medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Fluvastatin mitigates SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells
Francisco J. Zapatero-Belinchón1,2,3,4¶, Rebecca Moeller1,4¶, Lisa Lasswitz1,4¶, Marco van Ham5, Miriam
Becker1,2,3, Graham Brogden1, Ebba Rosendal2,6, Wenjie Bi5, Belén Carriquí1,4, Koushikul Islam2,3, Annasara
Lenman2,3, Antonia P. Gunesch1,7,8, Jared Kirui1,4, Thomas Pietschmann1,8, Anna K Överby2,6, Lothar Jänsch5,
Gisa Gerold1,2,3,4
1 Institute

for Experimental Virology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, a joint venture between the
Medical School Hannover and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Hannover, Germany
2 Department of Clinical Microbiology, Virology, Umeå University, SE-90185 Umeå, Sweden
3 Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Umeå University, SE-90185 Umeå, Sweden
4 Department of Biochemistry & Research Center for Emerging Infections and Zoonoses (RIZ), University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover Germany
5 Cellular Proteome Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstraße 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany
6 The Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), Umeå, Sweden.
7 Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany
8 German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner site Hannover-Braunschweig, Hannover, Germany
¶ equally contributed

Clinical data of patients suffering from COVID-19
have indicated that statin therapy, used to treat
hypercholesterolemia, is associated with a better
clinical outcome. We therefore investigated the effect
of statins on SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung
cells and found that fluvastatin inhibited coronavirus
infection, while other tested statins did not.
Fluvastatin inhibited high and low pathogenic
coronaviruses in vitro and ex vivo in a dose-dependent
manner. Proteomic analyses of infected versus
uninfected lung epithelial cells treated with
fluvastatin, simvastatin, or rosuvastatin revealed that
all tested statins modulated the cholesterol synthesis
pathways without compromising the innate antiviral
immune response. Strikingly, fluvastatin treatment
uniquely affected the proteome of SARS-CoV-2
infected cells, specifically downregulating proteins
that modulate protein translation and viral
replication. These results suggest that statin therapy
poses no additional risk to individuals exposed to
SARS-CoV-2 and that fluvastatin may have a
moderate beneficial effect on SARS-CoV-2 infection
by modulating protein translation.

receptor ACE23 is localized in lipid rafts, which are
cholesterol
and
glycosphingolipid
enriched
microdomains
of
the
plasma
membrane4,5.
Consequently, SARS-CoV, which also uses ACE2 as
host receptor, and other pathogens require such lipid
rafts at different life cycle steps6–9. Statins are
cholesterol-lowering drugs, prescribed to treat
hypercholesterolemia, cardiovascular disease and
diabetes. Notably, a significant proportion of the
population takes statins, in particular the elderly10, who
are at high risk of developing severe symptoms upon
SARS-CoV-2 exposure11. Retrospective studies report a
correlation of statin therapy and reduced all-cause
mortality of COVID-19 patients12,13,. On the other hand,
statins may increase expression of the ACE2 receptor of
SARS-CoV-214,15. Whether statins not only influence
disease outcome but also directly impact SARS-CoV-2
replication is unknown.

In this study, we used coronavirus cell culture models to
assess a possible direct impact of statins on coronavirus
infection. First, we investigated the role of selected
statins in low pathogenic coronavirus 229E infection.
Then, we validated our findings with SARS-CoV-2
using cell lines and air-liquid interface cultures from
SARS-CoV-2 │ COVID-19, virus │ cholesterol │
differentiated human primary bronchial epithelial cells.
hypercholesteremia │ statin │ risk factor │
To determine the effects of statins on cholesterol
proteomics │ air-liquid-interface culture │
biosynthesis and possible secondary effects influencing
cholesterol │ fluvastatin
SARS-CoV-2 infection, we analyzed the cellular
Correspondence: gisa.gerold@tiho-hannover.de
proteome in the presence or absence of statins and
SARS-CoV-2. Statin treatment upregulated cholesterol
Introduction
synthesis enzymes in infected and uninfected cells
without impairing viral immune sensing. Interestingly,
SARS-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative
fluvastatin treatment uniquely affected the proteome of
agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells, specifically downregulating
1
infected millions of people worldwide . There are interpathways and proteins important for RNA degradation,
individual
differences
in reports
the course
of COVID-19,
NOTE:
This preprint
new research
that has not which
been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
protein translation, and viral replication. Altogether, our
2
are incompletely understood to date . The SARS-CoV-2
results indicate that statin treatment is safe during the
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

COVID-19 pandemic and that fluvastatin may inhibit
SARS-CoV-2 infection by modulation of viral
replication and translation.
Results
Selected statins reduce coronavirus infection in
human cells
To assess a possible direct impact of statins on
coronavirus infection, we infected Huh7.5 cells
expressing a Firefly luciferase (Huh7.5 Fluc) with the
low pathogenic human coronavirus 229E. At a
concentration of 5 μM statins reduced infection of CoV229E moderately between 10 – 40 %. This reduction of
susceptibility was most pronounced (40%) and
statistically significant for fluvastatin (Fig. 1a). The most
commonly prescribed statins simvastatin and
atorvastatin reduced coronavirus 229E infection up to
10%. Lovastatin, pravastatin and rosuvastatin reduced

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

coronavirus 229E infection up to 15%, 25%, and 30%,
respectively, but the observations did not reach statistical
significance in the cell culture assay. Chloroquine
completely blocked coronavirus 229E infection as
expected16,17. When performing a dose-response analysis
for fluvastatin, we found a dose-dependent reduction of
coronavirus infection with a half-maximal inhibitory
concentration of 9.8 μM. At the investigated fluvastatin
doses, cell viability remained at 80% and higher
indicating no major cytotoxic effects (Fig. 1b). Doseresponse analysis for rosuvastatin showed a 40%
reduction of coronavirus 229E infection at 50 µM, which
correlated with a decrease in cell viability (Fig. 1c). We
did not observe a dose-dependent reduction of
coronavirus 229E infection upon simvastatin treatment
(Fig. 1d).
To investigate whether statins could modulate infection
with highly pathogenic SARS-CoV-2 isolates, we
Fig. 1: Lipid-lowering drugs selectively
reduce coronavirus infection in human
cells.
a, Huh7.5 Fluc cells were pretreated 24 h
with the indicated statins (5 μM) or
chloroquine as positive control and then
infected with hCoV229E harboring a
Renilla reporter gene (MOI 0.005) in
presence of the drugs. Renilla luciferase
activity as measure of infectivity was
determined 48 h after infection. The
hCoV229E infectivity (Renilla luciferase
activity) was normalized to cell viability
measured by the constitutive expression of
Firefly luciferase in Huh7.5 Fluc cells. The
dotted lines indicate 50% and 100% of
infection in solvent control treated cells. bd, Dose-response curves for the antiviral
and cytotoxic effect of fluvastatin (b),
rosuvastatin (c) and simvastatin (d) in
human cells. Infection and statin treatment
was performed as in a. at the indicated
statin concentration. e, Fluvastatin
decreases SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility of
human respiratory epithelial Calu-3 cells.
Virus genome copy numbers in cell lysates
and supernatants from cells pretreated with
selected statins (10 μM) or DMSO solvent
control and infected with SARS-CoV-2
(MOI 2.0x10-5) are shown. Results are
normalized to viral copy numbers in
DMSO treated cells. f, Number of
infectious SARS-CoV-2 particles in cell
culture supernatant from fluvastatin
pretreated and SARS-CoV-2 infected
Calu-3 cells (as in e) was determined by
titration on Vero cells. (a-e) Mean ± SD of
three independent biological replicates
shown. One-way ANOVA, followed by
Dunnett`s multiple comparison test *
p<0.05, *** p<0.0005, **** p<0.0001.

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

pretreated human respiratory epithelial cells with 10 µM
fluvastatin, rosuvastatin or simvastatin and infected the
cells with SARS-CoV-2 (strain SARS-CoV-2/München1.2/2020/984,p3)18. SARS-CoV-2 genome copy
numbers significantly decreased down to 60% in
supernatants upon fluvastatin treatment, whereas
rosuvastatin or simvastatin treatment did not reduce
SARS-CoV-2 genome copy numbers in supernatants
(Fig. 1e). In cell lysates of infected cells, treated with
fluvastatin, rosuvastatin or simvastatin, a slight
reduction of about 15% of SARS-CoV-2 genome copy
numbers was detected, but did not reach statistical
significance (Fig. 1e). As we detected a significant
decrease in SARS-CoV-2 genome copy numbers in
supernatants upon fluvastatin treatment, we titrated
released infectious SARS-CoV-2. Fluvastatin treatment
reduced SARS-CoV-2 titers 4-fold compared to DMSO
treatment, as determined by TCID50 assay on Vero cells
(Fig. 1f). Collectively, our data highlight that statins do
not promote coronavirus infection in human cells as was
speculated, but instead selected statins attenuate
coronavirus infection in vitro.

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Fluvastatin moderately decreases SARS-CoV-2
infection in air-liquid interface cultures of human
primary bronchial epithelial cells
We next aimed to corroborate our findings for fluvastatin
treatment in a model that closely resembles the human
respiratory tract. To that end, we differentiated human
primary bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) isolated from
three different individuals at an air-liquid interface (ALI)
into a pseudostratified, polarized epithelium containing
an apical layer of fully functional secretory and ciliated
cells and an underlying layer of basal cells. SARS-CoV2 infection was assessed in these ALI cultures with or
without fluvastatin (10 µM or 50 µM) pretreatment
administered in the basolateral medium. Here, we
increased the dosage of fluvastatin above the IC50
determined in monolayer cell culture, as in this more
complex multilayer cell culture model higher doses
might be required.
To monitor the course of infection, we measured
progeny virus release into the apical mucus with real
Figure 2: Fluvastatin treatment reduces SARSCoV-2 infection in HBEC ALI cultures.
a-c, HBEC ALI cultures from three donors were
pretreated with DMSO solvent control or
fluvastatin (10 µM or 50 µM) in the basal media for
24 h prior to SARS-CoV-2 infection at the apical
side (4.5x104 PFU). To assess viral replication,
apical samples from HBEC ALI cultures were
collected 24, 48 and 72 h post infection by a 1 h
wash in 300 µL growth medium. Progeny virus
released within these 24 h periods were quantified
by RT q-PCR alongside an RNA standard. RNA
genomes per ALI area in DMSO-treated samples
(circle, black solid line) was plotted against time for
the different statin concentrations (10 µM: square,
red dashed line; 50 µM: triangle, dark red dotted
line). RT q-PCRs were run in duplicates from three
HBEC ALI inserts per sample. b, ALI cultures were
fixed at 72 h (endpoint) and stained for SARS-CoV2 nucleocapsid protein and nuclei and analyzed by
immunofluorescence. Global fluorescence intensity
of infection (black bars) and nuclei (white bars) was
quantified from a fixed ROI omitting the well
borders. Depicted are averages and SD in global
fluorescence in arbitrary units from triplicates per
condition from HBEC ALIs for each donor. c, ALI
samples at 72 h (endpoint) were stained for SARSCoV-2 nucleocapsid protein for infection (green),
mucin5AC for secretory cells (red) and acetylated
tubulin for ciliated cells (yellow) and imaged on a
scanning confocal microscope. Depicted are
maximum intensity projections from z-stacks of
representative sites for the different conditions from
two different individuals. Scale bars = 25 µm.

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

time q-PCR in 24 h intervals. Viral RNA pronouncedly
increased over 72 h (105 to 107 for donor #1 and #2; 104
to 106 for donor #3; Fig. 2a black lines) indicating active
viral replication in the ALI cultures. We detected varying
levels of viral RNA in the samples from different donors
(donor #1 and #2 vs. donor #3), which may reflect
differences in susceptibility of individuals as observed in
natural infection. Treatment with 10 µM fluvastatin did
not affect viral release in highly infected samples (donor
#1 and #2; Fig. 2a, red dashed lines), whereas a moderate
decrease in released virus was observed in a less infected
sample (to 105 in donor #3; Fig. 2a, red dashed line). In
contrast, treatment with 50 µM fluvastatin, dramatically
reduced viral release in samples from all donors (at least
two log steps, Fig. 2a, dark red dotted lines).
We next stained the HBEC ALI cultures for
differentiation markers of ciliated cells (acetylated
tubulin, Fig. 2c, yellow) and goblet cells (mucin5AC,
Fig. 2c, red) in addition to SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid
protein (SARS-CoV-2 NC) (Fig. 2c, green), and
acquired overview images of all samples, as well as
detailed confocal images of highly infected HBEC ALI
cultures. We observed differences in number of goblet
and ciliated cells between the donors, which may reflect
donor-dependent variation or slight differences in the
differentiation. SARS-CoV-2 infection was mainly
detected in ciliated cells as reported previously for ALI
cultures19, but also in unstained cell populations, that
most possibly represent basal cells or differentiation
intermediates as reported for human lung tissues20.
To validate our findings, we quantified the intracellular
infection levels from immunofluorescence staining for
SARS-CoV-2 NC on the HBEC ALI cultures at 72 h.
Sample integrity was assessed at the same time by
nuclear staining. We observed that the nuclear signal
remained constant upon infection or fluvastatin
treatment for all samples (Fig. 2b, white bars), indicating
no cellular loss upon treatment and infection. SARSCoV-2 NC positive cells appeared at many sites in the
cultures for the highly infected samples from donor #1
and donor #2, whereas the samples from donor #3
showed only a few sites with SARS-CoV-2 NC positive
cells (Fig. 2b, black bars, DMSO and Fig. S1), in line
with the data on virus release. Fluvastatin treatment
reduced the overall SARS-CoV-2 NC signal only
slightly at lower dose (Fig. 2b, black bars, 10 µM and
Fig. S1) and highly drastic at the higher dose (Fig. 2b,
black bars, 50 µM and Fig. S1).
In summary, these results suggest that fluvastatin
treatment does not enhance SARS-CoV-2 infection in
three-dimensional respiratory epithelium models but
may rather have a moderate attenuating effect similar as
seen in the monolayer cell culture system.

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Statins regulate cholesterol synthesis independently
of SARS-CoV-2 infection
To determine the effects of fluvastatin, rosuvastatin and
simvastatin on global cellular processes, amongst which
cholesterol biosynthesis, Calu-3 cells were pretreated
with each statin or solvent control, then infected with
SARS-CoV-2 or left uninfected (mock), and cellular
proteomes were analyzed by label free mass
spectrometry (Fig. 3a). As additional control of
inoculum induced changes in the absence of replicating
virus, Calu-3 cells incubated with heat-inactivated virus
were used. All experiments were performed in biological
triplicates, generating quantitative information of in total
27 proteomes. SARS-CoV-2 genome copies decreased
significantly in supernatants of fluvastatin treated cells
compared to DMSO treated cells, in line with our
previous experiments (Fig. S2a). In total 3229 proteins
were identified unambiguously by at least one unique
tryptic peptide. Global inspection of our proteomic data
revealed four cholesterol biosynthesis pathway enzymes
that were significantly more abundant (either log10(p-value) ≥ 2, or log2(fold change) ± 4 and log10(p- value) ≥ 1.3) upon treatment with fluvastatin,
namely 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase
(HMGCR), farnesyl-diphosphate farnesyltransferase 1
(FDFT1), squalene monooxygenase (SQLE) and
methylsterol monooxygenase 1 (MSMO1) (Fig. 3b,
shown in orange). In addition, expression levels of
twelve proteins unrelated to cholesterol biosynthesis
changed significantly (shown in blue). To investigate the
modulatory effects of each statin during SARS-CoV-2
infection in more detail, we compared the top 40 altered
cellular pathways for each experimental condition. All
three statins upregulated cholesterol biosynthesis
pathways and depleted Ran, melatonin, and androgen
signaling pathways (Fig. 3c). The upregulation of
cholesterol biosynthesis enzymes to antagonize statinmediated blockade of HMGCR is in line with previous
reports21. Expectedly, statin treatment led to a slight
decrease in cholesterol concentration in cells cultured in
the absence of FCS, whereas no decrease in cholesterol
was observed in cells cultured in medium containing
FCS, as used in our experimental conditions (Fig. S2b).
Importantly, cholesterol synthesis proteins were
upregulated in both the presence and absence of
SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig. 3d). Specifically, HMGCR,
SQLE and FDFT1 expression levels increased upon
treatement with fluvastatin, simvastatin and rosuvastatin
independently of SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig. 3e). This
strongly suggests that SARS-CoV-2 infection itself does
not impair statin-mediated cholesterol synthesis
inhibition (Fig. 3d and e).

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020
Fig. 3: Statin treatment upregulates
expression of proteins involved in
cholesterol synthesis.
a, Experimental workflow of the whole cell
shotgun
proteomics
analysis.
Three
independent passages of Calu-3 cells were
pretreated with 10 μM of the different statins or
solvent control for 24 h and subsequently
infected in the presence of the drug with
SARS-CoV-2 (MOI 2.0x10-5) or left
uninfected (mock). 48 h later, viral titer was
determined via RT-qPCR from the
supernatants (see Fig. S2a) and cells were lysed
and used for protein extraction and subsequent
analysis by label-free mass spectrometry.
Unambiguous tryptic peptides were identified,
protein abundance determined by label-free
quantification algorithms and compared
between different experimental conditions. b,
Volcano plot showing changes in protein
abundance in fluvastatin treated cells vs.
DMSO solvent control treated cells.
Significantly enriched proteins (either –log10
p-value ≥ 2 or log2 fold change ≥ ±4 with –
log10 p-value ≥ 1.3) are highlighted in blue,
significantly enriched proteins involved in the
cholesterol synthesis pathway are highlighted
in orange. n=3, significance was analysed
using the Student’s t test. c, Analysis of top 40
significantly enriched canonical pathways
(p-value ≤ 0.05) upon statin treatment in
SARS-CoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells. d, Statin
induced changes in protein abundance in the
superpathway of cholesterol synthesis in
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells and uninfected
cells (mock). e, Median intensity differences
from three independent experiments of
selected cholesterol synthesis pathway proteins
upon indicated statin treatment. Experiments
performed in biological triplicates.

Statin treatment does not impair the innate immune
response against SARS-CoV-2
During SARS-CoV-2 infection, the innate immune
response plays an important role to fight the virus22.
However, immediate immune response is also causing
the observed immunopathology23. Therefore, it is crucial
to assess how prescribed medications, like statins,
modulate host defense mechanisms in the context of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. To demonstrate the effect of
SARS-CoV-2 infection in statin treated cells, we
compared protein expression in fluvastatin treated
uninfected cells with fluvastatin treated and SARS-CoV2 infected cells (Fig. 4a). As expected, we found viral
proteins such as the spike protein (S), the matrix protein
(M) as well as the accessory protein 9b (Orf9b) in lysates
from infected cells in all conditions (red dots in Fig. 4a
for fluvastatin treated conditions). In addition, virus

infection in fluvastatin treated cells upregulated host
proteins such as the interferon-induced GTP-binding
protein Mx1 (MX1), transcription termination factor 2
(TTF2), WD repeat-containing protein 87 (WDR87) and
DENN domain containing 6A (DENND6A). Among the
downregulated proteins upon infection were host
proteins such as septin-8 (SEPT8) and nuclear receptorbinding protein (NRBP1). We next analyzed, which
upstream regulators accounted for the observed
differences in protein abundance in uninfected and
infected cells in presence or absence of statins (Fig. 4b).
Here, we additionally included the protein abundance
profile of cells incubated with a heat-inactivated virus
control to account for protein dysregulation caused by
the inoculum in the absence of viral genome replication.
Interestingly, we observed that tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-modulated proteins were strongly downregulated
in infected cells treated with DMSO, simvastatin or
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020
Fig. 4: Statin treatment does not
alter the innate immune
response to SARS-CoV-2.
a, Volcano plot showing changes
in cellular protein abundance
upon SARS-CoV-2 infection of
fluvastatin treated cells. Viral
proteins are depicted in red and
significantly modulated host
proteins in blue (either –log10
p-value ≥2 or log2 fold change ≥
±4 with –log10 p-value ≥1.3).
n=3, significance was analysed
using the Student’s t test. b,
Heatmap showing upstream
regulatory
cytokines
and
chemokines affecting protein
abundance in cells upon SARSCoV-2 infection and statin
treatment
(red
upregulated
pathway; blue: downregulated
pathway). c-e, Changes in TNF
regulated (c) and interferon
stimulated genes (d,e) upon
SARS-CoV-2 infection and statin
treatment. Heatmap representing
the log2 fold change in protein
abundance upon statin treatment
as compared to the DMSO solvent
control in uninfected (mock) or
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. Heat
inact.; Replication deficient heat
inactivated virus control. Median
intensities from three biological
replicates.

rosuvastatin, while fluvastatin treatment prevented this
downregulation. In fact, SARS-CoV-2 infected cells
pretreated with fluvastatin displayed similar TNFmodulated protein abundance patterns as cells inoculated
with the heat-inactivated virus control. In contrast to the
downmodulating effect on the TNF pathway, SARSCoV-2 infection increased the expression of proteins
regulated by interferon lambda-1 (IFNL1) and interferon
alpha-2 (IFNA2). This IFN pathway induction occurred
both in the absence and in the presence of all three statins
(enrichment scores between 2 and 3), while it was absent
in cells incubated with heat-inactivated virus control.
This suggests that sensing of the virus in our cell culture
system depends on active viral replication and that this

sensing is not impaired by statins. Next, we examined the
protein abundance of genes regulated by TNF, IFNL1,
and IFNA2 in uninfected and infected cells (Fig 4c-d).
SARS-CoV-2 infection downregulated TNF-dependent
proteins such as heparan sulfate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2)
or syndecan 4 (SDC4) independent of statin treatment
(Fig. 4c). In contrast, virus infection strongly
upregulated the interferon induced protein with
tetratricopeptide repeats 3 (IFIT3) and IFIT1 only in
DMSO, simvastatin and rosuvastatin treated cells, but
not fluvastatin treated cells. Indeed, fluvastatin treated
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells showed protein expression
patterns of intermediate phenotype in-between the
phenotypes of heat-inactivated virus incubated cells and
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

DMSO treated SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. The
interferon-inducible protein MX1 was downregulated in
statin-treated uninfected cells compared to DMSO
treated uninfected cells, but was highly induced upon
SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig. 4d and e). Interestingly, we
found the interferon-inducible proteins 2'-5'oligoadenylate synthetase 3 (OAS3), ISG15 ubiquitin
like modifier (ISG15), DExD/H-box helicase 58
(DDX58), and major histocompatibility complex, class
I, C (HLA-C) to be upregulated by statin treatment in
uninfected cells. This suggests a possible modulatory
role of statins on the innate immune response of the
respiratory epithelium (Fig. 4d and e). In sum, statins did
not strongly affect the innate immune response to SARSCoV-2, but fluvastatin slightly decreased innate immune
responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection as compared to
DMSO, simvastatin and rosuvastatin treatment.
Fluvastatin induces a unique protein expression
profile in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells compared to
simvastatin and rosuvastatin.
Our results suggest that fluvastatin may inhibit infection
independently of its main cellular target HMGCR (Fig.
3). To elucidate secondary fluvastatin-specific effects on
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells, we compared protein
expression levels in infected cells with and without statin
treatment. To focus on highly regulated proteins, we
included proteins with either a -log10(p-value) ≥ 2 or with
a log2(fold change) ± 4 and a -log10(p-value) ≥ 1.3 in our
analysis (Fig. 5a). Eleven proteins were upregulated in
infected cells treated with fluvastatin as compared to
infected cells treated with DMSO. Expectedly, HGMCR
was upregulated strongest upon fluvastatin treatment
with a 380-fold increase over DMSO infected cells.
Seven proteins, including the E3 ubiquitin ligase cullin
CUL4B and the cytoskeletal forming GTPase SEPT8,
were downregulated upon fluvastatin treatment. In
addition, we detected seven viral proteins of which
fluvastatin pretreatment reduced their expression, with N
and ORF3a protein abundance being significantly
reduced (Fig. S3). This is in line with the observed
reduced virus infection measured by RT-qPCR and
plaque assay (Fig. 1 and Fig. S2a). Next, we unbiasedly
clustered protein expression levels of statin or
DMSO-treated infected cells according to the
differentially regulated pathways in each dataset (Fig. 5b
and Fig. S4). Strikingly, we found that fluvastatin treated
infected cells clustered independently from simvastatin,
rosuvastatin or DMSO treated infected cells. This
confirms that fluvastatin differentially affects the
cellular proteome of SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. The
cluster of pathways exclusively downregulated by
fluvastatin included inhibition of ARE-mediated mRNA
degradation, pyrimidine ribonucleotide de novo
biosynthesis,
telomerase
signaling,
PI3K/AKT
signaling, protein kinase A signaling, and the unfolded

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

protein response (Fig. S4). Among the pathways
exclusively upregulated by fluvastatin, we found
systematic lupus erythematosus in T cell signaling,
UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine biosynthesis II, CDK5
signaling, and the spliceosomal cycle (Fig. S4). These
results suggest that fluvastatin treated infected cells may
display stronger mRNA degradation and spliceosomal
turnover than solvent, simvastatin, or rosuvastatin
treated infected cells.
To shed more light on the proteins specifically
downregulated (p-values < 0.05) by fluvastatin, but not
simvastatin and rosuvastatin in SARS-CoV-2 infected
cells, we analyzed the differential abundance of proteins
in infected cells treated with each statin in comparison to
DMSO. Fluvastatin decreased the abundance of 35
proteins, while simvastatin and rosuvastatin decreased
the abundance of 25 and 18 proteins in infected cells.
Strikingly, we did not find any protein downregulated by
all three statins. In addition, there was little overlap
between pairs of two statins (Fig. 5c), suggesting that
statins differentially downregulate protein expression
upon infection. In total, 29 of the 35 proteins
downregulated in their abundance by fluvastatin, were
specific to this statin. To determine whether these 29
proteins are interconnected, we performed a STRING
network analysis. We found two major clusters of
interacting proteins in our dataset that were significantly
enriched (PPI enrichment: 3.96x10-4) (Fig. 5d). The first
cluster comprised four proteins and contained a
mitochondrial protein involved in mitochondrial matrix
peptide translocation (TIMM44) and a regulator of
innate RNA recognition (TUFM). The second cluster
comprised 15 proteins, most of which can be acetylated
(12/15), have an isopeptide bond (10/15), or bind RNA
(8/15) (compare color-coding of the node border).
Moreover, according to experimental evidence most
proteins in the second cluster interact with each other
(13/15) (compare pink edges). Among these proteins we
found the mRNA poly(A) tail binding protein
polyadenylate-binding protein 1 (PAPBC1), the
eukaryotic initiation factor 3 subunit B (EIF3B), the
RNA helicase DEAD-Box helicase 3 X-Linked
(DDX3X), and the IFN-induced protein kinase R
(EIF2AK2, or PKR). Gene ontology analysis of the
associated molecular functions of the downregulated
proteins revealed, amongst others, enrichment of
proteins involved in RNA binding (FDR = 5.4x10-4),
translation regulator activity (0.0026), poly(A) binding
(0.0057), and mRNA 5’-UTR binding (0.0074) (Fig. 5e).
This suggests that the proteins specifically
downregulated in fluvastatin treated SARS-CoV-2
infected cells play a role in translational regulation.
When we compared the biological processes associated
with all 29 proteins downregulated by fluvastatin in
infected cells, we observed that the enriched biological
processes are tightly interconnected (Fig. 5f). Whereas
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

most of the enriched biological processes were related to
protein translation, the most significantly enriched gene
cluster was annotated as regulation of viral genome
replication (FDR = 0.0103) that contained EIF2AK2,
PABPC1, DDX3X, and high mobility group box 2

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

(HMGA2). In summary, these findings suggest that the
proteins specifically downregulated by fluvastatin in
SARS-CoV-2 infected cells may play a role in protein
translation and thus SARS-CoV-2 replication.

Fig. 5: Fluvastatin induces a unique translational profile during SARS-CoV-2 infection.
a, Volcano plot showing fluvastatin induced changes in cellular protein abundance in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. Viral proteins
shown in red and significantly modulated host proteins in blue (either –log10 p-value ≥ 2 or log2 fold change ≥ ±4 with –log10
p-value ≥ 1.3). n=3, significance was analysed using the Student’s t test. b, Canonical pathway analysis of whole cell proteome
from SARS-CoV-2 infected cells with indicated treatments with a -log10 p value of at least 2. Hierarchical clustering based on
enrichment scores. For a magnified heatmap including pathway information please refer to Fig. S4. c, Venn diagram of proteins
significantly downregulated in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells upon treatement with the indicated statins. Numbers indicate statin
specific and overlapping proteins for the indicated treatment. d, STRING network of proteins downregulated during SARS-CoV2 infection in a fluvastatin specific manner. Nodes represent proteins and lines predicted interactions with line thickness indicating
the strength of evidence (pink lines: experimental evidence; grey lines: co-expression, textmining, co-occurrence, database). Node
border colors indicate the top four enriched gene ontology terms as indicated. e, Enriched gene ontology functions from fluvastatin
downregulated proteins. Circle size signifies number of proteins with the indicated function and color calculated FDR value. f,
Top, map depicting the enriched gene ontology biological processes within the dataset of fluvastatin downregulated proteins.
Nodes represent biological process term and line thickness level of gene overlap between processes. Network node color displays
FDR values. Bottom, list of enriched biological process terms indicating number of proteins per term (size) and FDR values (color).

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection
Discussion

Considering that a significant fraction of the population,
i.e. 26% of all Americans over the age of 40 years10 and
30-40% of all type 2 diabetes diagnosed in Germany24,
is on statin therapy, the primary goal of our study was to
assess direct effects of statin treatment on SARS-CoV-2
infection. Our data suggest that statin treatment does not
pose a risk for COVID-19 patients and fluvastatin is even
associated with a mild attenuation of SARS-CoV-2
infection in vitro. In accordance, previous retrospectives
studies reported an amelioration of COVID-19 outcome
in patients12,13,25,26. However, given the limitations of
retrospective studies, placebo-controlled trials are
required to clarify the role of statins in COVID-19
infected patients. It is important to note that the
inhibitory doses observed in our cell culture experiments
are an order of magnitude higher than statin serum
concentrations in patients, which are in the nM range27.
This suggests that the observed direct effects on SARSCoV-2 infection in tissue culture may not account for the
clinical observations in the retrospective cohort studies.
Unfortunately, fluvastatin, the only statin with
anti-coronavirus activity in our study, is prescribed
rarely and only one patient in the retrospective studies
received this therapy12,13. In sum, we found no evidence
for a direct aggravating effect of statins on SARS-CoV2 infection of human lung cells.
The known immunomodulatory effects of statins28–31
may ameliorate the outcome of hospitalized COVID-19
patients. In our study, statin treatment did not markedly
affected
SARS-CoV-2
immune
sensing
or
cytokine-mediated cellular responses in comparison to
solvent control (Fig. 4). However, the slight upregulation
of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in uninfected cells
and milder dysregulation of cytokine-regulated genes
after infection (Fig. 4) indicates that fluvastatin may
have a relevant immunomodulatory effect on lung
epithelial cells, which could ultimately ameliorate
COVID-19 immunopathology. Of note, our study does
not address the effect of statins on innate immune cells,
which may contribute to the clinical observations. In
particular, statins have a reported beneficial effect on
neutrophil function in infection 30,32,33 and in
pneumonia34. Investigations on the effect of statins on
immune responses and neutrophil function in animal
models of COVID-19 are ongoing and will clarify the
clinical observations.
A possible direct inhibition of the SARS-CoV-2 main
protease by statins was postulated in an in silico docking
study35. In this study the binding energy for fluvastatin,
simvastatin and rosuvastatin was in a similar range. Our
experimental observations, however, would predict a
higher efficacy and thus binding energy of fluvastatin.
Hence, it is unlikely that direct targeting of the SARS-

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

CoV-2 main protease causes the fluvastatin effects
observed in this study. Alternatively, statins may
indirectly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection by depleting
cholesterol from the plasma membrane. The primary
molecular target of statins is HMGCR, a rate-limiting
enzyme of the mevalonate pathway that regulates de
novo cholesterol synthesis36. Therefore, statins may
affect SARS-CoV-2 spike - ACE2 receptor interactions.
The latter was previously reported for SARS-CoV25. In
line with this, two recent studies state that cholesterol
homeostasis is critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection37,38. In
our experimental system we only observed moderate
reduction of total cellular cholesterol levels in human
lung cells. However the distribution of cholesterol in the
plasma membrane and hence ACE2 receptor localization
may nonetheless change upon statin treatment. We are
currently investigating the protein interactions of the
ACE2 receptor and their cholesterol dependency to shed
light on this phenomenon.
In this study, cholesterol synthesis inhibition did not
cause the observed fluvastatin specific reduction of
SARS-CoV-2 infection, since equimolar concentrations
of simvastatin, rosuvastatin and fluvastatin affected
cholesterol levels and cholesterol biosynthesis pathway
enzyme expression in a comparable manner (Fig. 3, Fig.
S2). This suggests that a secondary effect causes the
antiviral activity of fluvastatin. Indeed, expanded target
spectra of clinically approved drugs have been reported
for kinase inhibitors and statins facilitating repurposing
of established drugs but also aiding clinical decision
making39,40. In line with this, fluvastatin specifically
downregulated RNA binding proteins associated with
protein translation and viral genome replication (Fig. 5).
Some of the proteins identified in this study have been
reported to modulate infection in a virus-dependent
manner. For instance, PAPBC1 promotes dengue virus
replication41 and is cleaved by HIV-142 and
picornaviruses43,44. EIF2AK2 or DDX3X are proviral
proteins for the porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome virus45 and hepatitis C virus45,46 but inhibit
SARS-CoV47 by inducing IFN-I responses48. Here, we
found that the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3
subunit B (EIF3B), the RNA binding component of the
eukaryotic translation factor 3 complex (EIF3), is
downregulated in fluvastatin treated infected cells. As
EIF3 is critical for the translation of the coronavirus
murine hepatitis virus (MHV)49, one could speculate that
EIF3B is also a host dependency factor for SARS-CoV2. Interestingly, gene ontology annotation suggests that
80% of proteins downregulated exclusively in
fluvastatin treated SARS-CoV-2 infected cells are posttranslationally acetylated. Protein acetylation regulates
both cellular and viral protein function, subcellular
localization, and interaction50. Whether or not protein
acetylation plays a role during SARS-CoV-2 infection
requires experimental clarification.
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

In summary, we observed that fluvastatin downregulates
host proteins required for protein translation and viral
replication. Previous studies underscore the importance
of these processes in SARS-CoV-2 infection51. Hence,
we propose that fluvastatin exerts secondary effects
during SARS-CoV-2 infection by reducing the
abundance of SARS-CoV-2 host dependency factors. In
order to pinpoint, which of the host factors involved in
protein translation and viral replication are causing the
observed effect, we currently verify their biological
relevance during SARS-CoV-2 infection. A limitation of
our study is that ACE2 was not found by tryptic
fingerprinting mass spectrometry and hence we could no
evaluate whether ACE2 is upregulated upon statin
treatment as reported14,15. As we did not observe an
increase in SARS-CoV-2 infection upon statin treatment,
a biologically relevant ACE2 upregulation in our in vitro
studies can be excluded. Taken together, cumulative data
from this and other studies strongly argue that
individuals on statin therapy can safely continue their
statin regimen during the current SARS-CoV-2
pandemic.

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

h with either 5 μM of each compound or serial dilutions
of the tested compounds in 100 µl final volume.
Following the pretreatment, cells were inoculated with
hCoV229E at MOI 0.005 in the presence of the tested
compounds. The inoculum was removed 4 h later and
fresh medium containing the respective compounds was
added. Cells were lysed 48 h post inoculation in 50 μl
detergent containing buffer and Renilla luciferase
activity, as a measurement for infection, was determined
by mixing 20 μl of lysate with 60 μl of luciferase
substrate solution (Coelenterazine, 0.42 mg/ml in
methanol). To determine cell viability, Firefly luciferase
activity was measured from the same lysate by adding Dluciferin (0.2 mM D-luciferin in 25 mM glycyl-glycine)
as a substrate. Luciferase activity was measured in a
Centro XS3 LB960 (Berthold Technologies) microplate
reader.
SARS-2 infection and quantification by RT-qPCR

Fluvastatin (Sigma, order no. SML0038), simvastatin
(Sigma, order no. S6196), atorvastatin (Sigma, order no.
PZ0001), lovastatin (Sigma, order no. M2147),
pravastatin (biomol, Cay-10010342) and rosuvastatin
(Sigma, order no. SML1264) were dissolved in DMSO.
Chloroquine (Sigma, C6628), dissolved in H2O, served
as a positive control.

For infection experiments with SARS-CoV-2, the
SARS-CoV-2 isolate (strain SARS-CoV-2/München1.2/2020/984,p3)18, kindly provided by Christian
Drosten (Charité, Berlin) through the European Virus
Archive – Global (EVAg), was propagated in Vero cells
(3 passages) after primary isolation from patient
material. For infection, Calu-3 cells were seeded in
collagen coated 24 well plates at a density of 4.5x105
cells/well for initial infection studies or in 6 well plates
at a density of 2x106 cells/well for the MS data set. Cells
were pretreated with 10 μM fluvastatin, simvastatin,
rosuvastatin or DMSO for 24 h and then infected with
SARS-CoV-2 isolate at MOI 2.0x10-5 based on titration
in Vero cells. Heat-inactivated virus was used as a
control to determine unspecific binding of virions and
RNA. 4 h post infection, the inoculum was removed,
cells were washed twice with PBS and fresh medium
containing the respective compound was added. The
infection was stopped 48 h later, viral RNA was isolated
from cell lysates and supernatants using NucleoSpin
RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel) and QIAamp Viral RNA
Mini Kit (Qiagen), respectively, following the
manufacturer’s instructions. RT-qPCR was performed in
duplicates as described previously52 using a LightCycler
480 (Roche). In addition, SARS-CoV-2 titer in cell
culture supernatants was quantified by TCID50 assay on
Vero cells. Therefore, Vero cells were seeded in 96 well
plates and incubated with serial dilutions of cell culture
supernatant. 72 h later, cells were fixed with 10%
formalin and stained with crystal violet.

Effect of statins on hCoV229E

Cell viability assay

Huh7.5 FLuc cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a
density of 1x104 cells/well in complete Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) and incubated for
24 h at 37°C (5% CO2). The cells were pretreated for 24

Cell viability was determined at the end of the
experiment either by measuring Firefly luciferase
activity in cell lysates (Huh7.5 Fluc cells) or by MTT
assay. For the latter, MTT reagent (3‐[4,5‐
dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl]‐2,5 diphenyltetrazolium bromide,
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 10

Methods
Cell lines and virus strains
HEK293T cells, Huh7.5 cells constitutively expressing a
Firefly luciferase (Huh7.5 FLuc) and Calu-3 cells were
maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 0.1 mM non-essential
amino acids and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin at 37°C and
5% CO2. Each cell line was tested regularly for
Mycoplasma
contamination.
The
recombinant
hCoV229E encoding a Renilla luciferase gene was
produced in Huh7.5 cells at 33°C and titrated on Huh7.5
cells. The SARS-CoV-2 isolate (strain SARS-CoV2/München-1.2/2020/984,p3) was kindly provided by
Christian Drosten (Charité, Berlin) through the European
Virus Archive – Global (EVAg), amplified in Vero cells,
and handled under BSL3 conditions.
Reagents and Inhibitors

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

0.5 mg/mL in medium) was added to the cells. The
reaction was stopped with DMSO after 1 h and optical
density was measured at 570 nm using a plate reader
(Synergy 2, BioTek®).
Primary lung cell culture
Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) were
isolated with informed consent from lung tissue from
three individual patients, who underwent thoracic
surgery at the University hospital of Umeå, Sweden, with
ethical permission approved by the local Ethics Review
Board. HBEC were grown in Bronchial Epithelial Cell
Medium (BEpiCM, SC3211-b, SienCell) with
recommended supplements (SC3262, SienCell) and 100
U/ml penicillin + 100 µg/ml streptomycin (PeSt; Thermo
Fisher Scientific). For differentiation, 150.000 cells were
seeded onto a 12 mm semipermeable transwell insert
(0.4 µm Pore Polyester Membrane Insert, Corning) in
differentiation
media
(DMEM:BEpiCM
1:1
supplemented with 52 μg/ml bovine pituitary extract, 0.5
μg/ml hydrocortisone, 0.5 ng/ml human recombinant
epidermal growth factor, 0.5 μg/ml epinephrine, 10
μg/ml transferrin, 5 μg/ml insulin, 50 nM retinoic acid
(all from Sigma Aldrich) and PeSt as described
previously53. Cells were maintained submerged for the
first 7 days, after which the media was removed from the
apical side and cells were grown at air-liquid interface
for an additional two weeks to reach full differentiation.
Media was replaced trice/week with addition of fresh
retinoic acid to the media shortly before usage.
Differentiation of the HBEC were assessed using light
microscopy focusing on epithelial morphology, presence
of ciliated cells, and mucus production. Presence of
ciliated cells and goblet cells was also determined with
IF using antibodies directed against acetylated-tubulin
and muc5AC, respectively, as described under IF
staining below.
Virus production for ALI infection
SARS-CoV-2
(SARS-CoV-2/01/human/2020/SWE;
GeneBank accession no. MT093571.1) was propagated
as described previously in our preprint54. In brief, the
viral stock was propagated in Vero E6 cells for 48 h and
titrated by plaque assay. For the plaque assay, 10-fold
serial dilutions were added to Vero E6 cells
(4*105/well) seeded in 12-well plates (VWR) 12-24 h
prior to infection. After 1 h incubation, the inoculum was
removed, and wells were overlayed with semisolid
DMEM + 2 % FBS + PeSt + 1.2 % Avicel RC/CL for
incubation at 37°C in 5% CO2. At 65 h.p.i., the semisolid
overlay was removed, and cells were fixed with 4%
formaldehyde for 30 min. Cells were washed with PBS
and stained with 0.5% crystal violet in 20% MeOH for 5
minutes. Plates were washed with water and the plaques
counted.

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Infection and sample collection
For pretreatment at 24 h prior to infection, the medium
in the basal chambers were replaced with medium
containing either carrier control (DMSO), 10 µM or
50 µM fluvastatin. Immediately prior to infection, basal
medium containing drug or carrier control was replaced
again and the apical side of the HBEC ALI cultures
was rinsed three times with PBS. For infection,
of
SARS-CoV-2
(SARS-CoV4.5x104 PFU
2/01/human/2020/SWE; GeneBank
accession no.
MT093571.1) in a total volume of 300 µl infection
medium (DMEM + 10 U PeSt) was added to the apical
compartment. Cells were incubated at 37°C and 5%
CO2 for 3 h before the inoculum was removed and the
cells washed one more time with PBS.
At 24, 48 and 72 h.p.i., produced and secreted virus was
collected by addition of 300 µl infection medium to the
apical chamber and incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2 for
1 h. 100 µl of the sample was used for RNA extraction
using Qiaamp Viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. At 48 h.p.i., the medium
in the basolateral chamber was replaced with fresh
medium containing drug or carrier control. After sample
collection from the apical side at 72 h.p.i., the cells were
washed three times with PBS and fixed over night at 4°C
in 4% formaldehyde.
Real-time (RT) q-PCR for the quantification of virus
RNA in supernatant
To quantify the viral genome in the supernatant,
extracted RNA was used as template in qPCRBIO Probe
1-Step Go master mix (PCR Biosystems, London, UK)
together with SARS-CoV-2 primers (Forward: GTC
ATG TGT GGC GGT TCA CT, Reverse: CAA CAC
TAT TAG CAT AAG CAG TTG T) and probe (CAG
GTG GAA CCT CAT CAG GAG ATG C) specific for
viral RdRp52. Forward and reverse primer were modified
by Magnus Lindh at Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg. To quantify the number of viral genomes, a
standard curve ranging from 2 to 2 × 103 genomes was
run together with the SARS CoV-2 samples. The qPCR
reaction was carried out with the StepOnePlus™ RealTime PCR system (Thermo Fischer, Waltham, MA,
USA).
Immunofluorescence Analysis
HBEC ALI inserts were washed thrice apically and
basally for 10 min with IF buffer (130 mM NaCl, 10 mM
Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.05% NaN3, 0.1% BSA, 0.2%
Triton X-100, 0.04% Tween-20, pH7.4). Inserts were
blocked for 1 h at room temperature and subsequently
incubated with primary antibodies (SARS: SARS-CoV2:
nucleocapsid,
40143-R001,
SinoBiological;
mucin5AC: Ab-1 (45M1), #MS-145-P, ThermoFisher;
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

acetylated tubulin: T6793-0.2ml, Sigma; 1:200)
overnight at 4°C in IF buffer + 10% FBS. ALI inserts
were washed thrice apically and basally for 20 min with
IF buffer and subsequently stained with the respective
secondary antibodies (AF488: ThermoFisher A11088;
AF568: ThermoFisher A21144; AF647: ThermoFisher
A21240; 1:200) and Hoechst33342 (ThermoFisher
62249; 1:10000) for 1 h at room temperature in IF buffer
+ 10% FBS. Before imaging, samples were washed
thrice apically and basally for 20 min with IF buffer and
rinsed twice apically and basally for 50 min with PBS.
Quantification
For overview pictures and quantification, whole inserts
were imaged on a Cytation5 imaging platform (BioTek®)
with installed DAPI, GFP and Cy5 LED/filter cube
setups by taking 4x4 images with a 10% overlap for
stitching with a 4x objective and subsequent image
stitching based on the DAPI channel using linear blend
fusion (Gen5 prime software, BioTek®). Total
fluorescence intensity was quantified on a plug (region
of interest) covering the maximal insert surface without
touching the rim for each of the channels (Gen5 prime,
BioTek®).
Confocal imaging
At two sites, 4 mm punches (biopsy puncher, Miltex 3334) were taken from the whole insert and mounted on
cytoslides (Shandon, ThermoFisher 5991057) on
ProLong
Gold
antifade
mounting
medium
(ThermoFisher, P10144). Images were acquired on a
Leica SP8 confocal microscope with a 63x oil objective
at the BICU imaging unit of Umeå University.
Representative sites were imaged as z-stacks of 40 slices
with 0.5 µm step size and converted by maximum
intensity projection using Fiji55.
Mass Spectrometry
Calu-3 cells were treated with statins and infected as
described in section ´SARS-2 infection and
quantification by RT-qPCR´. Cells were lysed in buffer
containing 4% SDS, 10 mM DTT and 10 mM HEPES
(pH 8), heated at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated at 4°C
for 15 minutes (level 5, Bioruptor, Diagenode). Proteins
were precipitated with acetone at -20°C and resuspended
in 8 M urea buffer containing 10 mM HEPES (pH 8).
Total protein was diluted to a final concentration of 100
µg/ml in 10mM HEPES (pH 8) and 2 µg total protein
was used for further analysis. Reduction was performed
by applying a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP and
heating at 55°C for 1 h, alkylation was then performed
by the addition of final concentration of 20 mM MMTS
and incubation for 10 min at room temperature. Protein
digestion was performed by adding trypsin at a final
concentration of 1 µg protease to 50 µg total protein and

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

incubation over night at 37°C while shaking. Peptide
recovery was performed using EvoTips (Evosep) and
eluted using 0.2% TFA in 60% acetonitrile (ACN).
Peptides were dried and suspended in 100 µl 0.1% FA.
Twenty percent of the samples were loaded on Evotips.
Samples were injected into an Evosep I HPLC (Evosep)
connected to a timsTOFPro mass spectrometer with
PASEF (Bruker). The 15 sample per day standard
method (EvoSep I HPLC), and the standard Bruker
method “PASEF method for short gradients” (MS/MS
timsTOFPro) were applied.
MS/MS raw data files were processed by using Peaks X+
(Bioinformatics Solutions) and MaxQuant (1.6.17.0)
software56 and UniProtKB databases (Homo sapiens:
UP000005640/April
28,
2020;
SARS-CoV-2:
UP000464024/September 29, 2020). The following
search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin;
maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications,
methyl methanethiosulfonate (composition of H2CS at
cysteine); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and
acetyl (protein N-term); peptide tolerance, 20 ppm; LFQ
min. ratio count, 1; Match between runs Alignment time
window, 10 min; other parameters are used as default
settings. All raw data files will be uploaded and made
available through the Pride database. Data acquisition
and analyses were performed in R (4.0.2)57 using
following packages; tidyverse58, ggrepel59 and
pheatmap60. All the data were transformed into log2
values and proteins with at least one valid value were
used for further analysis. The missing values in each
sample were replaced with a lower normal distribution
(downshift = 1.8, standard deviation = 0.3). P-values
from Student’s t-tests and differences of log2 values
were used for the generation of volcano plots.
Protein-protein interaction network analysis of
statistically dysregulated proteins (p-value cut-off =
0.05) was performed with STRING with a medium
confidence threshold (0.4). STRING analysis was
exported to Cytoscape 3.8.2 and enrichment analysis
executed with EnrichmentMap 3.1.0 plugin61. Pathway
and upstream regulator analyses were generated through
the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis62.
Cholesterol analysis
Calu-3 cells were seeded on 24 well plates precoated
with collagen. 24 h post seeding, cells were treated in
duplicate with 10 µM of each statin in medium with or
without FCS for two days. The cells were then washed
twice in PBS, counted and stored in 1 ml HPLC-grade
water. Lipid isolation was performed as previously
Samples
were
dissolved
in
described63.
methanol:acetonitrile (1:1) and quantified using a
Hitachi Chromaster HPLC system fitted with a VDSpher
PUR C18-H (3 μm, 150×2.0 mm) column (VDS Optilab,
Berlin, Germany). The following separation conditions
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

were used; The mobile phase consisted of
methanol:acetonitire (1:1, v/v) and 0.1% formic acid
dissolved in H2O (95:5), at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min, a
column temperature of 22°C and the UV detector set at
202 nm.

qPCR, Yannic Becker for assistance as well as Thomas
Schulz, Tommy Olsson, Lars Nyberg and Anders
Sjöstedt for constant support.

Statistical analysis

1.

World Health Organization. Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19) Pandemic. at
<https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019>

2.

Price-Haywood, E. G., Burton, J., Fort, D. &
Seoane, L. Hospitalization and Mortality among
Black Patients and White Patients with Covid-19.
N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 2534–2543 (2020).

3.

Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry
Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked
by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell
181, 271–280.e8 (2020).

4.

Lu, Y., Liu, D. X. & Tam, J. P. Lipid rafts are
involved in SARS-CoV entry into Vero E6 cells.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 369, 344–349
(2008).

5.

Radenkovic, D., Chawla, S., Pirro, M., Sahebkar,
A. & Banach, M. Cholesterol in Relation to
COVID-19: Should We Care about It? J Clin Med
9, (2020).

6.

Li, G.-M., Li, Y.-G., Yamate, M., Li, S.-M. &
Ikuta, K. Lipid rafts play an important role in the
early stage of severe acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus life cycle. Microbes Infect. 9, 96–102
(2007).

7.

Kozak, S. L., Heard, J. M. & Kabat, D.
Segregation of CD4 and CXCR4 into distinct lipid
microdomains in T lymphocytes suggests a
mechanism for membrane destabilization by
human immunodeficiency virus. J. Virol. 76,
1802–1815 (2002).

8.

Ahn, A., Gibbons, D. L. & Kielian, M. The fusion
peptide of Semliki Forest virus associates with
sterol-rich membrane domains. J. Virol. 76, 3267–
3275 (2002).

9.

Stuart, A. D., Eustace, H. E., McKee, T. A. &
Brown, T. D. K. A novel cell entry pathway for a
DAF-using human enterovirus is dependent on
lipid rafts. J. Virol. 76, 9307–9322 (2002).

Experiments were conducted in three biological
replicates each with three technical replicates unless
otherwise stated. All statistical analyses were performed
using one or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by Dunnett or Sidak’s multiple comparison test
using GraphPad Prism software version 8 (GraphPad).

Bibliography

Corresponding authors
Correspondence to Gisa Gerold (gisa.gerold@tihohannover.de)
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgement
G.G. was supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg
Foundation, the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research together with the Ministry of Science and
Culture of Lower Saxony through the Professorinnen
Programm
III,
and
the
Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) - Projektnummer 158989968 - SFB 900
project C7 and the DFG project GE 2145/3-2 to G.G, the
German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) to J.K.
and the Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(project COVID-Protect, Projektnummer 01KI20143C)
to F.J.Z.B. The work was further funded by the Infection
Biology International PhD Program of Hannover
Biomedical Research School to R.M., the German
Centre for Infection Research (DZIF) to A.P.G. and T.P.,
the Helmholtz Alberta Initiative for Infectious Disease
Research (HAI-IDR), the Shandong University
Helmholtz International Laboratory to T.P, and the
SciLifeLab/KAW national COVID-19 research program
project grant 2020 and the Heart- and Lung foundation
project grant for COVID-19 (project number 20200385)
to A.K.Ö. and by the European Virus Archive GLOBAL
(EVA-GLOBAL) project that has received funding from
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under grant agreement No 871029.
We acknowledge the Biochemical Imaging Center at
Umeå university and the National Microscopy
Infrastructure, NMI (VR-RFI 2016-00968) for aiding in
microscopy. We thank Anders Blomberg and Gregory
Rankin at Umeå University for kindly providing us with
lung tissue for isolation of HBECs. We thank Christian
Drosten for providing the clinical SARS-CoV-2 isolate,
Volker Thiel for the hCoV 229E strain, Sven Reiche for
the SARS-CoV-2 reference material used in the RT-

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

10. Gu, Q., Paulose-Ram, R., Burt, V. L. & Kit, B. K.
Prescription cholesterol-lowering medication use
in adults aged 40 and over: United States, 20032012. NCHS Data Brief 1–8 (2014).
11. Davies, N. G. et al. Age-dependent effects in the
transmission and control of COVID-19 epidemics.
Nat. Med. 26, 1205–1211 (2020).
12. Zhang, X.-J. et al. In-Hospital Use of Statins Is
Associated with a Reduced Risk of Mortality
among Individuals with COVID-19. Cell Metab.
32, 176–187.e4 (2020).
13. Masana, L. et al. Effect of statin therapy on SARSCoV-2 infection-related. Eur. Heart J. Cardiovasc.
Pharmacother. (2020).
doi:10.1093/ehjcvp/pvaa128
14. Li, Y.-H. et al. Effects of rosuvastatin on
expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
after vascular balloon injury in rats. J. Geriatr.
Cardiol. 10, 151–158 (2013).
15. Shin, Y. H. et al. The effect of fluvastatin on
cardiac fibrosis and angiotensin-converting
enzyme-2 expression in glucose-controlled
diabetic rat hearts. Heart Vessels 32, 618–627
(2017).
16. Vincent, M. J. et al. Chloroquine is a potent
inhibitor of SARS coronavirus infection and
spread. Virol. J. 2, 69 (2005).
17. Wang, M. et al. Remdesivir and chloroquine
effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro. Cell Res. 30,
269–271 (2020).
18. Wölfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of
hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature
581, 465–469 (2020).
19. Ravindra, N. G. et al. Single-cell longitudinal
analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human
bronchial epithelial cells. BioRxiv (2020).
doi:10.1101/2020.05.06.081695
20. Hui, K. P. Y. et al. Tropism, replication
competence, and innate immune responses of the
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in human respiratory
tract and conjunctiva: an analysis in ex-vivo and

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020
in-vitro cultures. Lancet Respir. Med. 8, 687–695
(2020).

21. Borthwick, F. et al. Simvastatin treatment
upregulates intestinal lipid secretion pathways in a
rodent model of the metabolic syndrome.
Atherosclerosis 232, 141–148 (2014).
22. Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced Host Response
to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID19. Cell 181, 1036–1045.e9 (2020).
23. Allegra, A., Di Gioacchino, M., Tonacci, A.,
Musolino, C. & Gangemi, S. Immunopathology of
SARS-CoV-2 Infection: Immune Cells and
Mediators, Prognostic Factors, and ImmuneTherapeutic Implications. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21,
(2020).
24. Heidemann, C., Du, Y., Baumert, J., Paprott, R. &
Lampert, T. Soziale Ungleichheit und Diabetes
mellitus – Zeitliche Entwicklungbei Erwachsenen
in Deutschland. Journal of Health Monitoring,
Robert Koch-Institut 4, (2019).
25. Glende, J. et al. Importance of cholesterol-rich
membrane microdomains in the interaction of the
S protein of SARS-coronavirus with the cellular
receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2.
Virology 381, 215–221 (2008).
26. Tan, W. Y. T., Young, B. E., Lye, D. C., Chew, D.
E. K. & Dalan, R. Statin use is associated with
lower disease severity in COVID-19 infection. Sci.
Rep. 10, 17458 (2020).
27. Björkhem-Bergman, L., Lindh, J. D. & Bergman,
P. What is a relevant statin concentration in cell
experiments claiming pleiotropic effects? Br. J.
Clin. Pharmacol. 72, 164–165 (2011).
28. Papazian, L. et al. Effect of statin therapy on
mortality in patients with ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 310,
1692–1700 (2013).
29. Fedson, D. S. Treating influenza with statins and
other immunomodulatory agents. Antiviral Res.
99, 417–435 (2013).
30. Sapey, E. et al. Pulmonary infections in the elderly
lead to impaired neutrophil targeting, which is
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

improved by simvastatin. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 196, 1325–1336 (2017).
31. Pertzov, B. et al. Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA
reductase inhibitors (statins) for the treatment of
sepsis in adults - A systematic review and metaanalysis. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 25, 280–289
(2019).
32. Lee, C. S. et al. Simvastatin suppresses RANTESmediated neutrophilia in polyinosinicpolycytidylic acid-induced pneumonia. Eur.
Respir. J. 41, 1147–1156 (2013).
33. Chow, O. A. et al. Statins enhance formation of
phagocyte extracellular traps. Cell Host Microbe 8,
445–454 (2010).
34. Sapey, E. et al. Simvastatin improves neutrophil
function and clinical outcomes in pneumonia. A
pilot randomized controlled clinical trial. Am. J.
Respir. Crit. Care Med. 200, 1282–1293 (2019).
35. Reiner, Ž. et al. Statins and the COVID-19 main
protease: in silico evidence on direct interaction.
Arch. Med. Sci. 16, 490–496 (2020).
36. Stancu, C. & Sima, A. Statins: mechanism of
action and effects. J. Cell Mol. Med. 5, 378–387
(2001).
37. Daniloski, Z. et al. Identification of Required Host
Factors for SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Human
Cells. Cell (2020). doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.030
38. Wang, R. et al. Genetic screens identify host
factors for SARS-CoV-2 and common cold
coronaviruses. Cell (2020).
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.004
39. Huang, Y. et al. A framework for identification of
on- and off-target transcriptional responses to drug
treatment. Sci. Rep. 9, 17603 (2019).
40. Klaeger, S. et al. The target landscape of clinical
kinase drugs. Science 358, (2017).
41. Suzuki, Y. et al. Characterization of RyDEN
(C19orf66) as an Interferon-Stimulated Cellular
Inhibitor against Dengue Virus Replication. PLoS
Pathog. 12, e1005357 (2016).

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

42. Alvarez, E., Castelló, A., Menéndez-Arias, L. &
Carrasco, L. HIV protease cleaves poly(A)binding protein. Biochem. J. 396, 219–226 (2006).
43. Rivera, C. I. & Lloyd, R. E. Modulation of
enteroviral proteinase cleavage of poly(A)-binding
protein (PABP) by conformation and PABPassociated factors. Virology 375, 59–72 (2008).
44. Zhang, B., Morace, G., Gauss-Müller, V. &
Kusov, Y. Poly(A) binding protein, C-terminally
truncated by the hepatitis A virus proteinase 3C,
inhibits viral translation. Nucleic Acids Res. 35,
5975–5984 (2007).
45. Wang, X., Zhang, H., Abel, A. M. & Nelson, E.
Protein kinase R (PKR) plays a pro-viral role in
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
virus (PRRSV) replication by modulating viral
gene transcription. Arch. Virol. 161, 327–333
(2016).
46. Li, Q., Pène, V., Krishnamurthy, S., Cha, H. &
Liang, T. J. Hepatitis C virus infection activates an
innate pathway involving IKK-α in lipogenesis
and viral assembly. Nat. Med. 19, 722–729 (2013).
47. de Wilde, A. H. et al. A Kinome-Wide Small
Interfering RNA Screen Identifies Proviral and
Antiviral Host Factors in Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus Replication, Including
Double-Stranded RNA-Activated Protein Kinase
and Early Secretory Pathway Proteins. J. Virol. 89,
8318–8333 (2015).
48. Lai, M.-C., Sun, H. S., Wang, S.-W. & Tarn, W.Y. DDX3 functions in antiviral innate immunity
through translational control of PACT. FEBS J.
283, 88–101 (2016).
49. V’kovski, P. et al. Determination of host proteins
composing the microenvironment of coronavirus
replicase complexes by proximity-labeling. Elife 8,
(2019).
50. Murray, L. A., Combs, A. N., Rekapalli, P. &
Cristea, I. M. Methods for characterizing protein
acetylation during viral infection. Meth. Enzymol.
626, 587–620 (2019).

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

51. Bojkova, D. et al. Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2infected host cells reveals therapy targets. Nature
583, 469–472 (2020).
52. Corman, V. M. et al. Detection of 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR.
Euro Surveill. 25, (2020).

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020
Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics 30, 523–530
(2014).

63. Beck, A. et al. Quantification of sterols from carp
cell lines by using HPLC-MS. Sep. Sci. plus 1, 11–
21 (2018).

53. Danahay, H., Atherton, H., Jones, G., Bridges, R.
J. & Poll, C. T. Interleukin-13 induces a
hypersecretory ion transport phenotype in human
bronchial epithelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Lung
Cell Mol. Physiol. 282, L226–36 (2002).
54. Rosendal, E. et al. Detection of asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 exposed individuals by a sensitive
S-based ELISA. medRxiv (2020).
doi:10.1101/2020.06.02.20120477
55. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform
for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9,
676–682 (2012).
56. Tyanova, S., Temu, T. & Cox, J. The MaxQuant
computational platform for mass spectrometrybased shotgun proteomics. Nat. Protoc. 11, 2301–
2319 (2016).
57. R Core Team (2020). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria. at <https://www.R-project.org/>
58. Wickham, H. et al. Welcome to the tidyverse.
JOSS 4, 1686 (2019).
59. Kamil Slowikowski. ggrepel: Automatically
PositionNon-Overlapping Text Labels with
“ggplot2”. R package version 0.8.2. (2020). at
<https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=ggrepel>
60. Raivo Kolde. pheatmap:Pretty Heatmaps.
Rpackage version 1.0.12. (2019). at
<https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=pheatmap>
61. Merico, D., Isserlin, R., Stueker, O., Emili, A. &
Bader, G. D. Enrichment map: a network-based
method for gene-set enrichment visualization and
interpretation. PLoS One 5, e13984 (2010).
62. Krämer, A., Green, J., Pollard, J. & Tugendreich,
S. Causal analysis approaches in Ingenuity
preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Supplemental figures

Fig. S1: Infection of HBEC ALI cultures.
HBEC ALI cultures of three individuals were infected with SARS-CoV-2, immunostained for infection (SARS-CoV-2
NC) and nuclei (Hoechst33342) and imaged by acquisition of 4x4-images per insert with a 4x object on a Cytation5
screening microscope. Depicted are representative overview images of the infection signal stitched based on the nuclear
signal from each of the three donors. Stitching was performed in the BioTek Gen5+ software by alignment of images
acquired with a 10% overlap using linear blend as a fusion method based on the nuclear channel and alignment was
automatically transferred to the infection channel.

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Fig. S2. Confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 infection and effectiveness of statin treatment.
a, Viral copy numbers in the supernatants of statin treated and SARS-CoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells that were used for
the mass spectrometry analysis. Calu-3 cells were pretreated with statins or DMSO solvent control for 24 h followed by
infection with SARS-CoV-2 in the presence of the drug for 48 h at an MOI of 2.x10-5. Viral copies were determined by
RT-qPCR. n=4. b, Total cellular cholesterol quantification from Calu-3 cells cultured in media with or without FCS and
treated with fluvastatin, rosuvastatin, simvastatin or DMSO solvent control for 3 days. Results are normalized to the
corresponding DMSO solvent control. n=4 –FCS, n=3 +FCS, not significant n.s., ** P<0.01, *** P< 0.001,

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Fig. S3: Viral protein abundance in SARS-CoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells.
Abundance (as log2 values obtained by label free quantification) of seven viral proteins in SARS-CoV-2 infected
Calu-3 cells treated with statins. Viral proteins were not detected in uninfected cells. For statistical analysis missing
values were replaced from normal distribution with a constant downshift. One-way ANOVA, followed by Dunnett`s
multiple comparison test * p<0.05, *** p<0.0005, **** p<0.0001.

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statins in SARS-CoV-2 infection

Zapatero-Belinchón, Moeller & Lasswitz et al. 2020

Fig. S4: Canonical pathway
analysis
of
SARS-CoV-2
infected Calu-3 cells.
Canonical pathway analysis for
the whole-cell proteome of SARSCoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells
treated with the indicated statins
or DMSO solvent control.
Enriched pathways with a -log10
p-value of at least ±2 in one of the
three statin treatments are
depicted
in
the
heatmap.
Hierarchical clustering based on
enrichment
score
profiles.
Magnification of Fig 5b.

preprint version –www.biorxiv.org 20

