medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Public Health Data and A Medical Vulnerability Indicator

COVID-19 Medical Vulnerability Indicators: A Local Data Model for Equity
in Public Health Decision-Making

Paul M. Ong, Ph.D. (0000-0002-4358-6297)1, 2, Chhandara Pech, M.U.R.P. (0000-0002-3065051X)1, 2, Nataly Rios Gutierrez, B.A. (0000-0002-3413-9524)1, 2, Vickie Mays, Ph.D., MSPH
(0000-0002-3395-7939)3, 4
1 Department

of Urban Planning, UCLA Luskin School of Public Policy
Center for Neighborhood Knowledge
3 Departments of Psychology and Health Policy & Management, UCLA Fielding School of
Public Health
4
UCLA BRITE Center for Science, Research & Policy
2 UCLA

Correspondence Author
Vickie M. Mays, Ph.D., M.S.P.H.
University of California, Los Angeles
405 Hilgard Ave., 1258 Franz Hall, Box 951563, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563
Phone: 310.206.5159 Fax: 310.206.5895
Email: mays@ ucla.edu

Manuscript Type: Original Research Article
Abstract Word Count: 304
Manuscript Word Count: 6,526
Figures: 14
Tables: 4
Supplemental Tables: 1
0
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Objective: To develop indicators of vulnerability for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)
infection in Los Angeles County (LAC) by race and neighborhood characteristics.
Design: Development of indicators that combines pre-existing medical vulnerabilities with social
and built-environment data by zip code tabulation areas (ZCTAs).
Setting: Neighborhoods in LAC categorized by race/ethnicity ranked into quintiles by relative
vulnerability: Non-Hispanic white; Black; Latinx; Cambodians, Hmong and Laotians combined
(CHL); and Other Asians.
Data Sources: AskCHIS Neighborhood Edition, American Community Survey 2014-2018, and
California Department of Parks and Recreation.
Main Outcome Measures: 1) Pre-Existing Health Condition, 2) Barriers to Accessing
Healthcare, 3) Built Environment Risk, and 4) CDC’s Social Vulnerability.
Results: Neighborhoods most vulnerable to COVID-19 are characterized by significant
clustering of racial minorities, low income households and unmet medical needs. An
overwhelming 73% of Blacks reside in the neighborhoods with the two highest quintiles of preexisting health conditions, followed by Latinx (70%) and CHL (60%), while 60% of whites
reside in low or the lowest vulnerable neighborhoods. For the Barriers to Accessing Healthcare
indicator, 40% of Latinx reside in the highest vulnerability places followed by Blacks, CHL and
other Asians (29%, 22%, and 16% respectively), compared with only 7% of Whites reside in
such neighborhoods. The Built Environment Indicator finds CHL (63%) followed by Latinx
(55%) and Blacks (53%) reside in the neighborhoods designated as high or the highest
vulnerability compared to 32% of Whites residing in these neighborhoods. The Social
Vulnerability Indicator finds 42% of Blacks and Latinx and 38% of CHL residing in
neighborhoods of high vulnerability compared with only 8% of Whites residing these
neighborhoods.
Conclusions: Vulnerability to covid-19 infections differs by neighborhood and racial/ethnic
groups. Our vulnerability indicators when utilized in decision-making of re-openings or resource
distribution such as testing, vaccine distribution, hotel rooms for quarantine and other covid-19related resources can provide an equity driven data approach for the most vulnerable.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Los Angeles County, like the rest of the country, is facing a high number of COVID-19 infections
and deaths. The county has been affected by the virus at especially high rates, with a total of
289,366 infections and 6,877 deaths as of October 19, 20201. While originally it was thought that
all persons had the same level of susceptibility to COVID-19, not all persons nor communities
have been equally affected by this disease. Considered the “hotspot” for COVID-19 infections in
the state of California, the numbers of COVID-19 infections and deaths in Los Angeles County
have not been similarly distributed across neighborhoods. In examining County data, analyses
show significant disparities in reported cases and deaths by race and socioeconomic status. These
analyses support the notion of inequality in vulnerability in the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
pandemic2,3,4.
Understanding how the geographic patterns of social determinants of health and social risk
contribute to the medical vulnerability for COVID-19 is useful in helping public health and social
service agencies, as well as other stakeholders, to develop and target interventions to the
communities at greatest risk for the infectious transmission of COVID-19. This requires
developing a comprehensive monitoring system that combines multiple sources of local spatial
data to precisely track the temporal and geographic pattern of new cases and to uncover the factors
and mechanisms behind the transmission. Such knowledge is critical to slowing and hopefully
stopping the pandemic. We are still short of meeting the goal of having a fully operational
monitoring system, but there has been progress. The indicators in this brief contribute to that effort,
with a focus on identifying vulnerable neighborhoods.
This article draws on recent scientific literature on COVID-19 medical vulnerability, as well as
expert methodological input, to better understand factors contributing to the unequal burden of
COVID-19 across communities and populations in Los Angeles County. Several studies have
identified pre-existing conditions, such as Type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease,
immunocompromised state and/or severe obesity, that increase risk of COVID-19 infection and
complications5,6,7,8,9,10. Additionally, limited access to both health protecting equipment and risk
and care information can increase the likelihood COVID-19 comorbidities. Furthermore, lack of
access to quality healthcare services and social policies, such as access to health insurance, sick
days and the ability quarantine in isolation, can further exacerbate the inequality in COVID-19
outcomes 11,12,13,14,15. Beyond factors directly associated with health, structural factors further
increase COVID-19 inequity16. Previous research has found that existing spatial inequality is
reproduced over time, specifically that urban spatial structures produce and reproduce
socioeconomic inequalities 17,18. The racial discrepancies among COVID-19 outcomes in the U.S.
have not only been attributed to COVID-19 comorbidities, but also to the social, economic, and
physical factors that provide communities with the capacity to safely practice physical distancing
in order to reduce COVID-19 community spread19. While much has been made of herd
immunity20,21 in the absence of a vaccine that can attempt to accomplish that status, far more
important at this point is focusing on how to employ data to identify communities whose medical
vulnerabilities occur in the context of social and environmental risks and make them highly likely
to be exposed, become infected and potentially suffer significant and costly morbidity and
mortality outcomes10, 22.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The purpose of this project is to develop multiple indicators that point to probable communities
(geographic places defined by the Census Bureau’s Zip Code Tabulation Areas) and populations
at risk in Los Angeles County with high probability of COVID-19 infection and death across
different dimensions. To achieve this, we developed a medical vulnerability index of four
indicators: pre-existing health vulnerability, barriers to accessing healthcare, built environment
risk, and social vulnerability. We hope that these indicators will be helpful for policy makers, local
jurisdictions, foundations, and community organizations to identify areas with a high need of
resources to protect against a potential second wave of COVID-19 infections. Additionally, we
hope this information will help determine equitable distribution of resources to stem new infections
such as testing and vaccination, if available, in order to create more equitable and healthy
neighborhoods, especially for medically vulnerable populations that live in those neighborhoods.
It is our hope that this brief can help guide local communities in how to aggregate their own local
data to help drive initiatives that can respond to COVID-19 with greater equity. Local regions will
vary in the ability to harness local data and even in our instance there were many discussions
devoted to wanting data sources that were either not available, or would be time or cost prohibitive
to develop.
We present a detailed description of our methodology. The description includes information about
our data sources as well as information on how we developed each of our four indicators. We
provide data visualizations as part of our analyses to indicate geographic patterns by
neighborhoods. First, we include multiple maps in order to illustrate vulnerability across our four
indicators. Second, we present two different analytical components: 1) an analysis showcasing the
racial distribution across each of the four indicators; and 2) an analysis showcasing the average
vulnerability scores by majority ethnoracial groups. Last is our discussion and conclusion. Our
goal is to assess how our indicators work in illustrating race and place based differences in
vulnerability to Covid-19 infections. Our overall goal is to demonstrate how local data can be used
to locate, illustrate differences based on not just medical vulnerabilities but social risk which can
indicate racial disparities in Covid-19. As local areas must contend with resource allocations,
ethical methods for testing and should it be developed vaccine distribution local models of medical
vulnerability that attend to social determinants and social risk factors will be critical.
Data and Methodology
The project focuses on identifying neighborhoods in Los Angeles County that may be at an
elevated risk of exposure and positive infection for contracting COVID-19. To achieve this, we
developed four different indicators of medical vulnerability: 1) Pre-Existing Health Condition, 2)
Barriers to Accessing Healthcare, 3) Built Environment Risk, and 4) Social Vulnerability.
Selections of the components used to construct the first three indicators were guided by existing
research literature and input from health experts. The fourth indicator, the Social Vulnerability
index, mirrors the Center for Disease Control’s (CDC) 2018 Social Vulnerability Index 23 but
constructed for a different geographic unit of analysis then what is made available by the CDC.
Geographic Unit of Analysis
The basic geographic unit of analysis for this report is the Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA). We
utilize the ZCTA because our main source of population level health data, the California Health

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Interview Survey was only available to use in ZCTA format. The ZCTA is defined by the Bureau
of the Census (BOC) as “generalized area representations of United States Postal Service (USPS)
ZIP Code service areas”24. Zip Codes created by USPS for mail delivery purposes are constantly
changing. ZCTAs do not represent actual Zip Codes per se but are made by the Bureau of Census
to approximate Zip Codes and their boundaries are defined every 10 years with the Decennial
Enumeration. Through ZCTAs, the BOC is able to provide Census related data (e.g. demographic,
socioeconomic, housing characteristics) to a geography that closely mirrors USPS Zip Codes.
In some cases, there are occurrences where some of the data used to construct the indicators are
reported in a different geography other than ZCTAs. When there are incidents of this, we use a
geographic crosswalk to allocate the information into the ZCTA. The geographic crosswalk comes
from the Missouri Census Data Center’s (Geocorr 2018 edition). For example, census tracts do not
fall completely within ZCTA boundaries. As such, a crosswalk is needed to allocate tract level
data into ZCTAs. The spatial assignments take into account differences in population across tracts
and therefore a population weighted approach is used to assign tracts to ZCTAs. Below, we
indicate which variables are reported in a different geography other than ZCTA and therefore
require using the geographic crosswalk to assign to ZCTAs.
For the purpose of this report, ZCTAs are used to represent neighborhoods and the two terms are
used interchangeably.
Data Sources
Three major data sources are used to construct the four indicators of medical vulnerability. These
datasets are described below.
AskCHIS Neighborhood Edition25
The AskCHIS Neighborhood Edition (AskCHIS NE) database provides health estimates for
California down to the zip code tabulation area.4 The information for AskCHIS NE comes from
the California Health Interview Survey (CHIS). CHIS is conducted by the UCLA Center for Health
Policy Research (CHPR) in collaboration with the California Department of Public Health and the
Department of Health Care Services. CHIS is the largest state health survey in the nation.
Conducted since 2001, CHIS surveys adults, adolescents and children sampled from every county
in California. CHIS collects extensive information for all age groups on sociodemographic, health
status, health conditions, health- related behaviors, health insurance coverage, access to health care
services, and other health-related issues. The AskCHIS NE data used for this project represents
data collected for 2015-2016 (hereinafter referred to as 2016), which is the most current data
available from AskCHIS NE. The data was purchased directly from the CHPR and is not publicly
available for download.
American Community Survey26
The American Community Survey (ACS) is an ongoing survey conducted by the U.S. Census
Bureau to collect housing, demographic, social and economic information. The data utilized in this
project comes from the 2014-2018 five-year ACS estimates. For small geographies, including
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ZCTAs, statistics from the ACS are only reported in the five-year average dataset. Small
geographic areas reported by the BOC are defined as any area with less than 65,000 persons. Each
annual ACS survey represents a sample of about 2.0-2.5% of households and individuals, with the
five-year ACS representing roughly 12.5%.
California Department of Parks and Recreation 27
The California Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) provide data on the availability of
parks and open space in California. For this project, we included the DPR’s data on park acres
per 1,000 residents27, which is reported at the census tract level. Because of the difference in
reporting geography, we allocated DPR’s census tract data into ZCTAs using a geographic
crosswalk from census tracts to ZCTAs, weighted by the population of each tract.
Construction of the Indicators
Pre-existing Health Vulnerability
The Pre-existing Health Vulnerability indicator is meant to capture risks of COVID-19 infection
and death due to pre-existing health conditions that have been identified in scientific journals and
through input from health experts consulted for this project. This indicator is comprised of six
different variables, all of which are derived from the AskCHIS NE 2016 database, and which are
described below:
● Diabetes, defined as any adult respondent over the age of 18 ever diagnosed with diabetes
by a doctor. Diabetes has been identified in the literature as a pre-existing condition
increasing risk of COVID-19 infection or death5,7,9.
● Obesity, defined as any adult respondent over the age of 18 with a body mass index (BMI)
of 30.0 or above. Obesity has also been identified as a pre-existing condition that increases
likelihood of COVID-19 complications6,7,8,9.
● Heart Disease, defined as any adult respondent over the age of 18 ever diagnosed with heart
disease by a doctor. We included heart disease as a dimension in lieu of specific data on
hypertension which has been identified as one of the most common comorbidities related
to increased COVID-19 risk5,7,9.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

● Health Status, defined has any adult respondents ages 18-64 with fair or poor health. We
included health status as a measure of fair or poor health as a substitute for other preexisting health conditions absent from our data sources.i
● Mental Health, defined as any adult respondent over the age of 18 who reported serious
psychological distress in the past 12 months, constructed using the Kessler 6 series (K6
greater or equal to 13). People with severe mental health tend to have higher levels of preexisting conditions, such as Type 2 diabetes and heart disease, than the general
population28.
● Food Insecurity, defined as any adult respondent over the age of 18 with income less than
200% below the federal poverty line who self-identified their ability to afford enough
food29. We included this variable as a measure of poor nutrition. Poor nutrition is a leading
factor in contributing to widespread instances of diabetes and obesity across the world. 30
Barriers to Accessing Health Care
The indicator on Barriers to Accessing Health Care is meant to capture barriers that increase
difficulty in accessing COVID-19 and other general healthcare services. This indicator is
composed of five different variables, all derived from the 2014-18 5-year ACS data:
● Non-U.S. Citizens, defined as the share of immigrants who are not U.S. citizens. We
include non-U.S. citizens because this population often faces cultural and legal barriers to
accessing healthcare. Most of this group are from non-Western countries, and may risk
being labeled a “public charge,” which could potentially jeopardize their immigrant status.
A disproportionate number also have limited-English ability, and lack of health insurance,
which are factors included separately in the indicator.
● English Language Barrier; defined as the share of the population aged 5 years of older that
speak English “less than well”. Language barriers can often prevent people from accessing
important information in a timely manner. Many organizations lack the resources necessary
to provide documents in multiple-languages. Even if organizations have enough resources,
it takes time to provide all the necessary information in languages that are accessible to
different communities. This delay in translation applies to information regarding COVID19 risk and prevention.

The AskCHIS NE dataset also includes a separate variable on the health status of the elderly
(ages 65 and older). We constructed two versions of the pre-existing health indicator, one that
only includes ages 18-64 and an alternative that includes both ages 18-64 and 65 and up. The two
indicators are highly correlated (r value of 0.9897). However, the version that includes the
elderly had many more ZCTAs with no data, which is most likely a result of data suppression
due to small sample size. The indicator including the elderly covers 251 ZCTAs, while the one
that excludes the elderly covers 260 ZCTAs. Because the two are highly correlated and the
indicator without the elderly covered more ZCTAs overall, we opted to use 18-64 in the final
index.
i

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

• Lack of Broadband Access, defined as the share of households with a computer but without
broadband internet access. Lack of broadband hinders access to important information
distributed by local and federal health agencies regarding COVID-19, such as where to
find the closest COVID-19 testing center.
● Lack of Health Insurance, defined as the share of individuals without health insurance.
Despite the fact that the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES
Act) reimburses the medical cost of those with COVID-19, lack of healthcare insurance
may cause delays in accessing preventive care and seeking other health related benefits.
Moreover, many may not know about this provision in the CARES Act.
● Vehicles per Person, defined as the inverted ratio of vehicles available per person. We
inverted the ratio to indicate a higher level of vulnerability for households that have fewer
cars per person. Depending on the number of cars available per person, having the
availability to use a car for medical purposes might not be an option given that there might
be other priorities such as getting to work or school that prevents people in the household
from getting the healthcare they need. Moreover, some COVID-19 testing sites in Los
Angeles require that people arrive in a motorized vehicle. For example, Dodger Stadium
serves as LA County's largest coronavirus drive-thru testing site.
Built Environment Risk
The built environment risk indicator is meant to identify areas at higher risk of COVID-19
infection due to lack of adequate space available to adhere to shelter-in-place mandates and other
precautions that aim to limit the spread of COVID-19. The indicator is composed of four
variables:
● Population density, operationally defined as the total number of persons divided by the
ZCTA’s land area in square miles. Counts of the population are derived from the 2014-18
5-year ACS. Places that are densely populated increases the chances of encountering
people, which limits the ability to maintain social distancing guidelines and increases the
likelihood of encountering a COVID-19 carrier.
● Building structure density, operationally defined as housing structures with 10 or more
units divided by the total housing stock (i.e. as a share of all housing units in the ZCTA).
Similar to population density, building density also increases chances of encountering
people which limits social distance guidelines and increases likelihood of encountering a
COVID-19 carrier. We focus on 10 or more units because as opposed to including all multiunits (e.g. duplexes, triplexes), structures with 10 or more units are more likely to increase
one odds of encountering people in common areas (e.g. lobby, hallways, mailrooms) and
therefore increases the risk and COVID-19 contagion.
● In-unit housing crowding, operationally defined as having 1.01 or more persons per room.
In-unit crowding can increase a person’s risk to COVID-19 infection. If someone in a
household becomes infected with COVID-19 and there is not a room for them to quarantine

0

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in, the rest of the household has a higher risk of contracting the disease. A study recently
found that areas with the highest number of COVID-19 cases faced three-times the level
of overcrowding than areas with the lowest number of COVID-19 cases31.
● Availability of parks and open space per 1,000 residents. Areas with more parks and open
space enable individuals to more easily keep physically and mentally fit through outdoor
exercise or activity.
Social Vulnerability Index
The social vulnerability indicator is a close replica of the 2018 Social Vulnerability Index (SVI),
which was created by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to identify
vulnerable areas in need of preparation and response to hazardous events or natural disasters.
The SVI indicator addresses the level to which community experiences different social
conditions, such as unemployment and that might affect its ability to prepare and respond to
hazardous events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The CDC’s SVI is only available at the
census tract level. We utilize the same data source used by the CDC to construct their SVI, 201418 5-year ACS, and adopted the same methodological approach to construct the SVI for ZCTAs.
A total of 15 variables, organized into four dimensions, are used to construct the SVI for ZCTAs
in Los Angeles County. Each component of the SVI is described below.
Socioeconomic Status
● Persons Below Poverty, defined as the share of persons with income below the federal
poverty line;
● Unemployed, defined as the share of civilian labor force population (ages 16 and up) who
are unemployed;
● Per capita Income; is a measure of the amount of income earned per person
● No High School Diploma, defined as share of persons age 25 and older with no high school
diploma;
Household Composition
● Persons Aged 65 or Older as a share of the total population;
● Persons Aged 17 or Younger as a share of the total population;
● Civilian noninstitutionalized population with a disability; defined as any individuals age 5
years or older with a disability;
● Single-Parent Households with children under 18 as a share of total households;

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Minority Status and Language
● Racial Minority Population, defined as the share of the population who are not nonHispanic white (e.g. total population minus non-Hispanic white);
● Speaks English “Less than Well”; defined as the share of the population aged 5 years of
older that speak English “less than well”;
Housing Type and Transportation
● Multi-Unit Structure, defined as the share of housing structures with 10 housing units or
more;
● Mobile Homes, defined as the share of mobile homes;
● In-unit Housing Crowding, defined as having 1.01 or more persons per room;
● No Vehicle Households, define as households with no vehicles available as a share of all
households;
● Group Quarters, defined as share of persons in institutionalized group quarters.
Ranking Methodology
The project adopts a ranking approach to construct each of the four composite indicators. Only
ZCTAs within Los Angeles County are included in this processii. We adopted the ranking
approach utilized by the CDC to construct their Social Vulnerability Index. iii The advantage of
utilizing this approach is consistency in method in constructing the project's four indicators.
For each of the four composite indicators, we first rank each of the key underlying variables used
to construct each index. Using the ranking procedure in SAS, statistical software, we rank each
individual variable, with ranking values ranging from 0 to 99, which represent percentile
rankings. After ranking each underlying variable, we then summed the percentiles ranking, and
conducted a second wave of ranking using the summed percentiles. This in the end represents the
actual composite score.

ii

We utilized the geographic crosswalk (ZCTAs to county) from the Missouri Data Center (2018
Geocorr) to identify ZCTAs in Los Angeles County. Only those ZCTAs that have at least an
allocation score of 90% were included. The allocation factor indicates what proportion of the
ZCTA, weighted by population, belongs in Los Angeles County (there are some ZCTAs that
cross into neighboring counties).
iii For further details on the CDC’s SVI methodology see:
https://svi.cdc.gov/Documents/Data/2018_SVI_Data/SVI2018Documentation.pdf
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In the case of the Social Vulnerability index which is composed of multiple variables, organized
by four key dimensions, three rankings are involved: first, ranking each variable in each
dimension, ranking of the sum of the key variables, and lastly a ranking of a sum of all of the
variables and dimensions combined.
It is important to note that there are cases where a ZCTA may not have values or data across all
underlying variables. In these cases, the ZCTA was excluded. In other words, a ZCTA must have
a reported value (no missing data) for each of the underlying variables that are needed to
construct the index. If there is missing data for one of the components, then no index is
calculated for the ZCTA.
For analytical purposes and for mapping, we rank indicators into quintiles, from lowest to
highest vulnerability. Each quintile group contains roughly 56 ZCTAs. Maps for each of the four
vulnerability indicators are displayed in the next section.
Results
Maps
The following maps display neighborhoods in Los Angeles County by their level of vulnerability
across each of the four indicators: pre-existing conditions, barriers to accessing healthcare, build
environment risk, and social vulnerability. ZCTAs are grouped into quintile categories (five
groups) based on their composite scores for each of the four indicators, ranging from lowest to
highest vulnerability. Each quintile group contains roughly 20% of all ZCTAs within Los
Angeles County.
The brown areas represent neighborhoods that are vulnerable, with darker brown denoting the
greatest vulnerability. The green areas represent neighborhoods that are less vulnerable, with the
darker green denoting the lowest vulnerability. We also provide a map, displayed in Figure 1,
using regions defined by the Los Angeles Times to provide as visual aid for understanding the
layout of neighborhoods across Los Angeles iv.
Overall, we find that neighborhoods located in areas around South Los Angeles and the eastern
sides of the San Fernando Valley are within the highest vulnerability quintile across all indicators.
These areas have a disproportionately high number of low-income households and people of color.
In contrast, communities located along the coast and the Northwest County is within the lowest
vulnerability across all four indicators. The residents in these neighborhoods are disproportionately
non-Hispanic White and high-income.

Los Angeles Times “Mapping L.A. Boundaries API”: http://boundaries.latimes.com/sets/.
Retrieved on September 30, 2020
iv

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

----INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE---In the Pre-existing Health Vulnerability map, Figure 2, neighborhoods in the high or highest
vulnerability quintiles include those in the Antelope Valley, the San Fernando Valley, Boyle
Heights and East Los Angeles, and neighborhoods in South Los Angeles. In contrast, the least
vulnerable neighborhoods are located in Northwest County as well as across all coastal
neighborhoods.
----INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE---Figure 3 displays the map for the Barriers to Healthcare indicator. Neighborhoods that are in the
high or highest vulnerability are located mainly in Central Los Angeles, South and Southeast L.A.,
as well as pockets of neighborhoods in the San Fernando and San Gabriel Valley. The
neighborhoods falling within the lowest vulnerability are again located along the coast and in
Northwest County.
----INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE---For the Built Environment Risk indicator, Figure 4, regions in the high or highest vulnerability
quintile are again concentrated in Central L.A., Eastside L.A., South L.A. and San Fernando
Valley. In contrast, communities within the lowest quintiles expand around the city's outskirts and
include neighborhoods in Northwest County, the Antelope Valley, and the Santa Monica
mountains.
----INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE---Finally, neighborhoods in the high and highest vulnerability quintiles for the Social Vulnerability
Index, Figure 5, are located in the Antelope Valley, the San Fernando Valley, Northeast L.A.,
Eastside, South and Southeast L.A., and the Harbor. The lowest SVI vulnerability neighborhoods
are the coastal communities and in Northwest County.
----INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE---Data Analysis Results for Indicators
For this report's analytical component, we investigated the racial distribution of vulnerability
across each of the four indicators. We further explore racial parity by examining the level of
vulnerability across the four indicators based on the majority race for each ZCTA. Majority race
is defined as having an ethnoracial composition greater or equal to 50% for a particular ZCTA
(e.g. if the population of Blacks in a ZCTA is 50% or more then the ZCTA is designated as a
“Majority Black” neighborhood). (Appendix A includes additional analysis of variations by
neighborhood socio-demographic characteristics)

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Ethnoracial Distribution of Vulnerability
The purpose of this analysis is to understand the distribution of different ethnoracial groups across
each vulnerability indicator. In each of the figures below, each bar represents a given racial group,
and segments denote the percent population within a given vulnerability quintile for each indicator.
The data is ranked from the lowest to the highest vulnerability. Brown indicates a high
vulnerability, with a darker brown indicating a higher vulnerability level. Green represents lower
vulnerability, with a darker green indicating a lower level of vulnerability.
We included five ethnoracial groups: Non-Hispanic white (NH White); Black; Latinx;
Cambodians, Hmongs and Laotians combined (CHL Asians); and Other Asians. Asian Americans
are a heterogeneous ethnoracial group and also diverse with respect to socioeconomic outcomes.
We separate out Cambodians, Hmongs, and Laotians from other Asians since these groups tend to
be among the most economically disadvantaged within the Asian American subgroups in Los
Angeles County.
Figure 6, illustrates the uneven distribution of Pre-Existing Health Vulnerability across racial
groups. Black individuals carry the highest burden of pre-existing health conditions. Nearly 3/4th
(73%) of the African American population in the county reside in neighborhoods designated as
either high or highest vulnerability as measured by the pre-existing health condition index. In
contrast, only 8% of the Black population resides in neighborhoods with the lowest level of
vulnerability. Similarly, a high share of the Latinx and CHL Asian populations also reside in the
most vulnerable neighborhoods. About 70% of the Latinx and 60% of the CHL Asian population
reside in neighborhoods with either high or highest levels of vulnerability. In comparison, only
about 5% and 4% of their respective population live in neighborhoods with the lowest level of
vulnerability. Conversely, neighborhoods in the lowest vulnerable category contain a higher
percent of non-Hispanic whites when compared with the highest vulnerable category. Close to
60% of the NH white population in the county reside in either the low or lowest vulnerable
neighborhoods.
----INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE---Similarly, in Figure 7, we find that people of color are more likely to reside in neighborhoods with
more Barriers to Accessing Healthcare. Forty percent of the Latinx population resides in
neighborhoods with the highest level of vulnerability, while only 5% of the population resides in
neighborhoods with the lowest level of vulnerability. Black, CHL Asian, and Other Asians are also
disproportionately located in neighborhoods with the highest level of vulnerability (29%, 22%,
and 16% respectively). In contrast, 7% of the NH White population resides in neighborhoods with
the highest level of vulnerability, while 31% of whites reside in neighborhoods with the lowest
level of vulnerability.
----INSERT FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE----

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In Figure 8, we observe that in the Built-Environment Risk indicator, Black, Latinx and CHL Asian
populations are heavily concentrated in neighborhoods designated as either high or highest levels
of vulnerability (53%, 55%, 63% respectively). In contrast, about one third (32%) of the county’s
NH White population reside in high or highest vulnerability neighborhoods as it relates to the built
environment, while almost half (49%) reside in neighborhoods with the lowest level of
vulnerability.
----INSERT FIGURE 8 ABOUT HERE---Lastly, Figure 9, displays the five ethnoracial groups’ distribution by the neighborhoods Social
Vulnerability Index. This process is partly tautological because the Social Vulnerability Index
includes the shared minority population; nonetheless, the graph does demonstrate a
disproportionate distribution of vulnerability across different racial and ethnic communities. The
Black, Hispanic, and CHL Asian populations reside in neighborhoods with the highest level of
social vulnerability. About 42% of the Black population resides in neighborhoods with the highest
vulnerability, while only 7% reside in neighborhoods with the lowest vulnerability. Similarly,
about 42% of the Latinx population resides in neighborhoods with the highest vulnerability, while
only 5% reside in neighborhoods with the lowest vulnerability. Likewise, about 38% of the CHL
Asian population resides in neighborhoods with the highest vulnerability, while only 9% reside in
neighborhoods with the lowest vulnerability. Again, the NH White population resides mainly in
neighborhoods with the lowest level of vulnerability (31%) as measured by the SVI, while only a
small share of their population (8%) resides in neighborhoods with the highest level of
vulnerability.
----INSERT FIGURE 9 ABOUT HERE---Vulnerability Levels By Racial Majority Groups
We further analyzed the four indicators of COVID-19 vulnerability by categorizing ZCTA’s into
racial majorities and comparing their average vulnerability scores. Ethnoracial majority was
assigned based on the racial and ethnic composition of each ZCTA. For instance, if a group makes
up 50% or more of the population in the ZCTA then that group is assigned as being the majority
ethnoracial group for that ZCTA. ZCTAs with no majority of one ethnoracial group are designated
as “No Majority”. v Figure 10 displays ZCTAs by their majority ethnoracial designation.
----INSERT FIGURE 10 ABOUT HERE---We weighted each ZCTA by the area’s total population and then calculated the average
vulnerability score for each neighborhood type. The higher the average values the more
v

Of the 284 ZCTAs utilized in this analysis, 84 are majority NH white, 6 majority Black, 101 majority Latinx, 15
majority Asian, and 78 “No Majority” ZCTAs.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

vulnerability. Across all four indicators, we see changes in the racial patterns of vulnerability. In
Figure 11, majority Black and Latinx neighborhoods tend to have the highest pre-existing health
vulnerability compared to other racial groups. In contrast, majority NH White neighborhoods tend
to have the lowest level vulnerability. Additionally, as illustrated in Figure 12, neighborhoods with
a majority Latinx population have the highest level of barriers to accessing healthcare, followed
by neighborhoods with majority Asian populations. This is not surprising given that these two
groups are largely immigrant populations and with language barriers. In contrast, majority NH
white neighborhoods have the lowest level of barriers to accessing healthcare.
Figure 13 illustrates the distribution of built environment risk across racial groups. Majority Latinx
neighborhoods tend to be more vulnerable to built environment risk compared to other groups.
Interestingly enough, NH White, Asian, and Black majority neighborhoods are all within the low
vulnerability range. Neighborhoods with a majority Black population have the lowest level of built
environment risk. One probable explanation could be due to the location of these majority
neighborhoods for Asians and Blacks, which in Los Angeles county, tend to be in less dense
neighborhoods (out of the central city) with more single-family homes as in the case of Inglewood
for African Americans and San Gabriel Valley for Asians.
Finally, the Social Vulnerability Index, illustrated in Figure 14, shows that neighborhoods with
majority Latinx and majority Black populations have the highest level of social vulnerability,
while majority non-white neighborhoods have the lowest vulnerability.
----INSERT FIGURES 11 TO 14 ABOUT HERE---Neighborhood Socio-Demographic Characteristics by Levels of Medical Vulnerability
We also examine how each of the indicators correlate with neighborhood socio-demographic
characteristics. The focus is on whether burdens are higher in disadvantaged communities (lower
income, predominantly communities of color, and neighborhoods with a relatively large number
of individuals with language barriers). It’s important to note that some of these sociodemographic variables analyzed are also embedded in some of the indices as underlying
variables. We ranked neighborhoods from lowest to highest quintiles for each of the vulnerability
indicators. The reported values represent the average (mean) of each variable for all the ZCTAs
in each neighborhood group (quintiles).
The results in Table 1, illustrate the distribution of race, language barriers, and income across
neighborhoods with different levels of pre-existing health vulnerability. Neighborhoods with the
highest vulnerability disproportionately have a higher percentage of Latinx residents while
neighborhoods in the lowest vulnerability have a higher percentage of non-hispanic white
individuals. Additionally, neighborhoods with higher levels of vulnerability also
disproportionately have more residents with language barriers (speaks English “less than well”)
and have lower per capita income. For example, on average, the highest vulnerable
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

neighborhoods have four times more residents with English language barrier than the lowest
vulnerable neighborhoods. Additionally, the average per capita income in the highest vulnerable
neighborhood is nearly 3.5 times less than the lowest vulnerable neighborhoods.
----INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE---Similar patterns are found in Table 2, 3 and 4, with the neighborhoods in the highest level of
vulnerability for each of the indicators consisting of predominately Latinx and Black residents
compared to neighborhoods in the lowest level of vulnerability. In contrast, the lowest vulnerable
neighborhoods disproportionately have more non-Hispanic white residents. Furthermore, higher
vulnerable neighborhoods across all indicators have a higher share of residents with English
language barriers and lower income residents as opposed to the lower vulnerable neighborhoods.
----INSERT TABLES 2, 3, 4 ABOUT HERE---Discussion and Conclusion
This project developed four key indicators capturing different dimensions of COVID-19 related
vulnerabilities. These indicators address multiple factors associated with increased risk of
COVID-19 infections and mortality: pre-existing health conditions, barriers to accessing
healthcare, built environment risk, and social vulnerability. We map each of the indicators to
illustrate the different levels of vulnerability across Los Angeles County.
These four indicators share commonalities but are not identical. The analyses presented in the
previous sections review similarities in terms of the most vulnerable neighborhoods. For
instance, the most vulnerable neighborhoods across all indicators tend to be concentrated in areas
within South Los Angeles and the San Fernando Valley. These places are marked by low income
racial communities, while neighborhoods that showed up as being the least vulnerable are along
the coastal regions of the county marked by less density, higher incomes and higher proportions
of non-Hispanic Whites. In addition to mapping the four indicators, we presented a quantitative
analysis of the socioeconomic and demographic profiles of the most and least vulnerable
neighborhoods. Consistently across all indicators, the highest vulnerable are disproportionately
people of color and low- income, relative to communities at the other end of the spectrum.
At the same time, there are variations across dimensions. The four indicators have low to high
correlations (r values range from 0.38 for built environment risk and pre-existing health to 0.89
for SVI and barriers to accessing health care), indicating that each indicator is partially capturing
unique elements of vulnerability. (See Appendix A for full correlation table). In other words,
systemic inequality of vulnerability is complex, requiring multiple indices to fully understand the
systematic pattern. This also means that addressing one’s vulnerability along one dimension does
not automatically translate into addressing risks along the other dimensions. (For example,

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

alternating colors and shades of colors in the above maps show that places in the northeastern
section of Los Angeles County are not highly vulnerable to one type of risk but are highly
vulnerable to another type of risk.)
The usefulness of the indicators varies with the types of policies and plans being developed to
assist those most at risk from COVID-19’s direct and indirect impacts. For example, health
planners would be more focused on pre-existing health conditions, and urban planners would be
more focused on the built environment. It is the context of population health and the
responsibilities of public health to address the health of its locale that data such as ours can serve
as a roadmap. Public health is charged with decision-making of the distribution of health care
resources, the multi-sectorial planning needed to address complex risk vulnerabilities and
prevention efforts to stop or slow new infections. We provide a method for consideration of how
resources to prevent new infections and associated morbidities should be provided to
neighborhoods in the areas identified and prioritized by relevant indicators. We are providing
information that combines medical needs with the social determinants of health outcomes which
create risk and risk clusters in neighborhoods and in racial/ethnic populations.
We believe that the local data can enable public health agencies to better target scarce funds to
improve the effectiveness of testing and monitoring of the disease. Local data can provide crucial
knowledge and insights to social service providers, emergency agencies, and volunteers on where
to direct their time and resources, such as where to set up distribution sites for food and other
necessities. The ability to integrate these community factors to COVID-19 prevention plans is
essential in determining where to secure hotel rooms for quarantine and social isolation. These
informed and evidence-based actions are critical elements in slowing the spread of the disease.
The data will continue to be valuable over the foreseeable future. Knowing where and who needs
assistance allows responsible agencies to plan for the next wave of COVID-19 and for future
pandemics to assist people dealing with housing, mental health, suicide and substance abuse issues.
While the information is useful to more efficiently allocate existing resources, we believe that
more resources are needed. It is vital that state and local officials increase or shift funding in order
to provide appropriate healthcare services and coverage for neighborhoods with high pre-existing
health and social vulnerabilities. It is also necessary that state and local officials provide
significantly more preventive resources and adequate health information to communities with high
barriers to accessing healthcare. Furthermore, state officials and local policy makers should focus
their efforts to physically transform neighborhoods with high built-environment risk and social
vulnerabilities, to make these spaces safe for social distancing and quarantine efforts. Our data
clearly show that communities with high built environment risk contain small living quarters,
dense conditions and lack parks and greenery. We need community development that makes the
neighborhood into healthy places.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

It is our hope that our neighborhood and medical vulnerability indicators will be employed by local
agencies to reduce and potentially halt new infections in areas of particularly high risk as a part of
local efforts’ to move the county into conditions that can facilitate greater opening up of the city
in order to support economic recovery. It is our hopes that these results can help guide Los Angeles
County and even be used at the level of medical vulnerability indicators for the State of California
as part of the science of openings that is coupled with equity considerations for some of the most
vulnerable. These data also provide an equitable approach for the distribution of resources such as
testing, vaccine priorities and provision of PPE and financial resources.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1

Tracking the coronavirus in Los Angeles County. Los Angeles Times.
https://www.latimes.com/projects/california-coronavirus-cases-tracking-outbreak/los-angelescounty/ (accessed on September 30, 2020).
2 Gross, CP, Essien, UR, Pasha, S, Gross, JR, et al. Racial and ethnic disparities in population
level COVID-19 mortality. MedRxiv 2020.
3 DiMaggio, C, Klein, M, Berry, C, Frangos, S. Blacks/African American communities are at
highest risk of COVID-19: Spatial modeling of New York City ZIP code-level testing results.
Annals of epidemiology 2020;51:7-13.
4 Wiemers, EE, Abrahams, S, AlFakhri, M, Hotz, VJ, et al. Disparities in Vulnerability to Severe
Complications from COVID-19 in the United States (No. w27294). MedRxiv 2020.
5 Myers, LC, Parodi, SM, Escobar, GJ, Liu, VX. Characteristics of hospitalized adults with
COVID-19 in an integrated health care system in California. Jama 2020; 323(31):2195-8.
6
Hajifathalian, K, Kumar, S, Newberry, C, Shah, S, et al. Obesity is associated with worse
outcomes in COVID‐19: Analysis of early data from New York City. Obesity 2020;28(9):160612.
7 Richardson, S, Hirsch, JS, Narasimhan, M, Crawford, JM, et al. Presenting characteristics,
comorbidities, and outcomes among 5700 patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the New York
City area. Jama 2020;323(20):2052-59.
8
Kalligeros, M, Shehadeh, F, Mylona, EK, Benitez, G, et al. Association of obesity with disease
severity among patients with COVID-19. Obesity 2020;28(7):1200-4.
9 Argenziano, MG, Bruce, SL, Slater, CL, Tiao, JR, et al. Characterization and clinical course of
1000 patients with coronavirus disease 2019 in New York: Retrospective case series. BMJ
2020;369:m1996.
10 Chow, N, Fleming-Dutra, K, Gierke, R, Hall, A, et al. Preliminary estimates of the prevalence
of selected underlying health conditions among patients with coronavirus disease 2019—United
States, February 12–March 28, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2020;69(13), 382.
11 Macias Gil, R, Marcelin, JR, Zuniga-Blanco, B, Marquez, C, et al. COVID-19 pandemic:
disparate health impact on the Hispanic/Latinx population in the United States. The Journal of
Infectious Diseases 2020; 222(10):1592-95.
12 Yancy, CW. COVID-19 and African Americans. Jama 2020;323(19):1891-2.
13 Kanter, GP, Segal, AG, Groeneveld, PW. Income disparities in access to critical care services:
Study examines disparities in community intensive care unit beds by US communities’ median
household income. Health Affairs, 2020;39(8):1362-7.
14 Fortuna, LR, Tolou-Shams, M, Robles-Ramamurthy, B, Porche, MV. Inequity and the
disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on communities of color in the United States: The need
for a trauma-informed social justice response. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research,
Practice, and Policy 2020;12(5):442-5
15 Azar, KM, Shen, Z, Romanelli, RJ, Lockhart, SH, et al. Disparities in outcomes among
COVID-19 patients in a large health care system in California: Study examines disparities in
access and outcomes for COVID-19 patients who are members of racial and ethnic minorities
and socioeconomically disadvantaged groups. Health Affairs 2020;39(7).
16
Tai, DBG, Shah, A, Doubeni, CA, Sia, IG, et al. The disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on
racial and ethnic minorities in the United States. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2020;ciaa815.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

17

Davis, JB. Stratification economics and identity economics. Cambridge Journal of Economics
2015;39(5), 1215-29.
18 Ong, PM, & Gonzalez, SR. Uneven Urbanscape: Spatial Structures and Ethnoracial
Inequality. Cambridge University Press 2019.
19 van Dorn, A, Cooney, RE, Sabin, ML. COVID-19 exacerbating inequalities in the US. Lancet
(London, England) 2020;395(10232):1243.
20 Fontanet, A, Cauchemez, S. COVID-19 herd immunity: Where are we?. Nature Reviews
Immunology 2020;20:583-4.
21 Kwok, KO, Lai, F, Wei, WI, Wong, SYS. Herd immunity–estimating the level required to halt
the COVID-19 epidemics in affected countries. Journal of Infection 2020;80(6):e32-e33.
22 Patel, JA, Nielsen, FBH, Badiani, AA, Assi, S. Poverty, inequality and COVID-19: The
forgotten vulnerable. Public Health 2020;183:110-1.
23
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry/Geospatial Research, Analysis, and Services Program. Social Vulnerability Index 2018
Documentation. CDC 2018.
https://svi.cdc.gov/Documents/Data/2018_SVI_Data/SVI2018Documentation-508.pdf
24 Bureau, U.S. ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs). 2020. https://www.census.gov/programssurveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/zctas.html
25 AskCHIS Neighborhood Edition: https://askchisne.ucla.edu/ask/_layouts/ne/dashboard.aspx.
(accessed on September 30, 2020).
26 About the American Community Survey. United States Census Bureau..
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs. (accessed on September 30, 2020).
27 Parks for California. https://www.parksforcalifornia.org/methods (accessed on September 30,
2020).
28 Kavoor, AR. COVID-19 in people with mental illness: Challenges and vulnerabilities. Asian
Journal of Psychiatry 2020;51:102051.
29 AskCHIS NE Indicator Definitions.
http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/Lists/AskCHIS%20NE%20Indicator%20Definitions/AllItems.aspx.
(accessed on September 30, 2020).
30 Butler, MJ, Barrientos, RM. The impact of nutrition on COVID-19 susceptibility and longterm consequences. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 2020;87:53-4.
31 Botts, J.“California divide: How we analyzed the link between COVID-19 and crowded
housing in California. CalMatters. 2020. https://calmatters.org/projects/california-coronavirusovercrowded-housing-data-analysis/ (accessed on September 30, 2020)

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Contributor/Guarantor Information
The corresponding author attests that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others
meeting the criteria have been omitted. The study was conceptualized by PMO and VMM,
indicators were developed by PMO, CP, NRG, VMM, analyses were conducted by PMO, CP,
mapping was done by CP and NRG, first draft of the manuscript was written by PMO, CP, NRG
and all authors edited and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We thank the UCLA’s BRITE Center on Science, Research & Policy
(www.minoritydisparities.org) (MD 006932) for providing partial support for this research and
analyses. This project builds on the UCLA Center for Neighborhood Knowledge’s (CNK)
COVID-19 Equity Research Initiative, which includes studies examining how the negative
economic impacts of COVID-19 are distributed across neighborhoods. We are grateful to the
UCLA Latino Policy and Politics Initiative, UCLA Luskin Institute on Inequality and
Democracy, UCLA Asian American Studies Center, UCLA American Indian Studies Center,
UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate and the University of California Office of the President
(CBCRP Grant #R00RG2606) for their partnership and collaboration with the Initiative. These
organizations supported previous work which serves as a partial foundation for the analytical
work in this report. The authors alone are responsible for the content of this manuscript.

Disclaimer
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the University
of California, Los Angeles or the National Institute of Health as a whole. The authors alone are
responsible for the content of this report.

Competing Interests Declaration
All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form
at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare; no financial relationships with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; no
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Los Angeles County Regions

.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Pre-Existing Health Vulnerability, Los Angeles County

Figure 2 demonstrates the pre-existing health vulnerability in Los Angeles County, which captures
the risks of COVID-19 infection and death as a result of pre-existing health conditions. These
conditions include diabetes, obesity, heart disease, health status, mental health, and food
insecurity.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. Barriers to Accessing Healthcare, Los Angeles County

Figure 3 illustrates the vulnerability due to barriers to accessing health care, which captures
barriers that increase difficulty in accessing COVID-19 and other general healthcare services. The
five variables that make up this indicator include non-U.S. citizen status, English language barrier,
lack of broadband access, lack of health insurance, and vehicles per person.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. Built Environment Risk, Los Angeles County

Figure 4 depicts the built environment risk indicator, which identifies areas at higher risk for
COVID-19 infection due to lack of adequate space available to follow shelter-in-place mandates
and other precautions necessary to limit the spread of COVID-19. Four variables define this
indicator: population density, building structure density, in-unit housing crowding, and
availability of parks and open space per 1,000 residents.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5. Social Vulnerability Index, Los Angeles County

Figure 5 captures the social vulnerability index, which identifies vulnerable areas in need of
preparation and response to hazardous events or natural disasters. The four components of this
index include socioeconomic status, household composition, minority status and language, and
housing type and transportation.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6. Ethnoracial Distribution by Pre-Existing Health Vulnerability

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 7. Ethnoracial Distribution by Neighborhood Barriers to Accessing Healthcare

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 8. Ethnoracial Distribution by Neighborhood Built Environment Vulnerability

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 9. Ethnoracial Distribution by Neighborhood Social Vulnerability Index

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 10. ZCTAs in Los Angeles County by Majority Ethnoracial Group

Figure 10 identifies the majority ethnoracial group in each Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) as
determined by the Bureau of Census.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 11. Average Pre-Existing Health Vulnerability Index by Los Angeles County
Neighborhood’s Racial Majority

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 12. Average Barriers to Accessing Health Index by Los Angeles County’s
Neighborhood’s Racial Majority

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 13. Average Built Environment Risk Index by Los Angeles Neighborhood’s Racial
Majority

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 14. Average Social Vulnerability Index by Los Angeles County Neighborhood’s Racial
Majority

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Neighborhood Socio-Demographic Characteristics by Level of Pre-Existing Health
Vulnerability
Lowest

Low

Moderate

High

Highest

Distribution by Race
%NH white

60%

42%

31%

19%

7%

%Black

5%

6%

5%

6%

19%

%Latinx

15%

25%

41%

61%

68%

%Asian

16%

24%

20%

12%

4%

4%

8%

12%

16%

16%

$67.4k

$40.6k

$31.9k

$23.9k

$19.6k

51

52

52

53

52

% Speaks English
“less than well”
Per Capita Income
N (ZCTAs)

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2. Neighborhood Socio-Demographic Characteristics by Level of Social Vulnerability
Lowest

Low

Moderate

High

Highest

Distribution by Race
%NH white

60%

48%

31%

21%

8%

%Black

4%

5%

7%

11%

13%

%Latinx

15%

26%

40%

52%

70%

%Asian

16%

18%

19%

14%

9%

% Speaks English
“less than well”

3%

6%

10%

15%

20%

Per Capita Income

$63.9k

$49.0

$33.3k

$26.5

$18.6

55

56

55

56

55

N (ZCTAs)

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Neighborhood Socio-Demographic Characteristics by Level of Barriers to Accessing
HealthCare
Lowest

Low

Moderate

High

Highest

Distribution by Race
%NH white

62%

47%

29%

20%

10%

%Black

5%

7%

9%

9%

9%

%Latinx

17%

24%

41%

52%

70%

%Asian

12%

18%

18%

18%

10%

% Speaks English
“less than well”

2%

5%

9%

15%

23%

Per Capita Income

$66.0k

$48.4k

$31.7k

$26.3k

$19.0k

55

56

55

56

55

N (ZCTAs)

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.20215657; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 4. Neighborhood Socio-Demographic Characteristics by Built Environment Vulnerability
Lowest

Low

Moderate

High

Highest

Distribution by Race
%NH white

49%

40%

30%

25%

23%

8%

6%

7%

9%

9%

%Latinx

23%

37%

41%

50%

51%

%Asian

16%

14%

19%

13%

14%

% Speaks English
“less than well”

4%

7%

11%

14%

18%

Per Capita Income

$51.4k

$43.6k

$36.3k

$31.5k

$28.5k

55

56

55

56

55

%Black

N (ZCTAs)

31

