medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1

Model for evaluating cost-effectiveness of surveillance testing for SARS-CoV2
Jonathan Silver, MD MBA

Retired, Principal Investigator, NIAID, NIH
Email: jonathan.silver4@gmail.com
Postal address: 7516 Arrowood Road, Bethesda MD 20817
Cell phone: 240 780 1245

Abstract Testing people without symptoms for SARS-CoV-2 followed by isolation of those
.

who test positive could mitigate the covid-19 epidemic pending arrival of an effective vaccine.
Key questions for such programs are who should be tested, how often, and when should such
testing stop. Answers to these questions depend on test and population characteristics. A costeffectiveness model that provides answers depending on user-adjustable parameter values is
described. Key parameters are the value ascribed to preventing a death and the reproduction
number (roughly, rate of spread) at the time surveillance testing is initiated. For current rates of
spread, cost-effectiveness usually requires a value per life saved greater than $100,000 and
depends critically on the extent and frequency of testing.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2

. With renewed emphasis on testing for SARS-CoV2 (1) and the emergence of

Introduction

cheaper testing modalities (2), design and evaluation of testing programs are of increased
importance. Since the main purpose of testing is to identify cases so that they can be isolated to
prevent further spread, a critical measure is the number of secondary cases averted per dollar
spent on testing. This number will be higher, all else being equal, if testing is focused on those
with higher rates of infection – such as those with symptoms, contacts of those with covid-19,
people who have many contacts due to their work, or who live in areas with high incidence.
Once “high-yield” groups are exhausted, testing could extend to people with no identifiable
high prevalence characteristics. A recent paper assessed cost-effectiveness of testing those with
symptoms versus testing whole populations once or monthly, concluding that monthly testing
is cost-effective under some circumstances (3). How extensive should such surveillance testing
be, and how often should it be done? A model is needed to answer these questions. A little
thought shows that the answers depend on many variables, such as current disease prevalence,
test sensitivity, delays (if any) in isolating those who test positive, test costs, values ascribed to
saving lives, etc. This paper describes a model that allows users, including those without
programming skills, to easily change parameter values and compare results for a range of
values. The model first calculates how much a given surveillance testing program would reduce
the number of secondary cases per primary case, and then uses a “Susceptible-InfectedRemoved” (SIR) epidemiological model (4) to estimate how many cases would be averted by
testing over a period of time. Based on (user-modifiable) values ascribed to averting
hospitalizations and deaths, the model calculates cost-effectiveness from a societal point of
view, and determines the fraction of the population that should be tested and the frequency of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

testing to maximize cost-effectiveness. It also estimates the time at which surveillance testing
ceases to be cost-effective, and the fraction of tests that are positive at this time, possibly
useful as a proxy for cost-effectiveness. The model could be useful for those considering
whether to implement surveillance testing, and in the design or evaluation of such programs.
. For simplicity, the model assumes that people with covid-19 are infectious for an

Assumptions

average of 15 days and are equally infectious on each of these days. The duration of infectivity
can be changed in the model. Consider a public health program that tests a fraction f of the
population, chosen at random, every p days, with a test that has a sensitivity s (sensitivity =
proportion of those with covid-19 who test positive). Further suppose that test results are
available only after a potential delay so that those who test positive are isolated j days after
testing, where j is an integer between 0 and 14. If j were 15 or greater, the test would not avert
any cases so j>14 is not considered. Let R0 designate the average number of secondary cases
per primary case in the absence of random testing. At the beginning of the pandemic, R0 was
estimated to be ∼2.5, but with social distancing measures R0 has come down to ∼1.0-1.5 in the
US (5).
Number of secondary cases averted by surveillance testing.

When surveillance testing is done

once every 15 days or less often, the number of secondary cases prevented per primary case
can be estimated as f*s*R0*(14-j)*(15-j)/(30p). A derivation is provided in the supplement. This
estimate simplifies to ≈ f*s*R0/2 for j=0 and p=15 days. If only a fraction c of those tested
comply with isolation, the number of secondary cases averted per primary case is reduced by a
factor c. This estimate is based on multiplying the probability that testing is done on any
particular day of an infected person’s infectious period, times the number of secondary cases

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4

averted if testing were done on that day, and summing over all days that result in averting
cases.
If testing is done more frequently than once per infectious period, the calculation is more
involved since it must consider the possibility that an infected person is not detected on the
first several test dates during his/her infectious period, but then detected on a subsequent test.
The number of cases averted from such late detections declines because there are fewer days
left in an infectious period for isolation to have an impact. This calculation is described in more
detail in the supplement.
Optimal test fraction and frequency given budget constraint.

If there were no cap on

spending, the greatest reduction in spread would occur if everyone were tested (f=1) as often
as possible (e.g. daily, p=1). But if an organization has a budget for random testing, f=1 and p=1
may exceed the budget; in this case what fraction f of the population should be tested, at what
frequency (1/p), to provide the greatest reduction in spread? The optimum turns out to be
testing once per infectious period or less often, with the fraction tested determined by how
many tests the budget allows when testing is performed every p days. Mathematical details are
provided in the Supplement. In other words, all combinations of f and p constrained by the
budget, but with p greater than or equal to the infectious period, are equally efficient in
reducing secondary cases. Testing more frequently than once per infectious period is less
efficient because then some of the cases detected come from those tested more than once,
resulting in more dollars being spent per case detected.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5
Guideline for when confirmatory polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests should be done for

those who test positive on screening tests.

Antigen tests for SARS-CoV2 recently approved by

the FDA promise to be less expensive than pcr but may suffer from high false positive rates (2).
False positives from non-pcr screening tests could be dealt with by doing a confirmatory pcr
test on all those whose screening test is positive. From a cost-effectiveness point of view,
confirmatory pcr tests should be done when the cost of doing confirmatory tests is less than the
cost of isolating those who falsely test positive. An argument in the supplement shows that this
is equivalent to doing confirmatory tests when the false positive rate exceeds the ratio of the
cost of a pcr test to the cost of isolation. The latter might be estimated as the average value of
2 weeks of lost income or about $2000 in the US. If pcr tests cost $100, then it would be cost
effective to use them to confirm positive screening tests when the false positive rate exceeds 5
percent.
User-friendly

values.

cost-benefit model that facilitates comparing effects a range of parameter

A more complete cost-benefit analysis takes into account testing costs, societal costs

from isolations, money saved from hospitalizations averted (6), and monetized value of lives
saved (7). A detailed description of the model is provided in the supplement. While potentially
controversial, a ‘value per life’ is used by government agencies in other contexts, such as
deciding how much to spend on highway safety infrastructure (7). This value is sometimes
referred to a as the value of a statistical life; here it is designated ‘spending cap per life saved’.
Values of spending cap per life saved ranging from $100,000 to $1M are considered in the
following.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6

This model yields values for optimal fraction tested and frequency of testing that sometimes
differ from those that maximally reduce R0; for example, sometimes optimal testing frequency
is more than once per infectious period. This is not surprising because “extra” dollars spent on
reducing R0 early can reduce the extent of the epidemic over time.
Figure 1 shows a plot from the cost-effectiveness model for cumulative net benefit in $ per
capita over time, where time is measured in units of 15 days (1 infectious period). Benefit
curves for different spending caps per life saved are shown in different colors. The diagonal and
downward directed arrows at the top of the display permit the user to toggle among a range of
values for the number of days isolation is delayed, rate of compliance with isolation, test
frequency, test sensitivity, cost of screening test, R0 before surveillance testing is initiated, and
fraction tested; the cumulative net benefit curve updates immediately when these values are
changed. In general, the cumulative benefit rises over time, reaches a peak, and then falls as
the epidemic subsides. During the rising phase, the incremental benefits from random testing
exceed incremental costs. At the peak of cumulative net benefit, incremental costs just equal
incremental benefits. At later times, disease prevalence is sufficiently low that surveillance
testing is no longer cost effective. Thus, the time when cumulative net benefit peaks is an
estimate of when surveillance testing ceases to be cost effective. At early times cumulative net
benefit may be negative or show a small depression because benefits from reducing spread
take time to accrue whereas testing costs are constant in time. For the parameter values
indicated in the top portion of the figure, surveillance testing is marginally cost effective at a
spending cap per life saved of $200,000 (blue curve). Higher values of R0 make surveillance
testing cost-effective at lower values of spending cap per life saved. The value of spending cap

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7

per life saved that makes the peak of cumulative net benefit just greater than zero is effectively
the net cost per life saved from surveillance testing, a measure that could be compared to costs
per life saved from other interventions. The net cost per life saved from surveillance testing
should be evaluated at values of fraction tested and frequency of testing that maximize
cumulative net benefit.
Figure 2 is a table of the values of fraction tested f and period of testing p that maximize
cumulative net benefit, and the time when net benefit is maximal, for screening tests costing
$10, $30 or $100, with other parameters shown at the top. When surveillance testing is
marginally cost-effective, choosing optimal values for extent of testing and frequency of testing
is crucial for overall cost-effectiveness.
Figure 3 is a plot of new infections (per tenth of an infectious period) per capita over time with,
versus without, surveillance testing. In this illustration, infections decrease monotonically over
time given surveillance testing (blue curve) because the starting value of R0 (1.1) was chosen to
be only slightly above 1 and testing immediately reduced it to below 1.
Table 1 shows the fraction of tests that are positive (“critical fractions”) at the time when the
model suggests surveillance testing just ceases to be cost-effective, for illustrative values of
isolation delay, compliance rate, and screening test cost. In all cases, frequency of testing and
fraction of population tested were chosen to maximize cost-effectiveness. Of note, sometimes
the critical fractions are considerably lower than thresholds suggested for test positivity in
clinical testing (8).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8

The model was implemented in Analytica 101 software, which can be downloaded for free (9).
The model is free on request from the author and runs using the Analytica 101 software,
allowing users to compare results from a range of parameter values. Figure e1 in the
supplement shows the graphical interface where users can change parameter values, or ranges
of parameter values, and select outputs for display.
. The model does not allow for changing the fraction tested or frequency of

Model limitations

testing during a testing program; in theory, this could increase cost-effectiveness. Nor does the
model account for possible changes in R0 during a testing program due to behavioral changes
or public health measures other than surveillance testing. As a practical matter, this flexibility
could be achieved by considering model results up to a time t, and then running the model for
an additional period starting with revised estimates of R0 and initial parameters appropriate to
time t. This could be important if, for example, vaccination during a surveillance testing
program led to rapid reduction in the fraction of the population that is susceptible. The model
is conservative in that it does not consider indirect economic benefits from curtailing the
epidemic, such as reductions in jobs lost.
. A model is presented that allows rapid assessment of the impact of surveillance

Conclusions

testing on epidemic dynamics and optimization of program variables such as extent and
frequency of testing. An important feature of the model is that it gives users flexibility in
choosing values for parameters that involve value judgement or political consideration (such as
value per life saved), or may change over time during the epidemic (such as number of
secondary cases per primary case).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9
References
1. Manabe YC, Sharfstein JS, Armstrong K. The Need for More and Better Testing for COVID19. JAMA. Published online November 13, 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.21694
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim Guidance for Rapid Antigen Testing for
SARS-CoV-2, updated September 4, 2020 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/lab/resources/antigen-tests-guidelines.html).
3. Neilan AM, Losina E, Bangs AC, Flanagan C, Panella C, Eskibozkurt GE, Mohareb A, Hyle EP, Scott
JA, Weinstein MC, Siedner MJ, Reddy KP, Harling G, Freedberg KA, Shebl FM, Kazemian P,
Ciaranello AL. Clinical Impact, Costs, and Cost-Effectiveness of Expanded SARS-CoV-2 Testing in
Massachusetts. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Sep 18:ciaa1418. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1418. Epub ahead of
print. PMID: 32945845; PMCID: PMC7543346.
4. SIR model https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compartmental_models_in_epidemiology
5. Current estimates of R0 are available at http://rt.live.
6. Sloan C, Markward N, Young J, Frieder M, Grady L, Roasacker N, Vidulich A. Avelere.
https://avalere.com/insights/covid-19-hospitalizations-projected-to-cost-up-to-17b-in-us-in2020
7. U.S. Department of Transportation. Revised Departmental Guidance on Valuation of a Statistical
Life in Economic Analysis
https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/2016%20Revised%20Value%20of%20a
%20Statistical%20Life%20Guidance.pdf
8. Siddarth D, Katz R, Graeden E, Allen D, Tsai T. Evidence Roundup: Why positive test rates need
to fall below 3%. https://globalhealth.harvard.edu/evidence-roundup-why-positive-test-ratesneed-to-fall-below-3/
9. https://lumina.com/products/free101.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

11
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Lonnie Chrisman of Lumina.com for assistance with the Analytica 101 program.
The author has no conflicts of interest, including no relationship with Lumina, the company that created
the Analytica 101 software. No money was received to support this study.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

12
2
Figure 1. Cumulative net benefit (in $ per capita) of surveillance testing over time, for four values of
spending cap per life saved ($1M, $500,000, $200,000, $100,000). Time is in units of infectious periods
(∼2 weeks). Given parameter values shown at the top, surveillance testing is just cost-effective at a
spending cap per life saved of $200,000. Running the program, the user can choose among a range of
parameter values using the diagonal or downward-directed arrows at the top. Current effective R is R0
in the absence of surveillance testing. Other parameters that can be set by the user are shown in
Supplement Figure e1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13
3
Figure 2. Table of values for fraction of population tested and test period that maximize cumulative net
benefit, for screening test costs (rows) of $10, $30, and $100. The time when cumulative net benefit is
maximal is given in the fourth column (in units of infectious periods, ∼2 weeks). Time =0 is returned
when testing is not cost-effective, as indicated here when screening tests cost $100. Parameters whose
values can be changed by the user using the diagonal or downward-directed arrows are shown in the
upper portion of the figure. Other parameters that can be set by the user are shown in Supplement
Figure e1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14
4
Figure 3. Disease incidence over time (in units of number of new cases per tenth of an infectious period
per capita) with, versus without, surveillance testing. “u” on the y axis denotes cases per million people.
Parameters whose values can be changed by the user using the diagonal or downward-directed arrows
are shown in the upper portion of the figure. Other parameters that can be set by the user are shown in
Supplement Figure e1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.02.20242644; this version posted December 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15
Table 1. Critical positive test fraction. Fraction of screening tests that are positive when surveillance
testing just ceases to be cost-effective is shown in fourth column for illustrative values of isolation delay,
compliance rate and screening test cost. In all cases, spending cap per life saved was $500K, R0 was
1.25, test sensitivity was 0.75, and test frequency and fraction of population tested were chosen to
maximize cost-effectiveness.
Isolation delay

Compliance rate

Screening test cost

3 days
3 days
1 day

0.75
0.75
0.5

$10
$30
$10

Critical positive test
fraction
0.003
0.025
0.004

