medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Acceptability and feasibility of strategies to shield the
vulnerable during the COVID-19 outbreak: a qualitative study
in six Sudanese communities
Nada Abdelmagid1, 7, Salma A.E. Ahmed2,7, Nazik Nurelhuda3,7, Israa Zainalabdeen4,7, Aljaile Ahmed4,7,
Mahmoud Ali Fadlallah5,6,7, Maysoon Dahab1,7
1

London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, (Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology), London,

(London), United Kingdom
2

Independent public health researcher, Khartoum, (Khartoum), Sudan

3

University of Khartoum, Faculty of Dentistry, Khartoum, (Khartoum), Sudan

4

Y-PEER Sudan, Khartoum, (Khartoum), Sudan

5

Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, (Bangkok), Thailand

6

Public Health Institute (PHI), Khartoum, (Khartoum), Sudan

7

Sudan COVID-19 Research Group

Corresponding author:
Nada Abdelmagid, nada.abdelmagid@lshtm.ac.uk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background
Shielding of high-risk groups from coronavirus disease (COVID-19), either within their households or safe
communal structures, has been suggested as a realistic alternative to severe movement restrictions in response to
the COVID-19 epidemic in low-income countries. To our knowledge, this concept has not been tested or evaluated
in resource-poor settings. This study aimed to explore the acceptability and feasibility of strategies to shield
persons at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes, during the COVID-19 epidemic in six communities in
Sudan.
Methods
We purposively sampled participants from six communities, illustrative of urban, rural and forcibly-displaced
settings. In-depth telephone interviews were held with 59 members of households with one or more members at
higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes. Follow-up interviews were held with 30 community members after
movement restrictions were eased across the country. All interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim,
and analysed using a two-stage deductive and inductive thematic analysis.
Results
Most participants were aware that some people are at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes but were unaware
of the concept of shielding. Most participants found shielding acceptable and consistent with cultural inclinations
to respect elders and protect the vulnerable. However, extra-household shielding arrangements were mostly seen
as socially unacceptable. Participants reported feasibility concerns related to the social isolation of shielded
persons and loss of income for shielding families. The acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies were
reduced after movement restrictions were eased, as participants reported lower perception of risk in their
communities and increased pressure to comply with social commitments outside the house.
Conclusion
Shielding is generally acceptable in the study communities. Acceptability is influenced by feasibility, and by
contextual changes in the epidemic and associated policy response. The promotion of shielding should capitalise
on the cultural and moral sense of duty towards elders and vulnerable groups. Communities and households
should be provided with practical guidance to implement feasible shielding options. Households must be socially,
psychologically and financially supported to adopt and sustain shielding effectively.
Keywords
Shielding; COVID-19; Sudan; High-risk; Resource-poor; Acceptability; Feasibility; Participatory analysis

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Background
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern" [1]. The first COVID-19 case in Sudan was
reported on March 13, 2020. The Government of Sudan immediately declared a national emergency [2] and
enforced schools and universities closures [3]. Bans of mass gatherings [4] and border closures [5] followed
shortly after. However, a reprieve in late March to let in stranded Sudanese travellers [6] may have resulted in the
importation of more COVID-19 cases [7]. Following increasingly restrictive dusk-to-dawn curfews in Khartoum,
the capital, a lockdown was started on April 18 2020 [8], and, soon after, movement restrictions were extended to
other parts of the country [7].
From the beginning, Sudan adopted a test, track and quarantine strategy for containment of the epidemic [9]. Like
other African countries, Sudan acted early, instituting a lockdown when the country had recorded 66 confirmed
COVID-19 cases and 10 deaths [10].
COVID-19 comes to Sudan at a time of heightened political and economic fragility, after emerging from decades
of authoritarian rule. The response in Sudan has been challenged by a pre-pandemic fragile health system, weak
social protection systems and difficulties in accessing global emergency funding for COVID-19 [11]. Likely, the
true magnitude of the COVID-19 epidemic in Sudan is significantly underestimated by official statistics, as testing
capacity is limited and fraught with operational and logistical difficulties [12]. Moreover, among 28 African
countries, Sudan has the lowest levels of adherence to crucial prevention measures, such as mask-wearing,
physical distancing and compliance with movement restrictions [13], which may partially be due to severe
economic hardship faced by the population during the epidemic.
In low-income countries like Sudan, prevention is key to mitigating the impact of COVID-19. Shielding of highrisk individuals, either within their homes or in safe communal structures, has been suggested as an alternative to
widely-enforced social distancing measures such as lockdowns. The approach recognises that, in these settings,
high-risk individuals, especially the elderly, usually co-reside with young people and children in large households
[14]. While shielding does not significantly affect transmission dynamics [15], focusing limited resources on
shielding higher-risk individuals aims to reduce pressure on health systems, prevent COVID-19 deaths and allow
economic activities to resume. Through mathematical modelling, shielding seems to be effective at reducing
mortality from COVID-19, particularly when coupled with moderate social distancing and high levels of selfisolation of those with mild COVID-19 symptoms [15].

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

The shielding approach is premised on sound epidemiological principles that aim to reduce the number and
duration of effective contacts among high-risk groups and therefore, their risk of infection [16]. However, the
practical application of shielding in resource-poor settings may be challenging, and effective shielding strategies
will need to be developed and adapted locally, in a manner that is acceptable and feasible to the different contexts
[17-19]. In this study, we explored the acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies in six illustrative
communities in Sudan, to provide information to government and non-government COVID-19 responders in
Sudan seeking to protect high-risk groups during the epidemic.

Methods
Study design and setting
This qualitative study was conducted in participation with Sudan's Youth Peer Education Network (Y-PEER
Sudan), a nationwide network of trained youth volunteers active in promoting health and youth participation. At
the time of the study, Y-PEER Sudan was conducting awareness-raising campaigns on COVID-19 prevention in
communities across Sudan. We selected six communities in five Sudanese states, illustrative of different
contextual settings. In Khartoum state, we selected Umbadda district, a high-density poor urban population, and
Tuti Island, a close-knit agricultural community in the heart of the capital. We also selected two other urban
communities, El-Obeid, a high-density city in North Kordofan State, and Damazin North, a peri-urban setting on
the shared country border with South Sudan. Finally, we selected one rural village in the south of Gezira state,
and one internally displaced person's (IDP) camp in South Darfur (Dereij IDP camp). At the time of planning in
early April 2020, only Khartoum state had reported confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths.
The study was conducted remotely, complying with safety precautions and movement restrictions due to the
COVID-19 epidemic. Youth peers were trained remotely, through pre-recorded video and audio training sessions
on qualitative research, shielding strategies, informed consent and study procedures, developed and delivered by
the first author (NA). Training materials were shared via social media platforms, and this was followed by a live
question and answer social media session with three co-authors (NA, NN and MD).

Study participants
We interviewed two groups of participants in the six study sites at different times: once during periods of
movement restriction enforced in April 2020 and once after restrictions were eased in July 2020. To be eligible,
participants in the first round of interviews had to be an adult member of a household that had at least one member
at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes. Participants in the second round of interviews were any adults in

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

the community. For this study, we defined those at high risk as persons aged 60 years or more, or persons of any
age with one of the following chronic diseases: hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory
disease, chronic kidney failure, cancer and persons with immunosuppressive diseases or receiving
immunosuppressant therapy.
Youth peers purposively identified eligible participants through their existing community contacts. We identified
eleven participants in the second group through snowball sampling. In each study site, we aimed to interview 15
community members: 10 participants in the first phase, and 5 in the follow-up phase. We aimed to achieve a
balanced sample of age and gender among household participants. We considered this sample size to be a
manageable workload for volunteers working during an epidemic and the Islamic holy month of Ramadan in the
first phase, and an epidemic and rainy season in the second phase. After a preliminary analysis of data for each
site, we revisited the need to increase the sample size to reach data saturation.

Data collection
Semi-structured, in-depth telephone interviews were done by trained youth volunteers at a time convenient for
consenting participants between May 10 and June 20, 2020, during the first round of data collection, and July 01
to August 10, 2020, in the second round. After obtaining participants' permission, all interviews were audiorecorded. The interviews lasted between 40 and 70 minutes.
Interviewers used a pre-tested interview guide that contained open-ended questions. The interview guide covered
the following topics: (1) knowledge of high-risk groups and protective measures for them, (2) the acceptability
and feasibility of each of three shielding scenarios: (i) all extra-household activities are delegated to one family
member who lives in a separate part of the house from the rest of the family, (ii) the high-risk person voluntarily
shields, alone or with a carer, in a separate part of the house, (iii) neighbouring households or members of an
extended family voluntarily 'house-swap' and group their high-risk members into dedicated houses, and, finally,
(3) preferred and trusted sources and communication channels for information on COVID-19.

Finally,

participants were asked to suggest alternative or improved shielding strategies that would be suitable for their
families or communities, and effective measures for promoting and implementing shielding in their communities.
Interviews were conducted in Arabic.

Data management and analysis
Audio-recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim by youth volunteers. We analysed data using a content
analysis approach in two stages. The first stage was a participatory analysis through focus group discussions with

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

the interviewers to generate preliminary ideas for transcript analysis, gain a thorough understanding of the context
of data collection and identify immediate insights to assist responders. After the interviews were completed,
interviewers were asked to listen to their recordings, familiarise themselves with the data and complete a summary
report, summarising key ideas that emerged in conversations with participants. The interviewers were then invited
to participate in group discussions with co-authors (SAEA, NA, NN, MD, IZ, AA), who used the reports to prompt
follow-up questions and make use of the interpersonal dynamic of group discussions to generate new insights.
These groups discussions were recorded and used by the co-authors to develop a y report of preliminary findings
for quick dissemination to Y-PEER Sudan, the Ministry of Health and other COVID-19 responders.
The second stage was a thematic analysis using the transcripts. Data for each site was independently analysed for
possible themes by the co-authors (NA, SAEA, NN, MD, IZ and AA). Themes were derived from the interview
guide (deductive approach), by allowing emergent themes from the data (inductive approach) [20]. The analysis
was then collated by the second author (SAEA) in a single spreadsheet. Through discussion amongst co-authors,
consensus on themes and subthemes was reached, and categorisation was agreed. The themes were interpreted
further and compared to the objectives of the study to generate the conclusions. Illustrative quotations were
extracted by SAEA, translated into English by NA, and back-translated to Arabic by MAF. This article adheres
to the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) reporting guidelines [21].

Results
We interviewed 89 participants: 59 during periods of movement restrictions and 30 participants after movement
restrictions were eased (Table 1). The first group consisted of 25 females and 24 males, with an average age of 34
years old (age ranging from 20 to 70 years). The second group of participants consisted of 25 males and 5 females,
with an average age of 44 years old (age ranging from 20 years to 83 years).
We present the findings by the following themes: knowledge about groups at high risk of severe illness or death
due to COVID-19, knowledge and implementation of protective measures for high-risk groups, knowledge and
implementation of strategies to shield high-risk persons, acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies during
periods of severe movement restrictions, participants’ recommendations to make shielding more feasible for
communities, acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies after severe movement restrictions were eased,
and participants’ opinion on effective methods for promotion of shielding in their communities.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1 Age and sex of study participants (N=89)
Study site

First group
Sex (N)
Male

Female

El-Obeid

5

5

Tuti Island

9

Dereij IDP
camp
Umbadda

Mean age in
years (range)

Second group
Sex (N)

Mean age
years (range)

Male

Female

48.7 (28 – 70)

4

1

41.7 (24 – 74)

1

38 (22 – 59)

4

1

51 (40 – 69)

6

3

33.7 (26 – 45)

4

1

37.6 (26 – 60)

1

9

30 (20 – 60)

5

0

46.8 (20 – 83)

Damazin North

5

5

26.8 (22 – 31)

5

0

41 (24 – 57)

Gezira

5

5

29 (20 – 42)

3

2

46 (25 – 53)

Total (N)

31

28

25

5

in

Knowledge about groups at high risk of severe illness or death due to COVID-19
Most participants were aware that older people and those who have chronic diseases are at high risk of severe
illness or death from COVID-19. We observed that knowledge levels were high across study settings, i.e. urban,
rural and displaced populations.
"I expect that if an elderly person with a chronic disease like hypertension or asthma, God forbid, gets COVID19, it will be very difficult to prevent them from dying" – male, 43 years, Dereij IDP camp
One participant observed that all COVID-19 deaths in her community were amongst older people with chronic
diseases.
"To be honest, from my observations, those who died [from COVID-19] all had chronic illnesses. They were
elderly and had chronic diseases. For example, they would get a normal fever and vomiting, and in less than a
week, maybe three or four days, they die. I now know that people with chronic illnesses don't experience long
COVID-19 illness before they die" - female, 35 years, Dereij IDP camp
Participants reported multiple sources of this information, including radio, television, social media pages and
groups, mass text messages, leaflets and other community members.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Knowledge and implementation of protective measures for groups at high risk of severe illness
or death due to COVID-19
To protect people at high risk, a few participants mentioned that those living with them should wash their hands
and change their clothes when returning home to avoid transmitting the infection within the household. However,
the majority of participants reported measures for those at high risk themselves, such as maintaining their general
health and well-being and reducing social contacts outside the household.
"I have a special diet for [my father], and I give him vitamin C from time to time to boost his immunity, these are
the things that I managed to do. I manage to keep him at home because he is elderly. For the rest of the family
members, I look after them too, but I give him special care because he is the oldest person at home and is elderly,
so he can be vulnerable to anything" – male, 28 years, ElObeid
To reduce social contacts, participants mentioned advising older people to reduce or abandon social visits and
gatherings, wear face masks and abstain from physical greetings outside the home. Other participants mentioned
supportive measures to help those at high risk stay at home. For example, in El-Obeid, a participant reported that
there was a local community-based initiative called "Dawak Fi Beitak" which arranges regular home delivery of
medications to those with chronic illnesses.
Nonetheless, participants reported challenges to compliance with these protective measures. These include low
risk perception of COVID-19, COVID-19 denial, sociocultural barriers and financial challenges.
"The most important thing is that a person [who is at high risk] is convinced that COVID-19 is dangerous to
them. They must be aware of the danger of COVID-19 so they can protect themselves and others". - male, 54
years, Tuti Island
Another participant explained how social desirability and cultural traditions make it difficult to comply,
particularly by the elderly, who are revered in Sudanese culture.
"Our culture can [become an obstacle]. Even though the seriousness of this disease is communicated through all
media, people say that they cannot refrain from physical greetings, as these are cultural habits and traditions.
This kind of attitude makes you worry [about infection with COVID-19]. No matter how often we advise elderly
people to be isolated at home, it is difficult to implement this in our community." - male, 31 years, Dereij IDP
camp

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Other participants reported that high-risk family members insist on maintaining their social relations by
welcoming visitors or visiting others, continuing to pray at the mosque and attending important social events such
as funerals.
"In our community, people go to Friday prayers since mosques are still open even though they are supposed to
be closed. So, people continue to go to Friday prayers and evening prayers in Ramadan. I tried to stop [my
mother] from going, but she also refused because when she goes to pray in the mosque, the people there tell her
that prayers will end the epidemic and when we pray in the mosque [COVID-19] will not infect us, can you believe
that? So, they [should close these mosques]." - female, 31 years, Umbadda
In the rural study site, participants explained that most young family members are away working in cities, leaving
the elderly with the responsibility of running households.
"You will find that many households don't have young people, especially in rural areas, as they go to the capital
city or other areas [where there are jobs]. You rarely find a home with 2 or 3 young people; they are usually
elderly above 50 years or children under 15 years - so the elderly person has to leave home to provide the
household's needs." - male, 28 years, Gezira
Unlike other study sites, none of the participants from Damazin North reported implementing measures to protect
family members at high risk.

Knowledge and implementation of strategies to shield those at high risk of severe illness or
death due to COVID-19
Although most participants had good knowledge of high-risk groups and mentioned several protective measures,
the shielding concept was new to them. Many participants confused it with isolation or quarantine and interpreted
it as a complete disconnection from the family and community. There was also confusion as to whether shielding
occurred for those that have COVID-19-like symptoms or as a prevention measure. Nonetheless, four participants
were already implementing some form of shielding at home at the time of the study.
"I am currently using [shielding] at home with my father; I have set him up to stay in a separate part of the house,
a separate room. I provide him with everything he needs, and he prays in there too, he doesn't leave the house." male, 28 years, El-Obeid

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies during periods of severe movement
restrictions
For this study, we suggested and discussed three shielding strategies with the respondents to explore their opinions
on their acceptability and feasibility. The strategies are: (i) all extra-household activities are delegated to one
family member who lives in a separate part of the house from the rest of the family, (ii) the high-risk person
voluntary shields, alone or with a carer, in a separate part of the house, (iii) neighbouring households or members
of an extended family voluntarily 'house-swap' and group their high-risk members into dedicated houses.

Delegation of extra-household activities to one family member who lives in a separate part of
the house from the rest of the family
In general, this strategy was acceptable to many participants, either fully or partially.
"This is a very good suggestion. I am now using this strategy and applying it at home. I am the only one in the
family who leaves the household for shopping – I bring anything that is needed. No one else leaves the house." male, 28 years, El-Obeid
Although many agreed that it is feasible to choose one household member for all extra-household activities, most
were not convinced that isolating that person within the household is possible or necessary. Instead, most
participants emphasised that the delegated person should adopt infection prevention measures when returning
home, such as washing hands, changing clothes or bathing.
"This first suggestion is the best one. Each household selects one family member to provide all their needs, but
that person should not isolate themselves – when they come from outside, they can put their clothes in the sun,
and wash their hands with water and soap" – male, 22 years, Tuti Island
"My husband always goes out to bring our household needs. He is very careful not to harm anyone or a child at
home if he is feeling unwell or sick, but we have never isolated him, and we never will – we will not leave him
alone" - female, 43 years, Umbadda
One participant reported concerns about isolation resulting in the stigmatisation of the delegated person:
"This is a good suggestion but difficult to implement. We live in a community where social interaction is intense,
and so isolation is difficult. The feeling of isolation may make the person feel stigmatised and trigger thoughts
that they may actually be infected. This [suggestion] requires a great degree of awareness, insight and acceptance
– it can be implemented but not across all of Sudan." – male, 31 years, Damazin North

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Another participant noted the difficulty in adhering to isolation within the household, mainly because the
delegated person is healthy.
"We as Sudanese are very close and intimate [within our families]. If I ask you, with your knowledge and work in
this field of COVID-19, to stay away from your father or other household members while you are sick, you can
stay away from them because of their safety so they [do not get infected]. But if you are well, you will not be able
to do it. Inadvertently, you will come close [to your family members]." – Male, 28 years, Damazin North
Participants who did not accept this strategy mentioned several reasons, particularly the difficulty in having the
household rely on one person's income.
"To have one person from the household leave the house – you know that one person cannot [financially] support
a household. From each household, approximately three people are working to cover the household's expenses –
it is difficult to rely on one person." - male, 46 years, El-Obeid
Also, people within households play different roles and have different responsibilities, particularly in households
of extended families, and in rural areas.
"It's difficult. At home, some people are working on farms, others in the market. Also, most of these people have
limited income, and a person with limited income cannot stay at home." - male, 26 years, Gezira

Voluntary shielding of the high-risk person in a separate place within the household
For many participants, this strategy was acceptable primarily because it is in keeping with the setting of the
Sudanese home.
"I agree with this strategy, absolutely. And this already exists – in families with an older person, such as a
grandfather or father, they have their room or their hut, and other members of the household serve them with
food, or help then bathe. I agree with this suggestion totally." – male, 43 years, Dereij IDP camp
Participants mentioned several implementation challenges. For most, there are social challenges to isolating an
older person from the rest of the household, related to the respect and reverence of parents and the elderly. Some
reported that they cannot imagine their household life without the involvement of their parent or elderly family
member, especially for family activities such as meals, and that they were concerned about the impact of isolation
on the shielded person. Others reported that they would be concerned about what the rest of the community would
say about them if they isolated their elderly family member.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

"My children will never accept their mother isolating in a separate room. We are all taking precautions and
being careful, we are relying on Allah [to protect us]" - female, 43 years Umbadda
"This isolation that you mention, I think it's difficult. I, for one, cannot eat alone. People are used to eating
together, spending time with each other and chatting together [as a family]" – male, 54 years, Tuti Island
Other participants reported that the high-risk family member would refuse to be isolated, even if the rest of the
family accepts it. This refusal is somewhat linked to the lack of awareness of personal risk by the elderly
themselves – several participants reported that older people were not as aware as others of the risks of COVID19.
A few participants, particularly in Dereij IDP camp and Umbadda, reported a lack of space within low-income
households to facilitate shielding.
"If I was able to implement this strategy in my home, other people will not be able to, due to limited spaces in the
camp. I can implement this in my family and home, but my neighbours can't" – female, 35 years, Dereij IDP camp
As with the first strategy, participants suggested the use of prevention and safety measures when dealing with
elderly or high-risk persons at home, such as masks and handwashing, as an alternative to isolation.

Shielding of high-risk persons outside the household in a voluntary 'house swap' arrangement
In this strategy, where there is not enough space for shielding within the home, neighbours or extended families
voluntarily swap houses to give high-risk individuals and their carers a separate house to shield in, and a house
for those at low risk to live in and continue to work. For most participants, this strategy was neither acceptable
nor feasible.
"No one will accept to leave their house no matter what. Even if there is [an epidemic], they will tell you that they
can only be comfortable in their own home" - female, 27 years, Gezira
Respondents explained that households have different habits and rituals within their homes and that elderly family
members need the protection of their family and the comfort of their own homes for their well-being.
"This cannot be implemented because traditions are different; even people's habits are different. For example,
the type of food that is presented to a [high-risk] person at home may be different from other family members.
You can manage to do this within a household, but not in an extended family, like relatives or neighbours. If a
[high-risk] person needs special food, but they are [living] in one place with other [high-risk] people, they will
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

all be served the same food, so there will be compromises in this area ……….some elderly people need someone
to bathe them or feed them so if I put them with other people that have not dealt with them before, there will be
compromises [in their care]" - male, 28 years, El-Obeid
Older participants confirmed this unwillingness to leave their homes, citing a lack of trust in others, the importance
of maintaining traditions, and fear of criticism from the surrounding community.
"[Shielding outside the home] cannot be done. You know, Sudanese people have changed, they are not
[trustworthy] like they were before, and the economic situation has also [worsened]. For me, I don't think it will
happen. I cannot leave my home and stay in another person's house. As you know, Sudanese people talk – people
in Sudan cannot understand what is happening [with the epidemic]" - female, 63 years, El-Obeid
A few participants agreed that this strategy might be acceptable as it builds on the communal solidarity prevalent
in Sudanese communities. This exception was most pronounced in Dereij IDP camp, where half of the respondents
thought the strategy was acceptable. Nonetheless, they reported that this would require a high level of awareness
of risk in the population, and is more likely to be acceptable in a house swap with close relatives.
"This is acceptable, very acceptable. We as Darfuris are renowned for our generosity; people are very cooperative
with each other - male, 26 years, Dereij IDP camp

Participants' recommendations to make shielding more feasible for communities
Several respondents suggested measures to help those at high-risk to stay at home, including the delivery of regular
medications and home-based clinical monitoring services. Others emphasised the importance of maintaining
access to health services for the elderly and those with chronic illnesses during the COVID-19 epidemic.
To support at-home shielding, many participants suggested the provision of financial and in-kind support,
especially for poor households, to enable families with high-risk members to shield at home and comply with
prevention measures. For instance, participants suggested the provision of food baskets, soap, gloves and hand
sanitiser. Expectations of external assistance were generally higher in Dereij IDP camp compared to other study
sites.
"Older people and people with [chronic] diseases should be more careful when dealing with other people; they
should always be using hand sanitisers. This is the only problem I see. [Neighbourhood committees] can provide
these people with [material] assistance [at home] so they don't have to go to work, as mixing in the market [with

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

others] can transmit the disease. Some people are convinced that COVID-19 exists, and other people say they
would rather die of COVID-19 than starvation." –female, 23 years, Umbadda
Participants also mentioned that COVID-19 transmission in the general population should be reduced, and
suggested increasing information dissemination through the media, provision of advice from healthcare workers
to local communities, and promoting preventive behaviours in public areas. Participants in rural areas also
requested better access to COVID-19 testing as testing centres were only available in urban areas. Some
participants also suggested better enforcement of policies, such as lockdowns and inter-state travel restrictions, to
create an environment that is more supportive of shielding.
"I think that the policy has to be comprehensive. For example, during the lockdown in Khartoum or El-Obeid or
other places, people are not complying, and the authorities are not enforcing the implementation, commercial
activities should be suspended now. My father is one of the people who is not complying with the lockdown; he
goes to work. If there was serious enforcement of the lockdown, my father would have complied and stayed at
home, and I would be going out to get the household's essential only. I would be implementing this [shielding]
strategy you mentioned. But I cannot implement it now if there aren't other measures implemented, it has to be a
complementary policy - I cannot implement one part and ignore the other" – Male, 32 years, El-Obeid

Acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies after severe movement restrictions were
eased
In general, the acceptability and feasibility of shielding strategies were reduced after movement restrictions were
eased, as participants reported lower perception of risk in their communities. Some participants mentioned that,
in addition to widespread beliefs that COVID-19 transmission in communities no longer exists, several rumours
and misinformation about COVID-19 were prevalent in their communities, and COVID-19 is no longer at the
forefront of their concerns or interest. In the absence of risk awareness, it was unlikely that community members
would consider taking up shielding.
"In the current moment in our community, theoretically shielding is possible and if people are convinced to take
it up, it is possible. But there are many issues we didn't discuss that have to do with awareness. Fear of the virus
in the community I live in has regressed, and this means that even effective strategies [will not] be adopted,
because people will only adopt it when they feel at risk, and the risk has regressed a lot. Also, there are rumours
and misbeliefs in the community, about whether the virus exists, people are not giving it much attention. So, the

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

idea of isolating the elderly or an ill person is possible but what can prevent it is people's awareness – there are
very few people who are aware" - male, 24 years, El-Obeid
"In [our] neighbourhood community, it is not acceptable that a person does not leave their house [nowadays].
Some people are saying there is no COVID-19. [Shielding] may be acceptable in communities that are aware, for
example, in Khartoum neighbourhoods that have high awareness or other [similar] communities. There, you can
implement this, and it is an effective [strategy]" - male, 83 years, Umbadda
Challenges to implementation of shielding were similar to those mentioned by participants interviewed during the
period of movement restrictions, including socially-driven unwillingness to segregate family members,
particularly the elderly, and financial losses as a result of shielding. However, we noticed that compliance with
social commitments outside the household, such as visits to family, funerals and weddings, became more pressing
after movement restrictions were eased.
"All these [shielding strategies] are good. But people cannot implement them in our community. Community
members are now mingling and want to socialise with each other. They cannot leave our traditions. Our traditions
are the problem." - male, 54 years, Gezira

Participants’ opinions on effective communication and promotion of shielding strategies in
study communities
Many participants mentioned that diverse mass communication channels should be used to broadcast information
widely, including television, radio, social media, text messages and displaying visual materials in public places.
Different channels reach different population groups. For example, social media is widely used by younger
community members, especially in urban areas, whilst radio still plays a significant role in rural areas where
internet coverage is low and televisions not widely present. Within their communities, many participants
mentioned the use of mobile activities, such as vehicles with megaphones, and edutainment activities such as
theatre.
"The source we use most frequently is Facebook, and also radio, but mostly Facebook and WhatsApp, especially
among young people. Older people and rural areas [use] radio and television. They also listen to the local 'sheikh'
[religious leader] because they go to him with their problems so that he can raise their awareness [of COVID19]" – female, 20 years, Umbadda

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

To complement mass communication, many participants mentioned the importance of using local, trusted persons
to promote shielding. Influential community figures mentioned by participants included members of
neighbourhood committees (primarily youth), religious leaders, teachers, local health workers and other
community leaders, such as members of the local civil administration. In urban settings, local health workers,
neighbourhood committees, religious leaders and family members were the most trusted persons, whereas in rural
areas, family members, especially those working in the medical field, were influential. In the IDP camp, local
community and religious leaders were the most credible sources of information. Some participants mentioned that
trusted persons could use their existing platforms to share information, for example, imams giving sermons in
mosques. Other participants suggested more in-person activities such as household visits with infection prevention
precautions to families with high-risk family members.
Several participants mentioned the importance of using local dialects and languages to reach all groups within the
community, particularly the elderly, as many mentioned that current mass communication activities use formal
language that is not widely understood or preferred by their communities. Other participants commented that some
activities are inappropriately designed; for example, one participant mentioned that mobile megaphones travel too
fast to be fully heard or operate at inappropriate times of the day.
"I think awareness activities need to be continuous, especially in rural areas who may not have a television or
radio. Awareness-raising activities using simple means can be implemented there, and they can use local dialects.
Many [elderly] people now hear the megaphone from the street, and they ask me "what are they saying?" and I
have to explain to them what is being said about COVID-19" - female, 32 years, Dereij IDP camp
Some participants recommended that positive messaging and language should be used to promote preventive
behaviour, and to avoid promoting preventive behaviour by instigating fear in the population, through language
such as "the virus will kill you…". Other participants recommended that high-risk community members need to
be targeted with tailored risk communication to increase their understanding of their risk of severe illness and
death, and to empower them to take measures, such as shielding, to protect themselves.

Discussion
In low-resource settings, prevention is key to mitigating the impact of COVID-19. Shielding of high-risk
individuals, either within their homes or in safe communal structures, has been suggested as a realistic alternative
to widely-enforced social distancing measures such as lockdowns that may cause severe economic repercussions
[22]. While shielding is premised on sound epidemiological principles and has shown through modelling to cause
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

significant reductions in hospitalisations and mortality due to COVID-19, wide-scale implementation of shielding
can be fraught with social, cultural and operational challenges. In this study, we explored the acceptability and
feasibility of shielding strategies during the COVID-19 epidemic in six illustrative communities in Sudan. We
elicited contextual adaptations for the implementation and promotion of shielding in the study communities.
Across the different study settings, the majority of participants knew that some individuals were at higher risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes, particularly the elderly. This high level of knowledge may be indicative of effective
dissemination of information about COVID-19 through multiple channels across the study sites. Similar levels of
adequate knowledge of groups at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes were reported in other low- and
middle-income settings, including Kenya and Egypt [23, 24]. Despite that, only a few participants knew of
measures to reduce intra-household contacts with persons at high risk. Many participants initially confused
shielding with quarantine or isolation, and further information was needed to clarify the difference between these
measures – similar misunderstandings were reported by a study in Goma in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
[25]. Study participants were, however, positive when presented with concrete options for protecting high-risk
family members within the household.
Shielding of high-risk individuals was generally acceptable, and many participants' remarks referred to strong
Sudanese traditions of protecting the elderly and the vulnerable. Consultations with crisis-affected communities
in Yemen also reported acceptance of shielding within the context of strong cultural tendencies to protect the
elderly and most vulnerable [25]. Similarly, a shielding intervention in Ethiopia leveraged a culture that values
community solidarity and cohesion, where communities traditionally prioritise those most in need of protection
[26].
Our findings indicate that there was no outright acceptance or rejection of any of the proposed shielding strategies.
However, study participants were on a broad spectrum in terms of readiness to implement shielding. In general,
shielding strategies within the household were acceptable, while shielding outside the household was widely
unacceptable due to concerns about privacy, cultural norms and compromises in caregiving for shielded family
members. Consultations by humanitarian actors with displaced communities in Yemen and Lebanon yielded
similar findings of strong preference of household-based shielding and an aversion to shielding outside the
household [27]. In Yemen, community members found shielding within the extended family acceptable where
extended families live in compounds of neighbouring houses [25]. In our study, participants from the displacement
camp were more accepting of extra-household shielding; interviews with displaced Syrians in opposition-

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

controlled camps in Northwest Syria found a similar willingness to consider house swapping arrangements for
shielding [28].
We also found that acceptability of shielding is not static, but is influenced by contextual changes, where
enthusiasm for shielding had diminished in study communities after severe movement restrictions were eased.
The new context was one where a change in government strategy fuelled widely-prevalent beliefs that the
epidemic had indeed passed and created increased pressure to comply with social commitments. These findings
are corroborated by previous research, which showed that both government response measures and perceived risk
of the severity of respiratory infection epidemics had a significant influence on behavioural intentions towards
social distancing [29-31].
In all our study communities, feasibility was a determinant of acceptability. Feasibility was challenged both
socially and financially by study participants. Among the elderly, the loss of social capital due to eliminating
social contacts outside the home, especially in mosques and social gatherings, was a significant barrier to the
feasibility of shielding. Within the household, participants had concerns about the implications of segregation
within the household on family well-being, with some suggesting less strict separation combined with infection
and prevention measures such as maintaining hand hygiene within the household. Furthermore, a few participants
raised doubts about the sustainability of full compliance with segregation within the household, particularly where
none of the family members was unwell. These findings indicate that while shielding is widely acceptable, the
effectiveness of shielding in these communities may be lower than predicted by mathematical models, which
assume drastic reductions in contacts within the household [15]. Furthermore, this may indicate an intentionbehaviour gap amongst participants who accept household-level shielding but question their ability to implement
or sustain it. Previous researchers have also shown that low self-efficacy attenuates behavioural intentions and
behaviour adoption in the context of epidemics of respiratory infectious disease [29, 31, 32].
Our findings also show that a shielding promotion campaign requires a nuanced approach that addresses different
COVID-19 beliefs and perceptions, including those who do not believe COVID-19 exists in their community or
at all. Communication channels should combine mass communication with personal communication from trusted
and influential figures in the local communities. Our study participants report that the elderly tend to be least
informed about COVID-19 and their levels of risk, and are less likely to comply with preventive behaviours in
general. Other studies in Ethiopia and Bangladesh also found lower levels of knowledge about COVID-19, and
inadequate compliance with preventive behaviours among the elderly and individuals with chronic illnesses [33-

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

35]. These findings indicate that shielding promotion requires a targeted risk communication strategy for those at
high risk of severe COVID-19.
Our study has limitations. Firstly, in this study, we used interviews to explore the acceptability and feasibility of
shielding. In acceptability research, focus group discussions are preferred over interviews as they have the
advantage of allowing group members to collectively brainstorm and debate ideas, opinions, and
recommendations [36]. However, given the movement restrictions posed by COVID-19, remote interviews were
the appropriate choice for our study, and we are confident that we reached data saturation, as no additional themes
emerged in the final interviews at any of the study sites. Secondly, we conducted the interviews remotely by
telephone, which is subject to challenges including challenges to establishing rapport, absence of visual cues and
contextual data, and the relatively short time of the interview to avoid respondent fatigue [37-39]. Thirdly, in this
study, we inquired about the acceptability of a new concept of which the majority of study participants had no
prior knowledge. It is possible that some participants provided their opinion without considering the implications
of shielding on all aspects of their lives. However, given that reasons for and against acceptance were recurrent
across participants and study sites, we are confident that this limitation had a minimal effect on the findings,
probably in the direction of acceptance. Finally, given our study design, findings cannot be generalised to all
Sudanese communities.
Shielding promotion in the study communities should provide realistic options and practical guidance for
minimising social contacts within households, and should be accompanied by financial and social interventions
to support feasibility. Financial assistance by the Government of Sudan and other donors should be directed to
interventions that support shielding, such as providing home-based treatment for shielded individuals, and direct
financial support for families, including where the breadwinner is at high risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Interventions targeting shielding families and the larger community are needed to address concerns about
psychological well-being and social isolation of shielded individuals. In the former category, shielding promotion
should adopt an approach that highlights and leverages local traditions for protecting and the elderly and most
vulnerable in times of hardship, and interventions for incentivising and celebrating local community action that
supports shielding. For individuals and families that are shielding, supportive interventions may include
psychological health guidance and support, distribution of shielding aids such as soap, face coverings and cleaning
supplies, and innovative remote socialisation methods. To provide a supportive environment for shielding,
shielding promotion should occur in the context of broader communication interventions and policy responses
that enhance risk perception of COVID-19, address misinformation and incentivise compliance with preventive
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

behaviours in the population. Finally, to improve uptake, shielding promotion should be time-limited, by actively
promoting the strategy when there are early indicators of increasing incidence of COVID-19, and reducing
promotion when incidence and risk of COVID-19 are deemed low by responders.

Conclusion
Our study findings provide valuable insights and recommendations for COVID-19 responders in Sudan and
similar resource-poor settings. We conclude that shielding is generally acceptable in the study communities, and
that acceptability is influenced by feasibility, and by contextual changes in the epidemic and associated policy
response. Shielding promotion interventions in Sudanese communities may capitalise on the cultural sense of duty
towards elders and vulnerable groups and should address different COVID-19 beliefs and perceptions. Promotion
campaigns should include targeted risk communication and shielding promotion amongst individuals at higher
risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes. Households should be provided with practical guidance to implement realistic
household-level shielding options, with social, psychological and financial support interventions to sustain
shielding effectively. Furthermore, communities should be incentivised and rewarded for supporting and enabling
shielding.

List of abbreviations
COREQ

Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research

COVID-19

Coronavirus disease

WHO

World Health Organization

Y-PEER Sudan Sudan's Youth Peer Education Network

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References:
1. World Health Organization. Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005)
Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). 2020.
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-the-internationalhealth-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov).
Accessed 21 September 2020.
2.
Radio
Dabanga.
Sudan
declares
health
emergency
to
combat
coronavirus.
https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/sudan-declares-health-emergency-to-combat-coronavirus.
Accessed 21 Septemer 2020.
3. Radio Dabanga. Coronavirus measures: Sudan's Council of Ministers issues directions.
https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/coronavirus-measures-sudan-s-council-of-ministers-issuedirections. Accessed September 21 2020.
4. Reuters staff. Sudan confirms second coronavirus case, Khartoum bans mass gatherings.
https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-health-coronavirus-sudan/sudan-confirms-second-coronavirus-case-khartoumbans-mass-gatherings-idUKKBN21737U. Accessed September 21 2020.
5. Reuters staff. UPDATE 1-Sudan closes airports and borders over coronavirus fears.
https://uk.reuters.com/article/health-coronavirus-sudan/update-1-sudan-closes-airports-and-borders-overcoronavirus-fears-idUSL8N2B987L. Accessed September 21 2020.
6.
Radio
Dabanga.
Coronavirus:
Khartoum
airport
reopens
for
stranded
Sudanese.
https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/coronavirus-khartoum-airport-reopens-for-stranded-sudanese.
Accessed September 21 2020.
7. Kunna E. Sudan: Managing COVID-19 Pandemic During a Time of Transition. In: COVID-19: Impact on
MENA Countries. Arab Reform Initiative. 2020. https://www.arab-reform.net/publication/sudan-managingcovid-19-pandemic-during-a-time-of-transition/. Accessed September 21 2020.
8. Aljazeera and news agencies. Sudan locks down capital Khartoum after coronavirus cases rise.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/04/sudan-locks-capital-khartoum-coronavirus-cases-rise200418134801982.html. Accessed September 21 2020.
9. United Nations Country Team. Sudan: Corona Virus - COVID-19 Country Preparedness and Response Plan.
https://reliefweb.int/report/sudan/sudan-corona-virus-covid-19-country-preparedness-and-response-plan-cprpapril-2020. Accessed September 21 2020.
10. World Health Organization. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. 2020.
https://covid19.who.int/region/emro/country/sd. Accessed August 10 2020.
11. Logan S, Gali H. Sudan's transitional government must be supported through COVID-19. Here's why. The
Conversation. https://theconversation.com/sudans-transitional-government-must-be-supported-through-covid19-heres-why-140184. Accessed September 21 2020.
12. Altayb HN, Altayeb NME, Hamadalnil Y, Elsayid M, Mahmoud NE. The current situation of COVID-19 in
Sudan. New Microbes and New Infections. 2020;37:100746. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmni.2020.100746.
13. Partnership for Evidence-Based Response to COVID-19. Finding the Balance: Public Health and Social
Measures in Sudan September 08 2020.
14. Ruggles S, Heggeness M. Intergenerational Coresidence in Developing Countries. Population and
Development Review. 2008;34(2):253-81. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2008.00219.x.
15. van Zandvoort K, Jarvis CI, Pearson CAB, Davies NG, Nightingale ES, Munday JD et al. Response strategies
for COVID-19 epidemics in African settings: a mathematical modelling study. BMC Medicine. 2020;18(1):324.
doi:10.1186/s12916-020-01789-2.
16. Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R et al. Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns
Relevant
to
the
Spread
of
Infectious
Diseases.
PLOS
Medicine.
2008;5(3):e74.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074.
17. Butler N, Tulloch O. Considerations and Principles for Shielding People at High Risk of Severe Outcomes
from
COVID-19.
Social
Science
in
Humanitarian
Action
Platform.
2020.
https://www.socialscienceinaction.org/resources/considerations-principles-shielding-people-high-risk-severeoutcomes-covid-19/. Accessed September 21 2020.
18. Hodgins S, Saad A. Will the Higher-Income Country Blueprint for COVID-19 Work in Low- and Lower
Middle-Income Countries? Glob Health Sci Pract. 2020;8(2):136-43. doi:10.9745/GHSP-D-20-00217.
19. Andrew A, Armand A, Augsburg B, Taveras IK. Challenges of adopting coronavirus precautions in lowincome countries. Institute for Fiscal Studies. https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14779#_ftn3. Accessed
September 21 2020.
20. Fereday J, Muir-Cochrane E. Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid Approach of Inductive
and Deductive Coding and Theme Development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods. 2006;5(1):80-92.
doi:10.1177/160940690600500107.
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

21. Booth A, Hannes K, Harden A, Noyes J, Harris J, Tong A. COREQ (Consolidated Criteria for Reporting
Qualitative Studies). Guidelines for Reporting Health Research: A User's Manual. 2014:214-26.
doi:10.1002/9781118715598.ch21.
22. Teachout M, Zipfel C. The economic impact of COVID-19 lockdowns in sub-Saharan Africa. International
Growth Centre. 2020. https://www.theigc.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Teachout-and-Zipfel-2020-policybrief-.pdf. Accessed November 20 2020.
23. Abdelhafiz AS, Mohammed Z, Ibrahim ME, Ziady HH, Alorabi M, Ayyad M et al. Knowledge, Perceptions,
and Attitude of Egyptians Towards the Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). Journal of Community Health.
2020;45(5):881-90. doi:10.1007/s10900-020-00827-7.
24. Austrian K, Pinchoff J, Tidwell JB, White C, Abuya T, Kangwana B et al. COVID-19 related knowledge,
attitudes, practices and needs of households in informal settlements in Nairobi, Kenya [Pre-print]. Bulletin of the
World Health Organization. 2020. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.20.260281.
25. Schmidt-Sane M, Jones L, Tulloch O. Key Considerations: Emerging Evidence on Shielding Vulnerable
Groups During COVID-192020.
26. Seifu Estifanos A, Alemu G, Negussie S, Ero D, Mengistu Y, Addissie A et al. 'I exist because of we': shielding
as a communal ethic of maintaining social bonds during the COVID-19 response in Ethiopia. BMJ Global Health.
2020;5(7):e003204. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2020-003204.
27. Global Working Group on Community Shielding. Situation Update #1: August 2020. 2020.
https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/media/40471. Accessed November 10 2020.
28. Douedari Y, Alhaffar M, Al-Twaish M, Mkhallalati H, Alwany R, Ibrahim NBM et al. "Ten years of war!
You expect people to fear a 'germ'?": A qualitative study of initial perceptions and responses to the COVID-19
pandemic among displaced communities in opposition-controlled northwest Syria. Journal of Migration and
Health. 2020:100021. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmh.2020.100021.
29. Ahmad M, Iram K, Jabeen G. Perception-based influence factors of intention to adopt COVID-19 epidemic
prevention
in
China.
Environmental
Research.
2020;190:109995.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109995.
30. Chuang Y-C, Huang Y-L, Tseng K-C, Yen C-H, Yang L-h. Social capital and health-protective behavior
intentions in an influenza pandemic. PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0122970-e. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122970.
31. Teasdale E, Yardley L, Schlotz W, Michie S. The importance of coping appraisal in behavioural responses to
pandemic flu. British Journal of Health Psychology. 2012;17(1):44-59. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.20448287.2011.02017.x.
32. Williams L, Rasmussen S, Kleczkowski A, Maharaj S, Cairns N. Protection motivation theory and social
distancing behaviour in response to a simulated infectious disease epidemic. Psychology, Health & Medicine.
2015;20(7):832-7. doi:10.1080/13548506.2015.1028946.
33. Rabbani MG, Akter O, Hasan MZ, Samad N, Mahmood SS, Joarder T. Knowledge, Attitude and Practice
towards COVID-19 among people in Bangladesh during the pandemic: a cross-sectional study. medRxiv.
2020:2020.09.22.20198275. doi:10.1101/2020.09.22.20198275.
34. Adhena G, Hidru HD. Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice of High-Risk Age Groups to Coronavirus Disease19 Prevention and Control in Korem District, Tigray, Ethiopia: Cross-Sectional Study. Infect Drug Resist.
2020;13:3801-9. doi:10.2147/IDR.S275168.
35. Akalu Y, Ayelign B, Molla MD. Knowledge, Attitude and Practice Towards COVID-19 Among Chronic
Disease Patients at Addis Zemen Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia. Infect Drug Resist. 2020;13:1949-60.
doi:10.2147/IDR.S258736.
36. Ayala GX, Elder JP. Qualitative methods to ensure acceptability of behavioral and social interventions to the
target population. J Public Health Dent. 2011;71 Suppl 1(0 1):S69-S79. doi:10.1111/j.1752-7325.2011.00241.x.
37. Sturges JE, Hanrahan KJ. Comparing Telephone and Face-to-Face Qualitative Interviewing: a Research Note.
Qualitative Research. 2004;4(1):107-18. doi:10.1177/1468794104041110.
38. Novick G. Is there a bias against telephone interviews in qualitative research? Res Nurs Health.
2008;31(4):391-8. doi:10.1002/nur.20259.
39. Holt A. Using the telephone for narrative interviewing: a research note. Qualitative Research. 2010;10(1):11321. doi:10.1177/1468794109348686.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate:
The ethical approval for the study was obtained from Sudan's National Health Research Ethics Committee based
at the Federal Ministry of Health (number 1-4-20) and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine's
Research Ethics Committee (number 22051). All participants provided verbal informed consent, including explicit
permission to record the interview and to publish anonymised quotes from the interview. Participation was
voluntary, and participants were not financially rewarded for participation.

Consent for publication:
Not applicable

Availability of data and materials:
The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.

Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests

Funding:
The data collection costs were borne by the investigators and volunteer youth peers. NA was supported by UK
Research and Innovation as part of the Global Challenges Research Fund, grant number ES/P010873/1. Article
Processing Charges were covered by UK Aid via The British Council, as part of the 'Community-led COVID-19
Mitigation in Sudan: A Research and Advocacy Intervention' project. None of the above funding bodies had any
role in the design of the study and collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in writing the manuscript.

Authors' contributions
NA, NN and MD conceptualised the study and developed data collection tools in discussion with other co-authors.
IZ and AA coordinated and supervised data collection. SAEA, NA, NN, MD, IZ and AA analysed and interpreted
the data. NA and SAEA drafted the manuscript and NN, MD, IZ, AA, and MAF read, reviewed and approved the
final manuscript.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.14.20248160; this version posted December 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements:
We are grateful to the youth peers for their critical role in data collection and preliminary analysis, and for their
valuable insights into the context at the study sites. We thank Dr Jennifer Palmer and Professor Bayard Roberts
for the valuable comments and ideas on the study conceptualisation and design. We thank Ms. Sian White for her
assistance with drawing out behavioural insights from study findings, and shaping recommendations for shielding
promotion in Sudanese communities.

24

