medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Antithrombotic Therapy in COVID-19: Systematic Summary of Ongoing or Completed
Randomized Trials
Azita H. Talasaz, PharmD,1, 2 Parham Sadeghipour, MD,3 Hessam Kakavand, PharmD,1, 2 Maryam
Aghakouchakzadeh, PharmD,1 Elaheh Kordzadeh-Kermani, PharmD,1 Benjamin W. Van Tassell,
PharmD,4, 5 Azin Gheymati, PharmD,1 Hamid Ariannejad, MD,2 Seyed Hossein Hosseini,
PharmD,1 Sepehr Jamalkhani, MD(2021),3 Michelle Sholzberg, MDCM, MSc,6, 7 Manuel Monreal,
MD, PhD,8 David Jimenez, MD, PhD,9 Gregory Piazza, MD, MS,10 Sahil A. Parikh, MD,11, 12 Ajay
J. Kirtane, MD, SM,11, 12 John W. Eikelboom, MBBS,13 Jean M. Connors, MD,14 Beverley J. Hunt,
MD,15 Stavros V. Konstantinides MD, PhD,16, 17 Mary Cushman, MD, MSc18, 19 Jeffrey I. Weitz,
MD,20, 21 Gregg W. Stone, MD,11, 22 Harlan M. Krumholz, MD, SM,23, 24, 25 Gregory Y.H. Lip,
MD,26, 27 Samuel Z. Goldhaber, MD,10 and Behnood Bikdeli, MD, MS, 10, 11, 23, *
Total Words Count: 9020 (including text, tables, Figure legends, but not online supplement)
Affiliations:
1. Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
2. Tehran Heart Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
3. Cardiovascular Intervention Research Center, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and
Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
4. Department of Pharmacotherapy and Outcome Science, School of Pharmacy, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
5. Pauley Heart Center, Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Pharmacy, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
6. Departments of Medicine and Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
7. Department of Medicine, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
8. Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitari Germans Trials i Pujol,
Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia, Barcelona, Spain.
9. Respiratory Department, Hospital Ramón y Cajal and Medicine Department, Universidad
de Alcalá (Instituto de Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria), Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain.
10. Cardiovascular Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
11. Clinical Trials Center, Cardiovascular Research Foundation, New York, NY, USA.
12. New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA.
13. Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
14. Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA.
15. Haemostasis and Thrombosis Centre, St Thomas' Hospital, Westminster Bridge Road,
London, United Kingdom.
16. Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

17. Department of Cardiology, Democritus University of Thrace, Greece.
18. Department of Medicine, University of Vermont Larner College of Medicine and
University of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, VT, USA.
19. Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Vermont Larner College
of Medicine and University of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, VT, USA.
20. McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
21. Thrombosis and Atherosclerosis Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
22. Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
23. Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation (CORE), Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.
24. Department of Health Policy and Administration, Yale School of Public Health, New
Haven, CT, USA.
25. Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
26. Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
27. Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
FUNDING: None

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr. Bikdeli, Cardiovascular Medicine Division,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Shapiro 5, Suite 5156. Boston, MA 02115;
bbikdeli@bwh.harvard.edu, Behnood.bikdeli@yale.edu
TWEET: Several #RCTs are underway to understand the optimal prophylactic #antithrombotic
regimen across the spectrum of disease severity in patients with #COVID19.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
Endothelial injury and microvascular/macrovascular thrombosis are common pathophysiologic
features of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19). However, the optimal thromboprophylactic
regimens remain unknown across the spectrum of illness severity of COVID-19. A variety of
antithrombotic agents, doses and durations of therapy are being assessed in ongoing randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) that focus on outpatients, hospitalized patients in medical wards, and
critically-ill patients with COVID-19. This manuscript provides a perspective of the ongoing or
completed RCTs related to antithrombotic strategies used in COVID-19, the opportunities and
challenges for the clinical trial enterprise, and areas of existing knowledge, as well as data gaps
that may motivate the design of future RCTs.

KEY WORDS COVID-19, anticoagulant, antiplatelet, clinical trial, RCT, thrombosis
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019
DOAC = direct oral anticoagulant
DTI = direct thrombin inhibitor
ICU = intensive care unit
LMWH = low molecular weight heparin
RCT = randomized controlled trial
SARS-CoV-2 = severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
UFH = unfractionated heparin
VTE = venous thromboembolism

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Thromboembolism in Patients with COVID-19
Microvascular and macrovascular thrombotic complications including arterial and especially
venous thromboembolism (VTE) appear to be common clinical manifestations of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19), particularly among hospitalized and critically-ill patients (1-4). Pooled
analyses have helped in providing aggregate estimates of thrombotic events (4, 5). In a recent
systematic review and meta-analysis, the overall incidence of VTE among inpatients with COVID19 was estimated at 17% (95% confidence interval [CI], 13.4%-20.9%), with variation based on
study design and method of ascertainment, with a four-fold higher incidence rate in patients in the
intensive care units (ICU) compared with non-ICU settings (28% vs. 7%) (6). In addition, postmortem studies show frequent evidence of microvascular thrombosis in patients with COVID-19
(7, 8). The influence of these events on mortality rates remains unknown (9).

Pathophysiology of Thromboembolism in COVID-19: Virchow’s Triad in Action
COVID-19 can potentiate all three components of Virchow’s triad and increase the risk of
thrombosis (Figure 1). First, SARS-CoV-2 infection may trigger endothelial dysfunction. Using
the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)-2, expressed on the surface of many cells, SARS-CoV2 enters endothelial cells and may impair their intrinsic antithrombotic properties. It is proposed
that viremia, hypoxia, the inflammatory response, increased expression of tissue factor, and
elevated levels of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) can together disrupt the hemostasis
equilibrium, and promote endothelial activation (10-12). This induction of a procoagulant state
along with the reduction in plasminogen activators, further results in increased platelet reactivity
(13-15). Inflammatory cytokines and endothelial activation can lead to downregulation of

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

antithrombin and protein C expression, and an increase in the levels of plasminogen activator
inhibitor, fibrinogen, factors V, VII, VIII, and X, in addition to von Willebrand factor (16).
Increased platelet reactivity, NETosis and alterations in the aforementioned hemostatic factors
result in a hypercoagulable state (17-22). Particularly in COVID-19, it is thought that the excessive
inflammatory response plays an important role in the pathogenesis of thrombosis
(thromboinflammation), including pulmonary microthrombosis and pulmonary intravascular
coagulopathy (7,8). Antiphospholipid antibodies have been identified in some patients (23) but
their clinical significance is uncertain (24). Finally, venous stasis may synergistically combine
with this prothrombotic milieu in patients more severely affected by the clinical syndrome of
COVID-19 constituting of extreme fatigue with decreased daily activity, immobility due to oxygen
requirements in the hospital. This may be further exacerbated by development of complications
such as viral myocarditis and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (25, 26). All the aforementioned
mechanisms may increase the risk of arterial and venous thrombosis, thereby impacting the
severity of illness.

Antithrombotic Prophylaxis in COVID-19: Pros and Cons
Bedside observations, pathophysiological investigations, and initial epidemiological data led to
enthusiasm for antithrombotic prophylaxis in COVID-19 (27-31). The concern for thrombotic risk
was heightened by reports of VTE in 13% to 56% of patients despite the use of standard
prophylaxis. (32-35) This led some experts to recommend empiric use of escalated doses of
anticoagulants (36). However, the risks associated with intensified use of antithrombotic agents
such as bleeding should be weighed against the presumptive benefits (22, 27, 31).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In addition, there have been variations in methodology and outcomes assessment for thrombotic
events –including the concern about counting situ thrombosis in small vessels, a recognized feature
of acute lung injury also known as immunothrombosis, as pulmonary emboli. Due to these issues,
as well as well as the concerns for excess bleeding, a number of guidance statements have not
recommended empiric escalated-dose anticoagulation (27, 37).
Multiple ongoing randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are evaluating a variety of
antithrombotic regimens in patients with COVID-19 (Figure 2). These include trials of antiplatelet
agents, anticoagulants, fibrinolytic agents, or combinations of these agents. In most trials, the
intensity of antithrombotic therapy is proportional to the expected thrombotic event rates in the
population under study. Less intensive therapies including antiplatelet agents, oral anticoagulants,
and standard prophylactic dose of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) are typically studied in
the outpatient or lower acuity hospital settings. In turn, more intensive therapies including
intermediate-dose or fully-therapeutic doses of anticoagulants, or even fibrinolytic therapy are
under investigation in RCTs of hospitalized critically-ill patients.
The aims of this article are to systematically summarize the ongoing and completed RCTs
of antithrombotic therapy in patients with COVID-19, to evaluate the strengths and limitations of
the study designs, as well as the challenges and opportunities related to conducting and interpreting
RCTs during a global pandemic.

METHODS
We conducted a systematic literature search of trials in clinicaltrials.gov and World Health
Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP), with the pre-defined
keywords of COVID-19, and search terms for antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, anticoagulation,

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

fibrinolytic agents, and antithrombotic agents. We screened the identified studies and included
those that were designed as RCTs with at least one active arm of antithrombotic therapy (date of
last search: December 16, 2020). Supplemental Table 1 summarizes study-level inclusion and
exclusion criteria for this review.
For the included studies, we searched PubMed and MedRxiv for design papers, study
protocols or published results of those studies. The list was complemented by hand-searching and
discussion within the author group.
After identification of 918 records and manual screening of 180 records, we included 75
RCTs (Supplemental figure 1). In 13 cases, a design paper and/or study protocol was available. Of
all ongoing studies, one RCT reported the results in peer-reviewed literature (38) and one shared
the findings on a pre-print server (39). For three RCTs, final results are unknown but patient
enrollment was paused in critically-ill patients due to concern for futility and potential excess of
safety events (40).

REVIEW OF ONGOING OR COMPLETED RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS
As of December 16, 2020, 75 RCTs of antithrombotic agents for patients with COVID-19 were
registered at ClinicalTrials.gov or WHO ICTRP databases. Figure 2 provides a graphical summary
of all RCTs of antithrombotic agents in COVID-19 in a pharmacologic-based approach. Agents
used in these trials include antiplatelet agents, unfractionated heparin (UFH) and heparin
derivatives, parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs), direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs),
fibrinolytic agents, sulodexide (a mixture of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate) (39), dociparstat
(a heparin derivative with anti-inflammatory properties), and nafamostat (a synthetic serine
protease inhibitor with anticoagulant activity). A succinct discussion of the design features of these

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

trials is provided below according to the clinical setting (see Supplemental Tables 2 and 3 for more
details). Supplemental Table 4 summarizes the RCTs of other investigational agents with
antithrombotic properties but not meeting our eligibility criteria for the current manuscript.
In each section, the discussion starts with antiplatelet agents, followed by oral
anticoagulants, parenteral anticoagulants, fibrinolytic therapy, and investigational agents with
antithrombotic properties. This sequence is arbitrary and does not indicate treatment preference.
Figure 3 illustrates how RCTs of various agents can fill the knowledge gaps about antithrombotic
therapy in COVID-19 in various settings of illness severity.

Ongoing Clinical Trials of Antithrombotic Agents in the Outpatient Setting
Eleven RCTs of antithrombotic therapy in outpatients with COVID-19 have been registered in
clinical trials databases and are studying aspirin, DOACs, enoxaparin, and sulodexide compared
with no treatment (6/11) or with placebo (5/11). These trials are mostly (8/11) open-label, with the
number of participants ranging from 172 to 7,000 patients, and include patients with a
hyperinflammatory or procoagulant profile (including elevated levels of C-reactive protein [CRP]
(1/11) or d-dimer [2/11]) and exclude patients at high risk of bleeding (such as those with history
of recent gastrointestinal bleeding or intracranial hemorrhage). Pregnant women and patients with
severe kidney dysfunction (creatinine clearance [CrCl] < 30 mL/min) are excluded from 8 and 6
of these trials, respectively. The most common primary outcome in the outpatient trials include the
need for hospitalization, incidence of thromboembolic events, mortality or composite outcomes
inclusive of these within 21 to 90 days after randomization.
Aspirin, DOACs (at both low-intensity and high-intensity), LMWHs (at standard
prophylactic dose), and sulodexide are the agents under investigation in the outpatient setting. The

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

impact of low-dose aspirin on the composite rate of hospitalizations and mortality is being
evaluated in 3 RCTs with a total of 12,080 patients with COVID-19 (ACTCOVID19, LEAD
COVID-19, and ACTIV-4b). Low-intensity rivaroxaban (10 mg QD) is being evaluated in a total
of 4,600 patients in two ongoing RCTs (PREVENT-HD [NCT04508023] and NCT04504032).
Low-intensity apixaban (2.5 mg BID) is also under investigation in the ACTIV-4b trial in up to
7,000 patients. High-intensity DOACs including rivaroxaban (20 mg QD), apixaban (5 mg BID),
and edoxaban (60 mg QD) are being investigated among 7,992 patients in 4 RCTs (COVIDPREVENT, ACTIV-4b, HERO-19, and CONVINCE). The primary outcome for the COVIDPREVENT, HERO-19 and CONVINCE trials is the composite of mortality and arterial and venous
thromboembolism; the primary outcome for the randomized double-blind placebo controlled
ACTIV-4b trial is a composite of venous and arterial thromboembolism, hospitalization for
cardiovascular/pulmonary events and all-cause mortality. ETHIC and OVID RCTs are comparing
the effect of standard prophylactic dose of enoxaparin versus no intervention on the primary
outcome of hospitalization or mortality in 2,370 individuals (41).
SulES-COVID is the only completed trial of antithrombotic therapy in outpatients with
COVID-19. This single-center study of 243 participants assessed the efficacy of sulodexide,
compared with placebo on 21-day rates of hospitalization and need for use of supplemental
oxygen. Use of sulodexide was associated with reduced hospital admissions (relative risk [RR],
0.6; 95% CI, 0.37-0.96; p=0.03) and need for oxygen support (RR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.5 to 1; p=0.05),
without a significant effect on mortality (39). The study has limitations, including frequent (22.1%)
post-enrollment exclusions due to negative SARS-CoV2 test results or lost to follow-up.
Many of the outpatient antithrombotic therapy trials for COVID-19 are large and the
follow-up windows are sufficient to capture the intended primary outcomes. An issue with some

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of these trials is an open-label design, which is a pragmatic feature facilitating the design and
enrollment but potentially limits the internal validity, especially for outcomes that may be less
bias-resistant. In addition, the available data do not clarify whether dose adjustments are made for
renal or liver dysfunction.

Ongoing Clinical trials of Antithrombotic Agents in Hospitalized non-ICU Patients
We identified 50 ongoing RCTs related to antithrombotic therapy in hospitalized non-ICU patients
with COVID-19. Most trials (44/50) are open-label. The antithrombotic agents under investigation
include aspirin, P2Y12 inhibitors, dipyridamole, DOACs, heparin (both systemic and inhaled),
dociparstat, nafamostat, and a combination of these drugs. The planned sample sizes range
between 34 and 20,000 patients. Considering the potential link between elevated D-dimer, micro
and macro-thrombosis in COVID-19, and worse outcomes in COVID-19 (42-44), many RCTs
(N=16) include patients with elevated D-dimer levels with cut-offs ranging from >500 ng/mL to
>1,500 ng/mL (or defined as >2-4 times the upper limit of normal per the local laboratory). Most
trials exclude pregnant women (41 studies) and patients with active bleeding or history of
intracranial or gastrointestinal bleeding (39 studies). Many trials also excluded patients with CrCl
< 30 mL/min (20 studies). In most trials, the time frame for the primary outcome assessment is 2830 days, although a few studies are designed to assess the primary outcomes at earlier or longer
durations. These RCTs are focused on primary efficacy outcomes including all-cause mortality,
VTE, arterial thrombosis, requirement for respiratory support, or a composite of these outcomes.
The potential protective effect of antiplatelet agents in hospitalized patients with COVID19 is being evaluated in 11 RCTs. REMAP-CAP is a large global RCT with a multifactorial
adaptive design which is planning to randomize 7,100 patients to multiple therapeutic interventions

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

including an anticoagulant arm and antiplatelet agent arm looking ats aspirin, and the P2Y12
inhibitors clopidogrel, ticagrelor or prasugrel (45). PEAC aims to test the efficacy of aspirin in
shortening clinical recovery time. The impact of aspirin on all-cause mortality among hospitalized
patients is also under evaluation in the largest adaptive platform RCT for COVID-19
(RECOVERY) with 20,000 participants (46). RESIST (CTRI/2020/07/026791) aims to evaluate
the role of aspirin plus atorvastatin in clinical deterioration characterized by progression to WHO
clinical improvement ordinal score in 800 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 (47). CAMCovid-19 evaluates the impact of higher dose of aspirin (325 mg QID) along with colchicine and
montelukast on inflammatory markers such as hs-CRP in 34 patients. PARTISAN
(NCT04445623) will be comparing the effect of prasugrel versus placebo among 128 patients with
COVID-19 on the primary outcome of improved oxygenation expressed as the PaO2/FiO2 ratio at
7-day follow-up. Some RCTs are evaluating the impact of dipyridamole in hospitalized patients
with COVID-19. Dipyridamole 100 mg QID and the combination of dipyridamole ER 200mg/
aspirin 25mg are being evaluated in 3 small RCTs (TOLD, DICER and ATTAC-19) for primary
outcomes such as D-dimer level changes (for the first two trials) and improvement in COVID-19
WHO Ordinal Scale (a scale indicting severity of illness, from 0 [not infected] to 8 [death])
(ATTAC-19).
The use of DOACs in hospitalized ward patients with COVID-19 is under investigation in
5 RCTs. Low-intensity rivaroxaban is being investigated in 650 planned participants in the
ACOVACT and XACT trials of hospitalized patients to assess outcomes such as all-cause
mortality, ICU admission, and intubation. High-intensity (but not loading-intensity) DOACs
including rivaroxaban and apixaban are being evaluated in large RCTs that will enroll a total of
4,750 participants (ACTION, COVID-PREVENT, FREEDOM COVID, and XACT).

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C-19-ACS is an adaptive RCT conducted to evaluate the impact of the combination of lowdose rivaroxaban (2.5 mg BID) plus aspirin 75 mg/day plus clopidogrel 75 mg/day along with
atorvastatin and omeprazole on 30-day all-cause mortality in 3,170 hospitalized patients with
COVID-19. Patients with definite acute coronary syndromes are excluded from this RCT. The
effect of dual pathway inhibition using the combination of low-dose rivaroxaban and aspirin is
being evaluated in the adaptive ACTCOVID19 inpatient study. In this RCT of 4,000 patients, the
rate of invasive mechanical ventilation or death is assessed at 45 days post-randomization.
Twenty-eight ongoing studies are being conducted to examine the efficacy of heparinbased regimens on primary outcomes such as all-cause mortality, venous and arterial thrombosis,
re-hospitalization, the need for invasive mechanical ventilation, or composite outcomes inclusive
of these in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. The majority of these RCTs has chosen standarddose prophylactic anticoagulation regimen as the comparator. Intermediate-dose anticoagulation
will be tested in DAWn-Antico (48), X-COVID-19, COVID-19 HD, COVI-DOSE, EMOSCOVID, NCT04360824, and EUCTR2020-001891-14-ES with 4,434 patients in total. On the
other hand, a total of 18 RCTs with 19,776 patients will evaluate the efficacy of therapeutic
anticoagulation in non-ICU hospitalized patients (49). Only two trials totaling 494 patients
(IMPACT and HEP-COVID) will directly compare therapeutic and intermediate doses of heparin.
The different intensities of heparin derivatives are summarized in Supplemental Table 3.
Recognizing that heparin has more than an anticoagulant effect but also an antiviral and
anti-inflammatory effect, INHALE-HEP and NEBUHEPA are evaluating the impact of nebulized
UFH

on

the

rate

of

intubation

in

856

hospitalized

patients

with

COVID-19.

PACTR202007606032743 evaluates the impact of nebulized UFH on PaO2/FiO2 ratio in 100

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hospitalized patients. Standard of care (for INHALE-HEP and PACTR202007606032743) and
standard-dose prophylaxis with LMWH (NEBUHEPA) are the comparators, respectively.
High mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) is a protein involved in the pathogenesis of
inflammation. Elevated levels of HMGB1 is associated with worse the outcomes in COVID-19
(50). Dociparstat, a heparin derivative with presumed anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory
properties, inhibits HMGB1 and may reduce the formation of NETs and the risk of thrombosis.
The drug is being studied in NCT04389840 to assess its impacts on all-cause mortality and need
for mechanical ventilation in 600 patients with severe COVID-19 (51).
Nafamostat is a synthetic serine protease inhibitor with anti-viral, anti-inflammatory, and
anticoagulant activity previously used for anticoagulation during hemodialysis (52). Nafamostat
is under evaluation in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in 7 RCTs with 826 individuals in
total. The primary efficacy outcome in most (5/7) of these trials is time to recovery.
The strengths of many of the antithrombotic trials among inpatients with COVID-19
include relatively large sample sizes and ample follow-up for detection of events. With multiple
large clinical trials underway, robust evidence should soon be available comparing the
intermediate/therapeutic doses of heparinoids versus usual care. However, studies such as
PARTISAN and NCT04420299 have relatively small sample sizes and short periods of follow-up
(7 days and 10 days, respectively), rendering them susceptible to type II error. There is also
variability across the trials in methods for identification and ascertainment of thrombotic
outcomes. Lack of blinding and blinded outcome adjudication are practical limitations for some of
these trials.

Ongoing Clinical Trials of Antithrombotic Agents in Critically-Ill Patients

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The risk of thrombotic events appears to be highest among critically-ill patients with COVID-19.
A systematic review estimated that VTE event rates in critically-ill patients with COVID-19 would
be estimated at 27.9% (95% CI, 22.1%-34.1%) (6). Currently, there are 33 ongoing RCTs
evaluating the role of antithrombotic agents in critically-ill patients with COVID-19 of which 18
RCTs enroll mixed non-ICU and ICU populations and 16 RCTs solely enroll ICU patients. The
sample size of these studies range from 15 to 20,000 patients. These trials study the role of
antiplatelet agents (aspirin, clopidogrel and dipyridamole), systemic anticoagulants (intermediate
to full-therapeutic-dose of heparin and DTIs), inhaled UFH, fibrinolytic agents (tenecteplase and
alteplase), and nafamostat. Inclusion criteria in 11 of 34 RCTs require D-dimer cut-offs ranging
from >500 ng/ml to >3,000 ng/ml (or defined as >2-6 times the upper limit of normal limit). Allcause mortality, venous and arterial thrombotic complications, and oxygenation (expressed mostly
as PaO2/FiO2) status are the most common components of the primary efficacy outcomes.
Bleeding complications are the most widely used primary safety outcome among these studies.
The role of antiplatelet agents is under investigation in critically-ill patients in 4 trials. As
previously described, dipyridamole (TOLD) and aspirin (RECOVERY and CAM-Covid-19) are
under evaluation. COVID-PACT is a multicenter, open-label study that will randomize 750
patients with 2 x 2 factorial design trial to full-dose anticoagulation vs. standard-dose prophylactic
anticoagulation with heparin-based regimens (first randomization), and to antiplatelet therapy with
clopidogrel vs. no antiplatelet therapy (second randomization). The primary efficacy outcome is
the incidence of VTE or arterial thrombosis incidence 28 days after enrollment.
UFH and/or LMWH (19 studies) are the most common antithrombotic regimens under
investigation in the ongoing trials in critically-ill patients. INSPIRATION, IMPROVE, DAWnAntico, and COVI-DOSE are testing intermediate-dose versus standard prophylactic dose

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

anticoagulation in more than 1,500 participants in total. INSPIRATION has recently completed
enrollment of 600 patients and the results are imminent (53). Eleven RCTs are evaluating the
potential role of therapeutic-dose versus standard prophylactic dose anticoagulation in 5,142
patients. In December 2020, preliminary results of an interim analysis of pooled critically ill
patients enrolled in the three trials (ACTIV-4a, REMAP CAP, and ATTACC) by the Data Safety
and Monitoring boards paused enrollment of critically ill patients due to futility for the endpoint
of freedom from organ support at 21 days. Enrollment of moderately ill patients in this composite
trial continues. This decision was based on the determination of futility, and a potential for harm
due to possibly higher rates of bleeding. More details are forthcoming (40). Finally, IMPACT and
HEP-COVID are comparing therapeutic anticoagulation with intermediate-dose anticoagulation
in a total of 494 individuals.
The only published RCT in critically-ill patients with COVID-19 is HESACOVID, a
single-center study of 20 patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation randomized to
therapeutic versus standard-dose anticoagulation. Therapeutic-dose anticoagulation significantly
increased PaO2/FiO2 and ventilator free days (15 days [IQR 6–16] versus 0 days [IQR 0–11],
p = 0.028) (38). The study did not have sufficient power to compare all-cause mortality between
the study groups. Bleeding may have been underestimated due to barriers of performing imaging
testing, including computed tomography to identify a source, in critically-ill patients (54).
CHARTER-Irl, CHARTER-MT, and NCT04397510 are evaluating the utility of nebulized
UFH in 292 mechanically-ventilated critically-ill patients with COVID-19. The primary outcome
for CHARTER-Irl is the alterations in D-dimer area under the curve (AUC) within a 10-day
follow-up, and for CHARTER-MT is ventilator-free days with a follow-up duration of 28 days;
the primary outcome for NCT04397510 is improvement in PaO2/FiO2 ratio within 10 days.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The use of parenteral anticoagulants other than UFH and LMWHs in COVID-19 is being
studied in two trials. IMPACT will randomize 100 ICU patients with COVID-19 into 4 arms to
compare fondaparinux, argatroban, intermediate-dose heparin and therapeutic-dose heparin
(UFH/LMWH) with the primary outcomes of 30-day mortality. In ANTI-CO, bivalirudin is being
investigated in 100 critically-ill patients for the primary outcome of improvement in oxygenation
as determined by the PaO2/FiO2 ratio (55).
There are six RCTs (AtTAC, STARS, TRISTARDS, TACOVID, NCT04505592, and
IRCT20200415047080N1) evaluating the safety and efficacy of fibrinolytic therapy (tenecteplase
or alteplase) on COVID-19 related respiratory failure in a total of 440 patients (56). Most of these
trials include patients with severe disease (severe acute respiratory distress syndrome, elevated
troponin levels, and elevated D-dimer levels). The primary outcomes in 5 of these trials include
the improvement in PaO2/FiO2 ratio or ventilator free days. The time frame for studies evaluating
the change in PaO2/FiO2 ratio is between 48-72 hours and for those which evaluate ventilator free
days is 28 days. Patients receiving therapeutic anticoagulation, and those with thrombocytopenia,
or history of intracranial or gastrointestinal bleeding are excluded from fibrinolytic therapy trials.
Nafamostat is under evaluation in 4 studies in critically-ill patients with COVID-19
(DEFINE, RACONA, NCT04418128, and NCT04623021) with 650 participants in total.
Research in the ICU faces several challenges for study design, data/sample collection, and
patient follow-up (57). In many cases, patients are unconscious and obtaining informed consent
requires discussion with healthcare proxies. This is further complicated because visitors are
prohibited. The strengths of the aforementioned studies in the ICU include the diversity of studied
antithrombotic agents, and sample size in many RCTs. There are also a number of notable
limitations to these trials. The most important limitation is the small sample size in several studies,

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

raising the possibility of type II error. The small sample size will mostly influence trials of
thrombolytic therapy and non-heparin anticoagulants.

Ongoing Clinical Trials in Post-Discharge Patients
ACTIV-4c (NCT04650087) is a double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT which will evaluate the
impact of apixaban 2.5 mg BID on the rate of all-cause mortality, and arterial and venous
thromboembolism on 5,320 post-discharge patients. MICHELLE (NCT04662684) is an openlabel RCT with 320 participants aims to evaluate the safety and efficacy of rivaroxaban 10 mg QD
for 35+/-4 days versus no intervention after hospital discharge with a composite efficacy outcome
of VTE and VTE-related death.
In addition, there are 7 RCTs with a projected total of 1,452 participants which will
continue the already assigned antithrombotic therapy after discharge in patients who were
randomized in the general medical wards or in the ICU. In COVID-PREVENT, XACT, and
NCT04508439 RCTs, post-discharge thromboprophylaxis with rivaroxaban (10 or 20 mg QD) is
being investigated in 680 participants who were enrolled in general medical wards to measure the
incidence of VTE at 30-35 days after discharge. In the HERO-19 study, edoxaban 60 mg QD or
placebo will continue after discharge in 172 patients who were randomized in the ICU or non-ICU
settings to evaluate all-cause mortality rate and VTE incidence at 42 days. In the INSPIRATION
study, intermediate or standard prophylactic dose of enoxaparin will be continued after discharge
in 600 patients who were randomized in the ICU to evaluate the rate of VTE. Finally, aspirin in
the PEAC study, and dipyridamole ER plus aspirin in the ATTAC-19 study, will be continued
after discharge in patients randomized in the non-ICU general wards.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Incorporation of Vulnerable Populations in the Ongoing Trials
Most of the ongoing RCTs are excluding patients at increased risk of bleeding, or with acute and
chronic hepatic failure. In more than 50% of the trials designed to evaluate escalated dose
anticoagulation, patients with CrCl < 15 mL/min are excluded. CoV-Hep is an open-label study
which evaluates the role of low-dose (10 IU/kg/h) intravenous UFH on the rate of clotted dialyzers
in 90 critically-ill patients with COVID-19 undergoing continuous venous-venous hemodialysis
with a follow-up duration of 3 days. Specific dose adjustment for obesity is considered for 10 out
of 34 trials of systemic heparin compounds. Pregnant women are excluded from 25 out of 34 trials
of systemic heparin compounds. While patient selection in these studies is based on practical
considerations, it is unlikely that high-quality evidence will soon be available for antithrombotic
therapy in such vulnerable subgroups (Figure 4 and Supplemental Figure 2).

The Impact of RCTs on the Future Practice of Antithrombotic Therapy
A large number of RCTs will help to delineate the efficacy and safety of antithrombotic agents in
patients with COVID-19 (Central Illustration). Until the results accrue, participation in these RCTs
is encouraged. Efficacy outcomes vary based on the location of enrollment; i.e., between outpatient
trials and inpatient trials. As for safety outcomes, many of the trials are systematically assessing
major bleeding using the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) criteria or
the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium definitions (58, 59). While observational evidence
suggests low rates of major bleeding, (33, 60), observational studies have the potential for
underreported outcomes and therefore RCTs with systematic and prospective capture of both
thrombotic and bleeding events will help determine the true risk-benefit ratio for treatments. This

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

is especially the case since risk factors for thrombosis in COVID-19, such as D-dimer, may also
predict bleeding (33).
While results from the individual trials may inform interim practice, some challenges
persist. The large number of antithrombotic agents under investigation, the variable dosing
regimens tested, and variability in trial conduct as well as methods of outcome detection and
adjudication may complicate the identification of the optimal regimens. A prospective metaanalysis of RCTs, ideally with individual participant data, will help to assess the effects of distinct
agents across the spectrum of disease severity and may address the clinical and statistical
heterogeneity of the upcoming results. Efforts to harmonize endpoints have been advocated, with
creation of common data elements for VTE for example, to aid in pooling trial results (61, 62). In
addition, there are few head-to-head comparisons for many of the experimental therapies, such as
intermediate-dose compared with fully-therapeutic heparin-based regimens. Network metaanalytic techniques might generate insights into the comparative tradeoffs of these regimens (63).
Additional biomarker and clinical risk prediction sub-studies can also further elucidate subgroups
with more favorable net benefit profiles from distinct regimens. Moreover, the remaining
knowledge gaps summarized in Table 1 should be kept in mind so that the design of additional
studies could be considered.
Anti-inflammatory properties and activity against thromboinflammation have been
attributed to several antithrombotic regimens including heparin derivatives and antiplatelet agents
(30, 64, 65), with the potential to reduce large-vessel thrombosis and improve outcomes. Another
evolving concept is the role of microthrombosis and pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy (7, 8,
66) in the pathophysiology of respiratory failure in COVID-19 (67). Results from the small
HESACOVID study suggested improved arterial oxygenation (PaO2/FiO2) with therapeutic

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

versus standard-dose prophylaxis anticoagulation in critically-ill patients with COVID-19 (38).
However, combined investigation of three large-scale randomized trials of therapeutic
anticoagulation (ACTIV-4a, REMAP CAP, and ATTACC) paused enrollment of critically ill
patients for futility; we await further clarifications (40).
Therapeutic drug monitoring of the investigational agents is also important. Even when an
agent is selected (e.g., UFH), the best method for dose titration or adjustment remains uncertain
(68). Some experts recommend measuring anti-Xa levels in those receiving intravenous
unfractionated heparin, since the high levels of Factor VIII observed among critically-ill patients
with COVID-19 may interfere with aPTT assays. The necessity and optimal method for dosing
and monitoring of heparins and LMWHs, in particular for patients with kidney disease or obesity
is yet to be elucidated, and is even understudied outside COVID-19 (69). Ideally, future strategy
trials should test the merits and limitations of these monitoring tests.

Clinical Trial Enterprise During COVID-19 Pandemic: Is a Quantum Leap Taking Place?
The clinical trial enterprise has been significantly affected during the COVID-19 pandemic (70).
Patient recruitment in many ongoing pre-COVID-19 trials was temporarily halted. Notable
challenges such as barriers to follow-up and site-monitoring persist. However, the desire to provide
an evidence-based response has been one of the key drivers of positive changes during the
pandemic (71). These changes include multi-specialty study teams, harmonization of multicenter
protocols, expedited multi-institutional agreement execution and institutional review board and
governmental agency approvals, accelerated informed consent, and enrollment with digital
contact-free technology, expeditious outcomes ascertainment, remote monitoring, and

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dissemination of the findings via fast-track publications, pre-prints, and social media accounts
from scientific societies or investigators (Table 2) (72-74).
Although traditional RCTs have provided a great deal of knowledge for modern medicine,
they are confined to testing a limited number of interventions. Since COVID-19 has multi-organ
involvement and broad manifestations (including inflammation, ARDS, thrombosis and others),
adaptive platform trials –which allow for testing multiple interventions in a single disease based
on a decisive algorithm– have gained attention (75). This type of trial has a perpetual and multiarm-multi-stage design.(76) The RECOVERY Trial (77) and the World Health Organization
Solidarity Trial (78) have tested different steroid and antiviral regimens, respectively, and have
some additional agents under investigation, including aspirin in one of the hypotheses from
RECOVERY. REMAP-CAP is testing several interventions including steroids, antivirals, biologic
agents, simvastatin, and antiplatelet therapy. ACTIV4 platform is similarly using an adaptive
design for antithrombotic agents.
Notwithstanding the good will of investigators, the constant pressure to provide rapid
pandemic response may pose challenges, as well. In some cases, multiple small single-center RCTs
underpowered for their clinical points or using surrogate endpoints with short follow-up have been
designed (71, 79) and may compete against larger multicenter, and potentially more definitive,
studies. The large numbers of these trials alone, in addition to the intense pressure to present
broadly and publish these findings suggests at least some potential for Type I error with
amplification of these results through rapid dissemination of the results.
Additional methodological aspects deserve attention. Interpretation of these trial results
may be limited by underutilization of placebo (perhaps except for the outcome of mortality) (54,
79). Some experts consider that the pressures of working during a global pandemic makes the use

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of placebo more aspirational than realistic. Nevertheless, when feasible, placebo control improves
the internal validity of a trial. Further, appropriate endpoint assessment, including blinded
adjudication when feasible, and pre-specified analysis methods will remain of importance (54).
IRBs and independent ethics committees may experience the burden of numerous protocol
submissions and amendments during the pandemic. Burnout of healthcare systems during the
pandemic, and the risks to the research teams are unique challenges that should also be considered
when designing and executing study protocols (72). Investigators should attempt to foresee some
of the challenges in order to minimize the need for protocol amendments (80-82). Moreover, the
informed consent process has become adapted to facilitate discussions by telephone or video
conference, followed by verbal confirmation, and documentation of consent using approved
software programs and electronic signature, where acceptable (80, 83).
Efficacy and safety outcomes monitoring is also critical. Execution of online Clinical Event
Committee (CEC) and Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) meetings for assessing the
adverse events is a fast safe, efficient alternative to face-to-face meetings. If done with appropriate
planning to adhere to standards of high-quality CEC and DSMB meetings, such approaches may
be considered even when society transitions out of the pandemic (81, 83).
Peer-review and dissemination of the studies has had unique challenges and advancements,
too. Journal editors and reviewers have been pressured for rapid release of the results of completed
studies. This has activated fast-track peer-review process more than ever. Despite its merits, the
“COVID-19 fatigue” created by the fast-track review process might negatively impact the quality
of peer-review, as noted by occurrence of post-publication major revisions and retractions,
including in major journals (84). In a recent study, only 29% of the clinical trials of patients with
COVID-19 reviewed on ClinicalTrials.gov met the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(OCEBM) level 2 evidence (85). The process of peer-review remains an imperfect –yet essential–
step in the evaluation and reporting of results (86). Preprint servers include full drafts of research
studies shared publicly before peer-review. Pre-prints have the potential benefit of early
dissemination and opportunity for feedback and discussion, and could be of substantial benefit
during the pandemic. With a preprint, key researchers in the field can discover findings sooner;
indicate critical errors, or suggest new studies or data that strengthen the argument (87). The
limitations of pre-prints should be also communicated transparently, so that similar weight is not
placed on pre-print and peer-reviewed literature by the lay people, the press, healthcare workers,
or policy-makers. Indeed many retracted papers were from pre-print servers (84).
Prospectively planned meta-analyses would be of particular help during the pandemic.
Such studies can help understand the heterogeneity of the findings between interventions, between
distinct studies, and within subgroups. Prospective meta-analysis can also help with pooled
comparisons for interventions with small individual studies, as well as indirect comparisons for
interventions that do not have sufficiently-large head-to-head comparisons in existing studies.

CONCLUSIONS
Optimal antithrombotic therapy in patients with COVID-19 is yet to be determined. Results of
these ongoing RCTs, and prospective meta-analyses of the completed studies will help clarify
whether any of the plentiful antithrombotic regimens under investigation can safely mitigate
thrombotic complications and improve patient outcomes.

FUNDING: None

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCLOSURES: Dr. Van Tassell received the research support from Novartis, Swedish Orphan
Biovitrum, Olatec Therapeutics, Serpin Pharm. He is a consultant of R-Pharm, Serpin Pharma. Dr.
Monreal reports that he served as an advisor or consultant for Sanofi, Leo Pharma and Daiichi
Sankyo. Also, he received a nonrestricted educational grant by Sanofi and Bayer to sponsor the
RIETE registry. Dr. Jimenez has served as an advisor or consultant for Bayer HealthCare
Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Leo Pharma,
Pfizer, ROVI and Sanofi; served as a speaker or a member of a speakers’ bureau for Bayer
HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Leo
Pharma, ROVI and Sanofi; received grants for clinical research from Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi and
ROVI. Dr. Piazza has received research grant support from Boston Scientific Corporation, Bayer,
Bristol Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Portola/ Alexion Pharmaceuticals, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals; and
has received consulting fees from Amgen, Pfizer, Agile, and Prairie Education and Research
Cooperative. Dr. Parikh reports institutional research support from Abbott Vascular, TriReme
Medical, Surmodics, and Shockwave Medical. He is an advisory board member for Abbott
Vascular, Boston Scientific, Cardinal Health, Medtronic, Janssen, CSI and Philips. He receives
honoraria from Abiomed and Terumo. Dr. Kirtane reports Dr Kirtane reports institutional funding
from Medtronic, Boston Scientific, Abbott Vascular, Abiomed, CSI, CathWorks, Siemens, Philips,
ReCor Medical and travel expenses/meals from Medtronic, Boston Scientific, Abbott Vascular,
Abiomed, CSI, CathWorks, Siemens, Philips, ReCor Medical, Chiesi, OpSens, Zoll, and
Regeneron, all outside the submitted work. Dr. Eikelboom reports honoraria and grant support
from Astra Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers-Squibb/Pfizer, Daiichi Sankyo,
Glaxo Smith Kline, Janssen , Sanofi Aventis, and Eli Lilly, aswell as a personnel award from the
Heart and Stroke Foundation. Dr. Konstantinides reports research grants from Bayer AG,

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Boehringer Ingelheim, Actelion - Janssen; educational grants from Biocompatibles Group UK Boston Scientific, Daiichi Sankyo; lecture fees from Bayer AG, Pfizer-Bristol-Myers Squibb,
MSD. Dr. Weitz serves as a consultant and received honoraria from Bayer, Janssen, JnJ, BMS,
Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Daiichi-Sankyo, Merck, Servier, Anthos, Ionis, and
PhaseBio. Dr. Stone reports speaker or other honoraria from Cook, Terumo, and Orchestra
Biomed; Consultant to Valfix, TherOx, Vascular Dynamics, Robocath, HeartFlow, Gore, Ablative
Solutions, Miracor, Neovasc, V-Wave, Abiomed, Ancora, MAIA Pharmaceuticals, Vectorious,
Reva, Matrizyme, Cardiomech; Equity/options from Ancora, Cagent, Applied Therapeutics,
Biostar family of funds, SpectraWave, Orchestra Biomed, Aria, Cardiac Success, MedFocus
family of funds, Valfix. Dr. Krumholz reports personal fees from UnitedHealth, IBM Watson
Health, Element Science, Aetna, Facebook, Siegfried & Jensen Law Firm, Arnold & Porter Law
Firm, Ben C Martin Law Firm, and the National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases (Beijing,
China); ownership of Hugo Health and Refactor Health; contracts from the US Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services; and grants from Medtronic, US Food and Drug Administration,
Johnson and Johnson, and Shenzhen Center for Health Information, outside the submitted work.
Dr. Lip reports that he is a Consultant for Bayer/Janssen, BMS/Pfizer, Medtronic, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Novartis, Verseon and Daiichi-Sankyo and a speaker for Bayer, BMS/Pfizer,
Medtronic, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Daiichi-Sankyo. No fees are directly received personally.
Dr. Goldhaber has received research support from Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-MyersSquibb, Boston Scientific, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, and the National Heart, Blood, and Lung
Institute, and the Thrombosis Research Institute; he has received consulting fees from Bayer,
Agile, Boston Scientific, and Boehringer Ingelheim. Dr. Bikdeli reports that he is a consulting

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expert, on behalf of the plaintiff, for litigation related to two specific brand models of IVC filters.
The other authors report no Disclosures.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to Fatemeh
Esmaeili, MS, for her kind assistance in graphic designs.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

Piazza G, Campia U, Hurwitz S, et al. Registry of arterial and venous thromboembolic

complications in patients with COVID-19. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2060-72.
2.

Nadkarni GN, Lala A, Bagiella E, et al. Anticoagulation, mortality, bleeding and pathology

among patients hospitalized with COVID-19: a single health system study. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2020;76:1815-26.
3.

Schulman S, Hu Y, Konstantinides S. Venous Thromboembolism in COVID-19. J.

Thromb. Haemost. 2020[E-pub ahead of print];DOI https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1718532.
4.

Voicu S, Bonnin P, Stépanian A, et al. High prevalence of deep vein thrombosis in

mechanically ventilated COVID-19 patients. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2020[E-pub ahead of
print];https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.05.053.
5.

Nopp S, Moik F, Jilma B, Pabinger I, Ay C. Risk of venous thromboembolism in patients

with COVID‐19: A systematic review and meta‐analysis. Res Prac Thromb Haemost.
2020;6:1178-91.
6.

Jiménez D, García-Sanchez A, Rali P, et al. Incidence of venous thromboembolism and

bleeding among hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
CHEST. 2020 [E-pub ahead of print];https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2020.11.005.
7.

Ackermann M, Verleden SE, Kuehnel M, et al. Pulmonary vascular endothelialitis,

thrombosis, and angiogenesis in Covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:120-8.
8.

Wichmann D, Sperhake J-P, Lütgehetmann M, et al. Autopsy findings and venous

thromboembolism in patients with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med.
2020;173:268-77.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9.

Fernández-Capitán C, Barba R, del Carmen Díaz-Pedroche M, et al. Presenting

Characteristics,

Treatment

Patterns,

and

Outcomes

among

Patients

with

Venous

Thromboembolism during Hospitalization for COVID-19. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 2020[E-pub
ahead of print];https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1718402.
10.

Libby P, Lüscher T. COVID-19 is, in the end, an endothelial disease. Eur Heart J.

2020;41:3038-44.
11.

Giustino G, Pinney SP, Lala A, et al. Coronavirus and Cardiovascular Disease, Myocardial

Injury, and Arrhythmia: JACC Focus Seminar. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2011-23.
12.

Skendros P, Mitsios A, Chrysanthopoulou A, et al. Complement and tissue factor–enriched

neutrophil extracellular traps are key drivers in COVID-19 immunothrombosis. J Clin Investig.
2020;130:6151-7.
13.

Connors JM, Levy JH. COVID-19 and its implications for thrombosis and anticoagulation.

Blood. 2020;135:2033-40.
14.

Koupenova M. Potential Role of Platelets in COVID‐19: Implications for Thrombosis. Res

Prac Thromb Haemost. 2020;4:737-40.
15.

Siddiqi HK, Libby P, Ridker PM. COVID-19–A vascular disease. Trends Cardiovasc.

Med. 2020;https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcm.2020.10.005.
16.

Stefely JA, Christensen BB, Gogakos T, et al. Marked factor V activity elevation in severe

COVID‐19 is associated with venous thromboembolism. Am J Hematol. 2020;95:1522-30.
17.

Becker RC. COVID-19 update: Covid-19-associated coagulopathy. J Thromb Thrombolys.

2020;50:54-67.
18.

Zuo Y, Zuo M, Yalavarthi S, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps and thrombosis in

COVID-19. J Thromb Thrombolys. 2020;5:e138999.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19.

Singhania N, Bansal S, Nimmatoori DP, Ejaz AA, McCullough PA, Singhania G. Current

overview on hypercoagulability in COVID-19. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2020;20:393-403.
20.

Jin S, Jin Y, Xu B, Hong J, Yang X. Prevalence and impact of coagulation dysfunction in

COVID-19 in China: a meta-analysis. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120:1524-35.
21.

Katneni UK, Alexaki A, Hunt RC, et al. Coagulopathy and thrombosis as a result of severe

COVID-19 infection: a microvascular focus. Thromb Haemost. 2020[E-pub ahead of
print];DOI:https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1715841.
22.

Marchandot B, Trimaille A, Curtiaud A, et al. Staging severity of COVID-19 according to

hemostatic abnormalities (CAHA Score). Thromb Haemost. 2020[E-pub ahead of print];DOI
https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1715836.
23.

Zuo Y, Estes SK, Ali RA, et al. Prothrombotic autoantibodies in serum from patients

hospitalized with COVID-19. Sci. Transl. Med. 2020[E-pub ahead of print];DOI:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abd3876.
24.

Borghi MO, Beltagy A, Garrafa E, et al. Anti-phospholipid antibodies in COVID-19 are

different from those detectable in the anti-phospholipid syndrome. Frontiers in immunology.
2020;11:2692-9.
25.

Szekely Y, Lichter Y, Taieb P, et al. The Spectrum of Cardiac Manifestations in

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)-a Systematic Echocardiographic Study. Circulation.
2020;142:342-53.
26.

Giustino G, Croft LB, Stefanini GG, et al. Characterization of myocardial injury in patients

with COVID-19. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2043-55.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

27.

Moores LK, Tritschler T, Brosnahan S, et al. Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment of VTE

in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report. Chest.
2020;158:1143-63.
28.

Andreini D, Arbelo E, Barbato E, et al. ESC guidance for the diagnosis and management

of CV disease during the COVID-19 pandemic. ESC. June 2020. Available at:
https://www.escardio.org/Education/COVID-19-and-Cardiology/ESC-COVID-19-Guidance.
Accessed October 1,2020.
29.

The COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel's Statement on the Emergency Use

Authorization of Convalescent Plasma for the Treatment of COVID-19. National Institutes of
Health. September 2020. Available at: https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/.
Accessed Ocotober 1,2020.
30.

Thachil J, Tang N, Gando S, et al. ISTH interim guidance on recognition and management

of coagulopathy in COVID‐19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1023-6.
31.

Bikdeli B, Madhavan MV, Jimenez D, et al. COVID-19 and Thrombotic or

Thromboembolic Disease: Implications for Prevention, Antithrombotic Therapy, and Follow-Up:
JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:2950-73.
32.

Llitjos JF, Leclerc M, Chochois C, et al. High incidence of venous thromboembolic events

in anticoagulated severe COVID‐19 patients. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1743-6.
33.

Al-Samkari H, Karp Leaf RS, Dzik WH, et al. COVID and Coagulation: Bleeding and

Thrombotic Manifestations of SARS-CoV2 Infection. Blood. 2020;136:489-500.
34.

Middeldorp S, Coppens M, van Haaps TF, et al. Incidence of venous thromboembolism in

hospitalized patients with COVID‐19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1995–2002.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

35.

Klok F, Kruip M, Van der Meer N, et al. Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically

ill ICU patients with COVID-19. Thromb Res. 2020;191:145-7.
36.

Spyropoulos AC. The management of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients

with COVID-19. Blood adv. 2020;4:4028-.
37.

Antithrombotic Therapy in Patients with COVID-19. National Institutes of Health.

December 2020. Available at: https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/adjunctivetherapy/antithrombotic-therapy/. Accessed December 28,2020.
38.

Lemos ACB, do Espírito Santo DA, Salvetti MC, et al. Therapeutic versus prophylactic

anticoagulation for severe COVID-19: A randomized phase II clinical trial (HESACOVID).
Thromb Res. 2020;196:359-66.
39.

Gonzalez-Ochoa AJ, Raffetto JD, Hernández AG, et al. Sulodexide in the treatment of

patients with early stages of COVID-19: a randomised controlled trial. medrxiv. 2020[E-pub ahead
of print];https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.04.20242073.
40.

NIH ACTIV Trial of blood thinners pauses enrollment of critically ill COVID-19 patients.

National Institutes of Health. December 2020. Available at: https://www.nih.gov/newsevents/news-releases/nih-activ-trial-blood-thinners-pauses-enrollment-critically-ill-covid-19patients. Accessed December 24,2020.
41.

Barco S, Bingisser R, Colucci G, et al. Enoxaparin for primary thromboprophylaxis in

ambulatory patients with coronavirus disease-2019 (the OVID study): a structured summary of a
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials. 2020;21:1-3.
42.

Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel

coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020;395:497-506.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

43.

Zhang L, Yan X, Fan Q, et al. D‐dimer levels on admission to predict in‐hospital mortality

in patients with Covid‐19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1324-9.
44.

Weinberg I, Fernández-Capitán C, Quintana-Díaz M, et al. Systematic testing for venous

thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 and raised D-dimer levels. Thrombosis
Update. 2021[E-pub ahead of print];https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tru.2020.100029.
45.

Angus DC, Berry S, Lewis RJ, et al. The randomized embedded multifactorial adaptive

platform for community-acquired pneumonia (REMAP-CAP) study: rationale and design. Ann
Am Thorac Soc. 2020;17:879-91.
46.

Normand S-LT. The RECOVERY Platform. N Engl J Med 2020[E-pub

ahead

of

print];https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMe2025674.
47.

Ghati N, Roy A, Bhatnagar S, et al. Atorvastatin and Aspirin as Adjuvant Therapy in

Patients with SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised
controlled trial. Trials. 2020;21:1-3.
48.

Vanassche T, Engelen MM, Van Thillo Q, et al. A randomized, open-label, adaptive, proof-

of-concept clinical trial of modulation of host thromboinflammatory response in patients with
COVID-19: the DAWn-Antico study. Trials. 2020;21:1-14.
49.

Houston BL, Lawler PR, Goligher EC, et al. Anti-Thrombotic Therapy to Ameliorate

Complications of COVID-19 (ATTACC): Study design and methodology for an international,
adaptive Bayesian randomized controlled trial. Clin Trials. 2020;17:491-500.
50.

Chen L, Long X, Xu Q, et al. Elevated serum levels of S100A8/A9 and HMGB1 at hospital

admission are correlated with inferior clinical outcomes in COVID-19 patients. Cell Mol Immunol.
2020;17:992-4.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

51.

Lasky JA, Fuloria J, Morrison ME, et al. Design and Rationale of a Randomized, Double-

Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Phase 2/3 Study Evaluating Dociparstat in Acute Lung Injury
Associated

with

Severe

COVID-19.

Adv.

Ther.

2020

[E-pub

ahead

of

print];https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-020-01539-z.
52.

Maruyama Y, Yoshida H, Uchino S, et al. Nafamostat mesilate as an anticoagulant during

continuous veno-venous hemodialysis: a three-year retrospective cohort study. Int J Artif Organs.
2011;34:571-6.
53.

Bikdeli B, Talasaz AH, Rashidi F, et al. Intermediate versus standard-dose prophylactic

anticoagulation and statin therapy versus placebo in critically-ill patients with COVID-19:
Rationale and design of the INSPIRATION/INSPIRATION-S studies. Thromb Res.
2020;196:382-94.
54.

Bikdeli B. Anticoagulation in COVID-19: Randomized trials should set the balance

between excitement and evidence. Thromb Res. 2020;196:638-40.
55.

Kharma N, Roehrig S, Shible AA, et al. Anticoagulation in critically ill patients on

mechanical ventilation suffering from COVID-19 disease, The ANTI-CO trial: A structured
summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials. 2020;21:1-2.
56.

Moore HB, Barrett CD, Moore EE, et al. STudy of Alteplase for Respiratory failure in

SARS‐Cov2/COVID‐19: Study Design of the Phase IIa STARS Trial. Res Prac Thromb Haemost.
2020;4:984–96.
57.

Dahlberg J, Eriksen C, Robertsen A, Beitland S. Barriers and challenges in the process of

including critically ill patients in clinical studies. Scand J Trauma, Resusc Emerg Med. 2020;28:18.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

58.

Schulman S, Kearon C, Scientific SoCoAot, Thrombosis SCotISo, Haemostasis. Definition

of major bleeding in clinical investigations of antihemostatic medicinal products in non‐surgical
patients. J Thromb Haemost. 2005;3:692-4.
59.

Mehran R, Rao SV, Bhatt DL, et al. Standardized bleeding definitions for cardiovascular

clinical trials: a consensus report from the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium. Circulation.
2011;123:2736-47.
60.

Paranjpe I, Fuster V, Lala A, et al. Association of treatment dose anticoagulation with in-

hospital survival among hospitalized patients with COVID-19. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1224.
61.

Siegal DM, Barnes GD, Langlois NJ, et al. A toolkit for the collection of thrombosis-

related data elements in COVID-19 clinical studies. Blood Adv. 2020;4:6259-73.
62.

Tritschler T, Mathieu ME, Skeith L, et al. Anticoagulant interventions in hospitalized

patients with COVID‐19: A scoping review of randomized controlled trials and call for
international collaboration. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:2958-67.
63.

Lopes RD, Fanaroff AC. Anticoagulation in COVID-19: It Is Time for High-Quality

Evidence. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1827-9.
64.

Mousavi S, Moradi M, Khorshidahmad T, Motamedi M. Anti-Inflammatory Effects of

Heparin and Its Derivatives: A Systematic Review. Adv Pharmacol Sci. 2015;2015:507151.
65.

Bikdeli B, Madhavan MV, Gupta A, et al. Pharmacological agents targeting

thromboinflammation in COVID-19: review and implications for future research. Thromb
Haemost. 2020;120:1004–24.
66.

Deshpande C. Thromboembolic Findings in COVID-19 Autopsies: Pulmonary

Thrombosis or Embolism? Ann Intern Med. 2020;173:394-5.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

67.

McGonagle D, O'Donnell JS, Sharif K, Emery P, Bridgewood C. Immune mechanisms of

pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy in COVID-19 pneumonia. Lancet 2020;2:e437-e45.
68.

Lawlor M, Gupta A, Ranard LS, et al. Discordance In Activated Partial Thromboplastin

Time and Anti-factor Xa Levels in COVID-19 Patients on Heparin Therapy. Thromb Res.
2020;198:79-82.
69.

Schünemann HJ, Cushman M, Burnett AE, et al. American Society of Hematology 2018

guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: prophylaxis for hospitalized and
nonhospitalized medical patients. Blood Adv. 2018;2:3198-225.
70.

Selvaraj S, Greene SJ, Khatana SAM, Nathan AS, Solomon SD, Bhatt DL. The Landscape

of Cardiovascular Clinical Trials in the United States Initiated Before and During COVID‐19. J
Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e018274.
71.

Kimmel SE, Califf RM, Dean NE, Goodman SN, Ogburn EL. COVID-19 Clinical Trials:

A Teachable Moment for Improving Our Research Infrastructure and Relevance. Ann Intern Med.
2020;173:652-4.
72.

Tuttle KR. Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on clinical research. Nat Rev Nephrol.

2020;16:562-4.
73.

Bagiella E, Bhatt DL, Gaudino M. The consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on non-

COVID-19 clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:342-5.
74.

Makris M. Staying updated on COVID‐19: Social media to amplify science in thrombosis

and hemostasis. Res Prac Thromb Haemost. 2020;4:722-6.
75.

Angus DC, Alexander BM, Berry S, et al. Adaptive platform trials: definition, design,

conduct and reporting considerations. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2019;18:797-808.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

76.

Park JJ, Siden E, Zoratti MJ, et al. Systematic review of basket trials, umbrella trials, and

platform trials: a landscape analysis of master protocols. Trials. 2019;20:1-10.
77.

Horby P, Lim WS, Emberson JR, et al. Dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with Covid-

19-preliminary

report.

N

Engl

J

Med.

2020[E-pub

ahead

of

print];https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa2021436.
78.

Consortium WST. Repurposed antiviral drugs for COVID-19—interim WHO

SOLIDARITY

trial

results.

N

Engl

J

Med.

2020[E-pub

ahead

of

print];https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2023184.
79.

Varshney AS, Wang DE, Bhatt AS, et al. Characteristics of Clinical Trials Evaluating

Cardiovascular Therapies for Coronavirus Disease 2019 Registered on ClinicalTrials. gov: A
Cross Sectional Analysis. Am Heart J. 2020;232:105-15.
80.

FDA Guidance on Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during COVID-19

Public Health Emergency. FDA Guidance Document. September 2020. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/media/136238/download. Accessed October 30,2020.
81.

Spitzer E, Ren B, Brugts JJ, et al. Cardiovascular Clinical Trials in a Pandemic: Immediate

Implications of Coronavirus Disease 2019. Card Fail Rev. 2020;6:e09.
82.

Vaduganathan M, Butler J, Krumholz HM, Itchhaporia D, Stecker EC, Bhatt DL.

Regulation of Cardiovascular Therapies During the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2517-21.
83.

Gaba P, Bhatt DL. The COVID-19 pandemic: a catalyst to improve clinical trials. Nat Rev

Cardiol. 2020;17:673-5.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

84.

Retracted

coronavirus

(COVID-19)

papers

https://retractionwatch.com/retracted-coronavirus-covid-19-papers/.

2020.

Available

Accessed

at:

December

28,2020.
85.

Pundi K, Perino AC, Harrington RA, Krumholz HM, Turakhia MP. Characteristics and

strength of evidence of COVID-19 studies registered on ClinicalTrials. gov “letter”. JAMA Intern
Med. 2020;180:1398-400.
86.

Dean NE, Gsell P-S, Brookmeyer R, et al. Creating a framework for conducting

randomized clinical trials during disease outbreaks. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1366-9.
87.

Sarabipour S, Debat HJ, Emmott E, Burgess SJ, Schwessinger B, Hensel Z. On the value

of preprints: An early career researcher perspective. PLoS Biol. 2019;17:e3000151.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

HIGHLIGHTS
•

Venous and arterial thrombosis are among the prevalent manifestations of COVID-19.

•

The optimal thromboprophylactic regimens still remain unknown in patients with COVID19.

•

At this time, dozens of RCTs are evaluating the role of antithrombotic regimens among
outpatients and inpatients with COVID-19.

•

COVID-19 has led to changes in the design, conduct, analysis, and reporting of the RCT
results.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legends
Figure 1. Virchow’s Triad and COVID-19 Associated Coagulopathy. Caption: SARS-CoV-2
can potentiate all three sides of Virchow’s triad including endothelial dysfunction, blood flow
stasis, and hypercoagulability. ACE-2 dependent viral entry and the virus-induced inflammatory
response can lead to endothelial dysfunction; Bedridden status may lead to stasis; and
inflammation, viremia, and cytokine storm can produce a hypercoagulable state. Factor Xa may
play a role in spike protein cleavage and endocytosis of the virus. ACE: Angiotensin Converting
Enzyme; COVID: Coronavirus Disease 2019; DIC: Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy;
FDP: Fibrin Degradation Products; GM-CSF: Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor;
HF: Heart Failure; IL: Interleukin; LV: Left Ventricular; PAI: plasminogen activator inhibitor;
RAAS: Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System; RNA: Ribonucleic Acid; SIC: Sepsis Induced
Coagulopathy; TF: Tissue Factor; TNF: Tumor Necrosis Factor; tPA: tissue type plasminogen
activators; uPA: urokinase plasminogen activators; vWF: von Willebrand factor.

Figure 2. Summary of randomized controlled trials of antithrombotic agents in COVID-19
categorized based on pharmacologic class. Caption: UFH, LMWH, DTI, DOACs, antiplatelets,
fibrinolytic, and investigational agents are evaluating in different settings including outpatients,
inpatients (ICU and non-ICU), and post-discharge. *: Multifactorial designs or multiple
interventions. DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulant; DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors; ICU: Intensive
Care Unit; LMWH: Low Molecular Weight Heparin; UFH: Unfractionated Heparin.

Figure 3. Graphical Summary of ongoing RCTs of antithrombotic therapy in COVID-19
based on patient settings. Caption: Categorizing the RCTs evaluating different agents in different

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

settings including those treated entirely as outpatient, patients in the non-ICU hospital wards,
critically ill patients in the ICU, and post-hospital discharge. Others: dociparstat, nafamostat, and
sulodexide. DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulants; DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors; LMWH: Low
Molecular Weight Heparin; RCT: Randomized Clinical Trials; UFH: Unfractionated Heparin.

Figure 4. Illustration of how vulnerable populations were/ were not included in the existing
trials. Caption: Categorizing the RCTs evaluating different agents in vulnerable populations
including patients with advanced kidney disease, ESKD, patients with liver failure, and obese
patients. Further details are illustrated in Supplemental Figure 1. Obesity is defined differently in
different RCTs; body mass index greater than 30, 35, and 40 kg/m2 and weight more than 100 and
120 kg are among the most used definitions among RCTs. Others: dociparstat, nafamostat, and
sulodexide. DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulants, DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors, ESKD: End
Stage Kidney Disease; LMWH: Low Molecular Weight Heparin; RCT: Randomized Clinical
Trials; UFH: Unfractionated Heparin.

Central Illustration. Succinct Summary of ongoing RCTs of antithrombotic therapy in
COVID-19. DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulant; DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors; H-I: HighIntensity; ICU: Intensive Care Unit; L-I: Low-Intensity; LD: Low Dose; LMWH: Low Molecular
Weight Heparin; N: Number of Participants; RCTs: Randomized Controlled Trials; UFH:
Unfractionated Heparin.

40

Expected Knowledge Gain

Table 1. Expected Knowledge Gains from Ongoing Antithrombotic Therapy Trials in COVID-19 and Ongoing Knowledge Gaps
Outpatient

Non-Critical Inpatient

ICU

- The safety/efficacy of standard
prophylactic doses of LMWHs and DOACs
compared to standard of care or placebo in
high risk patients with early stage of the
COVID-19

-The safety/efficacy of intermediate dose and therapeutic
dose heparin derivatives or DOACs compared to standard
prophylactic anticoagulation

-The safety/efficacy of intermediate dose and
therapeutic dose anticoagulation compared with
prophylactic anticoagulation

- Proof of concept data of the role of inhaled antithrombotic
therapy in patients with COVID-19

-Effects of short-term infusion of bivaliridun on
PaO2/FiO2 ratio

- The impacts of antiplatelet agents on all-cause mortality

- The impacts of antiplatelet agents on
thrombotic outcomes and mortality

- The impact of aspirin administration on rate
of
MACE,
disease
progression,
hospitalization, and death in patients with
acute, symptomatic COVID-19

- The safety/efficacy of dociparstat and nafamostat in
hospitalized patients with COVID-19

- The safety/efficacy of sulodexide in patients
with acute, symptomatic COVID-19

Post-Discharge
-The safety/efficacy
of
extended
anticoagulation with
DOACs
or
LMWHs
after
hospital discharge

- Proof of concept data on the role of fibrinolytic
therapy in critically ill patients

Remaining Knowledge Gap

- Proof of concept data of the role inhaled
antithrombotic therapy in mechanically
ventilated patients with COVID-19
- PMA needed to understand the relative
efficacy of antiplatelet agents, standard
prophylactic dose of enoxaparin in
comparison with DOACs

- The efficacy/safety of fondaparinux, DTIs, and danaparoid
compared to standard prophylactic anticoagulation
- PMA needed to understand the tradeoffs of various
investigational antithrombotic regimens
- Best assay for LMWH/UFH monitoring in non-critically ill
patients with COVID-19

- The impact of antiplatelet therapy on survival
in critically ill patients with COVID-19
- PMA needed to understand the tradeoffs of
various investigational antithrombotic regimens

-The
role
of
antiplatelet agents
on VTE incidence in
post-discharge
patients

- Best assay for LMWH/UFH monitoring in
critically ill patients with COVID-19

COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019, DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulants, DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors, ICU: Intensive Care Unit, MACE: Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events, PMA:
Prospective Meta-Analysis, UFH: Unfractionated Heparin, VTE: Venous Thromboembolism.

41

Table 2. Antithrombotic Therapy Trial Design Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Various Areas of
Before COVID-19 Pandemic
Clinical Research
• Single specialty-based collaboration common
Investigators
• Focused, often established study groups
• Diverse research priorities
• Patient enrollment over a long time period, recruitment time could be
slow of fast
• Long-term follow up a routine feature of many trials
Study Design

During COVID-19 Pandemic
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Funding/ Financial
Support
IRB Approval
Informed Consent
Participants
Enrollment and
Engagement

• Time-consuming review and approval process for funding allocation

• Accelerated review, prioritizing trials that impact the response to the pandemic

• Time-consuming process with occasional long delays prior to approval

• IRBs meeting more frequently, often resulting in rapid review and approval
• More permissive regulations may expedite trial initiation

• Based on paper forms, may be cumbersome

• In-person or remote electronic informed consent available in many trials

• Variable willingness for trial participation by patients

• Patients willing to participate and engage in trials as partners
• Periodic slowdown or interruptions in enrollment for some non-COVID-19 trials, in COVID-19 trials there may be
changes in enrollment rate with COVID-19 disease waves.

• On site session for multiple predefined monitoring visits
• On site or in-person data audits

• Frequent off-site online sessions with more restricted onsite visit
• Remote monitoring and follow up
• Rapid enrollment makes keeping up to date with monitoring difficult, with risk of greater numbers of protocol
deviations going un-noticed.
• Ascertainment of events other than all-cause mortality may be challenging due to limitations in testing strategies during
the pandemic
• Some trials not able to incorporate endpoint adjudication (not recommended if resources allow)
• Systematic and blinded adjudication in online meeting for assessment endpoints
• Remote periodic meetings
• Less expensive and quicker than face to face adjudication

Monitoring and
Auditing

Clinical Events
Adjudication

DSMB Meetings
Follow-Up
Dissemination of
Results

Specialty-based and multi-specialty collaboration common
Frequent ad hoc collaborations within and between institutions and countries
Distinct focus on COVID-19-related trials, some adaptations required for pre-COVID-19 trials.
Time-sensitive trial design (to provide rapid access to high quality evidence). Trial design in short period of time may
lead to multiple smaller and underpowered trials rather than larger multicenter collaborations
Urgently needed medical solutions necessitate relatively fast patient enrollment
Incorporation of pragmatic design features.
Multiple projects around the world occasionally leading into several smaller trials rather than fewer large-scaler trials
Short-term follow up most common
Applicability for adaptive platform design for multiple aspects of COVID-19 trials. Multiple interventions, quick
enrollment, and the possibility of re-estimation of the optimal sample size during the study
Higher certain event rates (death or re-admission) that excepted from protocol

•
•
•
•

Central blinded outcome adjudication common
Face to face meetings
High costs
Time consuming process to request ad-hoc data from sites, summarize,
and send back to adjudication meetings

• Face to face meetings
• High costs

• Many trials using online platforms for DSMB meetings
• Less costly

• Face to face visits or phone calls
• More costly

• Remote monitoring and follow-up in many trials by phone calls and use of digital technology
• Cost-saving and more efficient

• Longer peer-review process
• More strict criteria for publication
• Uncommon use of pre-print servers

• Fast-track peer-review process expedites the dissemination of completed studies. However, very quick peer-review has
occasionally missed important flaws of submitted reports.
• Frequent use of pre-print servers to share the early results of the studies. The benefits of rapid dissemination and
potential limitations with lack of peer-review should be considered among the audience of the results.

APT: Adaptive platform trials, COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019, DSMB: Data and Safety Monitoring Board, IRB: Institutional Review Board, RCT: Randomized Clinical Trials, RFA: Request for Application.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Virchow’s Triad and COVID-19 Associated Coagulopathy

43

44

45

46

47

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Keywords: COVID-19 and coagulation, thrombosis, thrombotic, thromboembolism, thromboembolic, anticoagulation,
anticoagulant, antithrombotic, antiplatelet, aspirin, dipyridamole, Aggrenox, cilostazol, P2Y12 inhibitor, clopidogrel, ticagrelor,
prasugrel, ticlopidine, vorapaxar, eptifibatide, tirofiban, abciximab, heparin, UFH, LMWH, enoxaparin, dalteparin, tinzaparin,
bemiparin, nadroparin, fondaparinux, danaparoid, DTI, bivalirudin, argatroban, lepirudin DOAC, apixaban, rivaroxaban, edoxaban,
betrixaban, dabigatran, sulodexide, dociparstat, nafaostat, ulinastatin, defibrotide, crizanlizumab, rNAPc2, recombinant
antithrombin III, ATryn, thrombomodulin, activated protein C, drotrecogin alpha, thrombolytic, firinolytic, alteplase, reteplase,
tnecteplas. COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019, DOAC: Direct Oral Anticoagulant, DTI: Direct Thrombin Inhibitors, LMWH:
Low Molecular Weight Heparin, rNAPc2: Recombinant Nematode Anticoagulant Protein c2, UFH: Unfractionated Heparin, WHO
ICTRP: World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform

50

51

52

53

54

55

Supplemental Table 1. Study-level Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for the Systematic Review
Inclusion Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
• Focused on patients with COVID-19

• Studies of patients without COVID-19

• Designed as a randomized controlled trial

• Non-randomized design

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
• Registered
atpeer
clinicaltrials.gov
or the who
WHO
• Minimum
detail
including
the
(which was
not certified by
review) is the author/funder,
has granted
medRxiv a license
to display the
preprint in perpetuity.
rights
reserved. No reuseby
allowed without
permission. eligibility
ICTRP (or identifiedAllvia
hand-searching
intervention,
criteria and

authors), date of last search: December 16, 2020
• At least one active randomized arm including
widely available antithrombotic agents such as
antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, fibrinolytic
therapy (or investigational antithrombotic
agents with at least 500 total patients across all
trials or a single trial with more than 200
patients, for being discussed in the full text of
the current manuscript); Supplemental table 4
shows investigational agents which did not meet
inclusion criteria.
• The following characteristics being available
• Planned sample size
• Defined study intervention
• Inclusion and exclusion criteria
• Primary endpoint

estimated sample size not available
• Studies of pediatric patients

• Studies which focus on the treatment of
diagnosed thrombotic events (rather than
prophylactic treatment)

COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019, WHO ICTRP: World Health Organization International
Clinical Trials Registry Platform

56

MV

Composite
clinical endpoint

Other

VTE

P/F ratio

Mortality

Chronic Kidney
Disease

Obesity

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓
Exclude
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

Drug-Drug
Interaction

Mortality

Dose Adjustments

P/F ratio

Efficacy Outcomes (If composite, may include more than
1 component)
Primary
Secondary

VTE

Safety Outcomes

Final follow-up period
(days)

Exclusion Criteria (Brief)*

Primary Outcome Followup Duration (days)

Inclusion Criteria
(Brief)*

Duration of Randomized
Therapy (days)

Sample Size

Actual Dose Used
(daily)

Comparator

Actual Dose Used
(daily)

Agent Used

Blinding

Trial Code/ Name

Supplemental Table 2. Review of RCTs Categorized Based on Patient Settings

Open
Label

Open
Label

Apixaban

placebo
Apixaban

5 mg BID

Aspirin

81 mg

Aspirin

Edoxaban

7000

Age ranged 40 -79 years,
confirmed COVID-19 † in
past 14 days, platelet count
> 100,000/fL

Contraindication to use of
antithrombotic agents,
hospitalized patients,
pregnancy, active cancer,
indication for AC, single or
dual antiplatelet therapy, high
bleeding risk, CrCl <
30ml/min, DDI

4000

Confirmed COVID-19 by
laboratory findings, within
7 days of diagnosis or
worsening clinically, highrisk Patients

Advanced kidney disease,
advanced liver failure,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, high
bleeding risk, use of other
antithrombotic agents

28

45

45

MACE

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

Confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR

High risk bleeding, liver
failure, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, use of
therapeutic AC, use of DAPT,
use of HCQ, CrCl < 15
mL/min, amputation

25

25

25

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

2.5 mg BID

75-100 mg

60 mg

Standard of care

Double
Blind

No intervention

CONVINCE
NCT04516941

ACTCOVID19
NCT04324463

ACTIV-4b
NCT04498273

Ongoing trials in outpatient setting

-

NP

-

420

57

45

45

Up
to
75

Major
bleeding

‡

✓

NP

✓

✓
Exclude
Advanced
kidney
disease

--

--

✓

✓

✓
Exclude
CrCl<15
ml/min

--

--

Standard of care

35

35

35

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

1370

Age ≥ 55 years, confirmed
COVID-19 †, at least two
risk factors:
Age ≥ 70 years, BMI > 25
kg/m2, COPD, Diabetes,
CVD, Use of corticosteroid

High bleeding risk, PCI or
thrombolytic therapy in the last
24 hours, pregnancy, GFR < 30
mL/min, use of other
antithrombotic

21

90

90

Bleeding

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

✓

Life expectancy less than 3
months, resuscitation > 30
minutes, high bleeding risk,
other indication for
anticoagulation, GFR < 15
ml/min

NP

42

42

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

--

--

✓

NP

NP

✓
Exclude
GFR < 30
ml /min

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

Excluded
if
CrCl<15
ml/min

--

--

Edoxaban

60mg

Placebo

-

172

Open
Label

Aspirin

81 mg

-

1080

Confirmed COVID-19 †
within 24 hours

Pregnancy, high bleeding risk,
use of NSAIDs or steroids,
liver failure, CKD

14

14

14

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

40 mg sc

1000

Age ≥ 50 years, confirmed
COVID-19 † in the past 5
days, respiratory
symptoms, temp >37.5° C

Use of anticoagulant, high
bleeding risk, CrCl < 30
mL/min contraindications to
enoxaparin therapy, use of
DAPT, liver failure with
coagulopathy, non-adherence

14

30

90

Major
bleeding

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

✓

✓
Exclude
CrCl < 30
ml /min

--

--

OVID
NCT04400799

Double
Blind

Confirmed COVID-19 †
within 10 days, and
troponin ≥ ULN and/or Ddimer ≥0.5 mg

No intervention

-

400

✓
Exclude
eGFR <
30 ml
/min

No intervention

No intervention

COVID-PREVENT
NCT04416048

Enoxaparin

40 mg sc
(40 mg BID
if ≥ 100 kg)

NP

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, CrCl<30 ml
/min, liver failure, active
cancer, HIV, use of therapeutic
AC, use of DAPT ticagrelor or
prasugrel, 7 days prior to
randomization, aspirin>100
mg, NSAIDs

HERO-19
NCT04542408

Open
Label

Rivaroxaban

Confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR in the last 14 days, at
least one of these criteria:
D-dimer > 1.5 ULN and/or
TnT > 2 ULN + CAD or
DM or CS

LEAD
COVID-19
NCT04363840

ETHIC
NCT04492254

Open
Label

20 mg (15
mg for
30ml/min <
eGFR < 50
ml /min)
Reduce to
10 mg after
7 days

Open
Label

Enoxaparin

-

58

PREVENT-HD
NCT04508023
SulES-COVID
NCT04483830
NCT04504032

Double
Blind

Double
Blind

Double
Blind

Rivaroxaban

Sulodexide

Rivaroxaban

10 mg

500unit
BID

10 mg

placebo

Placebo

Placebo

-

-

-

4000

Age> 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR, at
least 1 additional risk
factors: age ≥ 60 years,
BMI > 35 kg/m2, Ddimer> 2 ULN,
thrombophilia, history of
VTE, CAD, PAD,
cerebrovascular disease,
diabetes, cancer

High bleeding risk, severe liver
failure, intolerance to
rivaroxaban, positive COVID19 serology after 2 weeks, use
of therapeutic AC, APS

35

35

37

243

Age> 40 years, 3 days or
less with clinical COVID19 symptoms
High risk patients
18<BMI< 35 kg/m2

Negative COVID-19 PCR test
(post enrollment exclusion) ,
previous treatment for COVID19, pregnancy, chronic use of
steroid, use of therapeutic AC,
history of DVT, and bed
confinement in the last 6
months, hospitalization

21

21

21

600

Confirmed COVID-19 †
in the past 7 days
Symptomatic for COVID19
High-risk COVID-19
(pulmonary disease,
chronic use of
immunosuppressants,
immunocompromised
patients, HTN, DM, any
high-risk chronic disease,
BMI ≥ 35kg/m2)

Hospitalization, hypoxemia,
high bleeding risk, head
trauma, hemodynamically
unstable state, active Cancer,
use of therapeutic AC, use of
DAPT, DDI with DOACs,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, CKD
(stage IV or receiving dialysis)

21

35

28

Bleeding
(Nonmajor,
Major,
Fatal)

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

✓

--

--

--

Major
bleeding

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓

--

--

--

Adverse
Events

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓
Exclude
CrCl < 30
ml /min

--

✓
Exclud
e

✓

✓
Exclude
CrCl < 20
ml /min

--

--

✓

✓
Exclude
Advanced
kidney
disease

--

ACTCOVID19
NCT04324463

ACOVACT
NCT04351724

Ongoing trials in hospital ward setting§
Open
Label

Open
Label

Rivaroxaban

Aspirin+
Rivaroxaban

2.5-5 mg
BID

75-100 mg
+
2.5 mg BID

LMWH

Control

NP

-

500

Symptomatic patients with
confirmed COVID-19 by
laboratory findings who
require hospitalization

4000

Symptomatic patients aged
≥ 18 yrs confirmed
COVID-19 by laboratory
findings within 72 hours of
admission

Pregnancy, breastfeeding, liver
failure, CrCl<20 ml/min,
cancer, high bleeding risk
MV>72 hours, advanced
kidney disease, advanced liver
failure, high bleeding risk, use
of P2Y12 inhibitors, pregnancy,
breastfeeding
DDI with DOACs

59

NP

28

29

45

29

45

NP

MACE

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

✓
Excluded

Enoxaparin

1.5
mg/Kg/d
SC or 1
mg/Kg SC
BID

Dalteparin

200 U/Kg/d
SC or 100
U/Kg BID

NP

UFH

80 units/kg
IV bolus
followed
by 18
units/kg/h

UFH

30

132

Age ≥ 18 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR or hospitalized
patients who are clinically
suspicious for COVID-19

Pregnancy, G6PD Deficiency,
high bleeding risk, vasodilatory
shock, uncontrolled HTN,
recent MI, use of antiplatelet,
severe liver or kidney failure

14

3000

Age ≥18 yrs, hospitalized
patients (anticipated to last
≥72 hours), confirmed
COVID-19 by
microbiological test

Invasive ventilation, HIT, high
bleeding risk, pregnancy, use
of DAPT, bacterial
endocarditis, use of AC

5000 U
BID

175 U/Kg
SC

4500 U

Open
Label
Tinzaparin

30

14 or until hospital discharge

200 mg
BID + 25
mg BID

600

CrCl<30 ml/min, liver failure,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, HIV,
cancer, high bleeding risk,
DIC, on aspirin>100 mg, Use
of DAPT, use of AC,
rivaroxaban hypersensitivity
and DDIs

NP

✓
(excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min)

--

✓

✓

✓

--

--

--

✓

✓

--

--

--

30

Major
bleeding

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

15

1528

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

30

1490

Major
bleeding
HIT

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

40 mg

Dipyridamol
e ER +
Aspirin+
Standard
care

NP

Age ≥ 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 † within 14
days, symptomatic patients
admitted to hospital with
D-dimer> 3 ULN

5000 U

Prophylactic anticoagulation

Rivaroxaban

20 mg if
CrCl≥50
ml/min and
15 mg if 30
ml/min
≤CrCl≤49
ml/min

Standard of
Care

To target
aPTT

Enoxaprin

Open
Label

UFH

Enoxaparin

Single
Blind

1 mg/Kg
SC BID

Tinzaparin

ATTACC
NCT04372589

ATTAC-19
NCT0441032
8

ACTION
NCT04394377

Enoxaparin

60

Enoxaparin

70 U/Kg
SC BID

Rivaroxaban
Reduce
to10mg
after 7 days

Prophylactic LMWH or UFH

Open
Label

20 mg (15
mg for 30
ml/min
<eGFR <
50 ml /min)

3500 U
NP

NP

10

10

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

120

Age ≥ 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR or
patients who are clinically
suspicious for COVID-19)
with D-dimer > 500 ng/ml
at the time of hospital
admission

CrCl<30 ml/min, pregnancy,
ICU admission, liver or
pancreas failure, high bleeding
risk, bacterial endocarditis, use
of AC

10

10

28

Bleeding
events
Adverse
effects

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

Excluded
Crcl<30m
l/min

--

--

3170

Confirmed COVID-19 †,
age ranged 40-85 yrs, or
diabetic, hypertensive or
coronary disease patients,
hospitalized patients

ACS, myocarditis, life
expectancy <3 months,
pregnancy, high bleeding risk

NP

30

30

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

--

--

--

300

Age ranged 18-80 yrs,
confirmed severe COVIDby RT PCR who have SIC
score>4 and D-dimer> 4
ULN

Invasive ventilation, high
bleeding risk, HIT, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, use of DAPT,
CrCl<30 ml/min, age>80 years

Until hospital
discharge or 30 days

Open
Label

-

164

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓
(excluded
CrCl<30
ml/min)

--

--

400

Age > 18 yrs, confirmed
moderate to severe
COVID-19 by RT-PCR
and
d-dimer > 1.5 ULN and/or
TnT > 2 ULN + CAD or
DM or CS

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, CrCl<30
ml/min, liver failure, HIV, use
of DAPT, ticagrelor, prasugrel,
aspirin>100 mg or NSAIDs

28

61

30

30

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

35

35

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

7 days or until
discharge

75 mg+
75 mg+
2.5 mg BID

Prophylactic dose

Bemiparin

Open
Label

Aspirin+
Clopidogrel+
Rivaroxaban

4000 U

NP

Enoxaparin

Bemiparin

COVID-PREVENT
NCT04416048

Single
Blind

No intervention

Bemiparin

BEMICOP
NCT04604327
BEMICOVID-19
NCT04420299

Adjusted to
body
weight

C-19-ACS
NCT04333407

Bemiparin

COVID-19 HD
NCT04408235

Open
Label

Age ≥ 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR or
other validated test who
require hospitalization
(CURB65<3 points; Sat.
O2>90%), 3-4 points
according to the WHO
ordinal scale, and D-dimer
>500 ng/ml

Inhaled
heparin

25000 U
every 6
hours

Every 6 hours
NP

80

MV, pregnancy, breastfeeding,
liver failure, high bleeding risk,
therapy with cytokine
inhibitors, antithrombotic,
SBP<90 mmHg, unlikely to
survive >48 hours

14

28

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

300

Age ranged 18-80 yrs,
confirmed moderate-severe
COVID-19 †, respiratory
failure (PaO2/FiO2 <250)
and/or increased D-dimer
level (>2000 ng/mL)

High bleeding risk, coagulation
abnormalities
DAPT, AC, major surgery < 1
month; neurosurgery <3
months; eye surgery <3
months, pregnancy, arterial
hypertension, CrCl <30 ml/min
ICU admission or endotracheal
intubation

28

30

6 months

INHALE-HEP
NCT04635241

Apixaban

2.5 mg BID
if at least
two of three
of age ≥80
years,
weight ≤60
kg or serum
creatinine
≥1.5 mg/dL

4000 U (6000 U if body
weight>100 kg)

5 mg BID

40 mg SC; 30 mg SC for CrCl <30 mL/min

Enoxaparin

1 mg/Kg
SC BID if
CrCl≥30
ml/min
1 mg/Kg
SC if
CrCl<30
ml/min

Enoxaparin

70 U/kg
BID

Placebo

Enoxaparin

Enoxaparin

Open
Label

Double
Blind

100 mg
QID

Standard of Care

Open
Label

Dipyridamole

DICER
NCT04391179
EMOS-COVID
NCT04646655
FREEDOM COVID
NCT04512079

Single
Blind

Age > 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 † who are
hospitalized ≤ 72 hours
and require supplemental
oxygen ≤ 6 liters per
minute by nasal cannula

Major
bleeding

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

✓

--

MV, ESKD, history of HIT,
pregnancy, high bleeding risk,
hospital stay <72 hours, use of
AC, bleeding diatheses,
bacterial endocarditis, clinical
condition with short life
expectancy

NP

30

3090

Major
bleeding

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
(excluded
if ESKD)

--

--

Pregnancy, bleeding, advanced
neurological impairment,
advanced oncological disease,
aPTT> 120 seconds, not due to
anticoagulant therapy, platelet
count <20 x 109 /L

21

28

7

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

--

--

--

3600

656

Hospitalized patients,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT PC or/ antigen test or
suspected COVID-19 who
meet the clinical criteria of
Temp≥38℃ and O2 Sat≤94
and existence of one
abnormal biomarker (Ddimer ≥1.0 μg /mL or CRP
>2 mg/L or ferritin >300
μg /L or lymphopenia
<1500 cells /m3)

Age ≥ 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19†, patients with
WHO ordinal scale of 3-5
who require hospitalization
but no immediate
requirement for MV

62

Tinzaparin
UFH

REMAP-CAP
NCT02735707

LMWH
Open
Label

NP

UFH

NP

Aspirin

75-100
mg/day

Clopidogrel

75 mg/day

Enoxaparin
No intervention

40-60 mg SC
NP

Pregnancy, bleeding, advanced
neurological impairment,
advanced oncological disease,
aPTT> 120 seconds, not due to
anticoagulant therapy, platelet
count <20 x 109 /L

NP

15

60

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

128

Age ranged 18-99 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19
pneumonia†

Pregnancy, breastfeeding, high
bleeding risk, severe liver
failure, cancer,
contraindications to use of
antiplatelet, Use of AC

15

7

1530

Major
bleeding

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

--

--

--

128

Symptomatic COVID-19
(Fever, cough, RR>24)

Pregnancy, breastfeeding, high
bleeding risk, allergy to
aspirin, malignant tumors,
blood diseases, liver failure,
AIDS, viral hepatitis
cardiac stent placement (< 1
year), alcohol abuse, other viral
pneumonia coagulopathy

14 days after
discharge

Dalteparin

-

200

Age ranged 18-100 yrs,
confirmed or suspected of
COVID-19 by CXR or CT
and with
at least one of the
following:
D-Dimer > 1ug/dl
ferritin>500 ng/ml
fibrinogen>50 mg/dl

14

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

462

Age ≥ 18 yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR,
hospitalized patients,
elevated D-dimer≥2ULN
or D -dimer above ULN
and SaO2 ≤ 93% on room
air

Pregnancy, NIPPV, MV, high
bleeding risk, use of DAPT,
pregnancy, history of HIT, use
of AC, ICU admission

28

28

28

Major
bleeding
HIT

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

--

7100

Hospitalized patients,
suspected or confirmed
COVID-19†

More than 14 days of hospital
admission, patients expected to
be discharged or dead in the
next 24 hours

14 days or until hospital
discharge

Open
Label

1.5
mg/Kg/dSC
or 1 mg/Kg
SC BID
200 U/Kg/d
SC or 100
U/Kg BID
175 U/Kg
SC
Weight
based

-

Prophylactic dose

Enoxaparin

100 mg

LMWH
UFH
Fondaparinux

Aspirin

Placebo

Standard
thromboprophylaxis

RAPID COVID COAG
NCT04362085

Open
Label

Prasugrel

LD: 60 mg
then 10 mg

No
interv
ention

NEBUHEPA
NCT04530578
PARTISAN
NCT04445623

Double
Blind

PEAC
NCT04365309

Open
Label

Nebulized
Heparin plus
SC
Enoxaparin

5000 U
every 8
hours plus
Enoxaparin
40mg /d or
60mg/d,
adjusted by
BMI and
CrCl

21

2190

--

✓
(Only
for
Prasu
grel)

--

-

63

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

Enoxaparin

40 mg SC
BID

40 mg SC

Rivaroxaban

10 mg

Critical illness with WHO
clinical improvement ordinal
score >5, AST/ALT > 240,
CPK > 5 ULN, prior aspirin
use (within 30 days), high
bleeding risk, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, unable to take
oral or nasogastric medications

186

Age ≥ 18 year, confirmed
COVID-19 pneumonia†
with clinical status from 3
to 5 on the seven-category
ordinal scale

Pregnancy, breastfeeding,
QTc>500ms, heart electrical
dysfunction, clinically
significant heart diseases,
Child-Puch score B or C, CrCl
< 30 mL/min, liver failure,
HIV infection

1014

7

2712

Age > 18 year, confirmed
COVID-19 †, hospitalized
patients

CrCl<15 ml/min, ICU
admission
use of AC

150

Age ranged 18-100 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19†,
Not requiring full
therapeutic AC, Not be
intubated,
Not be admitted for CNS
diagnosis

high bleeding risk, use of
therapeutic AC or DAPT, HD,
GFR<30 ml/min, cirrhosis or
liver failure, hepatorenal
syndrome, use
Immunosuppressants, life
expectancy of less than 6
months

64

NP

28

30

30

10 days or until discharge

Standard of care

-

800

Age ranged 40-75 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR and WHO ordinal
score 3 to 5 who require
hospitalization

10 days or until discharge

Conventional therapy

0.1-0.2
mg/kg/h

NP

40 mg or 40 mg BID

Open
Label

Nafamostat

Enoxaparin

Open
Label

75 mg

Aspirin

Enoxaparin

Open
label

XACT
NCT04640181

SEN-CoV-Fadj
NCT04390594

Open
label

X-Covid 19
NCT04366960

RESIST
CTRI/2020/07/026791

Ticagrelor

10 days or until discharge

Prasugrel

60 mg LD
then 10 mg
(if <75
years and
Wt>60 Kg
) and 5 mg
(if >75
years or
Wt<60 Kg)
60 mg BID

Adverse
effects

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

15

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

✓

Excluded
if
CrCl<15
ml/min

--

--

NP

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

30

NP

30

Bleeding
events

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

Enoxaparin

1 mg/kg SC
if BMI <30
kg/m2 or
0.5mg/kg
SC BID if
BMI ≥
30kg/m2

1 mg/Kg BID
1mg/kg SC

NP

Aspirin

NP

40 mg SC

Enoxaparin

Enoxaparin

Nafamostat

40 mg subcutaneously if BMI <30 kg/m2; 30
mg BID or 40 mg BID BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2

Open
Label

Enoxaparin

Open
Label

75 mg

Standard of
care

Blind

0.1
mg/kg/hr

Enoxaparin

Open
label

Enoxaparin

NCT04360824

EUCTR2020
-001891-14

CTRI/2020/0
8/027503

CTRI/2020/06/02622
0

20 mg

40

Age > 18 years, confirmed
COVID -19 by chest
imaging and RT-PCR with
Respiratory rate 15 to 30
breaths/minute SaO2SpO2 90%-94% OR PaO2/
FiO2: 200- 300 mmHg

Pregnancy, breastfeeding,
ECMO, MV, multiple organ
failure, CrCl<30 ml/min, Child
Pugh score ≥ 10 , infections,
high bleeding risk, altered
mental state, retinopathy or
macular degeneration, G6PD
deficiency, HI , at risk of
arrhythmia

10

14

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

60

Age ranged 18-65y,
confirmed COVID-19 by
laboratory findings with
SpO2 < 94%

MV, pregnancy, breastfeeding,
high bleeding risk

10

7

28

Bleeding
events

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

--

--

--

140

Age ≥ 18 year, confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR,
hospitalized patients,
weight ≥60 Kg

Pregnancy, high bleeding risk
allergy to LMWH, BMI>40
Kg/m2. AC therapy, high-flow
oxygen therapy or MV at the
time of study recruitment

NP

30

30

bleeding
events

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

170

Age ranged 18-100 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
laboratory findings,
hospitalized patients,
modified ISTH Overt DIC
score ≥ 3

CrCl<30 ml/min, high bleeding
risk, history of HIT, weight<40
Kg, AKI

30

Major
Bleeding

NP

✓
Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

✓

--

65

NP

30

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

UFH

aPTT 1.5- 2
X

Enoxaparin

1 mg/Kg
SC BID

Double
Blind

MV, high bleeding risk, use of
corticosteroid, AC, antiplatelet,
immunomodulators, liver
failure, CrCl<30 ml/min

7

268

Age ≥ 18 year, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR or
serology, Lung image with
involvement of at least
25%, O2sat < 93%,
alteration in D-dimer,
CRP, Ferritin, LDH

Imminence of orotracheal
intubation, high bleeding risk,
pregnancy, breastfeeding,
bleeding, HD,QT interval
prolongation, use of
therapeutic AC

7

130

Age > 18yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 by RQ-PCR,
hospitalized patients who
require supplemental O2

Pregnancy, cancer, CKD stage
III or
ESKD, high bleeding risk,
Age>75 years, Use of AC

100

Age ≥ 18yrs, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR
within 3 days, with
Clinical status of 4 or 5 on
the seven-category ordinal
scale

100

Age ranged 18-60 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR within 24 hours

2000

Age ≥ 18 years,
hospitalized patients,
confirmed COVID-19 by
positive microbiological
test within 72 hours,

28

28

28

90

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

Exclude
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓For
CrCl<40
ml/min
UFH

--

--

--

--

Excluded
CKD
stage III
or
ESKD

30

30

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

28

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

Excluded
Crcl<30
ml/min

--

--

7

7

14

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

Excluded
if
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

--

90

Bleeding

NP

✓

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓
For
CrCl<30

✓

--

Open
label

Nafamostat

NP

Standard of care

NP

NP

Nebulized
UFH

1,000 U/kg)
every 6
hours

Standard of care

-

NCT04628143

10 mg

PACTR
202007606032743

Rivaroxaban

NP

1 mg/Kg SC

Open
Label

600

Age ranged 18-85 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR, SaO2 < 94%,
Require supplemental O2
or NIV

-

Standard of care

Enoxaparin

1mg/kg
BID

Placebo

Enoxaparin

Dociparastat

4 mg/kg IV
bolus
followed by
continuous
IV infusion

No intervention

NCT04389840
NCT04485429
NCT04508439

Double
Blind

NP

UFH

To target
aPTT or
anti-Xa
(0.3-0.7
U/mL)

Serious chronic disease,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, MV,
HIV infection, corticosteroid
therapy, child-Pugh B or C,
hyperkalemia, liver failure,
CrCl < 30 ml/min, QTc
>500ms, rapidly deteriorating
clinical condition
Malignancies, heart, liver
failure, kidney diseases, poorly
controlled metabolic diseases,
pregnancy, breastfeeding,
Child Pugh C, , CrCl<30
ml/min, dialysis, HIT, high
bleeding risk, mild and severe
COVID-19

Contraindication to use of
anticoagulant, use of
therapeutic anticoagulation or
DAPT, high bleeding risk,

66

At least 14
days or
until
hospital
discharge

Prophylact
ic Dose
Anticoagu
lation

Open
Label

Standard
of care

ACTIV4a§
NCT0450
5774

Ongoing trials in ICU setting
21

325 mg
every 6
hours

Open
Label

Nebulized
heparin

25000 U
every 6
hours

NP

NP

100

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19†,
MV, D-dimer>1.2 mg/L

Pregnancy, inherited
coagulation abnormality

3

3

3

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

--

50

Confirmed COVID-19 †,
P/F ratio <200 mmHg> 70
mmHg, CT scan positive
for pulmonary thrombosis
or CT scan negative for
pulmonary thrombosis
with
D-Dimer > 10 mcg/mL, or
5 < D-dimer < 10 mcg/mL
and CRP> 100 mg/dL

Age < 18, high bleeding risk,
pregnancy, breastfeeding,
severe vasoplegic shock: NEP
> 300 ng/kg*min, GFR<30
ml/min, Contraindication to
use of anticoagulant

1

3

28

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

Exclude
GFR<30
ml/min

--

--

34

Age ranged 18-99 yrs,
confirmed
COVID-19†, hospitalized
patients with SaO2 <90%

CrCl<30 ml/min, severe
asthma, severe COPD

3 months

Aspirin

NP

ml/min
UFH

4 months

Open
label

NP

pregnancy, requirement for
chronic MV, imminent death

Until discharge

Alteplase
followed by
UFH

CHARTER-Irl
NCT04511923

Double
Blind

25 mg IV
over
2hours,
followed by
a 25 mg
over
22hours

Standard of care

NP

Ringer's solution
infusion

Bivalirudin

Standard of care

175
units/kg SC

AtTAC
NCT04453371

Double
Blind

Tinzaparin

CAM-Covid-19
CTRI/2020/09/0
28088

ANTI-CO
NCT04445935

Dalteparin

expected to require
hospitalization for > 72
hours

Standard of care

Enoxaparin

1 mg/kg SC
BID
or
1.5 mg/kg
SC
200
units/kg SC
or
100
units/kg SC
BID

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

Exclude
GFR<30
ml/min

--

--

40

Age>18 years, confirmed
or suspected COVID-19†,
ICU admission
intubation (<24hour)
PaO2/FiO2<300, acute
opacities on chest imaging
affecting at least one lung
quadrant

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
ECMO or HFOV, myopathy,
spinal cord injury, or nerve
injury or disease, imminent
death,
the use or anticipated use of
nebulized tobramycin

10

60

60

ADR

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

67

Enoxaparin

4000 U SC
BID
(Weight
based)

5 ml every 6
hours
4000 U

Dalteparin

5000 U
5000 U BID
(for CrCl <30
ml/min)
4 mmol / L

10U / Kg /
h

4000 U SC (for ward
setting) and BID (for
ICU setting)

Single
Blind

UFH

anti-Xa 0.5
- 0.7 U/mL

Sodium
citrate

CoV-Hep
NCT0448799
0
COVI-DOSE§
NCT04373707

Open
Label

Heparin

Open
Label

UFH

202

Age > 18 years,
confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR or CXR or CT, ICU
admission, intubation
(<24hour)
PaO2/FiO2<300

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
ECMO or HFOV, myopathy,
spinal cord injury, or nerve
injury or disease

10

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

808

Not requiring ICU at
admission with mild
disease to severe
pneumopathy with
symptom onset before 14
days, with need O2 but no
NIV or high flow, ICU
admission
with MV and DNR order

High bleeding risk, HIT,
endocarditis

14

14

90

Bleeding

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

CrCl<20
ml/min
UFH

--

--

90

Confirmed or probable
COVID-19†,
presence of AKI with
indication for renal
continuous venous venous
hemodialysis.

Previous coagulopathy or
thrombophilia, risk of citrate
poisoning (Lactate> 30mg / dL,
RNI> 2.5, total bilirubin>
15mg / dL), pregnancy,
contraindication to use of UFH

NP

3

3

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

--

--

Probable or confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR or
serology

High bleeding risk, CrCl<15
ml/min, AKI, use of
prophylactic AC > 3 days or
therapeutic AC > 1day, ECMO
required, HIT, impossibility to
perform a doppler ultrasound,
contraindication to use of
LMWH or blood-derived
products

NP

28

28
+
60

Bleeding

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

--

3500 U

175 U/kg

Enoxaparin
Tinzaparin

Tinzaparin

Nebulized
heparin

Nebulise
d 0.9%
Sodium
Chloride

Enoxaparin

CHARTERMT
NCT04545541
CORIMMUNO-COAG§
NCT04344756

Double
Blind

25000 U
every 6
hours

602

68

NP

Dalteparin

NP

Nadroparin

NP

Nadroparin

NP

Enoxaparin

Enoxaparin

COVID-PACT
NCT04409834

UFH

LMWH

1mg/kg
BID
aPTT 1.5 2.5 X

Enoxaparin
+
Clopidogrel

1mg/kg
BID + 75
mg

UFH +
Clopidogrel

aPTT 1.52.5 X + 75
mg

Enoxaparin
+
Clopidogrel

40 mg + 75
mg

UFH +
Clopidogrel

5000 TDS
+ 75 mg

Open
Label

200

High bleeding risk, HIT,
endocarditis, use of DAPT or
therapeutic AC, pregnancy, Wt
<40kg or >150kg

30

30

Bleeding

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓
AR
DS

NP

--

--

--

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

--

--

--

NP

750

UFH

confirmed COVID-19†,
Non-ICU with D-dimer>
1000 ng/mL or
ICU

40 mg SC

NP

5,000 U SC TID

Single
Blind,
Open
Label

UFH

Enoxaparin

COVID-HEP§
NCT04345848

UFH

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19†, ICU
admission

High bleeding risk, use of
DAPT or antiplatelet or
therapeutic AC, HIT,
contraindication to use of
antithrombotic agents

69

NP

28 or DISCHARGE

Dalteparin

28 or DISCHARGE

Tinzaparin

NP

Until discharge

NP

Prophylactic anticoagulation

Tinzaparin

NP

✓

NP

NP

1mg/kg
BID (0.5
mg/kg BID
for 15
ml/mi <
GFR < 30
ml/mi)

308

Age > 16 years, confirmed
COVID-19 †

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR or
serology, within 72 hours
of hospital admission, need
for oxygen have:
D- Dimer > 4.0 X ULN or
SIC ≥ 4

28

Severe, progressive, and/or
uncontrolled cardiac disease
(NYHA class IV), DM,
significant electrolyte
disturbance, eGFR <30
mL/min/1.73 m2, dialysis,
severe liver failure, bone
marrow failure, breastfeeding,
pregnancy, use of AC or
antiplatelet, receiving
potassium sparing diuretics

90

-

Adverse
events

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

6 months

60

high bleeding risk, liver failure,
CrCl<20 ml/min, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, bacterial
endocarditis, Therapeutic AC,
alcoholism

15 days or until
discharge

210

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by
radiographic infiltrates or
clinically findings and
SpO2 ≤ 94% or require
oxygen support

discharge or up to 7

UFH

5000 U SC
BID/TID or 7500
U BID/TID

50 U/Kg SC
NP

30mg and 40mg SC
or BID (0.5mg/kg
SC BID)

Enoxaparin

0.2mg/kg/h
r

Standard of Care

Nafamostat

2500U or
5000U

Double
Blind

LMWH
75 U/Kg
BID (For
ICU
setting)

Enoxaparin

Single
Blind

LMWH

Dalteparin

DAWn-Antico§
EUCTR-2020001739-28
DEFINE
NCT04473053
HEP-COVID§
NCT04401293

Open
Label

50 U/Kg
SC BID
(For ward
setting)

Adverse
events

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓
(UFH for
CrCl<15
ml/min)

--

--

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

--

--

✓

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓

--

--

NP
High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
use of DAPT or therapeutic AC
CrCl<15 ml/min, liver failure,
HIT

70

NP

30

30

Bleeding

NP

NP

NP

1 mg/Kg
SC BID

40 mg

NP

LMWH

18 U/kg/h
(To target aPTT 1.5-2
*reference value)

Double
Blind

Open
Label

Edoxaban
(After
DISCHARG
E)

60 mg OD

UFH

To target
aPTT (1.52*
reference
value)

Placebo

-

UFH

5000 U every 8 hours
(>7500 U TDS for
weight> 120 kg)

HESACOVID
RBR-949z6v

HERO-19§
NCT04542408

LMWH

High bleeding risk, history of
HIT, pregnancy, breastfeeding,
use of therapeutic AC

NP

30

90

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

172

Confirmed COVID-19 †,
hospitalization on ward or
ICU, COVID-19 with Tn>
ULN or D-dimer> 0.5

Use of therapeutic AC,
GFR<15 ml/min, high bleeding
risk

NP

42

42

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

✓

High bleeding risk, GFR< 10
ml/min, Age> 85 years,
circulatory shock, liver failure,
active cancer, HF (NYHA III,
IV class), chronic disease,
pregnancy, use of therapeutic
AC

4

28

28

Bleeding

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

--

--

--

✓

✓

✓
Exclude
GFR < 15
ml/min

--

--

✓

✓

UFH for
GFR < 10
ml/min

✓

--

40 mg

Enoxaparin
+
Tocilizumab

308

Prophylactic
Dose

5,000 U
every 8
hours

Open
Label

Hospitalized patients,
confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR within 10 days or by
CXR or CT, need for ≥ 4 L
of supplemental oxygen to
maintain SaO2≥93% or
need MV

1 mg/Kg
SC BID

5,000 U every
8 hours

UFH

Enoxaparin

HEPMAB§
NCT04600141

UFH +
Tocilizumab

18 U/kg/h
(To target
aPTT 1.5-2
*reference
value)

20

Confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR, severe
respiratory failure
requiring MV, D-dimer>
1000 microg/L

71

✓

Single
Blind

≥100 kg:
10mg
<100 kg
but ≥50 kg:
7.5 mg
<50 kg:
ymg

Argatroban

NP

UFH

10 U/kg/h
anti-Xa 0.1
-0.3 U/mL

40 mg SC (40 mg
SC BID for
weight > 120 kg)

710

UFH

186

Age > 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR,
serology, ICU or non-ICU
on MV or BiPAP, 100%
non-rebreather mask, or
high flow oxygen or
oxygen of at least 4 L/min
nasal, D-dimer> 700
ng/mL

High bleeding ris, DVT or PE,
use of therapeutic
anticoagulation

100

Age ranged 18-80 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR, ICU admission
within 5 days, not on
therapeutic anticoagulation

High bleeding risk, wt <50 kg,
severe chronic liver failure,
contraindication to use of
anticoagulant, congenital
bleeding diatheses, DNR /DNI
or CMO orders

72

NP

NP

30

30

6 months

7500 U TDS
(For AKI)

Enoxaparin

Open
Label

0.5 mg/kg SC BID (0.5
mg/kg SC for CrcL< 30
mL/min)

1 mg/kg
BID vs. 0.5
mg/kg BID

2.5 mg SC (If HIT)

Enoxaparin

40 mg SC
(Adjusted to
BMI and GFR)

Enoxaparin
UFH

Fondaparinux

UFH

aPTT goal
or antiXa
0.3-0.7
U/mL

Fondaparinux

IMPACT§
NCT04406389
IMPROVE
NCT04367831

Enoxaparin

1 mg/kg
BID
(weight and
age
adjusted)

30

Bleeding

Bleeding

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓
AKI UFH

If
GFR<30
ml/min:
UFH

✓
For
fonda
parinu
x

--

✓
(for
comp
arator
)

--

Open
Label

For CrCl ≤ 15
mg/dL:
5000 U SC BID

Nafamostat

Aspirin

Placebo

150 mg

-

NP

256

Age ranged 18-75 yrs,
hospitalized Patients,
confirmed COVID-19 † ,
SaO2 ≤94% or PaO2/FiO2
ratio ≤300 mmHg but >
100 mmHg, if patient on
supplemental oxygen or
SpO2/FiO2<200 if no
ABG available

Hospitalized patients,
confirmed COVID-19 by
clinically suspected or
laboratory

30

30

30

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

--

Pregnancy, breastfeeding,
eGFR < 30 ml/m, liver failure
(Child-Pugh score> 10),
requiring high doses of loop
diuretics (i.e., > 240 mg
furosemide daily), HIT,
bleeding, unstable
hemodynamic, CVD, ECMO,
hyperkalemia, uncontrolled
comorbidities

NP

28

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

Excluded
eGFR <
30
ml/min

--

✓

Age <18 years, known
hypersensitivity to aspirin,
recent major bleeding that
precludes use of aspirin,
current use of antiplatelet
therapy

28

6 months

Double
Blind

600

High bleeding risk, history of
HIT or immune
thrombocytopenia, use of AC
for another indications,
ischemic stroke in the past 2
weeks, pregnancy, Wt <40 kg,
Wt>120 kg or BMI > 35 kg/m2
with CrCl<30 ml/min

Until discharge

RECOVERY§
NCT04381936

RACONA
NCT04352400

Enoxaparin

1 mg/kg SC
(CrCl>
30ml/min
and
weight<
120kg)
Adjusted
based
weight and
CrCl

Standard of Care

Single
Blind,
Open
Label

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by PCR, ICU
admitted within 7 days, not
have another indication for
anticoagulation, estimated
survival of at least 24 h

20000

5000 U SC BID
(Adjusted to
BMI and GFR)

UFH

40 mg SC (CrCl> 30ml/min and
weight< 120kg)
Adjusted based weight and CrCl

Enoxaparin

UFH

For CrCl ≤
15 mg/dL:
10000 U
SC BID

Enoxaparin

1 mg/kg SC

Continuous Infusion

INSPIRATION
NCT04486508

Enoxaparin

Bleeding

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

73

NP

60

Age ranged 18-75 yrs,
patients on MV for ≤ 10
days with PaO2/FiO2 ratio
< 150 or inferred
PaO2/FiO2 ratio from SpO2
if ABG is unavailable
persisting for > 4 hours
despite optimal MV
+ neurologic exam without
focal signs or new deficit

15

Age ranged 15-70 yrs,
COVID 19 patients † with
P/F ratio <100 and
D.dimer > 3000 without
response to other
medications

Open
Label

Dipyridamole

UFH

25 over 22
hors then
25 mg for
next 22
hours
To Target
aPTT more
than 50

Control

100 mg
TDS

Standard of Care

Single
blinded

Alteplase
followed by
UFH

Low dose
Open
Label

Alteplase

High dose

Standard of Care

TRISTARDS
NCT04640194

TOLD§
NCT04424901

TACOVID
IRCT2020051504
7456N1

100 mg (10
mg bolus
+90 mg
over 2
hours)

-

NP

NP

100

270

Age ≥ 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR in
3 levels:
Moderate
Severe
Critical

Age ≥ 18 years (UK: age ≥
16 years), confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR,
ARDS with 100<
PaO2/FiO2 ratio ≤300,
either on non-invasive
ventilator support, OR on
mechanical ventilation
(<48 hours since
intubation),
Fibrinogen level ≥ ULN
D-Dimer ≥ 3*ULN

High bleeding risk, known
contraindications for
thrombolytics, MI in the last 3
weeks or cardiac arrest during
hospitalization, hemodynamic
instability, acute renal failure
requiring dialysis, liver failure,
tamponade, endocarditis,
pregnancy

2 hours

Alteplase
followed by
UFH

Standard of Care

STARS
NCT04357730

Open
Label

50 mg (10
mg bolus
+40 mg
over 2
hours)

2

28

6

NP

Bleeding

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

Exclude
AKI on
HD

--

--

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

--

--

--

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

1
High bleeding risk
NP

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
MV, existing severe medical
illnesses unrelated to COVID19

7

9

9

Chronic MV (>48 hours),
chronic pulmonary disease, PE
with hemodynamic instability,
use of OAC, high bleeding
risk, DNI or DNR

5

28

28

74

Bleeding

25000 U
every 6
hours

Open
Label

Nafamostat

0.1-0.2
mg/kg/h

Double
Blind

Tenecteplase
+ UFH

NP

Standard of Care

NP

30

Confirmed COVID-19 by
laboratory confirmation,
infection clinical and
radiological confirmation
of ARDS (PaO2/FiO2≤300
or SaO2≤ 315mmHg or
CPAP≥ 5 cmH2O, or nonventilated)

High bleeding risk, severe
renal disease (GFR<50
ml/min), severe liver failure
(Child-Pugh score > 12), not
expected to survive the next 24
hours

1

28

300

Age> 18 years, confirmed
COVID-19†, ward or ICU
admission without severe
ARDS (P/F ratio<100)
D-dimer > 1.5 g/mL
Fibrinogen > 100 mg/dL
Platelet>50000 /mm3

ARDS, high bleeding risk,
HIT, therapeutic AC, NSAIDs,
HCQ, antihistamine,
pregnancy, use of AC, aspirin

NP

84

50

Age> 18 years
, ICU Admission,
confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR, MV for ≤ 48 hrs,
PaO2/FiO2 ≤300

High bleeding risk,
O2 dependent at baseline

10

84

Age ranged 18-85 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
RT-PCR or chest CT
within 3 days, hospitalized
patients

Pregnancy, Breastfeeding,
Child-Pugh B or C or liver
failure, HIV or AIDS

60

Age ranged 18-75 yrs,
confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR within 14 days, Ddimer> 6 ULN, need
respiratory support

High bleeding risk, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, liver failure,
Child-Pugh B or C, use of
therapeutic AC, MV> 24 hrs

NP

Conventional
therapy

5 mL every 6
hours

0.9% Sodium
Chloride

LMWH

NP

0.25 mg/kg
Placebo
0.50 mg/kg

-

75

until discharge

Nebulized
Heparin

UFH

Standard of
Care

NCT0439751
0

Double
Blind

NCT04418128

IRCT202004150470
80N1
NCT04377997§

Open
Label

NCT04505592

Open
Label

Alteplase
followed by
enoxaparin

25-50 mg
over 2
hours IV
infusion by
25-50 /22
hours up to
maximum
dose of 0.9
mg/kg/d

ADR

NP

NP

✓

84

Bleeding

NP

NP

NP

10

30

Adverse
events

NP

✓

1014

28

28

Adverse
events

NP

NP

28

28

Bleeding

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

✓

Excluded
GFR< 50
ml/min

--

--

NP

✓

✓

NP

NP

NP

Receive
UFH

Recei
ve
UFH

--

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓

--

--

--

✓

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

--

--

--

✓

100

Age> 18 years
Confirmed COVID-19 by
CXR or CT

High bleeding risk, history of
HIT, pregnancy, CrCl<30
ml/min, AKI, use of DAPT
therapy, bacterial endocarditis,
contraindication to use of
antithrombotic agents

NP

Breastfeeding, pregnancy, high
bleeding risk, Child-Pugh B or
C, liver failure, eGFR<
30ml/min and hemodialysis or
hemofiltration, chronic disease,
QTc>500 msec, HIV or AIDS

NP

28

28 days or until discharge

NP

50

Confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR, hospitalized patients
in ward or ICU

28 days or until discharge

1 mg/kg SC BID

Enoxaparin

Nafamostat

Standard of care

Open
label

Enoxaparin

Continuous Infusion

NCT04584580§
NCT04623021

Single
Blind

D-dimer <1
mg/dl
Weight:
dose
<100kg:
40mg
100-150kg:
40mg BID
>150kg
60mg BID
D-dimer 13
mg/ dl
Weight:
dose
<100kg:
40mg BID
150kg:
80mg BID
>150kg:
120mg BID
D-dimer >3
mg/ dl
80mg BID

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

--

✓

--

28

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

NP

✓

Exculded
eGFR<
30ml/min

--

--

Major
bleeding

NP

NP

NP

NP

✓

NP

✓

NP

✓

✓
Exclude
CrCl<30
ml/min

--

✓

\ACTIV-4c
NCT04650087

Ongoing trials in post-discharge setting
Double
Blind

Apixaban

2.5 mg BID

Placebo

-

5320

Confirmed COVID-19 by
PCR, hospitalized for 48
hours or more hours

Contraindication to use of
antithrombotic agents, use of
AC or DAPT, high bleeding
risk, eGFR < 30 mL/min,
pregnancy, life expectancy <
3months, strong
inducers/inhibitors of p-gp or
CYP3A4

76

30

30

90

Rivaroxaban

10 mg

No intervention

MICHELLE
NCT04662684

Open
label

-

320

Age>18 years, confirmed
COVID-19 by RT-PCR,
pneumonia and modified
IMPROVE risk score of 4
or higher who have
received
thromboprophylaxis during
hospitalization

Use of therapeutic AC, high
bleeding risk active cancer,
pregnancy, breastfeeding, HIV
infection, unstable
cardiovascular diseases,
CrCl<30 ml/min, use of strong
CYP3A4 and PGP inhibitors

35
+/4

35
+/4

35
+/4

Major
bleeding

✓

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

NP

--

--

The full list of inclusion and exclusion criteria should be found in the original trial records. †Not mentioned at the registration platform. ‡Not pointed. §The joint RCTs of ICU and non-ICU settings come in the
ICU part of the table only.
ABG: Arterial Blood Gas, AC: Anticoagulant, AIDS: Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome, AKI: Acute Kidney Injury, APS: Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome, ARDS: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome,
BiPAP: Biphasic Intermittent Positive Airway Pressure, BMI: Body Mass Index, CAD: Coronary Artery Disease, CBC: Complete Blood Count, CHF: Congestive Heart Failure, CKD: Chronic Kidney Disease,
COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019, CMO: Comfort Measures Only, CPK: Creatine Phosphokinase, CrCl: Creatinine Clearance, CRP: C-Reactive Protein, CS:
Current Smoker, CT: Computerized Tomography, CVD: Cardiovascular Disease, DAPT: Dual Antiplatelet Therapy, DDI: Drug- Drug Interaction, DIC: Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation, DM: Diabetes
Mellitus, DNI: Do Not Intubate, DNR: Do Not Resuscitate, DVT: Deep Vein Thrombosis, ECMO: Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation, eGFR: estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate, ER: Extended Release,
ESKD: End-Stage Kidney Disease, ESR: Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, GFR: Glomerular Filtration Rate, Hgb: Hemoglobin, HCQ: Hydroxychloroquine, HD: Hemodialysis, HFOV: high frequency oscillatory
ventilation, HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus, HIT: Heparin‐Induced Thrombocytopenia, HTN: Hypertension, I: Intermediate, ICH: Intracerebral Hemorrhage, ICU: Intensive Care Unit, IL-1: Interleukin-1, IL6: Interleukin-6, IMPROVE: International Medical Prevention Registry on Venous Thromboembolism, INR: International Normalized Ratio, ISTH: International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, IU:
International Unit, IV: Intravenous, G6PD: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase, GIB: Gastrointestinal Bleeding, LD: Loading Dose, LDH: Lactate Dehydrogenase, LFT: Liver Function Tests, LMWH: Low
Molecular Weight Heparin, L/N ratio: Lymphocyte/Neutrophil ratio, LRU: Lipoprotein Lipase Releasing Units, MI: Myocardial Ischemia, MV: Mechanical Ventilation, NEP: Norepinephrine, NIPPV: Nasal
Intermittent Positive Pressure Ventilation, NIV: Non-Invasive Ventilation, NP: Not Provided, NSAID: Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug, NT-proBNP: N-Terminal-pro hormone B-type Natriuretic Peptide, O2
Sat: Oxygen Saturation Level, P: Prophylactic, PCI: Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction, PE: Pulmonary Embolism, P/F ratio (PaO2/FiO2) ratio: The ratio of arterial oxygen partial
pressure to fractional inspired oxygen, PHV: Prosthetic Heart Valve, RR: Respiratory Rate, RVD: Right Ventricular Dysfunction, RQ-PCR: Real-time Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction, RT-PCR: Reverse
Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction, SARS-CoV-2: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2, SC: Sub Cutaneous, SCr: Serum Creatinine, SIC: Sepsis-Induced Coagulopathy, SpO2: Peripheral
Oxygen Saturation, T: Therapeutic, Temp: Temperature, TIA: Transient Ischemic Attack, TnT: Troponin T, tPA: tissue-Plasminogen Activator, UFH: Unfractionated Heparin, ULN: Upper Limit Normal, VTE:
Venous Thromboembolism, WBC: White Blood Cell, Wt: Weight
*

77

✓

Supplemental Table 3. The intensities of heparin derivatives In the Studied RCTs
Drug

Standard Dose

Weight Adjustment

Renal Dose
Adjustment

Standard prophylaxis with heparin-based regimens across trials
Exclude the use of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder,
who has granted medRxiv
a license
display the preprint
in perpetuity.
If weight
≥ 100to kg:
enoxaparin
in patients
1, 2
Enoxaparin
40 mg
SC daily
All rights
reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
1
1,

40 mg SC BD

with CrCl<30 mL/min
2

Intermediate dose heparin-based regimens across trials
Dalteparin

Double dose of standard Prophylactic
dose *,3

Weight < 65 Kg: 4000 U BD
Weight ≥ 65 Kg: 6000 U BD
Weight ≥ 100 Kg: 8000 U BD 5

70 U/Kg SC BD 4, 5

40 mg SC BD

3, 6

0.5 mg/ kg/ BD (in non-ICU patients)
0.75 mg/kg/BD (in ICU patients)7

Enoxaparin

Weight adjusted *,3

Weight<50 Kg: 4000 U BD
50<weight<70 Kg: 5000 U BD
70<weight<100Kg: 6000 U
BD
Weight≥100 Kg: 7000 U BD 3
0.5mg/kg SC BD if BMI ≥
30kg/m2
Excluded weight<40 Kg 8

1 mg/kg SC daily †,8,9

15<CrCl< 30 mL /min:
reduced doses by 50% 3
Exclude CrCl<30 mL
/min 4, 5
Exclude CrCl<15
mL/min 6
15<CrCl< 30 mL/min:
reduced doses by 50% 3,
7

Exclude CrCl<30
mL/min 8,9

Excluded weight<50 kg 9

Nadroparin
Tinzaparin

UFH

1 mg/kg daily
80 mg BID
90 mg BID
100 mg BID
110 mg BID †,10
40 mg daily
50 mg daily
60 mg daily †,10
Double dose of standard prophylactic
dose *,3
Double dose of standard prophylactic
dose *,3

Weight <120 kg
121–130 kg
131–150 kg
151–170 kg
171–180 kg †,10
41–80 kg
81–100 kg
101–110 kg †,10
Weight adjusted *,3
Weight adjusted *,3

10 U/kg/h, to target anti-Xa 0.1 -0.3
U/mL 9

Excluded weight<50 kg 9

10000 U SC BD 10

Excluded weight>120 kgI

CrCl> 30 mL/min †,10
15 < CrCl ≤ 30 mg /dL
†,10

15<CrCl< 30 mL/min:
reduced doses by 50% 3
15<CrCl< 30 mL/min:
reduced doses by 50% 3
10 U/kg/h, to target
anti-Xa 0.1 -0.3 U/mL 9
10 U/kg/hr on
continuous
hemodialysis 11
To target aPTT 40-60
sec or To target anti-Xa
0.2-0.4 U/mL7
Dosing for CrCl ≤ 15
mg/dL 10

Fully-therapeutic anticoagulation across trials
Bemiparin
Dalteparin
Enoxaparin

Weight based ‡,12
200 U/Kg SC Daily or
100 U/Kg SC BD 13, 14

NP
BMI ≥ 40kg/m2:
100 U/Kg SC BD 14

1 mg/Kg SC BD 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,

BMI ≥ 40kg/m2:
1 mg/Kg SC BD 14

21, 22

78

NP
Exclude CrCl<30
mL/min 14
Exclude CrCl<40
mL/min 17
Exclude CrCl<30
mL/min 14, 15

Excluded if ESKD 16, 18,
20

23

23

Age (Years)
No adjustment for weight
CrCl
<75
>75
1 mg/kg BD
0.75 mg/kg/BD
NP 23
> 50 mL/min 23
23
0.75 mg/kg/BD
1 mg/kg/daily
NP
30 - 50 mL/min
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.04.21249227; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
23 to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not certified 1
bymg/kg/daily
peer review) is the author/funder,
who
has granted medRxiv aNP
license
0.75
mg/kg
daily
10 - 30 mL/mi
All rights reserved.
13,No
14 reuse allowed without permission.
1.5 mg/Kg SC Daily
Excluded weight <40 kg and >
1 mg/Kg SC QD if
150 kg 24
CrCl<30 mL/min 16
0.5 mg/kg BD for 15 <
GFR < 30 mL/min 20
25
D-dimer (mg/dl)
Excluded CrCl<30
Weight 25
mL/min 25
<1
1-3
>3

Tinzaparin

80mg
BD

< 100 kg

80mg BD

80mg
BD

100-150 kg

120mg
BD

80mg
BD

40mg daily

40mg BD

40mg BD
60mg BD

> 150 kg

175 U/Kg SC daily 13, 14, 26

BMI ≥ 40kg/m2:
175 U/Kg SC daily 14

18 U/kg/hour 21
To target aPTT 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22, 27
(1.5-2* reference value) 17, 21
(1.5-2.5* reference value) 13, 19, 28

Excluded weight <40 kg and >
150 kg 24

23

UFH
To target anti-Xa 13, 14, 22, 26, 27
(level 0.3 - 0.7 U/mL) 14, 22
(level 0.5 - 0.7 U/mL) 26

Exclude CrCl<30
mL/min 14
Exclude CrCl<20
mL/min 26
Exclude CrCl<30
mL/min 15
CrCl< 10 mL/min
To target aPTT
(1.5-2* reference value)

To target anti-Xa 14
(level 0.3 - 0.7 U/mL) 14

To target anti-Xa 14, 26
(level 0.3 - 0.7 U/mL) 14
(level 0.5 - 0.7 U/mL) 26

1: ETHIC, 2: OVID, 3: COVI-DOSE, 4: COVID-19 HD, 5: EMOS-COVID, 6: X-Covid 19, 7: DAWn-Antico, 8:
NCT04360824, 9: IMPROVE, 10: INSPIRATION, 11: CoV-Hep, 12: BEMICOP, 13: ATTACC, 14: ACTIV-4a, 15: ACTION,
16: FREEDOM COVID, 17: NCT04485429, 18: NCT04508439, 19: COVID-PACT, 20: HEP-COVID, 21: HEPMAB, 22:
IMPACT, 23: HESACOVID, 24: COVID-HEP, 25: NCT04584580, 26: CORIMMUNO-COAG, 27: RAPID COVID COAG,
28: TACOVID.
*
COVI-DOSE trial information in clinicaltrials.gov did not include definite intermediate doses and standard prophylactic doses
for LMWH except enoxaparin, and a double dose of standard prophylactic dose of enoxaparin, adjusted to body weight,
described as the intermediate dose. (Standard prophylactic doses of dalteparin, nadroparin, tinzaparin are 5000 U every 24
hours, 3800 U every 24 hours, 4500 U every 24 hours, respectively.)
†
We created a second section for INSPIRATION because in INSPIRATION trial, 1 mg/kg SC daily of enoxaparin as
intermediate dose anticoagulation is only used for CrCl> 30 mL/min and weight< 120 kg, and for other situations (CrCl> 30
mL/min and weight> 120 kg or 15 <CrCl ≤ 30 mL/min) defined different doses.
‡Experimental arm in BEMICOP trial defined bemiparin at the full therapeutic dose, adjusted to body weight. (Standard full
therapeutic dose of bemiparin is 115 U/kg SC daily.)
CrCl: Creatinine Clearance, ICU: Intensive Care Unit, NP: Not Provided, RCT: randomized controlled trial, SC: Sub
Cutaneous, UFH: Unfractionated Heparin.

79

Supplemental Table 4. Additional Investigational Agents with Antithrombotic Properties Studied in COVID-19
Ongoing
Agent
Mechanism of Action
Setting
Primary Outcomes Include
Randomized Trials
A monoclonal antibody targeting P-selectin. Crizanlizumab
CRITICAL
Crizanlizumab
can decrease inflammation by binding to P-selectin,
Ward
Level of soluble P-selectin in ng/ml
(NCT04435184)
blocking leucocyte and platelet adherence to the vessel wall.
Augmenting plasmin activity to hydrolyze fibrin clots;
reducing endothelial cell activation, increasing endothelial
Ward
DEFACOVID
Defibrotide
cell-mediated fibrinolysis, increasing tissue plasminogen
and
All-cause mortality
(NCT04348383)
activator and thrombomodulin expression; decreasing von
ICU
Willebrand factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.
Inactivation of thrombin, plasmin, and other serine proteases
Recombinant
of coagulation (factors IXa, Xa, XIIa). The inactivation of
ANTITROMBINA
Composite of mortality and need for
antithrombin
proteases is a major step in the normal clotting process and
(EUCT2020Ward
non-invasive ventilation or
III
thrombosis would be caused by active serine proteases if
001659-42)
mechanical ventilation
they were not inhibited by antithrombin.
Recombinant
nematode
Change in D-dimer level from
Inhibition of tissue factor/factor VIIa, attenuates coagulation
anticoagulant
ASPEN-COVID-19
Ward
baseline, time to recovery within 30
and the interleukin-10 response in human endotoxemia.
protein c2
days
(rNAPc2)
Time to recovery defined as
NCT04393311
Ward
attaining a score of 6, 7, or 8 on the
COVID-19 disease severity scale
Number of days of use of
mechanical ventilation,
As a urinary serine protease inhibitor, it inactivates plasmin, CTRI/2020/06/0257
Ward
04
change from baseline in PaO2/FiO2
elastase, thrombin, factors IXa, Xa, XIa, and XlIa. It also
Ulinastatin
ratio
inhibits several pro-inflammatory proteases and decreases
inflammatory cytokine.
ChiCTR2000030779
ICU
Blood gas, SOFA score
Mild cases: the critical illness rate
Ward
ChiCTR2000032135
of subjects at weeks 2
and
Severe or critical cases: changes of
ICU
PaO2/FiO2 from baseline
COVID-19: coronavirus disease 2019; ICU: intensive care unit; SOFA: sequential organ failure assessment.

80

Sample
Size
50

120

46

100

160

120
100
50

