medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

New-Onset IgG Autoantibodies in Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19

Sarah Esther Chang A, B, *
Allan Feng A, B, *
Wenzhao Meng C, *
Sokratis A. Apostolidis D, U, *

Contributing Authors:
Elisabeth Mack I
Maja Artandi E, F
Linda Barman E
Kate Bennett J
Saborni Chakraborty Q
Iris Chang B, G
Peggie Cheung A, B
Sharon Chinthrajah B, G
Shaurya Dhingra A, B
Evan Do B, G
Amanda Finck W
Andrew Gaano C
Reinhard Geßner H
Heather M. Giannini T
Joyce Gonzalez C
Sarah Greib H
Margrit Gündisch H
Alex Ren Hsu A, B
1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Alex Kuo A, B
Monali Manohar B, G
Rong Mao A, B
Indira Neeli K
Andreas Neubauer I
Oluwatosin Oniyide T
Abigail Elizabeth Powell L, M
Rajan Puri E
Harald Renz H, N
Jeffrey M. Schapiro Y
Payton A Weidenbacher L, M
Rich Wittman E

Senior authors
Neera Ahuja O
Ho-Ryun Chung P
Pras Jagannathan B, Q, R
Judith James X
Peter S. Kim L, M, S
Nuala J. Meyer T, U
Kari Nadeau B, G
Marko Radic K
William H. Robinson A, B, V
Upinder Singh B, Q, R
Taia T. Wang Q, R, S
E. John Wherry U, W
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Corresponding authors:
Chrysanthi Skevaki H, N
Eline T. Luning Prak C, U
PJ Utz A, B

Affiliations:
A

Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University School of

Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
B

Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University School of Medicine,

Stanford, CA, USA
C

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of

Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
D

Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of

Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
E

Department of Medicine, Division of Primary Care and Population Health, Stanford University

School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
F

Department of Medicine, Stanford CROWN Clinic, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,

CA, USA
G

Department of Medicine, Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford

University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
H

I

J

Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Philipps Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany

Dept. Hematology, Oncology, Immunology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany
Molecular Pathology and Imaging Core, Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology Division,

Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
K

Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, The University of Tennessee Health

Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA
L

Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA

M

ChEM-H, Stanford University, USA

N

Member of the Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), and the German

Center for Lung Research (DZL)
O

Department of Medicine, Division of Hospital Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,

Stanford, CA, USA
P

Institute for Medical Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg,

Germany
Q

Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford

University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
R

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

S

Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.

T

Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Perelman

School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
U

Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,

PA, USA
V

VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

W

Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of

Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
X

Arthritis & Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,

OK, USA.
Y

TPMG Regional Reference Laboratory, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Berkeley, CA, USA.

* Contributed equally

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Corresponding information for ETLP:
Eline T. Luning Prak
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Perelman School of Medicine
405B Stellar Chance Labs
422 Curie Blvd.
Philadelphia, PA 19104
luning@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
Tel. 215 746-5768

Corresponding information for CS:
Chrysanthi Skevaki
Institute of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiochemistry, Molecular Diagnostics,
Philipps-University Marburg, Baldingerstr., 35043, Marburg, Germany
Chrysanthi.Skevaki@uk-gm.de
Tel. +49 64215863850

Corresponding information for PJU:
Paul J. (P.J.) Utz
Department of Medicine
Division of Immunology and Rheumatology
Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection
Center for Clinical Sciences Research Building
269 Campus Drive
Room 2215A
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Stanford, CA 94305
pjutz@stanford.edu
Tel. 650 724-5421

E-mail addresses for UPenn authors other than ELP:
Wenzhao Meng

wmeng@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Sokratis A. Apostolidis

Sokratis.Apostolidis@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Kate Bennett

bennk@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Amanda Finck

finckam@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Andrew Gaano

Andrew.Gaano@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Heather M. Giannini

Heather.Giannini@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Joyce Gonzalez

Joyce.Gonzalez@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Oluwatosin Oniyide

Oluwatosin.Oniyide@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Nuala J. Meyer

Nuala.Meyer@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

E. John Wherry

wherry@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

E-mail addresses for Tennessee:
Marko Radic

mradic@uthsc.edu

Indira Neeli

ineeli@uthsc.edu

Email addresses for Stanford authors other than PJU:
Sarah Esther Chang

sechang@stanford.edu

Allan Feng

afeng1@stanford.edu

Maja Artandi

mktietze@stanford.edu

Linda Barman

lbarman@stanfordhealthcare.org

Iris Chang

changi2@stanford.edu
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Saborni Chakraborty

saborni@stanford.edu

Peggie Cheung

pcheung@stanford.edu

Sharon Chinthrajah

schinths@stanford.edu

Shaurya Dhingra

sdhingra@stanford.edu

Evan Do

evando@stanford.edu

Alex Ren Hsu

ahsu3494@stanford.edu

Alex Kuo

alex0229@stanford.edu

Monali Manohar

monali@stanford.edu

Rong Mao

rmao@stanford.edu

Abigail Elizabeth Powell

aepowell@stanford.edu

Rajan Puri

purir@stanford.edu

Payton Anders Weidenbacher

paytonw@stanford.edu

Rich Wittman

rwittman@stanford.edu

Peter S. Kim

kimpeter@stanford.edu

Neera Ahuja

nkahuja@stanford.edu

Prasanna Jagannathan

prasj@stanford.edu

Kari Christine Nadeau

knadeau@stanford.edu

William H. Robinson

w.robinson@stanford.edu

Upinder Singh

usingh@stanford.edu

Taia T. Wang

taiawang@stanford.edu

Email addresses for Marburg authors other than CS:
Margrit Guendisch

Guendisc@students.uni-marburg.de

Sarah Greib

Greibs@students.uni-marburg.de

Harald Renz

harald.renz@uk-gm.de

Andreas Neubauer

neubauer@uni-marburg.de
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Reinhard Gessner

Reinhard.Gessner@uk-gm.de

Elisabeth Mack

elisabeth.mack@staff.uni-marburg.de

Ho-Ryun Chung

ho.chung@staff.uni-marburg.de

E-mail addresses for other authors:
Judith James

judith-james@omrf.org

Jeffrey M. Schapiro

jeffrey.m.schapiro@kp.org

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus2 (SARS-CoV-2), is associated with a wide range of clinical manifestations, including autoimmune
features and autoantibody production.

We developed three different protein arrays to measure

hallmark IgG autoantibodies associated with Connective Tissue Diseases (CTDs), Anti-Cytokine
Antibodies (ACA), and anti-viral antibody responses in 147 hospitalized COVID-19 patients in three
different centers. Autoantibodies were identified in approximately 50% of patients, but in <15% of
healthy controls. When present, autoantibodies largely targeted autoantigens associated with rare
disorders such as myositis, systemic sclerosis and CTD overlap syndromes. Anti-nuclear antibodies
(ANA) were observed in ~25% of patients. Patients with autoantibodies tended to demonstrate one or
a few specificities whereas ACA were even more prevalent, and patients often had antibodies to
multiple cytokines. Rare patients were identified with IgG antibodies against angiotensin converting
enzyme-2 (ACE-2). A subset of autoantibodies and ACA developed de novo following SARS-CoV-2
infection while others were transient. Autoantibodies tracked with longitudinal development of IgG
antibodies that recognized SARS-CoV-2 structural proteins such as S1, S2, M, N and a subset of
non-structural proteins, but not proteins from influenza, seasonal coronaviruses or other pathogenic
viruses. COVID-19 patients with one or more autoantibodies tended to have higher levels of
antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 Nonstructural Protein 1 (NSP1) and Methyltransferase (ME). We
conclude that SARS-CoV-2 causes development of new-onset IgG autoantibodies in a significant
proportion of hospitalized COVID-19 patients and are positively correlated with immune responses to
SARS-CoV-2 proteins.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, is associated with many different clinical features that are
commonly found in autoimmune diseases, including arthralgias, myalgias, fatigue, sicca, and rashes13

. Less common manifestations of autoimmunity have also been observed in COVID-19 patients,

including thrombosis, myositis, myocarditis, arthritis, encephalitis, and vasculitis3. These clinical
observations, and the increasing proportion of “recovered” patients with persistent post-COVID-19
symptoms (so-called “long haulers”, or “long COVID”) suggest that inflammation in response to
SARS-CoV-2 infection promotes tissue damage in the acute phase and potentially some of the longterm sequelae4-6.
Autoantibodies, a hallmark of most but not all autoimmune disorders, have been described in
COVID-19 patients. In the earliest report, approximately half of hospitalized patients at an academic
hospital in Greece had high levels of serum autoantibodies, often associated with clinical findings
such as rashes, thrombosis, and vasculitis7. Serum anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were detectable in
approximately one third of patients7. Woodruff et al. reported that 23 of 48 (44%) of critically-ill
COVID-19 patients have positive ANA tests8,9. Zuo described an even higher prevalence of
thrombogenic autoantibodies, reporting that up to 52% of hospitalized COVID-19 patients have antiphospholipid antibodies. They further showed that autoantibodies have the capacity to cause clots in
mouse models10. In a large autoantibody screen, Gruber et al. demonstrated that Multisystem
Inflammatory

Syndrome

in

Children

(MIS-C)

patients

develop

autoantibodies,

including

autoantibodies against the lupus antigen SSB/La11. SSB/Ro autoantibodies have also been
described12. The apparent link between clinical manifestations resembling those seen in patients with
classifiable autoimmune diseases, and those observed in COVID-19 patients, has prompted searches
for candidate target autoantigens that may be useful for diagnosis and for improving understanding of
COVID-19 pathogenesis. The molecular targets of autoantibodies in individual patients with COVID-

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19 are largely unknown, as are their associations with anti-viral immune responses, and the timing of
their appearance in regard to infection with SARS-CoV-2.
We hypothesized that SARS-CoV-2 induces the production of antibodies against autoantigens
and cytokines/chemokines de novo, and these correlate with anti-viral responses. We assembled
three different custom bead-based protein arrays to measure IgG antibodies found in CTDs, ACA,
and anti-viral responses in 197 COVID-19 samples. Samples were obtained from 147 hospitalized
patients infected by SARS-CoV-2, some of which were collected longitudinally, in three
geographically distinct locations. Our results demonstrate that a large cadre of autoantigens are
targeted by circulating antibodies in a substantial proportion of hospitalized patients with COVID-19,
but less commonly in uninfected healthy controls (HC). Our studies confirm emerging reports of IgG
autoantibodies in hospitalized COVID-19 patients and demonstrate that a significant subset of
patients develop new-onset autoantibodies that could place them at risk for progression to
symptomatic, classifiable autoimmunity in the future.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) are produced by one in four hospitalized COVID-19
patients
To determine if hospitalized patients with COVID-19 produce autoantibodies against
prototypical autoantigens associated with systemic autoimmunity, we measured ANA using an
indirect immunofluorescence assay in one of our cohorts (University of Pennsylvania). We found that
seven out of 73 patients (10%) were positive at a dilution of 1:160 using a clinical-grade assay and
that another 13 were weakly positive (Supplementary Fig. 1a). A variety of ANA patterns were
observed including diffuse, speckled and nucleolar (Supplementary Fig. 1b and 1c). One patient
exhibited cytoplasmic staining but was negative for nuclear staining. Given the finding of positive and
weakly positive ANAs, we measured dsDNA antibodies. Only one individual out of 73 tested was
positive for dsDNA antibodies at a dilution of 1:270, and this individual also was ANA positive with a
speckled pattern (Supplementary Fig. 2). Since several patients who were severely or critically ill
had thromboembolic and vascular events, we also analyzed the same 73 patients for
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) and Proteinase 3 (PR3) antibodies, as these antibodies are associated with
autoimmune vasculitis. Only one individual tested positive for PR3 antibodies (Supplementary Fig.
2). The levels of positivity in these clinical-grade assays are in line with those of one of the authors
(J.J.) who reported that 17 of 113 (15.8%) patients with positive SARS-CoV-2 serology had serum
autoantibodies and/or antiphospholipid antibodies13. These findings prompted us to “cast a wider net”
for autoantibodies using additional patients and assays that detected larger numbers of not only
common, but also unusual autoantigens.

Protein microarrays identify autoantibody targets in hospitalized COVID-19 patients
To systematically and simultaneously measure a large number of different autoantibodies in
serum or plasma derived from patients acutely infected with SARS-CoV-2, we constructed a 53-plex
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

COVID-19 Autoantigen Array (Fig. 1, left half of panel). The array comprised well-characterized
autoantigens (Supplementary Table 1) across multiple rheumatologic diseases (Supplementary
Fig. 3). Included were prominent antigens targeted in systemic sclerosis (scleroderma, SSc, left
panel; myositis and overlap syndromes, second panel); systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
Sjögren’s syndrome, and mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD, third panel); gastrointestinal and
endocrine autoimmune disorders (fourth panel); chromatin-associated antigens (fifth panel); and
miscellaneous antigens, including proteins targeted in vasculitis or in which autoantibodies are
postulated to be directly pathogenic (sixth panel). Most antigens have been validated in previous
publications and were also validated using commercially available autoimmune disease prototype
sera (Fig. 1, bottom panel), or using previously characterized serum from Stanford’s biobank and
the Oklahoma Immune Cohort in the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation Arthritis & Clinical
Immunology Biorepository (SLE, SSc, MCTD, primary biliary cirrhosis, and other disorders, data not
shown).
We characterized 51 cross-sectional COVID-19 serum or plasma samples from patients who
provided samples within seven days of hospitalization (Fig. 1). As expected, prototype reference
samples from patients with classifiable autoimmune diseases were strongly positive for
autoantibodies, recognizing 25 of the 53 arrayed proteins (Fig. 1, bottom left panel, and
Supplementary Fig. 3). Serum from only four HC recognized a single autoantigen each (signal
recognition particle 54, SRP 54; Smith/ribonuclear protein, Sm/RNP; guanosine nucleotide binding
protein alpha subunit, GNAL, a candidate autoantigen in autoimmune hypophysitis; and Ku 70/80,
respectively, Fig. 1, middle panel). HC06 and HC30 each had high MFI anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO)
that exceeded the 5 SD cutoff if excluded from calculating the average TPO MFI using the other 29
HC samples. Both samples were therefore considered “positive” in our analysis, but we included them
in calculating the 5 SD cutoff on the COVID samples. In striking contrast, 25 of 51 (49%) hospitalized
patients with COVID-19 had autoantibodies recognizing at least one autoantigen (Fig. 1, top panel).
Using a stringent 5 SD cut-off, serum antibodies from eleven COVID-19 patients identified a single
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

antigen, thirteen recognized 2-3 antigens, and one subject (Subject UP40) recognized nine different
autoantigens. Ribosomal P proteins (P0, P1, and P2) were most prominently targeted in patients (10
of 50 patients, 20%), but were not found in any of the HC. Similar results were observed in 48 Kaiser
subjects analyzed using an earlier-generation 26-plex autoantigen microarray, identifying overlapping
RNA-containing autoantigen complexes including RPP14 Th/To, the Ro/La particle, the U1-small
nuclear ribonuclear protein (U1-snRNP), thyroid antigens, and chromatin proteins as targets in
hospitalized COVID-19 patients, but in none of the HC (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Rare antigens seen in patients with autoimmune myositis (MDA5, Mi-2, and tRNA synthetases
such as PL-7 and Jo-1), and candidate autoantigens in autoimmune myocarditis (troponin and MYH6,
Fig. 2a), were observed in individual patients, as were rare SSc autoantigens (Th/To (RPP25),
fibrillarin, and the U11/U12 snRNP, Fig. 2b). A subset of autoantibodies (e.g., antibodies that bind the
complement inhibitor C1q, thrombosis-associated antibodies that target beta 2 glycoprotein 1 (β2GP1), and vasculitis-associated antigens such as bactericidal permeability inducing protein (BPI)) that
have been implicated in pathogenic inflammation in target organs, were also found in individual
patients (Fig. 2c)4-6

14-16

. Relatively common autoantigens such as Scl-70, CENP A/B, and Sm/RNP

were infrequent. Thyroid autoantibodies were also commonly observed (12/147 subjects across our
entire study, 8.2%, using cutoffs of 3,000 MFI and 5 SD above HC). Thyroid dysfunction, which is
relatively common in the general population, has been reported in COVID-19 patients4,5. In all cases
where samples from more than one time point were available, anti-TPO and anti-thyroglobulin (TG)
were already present at high MFI levels in the baseline sample. Taken together, these findings reveal
that hospitalized patients with COVID-19 produce an increased frequency of autoantibodies, but that
there is substantial inter-individual variation in which autoantigens are targeted.

Secreted proteins are common autoantigens in hospitalized COVID-19 patients

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In a pair of elegant studies, Bastard5 and Wang17 independently identified anti-cytokine
antibodies (ACA) in patients with severe COVID-19. Both groups showed that a subset of ACA
prevent binding of soluble factors to their cognate cell surface receptors and have been postulated to
play a pathogenic role by thwarting protective immune responses to COVID-19. We created a 41-plex
array comprising secreted proteins and cell surface receptors, modeled on arrays we and others have
used previously to characterize “secretome” antibodies in immunodeficiency disorders18,19, SLE18,
and systemic sclerosis patients20 (Supplementary Table 2). We observed even more striking results
with the secretome array, which revealed that serum antibodies in 41/51 (80%) of hospitalized
COVID-19 patients recognized at least one secreted or cell surface autoantigen (Fig. 1, upper right
half of panel), while only 2/31 (6%) HC subjects recognized a single antigen (interferon-gamma, IFN-

γ in one and CD74 in the other, Fig. 1, middle right half of panel). Interestingly, the IFN-γ+ HC
subject (HC27) also had serum antibodies specific for Sm (a subunit of the U1-snRNP, using 5 SD
cutoff) and for both Ro60 and La (using a 3 SD cutoff), suggesting this “healthy” subject is in
preclinical evolution toward developing SLE, a disease in which we have previously described
multiple different ACA including anti-IFN-α and anti-B cell activating factor (BAFF)18.
Interferons, particularly the Type I interferon IFN-α2, were targeted in multiple COVID patients
at frequencies (n=23 across all interferons, 45%) higher than recently published findings from other
groups17,21. Serum from five subjects (UP11, UP38, UP41, UP42, and UP46) recognized two or more
interferons. In some COVID-19 patients, MFI values were comparable to or even exceeded those
observed in previously characterized prototype patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
type 1 (APS-1), pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), and atypical mycobacterial infections (AMI)
(see Fig. 3d).
Many interleukins were also prominently identified as autoantibody targets in this screen (e.g.,
interleukins -1, -6, -10, -15, -17A, -22 and -31), as were cytokines with well-characterized functions
such as leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), the chemotactic chemokine macrophage inflammatory
protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), and vascular endothelial growth factor-B (VEGF-B). Several striking
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reactivities were observed in individual COVID-19 patients, including IL-12p70 (Subject UP47); the
SARS-CoV-2 receptor angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE-2, Subject UMR19); granulocyte
macrophage colony stimulating factor which is the causative autoantibody target in PAP (GM-CSF,
Subject UP25); oncostatin-M (OSM, Subject UP40); and soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor
kappa B (sRANK-ligand, Subject UP19). Subject UP17 was being treated with a tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-α) inhibitor at the time of SARS-CoV-2 infection, explaining the high MFI reactivity
to TNF (Fig. 1). MFI for all antigens except IL-12p70 were very high (>10,000) in individual patients.
Autoantibodies against all interleukins, cytokines and ACE-2 identified in the initial screen were also
observed using a 5 SD cutoff in a second COVID-19 cohort (n=98 longitudinal samples from 48
different patients, see Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6), with few exceptions (e.g., IL-1α,
although IL-1β was targeted using a 3 SD cutoff; IL-31, which met a 3 SD cutoff; and GM-CSF).

A subset of autoantibodies is triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection
To determine if autoantibodies and anti-cytokine antibodies were generated de novo (versus
existed prior to infection), we analyzed 48 hospitalized COVID-19 patients (Stanford University,
University of Pennsylvania, and Marburg University) in whom samples were available at two or more
different time points. Twenty-four patients had an available sample from the day of hospitalization or t
(day 0). The interval between collection of the second sample ranged from 2-58 days (mean interval =
15.8 days). Two subjects (UP70 and UP71) also had a third sample drawn 14-21 days post ICU
admission. To reduce batch effects, all samples at all time points were analyzed on the 53-plex
COVID-19 Autoantigen Array in the same instrument run (Supplementary Fig. 5 top panel) together
with HC (Supplementary Fig. 5, middle panel, n=16) and serum samples from prototype
autoimmune diseases served as positive controls (Supplementary Fig. 5, bottom panel, n=8).
As with the unpaired samples described in Fig. 1, autoantibodies from patients with paired
samples had high MFIs in individual patients. Some patients were again identified whose serum

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

recognized a large number of autoantigens (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6). Twenty-five (52%) of
hospitalized COVID-19 patients had autoantibodies against at least one autoantigen. Serum
autoantibodies recognized two or more antigens (range 2-7 antigens) in seven patients (15%) (Fig.
3a, and Supplementary Fig. 6).

Longitudinal analysis identified prominent increases in

autoantibodies at the second available time point (Fig. 3b, red boxes). In 9 individual patients (19%),
autoantibody measurements were above the average for HC at the earliest available time point and
MFI increased by at least 50%, exceeding the 5 SD and 3,000 MFI cutoff at the later time point (Fig.
3b, e.g., MDA5, subject UP50; BPI, subject UP52; Supplementary Fig. 6). Some autoantibodies
were at or below the average for HC at the first time point and increased over time (e.g., histones and
histone H3, subject UP65; and β2GP1, subjects UP65 and UP52), suggesting these autoantibodies
were directly triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Others were already elevated at the first time point
and did not have large increases in MFI over time (n=22, 45%, blue boxes) (Fig. 3c and
Supplementary Fig. 6). In a small number of cases, autoantibody MFI levels decreased below the
SD and MFI cutoffs over time (n=5, 10%, green boxes), suggesting that their development might be
transient (e.g., PL-7, subject UP70, Fig. 3b). Anti-TPO and anti-Scl-70 (Fig. 3c, blue boxes)
remained elevated at high levels in all seropositive subjects regardless of the time of measurement,
suggesting that these autoantibodies were already present at hospitalization and likely represent
preclinical (asymptomatic), unreported, or undiagnosed autoimmunity.
To further evaluate the potential evolution of autoantibodies, we performed ANA testing on 21
individuals with paired samples. Eight individuals (38%) had positive or weak positive ANA reactivity.
Among these 8 individuals, ANAs were present at both time points in three, changed in intensity of
staining in two, and were positive at only one of the two time points in the final three (Supplementary
Fig. 1b). Taken together, these data indicate that autoantibody levels change over time in individual
COVID-19 patients, consistent with their production and, in some cases, transience during acute
illness.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We next examined whether IgG ACA are triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Paired samples
from the same 48 subjects described above were used to probe the 41-plex cytokine array, again in a
single, batched run. As observed with unpaired samples (Fig. 1), 28 of 48 (58%) of COVID-19
patients had at least one ACA (Supplementary Fig. 6). Of these twenty-eight, sera from fifteen
patients recognized one cytokine, five recognized two cytokines, and eight recognized three or more
cytokines (range 3-12 antigens). Interferons, IL-17, and RANK-L were the most common targets, and
interferons, IL-17, and IL-22 were new targets in some patients (Fig. 3d). In addition to Subject
UMR19 (Fig. 1), a second patient with high MFI ACE-2 autoantibodies was also identified (Subject
UMR12, Fig. 3d). Increased MFI was observed for one or more autoantibody at later time points in 12
patients (24%). Several were present at MFI levels near or below the average for HC at baseline and
were induced to high MFI levels at the second time point (e.g., anti-IFN-α, subject UMR07; anti-IFN-ε,
subjects UP63 and UP65; and anti-IL-22, subjects UP54, UP63, UP65, and UMR10, Fig. 3d). In
many patients, ACA MFI levels were significantly elevated at the first time point and decreased at the
later time point, suggesting that some ACA were pre-existing and/or developed transiently following
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Subject SU09 had very high MFI levels of anti-TNFα at both time points,
attributed to anti-TNF therapy. We conclude that antibodies against cytokines, chemokines, growth
factors, and receptors are common in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. Many are triggered in
response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, even at later time points distant from the time of infection (e.g.,
anti-IL-22, subject UMR10, day 29, Fig. 3d).
To further evaluate the change in autoantibodies and ACA over time, we performed a targeted
analysis of 21 of the 48 patients who had paired autoantibody and ACA data specifically at D0 and D7
of hospitalization (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Almost all patients (18/21, 86%) had demonstrable

changes in the number of antibodies, defined at varying thresholds of sensitivity (>3 SD vs. 3-5 SD
vs. >5 SD) between D0 and D7 (Supplementary Fig. 7a).

When combining the number of

autoantibodies or ACA (Supplementary Fig. 7b), there is a trend towards increased numbers both of
autoantibodies and ACAs per subject over time. Higher numbers of individuals with more
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

autoantibodies and ACAs at D7 compared to D0 at the 3-5 SD threshold were observed
(Supplementary Fig. 7b and 7c), but the difference in medians between D0 and D7 was not
statistically significant. Nevertheless, these data clearly show that there is ongoing evolution in both
the numbers and levels of autoantibodies and ACAs with time in hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

Broad anti-viral immune responses target internal viral proteins in hospitalized COVID19 patients
We have used protein arrays for epitope mapping and to measure antibody responses in
influenza vaccines22 and in a nonhuman primate human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine
study23. We used a similar approach here to characterize anti-viral responses following SARS-CoV-2
infection. We created a 28-plex COVID-19 viral array that included structural and surface proteins
from SARS-CoV-2 as well as eight commercially available recombinant nonstructural proteins
localized to the interior of the virus (Supplementary Table 3). As an initial validation, we compared
array-based detection and measurement using a clinical-grade ELISA (R=0.81, Spearman’s,
p<0.0001 for anti-SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid; R=0.60, Spearman’s, p<0.0001 for anti-SARS-CoV-2
RBD, Supplementary Fig. 8a and 8b, respectively). By studying the anti-viral antibody (AVA)
response, we hoped to understand if certain viral antigens might correlate with the development of
autoimmune responses. We hypothesized that poorly controlled SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to the
development of serum antibodies that recognize not just structural proteins such as the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein, but also nonstructural proteins, and that a subset of these viral proteins might correlate
with the development of autoimmunity. Proteins from related coronaviruses were also included to
explore whether pre-existing antibodies to seasonal coronaviruses might correlate negatively or
positively with disease severity, and with autoimmunity.
Fig. 4 depicts a heatmap representation of IgG reactivity based on MFI (Fig. 4a, left panel)
and calculation of SD above average MFI for HC (Fig. 4b, right panel). As expected, nearly all

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

patients had broad immune responses to viral structural proteins (first seven antigens on left, Fig. 4a
and b). Twelve patients had low MFI levels at the earliest time point (almost all were day 0, defined
as collection within the first 24-72 hours of hospitalization but developed high MFI IgG SARS-CoV-2
antibodies when tested at later time points, consistent with previously published findings in the setting
of acute illness24 (Fig. 4a). Other subjects (e.g., subject UP50) already had broad AVA responses at
day 0, suggesting they had been infected for a significant period of time prior to hospital admission.
IgG antibody levels against non-structural SARS-CoV-2 proteins were significantly elevated in
a majority of patients (n=35, 73%), particularly papain-like protease (PLPro, n=13 patients), open
reading frame proteins (Orf 8, n=14 patients and Orf 3a, n=18 patients); and nonstructural proteins
(NSP 1, n=20 patients, and NSP 9 n=31 patients, but not NSP 7 (n=0), NSP8 (n=1) or 3C-like
protease (n=3)). The number of targeted non-structural proteins increased over time in 20 of 49 (40%)
patients when compared with the earliest available time point, and were absent (n=14), did not
change (n=7), or decreased (n=8) in the remaining patients. Of the eight patients who showed a
decrease in the number of targeted non-structural SARS-CoV-2 antigens over time, all but one
decreased by a single antigen, and three were patients had samples collected at an interval of 37
days, making it likely that the immune responses were transient. A majority of patients had linked
antibody responses in which multiple non-structural antigens were targeted in the same subject. In
rare patients (e.g., subject UP65, see SARS-CoV-2 protein PLpro, Fig. 4a and 4b), the initial immune
response was focused on an internal protein (or was pre-existing) and later evolved to target spike
and other SARS-CoV-2 surface or structural proteins. We conclude that antibody responses in
hospitalized COVID-19 patients are not limited to structural proteins, that linked responses to multiple
non-structural proteins are observed over time, and that NSP9 is the most commonly recognized
internal SARS-CoV-2 protein of those tested on the array.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

New-onset IgG autoantibodies are temporally associated with anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG
responses
We next identified a subgroup of patients (n=12) whose anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody responses
suggested that they had been infected at a time point that was proximate to hospitalization and
capture of the first sample. Selection criteria for patients who were early in their anti-viral responses
included (i.) the first available sample was within three days of hospitalization; (ii.) anti-spike S1 IgG
levels were <5,000 MFI at baseline; (iii.) anti-RBD IgG levels were <20,000 MFI at baseline; and (iv.)
at least a 2-fold increase in MFI for IgG against both S1 and RBD was observed at the next available
timepoint. We then studied these patients to further determine if new IgG autoantibodies appeared at
the second time point, providing evidence that SARS-CoV-2 directly triggers development of
autoantibodies.
We compared IgG reactivities at both time points for all twelve subjects who met the above
criteria on COVID-19 autoantigen arrays (Fig. 5a, left panel) and cytokine arrays (Fig. 5b, middle
panel) with anti-viral responses using the virus array (Fig. 5c, right panel). Four of twelve patients
were found to have at least one newly induced autoantibody at the later time point (white boxes). Two
of these four patients had two or more new autoantibodies (Subjects UP52, n=5 antigens; and subject
UP65, n=10 antigens). β2GP1, histones, and the 54 kD component of the myositis autoantigen signal
recognition particle (SRP 54) were the most common antigens identified (n=2 subjects each). Given
the small sample size, no clear correlations were identified between individual autoantibodies and an
IgG response to a specific viral protein (Fig. 5d and Supplementary Fig. 9).
Finally, we correlated autoantibodies and ACA with anti-viral IgG responses using array data
from the cohort described in Fig. 3, focusing on Penn and Marburg samples which had been
collected at time points as proximate to the day of hospitalization as possible. We compared patients
who had one or more autoantibody (n=15first time point, n=13 second time point) with patients who
had no autoantibodies (n=21 first time point, n=23 second time point).

21

Anti-SARS-CoV-1 RBD

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

correlated positively with the autoantibody positive group (p=0.002 at the second time point using
Wilcoxon rank sum test, p=0.044 using Bonferroni correction for each time point). NSP1 (p=0.03 at
second time point, p=0.08 at first time point) and ME (p=0.04 at first time point; p=0.06 at second time
point) trended positively when correlating with autoantibodies but were not statistically significant
when correcting for multiple hypotheses. An identical analysis was performed on ACA+ vs. ACApatients, showing no correlations with IgG responses to any viral proteins, including influenza, SARSCoV-1, and seasonal coronaviruses (OC43 RBD, 229E-FL-GCN4, NL63 RBD, and HKU1 RBD).
Discussion
We have used a multiplexed, bead-based platform to identify circulating antibodies in
hospitalized patients with COVID-19 and have generated integrated results from three different
protein microarrays to discover COVID-19 associated autoantigens and link them to anti-viral
responses. Our studies have led to several important findings that provide further insights into
COVID-19 pathogenesis. First, we found that approximately half of hospitalized COVID-19 patients
develop serum autoantibodies against one or more antigens on our array even though only a quarter
of all patients are ANA+. Increased levels of autoantibodies are not simply a reflection of
hypergammaglobulinemia because they are produced out of proportion to total IgG serum
concentration. In most individuals, only a small number of autoantigens are targeted, which is more
consistent with a sporadic loss of self-tolerance than a global increase in autoantibody production.
Second, the autoantibodies we discovered are found in relatively rare connective tissue diseases that
are not typically measured in clinical labs, and some are predicted to be pathogenic. Third, a
surprisingly large number of ACA were identified, far more than just the interferon autoantibodies
described recently21. Fourth, antibodies recognizing nonstructural SARS-CoV-2 proteins were
identified that correlate positively with autoantibodies. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, some
autoantibodies are newly triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting that severe COVID-19 can
break tolerance to self.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Approximately 60-80% of all hospitalized COVID-19 patients in our study had at least one
ACA, with a greater number of different ACA specificities generated in individual patients than
observed for traditional autoantigens. Two recent studies demonstrated that IFN-α and IFN-ωblocking ACA are found in patients with severe COVID-1921,25. Anti-IFN antibodies with blocking
activity were absent in all 663 tested patients with mild COVID-19, strongly linking the presence of
anti-IFN to disease pathogenesis and severity21. Another study reported that type I interferon (IFN)
deficiency could be a hallmark of severe COVID-1926, while other investigators pointed towards an
untuned antiviral immune response due to delayed type I/III interferon expression27. Bastard identified
blocking ACA for additional cytokines including IL-6, IL-22, and IL-12p7021. ACA without blocking
activity still may be biologically important, for example by potentiating receptor binding or prolonging
cytokine half-life28,29. In another recent study, Wang identified autoantibodies against additional
secreted and tissue-associated proteins in COVID-19 patients17, some of which were pathogenic
when tested in animal models of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Pre-existing IFN-α autoantibodies were
recently identified in 4/10 (40%) SLE patients from NIH’s SLE cohort who later became infected with
SARS-CoV-232. We have identified ACA in SLE (including anti-BAFF blocking antibodies and antiIFNα)18, systemic sclerosis30, and a variety of immunodeficiency disorders18,19,31, suggesting that ACA
are probably more common than previously appreciated in immune-mediated diseases. Taken
together, these earlier studies are consistent with the notion that pre-existing ACA are pathogenic and
may place such individuals at increased risk of developing severe COVID-19. What is different about
our work from these earlier studies is that we show a change in ACA levels and in the numbers of
ACAs over time in many hospitalized individuals with acute COVID-19. Our findings suggest that
ACA may also form in response to viral infection or as a consequence of an inflammatory immune
response in which high levels of cytokines are generated.
In addition to ACAs modulating the immune response and potentially causing more destructive
inflammation, autoantibodies have the potential to contribute in a number of other ways to COVID-19
pathogenesis. Several autoantigens we discovered are naturally complexed with a structural RNA
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

molecule which could serve as a ligand for nucleic acid sensors such as Toll Like Receptors (e.g.,
TLR7, TLR3) in host cells. RNA or DNA released from dying cells could also form immune complexes
with viral or self-antigens that can promote autoantibody production. A subset of array-identified
autoantigens (e.g., MDA5) are encoded by interferon-inducible genes and would be predicted to be
transcribed in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Indeed, the acute phase of severe SARS-CoV-2
infection can be accompanied by marked tissue inflammation, cytokine storm (including secretion of
interferons), upregulation of interferon signaling pathways, and expression of ACE-2 in vascular
endothelium. Although not yet explored for COVID-19-associated autoantibodies or ACA, IgG
antibodies that bind SARS-CoV-2 proteins are often IgG1 and have afucosylated glycans. These
properties enhance immunoglobulin interactions with the activating Fcγ receptor FcγRIIIa, potentially
leading to increased production of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF33.
We postulate that a subset of the autoantibodies we have identified contribute to the formation
of inflammatory immune complexes in situ, particularly at endothelial surfaces. For example,
neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) have been implicated in COVID-19 patients with vasculitis.34
Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody (ANCA) associated vasculitis (AAV) has been strongly
associated with neutrophil activation and generation of proinflammatory NETs containing nucleic
acids, histones, and inflammatory peptides35. While we did not observe elevated levels of MPO or
PR3, we identified high MFI anti-BPI antibodies in 6% of COVID-19 patients. The detection of
autoantibodies to BPI and core as well as linker histones raises the possibility that NETs contribute to
the generation of autoantibodies in severe COVID-19, a possibility that is in line with the neutrophilia
that accompanies severe acute disease36. Disseminated microvascular coagulopathy and
microvascular injury in lung and skin from COVID-19 patients correlate with fibrin deposition and
thrombus formation37. SARS-CoV-2 membrane proteins including the spike protein (but not SARSCoV-2 RNA) colocalize with activated complement in ACE-2+ microvascular endothelia of COVID-19
lung tissue and normal-appearing skin37,38. Magro and colleagues hypothesize that spike protein on
the surface of circulating pseudovirions binds to endothelial ACE-2 (whose gene is interferon24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

inducible), providing a nidus for activation of complement and formation of microthrombi. Anti-C1q (an
SLE autoantigen), anti-β2GP1 (which is thrombogenic), anti-BPI, and anti-ACE-2 (if non-blocking)39
that were discovered in our screen would be predicted to exacerbate these pathogenic processes40.
Severe infection may also result in an “all-hands-on-deck” immune response that results in
loss of tolerance due to the presence of pro-inflammatory mediators that may lessen the requirement
for T cell help. Some patients with severe acute COVID-19 appear to mount extrafollicular B cell
responses that are characterized by expanded B cells and plasmablasts, loss of germinal centers,
and loss of expression of Bcl-641,42.

Antibody repertoires analyzed from hospitalized COVID-19

patients during acute disease include massive clones with low levels of somatic mutation (SHM)43,44
and elongated CDR3 sequences which can be associated with polyreactivity45 and are reminiscent of
immune responses seen in acute Ebola46 and salmonella infection47. It has been suggested that
these responses resemble SLE flares in which autoreactive B cells are also activated via an
extrafollicular, TLR7-dependent pathway8,41,48. Although SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA could itself
serve as a costimulatory TLR7 ligand, many of the autoantigens we have identified also bind to
structural RNAs such as the U1-snRNA (found in Sm/RNP complexes), 7S RNA (a component of
SRP), and tRNAs (e.g., Jo-1, PL-7, and PL-12) which might activate dendritic cells in a TLR7dependent manner49,50.
One of the most important unanswered questions raised by our studies is why specific
molecules are targeted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. For newly triggered ACA, the most likely
explanation is that they arise as a consequence of severe disease along with high levels of viremia,
tissue injury, and elevated local levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. However, it is
also possible that the presence of ACA could affect the regulation of self-reactive lymphocytes by
altering the half-lives of the receptor interactions of the target molecules. For traditional autoantigens,
one possibility is that viral proteins or the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome and self-molecules physically
interact, and that the initial immune response to the viral protein in a highly inflammatory
microenvironment expands to include self-proteins through linked recognition and intermolecular
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

epitope spreading. Another possibility is molecular mimicry in which one or more viral proteins or
epitopes cross reacts with self-proteins leading to loss of tolerance and development of
autoimmunity51,52. Experiments to explore these mechanisms are ongoing.
The vast majority of studies on SARS-CoV-2 proteins have focused on viral structural proteins
to develop efficient and accurate diagnostic assays, and to identify specific epitopes on surface
proteins for development of vaccines and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. These proteins are also
the major focus of the immune response in most infected individuals.

Here, we developed a

multiplexed viral protein array that enables simultaneous measurement of antibody responses against
28 different proteins from 13 different viruses. We determined that non-structural proteins are
recognized by antibodies in a large proportion of hospitalized COVID-19 patients, suggesting that B
cell responses expand over time to involve additional viral molecules. IgG antibody levels against
NSP1 and ME correlated positively with the presence of at least one autoantibody. We hypothesize
that prolonged inability to eradicate and clear virus expands the adaptive immune response to target
non-structural viral proteins, some of which might physically interact or cross-react with autoantigens
in the context of an intense local or systemic inflammatory environment, exceeding a threshold for
breaking tolerance to self. In contrast, patients who rapidly mount neutralizing antibody responses to
the viral spike protein abort “intraviral epitope spreading” and may be less likely to develop
autoantibodies. Why anti-SARS-CoV-1 RBD IgG responses associate with autoantibody positive
patients is unclear. Future longitudinal studies are needed to determine whether broad B cell
responses play any direct pathogenic role in patients with prolonged hospital courses or in patients
with long-term sequelae of COVID-19 infection; to correlate anti-viral responses with ACA and
autoantibodies over time using much larger COVID-19 cohorts including patients who are
asymptomatic or have mild disease; and to explore whether specific SARS-CoV-2 proteins might
cross-react with autoantigens discovered in our screens.
Many studies of hospitalized COVID-19 patients, including our study, suffer from important
limitations. First, confounding variables exist including heterogeneous demographics, medications at
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hospitalization, individualized treatment approaches, and, in some cases, unknown history of preexisting medical or autoimmune conditions. Second, “Day 0” is not day 0 of infection but instead
refers to a time point most proximate to hospitalization. Our viral array results (Figs. 4 and 5) confirm
that the time between initial infection and sample acquisition was heterogeneous, potentially
confounding interpretation of autoantibody and ACA results. Third, not all antigens (e.g., lipids,
hydrophobic proteins and carbohydrates) are compatible with our screening methodology, and as a
result we have certainly missed some reactivities. Fourth, we did not include patients who were
asymptomatic, had mild COVID-19, were vaccinated for SARS-CoV-2, had other severe viral
illnesses, or were children. Finally, our analysis was limited to hospitalized patients during acute
illness, with follow up times of days rather than months or years.
Although beyond the scope of these studies, our data generate many more questions that
need to be addressed in the coming years – questions that can only be answered by generating large
cohorts of prospectively enrolled subjects with new-onset viral syndromes, including patients with
COVID-19, respiratory illnesses which resemble COVID-19, and subjects enrolled in COVID-19
vaccine trials. Are autoantibodies and ACAs specific to COVID-19, or is their presence shared more
broadly in patients with influenza and other severe acute illnesses? Are autoantibodies and ACAs
found in convalescent serum used to treat patients with severe COVID-19? Do any of these
autoantibodies underly some of the signs and symptoms observed in “long COVID”, do they lead to
classifiable autoimmune disease, and can they be used as predictive markers or to identify subsets of
patients who would benefit from targeted immunotherapies?
Our studies have begun to quantify the impact of SARS-CoV-2 on autoimmunity, identifying
which antigens and specific autoimmune diseases to surveil in patients who have been infected, and
contributing to our mechanistic understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis. These studies provide a
starting point for large-scale epidemiology studies to determine the extent of autoimmunity that results
from SARS-CoV-2 infection, and long-term impacts on the health care system and the economy.
While the COVID-19 pandemic is leaving a wake of destruction as it progresses, it also provides an
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

unprecedented opportunity to understand how exposure to a new virus could potentially break
tolerance to self, potentially giving rise to autoimmunity and other chronic, immune-mediated,
diseases.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Serum and plasma samples
Hospitalized COVID-19 patients. Serum or plasma samples were obtained following protocols
approved by local institutional review boards (IRB) from 147 unique hospitalized subjects (n=99
unpaired; n=98 paired longitudinal samples from 48 distinct subjects). Samples were obtained from
four centers in three distinct geographic areas: Northern California (Kaiser Permanente Health Care
System, n=48 unpaired samples from hospitalized subjects, IRB# 55718) collected in March and April
2020; and Stanford Occupational Health Clinic, 20 paired samples from 10 unique hospitalized
subjects IRB# 55689) collected between April and June 2020; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (University
of Pennsylvania, n=50 unpaired; and 44 paired samples from 21 unique hospitalized subjects, IRB #
808542) obtained between April and June 2020; and Marburg, Germany (Philipps University Marburg,
1 unpaired; and 34 paired samples from 17 unique hospitalized subjects collected between April and
June 2020, IRB# 57/20). Clinical characteristics of the cohorts can be found in Supplementary
Tables 4-6.

Healthy Controls. Serum and plasma samples from anonymous healthy controls (HC, n=41) were
obtained prior to the COVID-19 pandemic from Stanford Blood Bank and Stanford Hospital and
Clinics.

Bead-based antigen array content
We created three different custom, bead-based antigen arrays modelled on similar arrays that we
previously used to study autoimmune and immunodeficiency disorders, and for characterizing vaccine
responses18,20,22,53-57. Antigens were selected based on our published datasets; literature searches
that have implicated specific antigens in COVID-19; potential for mechanistic contribution to COVID-

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19 pathogenesis; and compatibility with bead-based platforms. A complete list of all antigens,
vendors, and catalogue numbers can be found in Supplementary Tables 1-3.
The “COVID-19 Autoantigen Array” included 53 commercial protein antigens associated with
CTDs (Supplementary Table 1). The “COVID-19 Cytokine Array” comprised 41 proteins including
cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, acute phase proteins

and cell surface proteins

(Supplementary Table 2). Specific “secretome” proteins included a subset of molecules identified in
previous large screens in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (59-plex screen)18,
systemic sclerosis (scleroderma or SSc, 221-plex screen, manuscript in preparation)30, Autoimmune
Polyendocrine

Syndrome

Type

1

(APS-1)18,

Atypical

Mycobacterial

Infections

(AMI)18,

Immunodysregulation Polyendocrinopathy Enteropathy X-linked (IPEX)19, and more recently in
COVID-199. The “COVID-19 Viral Array” included 54 recombinant, purified SARS-CoV-2 proteins
from commercial sources, or recombinant proteins produced in the labs of several of the authors
(Peter Kim and Taia Wang, Supplementary Table 3)33. We also included proteins or protein
fragments from SARS-CoV-1, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), nonpathogenic
coronaviruses (OC43, 229E, NL63, and HKU1), Hepatitis B, Mumps, Rubella, Rubeola, Ebola, and
Influenza (hemagglutinin (HA) from A/California/07/2009 H1N1).

Array construction
Antigens were coupled to carboxylated magnetic beads (MagPlex-C, Luminex Corp.) such that each
antigen was linked to beads with unique barcodes, as previously described53,58. In brief, unless stated
otherwise, 8 μg of each antigen or control antibody was diluted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
and transferred to 96-well plates. Diluted antigens and control antibodies were conjugated to 1×106
carboxylated magnetic beads per ID. Beads were distributed into 96-well plates (Greiner BioOne),
washed and re-suspended in phosphate buffer (0.1M NaH2PO4, pH 6.2) using a 96-well plate washer
(Biotek). The bead surface was activated by adding 100 μl of phosphate buffer containing 0.5 mg 130

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ethyl-3(3-dimethylamino-propyl)carbodiimide (Pierce) and 0.5 mg N-hydroxysuccinimide (Pierce).
After 20 min incubation on a shaker, beads were washed and resuspended in activation buffer (0.05M
2-N-Morpholino EthaneSulfonic acid, MES, pH 5.0). Diluted antigens and control antibodies were
incubated with beads for 2 hours at room temperature. Beads were washed three times in 100 μl
PBS-Tween, re-suspended in 60 μl storage buffer (Blocking reagent for Enyzme Linked
Immunosorbent Assay, ELISA, Roche) and stored in plates at 4°C. Immobilization of some antigens
and control antibodies on the correct bead IDs was confirmed by analysis using commercially
available mouse monoclonal antibodies, or antibodies specific for epitope tags such as 6X-histidine.
In addition, prototype human plasma samples derived from participants with autoimmune diseases
with known reactivity patterns (e.g. ds-DNA, Scl-70, centromere, SSA, SSB, cardiolipin, whole
histones, and RNP, all purchased from ImmunoVision; also from Stanford Autoimmune Diseases
Biobank, and OMRF); APS-1, IPEX, PAP, or AMI associated with anti-IFN-γ blocking antibodies; as
well as normal human sera (ImmunoVision, Product # HNP-0300, certified to be nonreactive to Hep-2
cell lysates at a titer of 1:100), were used for validation.

Array probing
Serum or plasma samples were first heat inactivated at 56°C for one hour59 then tested at 1:100
dilution in 0.05% PBS-Tween supplemented with 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) and
transferred into 96-well plates in a randomized layout. The bead array was distributed into a 384-well
plate (Greiner BioOne) by transfer of 5 µl bead array per well. 45 µl of the 1:100 diluted sera were
transferred into the 384-well plate containing the bead array. Samples were incubated for 60 min on a
shaker at room temperature. Beads were washed with 3 × 60 µl PBS-Tween on a plate washer
(EL406, Biotek) and 50 µl of 1:500 diluted R-phycoerythrin (R-PE) conjugated Fcγ-specific goat antihuman IgG F(ab')2 fragment (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was added to the 384-well plate for
detection of bound human IgG. After incubation with the secondary antibody for 30 min, the plate was

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

washed with 3 × 60 µl PBS-Tween and re-suspended in 60 µl PBS-Tween prior to analysis using a
FlexMap3DTM instrument (Luminex Corp.). A minimum of 100 events per bead ID were counted.
Binding events were displayed as Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI). To ensure reproducibility and
rigor, all samples were run in duplicate in each experiment. Most samples were analyzed twice using
the same array run on different days, showing high concordance (mean Pearson correlation
coefficient 0.94, standard deviation (SD) 0.09 for one representative dataset). Prototype autoimmune
sera were also heat inactivated and compared with untreated prototype autoimmune serum on the
same arrays, with similar results (data not shown).

Anti-dsDNA ELISA
Anti-DNA ELISA was performed on calf thymus DNA (Sigma)-coated Immobilon 96 well plates that
were then blocked with 1% BSA in PBS. Dilutions of patient and control plasmas in blocking buffer
were incubated in the DNA-coated 96 well plates, unbound Ig was washed off, and bound IgG was
measured with rabbit anti-human IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Millipore). Samples were
analyzed at dilutions of 1:30, 1:90, 1:270 and 1:810. Of these dilutions, 1:270 was chosen as optimal
for distinguishing background binding from positive staining. Samples from five healthy donors were
tested under the same conditions and an arbitrary cut-off of 2× the highest measured value at 1:270
(which was 0.390 arbitrary units) was used to distinguish positive from negative levels of binding.

Anti-Myeloperoxidase (MPO) and Anti-Proteinase 3 (PR3) ELISAs
MPO (Cat# 708705) or purified proteinase 3 PR3 (Cat # 708700) pre-bound to the wells of microtiter
plates were purchased from Inova Diagnostics (San Diego, CA).

Assays were performed as

recommended by the manufacturer using a dilution of 1:100 plasma in diluent (provided in the assay
kit). Assay controls included strong positive, weak positive and negative samples provided by the
vendor.

Additional controls included samples from five healthy donors and three de-identified

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

patients known to have clinically elevated PR3 and MPO antibody levels. Results were scored as
positive or negative based upon the kit instructions.

ANA and imaging
ANAs were performed by indirect immunofluorescence using fixed and permeabilized Hep-2 cells
affixed to glass slides (Inova Diagnostics, Cat # 708100).

ANAs were detected using a FITC-

conjugated goat anti-human IgG antibody following vendor instructions. Samples were screened in a
blinded fashion at a dilution of 1:80 with ultraviolet (UV) microscopy by clinical laboratory staff (A.G.
and J.G.) who have extensive experience in the interpretation of ANA patterns. Positive and weak
positive samples were tested further at 1:160 (the dilution at which ANAs are considered to be
positive in the clinical lab assay, which uses the same assay kit). In addition to the kit positive and
negative controls (which were included on every slide), de-identified clinical samples from patients
with known clinically detectable ANAs were used.

For ANA image analysis, all images were collected with a Nikon Eclipse Ti with widefield illumination
equipped with a Nikon Plan Apo VC 60× 1.4 oil objective. FITC and Evans Blue fluorescence images
were collected with a Chroma dichroic/beamsplitter (part no 89402) and a Chroma quadset
CoolLED300 light source, using FITC 480/30× excitation and 519/26m emission filters, as well as Cy5
640/30× excitation and 697/60m emission filters. Images were acquired with a Hamamatsu ORCAER B&W CCD Digital Camera controlled with Metamorph V7.10.3.390 software and 1×1 camera
binning. Multiple stage positions were collected using a Ludl XY linear encoded stage and Z
motor. Minimum and maximum pixel values all set to the same level on a 12-bit camera (4,096 gray
levels- FITC 500 min, 2500 max, and Cy5 300 min, 1300 max), gamma set to 1, with acquisition
times and light source intensities consistent for all images for comparison purposes.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Anti-SARS-CoV-2 ELISAs
RBD ELISAs were performed as described in a previous study60 with several modifications. SARSCoV-2 RBD proteins (gift of Scott Hensley) were coated on the ELISA plates (Cat # 1193A15,
Thomas Scientific, Swedesboro, NJ) at a final concentration of 2 μg/mL in 50 μl of 1× PBS. Serum
and plasma samples were diluted 1:100 in sample dilution buffer (PBS-Tween with 1% non-fat milk
powder by weight) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Goat anti-human IgG-HRP (Cat#
109-035-008, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA) was diluted 1:10,000 with
sample dilution buffer and 50 μl of secondary antibody was added to each well. After washing 3×
(PBS-Tween), plates were incubated for 0.5 hour at room temperature and washed again 3× (PBSTween). 50 μl of TMB substrate (Cat# 555214, Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) were applied for the
color development at room temperature for 10 mins and stopped with 50 μl of 250 mM hydrochloric
acid. All samples were run in duplicate. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Assays were run with a
commercially produced kit (Cat# CV3002, LifeSensors, Malvern, PA.) and performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Serum and plasma samples were diluted 1:100 and plates were read at
OD450 nm. The RBD and nucleocapsid ELISAs were repeated to confirm the results. ELISA plates
were read at OD450 nm (CLARIOStar plate reader, BMG LABTECH Inc., Cary, NC).

Statistical Analyses
All data analysis and statistics were performed using R and various R packages61. For normalization,
average MFI values for “bare bead” IDs were subtracted from average MFI values for antigen
conjugated bead IDs. The average MFI for each antigen was calculated using samples from healthy
subjects known to be uninfected with SARS-CoV-2 (all obtained before December 2019). Antibodies
were considered “positive” if MFI was > 5 SD above the average MFI for HC for that antigen, and MFI
34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

was >3,000 units, a threshold which is more stringent than commonly published in related literature21.
A less stringent 3 SD cutoff used in a Luminex assay to measure SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulins in
blood and saliva62 was also employed for comparison in some experiments. An example can be
found in Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4.

ELISA and antibody number data were visualized in

GraphPad Prism v.9.0.0 (86). Upon publication of this study in a peer-reviewed journal, deidentified
array data will be uploaded to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgements
Funding
A.E.P. was supported by a Stanford Maternal and Child Health Research Institute postdoctoral
fellowship.
A.F. was funded by Stanford University and the Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education’s (VPUE)
2019-2020 Major Grant.
A.N. was funded by AH 06-01 (Carreras Foundation).
C.S. was funded by Universities Giessen and Marburg Lung Center and the German Center for Lung
Research, University Hospital Gießen and Marburg (UKGM) research funding according to article 2,
section 3 cooperation agreement, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)–funded- SFB 1021
(C04), KFO 309 (P10) and SK 317/1-1 (Project number 428518790) as well as by the Foundation for
Pathobiochemistry and Molecular Diagnostics.
E.J.W. was supported by NIH grants AI105343, AI112521, AI082630, AI201085, AI123539, and
AI117950 to E.J.W. E.J.W. is also supported by the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy which
supports the cancer immunology program at UPenn.
E.L.P. was funded by NIH UC4 DK112217 and NIH UM1-AI144288 (Autoimmunity Centers of
Excellence, ACE). The ACE is a research network supported by the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease (NIAID/NIH).

We thank the Human Immunology Core, which assisted with

COVID-19 sample processing and ELISAs, and receives infrastructure support from NIH PA30CA016520 and NIH P30-AI0450080, and the Clinical Immunology Laboratory at the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania.
E.M. was funded by Stiftung P.E. Kempkes (06/2014, 01/2016), Deutsche José Carreras LeukämieStiftung (18R/2016), Rhön Klinikum AG (RKA No. 64).
H.G. was supported by T32 HL007586.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

H.R. was funded by the Universities Giessen Marburg Lung Center and the German Center for Lung
Disease (DZL German Lung Center, no. 82DZL00502) for UGMLC.
I.N. was supported by UTHSC/UofM SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 Research CORNET Award.
K.N. was supported by NIH Grant 5U19AI057229-17, and by philanthropic support from the Sean N
Parker Center COVID-19 Research Fund.
M.A. was funded by the Sean N Parker Center COVID-19 Research Fund.
M.R. was funded by UTHSC/UofM SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 Research CORNET Award.
N.J.M. was funded by NIH HL137006 and HL137915, which funded the enrollment, biosample
collection, and clinical phenotyping of human subjects at Penn.
P.J.U. was supported by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes
of Health, R01 AI125197-04, NIH U01 AI150741-01S1 and the Henry Gustav Floren Trust.
P.S.K. was supported by the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, and the Frank Quattrone and Denise
Foderaro Family Research Fund.
S.A.A. was supported by 1T32AR076951-01, Allen Institute for Immunology, and the Chen Family
Research Fund.
S.C. was supported by NIH grants UM2 AI130836, UM1 AI130839, and U19 AI104209.
T.T.W. was supported by Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, the Searle Scholars Program, Fast Grants, the
CEND COVID Catalyst Fund, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the
National Institutes of Health under award numbers R01 AI139119, U19 AI111825, and U54
CA260517.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Author Contributions
S.E.C., A.F., P.J.U., C.S, and E.T.L.P. designed experiments and array panels.
S.E.C. and S.D. performed antigen array, ACA, and viral array production, quality control, sample
runs, and data acquisition.
W.M., J.G., A.G., A.F., K.B. and E.T.L.P. performed and/or interpreted ANA assays.
W.M., I.N., M.R. and E.T.L.P. performed and/or interpreted ELISAs.
T.W., S.C., P.A.W., A.E.P, and P.S.K. generated key antigens, provided pre-characterized sera, and
assisted with data analysis and interpretation of viral array assays.
W.H.R. generated key reagents for the autoantigen arrays and supervised A.H.
M.G., S.G. collected and processed patient blood samples.
M.G., S.G., E.M., S.A., N.J.M., H.M.G., O.O. collected, extracted, and analyzed clinical data.
E.M., A.N., H.R., R.G., and S.C. assisted in designing, recruiting, and/or following inpatient and HC
cohorts.
J.S. provided pre-characterized COVID-19 samples Kaiser Permanente that were used to establish
the array platforms and to select autoantigens for the final array.
N.J.M., E.J.W. designed the inpatient and HC Penn cohorts and obtained funding.
H.M.G., O.O., N.J.M., S.A. screened and enrolled human subjects at Penn and collected biosamples.
M.A., N.A., and K.N. supervised clinical data management in the CROWN clinic and performed chart
reviews that enabled correlation of array results with clinical parameters.
L.B. and M.A. from the Stanford CROWN Research Team contributed to collection and storage of
patient samples, collection of patient laboratory and clinical data, and distribution of blood samples.
P.J. and U.S. provided and characterized blood samples from an interferon lambda trial in patients
with mild COVID-19 that were used to establish assays and compare with results from hospitalized
patients.
S.E.C., A.F., S.D., S.A., W.M., H-R.C., A.K., P.C., A.H., W.H.R., C.S., E.T.L.P. and P.J.U. analyzed
and interpreted array data.
38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

S.E.C., A.F., S.D., S.A., W.M., C.S., E.T.L.P. and P.J.U. created figures and tables.
S.E.C., A.F., R.M., C.S., E.T.L.P., and P.J.U. wrote the paper.
P.J.U., C.S, E.T.L.P., E.J.W., and K.N. supervised the research.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
C.S. received consultancy fees and research funding from Hycor Biomedical and Thermo Fisher
Scientific, research funding from Mead Johnson Nutrition (MJN), and consultancy fees from Bencard
Allergie.
E.J.W. has consulting agreements with and/or is on the scientific advisory board for Merck, Elstar,
Janssen, Related Sciences, Synthekine and Surface Oncology. E.J.W. is a founder of Surface
Oncology and Arsenal Biosciences. E.J.W. has a patent licensing agreement on the PD-1 pathway
with Roche/Genentech.
E.M. received consultancy fees from Roche.
E.T.L.P. receives research funding from Janssen Research and Development, consultancy fees and
research funding from Roche Diagnostics, is a paid consultant for Enpicom and serves on the
scientific advisory board of the Antibody Society.
N.J.M. reports funding to her institution from Athersys Inc, Biomarck Inc, and Quantum Leap
Healthcare Collaborative, outside of the funded work.
S.C. reports grants from NIAID, CoFAR, Aimmune, DBV Technologies, Astellas, Regeneron, FARE,
and is an Advisory Board member for Alladapt, Genentech, Novartis, Sanofi, and received personal
fees from Nutricia.

All remaining authors report no conflicts of interest with the research reported in this manuscript.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In addition to funding sources, the authors would like to acknowledge Sharon Dickow for expert
administrative support; patients and their families who participated in the research and provided
samples for our studies; the many nurses, physicians, respiratory therapists, advance practice
providers and countless staff who cared for these patients; Alan Landay (Rush University Medical
Center) for insights into COVID-19 biology and feedback on assays; Titilola Falasinnu, Julia Simard,
Lisa Zaba, Matt Baker, Yvonne Maldonado, Scott Boyd, and Lori Chung for helpful discussions;
Jennifer Okwara for assistance with ANA indirect immunofluorescence image analysis; and Scott
Hensley for providing the RBD antigen for the ELISA.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References:
1

Guan, W. J. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J Med
382, 1708-1720, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 (2020).

2

Chen, N. et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 395, 507-513,
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30211-7 (2020).

3

Machhi, J. et al. The Natural History, Pathobiology, and Clinical Manifestations of SARS-CoV-2
Infections. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 15, 359-386, doi:10.1007/s11481-020-09944-5 (2020).

4

Asfuroglu Kalkan, E. & Ates, I. A case of subacute thyroiditis associated with Covid-19
infection. J Endocrinol Invest 43, 1173-1174, doi:10.1007/s40618-020-01316-3 (2020).

5

Brancatella, A. et al. Subacute Thyroiditis After Sars-COV-2 Infection. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
105, doi:10.1210/clinem/dgaa276 (2020).

6

Carfi, A., Bernabei, R., Landi, F. & Gemelli Against, C.-P.-A. C. S. G. Persistent Symptoms in
Patients After Acute COVID-19. JAMA, doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12603 (2020).

7

Patel, S. Y. et al. Anti-IFN-gamma autoantibodies in disseminated nontuberculous
mycobacterial infections. J Immunol 175, 4769-4776, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.175.7.4769 (2005).

8

Woodruff, M. et al. Critically ill SARS-CoV-2 patients display lupus-like hallmarks of
extrafollicular B cell activation. medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.04.29.20083717 (2020).

9

Woodruff, M. C., Ramonell, R. P., Lee, F. E. & Sanz, I. Broadly-targeted autoreactivity is
common in severe SARS-CoV-2 Infection. medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.10.21.20216192
(2020).

10

Zuo, Y. et al. Prothrombotic autoantibodies in serum from patients hospitalized with COVID-19.
Sci Transl Med, doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abd3876 (2020).

11

Gruber, C. N. et al. Mapping Systemic Inflammation and Antibody Responses in Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C). Cell, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.034 (2020).

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

12

Fujii, H. et al. High levels of anti-SSA/Ro antibodies in COVID-19 patients with severe
respiratory failure: a case-based review : High levels of anti-SSA/Ro antibodies in COVID-19.
Clin Rheumatol 39, 3171-3175, doi:10.1007/s10067-020-05359-y (2020).

13

James, J. A. in Workshop on Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19.

14

Barnes, B. J. et al. Targeting potential drivers of COVID-19: Neutrophil extracellular traps. J
Exp Med 217, doi:10.1084/jem.20200652 (2020).

15

Tomar, B., Anders, H. J., Desai, J. & Mulay, S. R. Neutrophils and Neutrophil Extracellular
Traps Drive Necroinflammation in COVID-19. Cells 9, doi:10.3390/cells9061383 (2020).

16

Zuo, Y. et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) as markers of disease severity in COVID19. medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.04.09.20059626 (2020).

17

Wang, E. Y. et al. Diverse Functional Autoantibodies in Patients with COVID-19. medRxiv,
2020.2012.2010.20247205, doi:10.1101/2020.12.10.20247205 (2020).

18

Price, J. V. et al. Protein microarray analysis reveals BAFF-binding autoantibodies in systemic
lupus erythematosus. J Clin Invest 123, 5135-5145, doi:10.1172/JCI70231 (2013).

19

Rosenberg, J. M. et al. Neutralizing Anti-Cytokine Autoantibodies Against Interferon-α in
Immunodysregulation Polyendocrinopathy Enteropathy X-Linked. Frontiers in Immunology 9,
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00544 (2018).

20

Ayoglu B, D. M., Crofford L, Furst D, Goldmuntz EA, Keyes-Elstein L, Mayes M, McSweeney
P, Nash R, Sullivan KM, Welch B, Pinckney A, Mao R, Chung L, Khatri P, Utz PJ. Identification
of unique autoantibody profiles in systemic sclerosis following hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Sci Transl Med (2020).

21

Bastard, P. et al. Auto-antibodies against type I IFNs in patients with life-threatening COVID19. Science, doi:10.1126/science.abd4585 (2020).

22

Price, J. V. et al. Characterization of influenza vaccine immunogenicity using influenza antigen
microarrays. PLoS One 8, e64555, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064555 (2013).

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

23

Neuman de Vegvar, H. E. et al. Microarray profiling of antibody responses against simianhuman immunodeficiency virus: postchallenge convergence of reactivities independent of host
histocompatibility

type

and

vaccine

regimen.

J

Virol

77,

11125-11138,

doi:10.1128/jvi.77.20.11125-11138.2003 (2003).
24

Röltgen, K. et al. Defining the features and duration of antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2
infection associated with disease severity and outcome. Science Immunology 5, eabe0240,
doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abe0240 (2020).

25

Vlachoyiannopoulos, P. G. et al. Autoantibodies related to systemic autoimmune rheumatic
diseases in severely ill patients with COVID-19. Ann Rheum Dis, doi:10.1136/annrheumdis2020-218009 (2020).

26

Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe
COVID-19 patients. Science 369, 718-724, doi:10.1126/science.abc6027 (2020).

27

Galani, I.-E. et al. Untuned antiviral immunity in COVID-19 revealed by temporal type I/III
interferon patterns and flu comparison. Nature Immunology 22, 32-40, doi:10.1038/s41590020-00840-x (2021).

28

Courtney, L. P., Phelps, J. L. & Karavodin, L. M. An anti-IL-2 antibody increases serum halflife
and improves anti-tumor efficacy of human recombinant interleukin-2. Immunopharmacology
28, 223-232, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3109(94)90058-2 (1994).

29

Sato, J. et al. Enhancement of anti-tumor activity of recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) by
immunocomplexing with a monoclonal antibody against rIL-2. Biotherapy 6, 225-231,
doi:10.1007/BF01878084 (1993).

30

Ayoglu B, D. M., Crofford L, Furst D, Goldmuntz EA, Keyes-Elstein L, Mayes M, McSweeney
P, Nash R, Sullivan KM, Welch B, Pinckney A, Mao R, Chung L, Khatri P, Utz PJ. Multiplexed
Autoantibody Profiles in a Systemic Sclerosis Clinical Trial Comparing Autologous
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation and Cyclophosphamide [abstract]. Arthritis
Rheumatol 70 (2018).
44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

31

Rosenberg, J. M. & Utz, P. J. Protein microarrays: a new tool for the study of autoantibodies in
immunodeficiency. Front Immunol 6, 138, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2015.00138 (2015).

32

Gupta, S., Nakabo, S., Chu, J., Hasni, S. & Kaplan, M. J. Association between anti-interferonalpha

autoantibodies

and

COVID-19

in

systemic

lupus

erythematosus.

medRxiv,

2020.2010.2029.20222000, doi:10.1101/2020.10.29.20222000 (2020).
33

Chakraborty, S. et al. Proinflammatory IgG Fc structures in patients with severe COVID-19.
Nature Immunology 22, 67-73, doi:10.1038/s41590-020-00828-7 (2021).

34

Zuo,

Y.

et

al.

Neutrophil

extracellular

traps

in

COVID-19.

JCI

Insight

5,

doi:10.1172/jci.insight.138999 (2020).
35

Nakazawa, D., Masuda, S., Tomaru, U. & Ishizu, A. Pathogenesis and therapeutic
interventions

for

ANCA-associated

vasculitis.

Nat

Rev

Rheumatol

15,

91-101,

doi:10.1038/s41584-018-0145-y (2019).
36

Narasaraju, T. et al. Neutrophilia and NETopathy as Key Pathologic Drivers of Progressive
Lung

Impairment

in

Patients

With

COVID-19.

Frontiers

in

Pharmacology

11,

doi:10.3389/fphar.2020.00870 (2020).
37

Magro, C. et al. Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the
pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 infection: A report of five cases. Transl Res 220, 1-13,
doi:10.1016/j.trsl.2020.04.007 (2020).

38

Magro, C. et al. Docket SARS CoV-2 Proteins with Cutaneous and Subcutaneous
Microvasculature and their Role in the Pathogenesis of Severe COVID-10. British Journal of
Dermatology (In press.).

39

Casciola-Rosen, L. et al. IgM autoantibodies recognizing ACE2 are associated with severe
COVID-19. medRxiv, 2020.2010.2013.20211664, doi:10.1101/2020.10.13.20211664 (2020).

40

Takahashi, Y., Haga, S., Ishizaka, Y. & Mimori, A. Autoantibodies to angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 in patients with connective tissue diseases. Arthritis Res Ther 12, R85,
doi:10.1186/ar3012 (2010).
45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

41

Woodruff, M. C. et al. Extrafollicular B cell responses correlate with neutralizing antibodies and
morbidity in COVID-19. Nat Immunol 21, 1506-1516, doi:10.1038/s41590-020-00814-z (2020).

42

Kaneko, N. et al. The Loss of Bcl-6 Expressing T Follicular Helper Cells and the Absence of
Germinal Centers in COVID-19. Ssrn, 3652322, doi:10.2139/ssrn.3652322 (2020).

43

Kuri-Cervantes, L. et al. Comprehensive mapping of immune perturbations associated with
severe COVID-19. Science Immunology 5, eabd7114, doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abd7114
(2020).

44

Nielsen, S. C. A. et al. B cell clonal expansion and convergent antibody responses to SARSCoV-2. Res Sq, doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-27220/v1 (2020).

45

Wardemann, H. et al. Predominant autoantibody production by early human B cell precursors.
Science 301, 1374-1377, doi:10.1126/science.1086907 (2003).

46

Davis, C. W. et al. Longitudinal Analysis of the Human B Cell Response to Ebola Virus
Infection. Cell 177, 1566-1582.e1517, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.036 (2019).

47

Di Niro, R. et al. Salmonella Infection Drives Promiscuous B Cell Activation Followed by
Extrafollicular Affinity Maturation. Immunity 43, 120-131, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.013
(2015).

48

Jenks, S. A. et al. Distinct Effector B Cells Induced by Unregulated Toll-like Receptor 7
Contribute to Pathogenic Responses in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Immunity 49, 725739.e726, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2018.08.015 (2018).

49

Lau , C. M. et al. RNA-associated autoantigens activate B cells by combined B cell antigen
receptor/Toll-like receptor 7 engagement. Journal of Experimental Medicine 202, 1171-1177,
doi:10.1084/jem.20050630 (2005).

50

Marshak-Rothstein, A. & Rifkin, I. R. Immunologically active autoantigens: the role of toll-like
receptors in the development of chronic inflammatory disease. Annu Rev Immunol 25, 419441, doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.22.012703.104514 (2007).

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

51

Fujinami, R. S., von Herrath, M. G., Christen, U. & Whitton, J. L. Molecular mimicry, bystander
activation, or viral persistence: infections and autoimmune disease. Clin Microbiol Rev 19, 8094, doi:10.1128/cmr.19.1.80-94.2006 (2006).

52

Fujinami, R. S. & Oldstone, M. B. Amino acid homology between the encephalitogenic site of
myelin basic protein and virus: mechanism for autoimmunity. Science 230, 1043-1045,
doi:10.1126/science.2414848 (1985).

53

Degn, S. E. et al. Clonal Evolution of Autoreactive Germinal Centers. Cell 170, 913-926.e919,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.026 (2017).

54

Sng, J. et al. AIRE expression controls the peripheral selection of autoreactive B cells. Sci
Immunol 4, doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.aav6778 (2019).

55

Ayoglu, B. et al. Anoctamin 2 identified as an autoimmune target in multiple sclerosis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 113, 2188-2193, doi:10.1073/pnas.1518553113 (2016).

56

Walter, J. E. et al. Broad-spectrum antibodies against self-antigens and cytokines in RAG
deficiency. J Clin Invest 126, 4389, doi:10.1172/JCI91162 (2016).

57

Furman, D. et al. Apoptosis and other immune biomarkers predict influenza vaccine
responsiveness. Mol Syst Biol 9, 659, doi:10.1038/msb.2013.15 (2013).

58

Ayoglu, B. et al. Anoctamin 2 identified as an autoimmune target in multiple sclerosis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 2188-2193 (2016).

59

Amanat, F. et al. A serological assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 seroconversion in humans.
Nature Medicine 26, 1033-1036, doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0913-5 (2020).

60

Kuri-Cervantes, L. et al. Immunologic perturbations in severe COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2
infection. bioRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.05.18.101717 (2020).

61

Team, R. C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. (2013).

62

Randad, P. R. et al. COVID-19 serology at population scale: SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody
responses in saliva. medRxiv (2020).
47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends

Fig. 1: High prevalence of autoantibodies in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. a. Heatmap
depicting serum IgG antibodies discovered using a 53-plex bead-based protein array containing the
indicated autoantigens (x-axis). Autoantigens are grouped based on disease (scleroderma, myositis
and overlap syndromes such as mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), SLE/Sjögren’s,
gastrointestinal and endocrine disorders), DNA-associated antigens, and antigens associated with
tissue inflammation or stress responses. COVID-19 patients (top panel), HC (n=31, middle panel),
and 8 prototype autoimmune disorders (bottom panel) are shown. Colors indicate autoantibodies
whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red) or <5 SD (black) above the average MFI for HC. MFIs
<3,000 were excluded. b. Heatmap using a 41-plex array of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors,
and receptors. The same samples in Panel A were also analyzed for anti-cytokine antibodies (ACA).
Cytokines are grouped on the x-axis by category (interferons, interleukins, and other cytokines/growth
factors/receptors). Prototype samples from patients with immunodeficiency disorders include three
patients with Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 (APS1), one patient with Pulmonary
Alveolar Proteinosis (PAP), and three patients with Atypical Mycobacterial Infections (AMI). Colors
indicate autoantibodies whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red) or < 5 SD (black) above the
average MFI for HC. MFIs <3,000 were excluded.

Fig. 2: Serum autoantibodies in COVID-19 patients recognize antigens targeted in rare
connective tissue diseases, and antigens associated with pathogenicity. Bar plots of twelve
antigens corresponding to Figure 1.

a. Antigens associated with autoimmune myositis and

myocarditis (MDA5, troponin 1, MYH6 (alpha-myosin), PL-7, Jo-1, and Mi-2). b. RNA-containing
antigens associated with systemic sclerosis (RPP25 Th/To, Fibrillarin, and U11/U12). c. Antigens that
may be pathogenic (C1q and β2GP1) and associated with vasculitis (BPI). MFI are shown on the y48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

axis. Subjects are shown on x-axis (COVID-19 patients, HC, and Prototype Autoimmune). Average
MFI for HC, 3 SD above the average MFI for HC, and 5 SD above the average MFI for HC are shown
with orange lines. Error bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

Fig. 3: Autoantibodies are triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection. a. Autoantibody (AutoAb, blue)
and anti-cytokine antibody (ACA, yellow) counts are shown at Day 0 (n=24 patients, left) and Day 7
(n=21 patients, right). Counts were based on antibodies that were present at levels at or exceeding 5
SD above the average MFI for healthy control samples. b. Examples of transient or fluctuating
autoantibodies against MDA5, the tRNA synthetase PL-7, and the vasculitis antigen BPI are shown.
c. Examples of antigens (Scl-70, TPO, and C1q) that are likely to have been present at the time of
infection and are unaffected by SARS-CoV-2 infection, are shown. d. Examples of ACA that are
inducible (e.g., IFN-ε), fluctuate (e.g., IFN-ω), or are present at baseline with little change over time
(e.g., IFN-γ), are shown. Additional examples (IL-17, IL-22, and ACE-2) are also included. MFI are
shown on the y-axis. Subjects are shown on the x-axis (COVID-19 patients, HC, and Prototype
Autoimmune). Red boxes signify autoantibodies that increase over time. Green boxes signify
autoantibodies that decrease over time or are transient (e.g., anti-PL-7, subject UP70). Blue boxes
signify antibodies that are elevated at baseline and remain relatively unchanged over time. Average
MFI for HC, 3 SD above average MFI for HC, and 5 SD above the average MFI for HC are shown
with orange lines. Error bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

Fig. 4: Measurement of anti-viral IgG responses using a COVID-19 viral array. a. Heatmap
depicting IgG antibodies using a 28-plex bead-based protein array. Viral protein antigens are grouped
based on sixteen proteins from SARS-CoV-2 (left panel), other coronaviruses (middle panel) and
other viruses (right panel), labelled on the x-axis. Most recombinant viral proteins were engineered to
include a 6X-His-tag, which was used to validate conjugation to beads using an anti-epitope
monoclonal antibody (bottom of panel). The same COVID-19 patients from Figure 3 (see
49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 6) were analyzed (top panel, n=94 longitudinal COVID-19 samples, including
paired samples from 44 subjects and 2 subjects who had 3 available timepoints each, subjects UP70
and UP71). HC (n=16, middle panel).

Two patient sample pairs (UP63 and UMR20) and were

excluded from analysis due to technical failure on the viral array assay. Colors correspond to the MFI
values shown at right. b. Heatmap depicting statistically significant anti-viral IgG responses. Colors
indicate IgG antibodies whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red) or <5 SD (black) above the
average MFI for HC samples collected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Fig. 5: New-onset autoantibodies correlate with anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG responses over time in
recently infected patients who developed COVID-19. Twelve patients were identified who had low
or absent anti-SARS-CoV-2 RBD or spike S1 protein responses at baseline and who went on to
develop high MFI IgG SARS-CoV-2 antibodies at the next available time point. Autoantigen data (a)
and ACA data (b) from Supplementary Figure 6 (using 5 SD and MFI >3,000 cutoffs) for these 12
patients and HC has been combined with anti-viral heatmap data from Figure 4 (c). Multiple new
autoantibodies are depicted with white boxes. Antigens are shown on the x-axis. Patients and HC are
shown on the y-axis. Colors for viral IgG levels correspond to the MFI values shown at far right. d.
Line graph comparing MFI for IgG antibodies against four viral proteins at Early (D0) and Late (D7)
time points for the same 12 patients in Panels A-C. e. Bar graph comparing MFI for IgG
autoantibodies against eight autoantigens or cytokines at Early (D0) and Late (D7) time points for the
same 12 patients in Panels A-D. Error bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample
replicates.

50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE LEGENDS

Supplementary Fig. 1: Anti-Nuclear Antibody (ANA) staining in University of Pennsylvania
COVID-19 patient cohort. a. IgG ANA indirect immunofluorescence results at a screening titer of
1:80, with positives confirmed at 1:160. Pie chart shows patient numbers (n=73 total), color coded by
strength of staining and pattern. b. Analysis of ANA data in paired samples obtained on 21 patients
showing the number of patients whose ANAs change over time. d. Images of positive ANAs from
individual subjects, showing diffuse (left), nucleolar (middle) and speckled (right) staining patterns. Of
note, UP01 was also weakly positive for dsDNA antibodies.

Supplementary Fig. 2: IgG ELISAs of virus and autoantigen-binding. Binding of IgG antibodies to
SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD), nucleocapsid, and autoantigens (double stranded DNA
(dsDNA), myeloperoxidase (MPO) and proteinase 3 (PR3)).

Each symbol represents a patient

(N=73). For subjects in which there were two or more time points, the D7 time point was chosen
except for subject UP68, in whom the D14 time point was chosen. UP01 had a weakly positive
dsDNA result. UP43 was positive for PR3.

Supplementary Figures related to Figure 1.

Supplementary Fig. 3: Heatmap of MFI corresponding to Figure 1.

Supplementary Fig. 4: Validation in Kaiser Permanente cohort. Standard deviation heatmap
depicting serum IgG antibodies discovered using a first generation 26-plex bead-based protein array
containing the indicated autoantigens (y-axis). Autoantigens are grouped based on disease
(scleroderma, SLE/Sjögren’s, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)/thyroid, nucleosomes, and antigens
associated with tissue inflammation. COVID-19 patients from Kaiser Permanente (left panel, n=48).
51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

HC (n=10, middle panel), and 7 prototype autoimmune disorders (right panel) are shown. Colors
indicate autoantibodies whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red), <5 or >3 SD (pink) or <3 SD
(black) above the average MFI for HC. MFIs <5,000 were excluded.

Supplementary Figures related to Fig. 3:

Supplementary Fig. 5: Evolution of IgG autoantibody development over time in hospitalized
COVID-19 patients. a. Heatmap using the same 53-plex bead-based protein array presented in
Figure 1, containing the indicated autoantigens (x-axis). Autoantigens are grouped based on disease
(scleroderma, myositis and overlap syndromes such as MCTD, SLE/Sjögren’s, gastrointestinal and
endocrine disorders), DNA-associated antigens, and antigens associated with tissue inflammation or
stress responses. COVID-19 patients (top panel, n=98 longitudinal COVID-19 samples, including 92
paired samples from 46 subjects and two subjects who had three available timepoints each, subject
UP70 and UP71). HC (n=16, middle panel), and 8 prototype autoimmune disorders (bottom panel)
are shown. b. Heatmap using a 41-plex array of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and
receptors. The same samples in Panel A were also analyzed for ACA. Cytokines are grouped on the
x-axis by category (interferons, interleukins, and other cytokines/growth factors/receptors). Prototype
samples from patients with immunodeficiency disorders include three patients with APS1, one patient
with PAP, and three patients with AMI. Colors correspond to the MFI values shown at far right.

Supplementary Fig. 6: Standard deviation heatmap of MFI corresponding to Figure 3.

Supplementary Fig. 7: Number of antibodies in 21 subjects with paired D0 and D7 time point
data, stratified by reactivity category. a. Heatmap of individual subjects. Rows denote subjects
and time points in days (day 0, D0 and day 7, D7). Columns denote Autoantibodies (AutoAb) and
52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Anti-Cytokine Antibodies (ACA).

Antibodies are above 5 standard deviations compared to pooled

healthy controls (5 SD) or between 3 and 5 standard deviations (3 SD). White cells indicate 0
antibodies. b. Antibody counts at D0 and D7 stratified by antibody category. Autoantibody (AutoAb,
blue) and anti-cytokine antibody (ACA, yellow) counts are shown for the same 21 subjects at Day 0,
(left) and Day 7 (right). Counts were based on antibodies that were present at levels between 3 and
5 SD above the average MFI for healthy control samples. c.

Antibodies per subject shown for

different antibody level cut-offs. 5 SD = > 5 SD above the average MFI for the HC group; 3 SD = >3
and <5 SD above the average MFI for HC; In SUM, the 5 and 3 SD data were separately added for
each individual. This category represents all antibodies detected at 3 SD or higher. AutoAb =
autoantibodies; ACA = anti-cytokine antibodies. Horizontal red lines indicate medians. Each symbol
represents a subject. P values are computed using the Wilcoxon paired rank sum test. Only D7
AutoAb vs. D7 ACA were significant (p<0.05) for the 3 SD and SUM antibody levels.

Supplementary Figures related to Figs. 4 and 5:

Supplementary Fig. 8: Comparison between ELISA and bead-based assays. a and b.
Correlation analysis between ELISA and multiplex bead data. All samples (including multiple time
points from individual subjects) were included in the correlation analysis (N=57 samples from 35
individuals). Each symbol represents a sample with the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) vs. the
optical density (OD). Spearman correlations were computed with two-tailed p-values. c and d. Two
representative line plots for 21 patients with paired samples at D0 and D7. IgG antibodies increased
over time for RBD (p=0.042, Wilcoxon rank sum test) but did not change over time for Nucleocapsid
(p=0.73, NS, Wilcoxon rank sum test).

53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 9: MFI bar plots for individual autoantigens and viral antigens for the four
patients with one or more newly triggered autoantibodies, corresponding to Figure 5. Error
bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES
Supplementary Table 1. “COVID-19 Autoantigen Array” content.
Autoantigen Array
Bead
ID

Antigen

1

Bare Bead

2

Human IgG from serum
Anti-Human

IgG

Fc

Vendor

Catalog #

Sigma

I4506

fragment

3

Specific

Jackson

109-005-008

4

Anti-Human IgG (H+L)

Jackson

109-005-003

Anti-Human IgG F(ab') fragment
5

specific

Jackson

109-005-006

6

Beta 2 Glycoprotein 1

Diarect

A14901

7

Myeloperoxidase

Diarect

A18501

8

La/SSB

Diarect

A12801

9

Ro52

Diarect

A12701

10

Proteinase 3

Diarect

A18601

11

Histone 1

Immunovision HIS-1001

12

Histone 2A and 4

Immunovision HIS-1002

13

Histone 2B

Immunovision HIS-1003

14

CENP B

Diarect

15

Histone 3

Immunovision HIS-1004

16

Histones

Immunovision HIS-1000

17

GBM

Diarect

A16801

18

C1q

Biodesign

A90150H

55

A12501

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19

BPI

Arotec

ATB01-02

24

Fibrillarin

Prospec

ENZ-566

31

U11/U12

Origene

TP303746

38

CENP A

Diarect

A16901

39

EJ

Diarect

A11101

40

HSP 70

Stressgen

NSP-555

41

HSP 90

Stressgen

SPP-770

42

Intrinsic Factor

Diarect

A16701

43

JO1

Diarect

A12901

44

Ku, p70/p80

Diarect

A17301

45

LKM1

Diarect

A13501

46

MDA5

Diarect

A30001

47

MI-2

Diarect

A18101

48

PCNA

Diarect

A15401

49

PL-12

Diarect

A15701

50

PL-7

Diarect

A15601

51

PM/Scl-75

Diarect

A17001

52

Nucleolin

Diarect

A19701

53

Ribo P0

Diarect

A14101

54

Ribo P1

Diarect

A14201

55

PDC-E2

Diarect

A17901

56

Ribo P2

Diarect

A14301

57

SRP54

Diarect

A18401

58

PM/Scl-100

Diarect

A16001

59

POLR3H

Origene

TP310633

56

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

60

PDH

Sigma

P7032

62

Ro60

Diarect

A17401

63

RPP14 (Th/To)

Origene

TP760291

65

Scl-70

Diarect

A12401

67

Sm/RNP

Immunovision SRC-3000

68

Smith

Immunovision SMA-3000

70

Troponin I

Prospec

PRO-1269

73

TG

Diarect

A12201

74

GNAL

Abnova

H00002774-P01

75

MYH6

Origene

TP313673

76

TPO

Diarect

A12101

77

ZnT8

78

U1-snRNP 68

Diarect

A13001

79

U1-snRNP A

Diarect

A13101

83

RPP25 (Th/To)

Origene

TP303538

57

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 2. “COVID-19 Cytokine Array” content.
Cytokine/Chemokine Array
Bead
ID

Antigen

1

Bare Bead

2

Human IgG from serum
Anti-Human

IgG

Fc

Vendor

Catalog #

Sigma

I4506

fragment

3

Specific

Jackson

109-005-008

4

Anti-Human IgG (H+L)

Jackson

109-005-003

Anti-Human IgG F(ab') fragment
5

specific

Jackson

109-005-006

6

CD74

Prospec

PRO-1467

7

IFN-lambda2

Peprotech

300-02K

8

IL-1alpha

Prospec

CYT-253

10

ITM2B

Elabscience

PKSH032599

26

IL-31

Prospec

CYT-625

27

IL-6

Prospec

CYT-098

29

OSM

Peprotech

300-10

30

IL-11

Prospec

CYT-214

32

IL-27

Prospec

CYT-048

33

CNTF

Prospec

CYT-272

34

CT-2

Prospec

PRO-1578

35

LIF

Peprotech

300-05

36

VEGFB

Peprotech

100-20B

37

HTRA1

R&D

2916-SE-020

58

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

38

GM-CSF

Peprotech

300-03

39

IFN-alpha2

R&D

11101-2

40

IFN-beta

Peprotech

300-02BC

41

IFN-gamma

Peprotech

300-02

42

IFN-epsilon

R&D

9667-ME-025/CF

43

IFN-lambda1

Peprotech

300-02L

44

IFN-lambda3

R&D

5259-IL-025/CF

45

IFN-omega

R&D

11395-1

46

IL-10

Peprotech

200-10

47

IL-12p40

Peprotech

200-12P40

48

IL-12p70

Peprotech

200-12

49

IL-15

Peprotech

200-15

50

IL-17F

Peprotech

200-25

51

IL-1beta

Peprotech

200-01B

52

IL-22

Peprotech

200-22

55

TNF-alpha

Peprotech

300-01A

56

TNF-beta

Peprotech

300-01B

Sino
58

ACE2

Biological

10108-H05H

59

Eotaxin

Peprotech

300-21

60

Eotaxin 2

Peprotech

300-33

62

IL-17A

Peprotech

200-17

63

IL-33

Peprotech

200-33

64

IL-7

Peprotech

200-07

65

MIP-1alpha

Peprotech

300-08

59

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

67

PDGFBB

Peprotech

100-14B

68

sRANK-ligand

Peprotech

310-01C

69

TIFI-gamma

Diarect

A11001

60

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 3. “COVID-19 Viral Array” content.
Viral Array
Bead
ID

Antigen

1

Bare Bead

2

Human IgG from serum
Anti-Human

Vendor/Source Catalog #

IgG

Fc

Sigma

I4506

fragment

3

Specific

Jackson

109-005-008

4

Anti-Human IgG (H+L)

Jackson

109-005-003

109-005-006

Anti-Human IgG F(ab') fragment
5

specific

Jackson

9

SARS2-FL-GCN4

Peter Kim Lab

16

SARS1 RBD

Peter Kim Lab

20

MERS RBD

Peter Kim Lab

24

OC43 RBD

Peter Kim Lab

25

229E-FL-GCN4

Peter Kim Lab

31

NL63 RBD

Peter Kim Lab

35

HKU1 RBD

Peter Kim Lab

36

A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) HA

Peter Kim Lab

37

Ebola glycoprotein (Ebola GP)

Peter Kim Lab

56

SARS2 RBD (TW)

Taia Wang Lab

57

Spike S1 (TW)

Taia Wang Lab

58

M (TW)

Taia Wang Lab

59

N (TW)

Taia Wang Lab

70

HBSAg

MyBioSource
61

MBS142509

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

71

Mumps

Prospec

MMP-001

72

Rubella

Prospec

RUB-291

73

Rubeola

MyBioSource

MBS319759

74

NSP8

ProSci

97-097

75

Spike S2

ProSci

10-115

76

Orf 3a

ProSci

10-005

77

Orf 8

ProSci

10-002

78

3C like Proteinase

ProSci

10-116

79

NSP 1

ProSci

97-095

80

NSP 7

ProSci

97-096

81

Envelope

ProSci

10-112

82

ME

Sino Biological

40598-V07E

83

NSP9

Sino Biological

40619-V40E

92

Plpro

Sino Biological

40593-V07E

62

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 4. Marburg University patient cohort clinical characteristics.

Age [Median (IQR)]
Sex [Percent; (N)]
female
male
BMI [Median (IQR)]
Comorbidities [Percent; (N)]
diabetes
obesity
chronic cardiac disease
coronary heart disease
arterial occlusive disease
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
asthma
renal insufficiency
rheumatic disorders
neurological neuromuscular disorders
oncological diseases
other immunosuppression
Days since start of symptoms
Days since COVID19 diagnosis† [Median (IQR)]
Duration of hospital stay [Median; IQR]
NIH Severity score
moderate/severe
critical
Mortality
Intensive Care Unit
Mechanical ventilation
Supplemental oxygen
Therapy [Percent; (N)]
antibiotics
antivirals
antimycotics
dialysis
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Inflammatory Biomarkers‡ [Median (IQR)]
CRP [mg/L]
IL-6 [pg/ml]
complement consumption
C3 [g/L]
C4 [g/L]
CH50 [U/ml]
AH50 [%]
†
days since COVID19 diagnosis until first time point
‡
first measurement during hospital stay

63

Marburg (N = 18)
66.50 (62.25-74.50)
17% (3)
83% (15)
28.00 (26.17-33.35)
33% (6)
44% (8)
39% (7)
17% (3)
0% (0)
0% (0)
6% (1)
11% (2)
6% (1)
39% (7)
22% (4)
22% (4)
ND
9.50 (6.00-15.50)
29.00; 21.50-39.75
33% (6)
61% (11)
28% (5)
78% (14)
83% (15)
33% (6)
89% (16)
28% (5)
11% (2)
33% (6)
6% (1)
95.20 (47.95-145.68)
95.50 (37.50-126.00)
1.40 (1.19-1.47)
0.36 (0.31-0.57)
48.00 (43.50-57.75)
108.00 (102.20-109.00)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 5. University of Pennsylvania patient cohort clinical characteristics.
UPenn (N = 81)
Age [Median (IQR)]
Sex [Percent; (N)]
female
male
NIH Disease Severity score
day 0 (mean, range)
day 14 (mean, range)
Mortality [Percent; (N)]
Thrombotic complications [Percent; (N)]
Comorbidities
Obesity
T2DM
Hyperlipidemia
Chronic kidney disease

57.5 (34.5-80.5)
45% (36)
55% (45)
3 (2-5)
4 (1-7)
21% (17)
32% (26)
41% (34)
40% (33)
48% (39)
17% (14)

64

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 6. Stanford patient cohort clinical characteristics.

Age [Median (IQR)]
Sex [Percent; (N)]
female
male
Days since COVID19 diagnosis† [Median (IQR)]
NIH Severity score
moderate/severe
critical
†
days since COVID19 diagnosis until first time point

65

Stanford (N = 10)
44 (28-67)
60% (6)
40% (4)
36 (8-56)
80% (8)
20% (2)

b

Prototype
Autoimmune

Healthy Control

COVID-19

a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

< 5 SD

> 5 SD

Fig. 1: High prevalence of autoantibodies in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. a.
Heatmap depicting serum IgG antibodies discovered using a 53-plex bead-based protein
array containing the indicated autoantigens (x-axis). Autoantigens are grouped based on
disease (scleroderma, myositis and overlap syndromes such as mixed connective tissue
disease (MCTD), SLE/Sjögren’s, gastrointestinal and endocrine disorders), DNA-associated

antigens, and antigens associated with tissue inflammation or stress responses. COVID-19
patients (top panel), HC (n=31, middle panel), and 8 prototype autoimmune disorders
(bottom panel) are shown. Colors indicate autoantibodies whose MFI measurements are >5
SD (red) or <5 SD (black) above the average MFI for HC. MFIs <3,000 were excluded. b.
Heatmap using a 41-plex array of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and receptors. The
same samples in Panel A were also analyzed for anti-cytokine antibodies (ACA). Cytokines
are grouped on the x-axis by category (interferons, interleukins, and other cytokines/growth
factors/receptors). Prototype samples from patients with immunodeficiency disorders include
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

three patients with Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 (APS1), one patient with
Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis (PAP), and three patients with Atypical Mycobacterial
Infections (AMI). Colors indicate autoantibodies whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red)

or < 5 SD (black) above the average MFI for HC. MFIs <3,000 were excluded.

b

MFI

MFI

MFI

MFI

MFI

MFI

a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MFI
MFI

MFI

MFI

MFI

MFI

c

Fig. 2: Serum autoantibodies in COVID-19 patients recognize
antigens targeted in rare connective tissue diseases, and
antigens associated with pathogenicity. Bar plots of twelve antigens
corresponding to Figure 1. a. Antigens associated with autoimmune

myositis and myocarditis (MDA5, troponin 1, MYH6 (alpha-myosin),
PL-7, Jo-1, and Mi-2). b. RNA-containing antigens associated with
systemic sclerosis (RPP25 Th/To, Fibrillarin, and U11/U12). c. Antigens
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that may be pathogenic (C1q and β2GP1) and associated with
vasculitis (BPI). MFI are shown on the y-axis. Subjects are shown on
x-axis (COVID-19 patients, HC, and Prototype Autoimmune). Average
MFI for HC, 3 SD above the average MFI for HC, and 5 SD above the
average MFI for HC are shown with orange lines. Error bars represent

one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

a
15

Number of Subjects

15

D0

AutoAb
ACA

D7

10

10

5

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

5

Number of Antibodies per Subject

6

7

8

9

10

MFI

MFI

b

MFI

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MFI

MFI

c

MFI

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MFI
MFI

MFI
MFI

d

MFI

MFI

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 3: Autoantibodies are triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection. a. Autoantibody (AutoAb, blue) and anticytokine antibody (ACA, yellow) counts are shown at Day 0 (n=24 patients, left) and Day 7 (n=21 patients,
right). Counts were based on antibodies that were present at levels at or exceeding 5 SD above the average
MFI for healthy control samples. b. Examples of transient or fluctuating autoantibodies against MDA5, the
tRNA synthetase PL-7, and the vasculitis antigen BPI are shown. c. Examples of antigens (Scl-70, TPO, and
C1q) that are likely to have been present at the time of infection and are unaffected by SARS-CoV-2 infection,

are shown. d. Examples of ACA that are inducible (e.g., IFN-ε), fluctuate (e.g., IFN-ω), or are present at
baseline with little change over time (e.g., IFN-γ), are shown. Additional examples (IL-17, IL-22, and ACE-2)
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

are also included. MFI are shown on the y-axis. Subjects are shown on the x-axis (COVID-19 patients, HC,

and Prototype Autoimmune). Red boxes signify autoantibodies that increase over time. Green boxes signify
autoantibodies that decrease over time or are transient (e.g., anti-PL-7, subject UP70). Blue boxes signify
antibodies that are elevated at baseline and remain relatively unchanged over time. Average MFI for HC, 3

SD above average MFI for HC, and 5 SD above the average MFI for HC are shown with orange lines. Error
bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

a

b

COVID-19

80,000
60,000

< 5 SD
> 5 SD

40,000

20,000
0

Healthy
Control

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SARS-CoV-2

Other Other
CoV Viral

SARS-CoV-2

Other Other
CoV Viral

Fig. 4: Measurement of anti-viral IgG responses using a COVID-19 viral
array. a. Heatmap depicting IgG antibodies using a 28-plex bead-based protein
array. Viral protein antigens are grouped based on sixteen proteins from SARSCoV-2 (left panel), other coronaviruses (middle panel) and other viruses (right

panel), labelled on the x-axis. Most recombinant viral proteins were engineered
to include a 6X-His-tag, which was used to validate conjugation to beads using
an anti-epitope monoclonal antibody (bottom of panel). The same COVID-19
patients from Figure 3 (see Supplemental Figures 9 and 10) were analyzed (top

panel, n=94 longitudinal COVID-19 samples, including paired samples from 44
subjects and 2 subjects who had 3 available timepoints each, subjects UP70 and
UP71). HC (n=16, middle panel). Two patient sample pairs (UP63 and UMR20)
and were excluded from analysis due to technical failure on the viral array assay.

Colors correspond to the MFI values shown at right.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

b. Heatmap depicting

statistically significant anti-viral IgG responses. Colors indicate IgG antibodies
whose MFI measurements are >5 SD (red) or <5 SD (black) above the average
MFI for HC samples collected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.

a

b

c

COVID-19

80,000
60,000
40,000

Healthy Control

20,000
0
< 5 SD
> 5 SD

e

MFI

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MFI

d

Fig. 5: New-onset autoantibodies correlate with anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG responses over time in recently

infected patients who developed COVID-19. Twelve patients were identified who had low or absent anti-SARSCoV-2 RBD or spike S1 protein responses at baseline and who went on to develop high MFI IgG SARS-CoV-2
antibodies at the next available time point. Autoantigen data (a) and ACA data (b) from Supplementary Figures 9

and 10 (using 5 SD and MFI >3,000 cutoffs) for these 12 patients and HC has been combined with anti-viral
heatmap data from Figure 4 (c). Multiple new autoantibodies are depicted with white boxes. Antigens are shown on
the x-axis. Patients and HC are shown on the y-axis. Colors for viral IgG levels correspond to the MFI values

shown at far right. d. Line graph comparing MFI for IgG antibodies against four viral proteins at Early (D0) and
Late (D7) time points for the same 12 patients in Panels A-C. e. Bar graph comparing MFI for IgG autoantibodies

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.21250559; this version posted January 29, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

against eight autoantigens or cytokines at Early (D0) and Late (D7) time points for the same 12 patients in Panels

A-D. Error bars represent one standard deviation of the MFI for sample replicates.

