medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Article

Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Years of Potential Life
Lost Attributable to COVID-19 in the United States:
An Analysis of 45 States and the District of Columbia
Jay J. Xu 1,† * , Jarvis T. Chen 2 , Thomas R. Belin 1,3 , Ronald S. Brookmeyer 1 , Marc A.
Suchard 1,4,5 and Christina M. Ramirez 1
1
2
3
4
5

*
†

Department of Biostatistics, Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard T.H. Chan School Of Public Health, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, United States of America
Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
Department of Computational Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
Correspondence: jayxu33@ucla.edu
Current address: 650 Charles E. Young Drive South, 51-254 CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) epidemic in the United States has
disproportionately impacted communities of color across the country.
Focusing on
COVID-19-attributable mortality, we expand upon a national comparative analysis of years of
potential life lost (YPLL) attributable to COVID-19 by race/ethnicity (Bassett et al., 2020), estimating
percentages of total YPLL for non-Hispanic Whites, non-Hispanic Blacks, Hispanics, non-Hispanic
Asians, and non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Natives, contrasting them with their respective
percent population shares, as well as age-adjusted YPLL rate ratios – anchoring comparisons
to non-Hispanic Whites – in each of 45 states and the District of Columbia using data from
the National Center for Health Statistics as of December 30, 2020. Using a novel Monte Carlo
simulation procedure to quantify estimation uncertainty, our results reveal substantial racial/ethnic
disparities in COVID-19-attributable YPLL across states, with a prevailing pattern of non-Hispanic
Blacks and Hispanics experiencing disproportionately high and non-Hispanic Whites experiencing
disproportionately low COVID-19-attributable YPLL. Furthermore, observed disparities are generally
more pronounced when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL compared to death counts, reflecting
the greater intensity of the disparities at younger ages. We also find substantial state-to-state
variability in the magnitudes of the estimated racial/ethnic disparities, suggesting that they are
driven in large part by social determinants of health whose degree of association with race/ethnicity
varies by state.
Keywords: Communities of Color; Coronavirus; COVID-19; Epidemiology; Monte Carlo Simulation;
Public Health; Racial and Ethnic Disparities; United States; Social Determinants of Health; Years of
Potential Life Lost

1. Introduction
Racial and ethnic disparities in outcomes associated with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
in the United States have been the subject of widespread concern and societal discourse. Statistics
on COVID-19 outcomes that local and state governmental health agencies in the United States (U.S.)
publicly
did new
notresearch
initially
include
racial/ethnic
demographic
information
confirmed
cases
NOTE: This released
preprint reports
that
has not been
certified by peer
review and should
not be used on
to guide
clinical practice.
or deaths. Public pressure quickly grew for such information to be provided [1,2], with many local

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2 of 27

and state governmental health agencies quickly following suit. Racial/ethnic data on COVID-19
outcomes have revealed substantial racial/ethnic disparities, with non-Hispanic Blacks, Hispanics, and
non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Natives experiencing disproportionately high numbers of
cases, hospitalizations, and deaths [3]. Characterizing racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19 outcomes
is an active area of scientific research [4–23], and quantifying racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19
mortality burden has been a particular area of focus. For example, the Color of Coronavirus project
of the American Public Media Research Lab [24] tracks COVID-19 death counts by race/ethnicity in
each state, providing analyses and extended commentary on mortality rates by race/ethnicity and
comparisons between the percentage of total deaths and the percent population share by race/ethnicity.
Another similar data hub for COVID-19 mortality statistics by race/ethnicity is the COVID Racial Data
Tracker of the COVID Tracking Project [25].
Given the substantially greater COVID-19 case fatality rates experienced by individuals in older
age groups, COVID-19 death counts and mortality rates are predominantly determined by data
from COVID-19 decedents in older age groups. Younger individuals, however, are also susceptible
to death from COVID-19, which in principle represent greater unrealized years of life, economic
productivity, and broader contributions to society compared to decedents of greater age. An alternative
epidemiological measure of mortality that explicitly weights deaths that occur at earlier ages more
heavily than deaths that occur at later ages is years of potential life lost (YPLL) [26]. YPLL for an
individual fatality i is defined to be the difference between an upper reference age A and age at death
ai if the difference is positive and zero otherwise:
YPLLi = max {A − ai , 0} .

(1)

When comparing racial/ethnic subgroups with disparate mortality rates in younger age groups,
higher YPLL is expected for those subgroups with comparatively higher mortality rates in the younger
age groups, assuming a constant upper reference age is used across racial/ethnic groups. YPLL has
been used in diverse contexts to quantify racial/ethnic disparities in premature mortality [27–29]. In
the context of COVID-19, Bassett et al. (2020) [30] performed an analysis of COVID-19 deaths in the U.S.
as a whole using COVID-19 mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics as of July 22,
2020, calculating both age-specific mortality rates and YPLL by race/ethnicity. They found substantial
racial/ethnic disparities in mortality rates across all age groups, but the magnitudes of the disparities
were larger within younger age groups, which was reflected in their calculations of YPLL (with
A = 65). Although non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics both comprise a smaller percentage of the U.S.
population than non-Hispanic Whites, Basset et al. found that both non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics
experienced greater YPLL than non-Hispanic Whites, which was largely due to comparatively higher
mortality rates in younger age groups.
Here, we extend the work of Bassett et al. by quantifying racial/ethnic disparities in YPLL
attributable to COVID-19 at the individual state level, examining both their magnitude and their
state-to-state variation. Specifically, we estimate percentages of total YPLL by race/ethnicity,
contrasting them with their respective percent population shares, as well as age-adjusted YPLL
rate ratios (RR) – anchoring comparisons to non-Hispanic Whites – in each of 45 states and the District
of Columbia (D.C.). For comparison, we also calculate racial/ethnic percentages of total deaths
and estimate the corresponding age-adjusted mortality RR’s to examine potential differences in the
characterization of racial/ethnic disparities when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL compared
to death counts. We also adopt a different inferential paradigm than Bassett et al. for uncertainty
quantification, comprising novel Monte Carlo (MC) simulation techniques for interval estimation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3 of 27

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Data
We examine U.S. national COVID-19 mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) as of December 30, 2020 – the last data update for calendar year 2020 – summarized as
cumulative death counts within age groups stratified by state (as well as D.C. and Puerto Rico) and
race/ethnicity [31], which we refer to hereafter as the NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data. The following 8
racial/ethnic groups are used in the NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data: non-Hispanic White (NH White),
non-Hispanic Black (NH Black), Hispanic, non-Hispanic Asian (NH Asian), non-Hispanic American
Indian or Alaska Native (NH AIAN), non-Hispanic Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander,
non-Hispanic Two or More Races, and Unknown. The set of mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive,
and chronologically ordered age groups used are <1, 1–4, 5–14, 15–24, 25–34, 35–44, 45–54, 55–64,
65–74, 75–84 and 85+. See File S1 in the Supplementary Materials for the NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data as
of December 30, 2020, which consists of 301,679 total deaths. Because there is a lag in time between the
actual date of death and when the death certificate is completed, submitted to NCHS, and processed,
this number does not reflect the actual number of deaths in the U.S. as of December 30, 2020, which
was reported to be 342,577 by the New York Times [32]. Some states’ data reported to the NCHS have
been documented as severely delayed [33–35], especially North Carolina, which is one of a few states
that, at the time of writing, doesn’t use an electronic death registration system [36]. Our analyses of the
NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data implicitly assumes that there is no systematic bias in the speed with which
death certificates are reported by states to the NCHS with respect to race/ethnicity or age at death.
Death counts between 1 and 9 within individual age groups are suppressed in the NCHS
Race/Ethnicity Data due to confidentiality regulations. A total of 1,160 age groups across the 50
states plus D.C. and 8 racial/ethnic groups have suppressed death counts. Although the NCHS
Race/Ethnicity Data do not explicitly provide the total number of actual deaths in each state, the
NCHS provides a separate but synchronously updated publicly available dataset of COVID-19 deaths
summarized as cumulative death counts within the same age groups as the NCHS Race/Ethnicity
Data stratified by state and sex, which we refer to hereafter as the NCHS Sex Data [37], that does
explicitly provide the total number of actual deaths in each state; see File S2 in the Supplementary
Materials for the NCHS Sex Data as of December 30, 2020. Hence, for each state, we can ascertain the
total number of deaths that are within the union of age groups with suppressed death counts, each of
which contains between 1 and 9 deaths. The NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data also provides non-suppressed
death counts within these same age groups stratified by race/ethnicity for the U.S. overall.
To standardize estimates by age, we make use of 2019 estimates of the U.S. population age
distribution stratified by state, race, and ethnicity from CDC WONDER [38], defined over integer ages
from 0 to 84 and a catch-all 85+ age group. Percent population shares by race/ethnicity both nationally
and in each state are calculated from the 2019 CDC WONDER data. See File S3 in the Supplementary
Materials for the 2019 CDC WONDER data.
2.2. Estimation Procedure for YPLL-Based Estimands from Administratively Interval Censored Ages at Death
The YPLL-based estimands that we consider here are total YPLL, percentage of total YPLL, and
age-adjusted YPLL rates by race/ethnicity as well as age-adjusted YPLL rate ratios for NH Blacks,
Hispanics, NH Asians, and NH AIAN’s relative to NH Whites. In contrast to the super-population
perspective adopted by Basset et al., where observed COVID-19 deaths were viewed as a single
realization of a hypothetical probability distribution and frequentist statistical theory was used for
interval estimation [39], we take the finite-population perspective that the observed COVID-19 deaths
simply constitutes the population of interest. As a result, estimation uncertainty in our context can
be attributed to three sources: (a) administrative interval censoring of ages at death, (b) suppression

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4 of 27

of low death counts within individual age intervals, and (c) unknown race/ethnicity for a subset of
deaths.
Focusing first on the issue of administrative interval censoring of ages at death and assuming
no suppressed death counts or deaths of unknown race/ethnicity for purposes of illustration, the
unknown exact ages at death for each individual precludes exact calculation of individual YPLL
values. For the purpose of calculating aggregate YPLL, the standard approach in such settings is to
operationally impute each individual’s age at death with its interval midpoint, a method that implicitly
assumes uniformly distributed ages at death within individual age intervals [40]. However, applied
epidemiological studies employing this "midpoint method" typically do not quantify the uncertainty
associated with YPLL-based estimates as a result of the administrative interval censoring of ages at
death [41–44]. Xu et al. (2021) [45] proposed a MC simulation procedure to quantify the uncertainty
associated with YPLL-based estimates obtained from mortality data summarized as death counts
within age intervals. We refer the reader to their paper for the details of the MC simulation procedure,
but to summarize it briefly, the procedure comprises independently simulating ages at death for each
individual from continuous uniform distributions defined over their respective age intervals at each
MC iteration, calculating a point estimate of the estimand of interest from the corresponding simulated
YPLL values. The overall point estimate is defined to be the mean of the collection of MC point
estimates, and the lower and upper endpoints of a (1 − α) × 100% interval estimate (which can be
conceptualized as a "range interval" per Bobashev and Morris (2010) [46]) are defined to be the α2 and
1 − α2 quantiles of the collection of MC point estimates, respectively.
2.3. Procedure Modification to Account for Suppression of Low Death Counts
The second source of estimation uncertainty, suppression of low death counts within individual
age intervals, arises out of privacy and confidentiality concerns associated with publishing small death
counts within individual age intervals, which can risk revealing personally identifiable information for
individual COVID-19 deaths. We introduce a modification of the Xu et al. MC simulation procedure
described in Section 2.2 to account for this additional source of estimation uncertainty while still
assuming no deaths of unknown race/ethnicity for purposes of illustration.
For each state, we know the total number of deaths contained in the union of intervals with
suppressed death counts, each of which must be an integer between 1 and 9. As such, we can
exhaustively enumerate all possible death count combinations across the intervals with suppressed
death counts. Each death count combination corresponding to the intervals with suppressed death
counts juxtaposed with the intervals containing non-suppressed death counts constitutes one possible
"mortality dataset" of death counts within age intervals. We modify the Xu et al. MC simulation
procedure by independently simulating ages at death for each individual for each mortality dataset at
each MC iteration. Then, a point estimate of the estimand of interest is calculated for each mortality
dataset from the corresponding simulated YPLL values, from which we store only the minimum
and maximum point estimate across the mortality datasets at each MC iteration. A conservative
(1 − α) × 100% interval estimate of the estimand of interest is then constructed from the α2 quantile of
the collection of minimum MC point estimates and the 1 − α2 quantile of the collection of maximum
MC point estimates. We describe the interval estimate as "conservative" as a result of our estimation
strategy of considering all possible mortality datasets and using the extrema of the subsequent MC
point estimates to construct the interval estimate; a (1 − α) × 100% interval estimate of the estimand
of interest obtained from the standard Xu et al. MC simulation procedure had the suppressed death
counts been known (and assuming no deaths with unknown race/ethnicity) would be completely
contained in the corresponding conservative (1 − α) × 100% interval estimate.
2.4. Procedure Modification to Further Account for a Subset of Deaths with Unknown Race/Ethnicty
The third source of estimation uncertainty, unknown race/ethnicity for a subset of deaths, can be
accommodated through an additional modification of the Xu et al. MC simulation procedure. The

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5 of 27

key idea is to separate the tasks of obtaining a maximum and minimum point estimate at each MC
iteration. Specifically, when the estimand of interest primarily concerns racial/ethnic group r (i.e., total
YPLL for racial/ethnic group r, percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r, age-adjusted YPLL
rate for racial/ethnic group r, and age-adjusted r-to-NH White YPLL RR), we assume all deaths among
the Unknown racial/ethnic group are members of racial/ethnic group r and appropriately combine
death counts within their age intervals before exhaustively enumerating all possible mortality datasets,
simulating ages at death for each individual for each mortality dataset, calculating a point estimate
from the corresponding simulated YPLL values for each mortality datset, and storing the maximum
point estimate across mortality datasets at each MC iteration. The task of obtaining a minimum point
estimate at each MC iteration is pursued analogously but separately, where the key distinction is that
we do not combine the Unknown racial/ethnic group and racial/ethnic group r. Therefore, a separate
set of mortality datasets is considered for each task of maximization and minimization.
2.5. Computational Savings by Omitting Unnecessary Mortality Datasets
The total number of mortality dataset scenarios can be enormous, potentially making it
computationally infeasible to simulate ages at death for all mortality datasets. However, substantial
computational savings can be achieved by (a) combining racial/ethnic groups not included in the
definition of the estimand of interest and (b) identifying mortality datasets that we do not need to
simulate ages at death from because they would yield a maximum or minimum MC point estimate
with probability 0. We describe an example of such combinatorial reductions when the estimand of
interest is the percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r.
For the task of obtaining a maximum point estimate at each MC iteration, we combine the
Unknown racial/ethnic group with racial/ethnic group r, combine the remaining racial/ethnic groups
into a single non-r racial/ethnic group, which we denote r̄, and enumerate all possible mortality
datasets. In this case, only one mortality dataset needs to be considered, namely, the one that contains
the maximum possible number of deaths in the lowest age intervals corresponding to suppressed
death counts for racial/ethnic group r. The remaining mortality datasets can be omitted because they
would yield a maximum MC point estimate with probability 0. For the task of obtaining a minimum
point estimate at each MC iteration, we combine all of the non-r racial/ethnic groups (including the
Unknown racial/ethnic group) into a single non-r racial/ethnic group r̄ and enumerate all possible
mortality datasets. Here, the only mortality dataset that needs to be considered is the one that contains
the maximum possible number of deaths in the lowest age intervals corresponding to suppressed death
counts for the combined non-r racial/ethnic group r̄ and, if necessary, the maximum possible number
of deaths in the highest age intervals corresponding to suppressed death counts for racial/ethnic group
r. The remaining mortality datasets can be omitted because they would yield a minimum MC point
estimate with probability 0.
For estimation of the age-adjusted YPLL rates and RR’s, identifying mortality datasets that we
not need to simulate ages at death from is a more challenging task, but it is still possible. Inequality
conditions can be established computationally to identify meaningful numbers of mortality datasets
that can be omitted in our analyses.
2.6. Complete Monte Carlo Simulation Procedure for Estimation of YPLL-Based Estimands
Here, we comprehensively summarize the complete modified Xu et al. MC simulation procedure
for estimation of the YPLL-based estimands of interest that quantifies the uncertainty associated
with the administrative interval censoring of ages at death, suppression of low death counts within
individual age intervals, and unknown race/ethnicity for a subset of deaths. We limit the analyses
presented here to jurisdictions in the continental U.S. with at least 500 total deaths in the NCHS Sex
Data, a condition satisfied by 45 states as well as D.C., which for brevity we characterize as a "state"
in summaries of the results of our analyses. The 5 states omitted in our analyses are Alaska, Hawaii,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6 of 27

Maine, Vermont, and Wyoming. For each examined state s, the procedure can be comprehensively
summarized as follows.
1. Calculate the difference between the total number of deaths as provided by the NCHS Sex Data
and the total number of deaths contained in intervals with non-suppressed death counts; this is
the number of deaths contained in the union of intervals with suppressed death counts.
2. Let B denote the total number of MC iterations, and let b = 1, ..., B index the MC iterations. For
the task of obtaining a maximum MC point estimate of the estimand of interest that primarily
concerns racial/ethnic group r at each MC iteration b, combine the Unknown racial/ethnic group
with racial/ethnic group r into a combined r-Unknown racial/ethnic group whose constituents
we all assume to be in racial/ethnic group r, combine the remaining racial/ethnic groups that
are not included in the definition of the estimand into a single "other" racial/ethnic group, and
enumerate all possible mortality datasets, omitting those that would yield a maximum MC point
estimate with probability 0. For the task of obtaining a minimum MC point estimate of the
estimand of interest, combine all of the racial/ethnic groups not included in the definition of the
estimand (including the Unknown racial/ethnic group) and enumerate all possible mortality
datasets, omitting those that would yield a minimum MC point estimate with probability 0. Let
(max)
Js
denote the number of mortality datasets considered for the maximization task in state s,
(min)
and let Js
denote the number of mortality datasets considered for the minimization task in
state s.
3. Specify a YPLL upper reference age A less than or equal to 85 years. We view age group <1
as equivalent to the singular age 0, and the remaining numeric NCHS age group endpoints
represent integer age at last birthday so that there is a 1-year gap between the endpoints of two
chronologically consecutive age groups (e.g., 35-44 and 45-54). We treat age as a continuous
variable, and as a consequence, we mathematically interpret the <1 age group (age 0) as the
right half-open interval [0, 1), the 85+ age group as the half-bounded interval [85, ∞), and the
remaining NCHS age groups as right half-open intervals with lower limit equal to the lower
endpoint of the corresponding NCHS age group and upper limit equal to the upper endpoint
of the corresponding NCHS age group plus one (e.g., age group 5–14 is viewed as = [5, 15)).
(max)
At each MC iteration b and for each mortality dataset j = 1, ..., Js
+ Js(min) considered for
(b)

the maximization and minimization tasks, independently simulate an age at death ãijs for
each individual fatality i corresponding to age interval ( Lijs , Uijs ), where A > Lijs , from the
corresponding continuous uniform distribution:
(b) ind

ãijs ∼ U ( Lijs , Uijs ).

(2)

Observe that A is intentionally and necessarily chosen to be less than or equal to 85 years to
obviate the simulation of ages at death corresponding to the 85+ age group, thereby avoiding
potential analytic difficulties because each fatality corresponding to the 85+ age group contributes
nothing to YPLL.
4. At each MC iteration b and for each mortality dataset j, calculate a point estimate of the estimand
of interest. In particular, for the estimation of the percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group
r, first calculate total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r (which includes the Unknown racial/ethnic
group for the maximization task) and the remaining racial/ethnic groups from the simulated
n
o
n
o
(b)
(b)
\ rjs = ∑max A − ã(b) , 0 and YPLL
\ r̄js = ∑max A − ã(b) , 0 ,
ages at death, which are YPLL
ijs
ijs
i ∈r

i∈
/r

(b)

brjs ,
respectively. Then, the percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r, which we denote π
is given by:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7 of 27

(b)

\ rjs
YPLL

(b)

brjs =
π

(b)

(b)

× 100%.

(3)

\ rjs + YPLL
\ r̄js
YPLL

For estimation of the age-adjusted r-to-NH White YPLL RR, first estimate the age-adjusted YPLL
rates for racial/ethnic group r and NH Whites, using the 2019 CDC WONDER age distribution
estimate of the overall U.S. population as the standard population. The age-adjusted YPLL rate
for racial/ethnic group r (which includes the Unknown racial/ethnic group for the maximization
task) is calculated using direct age adjustment [47] from the simulated ages at death, which we
(b)
b YPLL,rjs
denote R
. Since the simulated ages at death are continuous and the CDC WONDER age
distribution estimates are defined over integer ages from 0 to 84, we aggregate the corresponding
simulated YPLL values with respect the 1-year intervals implied by these integer ages (i.e., age
a ∈ {0, 1, ..., 84} implies age interval [ a, a + 1)) to calculate the age-specific YPLL rates, which
are subsequently applied to the standard population to obtain the age-adjusted YPLL rate for
racial/ethnic group r:

(b)

84

(b)
b YPLL,rjs
R
=

∑

na ×

a =0

\ rjsa
YPLL
nrsa

!
,

84

(4)

∑ na + n85+

a =0

(b)

\ rjsa =
where YPLL

∑

i ∈r
(b)
ãijs ∈[ a,a+1)

n
o
(b)
max A − ãijs , 0 denotes aggregate YPLL corresponding to age

a ∈ {0, 1, ..., 84}; nrsa denotes the 2019 CDC WONDER U.S. population estimate for race/ethnicity
r, state s, and age a ∈ {0, 1, ..., 84}; and n a denotes the 2019 CDC WONDER U.S. population
estimate for age a ∈ {0, 1, ..., 84, 85+}. Then, the age-adjusted r-to-NH White YPLL RR is defined
(b)
(b)
b YPLL,rjs
b YPLL,NH
to be the quotient of R
and R
White,js :

(b)
c YPLL,r,NH
RR
White,js =

(b)
b YPLL,rjs
R
(b)
b YPLL,NH
R
White,js

.

(5)

(max)

MC point estimates of the estimand
5. At each MC iteration b, store the maximum of the Js
(max)
of interest calculated from the set of Js
mortality datasets considered for the maximization
(min)
(min)
task, and store the minimum of the Js
MC point estimates calculated from the set of Js
mortality datasets considered for the minimization task.
6. A conservative (1 − α) × 100% interval estimate of the estimand of interest is given by the α2
quantile of the B minimum MC point estimates and the 1 − α2 quantile of the B maximum MC
point estimates.
Defining a valid overall point estimate for the estimand of interest is not straightforward due
to our estimation strategy; to be explicit, the midpoint of the conservative (1 − α) × 100% interval
estimate should not be interpreted as the point estimate. As such, in the results we present, we
communicate our estimates solely as intervals, basing conclusions and interpretations on the ensemble
of interval estimates we produce.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8 of 27

2.7. Monte Carlo Simulation Procedure for Estimation of Age-Adjusted Mortality Rates and Rate Ratios
Because we can enumerate the death count combinations for the intervals with suppressed death
counts in each state, we can determine the entire plausible range of total deaths and percentage
of total deaths by race/ethnicity in each state, which complement our estimates of total YPLL and
percentage of total YPLL by race/ethnicity. At the time of writing, every U.S. state except North Dakota
publicly reports COVID-19 death counts by race/ethnicity [48], which are more up to date than the
(lagged) NCHS Race/Ethnicity Data. However, because different states can use different race/ethnicity
categories, rendering direct comparisons between states difficult, we did not use the COVID-19 death
counts by race/ethnicity that states themselves publicly report in our analyses. For comparison to our
estimates of the age-adjusted YPLL rates and RR’s, we also consider estimation of the corresponding
age-adjusted mortality rates and RR’s. We want these quantities to be age-standardized to the 2019
CDC WONDER age distribution estimate of the overall U.S. population – without combining CDC
WONDER age intervals to align them with the NCHS age intervals – so that estimated YPLL and
mortality rates in our analyses are age-standardized to as identical as possible standard populations in
terms of age interval granularity. To this end, we perform an analogous MC simulation procedure to
obtain conservative (1 − α) × 100% interval estimates of the age-adjusted mortality rates and RR’s in
the U.S. and in each examined state. The procedure largely mirrors the MC simulation procedure for
the YPLL-based estimands described previously in Section 2.6. However, ages at death are simulated
for all individuals in non-85+ age groups. In the direct age adjustment procedure, we sum the number
of simulated ages at death falling within the 1-year intervals implied by integer ages 0 to 84 to calculate
the age-specific mortality rates for ages 0 to 84 as well as calculate an age 85+ mortality rate, which are
subsequently applied to the standard population to obtain the age-adjusted mortality rate, which we
(b)
b mort,rjs
denote R
for racial/ethnic group r:
84

(b)
b mort,rjs
R
=

∑

a =0

na ×

(b)
dˆrjsa
nrjsa

!


+ n85+ ×

dˆrjs,85+
nrjs,85+


,

84

(6)

∑ na + n85+

a =0

(b)
where dˆrjsa =

∑

1 is the number of simulated ages at death equal to age a ∈ {0, 1, ..., 84},

i ∈r
ãijs ∈[ a,a+1)

and dˆrjs,85+ denotes the number of deaths in the 85+ age group. Then, the age-adjusted r-to-NH White
(b)
(b)
b mort,rjs
b mort,NH
mortality RR is defined to be the quotient of R
and R
White,js :

(b)
c mort,r,NH
RR
White,js =

(b)
b mort,rjs
R
(b)
b mort,NH
R
White,js

.

(7)

2.8. Computation
We perform the modified Xu et al. MC simulation procedure described in Section 2.6 for B = 1000
iterations using a constant YPLL upper reference age of A = 75 years for all racial/ethnic groups
considered, an approach used by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [49–56]
and in other applied research domains [57,58], obtaining conservative 95% interval estimates of
total YPLL, percentage of total YPLL, and age-adjusted YPLL rates by race/ethnicity as well as
age-adjusted YPLL RR’s for NH Blacks, Hispanics, NH Asians, and NH AIAN’s relative to NH
Whites in each of the 46 examined states. An approach that has been employed in applied studies
contrasting YPLL by race/ethnicity is to use race/ethnicity-specific YPLL upper reference ages

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9 of 27

corresponding to the respective life expectancies [28,29,59–62], thereby reflecting known heterogeneity
in underlying life expectancies between racial/ethnic groups. However, out of a desire informed by
a health equity perspective not to necessarily normalize underlying racial/ethnic disparities in life
expectancy, a sentiment shared in other applications [63,64], we decided to use a constant YPLL upper
reference age (A = 75) for all racial/ethnic groups considered to provide a comparison of YPLL by
race/ethnicity that is not dependent on underlying racial/ethnic differences in life expectancies. We
also obtain conservative 95% interval estimates of age-adjusted mortality rates by race/ethnicity
as well as age-adjusted mortality RR’s for NH Blacks, Hispanics, NH Asians, and NH AIAN’s
relative to NH Whites using an analogous MC simulation procedure described in Section 2.7, also
for B = 1000 iterations. All MC simulation analyses were performed using the R version 3.6.0
programming language [65]. The code used in the analyses is available upon reasonable request from
the corresponding author.
3. Results
Tables S1-S5 in the Supplementary Materials contain the entirety of the results. Table S1 presents
conservative 95% interval estimates of total YPLL for the 5 racial/ethnic groups considered in the
U.S. and in each of the 46 examined states, and Table S2 presents intervals denoting the entire
plausible range of total deaths by race/ethnicity in the U.S. and in each examined state. Table S3
presents conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL and intervals denoting
the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths for the 5 racial/ethnic groups considered
in the U.S. and in each of the examined states. When the interval of the percentage of total deaths
for racial/ethnic group r ∈ {NH White, NH Black, Hispanic, NH Asian, NH AIAN} is completely
above its percent population share, deaths among racial/ethnic group r are overrepresented in
COVID-19 deaths. Conversely, when the interval of the percentage of total deaths for racial/ethnic
group r is completely below its percent population share, deaths among racial/ethnic group r are
underrepresented in COVID-19 deaths. The interpretation of the conservative 95% interval estimates
of the percentage of total YPLL relative to the percent population share is slightly more nuanced,
however. When the conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic
group r is completely above its percent population share, deaths among racial/ethnic group r are
either overrepresented or decedent ages among racial/ethnic group r are disproportionately younger
relative to decedents of the other racial/ethnic groups or both – to a degree that is statistically
discernable. Conversely, when the conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total
YPLL for racial/ethnic group r is completely below its percent population share, deaths among
racial/ethnic group r are either underrepresented or decedent ages among racial/ethnic group r are
disproportionately older relative to decedents of the other racial/ethnic groups or both – to a degree
that is statistically discernable.
The magnitudes of the disparities can depend on whether mortality is measured in terms of YPLL
or death counts. If the interval of the percentage of total deaths for racial/ethnic group r is completely
above its percent population share and the conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total
YPLL for racial/ethnic group r is completely above the interval of the percentage of total deaths for
racial/ethnic group r, it means that although deaths among racial/ethnic group r are overrepresented,
decedent ages among racial/ethnic group r are also skewed disproportionately toward younger ages
to such a degree that the disparity in the COVID-19 mortality burden with respect to racial/ethnic
group r is statistically discernably greater when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL compared
to death counts. Similarly, if the interval of the percentage of total deaths for racial/ethnic group r
is completely below its percent population share and the conservative 95% interval estimate of the
percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r is completely below the interval of the percentage
of total deaths for racial/ethnic group r, it means that although deaths among racial/ethnic group r
are underrepresented, decedent ages among racial/ethnic group r are also skewed disproportionately
toward older ages to such a degree that the disparity in the COVID-19 mortality burden with respect

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10 of 27

to racial/ethnic group r is statistically discernably greater when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL
compared to death counts.
Moreover, the direction of the disparities in the COVID-19 mortality burden can also depend on
whether mortality is measured in terms of YPLL or death counts. If the interval of the percentage of total
deaths for racial/ethnic group r is completely below its percent population share but the conservative
95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r is completely above its
percent population share, deaths among racial/ethnic group r are underrepresented, but decedent
ages among racial/ethnic group r are skewed disproportionately toward younger ages relative to
decedents of the other racial/ethnic groups to a degree that outweighs the disproportionately low
number of deaths. Similarly, if the interval of the percentage of total deaths for racial/ethnic group
r is completely above its percent population share but the conservative 95% interval estimate of the
percentage of total YPLL for racial/ethnic group r is completely below its percent population share,
deaths among racial/ethnic group r are overrepresented, but decedent ages among racial/ethnic group
r are skewed disproportionately toward older ages relative to decedents of the other racial/ethnic
groups to a degree that outweighs the disproportionately high number of deaths.
Table S4 presents conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted YPLL and mortality
rates per 10,000 population for the 5 racial/ethnic groups considered in the U.S. and in the
examined states. Table S5 presents conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted YPLL
and mortality RR’s for NH Blacks, Hispanics, NH Asians, and NH AIAN’s relative to NH Whites
in the U.S. and in the 46 examined states. When the age-adjusted r-to-NH White YPLL RR (r ∈
{NH Black, Hispanic, NH Asian, NH AIAN}) is completely above 1.0, it means that after accounting
for differences in the population age distributions between racial/ethnic group r and NH Whites,
racial/ethnic group r experiences COVID-19-attributable YPLL at a rate that that is statistically
discernably above that of NH Whites. Similarly, when the age-adjusted r-to-NH White mortality RR is
completely above 1.0, it means that after accounting for differences in the population age distributions
between racial/ethnic group r and NH Whites, racial/ethnic group r experiences death from COVID-19
at a rate that is statistically discernably above that of NH Whites. When the conservative 95% interval
estimate of the age-adjusted r-to-NH White YPLL RR is completely above the conservative 95% interval
estimate of the age-adjusted r-to-NH White mortality RR, the age-adjusted COVID-19 mortality burden
for racial/ethnic group r relative to NH Whites is statistically discernably greater in magnitude
when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL compared to death counts as a result of individuals of
racial/ethnic group r dying at systematically and statistically discernably younger ages relative to
NH Whites after accounting for differences in the population age distributions between racial/ethnic
group r and NH Whites.
3.1. Results for Non-Hispanic Whites
Figure 1 displays a graphical comparison between the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL, intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths,
and the percent population share for NH Whites in the U.S. and in each examined state. Nationally,
NH White COVID-19 deaths are underrepresented, comprising 57.6%–58.1% of total deaths despite
representing 61.2% of the U.S. population. At the individual state level, NH White intervals of the
percentage of total deaths are completely above the NH White percent population share in 24 of the
examined states and completely below in 21 of the examined states. However, NH White COVID-19
decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed disproportionately toward older ages to such a degree that
the U.S. national NH White conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL ([40.1%
– 40.8%]) is completely below the U.S. national NH White interval of the percentage of total deaths.
At the individual state level, the NH White conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of
total YPLL are completely below the NH White intervals of the percentage of total deaths in 44 of the
46 examined states, reflecting a consistent pattern across states of NH Whites dying from COVID-19
at older ages than individuals of other racial/ethnic groups. For example, in Louisiana, NH Whites

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

11 of 27

Figure 1. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL before age 75, intervals
denoting the entire plausible range for the percentage of total deaths, and the percent population shares
for NH Whites in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020.

represent 59.1% of the population and only 52.6%–53.4% of total deaths, but the NH White conservative
95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is an even lower [29.7% – 34.7%]. Furthermore,
NH White conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are completely below
the NH White percent population share in 43 of the 46 examined states, greater than the corresponding
number for the intervals of the percentage of total deaths. The direction of the disparity in fact reverses
when using YPLL rather than death counts to measure mortality in 21 of the 24 states where NH White
COVID-19 deaths are overrepresented. For example, in Massachusetts, NH Whites represent 72.1% of
the population and 80.1%–81.3% of total deaths, but the NH White conservative 95% interval estimate
of the percentage of total YPLL is only [54.0% – 62.7%].
3.2. Results for Non-Hispanic Blacks
Figure 2 displays a graphical comparison between the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL, intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths,
and the percent population share for NH Blacks in the U.S. and in each examined state. Nationally,
COVID-19 deaths among NH Blacks are overrepresented, comprising 16.9%–17.4% of total deaths
despite representing only 13.2% of the U.S. population. Indeed, at the individual state level, NH Black
intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely above the NH Black percent population share
in 26 of the examined states and completely below in only 8 of the examined states. In fact, the NH
Black interval of the percentage of total deaths in D.C. is completely above all of the corresponding
intervals for the other racial/ethnic groups. Although this is partially due to the fact that NH Blacks
are the predominant racial/ethnic group in D.C., comprising over 45% of the population, the disparity
between the percentage of total deaths and the NH Black percent population share is by far the highest
in D.C. among the examined states. Moreover, NH Black COVID-19 decedent ages in the U.S. overall
are skewed disproportionately toward younger ages to such a degree that the U.S. national NH Black

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

12 of 27

Figure 2. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL before age 75, intervals
denoting the entire plausible range for the percentage of total deaths, and the percent population shares
for NH Blacks in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020.

conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL ([23.0% – 23.6%]) is completely
above the U.S. national NH Black interval of the percentage of total deaths. Indeed, at the individual
state level, the NH Black conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are
completely above the NH Black intervals of the percentage of total deaths in 27 of the examined states
and completely below in none of the examined states. For example, NH Blacks represent 14.6% of the
population in Michigan but an astonishing 27.7%–29.0% of total deaths, yet the NH Black conservative
95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is a staggering [42.4% – 47.4%]. Interestingly,
the reverse phenomenon is observed in D.C., where the NH Black conservative 95% interval estimate
of the percentage of total YPLL ([52.3% – 68.9%]) is completely below the NH Black interval of the
percentage of total deaths ([69.6% – 71.4%]). NH Black conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL are completely above the NH Black percent population share in 33 of the 46
examined states, greater than the corresponding number for the intervals of the percentage of total
deaths, and completely below in none of the examined states. NH Black conservative 95% interval
estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are also completely above all of the corresponding intervals
for the other racial/ethnic groups in 6 of the examined states (D.C., Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland,
Mississippi, and South Carolina). The direction of the disparity in fact reverses when using YPLL
rather than death counts to measure mortality in 3 of the 8 states (Arkansas, Iowa, and Minnesota)
where the NH Black intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely below the NH Black
percent population share. For example, in Minnesota, NH Blacks represent 7.5% of the population and
only 5.3%–6.2% of total deaths, but the NH Black 95% conservative interval estimate of the percentage
of total YPLL is [12.9% – 21.7%].
Figure 3 presents a graphical comparison of the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL and mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each examined
state. The U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13 of 27

Figure 3. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL and
mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020. States are ordered from top to bottom in descending order of the signed
difference between the lower limit of the YPLL RR interval and the upper limit of the mortality RR
interval. Values are displayed on the base 10 logarithmic scale. Interval endpoints above 20.0 and
below 0.30 are truncated, with the actual values numerically annotated.

White mortality RR is [1.91 – 1.99], and the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted
NH Black-to-NH White mortality RR are completely above 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 in 39, 17, and 2 of the
examined states, respectively. However, NH Black decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed
disproportionately toward younger ages relative to NH Whites, after accounting for differences in the
national population age distributions between NH Blacks and NH Whites, to such a degree that the U.S.
national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL RR is
[2.84 – 2.97], completely above the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted
NH Black-to-NH White mortality RR. Indeed, in 30 of the 46 examined states, the conservative 95%
interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above the
conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White mortality RR, reflecting
a broad pattern across states of NH Blacks dying from COVID-19 at earlier ages than NH Whites after
accounting for differences in their respective state population age distributions. Moreover, conservative
95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above
1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 in 39, 33, and 17 of the examined states, respectively, greater than or equal to the
corresponding numbers for the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White mortality RR’s. Among the
examined states, Michigan stands out markedly with the highest conservative 95% interval estimate of
the age-adjusted NH Black-to-NH White YPLL RR ([5.77 – 6.67]).
3.3. Results for Hispanics
Figure 4 displays a graphical comparison between the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL, intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths,
and the percent population share for Hispanics in the U.S. and in each examined state. Nationally,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14 of 27

Figure 4. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL before age 75, intervals
denoting the entire plausible range for the percentage of total deaths, and the percent population shares
for Hispanics in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with respect
to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics as of
December 30, 2020.

COVID-19 deaths among Hispanics are approximately proportional to their percent population share:
Hispanics comprise 18.5% of the U.S. population and 18.6%–19.1% of COVID-19 deaths. At the
individual state level, Hispanic intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely above
the Hispanic percent population share in 11 of the examined states and completely below in 29
of the examined states. Hispanic intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely above
the NH White intervals of the percentage of total deaths in 4 of the examined states (California,
D.C., New Mexico, and Texas) and are completely above all of the corresponding intervals for the
other racial/ethnic groups in 2 of those states (California and Texas). Although COVID-19 deaths
among Hispanics nationally are about in line with their percent population share, Hispanic COVID-19
decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed disproportionately toward younger ages to such a degree
that the U.S. national Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL
([30.3% – 31.0%]) is completely above the U.S. national Hispanic interval of the percentage of total
deaths. This national trend of Hispanics dying from COVID-19 at earlier ages relative to non-Hispanics
is also widely observed at the individual state level, with the Hispanic conservative 95% interval
estimates of the percentage of total YPLL completely above the Hispanic intervals of the percentage
of total deaths in 38 of the examined states and completely below in none of the examined states.
For example, in Illinois, Hispanics represent 17.5% of the population and comprise a commensurate
17.3%–18.0% of total deaths, but the Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage
of total YPLL is [35.5% – 39.5%]. Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of
total YPLL are completely above the Hispanic percent population share in 34 out of the 46 examined
states, greater than the corresponding number for the intervals of the percentages of total deaths, and
completely below in only 1 state (New Mexico). Furthermore, Hispanic conservative 95% interval
estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are completely above the corresponding intervals for NH
Whites in 10 of the examined states and completely above all of the corresponding intervals for the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15 of 27

other racial/ethnic groups in 7 of those states, each of which is greater than the corresponding number
for the intervals of the percentage of total deaths. The direction of the disparity in fact reverses when
using YPLL rather than death counts to measure mortality in 20 of the 29 states where the Hispanic
intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely below the Hispanic percent population share.
For example, in Connecticut, Hispanics represent 16.9% of the population and only 9.5%–10.7% of
total deaths, but the Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is
[20.9% – 30.7%]. We also note that the results for Hispanics in New Mexico are anomalous compared
to the rest of the examined states, with both the Hispanic interval of the percentage of total deaths and
the Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL markedly below the
Hispanic percent population share: Hispanics represent nearly 50% of the population in New Mexico
but comprise only 34.9%–35.8% of total deaths, and the Hispanic conservative 95% interval estimate of
the percentage of total YPLL is [29.8% – 36.7%].
Figure 5 presents a graphical comparison of the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White YPLL and mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each examined
state. The U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH
White mortality RR is [1.95 – 2.03], and conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted
Hispanic-to-NH White mortality RR are completely above 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 in 40, 21, and 6 of the
examined states, respectively. However, Hispanic COVID-19 decedent ages in the U.S. overall are
skewed disproportionately toward younger ages relative to NH Whites, after accounting for differences
in the national population age distributions between Hispanics and NH Whites, to such a degree
that the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White
YPLL RR is [2.90 – 3.02], completely above the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the

Figure 5. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White YPLL and
mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020. States are ordered from top to bottom in descending order of the signed
difference between the lower limit of the YPLL RR interval and the upper limit of the mortality RR
interval. Values are displayed on the base 10 logarithmic scale. Interval endpoints above 20.0 and
below 0.30 are truncated, with the actual values numerically annotated.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

16 of 27

age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White mortality RR. Indeed, the conservative 95% interval estimates of
the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above the conservative 95% interval
estimates of the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White mortality RR in 37 of the 46 examined states
and are completely below in none of the examined states, reflecting a robust pattern across states of
Hispanics dying from COVID-19 at earlier ages than NH Whites after accounting for differences in
their respective state population age distributions. Moreover, conservative 95% interval estimates of
the age-adjusted Hispanic-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 in 42, 35, and
26 of the examined states, respectively, greater than the corresponding numbers for the age-adjusted
Hispanic-to-NH White mortality RR’s. The conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted
Hispanic-to-NH White YPLL RR are notably high and disconcerting in a sizable number of states:
Illinois, Washington, and Wisconsin (completely above 5.0); California, North Carolina, and Oregon
(completely above 6.0); Maryland (completely above 7.0); and D.C. (completely above 8.0).
3.4. Results for Non-Hispanic Asians
Figure 6 displays a graphical comparison between the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL, intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths,
and the percent population share for NH Asians in the U.S. and in each examined state. Nationally,
COVID-19 deaths among NH Asians are underrepresented, comprising only 3.6%–4.0% of COVID-19
deaths despite representing 6.3% of the U.S. population. Accordingly, NH Asian intervals of the
percentage of total deaths are completely below the NH Asian percent population share in 32 of the
examined states and completely above in only 1 examined state (Nevada). The U.S. national NH
Asian conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL ([3.8% – 4.4%]) is statistically
indistinguishable from the U.S. national NH Asian interval of the percentage of total deaths. However,
NH Asian conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL contain the NH Asian

Figure 6. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL before age 75, intervals
denoting the entire plausible range for the percentage of total deaths, and the percent population shares
for NH Asians in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

17 of 27

percent population share in the vast majority of the examined states (n = 37), are completely above
the NH Asian percent population share in 1 state (Minnesota), and are completely below the NH
Asian percent population share in 8 states. Furthermore, in 3 of the examined states (Minnesota,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin), the NH Asian conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of
total YPLL are completely above the NH Asian intervals of the percentage of total deaths, indicating
that NH Asians die from COVID-19 at statistically discernably earlier ages than individuals of other
racial/ethnic groups in these states. Conversely, in 2 of the examined states (California and Nevada),
the NH Asian conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are completely
below the NH Asian intervals of the percentage of total deaths, indicating that NH Asians die from
COVID-19 at statistically discernably older ages than individuals of other racial/ethnic groups in these
states. In Minnesota, the direction of the disparity in fact reverses when using YPLL rather than death
counts to measure mortality: NH Asians comprise 5.5% of the population and only 3.6%–4.5% of total
deaths, but the conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is [8.0% – 15.1%].
The estimated ordered relationship between the NH Asian percent population share, percentage of
total deaths, and percentage of total YPLL in California is unique among the 46 examined states:
NH Asians represent 16.0% of the population but constitute only 11.6%–11.9% of total COVID-19
deaths. However, NH Asian decedent ages are skewed disproportionately toward older ages relative
to the other racial/ethnic groups to such a degree that the conservative 95% interval estimate of
the percentage of total YPLL is only [7.1% – 8.2%], completely below the NH Asian interval of the
percentage of total deaths.
Figure 7 presents a graphical comparison of the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White YPLL and mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each examined

Figure 7. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White YPLL and
mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020. States are ordered from top to bottom in descending order of the signed
difference between the lower limit of the YPLL RR interval and the upper limit of the mortality RR
interval. Values are displayed on the base 10 logarithmic scale. Interval endpoints above 20.0 and
below 0.30 are truncated, with the actual values numerically annotated.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18 of 27

state. The U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White
mortality RR is [0.83 – 0.95], meaning that after accounting for differences in the national population
age distributions between NH Asians and NH Whites, NH Asians actually die from COVID-19 at a rate
that is statistically discernably lower than that of NH Whites. At the individual state level, however,
the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White mortality RR are
completely above 1.0 in 14 of the examined states and completely below 1.0 in only 4 of the examined
states. Moreover, NH Asian decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed disproportionately toward
younger ages relative to NH Whites, after accounting for differences in the national population age
distributions between NH Asians and NH Whites, to such a degree that the U.S. national conservative
95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White YPLL RR is [0.99 – 1.17], completely
above the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White
mortality RR and also nearly representing a statistically discernable reversal in the direction of the
age-adjusted NH Asian-NH White disparity in the COVID-19 mortality burden. At the individual state
level, however, the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White
YPLL RR are completely above the intervals of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White mortality RR
in only 4 of the 46 examined states (California, Minnesota, New Jersey, and Wisconsin) and completely
below in none of the examined states, suggesting that the age-adjusted national trend of NH Asians
dying from COVID-19 at earlier ages than NH Whites is driven in large part by a small subset of
states. Furthermore, conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White
YPLL RR are completely above 1.0 in 11 of the examined states, slightly below the corresponding
number for the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White mortality RR’s, but completely above 2.0 in
2 of the examined states (Minnesota and Wisconsin). In particular, the conservative 95% interval
estimate of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White YPLL RR in Minnesota ([3.82 – 6.05]) stands out
markedly among the examined states with the highest age-adjusted NH Asian-NH White disparity in
COVID-19-attributable YPLL.
3.5. Results for Non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Natives
Figure 8 displays a graphical comparison between the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
percentage of total YPLL, intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage of total deaths,
and the percent population share for NH AIAN’s in the U.S. and in each examined state. Nationally,
COVID-19 deaths among NH AIAN’s are overrepresented, comprising 1.1%–1.6% of COVID-19 deaths
despite representing only 0.84% of the U.S. population. At the individual state level, NH AIAN
intervals of the percentage of total deaths are completely above the NH AIAN population share in 12
of the examined states and completely below in only 1 state (Florida). However, NH AIAN COVID-19
decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed disproportionately toward younger ages to such a degree
that the U.S. national NH AIAN conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is
[2.0% – 2.6%], completely above the NH AIAN interval of the percentage of total deaths. Moreover,
at the individual state level, the NH AIAN conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of
total YPLL are completely above the NH AIAN intervals of the percentage of total deaths in 10 of
the examined states and completely below in none of the examined states. For example, in South
Dakota, NH AIAN’s represent 8.8% of the population and 10.6%–12.4% of total deaths, but the NH
AIAN conservative 95% interval estimate of the percentage of total YPLL is an even greater [20.4%
– 45.5%]. The NH AIAN conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL are
completely above the NH AIAN percent population share in 15 of the examined states, greater than the
corresponding number for the NH AIAN intervals of the percentage of total deaths, and completely
below in none of the examined states. The magnitudes of the disparities in the COVID-19 mortality
burden for NH AIAN’s are shockingly immense in 3 of the examined states (Arizona, Montana, and
New Mexico), with both the NH AIAN conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total
YPLL and the NH AIAN intervals of the percentage of total deaths exorbitantly exceeding the NH
AIAN percent population share. For example, NH AIAN’s represent only 9.1% of the population of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

19 of 27

Figure 8. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the percentage of total YPLL before age 75, intervals
denoting the entire plausible range for the percentage of total deaths, and the percent population shares
for NH AIAN’s in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020.

New Mexico but a stunning 34.8%–35.7% of total deaths, yet the interval estimate of the percentage of
total YPLL is a staggering [48.5% – 57.0%].
Figure 9 presents a graphical comparison of the conservative 95% interval estimates of the
age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL and mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each examined state.
The U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White
mortality RR is [1.82 – 2.70], and the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH
AIAN-to-NH White mortality RR are completely above 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 in 14, 8, and 6 of the examined
states, respectfully. However, NH AIAN COVID-19 decedent ages in the U.S. overall are skewed
disproportionately toward younger ages relative to NH Whites, after accounting for differences in
the national population age distributions between NH AIAN’s and NH Whites, to such a degree
that the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White
YPLL RR is [3.79 – 5.06], completely above the U.S. national conservative 95% interval estimate of the
age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White mortality RR. At the individual state level, the conservative
95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above
the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH Asian-to-NH White mortality RR in
7 of the 46 examined states and completely below in none of the examined states, suggesting that
the age-adjusted national trend of NH AIAN’s dying from COVID-19 at younger ages relative to NH
Whites is driven in large part by a small subset of states. Furthermore, conservative 95% interval
estimates of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL RR are completely above 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0
in 20, 14, and 11 of the examined states, respectfully, greater than the corresponding numbers for the
age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White mortality RR’s. The conservative 95% interval estimates of the
age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL RR in 4 of the examined states (which are among the 7
states where the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL
RR are completely above the conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

20 of 27

Figure 9. Conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted NH AIAN-to-NH White YPLL and
mortality RR’s in the U.S. and in each of the 45 examined states and the District of Columbia with
respect to cumulative COVID-19 deaths according to data from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020. States are ordered from top to bottom in descending order of the signed
difference between the lower limit of the YPLL RR interval and the upper limit of the mortality RR
interval. Values are displayed on the base 10 logarithmic scale. Interval endpoints above 20.0 and
below 0.30 are truncated, with the actual values numerically annotated.

White mortality RR) stand out starkly among the examined states with the highest age-adjusted NH
AIAN-NH White disparities in COVID-19-attributable YPLL and are simply astronomical: Arizona
([14.79 – 23.70]), Mississippi ([17.97 – 34.13]), Montana ([11.14 – 22.46]), and New Mexico ([11.83 –
31.63]).
4. Discussion
Over 926,058 years of potential life before the age of 75 have been lost in the U.S. as a result of
COVID-19, according to (lagged) NCHS data as of December 30, 2020, corresponding to 301,679 deaths.
Proportionally scaling up this lower bound to the true number of COVID-19 deaths as of December 30,
2020 (342,577), as documented by the New York Times, results in an estimated lower bound of total
U.S. COVID-19-attributable YPLL in excess of 1 million. However, the relative COVID-19 mortality
burden by race/ethnicity has been far from equitable. Building upon the national comparative YPLL
analysis by race/ethnicity by Bassett et al., we performed a corresponding state-by-state analysis,
quantifying racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19-attributable YPLL and death counts in 45 states
and D.C. Because our YPLL analyses were performed at a more geographically precise level, they
allowed for the identification of individual states where racial/ethnic disparities are particularly
exacerbated and where younger non-NH White populations have been disproportionately devastated,
as well as states that are exceptions to overarching national trends, which may aid in ascertaining
important state-level characteristics that may be associated with the observed racial/ethnic disparities
in COVID-19 mortality. Although a comprehensive investigation into the specific reasons as to why
certain states possess higher degrees of racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19-attributable mortality
than others is outside the scope of this paper, our analyses serve as an initial exploratory tool to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

21 of 27

investigate why communities of color are harder hit from the U.S. COVID-19 epidemic in some states
than in others.
Researchers have proposed multiple narratives to explain the vast disparities in the COVID-19
mortality burden by race/ethnicity. For example, Blacks and Hispanics in the U.S. have higher rates of
underlying medical conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, and obesity [66,67], which have been
established as definitive or probable risk factors of severe illness as a result of COVID-19 infection
[68], and it has been hypothesized that the high prevalence of these conditions among Blacks and
Hispanics in the U.S. contributes in large part to the observed disparities. Genetic factors have also
been speculated as playing a role in the excess mortality experienced by Blacks in particular [69–71].
However, given that racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19 mortality burden reflect disparities
in both the risk of COVID-19 infection and the risk of severe illness given COVID-19 infection,
the underlying causes of the racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19 mortality burden are likely
multi-faceted, comprising a complex and interactive combination of factors, including the prevalence
of pre-existing comorbid conditions and potentially genetic factors. However, the wide geographical
variation of the magnitudes of the estimated racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19 mortality
burden across states suggests that they are driven in large part by social determinants of health [72]
whose degree of association with race/ethnicity varies state to state, a perspective widely propounded
in the scientific community [73–78]. In the context of COVID-19, social determinants of health that
shape different experiences of individuals in different racial/ethnic groups may include differential
access to healthcare, housing conditions, environmental conditions, and domain of employment
[79]. For example, Blacks and Hispanics are overrepresented in many frontline essential industries
[80–82], resulting in higher rates of COVID-19 exposure and potential subsequent mortality. Blacks and
Hispanics also generally experience higher rates of industrial air pollution [83], which may increase
the risk of COVID-19 mortality [84]. While an important limitation of our analyses is that they are
descriptive in nature, the sheer magnitude of many of the estimated state-level disparities in our
analyses speaks to the degree of urgency for communities of color in relation to the U.S. COVID-19
epidemic.
At the time of writing, two COVID-19 vaccines, one manufactured by Pfizer, Inc./BioNTech [85]
and the other by ModernaTX, Inc. [86], have been granted emergency use authorization by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, with several vaccine candidates in Phase III clinical trials. Vaccine
distribution strategy has been the subject of rigorous public policy debate, with varying opinions on
which segments of the population to prioritize for vaccination [87,88]. In any case, it is critical that
communities of color particularly devastated by the U.S. COVID-19 epidemic have direct and equitable
access to COVID-19 vaccines. Nevertheless, while vaccination serves as the most potent tool to fight
COVID-19, both vaccine-based and non-pharmaceutical interventions should be pursued to prevent
the further devastation of communities of color from the U.S. COVID-19 epidemic and to confront
future public health crises.
5. Conclusions
In summary, we performed an extensive secondary analysis of U.S. national COVID-19 death
counts stratified by state, race/ethnicity, and age group from the National Center for Health Statistics
as of December 30, 2020, quantifying racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19-attributable YPLL before
age 75 in each of 45 states and D.C. Specifically, we quantified these disparities in YPLL through
the estimation of percentages of total YPLL by race/ethnicity, contrasting them with their respective
percent population shares, as well as age-adjusted YPLL RR’s for NH Blacks, Hispanics, NH Asians,
and NH AIAN’s relative to NH Whites. Substantially complicating our analyses, however, were
three sources of uncertainty in the data, namely, the administrative interval censoring of ages at
death (precluding the exact calculation of YPLL), suppression of death counts between 1 and 9
within age intervals denoting age at death, and unknown race/ethnicity for a subset of COVID-19
deaths. We overcame these challenges in estimation by developing a novel adaptation of the MC

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

22 of 27

simulation procedure proposed by Xu et al. that targets estimation of the extrema of the values
of the estimands of interest that could theoretically be attained. However, a consequence of this
conservative estimation strategy was wide interval estimates in scenarios for states and racial/ethnic
groups corresponding to a high ratio of potential suppressed death counts to non-suppressed death
counts and/or a comparatively large number of deaths with unknown race/ethnicity, which can reduce
the power to detect racial/ethnic disparities when they exist and are small. Despite these challenges in
estimation, our analyses revealed substantial racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19-attributable YPLL
before age 75 across U.S. states, with a prevailing pattern of NH Blacks and Hispanics experiencing
disproportionately high COVID-19-attributable YPLL and NH Whites experiencing disproportionately
low COVID-19-attributable YPLL. For comparison, we also calculated bounds for the corresponding
percentages of total deaths and estimated the corresponding age-adjusted mortality RR’s in the 45
examined states and D.C., which revealed that racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19 mortality
burden are generally greater in magnitude when measuring mortality in terms of YPLL compared
to (age-irrespective) death counts, reflecting the greater intensity of the disparities at younger ages.
The substantial state-to-state variation in the magnitudes of the estimated racial/ethnic disparities
suggests that these disparities are driven in large part by social determinants of health encompassing
domains such as healthcare access, housing conditions, environmental conditions, and domain of
employment, whose degree of association with race/ethnicity varies by state. COVID-19 certainly
didn’t cause racial/ethnic disparities in health outcomes, but it did highlight and bring unprecedented
national attention to long-standing societal and health inequalities that many communities of color in
the U.S. face. Only time will tell whether the U.S. COVID-19 epidemic catalyzes sustained efforts to
reduce and eventually eliminate racial/ethnic disparities in health outcomes.
Supplementary Materials: File S1: Cumulative COVID-19 death counts in the U.S. stratified by state,
race/ethnicity, and age group from the National Center for Health Statistics as of December 30, 2020, File
S2: Cumulative COVID-19 death counts in the U.S. stratified by state, sex, and age group from the National
Center for Health Statistics as of December 30, 2020, File S3: 2019 CDC WONDER estimates of the U.S. population
stratified by state, race, ethnicity, and age group, Table S1: Conservative 95% interval estimates of total YPLL
by race/ethnicity in the U.S. and in each examined state, Table S2: Intervals denoting the entire plausible range
of total deaths by race/ethnicity in the U.S. and in each examined state, Table S3: Conservative 95% interval
estimates of the percentage of total YPLL and intervals denoting the entire plausible range of the percentage
of total deaths by race/ethnicity in the U.S. and in each examined state, Table S4: Conservative 95% interval
estimates of age-adjusted YPLL and mortality rates by race/ethnicity in the U.S. and in each examined state, Table
S5: Conservative 95% interval estimates of the age-adjusted YPLL and mortality RR’s for NH Blacks, Hispanics,
NH Asians, and NH AIAN’s relative to NH Whites in the U.S. and in each examined state.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.J.X.; Data curation, J.J.X.; Formal analysis, J.J.X.; Methodology, J.J.X.;
Software, J.J.X.; Visualization, J.J.X.; Writing – original draft, J.J.X.; Writing – review & editing, J.J.X., J.T.C., T.R.B.,
R.S.B., M.A.S. and C.M.R.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: T.R.B. has received support from NIH/NCATS grant UL1 TR001881 and NIH/NIMH grant
P30 MH058107 in addition to funding outside the scope of this work from the Patient Centered Outcomes Research
Institute and the Movember Foundation. M.A.S. has received contracts from Janssen Research & Development,
LLC; Private Health Management, Inc.; the United States Department of Veteran Affairs; and the United States
Food & Drug Administration and research grants from the National Institutes of Health, all outside the scope of
this work. C.M.R. has received a contract from Private Health Management, Inc. outside the scope of this work.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

23 of 27

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
CDC
D.C.
NCHS
NH AIAN
NH Asian
NH Black
NH White
RR
U.S.
YPLL

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
District of Columbia
National Center for Health Statistics
Non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Native
Non-Hispanic Asian
Non-Hispanic Black
Non-Hispanic White
Rate Ratio
United States
Years of Potential Life Lost

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

Minority groups at risk as states withhold, provide partial COVID-19 racial data, Accessed January 28, 2021. https:
//abcnews.go.com/Politics/states-missing-covid-19-racial-ethnic-data-creates/story?id=70338255.
Krieger, N.; Gonsalves, G.; Bassett, M.; Hanage, W.; Krumholz, H. The Fierce Urgency Of
Now: Closing Glaring Gaps In US Surveillance Data On COVID-19.
Health Affairs Blog 2020.
doi:10.1377/hblog20200414.238084.
COVID-19 Hospitalization and Death by Race/Ethnicity, Accessed January 28, 2021.
https:
//www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/investigations-discovery/hospitalizationdeath-by-race-ethnicity.html.
Millett, G.A.; Jones, A.T.; Benkeser, D.; Baral, S.; Mercer, L.; Beyrer, C.; Honermann, B.; Lankiewicz, E.;
Mena, L.; Crowley, J.S.; others. Assessing differential impacts of COVID-19 on Black communities. Annals
of Epidemiology 2020, 47, 37–44.
Karaca-Mandic, P.; Georgiou, A.; Sen, S. Assessment of COVID-19 Hospitalizations by Race/Ethnicity in
12 States. JAMA Internal Medicine.
Holtgrave, D.R.; Barranco, M.A.; Tesoriero, J.M.; Blog, D.S.; Rosenberg, E.S. Assessing racial and ethnic
disparities using a COVID-19 outcomes continuum for New York State. Annals of Epidemiology 2020,
48, 9–14.
Golestaneh, L.; Neugarten, J.; Fisher, M.; Billett, H.H.; Gil, M.R.; Johns, T.; Yunes, M.; Mokrzycki, M.H.;
Coco, M.; Norris, K.C.; others. The association of race and COVID-19 mortality. EClinicalMedicine 2020, p.
100455.
Renelus, B.D.; Khoury, N.C.; Chandrasekaran, K.; Bekele, E.; Briggs, W.M.; Ivanov, A.; Mohanty, S.R.;
Jamorabo, D.S. Racial Disparities in COVID-19 Hospitalization and In-hospital Mortality at the Height of
the New York City Pandemic. Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities 2020, pp. 1–7.
Lieberman-Cribbin, W.; Tuminello, S.; Flores, R.M.; Taioli, E. Disparities in COVID-19 Testing and Positivity
in New York City. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2020, 59, 326–332.
Rodriguez-Diaz, C.E.; Guilamo-Ramos, V.; Mena, L.; Hall, E.; Honermann, B.; Crowley, J.S.; Baral, S.;
Prado, G.J.; Marzan-Rodriguez, M.; Beyrer, C.; Sullivan, P.S.; Millett, G.A. Risk for COVID-19 infection and
death among Latinos in the United States: Examining heterogeneity in transmission dynamics. Annals of
Epidemiology 2020, 52, 46–53.
Gross, C.P.; Essien, U.R.; Pasha, S.; Gross, J.R.; Wang, S.y.; Nunez-Smith, M. Racial and Ethnic Disparities
in Population-Level Covid-19 Mortality. Journal of General Internal Medicine.
Arasteh, K. Prevalence of Comorbidities and Risks Associated with COVID-19 Among Black and Hispanic
Populations in New York City: an Examination of the 2018 New York City Community Health Survey.
Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities 2020, pp. 1–7.
Abedi, V.; Olulana, O.; Avula, V.; Chaudhary, D.; Khan, A.; Shahjouei, S.; Li, J.; Zand, R. Racial, Economic,
and Health Inequality and COVID-19 Infection in the United States. Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health
Disparities 2020, pp. 1–11.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

24 of 27

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.

Thomas, M.D.; Michaels, E.K.; Darling-Hammond, S.; Nguyen, T.T.; Glymour, M.M.; Vittinghoff, E. Whites’
County-Level Racial Bias, COVID-19 Rates, and Racial Inequities in the United States. International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health 2020, 17, 8695.
Zelner, J.; Trangucci, R.; Naraharisetti, R.; Cao, A.; Malosh, R.; Broen, K.; Masters, N.; Delamater, P. Racial
Disparities in Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Mortality Are Driven by Unequal Infection Risks.
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2020, p. ciaa1723.
Wang, Q.; Berger, N.A.; Xu, R. Analyses of Risk, Racial Disparity, and Outcomes Among US Patients With
Cancer and COVID-19 Infection. JAMA Oncology 2020.
Tirupathi, R.; Muradova, V.; Shekhar, R.; Salim, S.A.; Al-Tawfiq, J.A.; Palabindala, V. COVID-19 disparity
among racial and ethnic minorities in the US: A cross sectional analysis. Travel Medicine and Infectious
Disease 2020, 38, 101904.
Muñoz-Price, L.S.; Nattinger, A.B.; Rivera, F.; Hanson, R.; Gmehlin, C.G.; Perez, A.; Singh, S.; Buchan,
B.W.; Ledeboer, N.A.; Pezzin, L.E. Racial Disparities in Incidence and Outcomes Among Patients With
COVID-19. JAMA Network Open 2020, 3, e2021892–e2021892.
Parcha, V.; Malla, G.; Suri, S.S.; Kalra, R.; Heindl, B.; Berra, L.; Fouad, M.N.; Arora, G.; Arora, P. Geographic
Variation in Racial Disparities in Health and Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) Mortality. Mayo Clinic
Proceedings: Innovations, Quality & Outcomes 2020, 4, 703–716.
Gu, T.; Mack, J.A.; Salvatore, M.; Sankar, S.P.; Valley, T.S.; Singh, K.; Nallamothu, B.K.; Kheterpal, S.;
Lisabeth, L.; Fritsche, L.G.; others. Characteristics Associated With Racial/Ethnic Disparities in COVID-19
Outcomes in an Academic Health Care System. JAMA Network Open 2020, 3, e2025197–e2025197.
Vahidy, F.S.; Nicolas, J.C.; Meeks, J.R.; Khan, O.; Pan, A.; Jones, S.L.; Masud, F.; Sostman, H.D.; Phillips, R.;
Andrieni, J.D.; others. Racial and ethnic disparities in SARS-CoV-2 pandemic: analysis of a COVID-19
observational registry for a diverse US metropolitan population. BMJ Open 2020, 10, e039849.
Ogedegbe, G.; Ravenell, J.; Adhikari, S.; Butler, M.; Cook, T.; Francois, F.; Iturrate, E.; Jean-Louis, G.; Jones,
S.A.; Onakomaiya, D.; others. Assessment of Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Hospitalization and Mortality in
Patients With COVID-19 in New York City. JAMA Network Open 2020, 3, e2026881–e2026881.
Strully, K.; Yang, T.C.; Liu, H. Regional variation in COVID-19 disparities: connections with immigrant
and Latinx communities in US counties. Annals of Epidemiology 2021, 53, 56–62.
The Color of Coronavirus: COVID-19 Deaths by Race and Ethnicity in the U.S., Accessed January 28, 2021.
https://www.apmresearchlab.org/covid/deaths-by-race.
The COVID Racial Data Tracker, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://covidtracking.com/race.
Gardner, J.W.; Sanborn, J.S. Years of Potential Life Lost (YPLL)—What Does it Measure? Epidemiology 1990,
pp. 322–329.
Desenclos, J.C.A.; Hahn, R.A. Years of potential life lost before age 65, by race, Hispanic origin, and
sex—United States, 1986–1988. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: CDC Surveillance Summaries 1992, pp.
13–23.
Li, C.; Ekwueme, D.U.; Rim, S.H.; Tangka, F.K. Years of Potential Life Lost and Productivity Losses From
Male Urogenital Cancer Deaths—United States, 2004. Urology 2010, 76, 528–535.
Max, W.; Sung, H.Y.; Shi, Y. Deaths From Secondhand Smoke Exposure in the United States: Economic
Implications. American Journal of Public Health 2012, 102, 2173–2180.
Bassett, M.T.; Chen, J.T.; Krieger, N. Variation in racial/ethnic disparities in COVID-19 mortality by age in
the United States: A cross-sectional study. PLOS Medicine 2020.
Deaths involving coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) by race and Hispanic origin group and age, by state,
Accessed December 30, 2020. https://data.cdc.gov/NCHS/Deaths-involving-coronavirus-disease-2019COVID-19/ks3g-spdg.
Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://github.com/nytimes/
covid-19-data.
U.S. Deaths Are Up Sharply, Though Covid-19’s Precise Toll Is Murky, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://
www.wsj.com/articles/covid-19s-exact-toll-is-murky-though-u-s-deaths-are-up-sharply-11589555652.
Excess Deaths From COVID-19 and Other Causes, March-April 2020, author=Woolf, Steven H and
Chapman, Derek A and Sabo, Roy T and Weinberger, Daniel M and Hill, Latoya. JAMA 2020, 324, 510–513.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25 of 27

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Weinberger, D.M.; Chen, J.; Cohen, T.; Crawford, F.W.; Mostashari, F.; Olson, D.; Pitzer, V.E.; Reich, N.G.;
Russi, M.; Simonsen, L.; others. Estimation of Excess Deaths Associated With the COVID-19 Pandemic in
the United States, March to May 2020. JAMA Internal Medicine 2020, 180, 1336–1344.
Why is NC delayed in reporting COVID-19 death data? It’s about death certificates., Accessed January 28,
2021. https://www.northcarolinahealthnews.org/2020/09/18/why-is-nc-delayed-in-reporting-covid19-death-data/.
Provisional COVID-19 Death Counts by Sex, Age, and State, Accessed December 30, 2020. https://data.cdc.
gov/NCHS/Provisional-COVID-19-Death-Counts-by-Sex-Age-and-S/9bhg-hcku.
Bridged-Race Population Estimates 1990-2019 Request, Accessed December 30, 2020. https://wonder.cdc.
gov/Bridged-Race-v2019.HTML.
Rothman, K.J.; Greenland, S.; Lash, T.L. Modern Epidemiology; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008.
Romeder, J.; McWhinnie, J. Potential Years of Life Lost Between Ages 1 and 70: An Indicator of Premature
Mortality for Health Planning. International Journal of Epidemiology 1977, 6, 143–151.
Arcà, M.; Di Orio, F.; Forastiere, F.; Tasco, C.; Perucci, C. Years of Potential Life Lost (YPLL) before Age 65
in Italy. American Journal of Public Health 1988, 78, 1202–1205.
Curran, J.W.; Morgan, W.M.; Hardy, A.M.; Jaffe, H.W.; Darrow, W.W.; Dowdle, W.R. The epidemiology of
AIDS: current status and future prospects. Science 1985, 229, 1352–1357.
Albert, V.A.; Koh, H.K.; Geller, A.C.; Miller, D.R.; Prout, M.N.; Lew, R.A. Years of potential life lost: Another
indicator of the impact of cutaneous malignant melanoma on society. Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology 1990, 23, 308–310.
Mitra, A.K.; Payton, M.; Kabir, N.; Whitehead, A.; Ragland, K.N.; Brown, A. Potential Years of Life Lost Due
to COVID-19 in the United States, Italy, and Germany: An Old Formula with Newer Ideas. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 2020, 17, 4392.
Xu, J.J.; Belin, T.R.; Ramirez, C.M. Uncertainty Quantification of Years of Potential Life Lost-Based Estimates
from Mortality Data Summarized as Death Counts Within Age Intervals. Annals of Epidemiology 2021,
55, 1–3.
Bobashev, G.V.; Morris, R.J. Uncertainty and Inference in Agent-based Models. 2010 Second International
Conference on Advances in System Simulation. IEEE, 2010, pp. 67–71.
Celentano, D.D.; Szklo, M. Gordis Epidemiology; Elsevier, 2019.
Racial Data Transparency, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/racial-datatransparency.
Table 25. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2007, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2010/
025.pdf.
Table 25. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980-2010, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2011/
025.pdf.
Table 21. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2010, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2012/
021.pdf.
Table 21. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2011, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2013/
021.pdf.
Table 19. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2013, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2014/
019.pdf.
Table 18 (page 1 of 4). Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic
origin: United States, selected years 1980–2014, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/hus/2015/018.pdf.
Table 18. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2015, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2016/
018.pdf.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

26 of 27

56.

57.
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.

72.
73.
74.

75.

76.

Table 18. Years of potential life lost before age 75 for selected causes of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin: United
States, selected years 1980–2016, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2017/
018.pdf.
Borse, N.N.; Rudd, R.A.; Dellinger, A.M.; Sleet, D.A. Years of potential life lost from unintentional child
and adolescent injuries—United States, 2000–2009. Journal of Safety Research 2013, 45, 127–131.
Khalil, M.I.; Bimali, M.; Davis, R.; Machado, B.; Kamel, M. MP23-06 Racial Disparities in Years of Potential
Life Lost Secondary to Untreated Low and Intermediate Risk Prostate Cancer Deaths. The Journal of Urology
2020, 203, e339–e340.
Ekwueme, D.U.; Guy Jr, G.P.; Li, C.; Rim, S.H.; Parelkar, P.; Chen, S.C. The health burden and economic
costs of cutaneous melanoma mortality by race/ethnicity–United States, 2000 to 2006. Journal of the
American Academy of Dermatology 2011, 65, S133–e1.
Ekwueme, D.U.; Guy Jr, G.P.; Rim, S.H.; White, A.; Hall, I.J.; Fairley, T.L.; Dean, H.D. Health and Economic
Impact of Breast Cancer Mortality in Young Women, 1970—2008. American Journal of Preventive Medicine
2014, 46, 71–79.
Bucholz, E.M.; Normand, S.L.T.; Wang, Y.; Ma, S.; Lin, H.; Krumholz, H.M. Life Expectancy and Years of
Potential Life Lost After Acute Myocardial Infarction by Sex and Race A Cohort-Based Study of Medicare
Beneficiaries. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 2015, 66, 645–655.
Iyer, D.G.; Shah, N.S.; Hastings, K.G.; Hu, J.; Rodriguez, F.; Boothroyd, D.B.; Krishnan, A.V.; Falasinnu,
T.; Palaniappan, L. Years of Potential Life Lost Because of Cardiovascular Disease in Asian-American
Subgroups, 2003–2012. Journal of the American Heart Association 2019, 8, e010744.
Buchanich, J.M.; Doerfler, S.M.; Lann, M.F.; Marsh, G.M.; Burke, D.S. Improvement in racial disparities in
years of life lost in the USA since 1990. PloS ONE 2018, 13, e0194308.
Shah, N.S.; Molsberry, R.; Rana, J.S.; Sidney, S.; Capewell, S.; O’Flaherty, M.; Carnethon, M.; Lloyd-Jones,
D.M.; Khan, S.S. Heterogeneous trends in burden of heart disease mortality by subtypes in the United
States, 1999-2018: observational analysis of vital statistics. BMJ 2020, 370.
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2019.
Profile: Black/African Americans, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.
aspx?lvl=3&lvlid=61.
Profile: Hispanic/Latino Americans, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/
browse.aspx?lvl=3&lvlid=64.
People with Certain Medical Conditions, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-with-medical-conditions.html.
Giudicessi, J.R.; Roden, D.M.; Wilde, A.A.; Ackerman, M.J. Genetic susceptibility for COVID-19–associated
sudden cardiac death in African Americans. Heart Rhythm 2020, 17, 1487–1492.
Bunyavanich, S.; Grant, C.; Vicencio, A. Racial/Ethnic Variation in Nasal Gene Expression of
Transmembrane Serine Protease 2 (TMPRSS2). JAMA 2020, 324, 1567–1568.
Sarangarajan, R.; Winn, R.; Kiebish, M.A.; Bountra, C.; Granger, E.; Narain, N.R. Ethnic Prevalence of
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Deletion (D) Polymorphism and COVID-19 Risk: Rationale for Use of
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/Angiotensin Receptor Blockers. Journal of Racial and Ethnic
Health Disparities 2020.
Social Determinants of Health, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectivesand-data/social-determinants-health.
Abrams, E.M.; Szefler, S.J. COVID-19 and the impact of social determinants of health. The Lancet. Respiratory
Medicine 2020.
Shah, G.H.; Shankar, P.; Schwind, J.S.; Sittaramane, V. The Detrimental Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis on
Health Equity and Social Determinants of Health. Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 2020,
26, 317–319.
Shah, G.H.; Shankar, P.; Schwind, J.S.; Sittaramane, V. The Detrimental Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis on
Health Equity and Social Determinants of Health. Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 2020,
26, 317–319.
Rollston, R.; Galea, S. COVID-19 and the Social Determinants of Health 2020. 34, 687–689.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.28.21249411; this version posted January 31, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

27 of 27

77.

78.

79.
80.

81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.

Maness, S.B.; Merrell, L.; Thompson, E.L.; Griner, S.B.; Kline, N.; Wheldon, C. Social Determinants of
Health and Health Disparities: COVID-19 Exposures and Mortality Among African American People in
the United States. Public Health Reports 2021, 136, 18–22.
Dalsania, A.K.; Fastiggi, M.J.; Kahlam, A.; Shah, R.; Patel, K.; Shiau, S.; Rokicki, S.; DallaPiazza, M. The
Relationship Between Social Determinants of Health and Racial Disparities in COVID-19 Mortality. Journal
of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities 2021.
Singu, S.; Acharya, A.; Challagundla, K.; Byrareddy, S.N. Impact of Social Determinants of Health on the
Emerging COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States. Frontiers in Public Health 2020, 8.
Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey. HOUSEHOLD DATA. ANNUAL AVERAGES.
Employed persons by detailed industry, sex, race, and Hispanic or Latino ethnicity, Accessed January 28, 2021.
https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat18.htm.
Rogers, T.N.; Rogers, C.R.; VanSant-Webb, E.; Gu, L.Y.; Yan, B.; Qeadan, F. Racial Disparities in COVID-19
Mortality Among Essential Workers in the United States. World Medical & Health Policy 2020, 12, 311–327.
Selden, T.M.; Berdahl, T.A. COVID-19 And Racial/Ethnic Disparities In Health Risk, Employment, And
Household Composition. Health Affairs 2020, 39, 1624–1632.
Zwickl, K.; Ash, M.; Boyce, J.K. Regional variation in environmental inequality: Industrial air toxics
exposure in US cities. Ecological Economics 2014, 107, 494–509.
Wu, X.; Nethery, R.; Sabath, M.; Braun, D.; Dominici, F. Air pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United
States: Strengths and limitations of an ecological regression analysis. Science Advances 2020, 6, eabd4049.
Information about the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines/Pfizer-BioNTech.html.
Information about the Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines/Moderna.html.
People Are Dying. Whom Do We Save First With the Vaccine?, Accessed January 28, 2021. https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/12/24/magazine/who-should-get-the-covid-vaccine-next.html.
The Elderly vs. Essential Workers: Who Should Get the Coronavirus Vaccine First?, Accessed January 28, 2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/05/health/covid-vaccine-first.html.

