medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

China’s fight against COVID-19:
What we have done and what we should do next?
Sixiang Cheng, MDa,b, Yuxin Zhao, MDa, Atipatsa Chiwanda Kaminga, MD c, d,
Pingxin Zhang, phD e, Huilan Xu, phDa*
Affiliations
a

Department of Social Medicine and Health Management, Xiangya School of Public
Health, Central South University, Changsha 410078, Hunan Province, China.
b

College of Data Science and Information Engineering, Guizhou Minzu University,
Guiyang 550025, Guizhou Province, China.
c

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Mzuzu University, Private Bag 201,
Luwinga, Mzuzu 2, Malawi
d

Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, Xiangya School of Public Health,

Central South University, Changsha 410078, Hunan, China
e

School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China
Contact information
*Corresponding author: Huilan Xu
Email: xhl_csu@163.com

Abstract
Background: On 12 March, the World Health Organization Director-General
declared that “the threat of a global pandemic has become a reality”, and the disease
caused by the novel coronavirus, known as COVID-19, has become a global concern.
Chinese efforts in curbing the virus have widely been recognized. Even the WHO has
lauded the efforts of the Chinese government and advised the world to learn from
China in fighting the disease. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, to curb the spread of
the epidemic, the Chinese government has implemented unprecedented prevention
interventions at the nationwide level. Currently, the outbreak in Wuhan is changing in
a positive direction and has been effectively controlled. However, it is not clear what
these measures were and how these measures changed to curb the outbreak of
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 quickly. This study explored the characteristics and identified that China's
control strategies have changed the epidemiological curve of rapidly rising new
confirmed cases of COVID-19. This study also seeks to expand the experiences and
lessons from this outbreak.
Methods: We collected public health interventions measures from Jan 20, 2020, to 5
March 2020, and data from COVID-19 daily newly confirmed cases and daily
cumulates cases to compare the control effects and changing trends. We performed a
retrospective description of these intervention strategies from three stages. Besides,
from the perspective of public health, the experiences and lessons exposed by this
outbreak were roughly summarized.
Results: These non-pharmacology interventions measures adopted by the Chinese
government by the instruction and spirit of President Xi Jinping were timely and
efficient.
Conclusions: The present study was conducted to comprehensively analyze from a
social epidemiology context. The results confirmed that these radical interventions
taken by the Chinese government were effective, ambitious, and agile. However, we
must be aware that the epidemic situation in Wuhan is still challenging.
Keywords: China; COVID-19; intervention measures; change features, lessons

1. Introduction
An unprecedented outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan, Hubei
Province, China, emerged in December 2019. A novel coronavirus was identified as
the causative agent and was subsequently termed SARS-CoV-2 by the World Health
Organization (WHO). Epidemic disease quickly spread across 31 provinces and
regions. As of 23:00 CET on March 5, a total of 98,067 new confirmed cases have
been reported globally, with deaths of 3,281. A total of 17,637 cases have been
confirmed in 78 countries outside China. [1] The new coronavirus outbreak has
surpassed the severity of SARS in 2003.[2, 3] The outbreak of virus coincided with
China's Spring Festival travel peak, and to curb the spread of the disease, the Chinese
government launched unprecedented public health intervention measures, such as
shutting down Wuhan transportation, extending the legal holiday, mass isolation, strict
enforcement of quarantine of all contacts, and canceling all public gatherings and
health public to abide by hygienic practices. To reduce the flow of people, the health
monitoring of returning residents has been conducted at the nationwide level. As of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

16:00 clock on February 28, Dr. Wan’nian Liang, chief of the National Health
Commission's institutional reform department and head of the Chinese expert panel,
said: The virus outbreak in Wuhan is curbed basic. The number of new confirmed
cases per day declined from a high peak of 3,900 cases on 13 February to 323 cases
on 27 February. The number of newly cured cases has exceeded the number of newly
confirmed cases for eight consecutive days since February 20. The proportion of
severe cases declined from 31.6% to 22.4% from February 11 to February 27. The
death rate has fallen from a peak of 9.0% on January 16th to 4.4% now. [4] As the
WHO leader Bruce Aylward said at a COVID-19 news conference on February 24,
“China's made comprehensive non-pharmaceutical interventions, which have
effectively prevented the transmission of the virus, providing important lessons for the
global response to new virus”[5]. This is an unprecedented effort, and it surpasses
previous efforts to combat SARS." However, there is no doubt that no other countries
can follow China's current example.[6] In the global spread background, from the
perspective of social epidemiology, this paper aims to summarize these detailed
intervention measures taken by the Chinese government and explain how the
COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, Hubei Province was effectively controlled by these
public health interventions measures. We also improve the public health system in the
future by summarizing these lessons from this outbreak.
2. Methods
2.1. Ethical approval
This project was not applicable for institutional review board approval because it used
publicly accessible information and data.
2.2. Data extraction and measures collection
The case report data was collected from January 11, 2020, to March 5, 2020, and the
detail intervention measures conducted by China and Hubei Province were described,
along with the subsequent changes in trends and analysis of its effects. Data as
extracted and tabulated in Excel 2010 Microsoft and make data analysis.
Step 1: We extracted the data from the information reporting system of National Health
Committee issued by health emergence office on January 11, 2020 - March 5, 2020,
select the cumulative number of confirmed cases (Mainland in China, Hubei) and the
number of daily new confirmed cases (Mainland in China, Hubei province, Wuhan
city), taking the ratio of daily cumulative cases and daily new cases as the study
indicators, to illustrate how these intervention measures were implemented.
Step 2: Relevant important documents and announcements were collected from the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

official website of the Chinese government and the people's government of Hubei
Province and the people's government of Wuhan by date.
3. Results:
3.1 Response measures summary and data analysis
In this paper, we made a retrospective description and summary of these inventions
strategy at three stages:
Stage 1: During the early stage of the outbreak, before 20 January 2020, the main
strategy focused on preventing the exportation of cases from Wuhan and other priority
areas of Hubei Province and preventing the importation of cases by other provinces;
the overall aim was to control the source infection, blocking transmission and
preventing further spread. The response mechanism was initiated with multisectoral
involvement in joint prevention and control measures. The Huanan Seafood
Wholesale Market in the municipality of Wuhan was closed, and efforts were made to
identify the zoonotic source. Information on the epidemic was sent to WHO on 3
January, and the whole genome sequence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was shared with
WHO on 10 January. Protocols for COVID-19 diagnosis and diagnosis and treatment
were formulated.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the Chinese government has taken the most
comprehensive, thorough and rigorous prevention and control measures to prevent
and control the epidemic. The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
and the State Council quickly launched the national emergency response. A Central
Leadership Group for Epidemic Response and the Joint Prevention and Control
Mechanism of the State Council were established. President Xi Jinping personally
directed and deployed the prevention and work control and requested that the
prevention and control of the COVID-19 outbreak be the top priority of government
at national levels.[7] Prevention and control measures have been implemented rapidly,
from the early stages in Wuhan and other key areas of Hubei province to the current
overall national epidemic. It has been undertaken in three main phases, with important
events defining those phases. COVID-19 outbreak was included in the statutory report
of Class B infectious diseases and border health quarantine infectious diseases on
January 20, which marked the transition from the initial partial control approach to the
comprehensive adoption of various control measures by the law.
On January 22, the state council, the Communist Party of China (CPC) central
committee, The official announcement that Wuhan of Hubei Province, a metropolis of
12 million people, to shut down traffic transportation to control the flow of people. On

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Jan 23, the authorities in Wuhan announced the lockdown of the city, shutting down
all public transportation, canceling flights and trains and closing schools and factories.
On January 25, members of the standing committee of the political bureau of the CPC
central committee held special meetings to restudy and redeployed and launched the
prevention and control of the epidemic, especially the treatment of patients.
On January 27, Prime Minister Li Keqiang headed the Central Leading Group for
Epidemic Response and went to Wuhan to inspect and coordinate the prevention and
control work of relevant departments and provinces (autonomous regions and
municipalities) across the country. Vice-Premier Sun Chunlan, who has been working
on the front lines in Wuhan, has led and coordinated the front-line prevention and
control of the outbreak.
On January 29, all provinces across China had launched the highest level of response
for major public health emergencies.
On Feb 2, construction began on two temporary hospitals.
On Feb 3, medical rescue teams from 20 provinces were urgently selected to
gradually transform 13 exhibition centers in Wuhan into "quadrangle hospitals" to
ensure that mild patients were treated. Two days later, the first three quadrangle
hospitals were opened, and the first mild cases were admitted (there were 4,250 beds
in the three hospitals).On Feb 7, a temporary hospital carried out an acceptance
inspection and was completed (more than 10 days) in Wuhan. On Feb 10, President Xi
Jinping conducted research and guidance on the prevention and control of the
epidemic in Beijing and connected by video conference with the medical staff of
Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital and Wuhan Union Hospital. On Feb 12, nearly 20,000
medical staff members were sent to Wuhan, Hubei Province, and other areas for
medical treatment. We organized medical staff from 19 provinces to provide support
to other areas of Hubei Province.
Stage 2: On February 16, 2020, epidemic prevention and control actions in Wuhan
and Hubei came to the most critical stages. The main strategy was to reduce the
intensity of the outbreak and slow the increase in new cases. In Wuhan and other key
areas of Hubei Province, the focus is on treating patients aggressively, reducing deaths
and preventing export cases from exports. In other provinces, the focus is on the
prevention of importation, containment of disease transmission and implementation of
joint prevention and control measures. At the most critical stage of epidemic
prevention and control, Wuhan was still the main battle area. As of Feb 24, there were
9 new hospitals with more than 6,960 beds, and 5,606 patients were sent to the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

hospital. Besides, excellent medical workers were sent to Hubei and Wuhan from all
places. (1) In terms of reducing the infection rate, Hubei Province, especially Wuhan,
has formulated and implemented local prevention and control measures according to
the actual situation, strictly implemented the "four early stages" measures, and
effectively completed the classified centralized management of "four types of people".
(2) The prevention and control measures were conducted in the community, with
precise management and it was imperative to make full use of the power at the
community level to curb spread from communities. (3) In terms of improving the
admission rate, distinguish different situations, classify and treat all the existing
patients with confirmed severe diseases, including those with clinical diagnosis, in a
designated hospital, and those with confirmed mild diseases can be treated and
observed at isolation places.
On Feb 16 p.m, the Hubei Province people's government issued the three most
strictest announcements within 1.5 hours. The detail orders were summarized as
follows:
(1) Urban and rural communities and village groups adopted closure management
measures: residential areas were under the strictest closed management for 24 hours;
dragnet dynamic rolling screening for all residents (only 3 days, Feb 16-19): based on
the following principles: conclude the exactly cases number, do not miss a family, do
not leave a person, constantly one day, to ensure full coverage; and strengthening the
epidemiological investigation of the "four categories of people" (exposed infection
persons, close contact of the diagnosed person, suspected cases and confirmed cases).
(2) Strengthening the management of key areas. All non-essential public places shall
be closed, and all mass gathering activities should be stopped.
(3) Strengthening comprehensive health screening of residents: (a) the community
(village), residential areas, buildings, workplaces, and other grassroots units with
confirmed (including clinical diagnosis) cases of new coronavirus pneumonia shall be
firmly isolated in a closed and hard manner for 14 days. (b) carry out dynamic rolling
screening for all residents to ensure that "no one household was missed, no one was
left behind". Ensure all communities must have full coverage.
(4) Strengthening the closure management of rural village groups requires that the
natural village groups (villages) be used as the unit to implement hard isolation. Each
household may send one person every three days to purchase necessary daily
necessities. These detailed measures are summarized in Table 1S as supplemental
files.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Stage 3: The third stage of the outbreak focused on reducing clusters of cases,
thoroughly controlling the epidemic, and striking a balance between epidemic
prevention and control, sustainable economic and social development, the unified
command, standardized guidance, and scientific evidence-based policy
implementation. For Wuhan and other priority areas of Hubei Province, the focus was
on patient treatment and the interruption of transmission, with an emphasis on
concrete steps to fully implement relevant measures for the testing, admitting and
treating of all patients. Wuhan and Hubei Province continue to strictly control traffic
transitions, such as controlling entrances and exits, and other provinces in China are
also trying to prevent the risk of imported cases from other countries.
3.2 New confirmed cases situation
As shown in Figure 1, the highest number of confirmed cases was on 12 February. We
can see that the number of new confirmed cases rose sharply before January 20, this
trend almost to the third week (see Figure 1), but the epidemiological curve in Figure
1 shows that these extraordinary intervention measures directly led to flat declines or
stayed at low levels from February 17 to 20 (Hubei), which indicated the situation
spread of the epidemic of basic be control. The epidemiological curve showed that
such measures directly lead to a flat decline or stay at a low level.

Figure 1.Daily Confirmed cases of COVID-19 in China and Hubei Province.
3.3 Change trends of new confirmed cases:
Figure 2 also presents a trend that peaks near a plateau and then declines on 17 Feb
2020. Obviously, from the respectively of epidemiology, if there is such a curve, it

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

must be due to some interventions. In this study, we believe that these positive results
indicated that the new governors of Hubei Province and Wuhan, who took office from
February 12, have conducted these powerful measures or actions to prevent
transmission from disease rapidly.

Figure 2. Change trends of daily newly confirmed cases and daily cumulative
cases.
4. Discussion
In this paper, we collected these measures systematically and made respective
descriptions. Our purpose is to tell the reader that COVID-19 is spreading globally at
an alarming speed, and an outbreak in any environment could bring very serious
consequences for each country. Some countries in Europe still take vague attitudes
about this outbreak, such as “herd immunity”. People refuse to wear facemasks and so
on. China’s experience has shown that non-pharmacology interventions can reduce or
even stop transmission in some cases successfully. Even in the face of widespread
transmission - what China’s experiences have shown was that if we keep calm, take
action immediately with global, and implement systematic identification case and
contact tracing, we would change the course of the epidemic, prevent people from
getting sick and prevent the most vulnerable from dying.
To the best of our knowledge, the main strategy of “Four early”: “early identification,
early report, early isolation and early treatment” was put forward and concentrating
patients, medical experts, and medical resources into special centers to improve the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

rate of admission and minimize the mortality of severe patients. In Wuhan city and
other priority areas of Hubei Province, the focus was on actively treating patients,
reducing deaths, and preventing exports. In other provinces, the focus was on
preventing importations, curbing the spread of the disease and implementing joint
prevention and control measures. In this fight, medical resources from all over China
have been mobilized to support the medical treatment of patients in Wuhan. A total of
343 medical teams were organized, and 42,200 medical staff members from 29
provinces and Xinjiang production and construction corps were used to assist Wuhan
and Hubei Province. Less than 10 days to construct two temporary hospitals. As of 28
Feb,16 new shelter hospitals to centralize treatment patients based on the principle
that all patients could be treated. It is noticed that the outbreak in China, including the
hardest-hit Hubei Province, had been well under control with high-level measures for
prevention and control, with temporary hospitals playing a role by separating
Non-severe patients. Especially, square cabin hospitals have created a new model for
China to respond to public health emergencies and crises in the future and to rapidly
expand medical resources.
The Chinese government did everything possible to reserve beds, and relevant
premises were repurposed to ensure that all cases could be treated on time. Wuhan
and Hubei Province were treated as a priority for medical materials needs, and many
provinces were organized to help one (total of 19 provinces). Because of the serious
problems in virus prevention and control work in Hubei and Wuhan, the central
committee of the Communist Party of China made timely adjustments to change the
leading groups of the Hubei and Wuhan party committees.
In addition, new technologies such as big data and artificial intelligence are used to
enhance contact tracing and focus group management and resource allocation, to
identify the source of suspected cases, to conduct epidemiological investigations in
the community. The data and information system for epidemic prevention and control
based on the people's public security big data system is an important "weapon" for
Wuhan to win the battle of epidemic prevention and control. Additionally, the Wuhan
government proposed a large step to ensure that 100% of confirmed patients should
be received to the hospital, that 100% of suspected cases were undergoing nucleic
acid-based testing, 100% of fever patients were detected, 100% of close contacts
persons were isolation, and community villages implemented 100% 24-hours closed
management. In particular, the fact of five "hundred percent" told us during February
16-19, 2020, these powerful actions to correct the statement of former Wuhan official
epidemiology investigation data (98.6%)[9].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Zhong Nanshan’s study team [8]et al. used the population migration data on January 23,
2020, and the latest COVID-19 epidemiological data to integrate the classical
infectious disease prediction model (SEIR) to predict the epidemic trend, which
shows that the response measures taken by the Chinese government on January 23
effectively cubed the spread of the epidemic. If these public intervention measures
had been delayed for another five days, the epidemic trend would have tripled, and the
disease spread to many places and grown exponentially in one region, which is
devastating for humans.
Facing a new kind of virus, there are many unknowns and no specific drugs or
effective vaccines for this disease. To reduce morbidity and mortality, the Chinese
government has adopted non-drug intervention measures, namely, social isolation,
medical observation, contact limitation, self-protection, the combination of these
traditional and modern public health intervention measures, the course of the
epidemic, and the epidemic curve. As the WHO leader Bruce Aylward said at the
COVID-19 news conference of February 24 in Beijing[4]: “This is one of the biggest
successes of China's response to the outbreak. The past month, for example, there
were more than 1,800 epidemiological investigation teams in Wuhan, with at least 5
persons in each group, tracking thousands of close contacts every day. It is through
painstaking efforts that the vast majority of identified close contacts were tracked
down and their health monitored. These remarkable results have not come easily
because of the epidemiology of these curves. Behind it in every line is an important
policy decision for China's leaders to guide the public to conform to these great
decisions, which was not easy.
5. Limitations
In this paper, several limitations must be acknowledged. First, we did not collect
suspected cases and death cases, so we didn’t discuss the measures regarding medical
treatment situations in this crisis. Second, Wuhan city has been shutting down
transportation more than two months, we did not discuss these mental health services
about patients and their family in this outbreak, and future research needs to try to
explore these topics.
6. Lessons and future gaps
This outbreak of COVID-19 gave us many heavy lessons. This outbreak has also
sounded the alarm, revealing that China has an obvious knowledge gap in the
prevention and control system and mechanism of the public health emergency
management system. We summarize the following lessons based on a very basic
understanding:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

First, very important questions exist: Who will report when an epidemic outbreak?
Where to report? Who will make these important decisions? To our knowledge, the
China CDC has been established as the most effective reporting system since the
SARS outbreak in 2003, which was the best reporting system in the world at that time;
unfortunately, it seems this time it did not developed fully.
We believe when people are facing an outbreak of an unknown infectious disease, it
would have been far better to know the first time and to report decisions to the public
in a manner at the valuable time for the public health and emergency response.
According to the situation in early January 2020, the data integration of multiple
levels may not be realized in Wuhan. For example, the disease report data of the CDC,
the diagnosis and treatment data of the medical and administrative system, the data of
various research teams, etc., have not been integrated on time.
Therefore, it is necessary to build a high-level decision support center for Chinese
public health security in the future to share information, comprehensively study and
judge risks faced by public health security, and these value information can be timely
reported to the public[10].
Second, in the early outbreak, because the diagnosis process was not clear, many
suspected patients had no method for confirmation and thus gave the clinicians heavy
pressure, but the CDC did not develop good quality production of detection reagent in
a very short time and did not ensure good production quality. In this sense, sample
collection became difficult. In this process, each communication and consultation
channel between the CDC and hospital did not have good collaboration in the early
stage, which badly affected the early screening and diagnosis of the infected cases.
Finally, after the outbreak, with people's panic and anxiety, residents with fever,
influenza and new coronavirus infection pneumonia patients were merged into
hospital fever clinics, resulting in a large number of COVID-10 patients becoming the
transmission source and resulting in cross-infection, and finally giving community
spread remains a huge threat. The roles of general practitioners (GPs) and the
community-level health service system may not be fully developed in this outbreak.
7. Conclusions
The analysis results confirmed that these non-pharmacology interventions were taken
by the Chinese government were effective, ambitious, and agile. However, we must
be aware that the epidemic situation in Wuhan is still challenging.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046086; this version posted March 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments
We sincerely take the opportunity to thank anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful
and meaningful comments. This study was supported by the School Foundation of
Guizhou Minzu University (Grant No. GZMU([2019]YB05)).
Conflicts and interest
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Abbreviations
COVID-19: novel coronavirus pneumonia, CPC: Communist Party of China, SEIR:
Susceptible, Infected, Exposed, Recovered, GP: General Practitioners.

References
[1] World Health Organization.Novel Coronavirus(2019-nCov) Situation
Report-22.https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/20
200305-sitrep-22-nov.pdf?sfvrsn=fb6d49b1 22020[Z].
[2] Zhou P, Yang X L, Wang X G, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus
of probable bat origin. Nature. 2020
[3] Li Q Guan X W P W X. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China of Novel
Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. The New England Journal of
Medicine.[2020-129]https:www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2001316DOI:10.1056/NEJMo
a2001316.
[4] The transcript of the press conference on February 28, 2020(in Chinese)[Z]. 2020: 2020-2-29.
[5] Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) [Z]. 2020.
[6] Wilder-Smith A, Chiew C J, Lee V J. Can we contain the COVID-19 outbreak with the same
measures as for SARS? Lancet Infect Dis. 2020
[7] Novel coronavirus diagnosis and treatment protocol(in Chinese)2020[Z].
[8] Yang ZF Z, Z W, K. Liang SH, et al.Prediction of COVID-19 increasing trend in China under
public health intervention based on SEIR optimization model and AI. Journal of Throacic Disease.
2020
[9] 98.6% statement of there are still missing some suspected cases. Wuhan has launched a
“dragnet-style search” https://m.hexun.com/news/2020-02-18/200323591.html
[10] Jiao HUANG, Shao-Fa Nie, Sheng WEI. Reflections on present response to the pneumonia
associated with a novel coronavirus (2019 - nCov). Journal of New Medicine.2020.3: No.1

Supplement File
Table 1

Detail public health interventions

Date

Measures

2020-01-07

General secretary Xi Jinping personally hosted a conference of the standing committee of the political bureau of the CPC central committee, he
put forward requirements on the prevention and control of the epidemic, made a comprehensive study of the situation, and promptly put
forward the general demands of "strengthening confidence, working in the same boat, scientific prevention, and control, and taking precise
measures" as an overall goal.

2020-01-20

COVID-19 was included in the statutory report of Class B infectious diseases and border health quarantine infectious diseases on 20 January
2020 by the National Health Commission and timely release of information on the epidemic situation.

2020-01-22

The central committee of the communist party of China has urged Hubei province to implement comprehensive and strict controls on the
outflow of people of Hubei.

2020-01-23 10:00 a.m.

Wuhan, according to the announcement of the epidemic prevention and control headquarters, the city's buses, subways, ferries, and
long-distance passenger transport were suspended, and the airport and railway station were temporarily closed.

2020-01-24

The state council held the conference on joint prevention and control mechanism of pneumonia epidemic caused by new coronavirus infection
pneumonia spread situation.

2020-01-25
(The first day of the Chinese
New Year）

General secretary Xi Jinping presided over the meeting of the standing committee of the political bureau of the CPC central committee,
restudied, redeployed and remobilized the work of epidemic prevention and control, set up the central leading group for epidemic response, and
dispatched the central steering group to ask the state to give full play to the coordination of the joint prevention and control mechanism of
domestic work. He standing committee of the political bureau of the CPC central committee held a meeting to study the prevention and control
of pneumonia caused by novel coronavirus infection.

Continued Table 1
Date

Measures

2020-01-27

Prime Minister Li Keqiang headed the Central Leading Group for Epidemic Response and went to Wuhan to inspect and coordinate the prevention and control
work of relevant departments and provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities) across the country. Li Keqiang went to Jinyintan hospital, which was the
largest number of confirmed and severe patients hospital, and made a video conference with medical staff in the negative pressure ICU, and communicated with
doctors.

2020-01-27

Vice Prime Minister Sun Chunlan led the central groups to Hubei province to carry out the prevention and control of the new coronavirus pneumonia epidemic
guidance.

2020-02-02

Two shelter hospitals (“Huoshenshan, Leishenshan”)were beginning to the building.

2020-02-03

Present Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the standing committee of the political bureau of the CPC central committee to study and strengthen the prevention and
control of pneumonia caused by new coronavirus infection and delivered an important speech.

2020-02-03

On Feb 3, medical rescue teams from 20 provincial were urgently selected to gradually take 13 exhibition centers in Wuhan transform into" quadrangle hospitals"
to make sure the mild patients were treatment. Two days later, the first three quadrangle hospitals were opened and the first mild cases were admitted(there are
4,250 beds in the three hospitals).

2020-02-04

Wuhan temporary(“Huoshenshan”) hospital received the first batch of confirmed patients of COVID-19.

2020-02-05

Wuhan, completed of three cabin hospitals and The national emergency medical rescue team to a help Wuhan.

Continued Table 1
Date

Measures

2020-02-06

Various measures to increase the supply of beds, through the deployment of external support forces, tapping local potential to increase the number of medical
staff; by tapping the potential of existing designated hospitals, building new specialized hospitals and setting up centralized isolation points to increase the supply
of beds, and by tapping the potential of local development and organizing 16 provincial (regional and municipal) counterpart support, to increase the relevant
municipal and county medical forces. At the same time, we will continue to ensure the supply of key medical prevention and control materials by the
arrangements already made.

2020-02-06

Vice Primer Sunchunlan, works on the frontlines in Wuhan, has led and coordinated the frontline prevention and control of the outbreak since the outbreak.
epidemic comprehensive investigation mobilization deployment.

2020-02-07

Wuhan, Hubei: the temporary hospital will carry out acceptance inspection and completed (more than 10 days).

2020-02-09

Wuhan: another (“Leishenshan”)temporary hospital was receiving patients.

2020-02-10

General secretary Xi Jinping conducted research and guidance on the prevention and control of the epidemic in Beijing, and connected vide conference with
medical staffs of Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital and Wuhan Union Hospital, two temporary hospitals.

2020-02-12

Nearly 20,000 medical workers were sent to Wuhan, Hubei province, and other areas for medical treatment. We will organize 19 provinces to provide more
support to medical workers in other areas of Hubei province while doing local prevention and control work. Meanwhile, the outbreak site of the Hubei epidemic
bureau should take the same measures immediately as Wuhan.

2020-02-12

The national health commission held a meeting of leading party members to study and put forward precise prevention and control measures for the new
pneumonia epidemic. Hubei province, especially Wuhan, is still the top priority in epidemic prevention and control. We should focus on solving the problem of
insufficient beds and medical personnel, increase the supply of critical care beds, ensure smooth transfer channels for treatment and treatment, strictly implement
the measures of centralized management of "four types of personnel", and ensure the total cases were cleared.

Continued Table 1
Date
2020-02-14

Measures
Vice prime Sun Chunlan, who has been working on the frontlines in Wuhan, she said: we will make further arrangements to defend Wuhan and hubei。 Based on
the goals“Save the patients and prevent the disease were spread”，We will strive to make sure that 100% of the confirmed patients were received, 100% of the
suspected patients received a nucleic acid testing, 100% of the febrile patients receive were tested, 100% of the close contacts are isolated, and 100% of the
community villages implement 24-hour closed management. We must ensure that all receivables patients are collected, earnestly implement the "four early"
measures, and resolutely control the source and cut off the way of transmission. We will continue to integrate traditional Chinese and western medicine, move
forward, care for medical workers, and increase treatment for minor and severe cases.

2020-02-15

This time, for the epidemic prevention and control work in Wuhan and Hubei province, it is the most critical stage. At the most critical stage of epidemic prevention
and control, Wuhan in Hubei province is still the main battlefield，At present, it has opened nine hospitals with more than 6,960 beds and 5,606 patients in the
hospital. Excellent medical workers were sent to Hubei and Wuhan from all places. (1) In terms of reducing the infection rate, Hubei province, especially Wuhan
city, has formulated and implemented local prevention and control measures according to the actual situation, strictly implemented the "four early" measures, and
effectively completed the classified centralized management of "four types of people".(2) To push the prevention and control forces to sink into the community,
precise management, make use full of the power at the community level, to curb spread from communities. (3) In terms of improving the admission rate, distinguish
different situations, classify and treat all the existing patients with confirmed severe diseases, including those with clinical diagnosis, to be treated in a designated
hospital, and those with confirmed mild diseases can be treated and observed at the isolation point.

Continued Table 1
Date
2020-2-16
Hubei province
people's
government
website issued
three most strictly
announcements
within 1.5 hours

Measures
Urban and rural communities and village groups were adopted closure management measures: residential areas are under the strictest closed management 24
hours; Dragnet dynamic rolling screening for all residents (only 3days, Feb 16-19): base on the principle: conclude the exactly cases number, do not miss a
family, do not leave a person, constantly one day, to ensure full coverage, no blind spots; To strengthen the epidemiological investigation of the "four
categories of people" (Latent infection, close contact of the diagnosed person, suspect cases and confirmed cases). (2)strengthening the management of key
areas. All non-essential public places shall be closed and all mass gathering activities should be stopped. (3)strengthening comprehensive health screening of
residents: (a) The community (village), community, residential area, building, workplace, and other grass-roots units with confirmed (including clinical
diagnosis) cases of new crown pneumonia shall be firmly isolated in a closed and hard manner for 14 days. (b)Carry out dynamic rolling screening for all
residents to ensure that "no one household was missed, no one left behind, and no one left behind". Ensure all communities were full coverage.
(4)Strengthening the closure management of rural village groups requires that the natural village group (village bay) should be used as the unit to implement
hard isolation. Each household may send one person every three days to purchase necessary daily necessities. (4)strengthening the management of key areas.
All non-essential public places shall be closed and all mass gathering activities shall be stopped.

2020-2-20

Based on a clear understanding of the number. Only take three days (Feb 16-19) to achieve the "four categories people" screening classification to zero, to
know the real numbers, the epidemiological investigation should be accurate, to ensure that every newly diagnosed patient was followed up timely.

2020-2-23

Focuses on reducing the accumulation of cases, completely controlling the outbreak, and eliminating new confirmed cases, to strike a balance between
epidemic prevention and control, sustainable economic and social development. China has taken strict measures to delay the start of school, return to work
flexibly, travel on different dates, and monitor health and personnel management. Wuhan and Hubei province, continue to strictly control the traffic
transitions, such as control the entrances and exits, and other provinces in China to prevent the risk of imported cases.

