medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

The Effectiveness of Targeted Quarantine for
Minimising Impact of COVID-19
Alastair Jamieson-Lane 1 , Eric Cytrnbaum
1

2

Institut für Chemie und Biologie des Meeres , Carl von Ossietzky
Universität Oldenburg, Germany
2
Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia,
Canada
April 3, 2020
Abstract
We model the extent to which age targeted quarantine can be used to
reduce ICU admissions caused by novel coronavirus COVID-19. Using demographic data from New Zealand, we demonstrate that lowering the age
threshold for quarantine to 50 years of age reduces ICU admissions drastically, and show that for sufficiently strict isolation protocols, isolating
one third of the countries population for a total of 6 months is sufficient
to avoid overwhelming ICU capacity throughout the entire course of the
epidemic. Similar results are expected to hold for other countries, though
some minor adaption will be required based on local age demographics
and hospital facilities.

1

Introduction

COVID-19, initially observed/detected in Hubei province of China during December 2019, has since spread to all but a handful countries, causing (as of the
time of writing) an estimated 855,000 infections and 42,000 deaths ([8], March
31st). COVID-19 has a basic reproductive number, R0 , currently estimated
in the region of 2.5 - 3 [5]. Social distance and general quarantine measures
can reduce R0 temporarily, but not permanently. For R0 = 3, left unchecked
COVID-19 can be expected to infect more than 90% of the population, with
30% of the population infected at the epidemic peak. Even with significant
quarantine measures in place the population will not reach “herd immunity”
to this virus until 2/3 of the population has gained resistance- either through
vaccination, or infection and subsequent recovery.
In order to place these numbers in a concrete context, a recent survey in
New Zealand indicated that the country had a total of 520 ventilator machines
[7]. Given the country’s demographics (see table 1), and current estimates of
1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Here we provide demographic data for New Zealand [2], along with
risk of ICU admission per infection for each age group [1]. Finally we give
the expected number of ICU admissions, assuming 2/3rd s of each age category
becomes infected over the course of the epidemic- the minimum required to
reach herd immunity.
Age
Population ICU risk Expected ICU
admissions
0-9
615,364
0.005%
20
10-19 606,025
0.015%
61
20-29 664,742
0.06%
266
30-39 611,029
0.16%
651
40-49 613,469
0.31%
1263
50-59 611,028
1.2%
5,069
60-69 488,835
4.5%
14,823
70-79 317,385
10.5%
22,212
80+
169,555
19.4%
21,879
ICU risk per age cohort, the country would expect to see at minimum 66,000
ICU patients over the course of an epidemic. Thus, assuming that severe cases
require 14 days in ICU, treatment of all patients would require over 900,000
ventilator days – amounting to five years of continuous use of all ventilators.
This is 15 times more demand than could be accommodated in the expected
4 month span of an unmitigated epidemic. The details of this calculation may
vary from country to county, but the final conclusion is ubiquitous: hospitals
are not prepared for this disease.
Efforts to “flatten the curve” will need to reduce the epidemic peak not
merely by a factor of two, but instead by an order of magnitude or more. Even
in the most optimistic scenarios, for the most well equipped countries, such
efforts must be maintained for years on end.
Societal lockdown may be effective at eradicating COVID-19 locally, but
when lockdown is complete a large susceptible population will remain; if the
virus is later re-introduced, as expected in our globalized and interconnected
world, a new epidemic is likely to occur. While buying time allows for manufacturing of new medical equipment, and further scientific investigations, such
efforts can not be maintained indefinitely, and even optimistic predictions predict a vaccine will take no less than one full year to develop. For this reason it
proves necessary to discuss not just what quarantine measures are needed, but
also how society might return to normal, and over what time frame this can be
achieved.

2

Targeted Quarantine and Release

As has been observed in South Korea[4] , death rate is tightly correlated with
age. While deaths in younger age categories are observed, a recent report from
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

1

2

3

4

Figure 1: A schematic illustration of targeted quarantine. Susceptible population in black, infectious population in green, and recovered population in
blue. 1) we isolate at risk populations as quickly, and as strictly as possible. 2)
COVID-19 is allow to spread through the large, low risk population. This leads
to a small number of hospitalizations, which the hospital system is able to cope
with. 3) The low risk population recovers, and herd immunity is achieved. 4)
Quarantine is (cautiously) removed, and high risk individuals are able to return
to normal social activity.
Italy[3] indicates that the vast majority of deaths occur in patients with known
pathologies. It should thus be possible to predict who is most at risk with high
fidelity. By controlling which 2/3rds of the population become infected we may
avoid overtaxing the healthcare system and thus minimise mortality.
We consider a strategy in which initially all of society (bar essential service workers) are locked down for two to four weeks so as to brake the initial
uncontrolled epidemic spread. At the end of this time, rather then reduce quarantine measures uniformly over all society, a government could instead engage
in a program of ‘targeted quarantine’; those individuals with no risk factors
would be encouraged to return to work and socialize, while at risk individuals would be asked to remain at home under strict quarantine. The infection
would be allowed to pass through the large, low risk population, resulting in a
small number of ICU admissions due to occasional unexpected complications.
Once the epidemic has passed through the low risk population, quarantine mea3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

sures can be lowered in stages, with each stage exposing successively higher
risk populations. Despite the increased risk on the individual level, the reduced
susceptible population for each subsequent stage would lead to a natural ‘flattening of the curve’, and a smaller fraction of these later populations becoming
infected. Eventually herd immunity would be achieved, and isolation measures
can be safely dropped for the entire population. Figure 1 gives a schematic
representation of this approach.
Similar strategies were alluded to by Ferguson et al [1], who advised social
distancing for those over the age of 70, and investigated explicitly by Chikina
& Pegden [6], who completed a comprehensive sensitivity analysis suggesting a
significant reduction in mortality for a wide range of parameters. Both papers
however, proposed a fixed age of division (70 and 65 years of age, respectively),
and explored what might be considered reasonable parameter ranges in terms of
levels of isolation possible, predicting, even in their most optimistic estimates,
hundreds of thousands of fatalities. There is, however, no reason to restrict the
targeted quarantine threshold to 65 or 70 years of age, and, as we shall show,
lowering this age threshold to 50 can reduce fatalities substantially.

3

The Model

In order to illustrate the general approach described above, we consider a simple
SIR type model, in which our population is divided both by disease status
(Susceptible, Infected, Recovered), and by age cohort. Here we lump people by
decade, as this is the granularity that fatality rates and ICU admission data are
reported. We assume fixed recovery rate γ = 0.1 days−1 , and a fixed infection
rate β = 0.25 days−1 . Interactions between age cohorts are governed by the
contact matrix κ(t). Entry κi,j gives the contact rate between age cohort i and
age cohort j. This is the system parameter that can be changed through public
policy and human behavior.

βSk X
κk,j Ij
Ṡk = −
N j

(1)

βSk X
I˙k =
κk,j Ij − γIk
N j

(2)

Ṙk = γIk

(3)

S

I

R

S

I

R

S

I

R

In order to simulate targeted quarantine measures, we select some threshold
age A, and some time window (ts , te ) during which quarantine measures apply.
We define two contact matrices, one for the quarantine period, and one for the

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

non-quarantine period. These matrices take the form:



1 1 1
κF
κ(t ∈
/ [ts , te ]) = 1 1 1 , κ(t ∈ [ts , te ]) = κF
1 1 1
κ×

κF
κF
κ×


κ×
κ× 
κQ .

(4)

During quarantine, we assume a contact rate κi,j (t) = κQ = 0.1, for individuals within the quarantine (i, j > A), and κi,j (t) = κ× = 0.1 across the
quarantine barrier. Individuals outside of the quarantine group (i, j ≤ A) have
contact rate κi,j (t) = κF = N/Nnq where Nnq is the total population not in
quarantine (Nq gives the population in quarantine. Similarly Sq gives the susceptible population under quarantine, and Inq gives the infectious population
not under quarantine). This choice of κF approximately preserves the total
number of interactions experienced by the out of quarantine population, by
compensate for the loss of interaction caused by the removal of the quarantined
population.
P
ICU demand at any given time is given by
αk Ik , where here αk is the
probability of ICU
admission
for
age
category
k
(see
table 1). Cumulative ICU
P
bed demand is αk (Ik +Rk ). Full R code for all models is publicly available on
Github 1 . Readers are encouraged to adapt demographic and clinical parameters
based on their own circumstances, and in response to further research.

4

Results

Simulation of the above system for a range of quarantine thresholds A results in
ICU demand as depicted in Figure 2. Figure 3 summarizes peak ICU demand
as a function of A. Peak ICU demand is minimized for a quarantined threshold
of A ≈ 40, and total ICU demand is minimized for A ≈ 50.
In order to understand the importance of our various quarantine compliance
parameters, it proves useful to determine the total number of infections due to
“quarantine leakage”. This value is well approximated by



−βκ× Rnq (∞)
.
(5)
Infections from leakage = Nq 1 − exp
γN − βκQ Nq
Derivation of this expression is given in the Appendix. Figure 4 verifies this
expression for a variety of κ× values by comparing equation 5 to the results of
full scale SIR simulation.
While complicated at first glance, equation 5 provides two key insights:
firstly, we observe that all reductions in cross quarantine contact rate, κ× , lead
to a corresponding reduction in infections - halving κ× will (approximately)
halve the number of quarantined individuals getting infected. Secondly, we
observe the importance of keeping κQ well below the epidemic threshold. So
long as γ  βκQ Nq /N , quarantine measures are strict enough to prevent selfsustaining chains of infection in the quarantine population and κQ has only
1 https://github.com/alastair-JL/COVID

strategy

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

6

Figure 2: Epidemic curves assuming 110 days of quarantine (ts = 70, te = 180),
for a variety of age thresholds A. Total Ventilator numbers are given by the
black line. Note that the results of quarantining everyone and quarantining no
one are largely the same, with quarantine simply delaying the peak. An age cut
off of 50 years (teal curve) captures a large enough portion of the population to
achieve herd immunity, while reducing fatalities compared to cut offs at 60 or
70 years.

Figure 3: Depending on the placement of our quarantine threshold, both peak
and total ICU admissions vary. Given that hospital facilities are rapidly overwhelmed in even the best case scenario above, total ICU demand is expected to
be a close proxy for total fatalities. A threshold at 50 years of age minimizes
this number.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

moderate impact. However, if the within quarantine contact rate κQ approaches
the threshold γ = βκQ Nq /N , the number of infections increases very quickly.
Hence while it is preferable to keep κ× as small as possible, it is critical to keep
κQ small enough. Once this has been achieved, efforts can be focused elsewhere.
So far we have seen how careful selection of age threshold can reduce ICU
admission (figure 3), and also how reducing cross quarantine contact reduces
infection (figure 4). This leads naturally to the question of “What is our best
case scenario? How do we get there?”. In figure 3 we showed how a single
stage quarantine approach can decrease mortality. In figure 5 we show that a
two stage quarantine approach can do even better, under ideal circumstances
bringing peak ICU demand below capacity. Given that ICU overflow translates
almost directly to patient mortality, this is a very desirable goal.

5

Discussion

5.1

Logistics

Above we have implemented a variety of possible containment strategies through
simply changing a few parameter values. Implementing such policies in real life
will be significantly harder. A few of the most pressing logistical issues which
need analysis are:
• Establishing food delivery infrastructure so that quarantined individuals
can stay at home.
• Partitioning health care facilities so as to prevent mixing between quarantine groups.
• Communication and public education so that people understand both
what is required for the approach to work, and how it benefits them.
• Rearranging our workforce, so as to account for the large number of senior
staff who will no longer be available in person.
• Identifying new jobs that will need to be carried out, so as to maintain
quarantine as effectively as possible.
• Investigation and community engagement with ‘de-mixing’ households, so
that people in different quarantine groups are no longer living with one
another. Such measures may be disruptive, but are likely necessary if we
wish to minimize κ× , and would (for example) involve children staying
with aunties and uncles, or family friends, rather than grandparents. Individuals in the quarantine group currently living alone might consider
moving in with other quarantined persons, and university students would
be required not to return to their parents households.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

8

Figure 4: Total infections caused by quarantine leakage assuming κQ = 0.1.
Black circles give the predictions based on full SIR dynamics, red crosses give the
predictions of equation 5. Note that these calculations only include infections
caused by imperfect quarantine, and ignore infections occurring either outside
the quarantine population, or outside the quarantine time period.

Figure 5: Assuming perfect quarantine between age groups (κ× = 0), we are able
to keep ICU demand below ICU capacity using a multi-stage release strategy.
For the red curve, we assume quarantine of everyone over 50 years of age from
day 65 to 160, and quarantine of everyone over 60 years of age from day 160 to
255 (that is to say, 3 month intervals for each stage of isolation). At no point is
the under 50 population required to remain in quarantine, although moderate
social distancing is required in the first 3 month window. Isolating only the 60+
cohort in the first 3 month window (as opposed to 50+) leads to overflowing ICU
capacity by a factor of 5. An alternative strategy (blue), extends quarantine
until day 290 (an extra month). This extended quarantine of the over 60 cohort
reduces total ICU admissions from 17500 to 11400, and spreads these resulting
admissions over a far wider time span.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

5.2

Assumptions to be Investigated

We have explored means of minimizing the death toll and burden on the medical system. This work is based on a number of assumptions. Each of these
assumptions must be verified before any of the above plans are implemented:
• We have taken the ICU admission rates provided by Ferguson et al. as our
baseline assumption[1]. If it is later found that the ICU admission risk
amongst younger generations are higher than expected, it is likely that
ICU capacity will be exceeded. Nonetheless, separation of age cohorts still
leads to a net improvement in outcome, as it allows the medical system to
deal with separate epidemic peaks as opposed to a single larger peak [6].
• We assumed that infection provides immunity, or at least resistance to
COVID-19. If it is found that infection does not result in subsequent
resistance, or resistance is short lived, then any protocol that depends on
herd immunity will fail.
• We have made simplifying assumptions about community structure. It is
likely that community structure (for example, retirement homes, where
high risk individuals interact frequently with other high risk individuals)
may increase the threshold required for herd immunity to be acquired.

5.3

Opportunities

There are a number of research avenues that may improve upon the outcomes
we have described.
We have considered a simple age structured population; this was driven primarily by the availability of age structured ICU risk data. With better understanding of the underlying health conditions associated with severe COVID-19
outcomes, and better demographic data on the frequency of these risks, it will
be possible to pre-isolate high risk individuals in our under 50 age cohort, and
simultaneously, reduce quarantine requirements for individuals over 50 who have
a clean bill of health.
We assumed a “predetermined” epidemic response strategy. Future developments in serological testing would allow more dynamic strategies to be adopted,
based on weekly testing of antibody levels in the population; decisions on quarantine measures could then be made based on observed immunity levels in the
population, rather than simply occurring at three month intervals. Such screening and feedback would greatly mitigate the various uncertainties in the model.
Finally, although here we have considered age-targeted quarantine approaches
as they apply to the population of New Zealand, this was merely for the sake
of concreteness; nothing in the approach described is specific to that country.
Readers are encouraged to make use of our code, and explore the dynamics
given their own local demographic data.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

6

Conclusions

While previous authors [1] [6] have alluded to and explored the use of age targeting, they have done so in the limited sense of quarantining retirees, and assumed
moderate social distancing measures are implemented. Here we argue that this
undersells the potential effectiveness of the targeted quarantine approach; any
government willing to take the extraordinary measure of shutting down all of
society should, at the very least, consider the significantly less drastic measure
of quarantining one third of their population.
To the low risk population, our strategy offers a fast return to functional
society, and, for those few who do get sick, access to medical facilities and staff
who are dealing with a manageable number of cases. To those under isolation,
targeted quarantine offers the possibility of avoiding COVID-19 altogether. By
releasing a large portion of the population from lockdown after a small number
of weeks, age-targeted quarantine balances the need to maintain a functional
society and economy, with the limitations of hospital resources, and has the
potential to significantly reduce casualties.

7

Acknowledgements

Funding was provided by the School of Medicine and Health Science, Carl von
Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg. This work is based on modelling done in
collaboration with the Interventional Modelling Team at the Department of
Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention at the University Medical Center
Groningen. Further advice and feedback was provided by the the Mathematical
Biology team of the University of British Columbia. Special thanks to Corinna
Glasner for guidance and editorial advice on an early version of this manuscript,
and to Alejandra Herrera for some added clarity and final polish.

References
[1] Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19
mortality and healthcare demand.
[2] Place Summaries | New Zealand | Stats NZ.
[3] epiCentro. Report sulle caratteristiche dei pazienti deceduti positivia
COVID-19 inItal iaIl presente reportè basato sui dati aggiornatial 17 Marzo
2020, March 2020.
[4] KCDC. KCDC. Library Catalog: www.cdc.go.kr.
[5] Ying Liu, Albert A. Gayle, Annelies Wilder-Smith, and Joacim Rocklöv.
The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of Travel Medicine, 27(2), March 2020. Publisher: Oxford
Academic.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049692; this version posted April 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

[6] Maria Chikina, and Wesley Pegden. Age-targeting for COVID-19 mitigations, February 2020.
[7] Ministry of Health. ventilators-and-icu-beds-20mar-2020.pdf, March 2020.
[8] Worldometer. Coronavirus Mortality Rate (COVID-19) - Worldometer,
March 2020. Library Catalog: www.worldometers.info.

8

Appendix: Analytic formula for the effects of
quarantine leakage

In order to understand the effects of our various parameters, we wish to estimate the effects of ‘quarantine leakage’. While simulations determine such
results quickly enough, determination of an analytic expression is useful for
quickly judging the importance of each parameter. In order to determine such
a formula, we proceed in three steps.
First, we calculate the number of infections a quarantined individual
R ∞ ex×
pected to receive from the non-quarantined population. This is equal to 0 βκ
N Inq dt.
R ∞ βκ×
×
Because Ṙnq = γInq we find 0 N Inq dt ≈ βκ
γN Rnq (∞). The value Rnq (∞)
is a function of R0 , found by solving 1 − Rnq (∞) = exp[−R0 Rnq (∞)]. In the
case R0 = 2.5, Rnq (∞) = 0.89.
For our next step, we must account for the fact that infections that enter our
quarantined population may then spread (especially important when κ× < κQ ).
N
Whenever γ > βκQ Nq , transmission is unable to sustain itself and this spread
can be modeled as a subcritical branching process. Such a process has leads
to an expected population of γ/(γ − βκQ Nq /N ) infections before extinctionthat is to say, each imported infection is expected to lead to γ/(γ − βκQ Nq /N )
infections total.
βκ×
Multiplying the results of the previous two steps gives λ = Rnq N γ−βκ
,
Q Nq
the total number of infections due to quarantine leakage that each quarantined
individual expects to encounter. The actual number of infections a given individual receives is Poisson distributed, and the probability of receiving zero
infections is thus given by e−λ .
In total combining the above, we end up with



−βκ× Rnq (∞)
Nq 1 − exp
.
(6)
γN − βκQ Nq
individual infected due to quarantine leakage. This is give as equation 5 in the
main text.

11

