medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Thoughts on Higher Medical Education Under Major Public Health
Emergencies: Thinking Ahead After COVID-19 Outbreak
Wei Lin 1, Yan Chen2, Songchang Shi 3, Jixing Liang1, Huibin Huang1,Liantao Li1, Liangchun
Cai1, Liyao Zong1,Nengying Wang1, Junping Wen1, Gang Chen1
1. Department of Endocrinology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Shengli Clinical Medical College of
Fujian Medical University, FuZhou, 350001, China.
2. Office of Academic Research, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fujian 350001, China
3. Department of Critical Care Medicine, Fujian Provincial Hospital South Branch, Shengli

，350001, China.

Clinical Medical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou

4. Fujian Academy of Medical Sciences, Fuzhou Fujian, 350001, China
The first three authors contributed to the study equally.

Address correspondence and reprints to: Gang Chen and Junping Wen
Gang Chen, Professor of Fujian Medical University
E-mail: chengangfj@163.com
Junping Wen, Professor of Fujian Medical University
E-mail: junpingwen@163.com

Key point

：What are the reflections on approaches to teaching and learning during

Questions

COVID-19 Outbreak?

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

：

Findings Fifty fourth-year medical students receiving the “5+3” pattern courses regarding
internal medicine were enrolled. Five Point Likert Scale Questionnaires which contains
20 items were used. This study indicates that medical education based on 5G network that
combined team-based learning (TBL) and online interaction is a more suitable option to teach
medical students online during COVID-19 outbreak.

Meaning

：China's experience in online higher medical education may serve as a reference

to other countries during the pandemic.

Word count: 3724

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Importance: The spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has posed great
threat to people's health and several medical schools in the world suspended classes as
a precaution against the virus. China has also adopted precautionary measures to keep
medical schools running without suspending classes. Thinking ahead after COVID-19
Outbreak is important.
Objective: To explore the most suitable teaching and learning pattern in medical school
during COVID-19 Outbreak.

Design: This study is a case-control study. We had tried to apply a new blended
teaching model based on 5G network that combined team-based learning (TBL) and
online interaction to the students before the outbreak and then universities responded
to the COVID-19 outbreak by closing campuses and shifting to other forms of
distance learning. In other word, the courses started using blended teaching model
before COVID-19 outbreak and might last using other forms of distance learning
throughout the pandemic. Five Point Likert Scale Questionnaires which contains
20 items were used, and the effect of the two kinds of teaching patterns was compared
by evaluating the indicators of core competencies of students including
professionalism, attitude towards learning, knowledge and learning skills, teamwork
skills, motivation in learning, adaptability and acceptance of the courses and
network environment.
Setting: Our study based on a single center.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Participants: Fifty fourth-year medical students receiving the “5+3” pattern courses
regarding internal medicine were enrolled in the study.

：The teaching and learning patter started

Exposure(s) (for observational studies)

using blended teaching model before COVID-19 outbreak and might last using other
forms of distance learning throughout the pandemic.

：

Main Outcome(s) According to the descriptive statistical analysis of the first part of
the questionnaire (question 1-16), the average score of adaptability and acceptance of
the courses is 2.60 lower than 3, indicating that students are more adapted to other
forms of distance learning during COVID-19 outbreak; the average score of the rest
of the questions is higher than 3, indicating that blended teaching model based on 5G
network is superior to other forms of distance learning. The number of male students
who are inclined to the blended teaching model based on 5G network is 0.13 times as
much as that of female students (95%CI:0.028~0.602, p=0.009).

Results: Online forms of distance learning were accepted by the students. Female
students had higher expectations on the course and were more likely to adapt well to
the change during the COVID-19 outbreak. However, all students preferred the
blended teaching model based on 5G network that combined team-based learning
(TBL) and online interaction before the pandemic.

Conclusion: It indicates that medical education based on 5G network that combined
team-based learning (TBL) and online interaction is a more suitable option to teach

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medical students online. China's experience in online higher medical education may
serve as a reference to other countries during the pandemic.
Keywords: COVID-19, Medical education, Distance learning, 5G, Pandemic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The advances in medical education is an important indicator of a country's level of
medical science development. The core mission of medical education is to train
qualified medical personnel for the country. In today's era of globalization, medical
education associated with human health issues such as the control of HIV/AIDS, the
outbreak of SARS and the spread of bird flu are no longer limited by national borders.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been ongoing in China since December,
2019. On January 30, 2020, the second meeting of the Emergency Committee
convened by the WHO Director-General under the International Health Regulations
(IHR) declared that the outbreak of COVID-19 constitutes a Public Health Emergency
of International Concern (PHEIC)[1]. The pandemic raised great concern in China and
other countries [2-5]. In order to prevent the spread of COVID-19 at mass gatherings,
Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China adopted countermeasures
such as online education to keep medical schools running without suspending classes.
According to Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report as of 18 March
2020, the total confirmed cases globally reached 191127 with 110011 confirmed cases
outside China including 15084 total confirmed new cases with an increase of over
13%. This pandemic has posed great challenges to the global public health, health
care system and medical education, which triggered new thinking about medical
education under PHEIC. This article summarizes and reflects on the measures adopted

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

by China in medical education during COVID-19 outbreak so as to provide vital
experience of how to conduct medical education under PHEIC.

Health professionals for a new century: transforming education to strengthen
health systems in an interdependent world published in Lancet proposed an idea of
the third-generation educational reform[6]. It focuses on systems based medical
education to improve the performance of health systems by adapting core professional
competencies to specific contexts, while drawing on global knowledge. With the rapid
development of medical science, the traditional teaching methods featuring slow
knowledge updating and low teaching efficiency, to some extent, are unable to fully
meet the diverse learning needs of medical students. Since blended learning was
proposed in 2003, it has become one of the mainstream educational approaches in the
medical educational reform[7]. Blended learning is a style of education in which
students learn via electronic and online media as well as traditional face-to-face
teaching, which places an emphasis on empowering students with the skills and
knowledge required to make the most of the online material and independent study
time, guiding students toward the most meaningful experience possible[8]. E-learning
is based on network support. 5G is the abbreviation of the fifth-generation mobile
communication technology. 5G network features enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB)
coping with the significant increase of data volumes, overall data capacity, and user
density, massive machine type communications (mMTC) requiring low power
consumption for a huge number of connected devices, ultra-reliable and low latency
communications (URLLC) providing safety-critical and mission critical applications.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Compared with 4G network, WLANs or Wi-Fi, 5G network guarantees the same
consistency in performance with less interference, which is very important for critical
machine-to-machine communications, especially where the number of devices is
massive. Team-based learning (TBL) is a structured form of small-group learning that
emphasizes student preparation out of class and application of knowledge in class. In
accordance with boosting medical educational reform by new technologies, we had
tried to apply a new blended teaching model based on 5G network that combined TBL
and online interaction to 50 fourth-year medical students who were receiving the “5+3”
pattern courses regarding internal medicine in July, 2019 before the outbreak of
COVID-19. They were organized strategically into 5 teams of 10 students that work
together throughout the online class in this model. The pandemic was later determined
to be PHEIC seriously endangering international public health, which posed great
challenges to medical education. Medical universities in China closed campuses and
shifted to other forms of distance learning such as massive open online courses
(MOOCs), recorded teaching video in Rain Classroom, chatting via QQ in response to
the COVID-19 outbreak. Home-based learning allows students to extend their
education from school to home, from offline to online, from passive learning to active
learning. It seems to be an alternative learning approach under PHEIC that conform to
the trend of the third-generation educational reform. In this study, we compared the
blended teaching model based on 5G network that combined TBL and online
interaction conducted on July, 2019 before the outbreak and other forms of distance
learning during the pandemic by using online survey tool to discuss the impact of this

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

change will bring towards the students’ core competencies including professionalism,
attitude towards learning, knowledge and learning skills, teamwork skills, motivation
in learning, adaptability and acceptance of the courses.

2. Subject and Method

2.1 Subject

Fifty fourth-year medical students receiving the “5+3” pattern courses regarding
internal medicine were enrolled in the study. “5+3" pattern is an innovative training
pattern in graduate education for a professional degree in clinical medicine. The
pattern focuses on innovation in training talent as well as reform of the administrative
mechanism. In “5+3" pattern, medical students directly enter the 3 years of pursuing a
master 's degree after completing 5 years of preclinical and clinical courses. It
advances the organic link between student cultivation and standardized training for
residents, and facilitates the tight connection between professional training and
occupational qualifications. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Fujian Provincial Hospital, and all the participants provided written
informed consent.

2.2 Study design

The questionnaire in the electronic form was distributed to the students via WeChat.
They filled it out voluntarily and submitted the statistics the next day. It was designed
through reviewing domestic and foreign literature such as Health professionals for a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

new century: transforming education to strengthen health systems in
an interdependent world published in 2010 and the " Six Excellence
and One Top-Notch Talent Training Plan 2.0” launched by Ministry of Education of
the People's Republic of China in 2018.

The Five Point Likert Scale Questionnaire regarding the two kinds of teaching
patterns which contains 20 items was used to compare the blended teaching model
based on 5G network that combined TBL and online interaction and other forms of
distance learning. It consists of 5 answer options which contain two extreme poles and
a neutral option connected with intermediate answer options. The questionnaire was
divided into two parts. The first part refers to the comparison between the effect of
two kinds of teaching patterns. The options start with "strongly in favor of other forms
of distance learning " at 1 point, "neutral" at 3 point, and "strongly in favor of the
blended teaching model based on 5G network that combined TBL and online
interaction " at 5. The second part refers to the comparison between the user
experience of online platform based on 5G network and other prevalent forms of
wireless internet connection such as WIFI and 4G network. The options start with
"strongly in favor of the user experience of other prevalent forms of wireless internet
connection such as WIFI and 4G network " at 1 point, "neutral" at 3 point, and
"strongly in favor of the user experience of online platform based on 5G network " at
5.

2.3 Statistical analysis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All data were collected by WJX, an electronic questionnaire design tool. They were
verified by two teachers and exported to SPSS version 26.0 (IBM, United States).
Reliability analysis and descriptive statistical analysis was conducted on the data,
respectively. If data were normally distributed, they were expressed as mean ±
standard deviation. If data were not normally distributed, they were expressed as the
median. In addition, the binary logistic regression was used to analyze the impact of
gender on the scores of the questionnaire.

3 Result

3.1 Basic information of the subjects

Fifty fourth-year medical students receiving the “5+3” pattern courses regarding
internal medicine were enrolled in the study. Fifty electronic questionnaires were
distributed and 96% (48/50) of the valid ones were returned. The subjects aged
(22.4 ± 0.79) years old, of which 25 were male students, accounting for 52.0% of the
effective sample; 23 were female students, accounting for 48.0% of the effective
sample.

3.2 Data analysis

3.2.1 Reliability analysis

Cronbach's Alpha in SPSS Statistics was used to measure the internal consistency
of the valid questionnaires in this study. The results showed that the questionnaire has

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

high internal consistency or high reliability as the value of Cronbach's Alpha is 0.73,
and the value of Cronbach's Alpha based on the standardized items is 0.95, both of
which are at a high level.

3.2.2 Descriptive statistical analysis

The questionnaire in this study consists of two parts involving five aspects of
indicators of core competencies (Figure 1). The first part of the questionnaire is
designed on the basis of competency-oriented teaching. The items cover four
indicators of core competencies including A:professionalism and attitude towards
learning (question 1-5), B: knowledge and learning skills (question 8,9,10,12,16), C:
teamwork spirit (question 11), as well as D: motivation in learning and acceptance of
the courses (question 6,7,13,14,15). The second part of questionnaire is mainly for the
evaluation of network environment of online education including E: user experience
under the certain network environment (question 17-20).

The data of the results of the questionnaire were normally distributed(P>
0.05). According to the descriptive statistical analysis of the first part of the
questionnaire (question 1-16) (Table 1), the average score of adaptability and
acceptance of the courses is 2.60 lower than 3, indicating that students are more
adapted to other forms of distance learning during COVID-19 outbreak; the average
score of the rest of the questions is higher than 3, indicating that blended teaching
model based on 5G network is superior to other forms of distance learning on the
aspects of professionalism, attitude towards learning, knowledge and learning skills,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

teamwork skills and motivation in learning; the average score of the challenging level
of the course is 4.04, indicating that blended teaching model based on 5G network is
more challenging for most of the students than other forms of distance learning.
According to the descriptive statistical analysis of the second part of the questionnaire
(question 17-20) (Table 2), the average score of network latency and stability is 2.83
lower than 3, which suggests that other forms of wireless internet connection are more
stable currently; the rest of the questions in the second part of the questionnaire score
more than 3, indicating that students believe that blended teaching model based on 5G
network is better than other forms of distance learning on the aspects of real-time
interaction, high-definition image quality and voice clarity.

3.2.3 Binary logistic regression

Expectations on the course will have an impact on students’ professionalism,
attitude towards learning (question 1, Table 3). As for this question, it shows that the
number of male students who are inclined to the blended teaching model based on 5G
network is 0.13 times as much as that of female students (95%CI:0.028~0.602,
p=0.009). In other word, female students have higher expectations on the blended
teaching model based on 5G network. Moreover, the impact of the course on the
comprehensive abilities and advanced thinking are highly related to the knowledge
and learning skills which is one of the core competencies (question 10, Table3). It
shows that the number of male students who are inclined to the blended teaching
model based on 5G network is only 0.163 times as much as that of female students,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

which indicates that female students believe the blended teaching model based on 5G
network is beneficial to improving their comprehensive abilities and advanced
thinking. As for question 17-20, it shows that there is no difference between male and
female in terms of online platform preferences,

4 Discussion

4.1 Importance and necessity of the strategies for higher medical education in
China during PHEIC

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, China’s higher medical education mostly
adopted traditional education model, namely the second-generation education
model. However, with the incredible growth of Internet since the 1990s, online
education has begun to thrive. In 2009, Khan Academy and flipped class became
popular in China, and a number of higher medical education institutions in China have
begun to accept or try online education. In 2010, large-scale online courses such as
MOOCs had a tremendous impact on China’s higher medical education. At present,
there are numerous excellent online platforms of MOOCs, including Coursera,
Udacity and edX, the top three world-renowned education platforms as well as
domestic platforms such as Chinese university MOOC, XuetangX and Icourses. The
proliferation of online education has already been an inevitable trend, and the
COVID-19 pandemic facilitates its development.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

There have also been some special periods in Chinese medical education history
that are very similar to the current COVID-19 pandemic. For example, during the
outbreak of SARS in 2003, classes were suspended in Beijing and some other cities in
China. At that time the Internet was not as developed as it is now, so educational
programs were mostly broadcasted on air to guide students to learn independently.
These measures played an important part in special times, and also accelerated the
rapid development of education informatization and the infrastructure. As speculated
earlier, the findings of this study show that medical students prefer home-based online
learning in terms of adaptability and acceptance of the course. With regard to the
relevant observational indicators of competency-oriented medical education involved
in this research questionnaire, the results also show that quite a number of medical
students believe that home-based online education model can, to some extent,
cultivate their professionalism, stimulate their motivation in learning and bring more
fun to the study amid the pandemic. Meanwhile, medical students can obtain
knowledge and improve learning skills through online education. In a sense, through
online interaction based on WeChat groups, QQ groups and other platforms,
home-based online learning can also foster their teamwork spirit. Therefore, the result
of this study to some degree further confirm that Chinese government has
implemented timely and correct strategies in response to the PHEIC, which extends
higher medical education from school to home and accelerated the popularization of
online education. It may be an inevitable trend for the development of medical
education in the future.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4.2 The online teaching model of higher medical education in China under
PHEIC

After the COVID-19 outbreak, students had to stay at home to eliminate
chances of being infected. However, the devices and network environment for online
learning differ among families. Given the Guidance on Online Education issued for
schools in China amid COVID-19 pandemic, China’s higher medical education was
conducted via PCs, mobile devices, TV and other media based on online platforms.
The teaching models include online courses, live streaming, independent learning, etc.

Online courses are a series of lessons delivered on the website or to the mobile
devices, which can be conveniently accessed anytime and anyplace. In recent years,
with the booming of high-quality course resources, MOOCs and “golden courses” in
the field of higher education and the popularity of micro courses and flipped
classroom, the number of various online courses in high quality is increasing rapidly.
In the face of COVID-19 pandemic, such massive resources can be accessed for free
on the online platforms in China such as China University MOOC, Good
University Online, Wisdom Tree, etc. As for the current teaching plan, it is
recommended to employ MOOCs and SPOCs, meanwhile setting up Q&A groups as
supplement for online courses. However, some shortcomings of online courses
surfaced in its current application. For instance, the number of high-quality MOOCs,
micro courses and “golden courses” are limited, which cannot cover all courses for all
grades. As for the Internal Medicine courses, there is a lack of sufficient high-quality

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

online course resources. Meanwhile, considering the nature of online courses,
teachers cannot monitor students’ learning efficiency and test their real-time learning
effectiveness. Thus, the following related measures are needed to improve the quality
of online courses.  Publish daily learning tasks at a fixed time to create a good
online learning atmosphere, and check students' learning tasks in a timely fashion. 
Offer learning support services, such as designating an excellent student as an
assistant, managing class discipline, and collecting questions raised by
students.  Organize live streaming classes and answer students’ doubts to strengthen
their sense of actually being in the class.  Drawing up a plan to promote high-quality
MOOCs, “golden courses” and micro courses after the pandemic.

Live streaming teaching, as a new type of online teaching model, is becoming more
familiar to and applied by increasing numbers of teachers and students. Compared
with online courses, live streaming teaching allows teachers and students to
communicate in real time, provides a strong sense of presence and offers more
interactions. Especially with the development of internet and popularity of live
streaming culture, it appeals to college students even more. Live streaming teaching is
a teaching model that relatively resembles offline classes but unstable network
environment like high network latency and low network speed may ruin the students’
experience of learning in the live streaming online classroom. Hence, followings are
some advice to improve the quality of live streaming teaching :  Familiarize with the
live streaming platform in advance and test it, and make precautionary plans for
unstable network environment.  Promote the application of 5G network in live

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

streaming teaching and increase the bandwidth. The results of this study show that
image quality, voice clarity, network speed and latency of 5G network are all better
than other forms of wireless network connection.  In the process of teaching, course
content can be divided into several fragments or small units, and some content-related
interactions and tests can be presupposed.  With flipped classroom, students can
study on their own first, find some common problems through exercises, tests and
tasks, and then attend the live streaming to solve those problems. The teacher ought
to turn on the camera throughout the teaching process to maintain a sense of
presence.  Avoid the online rush hours to ensure a stable live streaming during the
pandemic.

Independent learning model mainly depends on individual student to study on their
own with learning resources provided by teachers while teachers give guidance and
answer questions online afterwards. Under the circumstance where teachers and
students are in different places, such self-learning is almost inevitable with advantages
like low cost, easy operation and high flexibility, but the disadvantages lie in its weak
interaction,

poor

learning

atmosphere,

and

high

requirements

for

self-discipline. During the pandemic, it may become a preferential option for most
schools, particularly for teachers who lack relevant experience in online teaching, or
the network environment at students or teachers’ home is poor.

In summary, it is recommended teaching models such as online courses, live
streaming and independent learning can be adopted amid COVID-19 pandemic to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

achieve a better study experience. The result of the questionnaire show that students
respond well to online education and have high enthusiasm, especially female medical
students who have higher expectations for online courses. The 5G network can
present high-definition image quality, improve voice clarity, and make real-time
interaction more appealing. However, in terms of observation indicators concerning
the evaluation of competence-oriented capacity, most medical students
are more inclined to use the blended teaching model based on 5G network that
combined TBL and online interaction. That indicates online learning based on 5G
network can better improve students' enthusiasm and sense of participation. We can
try to diversify the form of online education to enhance the students’ learning
experience. In particular, the model of flipped classroom can be adopted. Students in
this model are encouraged to study independently through high-quality MOOCs and
literature before class, and TBL can be carried out on social platforms such as online
WeChat group or QQ group to cultivate students' teamwork spirit. After that, teachers
summarize the class by integrating knowledge of medical humanity, public health and
social economics to improve students' professionalism and analyzing the problems or
questions raised by the students in the form of online live broadcast supported by 5G
network to achieve a good learning experience.

4.3 Some suggestions on online teaching for different practitioners of higher
medical education in China under major public health emergencies

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, a variety of online teaching programs aimed at
higher medical education has been formulated and implemented, but in this particular
period the effectiveness and results of online teaching need joint efforts by subjects of
practice involved in actual work such as higher medical education managers, teachers
and students.  Amid current pandemic, the administrative department of higher
medical education and school administrators should take actions based on a long-term
perspective, systematic thinking and top-level design.

 Teachers are the main body

of the action of “keep medical schools running without suspending classes”. On the
one

hand,teachers

have

to change their ideas to form a "student-centered" teaching concept. On the other hand,
teachers ought to improve their information literacy, familiarize themselves with
online education, and master the method of online teaching. In addition to teaching
basic professional knowledge, ideological and political concept, benevolence to
patients, contribution to society, as well as the preventive medicine should be
integrated into online courses. Moreover, it is necessary to raise medical students
awareness of PHEIC during the pandemic, especially teach them about precautionary
and preventive measures such as clinical diagnosis and treatment, isolation of patients
and self-protection so that they can be competent in the future to handle public health
emergencies and give medical guidance to the masses.

5 Conclusion

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

“Keep medical schools running without suspending classes” is China's crisis
intervention strategy for higher medical education in response to COVID-19 outbreak.
Although from the perspective of online teaching practice, it is hard for teachers to
follow the performance of each student in online classes, but this strategy provides
opportunities to turn crisis into opportunity in medical education. In the era of
globalization and information, actively reflecting on China’s response and teaching
strategies amid the COVID-19 pandemic is of great significance to facilitate the
in-depth development of medical science and medical education, deepen the teaching
concept of "student-centered” and "competency-oriented" medical education, as well
as explore teaching approaches to advance the medical education. More importantly,
with the wide spread of COVID-19, China's experience in online higher medical
education may serve as a reference to other countries during the pandemic.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

World Health Organization. Statement on the second meeting of the International Health
Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus
(2019- nCoV)[EB/OL]. (Accessed 21st Feb 2020) Available at:
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-the-i
nternational-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-nov
el-coronavirus-(2019-ncov).

2.

Eurosurveillance, E.T. Note from the editors: World Health Organization declares novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) sixth public health emergency of international concern.
Eurosurveillance,2020.

3.

Del Rio C, Malani PN.2019 Novel Coronavirus—Important Information for Clinicians. J
AMA,Published online February 05,2020.

4.

Nishiura H, Jung SM, Linton NM, et al.The Extent of Transmission of Novel Coronavirus in
Wuhan, China 2020. J Clin Med,2020,9(2).

5.

Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, et al. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in
China. Nature,2020.

6.

Frenk, J,

Chen, L, Bhutta, ZA, et al. Health professionals for a new century: transforming

education to strengthen health systems in an interdependent world. Lancet, 2010,
376(9756):1923-58.
7.

Jin H, Hu YY, Song L. Technology promotes education innovation: an analysis of the NMC
horizon report: 2017 higher education edition. Journal of Distance Education, 2017(2): 3-8.

8.

Wang GH, Yu SY, Huang HF, et al.
learning in China.

，

An analysis of the current research status of blended

Distance Education in China, 2015(2): 25-31.

，

．

：

9.

Savoia E Rodday AM Stoto MA Public health emergency preparedness at the local level

10.

．Heahh Serv Res，2009，44(5)：1909 一 1924.
Wang L, Jia JZ,Duan LP．The exploration and innovation of China’S Clinical medical
education’s comprehensive reform．Journal of Graduate Education Academic，2015(3)：3-6．
results of a national survey

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20053918; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1 The composition of indicators of core competencies in the questionnaire

A: Professionalism and attitude towards learning (question 1-5)
B: Knowledge and learning skills (question 8,9,10,12,16)
C: Teamwork spirit (question 11)
D: Motivation in learning and acceptance of the courses (question 6,7,13,14,15) E: User
experience under the certain network environment (question 17-20).

