medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Face mask use in the general population and optimal
resource allocation during the COVID-19 pandemic
Colin J. Worby1 and Hsiao-Han Chang2
1

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA (cworby@broadinstitute.org)
Department of Life Science & Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing
Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan (hhchang@life.nthu.edu.tw)
2

ABSTRACT
The ongoing novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has rapidly spread in early 2020,
causing tens of thousands of deaths, over a million cases and widespread socioeconomic
disruption. With no vaccine available and numerous national healthcare systems reaching or
exceeding capacity, interventions to limit transmission are urgently needed. While there is broad
agreement that travel restrictions and closure of non-essential businesses and schools are
beneficial in limiting local and regional spread, recommendations around the use of face masks
for the general population are less consistent internationally. In this study, we examined the role
of face masks in mitigating the spread of COVID-19 in the general population, using epidemic
models to estimate the total reduction of infections and deaths under various scenarios. In
particular, we examined the optimal deployment of face masks when resources are limited, and
explored a range of supply and demand dynamics. We found that face masks, even with a
limited protective effect, can reduce infections and deaths, and can delay the peak time of the
epidemic. We consistently found that a random distribution of masks in the population was a
suboptimal strategy when resources were limited. Prioritizing coverage among the elderly was
more beneficial, while allocating a proportion of available resources for diagnosed infected
cases provided further mitigation under a range of scenarios. In summary, face mask use,
particularly for a pathogen with relatively common asymptomatic carriage, can effectively
provide some mitigation of transmission, while balancing provision between vulnerable healthy
persons and symptomatic persons can optimize mitigation efforts when resources are limited.
BACKGROUND
The rapid global spread of SARS-CoV-2 and the resulting coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has led to urgent efforts to contain and mitigate transmission, leading to significant
and widespread socioeconomic disruption. As of April 3rd 2020, over one million cases have
been reported worldwide, as well as over 60,000 deaths, with ongoing spread in most parts of
the world [1]. While infection is frequently asymptomatic, or associated with only mild symptoms
in many people [2,3], it can cause severe and life-threatening illness in the
immunocompromised and the elderly, with a case fatality ratio of over 10% in the latter group
[3–5]. The rapid spread of the virus has raised concerns that healthcare systems lack sufficient
resources and will be unable to bear the burden of accommodating patients suffering from
COVID-19, resulting in significantly increased morbidity and mortality. There is an urgent need

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

to better understand the effectiveness of potential interventions to limit the spread of the
disease, especially in the context of resource limitations.
In order to avoid overwhelming national healthcare resources and mitigate the burden of
infection, many countries have imposed both international and domestic travel restrictions,
closed schools and non-essential businesses, and strictly limited public gatherings [6]. Such
measures are designed to minimize person-to-person exposures, reducing the effective
reproduction number R0, and thus the growth rate of the epidemic. Furthermore, behavior such
as social distancing, self-isolation while symptomatic, handwashing, disinfecting surfaces and
hygienic etiquette around coughing and sneezing can further mitigate transmission on an
individual level. Interventions such as these can offer protection (reduction in risk of infection) to
susceptible individuals, and/or containment (reduction in risk of onward transmission) to infected
individuals. While such measures are near universally encouraged by governments and public
health departments, there is limited international consensus on the use of face masks among
the general public. Face mask use is common in East and South East Asia, and is currently
recommended by the government in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan for healthy persons in
crowded public spaces, as well as for symptomatic persons in Japan and Singapore [7,8]. Face
mask use was compulsory in public in Wuhan, China, during public lockdown at the height of
the epidemic. In contrast, the WHO does not currently recommend mask use among the general
population [9], and the US government did not [10] until April 3, 2020, at which point cloth face
coverings were recommended by the CDC [11]. There is a growing recognition across Western
countries that face mask use should be part of public health policy for mitigating the spread of
Covid-19. Recently, the Czech Republic made it mandatory to cover the nose and mouth in
public [12], while Austria required the use of face masks in supermarkets [13].
Face masks may offer some degree of protection and containment; however, studies of mask
effectiveness are relatively limited. While no studies to date have examined the effectiveness
against transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the mechanisms of transmission via droplet and direct
contact are likely highly similar to better characterized viruses. A cluster randomized household
study examined the effectiveness of surgical and P2 (N95) masks in preventing transmission of
influenza-like illness, finding a significant reduction associated with compliant mask use,
although most participants failed to adhere to mask use sufficiently to see a benefit [14].
Cowling et al. showed that mask use and handwashing implemented within 36 hours of a case
diagnosis could significantly reduce secondary household influenza cases (odds ratio 0.33) [15].
Mathematical models have also suggested that the number of influenza A cases can be
reduced significantly even if just a small proportion of the population wear masks [16]. A
systematic review on physical interventions to limit transmission of respiratory viruses, including
severe acute respiratory syndrome, concluded that face mask use was effective [17]. In
particular, N95 masks were slightly, but not significantly, more effective in reducing transmission
than surgical masks, but were less comfortable to wear and caused skin irritation, potentially
leading to lower compliance. Generally, the theoretical protective effect of masks may be
diminished by a number of factors. Compliance and effective use may be inadequate [14],
masks may not be replaced frequently enough to prevent contamination [18], and finally, Covid19 infection may even occur via alternative routes, such as ocular transmission [19].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Although personal protection is a leading motivator for mask wearing [20], it is generally thought
that face masks are more effective in providing containment, limiting onward transmission from
infectious carriers. Surgical and N95 masks limit and redirect the projection of airborne droplets
[21], and surgical mask wearing is estimated to be associated with a reduction in overall viral
aerosol shedding [22] and coronavirus [23]. While diseases with a large proportion of
symptomatic cases may result in most carriers reducing personal contacts (by choice or
incapacity), Covid-19 is thought to have a high proportion of mildly symptomatic or
asymptomatic cases, and therefore more infectious persons unaware of their status may
continue to expose others. As such, even if masks offer limited personal protection, a general
recommendation to wear masks in public may be particularly beneficial by containing
transmission from unknowingly infectious persons.
Some countries have seen an enormous demand for face masks from the public, with supplies
being diminished and shortages reported [7], drawing criticism for limiting supplies in healthcare
facilities. Even with lesser public demand, the United States reported mask shortages among
healthcare workers [24]. Recognizing the need for masks, the Central Epidemic Command
Center (CECC) in Taiwan made efforts to increase mask production from January and
announced when, where, and how to wear masks [25]. In facing such resource shortages, it is
vital that limited supplies are used effectively. Clearly, protection of staff at healthcare facilities is
of critical importance, but allocating additional resources optimally among the general
population can offer further benefits.
In this study, we investigated the role of face mask use and distribution among the general
public during a coronavirus outbreak, in order to better understand (i) the overall reduction in
cases and deaths associated with mask distribution and use, (ii) how best to optimize
distribution in a resource limited setting, and (iii) the role of dynamic supply and demand during
an ongoing outbreak. With no available vaccine and limited options for treatment of COVID-19,
it is crucial to allocate resources optimally to minimize cases and deaths worldwide.
METHODS
In order to explore both the population-level effects of distributing facemasks to different
subpopulations, as well as capturing the supply and demand dynamics during an ongoing
epidemic, we proposed two models. Firstly, the resource allocation model allows a limited
number of masks to be distributed among the initial susceptible population, or allocated to
symptomatic individuals while supplies are available. This allows us to compare distribution
strategies in terms of final numbers of infections and deaths. Secondly, the supply & demand
model captures dynamic mask availability, which varies in response to increased demand
among the entire population as the number of reported cases increase, as well as mask
production rates.
Both models share the same basic epidemic SEIRD model structure (Figure 1) and the
assumption of a closed, randomly mixing population of size N. Upon infection, susceptible

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

individuals (S) enter the exposed (E) compartment in which a person is non-infectious.
Infections progress to pre-symptomatic (IP) in which a person is infectious, but exhibiting no
symptoms, and then either mildly symptomatic/asymptomatic (IA) or symptomatic (IS), similar to
the model structure described by Anderson et al. [6]. Infected persons in either category can
then recover (R), or if symptomatic, may die (D). Each compartment is partitioned into those
wearing masks, and those not. Masks reduce susceptibility to infection in healthy individuals;
mask wearers’ susceptibility relative to non-wearers is denoted rs, where rs=0 represents a fully
protective mask. Similarly, masks are assumed to decrease transmissibility in infectious
persons; a mask wearer has a relative transmissibility of rt, with rt=0 representing a mask
completely restricting onward transmission. For convenience, we also define the terms
‘protection’ and ‘containment’ as 1– rs and 1– rt, respectively, and use ‘mask effectiveness’ to
refer to these properties collectively.
We obtained epidemiological
parameter estimates from the
available literature, and
acknowledging the considerable
uncertainty associated with many
characteristics of disease spread,
explored a range of values for certain
key values. We assumed a basic
reproduction number for symptomatic
cases of R0=2.5 [6,26], and a 14 day
period from symptoms to recovery
Figure 1. The compartmental structure common to both
[27]. Estimates for the proportion of
models used in this study is shown at the top. Susceptible
asymptomatic cases vary
hosts (S) become exposed (E) and progress to presymptomatic infectious (IP). Infected hosts can become
considerably; including 18% based
either asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (IA), or
on data from the Diamond Princess
symptomatic (IS). Recovery (R) or death (D) follow. The
cruise ship (with a high proportion of
resource allocation model and the supply & demand
elderly people) [28], 25% according
model then have unique additional features and
dynamics. For a full description of each model and the
to the director of the US CDC [29],
specification of dynamics between compartments, see
30% based on Japanese evacuees
the Supplementary materials.
from Wuhan [30], and even up to
78% based on limited reporting from China [31]. Given the importance of this parameter in
determining allocation of resources, we allowed this parameter to vary over a plausible range.
Mild/asymptomatic cases are assumed to have an infection rate 50% lower than fully
symptomatic cases. While there is currently limited evidence on the progression of infection in
different age groups, we assumed that the proportion of asymptomatic cases in the elderly (70+)
was half the proportion in the younger population, and that the death rate among symptomatic
elderly cases was 9.7%, versus 1.3% in younger cases [32]. All parameters used in the model
are provided in supplementary table 1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Resource allocation model
In this model, the compartments described above are further partitioned by age group (young,
<70, and elderly, 70+). We assume elderly persons are more likely to progress to symptomatic
infection, and additionally are more likely to progress from symptomatic infection to death than
young people. All symptomatic infections are assumed to be detected, while asymptomatic/mild
infections are detected with a given probability. We assume a fixed supply of masks, sufficient
to protect M0 persons in the population for the duration of the epidemic. Masks may be adopted
by the healthy population at the start of the epidemic, while a certain proportion may be withheld
for individuals with detected infection during the outbreak. We explore a variety of strategies to
determine how masks may be optimally distributed such that total infections and deaths are
minimized:
●
●
●

●

●

●

Strategy 1: M0 of the susceptible population wear masks at the start of the epidemic.
Strategy 2: M0 of the susceptible population wear masks at the start of the epidemic,
with prioritized coverage of the elderly.
Strategy 3a: 0.25M0 susceptible individuals wear masks at the start of the epidemic,
prioritizing the elderly. Remaining masks are distributed to detected infectious
individuals until supplies are diminished.
Strategy 3b: 0.5M0 susceptible individuals wear masks at the start of the epidemic,
prioritizing the elderly. Remaining masks are distributed to detected infectious
individuals until supplies are diminished.
Strategy 3c: 0.75M0 susceptible individuals wear masks at the start of the epidemic,
prioritizing the elderly. Remaining masks are distributed to detected infectious
individuals until supplies are diminished.
Strategy 4: All available masks are distributed to detected infectious individuals.

For a range of mask effectiveness parameters, we identify the mask distribution strategy which
minimizes both the number of infections and the number of deaths in the population. The model
details are described in Supplementary Materials and baseline parameter values are listed in
the Supplementary Table. While we do not explicitly model individual mask use and
manufacture here, this can be thought of as continuous production to provide an equilibrium
number of masks which may effectively be used by the fraction M0 of the population for the
duration of the epidemic. A more explicit model of mask use is described in the following model.
Supply & demand model
To understand the interplay between mask availability and disease dynamics, we modeled the
supply and demand of face masks in a population, allowing masks to be produced at a given
rate B, while demand may increase as the reported number of cases increases [7,33]. In this
model, we allow for movement between mask-wearing and non-mask-wearing status,
depending on availability and demand. Masks must be continually acquired to remain a mask
wearer. We assumed that the mask is worn on average for μ days before requiring replacement,
and the rate of non-wearers acquiring masks depends on both demand (ωA for healthy and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

asymptomatic individuals, or ωS for symptomatic individuals) and current supply (M/N, the
proportion of mask in the overall population). We assume that demand for masks increases with
the number of reported cases in the population up to a certain plateau, and as such modeled
the relationship between ωA and the number of symptomatic infections in the following sigmoidal
function:
𝜔" =

$
$%& '() *+ '(,

The range of ωA is [0, 1], k1 represents the rate of demand increase, and k2 represents the
timing of demand, defined as the number of reported cases when half the population seeks face
masks (i.e. higher k2 means mask demand increases later in the outbreak). We allow ωS to
differ from ωA, in order to explore the effects of recommending face mask use to the general
population (ωS=ωA), or specifically to symptomatic individuals (ωS>ωA). This parameterization
allows us to explore different demand dynamics, for example, panic buying (high k1), delayed
response to epidemic threat (high k2), limited interest in mask use (low k1, high k2) (Figure S3).

Figure 2. Reduction in total deaths under each of the described resource allocation strategy
for a range of resource availability levels. Each panel represents intervention effectiveness in
terms of relative susceptibility and transmissibility, with the bottom left panel denoting the most
effective intervention (75% reduction in susceptibility and transmissibility) and the top right panel
representing the least effective intervention (25% reduction in susceptibility and transmissibility).
Resources are provided naïvely (pink), prioritized to the elderly (green), saved for detected cases
(red), or balanced at different levels between healthy individuals, prioritizing the elderly, and
detected cases (blue). 30% of cases are assumed to be undetected. See Methods for further details.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

RESULTS
Resource allocation model
We simulated outbreaks under a variety of parameter values associated with mask
effectiveness (protection and containment) and mask supply, and identified the resulting total
numbers of infections and deaths under each strategy described in the methods. Figure 2
shows the impact of mask distribution under different strategies, for different levels of
availability. Reduction in total deaths increased with mask effectiveness and availability. Even
limited distribution of relatively ineffective masks could result in an appreciable reduction; 10%
adoption in the population could result in 5% fewer deaths (Fig. 2, top right). While immediate
provision to the healthy population provided maximal impact, delayed implementation of a
general mask wearing policy could still provide reductions in total cases. The epidemic peak
could be increasingly delayed with earlier adoption of mask use (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Rapid introduction of face masks to the
general population can reduce cases and delay
the epidemic peak. For a range of implementation
dates, 25% of the general population adopt face
masks conferring 25% protection and 50%
containment.

Naïve distribution of masks among the
general population (strategy 1) was
usually suboptimal; indeed, for a mask
providing better containment than
protection (rt<rs), this is the least optimal of
the strategies we tested unless resources
were plentiful (Figure 2, bottom right
panels). While prioritizing allocation to
elderly persons (strategy 2) only slightly
reduced the total number of infections
beyond that achieved with naïve
distribution (Figure S1), the number of
deaths was generally much lower with this
strategy. The benefit of prioritizing the
elderly population was largest in scenarios
with a limited supply of protective masks,
diminishing gradually with masks offering
more limited protection. With plentiful
resources, the difference between
prioritizing the elderly population and
random distribution became limited.

Providing masks only to detected cases was an effective strategy in some limited resource
scenarios when containment was high (Figure 2, red lines). However, since many infections are
not detected, this strategy fails to provide any containment to the large, undetected infective
population, and the benefits associated with increasing supply reach a maximum once there are
sufficient resources for all detected cases. As such, this policy offers the least optimal
distribution for a range of mask effectiveness parameters when resources are abundant (e.g.
>50% of the population can be covered). As an intervention that offers no protection to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

susceptible individuals, the associated reduction in total infections only depends on mask
containment. By providing a mask offering intermediate levels of containment (50%) to all
detected infectious cases, the number of deaths can be reduced by up to 30%, reaching this
level with resources to cover 25% of the population. Increasing the case detection rate can
further increase the benefits of this strategy.
In many scenarios, achieving a balance between providing resources to infective persons and
the elderly population offers the optimal outcome in terms of total infections and deaths (Figure
2, blue lines). These strategies (3a-c) offer containment focused on symptomatic cases, but also
mitigating transmission from a proportion asymptomatic carriers. Additionally, some degree of
protection is granted to susceptible individuals, with a focus on the more vulnerable elderly
population. Figure 4 shows the optimal distribution strategy over the full range of mask
effectiveness parameters with resources to cover 40% of the population, as well as the
corresponding reduction in total infections and deaths, relative to the naïve strategy of random
distribution. The optimal balance of mask distribution varied according to supply and mask
effectiveness. Generally, while resources are plentiful, providing the majority of available
supplies to the healthy population (prioritizing the elderly) at the start of the epidemic was
optimal (e.g. strategy 3a) for reducing cases and deaths. Increasing the case detection rate
among mild/asymptomatic cases will improve the effectiveness of these balanced strategies.
Optimizing mask distribution offering limited protection and containment unsurprisingly had a
minimal additional benefit beyond random distribution in the healthy population (Figure 4, right).
However, we found that while total infections remained similar, optimizing distribution had the
effect of delaying the peak week of the outbreak (e.g. Figure S2). In practice, this is highly
desirable for providing additional time to scale up healthcare resources and infrastructure, and
may result in an indirect reduction of morbidity and mortality associated with overstretched
healthcare facilities.
A far smaller supply of highly effective masks were required to achieve similar reductions in total
infections compared to a large supply of less effective masks. Masks retained for provision to
infectious persons are more rapidly exhausted when they provide either limited protection or
containment. Deaths could be reduced by 65% with 15% coverage of a highly effective mask
(75% containment), compared to a reduction of 30% with 25% coverage of an intermediate
mask, and a reduction of 10% with 30% coverage of a low effectiveness mask (25%
containment). In the resource allocation model, new mask production and ongoing supply is not
explicitly considered. In the following model, we investigate the role of these dynamics.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. Optimal distribution of resources for different levels of intervention
effectiveness. The strategy which minimized the number of infections (top left) and the number
of deaths (bottom left) is indicated for each level of intervention protection and suppression.
With a supply of masks for 40% of the population, resources are provided under each of the
strategies described in Methods. The reduction in infections and deaths under the optimal
strategy is shown in the right column, relative to the numbers under the naïve strategy. The
area shaded in gray represents complete suppression of the outbreak under the optimal
strategy. Here we assume the probability of asymptomatic carriage to be 0.3 among cases
<70y.

Supply and demand model
We explored different models of mask availability and demand by varying the parameterization
of the demand function described in the methods, as well as the rate of production of new
masks. Unsurprisingly, regardless of demand dynamics, a higher production rate of masks
increased availability and therefore coverage of the population. Figure S4 shows the reduction
in total infections given different levels of protection and mask production, highlighting that a
greater number of less effective masks were required to achieve the same impact as fewer, but
more effective, masks. For a given level of mask production, a ‘panic buying’ scenario, in which
maximum demand for masks was attained very early in the epidemic, generally had a
detrimental impact on the resulting outbreak (Figure S5). Unless production is ramped up during
the outbreak, an inability to build a stockpile of available resources prevents infected persons
obtain masks readily during peak transmission (Figure 5, left). In contrast, a more gradual

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

increase in demand, or equivalently, a managed distribution of resources such that a stockpile
can be built up in the early stages of the epidemic, results in greater availability of masks during
peak transmission, and fewer overall cases (Figure 5, right). Prioritizing provision to infectious
cases (setting ωS>ωA) can reduce cases further (Figure 5, bottom), in line with our findings from
the resource allocation model, under the assumption that masks offer a greater degree of
containment than protection. This effect is smaller if the proportion of asymptomatic infections is
high (Figure S6). While building up supplies in the early phase of the epidemic can be
beneficial, high levels of production were required to avoid shortages during peak demand
(Figure S7).

Figure 5. Managing resource demand in the early stages of the outbreak can limit the total
number of infections. Epidemic curves (pink) under a ‘panic buying’ demand curve (left), and a more
gradual managed demand curve (right) when prioritizing (top) and not prioritizing (bottom) masks for
infectious cases. Demand is shown as a dashed grey line, while the relative available mask supply is
shown in blue. The proportion of the susceptible and symptomatically infected population wearing masks
are shown as green and red lines, respectively. (k1, k2) are shown on the top of each subfigure. The
dynamics shown here are based on mask production rate, B/N, equal to 30%.

DISCUSSION
During a pandemic such as COVID-19, mitigating the spread of infections is essential in the
absence of a vaccine and limited critical care resources. In this study, we have shown that face
mask use in the general population can have a beneficial impact in reducing the total number of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

cases and deaths, and that this impact naturally increases with mask effectiveness. The
benefits of mask deployment are apparent even with low effectiveness and limited resources. In
such cases, though mask deployment may not have a large impact on total cases and deaths,
indirect benefits for outbreak management are achieved by delaying the epidemic peak.
Importantly, however, the overall impact of mask deployment hinges on appropriate distribution
strategies. We consistently observed that the random distribution of masks throughout the
general population is a suboptimal strategy. In contrast, prioritizing the elderly population, and
retaining a supply of masks for identified infectious cases generally leads to a larger reduction in
total infections and deaths than a naïve allocation of resources. While there remains much
uncertainty around the true effectiveness of face masks - especially when factoring in
differences in mask types, levels of adherence and patterns of human behavior - there is
evidence to suggest that masks can provide a measure of protection and containment for
respiratory viruses, likely a greater degree of the latter than the former.
The more effective a mask is, the fewer masks are required to suppress an epidemic. Under a
strategy in which masks are retained for infectious persons, this is particularly important. As a
higher proportion of infectious persons - both symptomatic and asymptomatic (and possibly
unaware of their status as a carrier) - are wearing masks offering a high level of containment, a
smaller number of onward transmissions occur, requiring fewer masks to be provided for newly
diagnosed individuals. While mask use can help to mitigate transmission, the supply & demand
model suggests that panic buying at the very early phase of an epidemic can be detrimental,
and that managing demand in the early stages of the outbreak could be beneficial. In Taiwan,
the government implemented such a resource management strategy in early February 2020,
limiting the number of masks each person can buy per week with their National Health
Insurance cards [25]. As human behavior and compliance are a significant component of how
effective mask use is, it is essential that public health recommendations concerning face masks
in the general population occur in tandem with clear education on proper use and application,
such that limited resources are used as effectively as possible.
During a pandemic such as COVID-19, optimizing the deployment of resources is essential. Our
models concern the distribution of resources in the general population, under the assumption
that healthcare workers and key personnel have adequate protection - clearly it is essential that
this subpopulation should have prioritized access to protective equipment. However, if
production can be increased such that face masks may be available to the general population,
an optimized deployment of these resources can limit spread. While we considered the elderly
population in our model, we did not explicitly consider other vulnerable subpopulations, such as
immunocompromised persons or those with other respiratory conditions. Such persons with
increased risk of suffering severe infections, and perhaps more importantly, those interacting
with them, should belong to the prioritized subpopulation we considered in the resource
allocation. In addition, we did not consider heterogeneity in population mixing. In reality, there
are clusters of particularly vulnerable persons (e.g. hospitals, nursing homes, long term care
facilities, prisons, homeless shelters) which pose an elevated risk; failing to protect such
communities could lead to rapid and highly localized spread. It is likely that face mask use is
also more beneficial in populations with higher contact rates. Future modeling work could

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

consider meta-populations of different population densities to optimize resource deployment in
urban vs. rural settings.
The use of face masks in mitigating the spread of a pandemic disease such as COVID-19 is one
of many strategies that are being implemented simultaneously, including social distancing,
travel restrictions and self-isolation. Even during lockdown measures in which people are only
rarely leaving their homes, many still face high exposure settings (e.g. conducting essential
work, trips to the supermarket) albeit less frequently. Face mask use could be a particularly
important component of transmission mitigation once social distancing measures are relaxed,
and potential exposures rapidly increase. Preparing an adequate supply of face masks for such
a transitionary period could help to prevent a potentially costly second peak.
Funding
This study was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan (MOST
109-2636-B-007-006). CW received support from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (grant number U19AI110818). The funders had no role in preparation of
the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.

Johns Hopkins CSSE Covid-19 Dashboard. [cited 4 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd402994
23467b48e9ecf6

2.

Qiu J. Covert coronavirus infections could be seeding new outbreaks. Nature. 2020.
doi:10.1038/d41586-020-00822-x

3.

Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin D-Y, Chen L, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier
Transmission of COVID-19. JAMA. 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2565

4.

Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. [The
epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID19) in China]. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2020;41: 145–151.

5.

Severe Outcomes Among Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) — United
States, February 12–March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69.
doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6912e2

6.

Anderson RM, Heesterbeek H, Klinkenberg D, Déirdre Hollingsworth T. How will countrybased mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic? The Lancet.
2020. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30567-5

7.

Feng S, Shen C, Xia N, Song W, Fan M, Cowling BJ. Rational use of face masks in the
COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet Respir Med. 2020. doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30134-X

8.

Everington K. Masks mandatory on Taiwan trains, intercity b... | Taiwan News. In: Taiwan
News [Internet]. Taiwan News; 1 Apr 2020 [cited 4 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/3908366

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

9.

When and how to use masks. [cited 1 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public/whenand-how-to-use-masks

10. Center for Devices, Radiological Health. N95 Respirators and Surgical Masks (Face
Masks). In: U.S. Food and Drug Administration [Internet]. 2020 [cited 1 Apr 2020].
Available: http://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/personal-protective-equipment-infectioncontrol/n95-respirators-and-surgical-masks-face-masks
11. CDC. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). In: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [Internet]. 4 Apr 2020 [cited 4 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/cloth-face-cover.html
12. Would everyone wearing face masks help us slow the pandemic? In: Science | AAAS
[Internet]. 28 Mar 2020 [cited 1 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/would-everyone-wearing-face-masks-help-usslow-pandemic
13. Murphy F. Austria to make basic face masks compulsory in supermarkets. In: U.S.
[Internet]. Reuters; 30 Mar 2020 [cited 1 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-austria-idUSKBN21H16A
14. MacIntyre CR, Cauchemez S, Dwyer DE, Seale H, Cheung P, Browne G, et al. Face mask
use and control of respiratory virus transmission in households. Emerg Infect Dis. 2009;15:
233–241.
15. Cowling BJ, Chan K-H, Fang VJ, Cheng CKY, Fung ROP, Wai W, et al. Facemasks and
hand hygiene to prevent influenza transmission in households: a cluster randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2009;151: 437–446.
16. Tracht SM, Del Valle SY, Hyman JM. Mathematical modeling of the effectiveness of
facemasks in reducing the spread of novel influenza A (H1N1). PLoS One. 2010;5: e9018.
17. Jefferson T, Del Mar C, Dooley L, Ferroni E, Al-Ansary LA, Bawazeer GA, et al. Physical
interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses: systematic review.
BMJ. 2009;339. doi:10.1136/bmj.b3675
18. Reusability of Facemasks During an Influenza Pandemic. [cited 1 Apr 2020]. Available:
http://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=s04272006
19. Li J-PO, Lam DSC, Chen Y, Ting DSW. Novel Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): The
importance of recognising possible early ocular manifestation and using protective
eyewear. Br J Ophthalmol. 2020;104: 297–298.
20. Sim SW, Moey KSP, Tan NC. The use of facemasks to prevent respiratory infection: a
literature review in the context of the Health Belief Model. Singapore Med J. 2014;55: 160.
21. Tang JW, Liebner TJ, Craven BA, Settles GS. A schlieren optical study of the human cough
with and without wearing masks for aerosol infection control. J R Soc Interface. 2009;6:
S727.
22. Milton DK, Fabian MP, Cowling BJ, Grantham ML, McDevitt JJ. Influenza Virus Aerosols in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Human Exhaled Breath: Particle Size, Culturability, and Effect of Surgical Masks. PLoS
Pathog. 2013;9. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003205
23. Leung NHL, Chu DKW, Shiu EYC, Chan K-H, McDevitt JJ, Hau BJP, et al. Respiratory
virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks. Nat Med. 2020; 1–5.
24. Nierenberg A. Where Are All the Masks? 21 Mar 2020 [cited 1 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/article/face-masks-coronavirus.html
25. Wang CJ, Ng CY, Brook RH. Response to COVID-19 in Taiwan: Big Data Analytics, New
Technology, and Proactive Testing. JAMA. 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3151
26. Majumder M, Mandl KD. Early Transmissibility Assessment of a Novel Coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3524675
27. Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L, Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in
Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected Patients. N Engl J Med. 2020;382: 1177–1179.
28. Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the Asymptomatic Proportion of
2019 Novel Coronavirus onboard the Princess Cruises Ship, 2020.
doi:10.1101/2020.02.20.20025866
29. CDC Director On Models For The Months To Come: “This Virus Is Going To Be With Us.”
In: NPR.org [Internet]. 31 Mar 2020 [cited 2 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/03/31/824155179/cdc-director-on-modelsfor-the-months-to-come-this-virus-is-going-to-be-with-us
30. Nishiura H, Kobayashi T, Suzuki A, Jung S-M, Hayashi K, Kinoshita R, et al. Estimation of
the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections (COVID-19). Int J Infect Dis. 2020.
doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.020
31. Day M. Covid-19: four fifths of cases are asymptomatic, China figures indicate. BMJ.
2020;369. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1375
32. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72 314 Cases From
the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA. 2020.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2648
33. Wu H, Huang J, Zhang CJP, He Z, Ming W-K. Facemask shortage and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak: Reflection on public health measures. medRxiv. 2020;
2020.02.11.20020735.
34. Hermanowicz SW. Forecasting the Wuhan coronavirus (2019-nCoV) epidemics using a
simple (simplistic) model - update (Feb. 8, 2020). doi:10.1101/2020.02.04.20020461
35. Omori R, Mizumoto K, Nishiura H. Ascertainment rate of novel coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in Japan. doi:10.1101/2020.03.09.20033183

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Resource allocation model
Consider a population of size N, comprising Ny and No young (<70 years old) and elderly (70+
years old) respectively. At a given time, each individual has a status as a mask-wearer (m) or a
non wearer (n). For each age group x (x=y for young, x=o for elderly), and status s (s=m for
mask wearer, s=n for non wearer), let Sxs, Exs, be the number of susceptible and exposed (but
not infectious) individuals. Let 𝐼/01 , 𝐼"01 and 𝐼201 be the number of pre-symptomatic,
asymptomatic/mildly symptomatic and fully symptomatic individuals respectively. Finally, let Rx
and Dx be the number of recoveries and deaths. Fully symptomatic cases are associated with
an infection rate of 𝛽2 , while pre-symptomatic and mildly/asymptomatic cases have a lower
infection rate 𝛽" ; we assume 𝛽2 = 2𝛽" . Progression from exposed to pre-symptomatic occurs at
rate 𝛼$ , and progression to either 𝐼2 or 𝐼" occurs at rate 𝛼6 . The probability of developing only
mild symptoms or no symptoms among age group x is 𝑃80 . Removal occurs at rate 𝛾2 and 𝛾"
respectively. The proportion of fatalities among fully symptomatic cases in age group x is
assumed to be 𝑝0; . Dynamics are governed by the following system of differential equations:

where m* is an indicator function equal to 1 when there is a remaining supply of masks M, and
is the probability of detecting mild/asymptomatic infections. As masks are provided to newly
diagnosed cases, supplies are depleted at the following rate:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Monotonically declining until zero is reached, at which point, no further masks are provided for
detected cases.
Supply & demand model

𝑑𝑆 >
𝑆>
=−
𝛽 𝐼 > + 𝐼/> + 𝐼"C 𝑟E + 𝐼/C 𝑟E + 𝛽2 𝐼2> + 𝐼2C 𝑟E
𝑑𝑡
𝑁 " "
𝑑𝑆 C
𝑆 C 𝑟1
=−
𝛽" 𝐼"> + 𝐼/> + 𝐼"C 𝑟E + 𝐼/C 𝑟E + 𝛽2 𝐼2> + 𝐼2C 𝑟E
𝑑𝑡
𝑁
𝑑𝐸 > 𝑆 >
=
𝛽 𝐼 > + 𝐼/> + 𝐼"C 𝑟E + 𝐼/C 𝑟E + 𝛽2 𝐼2> + 𝐼2C 𝑟E
𝑑𝑡
𝑁 " "
𝑑𝐸 C 𝑆 C 𝑟1
=
𝛽" 𝐼"> + 𝐼/> + 𝐼"C 𝑟E + 𝐼/C 𝑟E + 𝛽2 𝐼2> + 𝐼2C 𝑟E
𝑑𝑡
𝑁

+ 𝜇𝑆 C − 𝜔"

− 𝜇𝑆 C + 𝜔"

+ 𝜇𝐸 C − 𝜔"

𝑑𝐼/C
𝑀
= 𝛼$ 𝐸 C − 𝜇𝐼/C + 𝜔" 𝐼/> − 𝛼6 𝐼/C
𝑑𝑡
𝑁
𝑑𝐼">
𝑀
= 𝛼6 𝐼/> 𝑃8 + 𝜇𝐼"C − 𝜔" 𝐼"> − 𝛾" 𝐼">
𝑑𝑡
𝑁

𝑀 >
𝑆
𝑁

𝑀 >
𝐸 − 𝛼$ 𝐸 >
𝑁

− 𝜇𝐸 C + 𝜔"

𝑑𝐼/>
𝑀
= 𝛼$ 𝐸 > + 𝜇𝐼/C − 𝜔" 𝐼/> − 𝛼6 𝐼/>
𝑑𝑡
𝑁

𝑀 >
𝑆
𝑁

𝑀 >
𝐸 − 𝛼$ 𝐸 C
𝑁

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

𝑑𝐼"C
𝑀
= 𝛼6 𝐼/C 𝑃8 − 𝜇𝐼"C + 𝜔" 𝐼"> − 𝛾" 𝐼"C
𝑑𝑡
𝑁
𝑑𝐼2>
𝑀
= 𝛼6 𝐼/> 1 − 𝑃8 + 𝜇𝐼2C − 𝜔2 𝐼2> − 𝛾2 𝐼2>
𝑑𝑡
𝑁
𝑑𝐼2C
𝑀
= 𝛼6 𝐼/C 1 − 𝑃8 − 𝜇𝐼2C + 𝜔2 𝐼2> − 𝛾2 𝐼2C
𝑑𝑡
𝑁
𝑑𝑅 >
𝑀
= 𝛾" 𝐼"> + 𝛾2 𝐼2> + 𝜇𝑅 C − 𝜔" 𝑅 >
𝑑𝑡
𝑁

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES

Figure S1. Reduction in total infections under each of the described resource allocation
strategy for a range of resource availability levels. Corresponds to Figure 2. Each panel
represents intervention effectiveness in terms of relative susceptibility and transmissibility, with
the bottom left panel denoting the most effective intervention (75% reduction in susceptibility
and transmissibility) and the top right panel representing the least effective intervention (25%
reduction in susceptibility and transmissibility). Resources are provided naïvely (pink), prioritized
to the elderly (green), saved for detected cases (red), or balanced at different levels between
healthy individuals, prioritizing the elderly, and detected cases (blue). 30% of cases are
assumed to be undetected. See Methods for further details.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure S2. Optimizing mask distribution strategy can delay epidemic peak. We
demonstrate that, even low coverage (5% of the population) of a mask offering no protection
and 40% containment, the epidemic peak can be delayed when retaining resources for detected
cases.

Figure S3. Different parameterizations of demand dynamics. Different values of k1 and k2,
provided as the title for each panel, result in different demand responses to increasing numbers
of reported cases. A panic buying scenario can be approximated in the bottom right panel,
where demand is maximal very early in the epidemic. A gradual increase in demand is shown in
the top left panel, in which 50% of the population seek masks if and when cases reach 5 million.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure S4. Impact of mask production rates on final number of infections. For different
levels of mask protection and mask production, to reduction in total numbers of infections.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure S5. Levels of reduction in total infection numbers compared to no mask condition
under different demand functions. The level of total infection reduction (%) varies with the
timing of 50% population demand on masks (k1) and the rate of demand increase (k2) given high
(top; B/N= 30%) or low bottom; B/N= 1%) mask production when prioritizing (left) or not prioritizing
(right) masks for infectious cases. Generally, ‘panic buying’ is detrimental and prioritizing to
infectious cases (setting ωS>ωA) is beneficial.

Figure S6. The effect of prioritizing masks to infectious cases is less apparent if the
proportion of asymptomatic infections is high.

Figure S7. Low mask production rate can limit the advantage of building up supplies.
Epidemic curves (pink) under a ‘panic buying’ demand curve (left), and a more gradual
managed demand curve (right) when prioritizing (top) and not prioritizing (bottom) masks for
infectious cases. Demand is shown as a dashed grey line, while the relative available mask
supply is shown in blue. The proportion of the susceptible and symptomatically infected
population wearing masks are shown as green and red lines, respectively. (k1, k2) are shown on

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

the top of each subfigure. While supplies are built up in the early phase of the epidemic,
shortage still occurs during the outbreak if mask production rate is low (B/N = 1% here).

SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE
Parameter

Definition

Baseline
value

References

R0

Basic reproduction number for
symptomatic individuals

2.5

[6]
[34]
[26]

1/α1

Time from exposed to pre-symptomatic 1

[6]

1/α2

Time from pre-symptomatic to
symptomatic/ asymptomatic

5

[6]

Pa

The proportion of asymptomatic
infections

30% (varied in
simulations)

[30]

1/ 𝜸A

Time to recovery for asymptomatic
infections

14

[6][27]

1/ 𝜸S

Time to recovery for symptomatic
infections

14

[6][27]

rt

Relative transmissibility with mask

Varied in
simulations
(=0.5 if not
specified)

rs

Relative susceptibility with mask

Varied in
simulations
(=0.6 if not
specified)

Resource
allocation
model

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052696; this version posted April 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

N70

Proportion of people age 70+

7.6%

Taiwan as
an example:
census.dgb
as.gov.tw

Death rate among symptomatics in
70+
Death rate among symptomatics in
<70

9.7%

[32]

Detection rate of non-severe infections

44% [Japan]

1/μ

Average time of wearing disposable
mask

1

B

Daily mask production

Varied in
simulations

d

The ratio of rate of wearing mask
between symptomatic infected
individuals and others (ωS/ωA)

Varied in
simulations
(=1000 if not
specified)

1.3%

Supply &
demand
model

[35]

