medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A first study on the impact of current and future control measures on
the spread of COVID-19 in Germany
Maria Vittoria Barbarossa1,3,? , Jan Fuhrmann3,5 , Julian Heidecke1 , Hridya Vinod Varma2 ,
Noemi Castelletti4 , Jan H. Meinke5 , Stefan Krieg5 , and Thomas Lippert5
1

Institute for Applied Mathematics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
2
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Frankfurt Institute of Advanced Studies, Frankfurt, Germany
4
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany
5
Jülich Supercomputing Centre, Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany
?
Correspondence: barbarossa@fias.uni-frankfurt.de
March 28th 2020

Abstract
The novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), identified in China at the end of December 2019 and causing the
disease COVID-19, has meanwhile led to outbreaks all over the globe, with about 571,700 confirmed
cases and about 26,500 deaths as of March 28th, 2020. We present here the preliminary results of a
mathematical study directed at informing on the possible application or lifting of control measures in
Germany. The developed mathematical models allow to study the spread of COVID-19 among the
population in Germany and to asses the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1

Introduction

The novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), identified in China at the end of December 2019 and causing the
disease COVID-19, has meanwhile led to outbreaks all over the globe, with about 571,700 confirmed
cases and about 26,500 deaths as of March 28th, 2020 [1]. We present here the preliminary results
of a mathematical study directed at projecting possible modifications and improvement of control
measures in Germany. The developed mathematical models allow to study the spread of COVID-19
among the population in Germany and to asses the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions. The
overall goal is to suggest strategies for the mitigation of the current outbreak, slowing down the spread
of the virus and thus reducing the peak in daily diagnosed cases, the demand for hospitalization or
intensive care units admissions, and eventually fatalities. The project was developed in the framework
of a newly established collaboration on ”Epidemiology and Pandemics” between Heidelberg University,
the Frankfurt Institute of Advanced Studies and the Jülich Supercomputing Center.

Highlights
• In this study, mathematical modeling is used to predict the spread of COVID-19 among the
German population and to evaluate the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions. The proposed setting allows to investigate how a specific intervention scenario affects the dynamics of the
epidemics, with particular attention to interactions between individuals of the same or different
age groups (children, adults and people older than 60y).
• A most undesirable scenario (do-nothing scenario), where the only control measures
are increased awareness due to media activities (washing hands, proper coughing and sneezing,
keeping distance from obviously sick persons), according to the mathematical model would lead
to a peak in the curve of diagnosed cases at the end of April 2020, with about 2.8 Mio active
detected cases on the day of the peak, a total of 80 Mio infected (out of which only about 8 Mio
detected and 23.5 Mio asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections), and a total of 630,000 fatalities
over the course of the epidemic. This is in line with what was predicted for the outbreak in the
United Kingdom in an analogous do-nothing scenario [4].
• Hitherto adopted main control measures (incl. closure of schools and universities, remote
working policy, isolation of infected cases and maintenance of testing activity as of March 2020)
have then been included in the mathematical model to fit the curves of reported cases in Germany
as of March 25th. The maintenance of these measures until the end of 2020 was
assumed to predict the ”baseline” (BSL) scenario. Model simulations indicate that,
compared to the do-nothing scenario, where no interventions are applied, the BSL scenario
would lead to: (i) a shift in the epidemic peak by about one month (expected in early June
2020), (ii) a reduction of detected SARS-CoV-2 infections by 60% (from 2.8 Mio to 1.26 Mio) at
the outbreak peak, (iii) a reduction by about 100,000 fatalities (expected over 530,000 fatalities
in total) and (vi) about 69 Mio infected (thereof 20 Mio asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections)
over the course of the epidemic.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

• A low-damage scenario could be predicted by enriching the baseline measures with
significantly increased testing activity (not only suspected SARS-CoV-2 infectives but
also persons without symptoms or known close contacts to identified cases), a rather strict
isolation protocol of detected SARS-CoV-2 cases for about two weeks, and reduced contacts with
vulnerable individuals. According to the model, these interventions, if starting immediately and
going into full effect within five to ten days seem to reduce the number of fatalities to a minimum
of 18,000 and the peak number of infectives to 660,000 active detected infections at the day of the
peak in the third week of April. However, this dramatic slowdown of the epidemic comes with
a price since successfully preventing new infections also slows down the increase of the number
of recovered, and hence immune, individuals. For this scenario to work effectively, all the
above mentioned strict control measures (including BSL measures) must remain in
effect for more than one year.
• A partial lifting of the restrictions imposed thus far, planning for a reopening of schools,
universities, and restaurants, resuming work and most club activities after mid April
2020 is predicted to result in an increase of some 15% of the death toll over the BSL scenario
by the model. Simulations indicate that the favorable effects of the restrictions imposed to date
would be substantially reversed, leading to a comparable scenario as the do-nothing scenario,
with an epidemic peak around mid May 2020, 2.2 Mio diagnosed cases on the day of the peak
and 620,000 fatalities over the course of the epidemic. If, however, this is accompanied
by significantly increased testing activity, isolation of identified cases and reduced
contact with vulnerable individuals, such a partial withdrawal leads to less severe
consequences. Indeed, model simulations of this scenario indicate that the (first) epidemic
peak would be reached due to increased testing activity in the second half of April 2020, with
670,000 detected SARS-CoV-2 infections at the outbreak peak. A second peak would follow and
the epidemic would last for a longer period (more than one year), but the total number of cases
(14.4 Mio, out of which there are 1.2 Mio asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections) and fatalities
(about 60,000) would be substantially limited by the measures according to the model.
• A close-to-total shutdown of any economic and social activities for a period of 5
weeks from now will probably only cause a shift in one of the described scenario. While the
advantage of a temporary shutdown is buying time (the expected peak being mid July 2020 with
1.3 Mio identified cases at the day of the peak), which might be helpful if the health care systems
can be prepared to be in a better position to deal with the disease, such a scenario would still
lead to about 570.000 fatalities in total, as the model predicts. If accompanied by increased test
activity this scenario leads to similar fatality numbers (258,000) and even higher peak numbers
of known infected individuals (22.6 Mio) as compared to a scenario with increased testing alone
as additional measure. The main effect of a shutdown with abrupt start and end would be
delaying the peak of known active cases, while at the same time making it narrower and higher.
A significant increase in testing activity for the detection of infections, including
for antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 could be quite beneficial. First, this will reveal a
large number of already present but yet undetected infected individuals, and allow to carefully
isolate them. Further, antibody testing would allow identifying unknown recovered (presumably
immune) individuals, who could then resume their normal levels of activity.
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2

Methods

2.1

Data

The meanwhile publicly available dataset provided by the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) [2] was used
for this study and was last accessed on March 26th, 2020. Total cases per federal state and district
are recorded in the database as reported to the local health authorities. The reporting date - the date
on which the local health authority became aware of the case and recorded it electronically - is used
to display the newly transmitted cases per day. A few days can pass between the notification by the
doctors and laboratories to the health authority and the transmission of the data to the RKI, henceforth the exact time of infection of the reported cases cannot usually be determined. The notification
date to the health department therefore best reflects the time of detection of the infection (diagnosis
date) and thus the current infection process.
The dataset is provided as a grouped incidence table where each stratum (data row) is defined by
the variables: ”Federal State” (Bundesland), ”District” (Kreis), ”Age” (categorical), ”Gender” and
”Reporting date”. Six different age groups are reported: 0-4 years, 5-14 years, 15-34 years, 35-59 years,
60-79 years and 80+ years. For 0.4% of cases the age information is missing. The cumulative number
of reported SARS-CoV-2 infections in Germany up to March 26th was confirmed to be 36,508, with
+4,953 (+13.6%) new cases compared to the previous day. The percentage of male patients (54.3%) is
higher compared to that of females (45.3%), (0.4% gender unknown). A similar feature was observed
also in COVID-19 data from other countries, e.g. Italy [3]. Most patients are registered with an age
between 15 and 79 years, with the predominance of the age category 35-59 (Figure 1a). The earliest
cases were reported on Jan 24th, 2020. The first dead patients were reported on Feb 20th, 2020
(Figure 1b). Since March 4th, 2020 (with the exception of March 8th, 2020) at least one death per
day was reported. The age distribution of dead patients is dominated by the age category 80+ years.
As of March 26th no fatal case younger than 35 years was reported.

2.2

Mathematical Models

The mathematical models adopted for this study are based on systems of differential equations which
describe interactions between different groups of individuals in the population. The proposed approach
extends the known S-E-I-R (susceptibles-exposed-infected-recovered) scenario for disease dynamics [7].
Individuals are classified according to their status with respect to the virus spread in the community.
In particular we distinguish between individuals who have been exposed to the virus but are not
yet infectious, asymptomatic infectives, infectives with mild or influenza-like symptoms (not reported
as SARS-CoV-2 infections), and reported SARS-CoV-2 infectives. We assume that infected patients
without SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis are unlikely to die of the virus-induced disease. Undetected infections
lead to undetected recoveries in the population, which cannot be reported unless testing on ongoing
(virus detection) or previous (antibody detection) SARS-CoV-2 infections is performed.
The so-called basic reproduction number (R0 ) of an infectious disease is a parameter which can
be calculated from the underlying mathematical model of the transmission network. In simple disease
transmission models R0 > 1 implies that the virus will spread in the population, and the larger the
value of R0 , the harder it is to control the epidemic.
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Data from [2] as of March 26th, 2020. (a) Daily new COVID-19 cases classified by age
groups reported in Germany since Jan 24th, 2020. (b) Daily new COVID-19 deaths classified by age
groups reported in Germany since Feb 20th, 2020.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: COVID-19 outbreak scenario in absence of active control on virus spread. Elementary model
with parameters calibrated to German data from [2] collected until March 13th, 2020. This model
does not take into account age or social structures in the population and is used here only as a proof
of concepts for the refined modeling approach.

2.3

Preliminary study - Elementary model with homogeneous population

The simplest approach that we adopted to understand the evolution of the epidemic in time is based
on the assumption that the population is homogeneous (in particular with respect to age and social
habits). This simplistic assumption is of course not reflecting the multidimensional complexity of
the ongoing situation but can nevertheless help in determining major factors affecting disease spread.
Calibrating our simplest (homogeneous) model on time series for reported cases (data from [2]) from
January 28th until March 13th, 2020 we obtain R0 = 4.3. This value is obtained assuming minimal
or no control measures applied to mitigate the spread of the epidemic and is in line with previous
estimates for R0 in other countries during the initial phase of the outbreak [5, 6]. Figure 2 shows
the situation without any control measure applied, as the epidemic spreads among the population.
The severity of the outbreak is highly dependent on contacts with infectives (symptomatic or not). A
reduction in contact rates of all individuals postpones and lowers the peak in the curve of currently
active infections (cf. Fig. 3(a)). Under our working hypotheses, asymptomatic individuals are those
with highest contact rates (due to absence of symptoms), while detected COVID-19 cases are those with
lowest contact rates, though not being completely isolated. Reduction of contacts of asymptomatic
infectives, as well as successful measures for early detection of new infections are potential measures
to reduce the basic reproduction number, hence the severity of the outbreak (cf. Fig. 3(b)).

2.4

Refined model

The preliminary model described in Sec. 2.3 was refined to include age groups and immunological
stages during infections. This allows to consider features like the immune response of individuals
during infection, as well as social behavior, in particular interactions among individuals of the same
or different age groups. Based on the statistical analysis of the RKI data 2.1 we distinguish three
groups: children (0-14y), adults (15-59 y) and people 60y or older. The refined model also includes
additional stages of infection to obtain a more realistic time course of individual infections.
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Reduction in contact rates, in particular of asymptomatic infectives, and early detection of
new infections (a) lead to a less severe outbreak and (b) can be used to control the basic reproduction
number R0 .
Further we incorporate in the model (i) general increased awareness in the population due to the effect
of media (M), as well as (ii) active control due to main intervention measures adopted in Germany
since February 2020. These control measures include: (CS) Closure of all schools, universities, sports
clubs and canceling public events; (HO) reduced contacts in workplaces and outside the household
(restaurants, bars, public transport); (T0) initial efforts to improve detection by more testing, and
(IC0) isolation of infected cases. Details are summarized in Table 1. Collected reported cases for
the three age groups were used to fit the model including control measures as indicated in Table 1,
until March 25th (Fig. 4a). The obtained setting was used to construct predictions (Fig. 4b) the
baseline (BSL) scenario, in which the currently applied control measures (CS,HS,TO, and ICO) and
the awareness due to the effect of media are maintained for the time of simulations (1 year). The
BSL scenario is projected to result in more than half a million fatalities (648 deaths per
100,000 popul.) throughout Germany, with over 1.2 mio active cases on the day of the
peak (day 127, beginning of June 2020). Compared to a scenario without the application of
interventions, the maintenance of the baseline measures until the end of 2020 leads to a reduction in
about 100.000 fatalities and a reduction of number of detection at the outbreak peak by 60% (from
2.8 Mio to 1.26 Mio.).
In light of these results and considering that the current restrictions on public life are hard to sustain in the long run, we are led to simulate several scenarios based on possible further nonmedical
interventions (cf. Table 2). Among these interventions are massive expansions of testing for infections
both among symptomatic (T1) and increasingly among asymptomatic persons (T1+), even stricter
isolation of identified cases (IC, IC+), increased caution in contact by and with endangered individuals
to different extents (IO, IO-), and finally a close to total shutdown (SD) of economic activities, as
it was successfully exercised in Hubei province in China. Moreover, we investigate the effects of
at least a partial rollback of the measures being currently imposed, specifically reopening
schools, universities and some organized social activities (RB-CS) on the one hand, and vastly reduced
restrictions of economic activities (RB-HO) on the other hand.
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Cumulated COVID-19 cases classified by age groups. (a) Model simulations (continuous
curves) and data from [2] as of March 25th, 2020. The most recent data points are highly affected
by uncertainties (underreporting) and are not taken into account for model calibration; (b) Model
predictions for baseline (BSL) scenario until end Jan. 2021. Dashed curves represent daily detected
new cases, continuous curves represent active infections.
Label

Policy

Description/Working assumptions

CS

Closure of all schools,
universities,
sport
clubs. Public events are
canceled.

Reducing contacts: child-child (- 60%), child-adult (-5%),
adult-adult (- 50%), senior-senior (- 10%). Assumed to be applied at national scale on March 14th 2020 (day 48).

HO

Remote working policy
(home office), closure of
all restaurants and bars,
reduced (use of) public
transport service.

Reducing contacts: child-child (- 20%), child-adult (- 20%),
adult-adult (- 50%), child-senior (- 30%), adult-senior (- -30%),
senior-senior (- 30%). Assumed to be applied at national scale
from March 13th (day 45), contact reductions fully achieved
after 13 days.

M

Awareness raising due
to media, canceling big
events

Information and media activities increase social distancing
and personal hygiene (e.g., washing hands), limited (self)quarantine of known or suspected cases starting on Feb 25th
(day 28). All contacts are effectively reduced by 20%, contact between senior and adult/child slightly more reduced, fully
achieved after 20 days.

T0

Testing

Increased testing activity since Feb 28th (day 31). Approx. 10fold increase in testing compared to previous phase, achieved
after 21 days.

IC0

Isolation
cases

of

infected

Identified infected cases isolated for 2 weeks. Reduces contacts
(for individuals in specific groups by - 70%) to be implemented
starting on March 28th (day 60), fully in effect by day 65.

Table 1: Summary of control measures for mitigation of COVID-19 infections adopted in Germany as
of March 26th.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

Results and Observations

Among the simulated scenarios (Fig. 5), the most coherent predictions are the effectiveness of enhanced
testing (T1, T1+) and particular care toward endangered persons (IO, IO-) for the reduction of the
predicted number of fatalities. The expansion of testing capacities by a factor of 10 alone already
results in a reduction of fatalities by about 50% as compared to the baseline (result not shown in
figures). Clearly, increased testing will result in a higher number of diagnosed cases, increasing the
peak number of known infectives by a factor of two (Fig. 6b, Fig. 6c), but it is important to keep in
mind that the additional identified cases should be expected to be mostly weakly symptomatic. The
expected peak number of patients requiring hospitalization is reduced by more than 30%, and the
same is true for patients requiring intensive care (result not shown in figures).

Label

Policy

Description/Working assumptions

T1

Significant increase of testing, in
particular of individuals with relevant symptoms and/or contact
to identified cases

Further increase in testing by at least four-fold, starting on day 60 (28.03.), fully achieved after 10 days.

T1+

Significant increase in testing, including of asymptomatic individuals without known direct contact
to identified cases

Further increase of tests by a factor of 15 (over T0),
starting at day 60 (March 28th), fully implemented by
day 70 (April 7th).

RB

(partial) Rollback of measures
HO and/or CS, significantly
weakens the control measure described therein

Turns back 80-90% of the reductions in contact rates
achieved by HO/CS, slowly starting on day 75 (April
12th), fully in effect on day 82 (April 19th).

IC

Stricter isolation of known infectives compared to IC0

Reduces contact rates of of identified COVID-19 infectives by -70% (compared to IC0), starting on day
60 (March 28th), in full effect by day 65 (April 2nd).

IC+

Even stricter isolation of known
cases

Analogous to IC, leading to higher reduction (90% compared to IC0) in contact rates of identified
COVID-19 infectives (-90% compared to IC0).

IO

General social distancing (incl.
self-separation) of individuals at
risk, in particular elderly

Reduction of child-senior and adult-senior contacts by
-70%, starting on day 60, in full effect on day 65.

IO-

Lighter version of IO

Reduction of child-senior and adult-senior contacts by
-40%, starting on day 60, in full effect on day 65.

SD

Temporary close-to-total shutdown of economic and social activities

Further reduction of contacts by 80% starting immediately and being in effect for 5 weeks

Table 2: Possible measures included in simulated scenarios, starting from March 28th or later.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Testing not only suspected infectives but also persons without symptoms or known close
contacts to identified cases is projected to reduce the number of fatalities even further, in
particular if combined with rather strict isolation of identified cases for about two weeks and strongly
reduced contacts between endangered individuals and possible infectives (scenario IO IC T1+). These
interventions, if starting immediately and going into full effect within five to ten days
(Table 2), promise to reduce the number of fatalities by a factor of about 30 (18,000
expected deaths, Fig. 6c) and the peak number of infectives by a factor of two (660,000
active detected infections at the day of the peak Fig. 6b). The number of required hospitalizations and intensive care patients should be reduced even further, since the increase in testing
results in more diagnosed cases with mild or possibly without symptoms. However, this
dramatic slowdown of the epidemic comes with a price since successfully preventing new infections
also slows down the increase of the number of recovered, and hence immune, individuals. It should be
remarked that the current restrictions (BSL) on public life were assumed to remain largely in effect in
this scenario. Save for quick breakthroughs in the development of a vaccine or effective medication,
or a significant reduction of the virus’ aggressiveness, we are talking about years rather than
months during which the measures have to remain in effect.
This leads us to consider two more scenarios which include an at least partial lifting of the restrictions imposed thus far. We assume this to start around Easter (April 12th, 2020), including reopening
schools, universities, and restaurants, resuming normal work and most club activities, and at least
some resurgence in travel. Without any further intervention, this lifting of measures alone
(scenario RB-HO-CS) is expected to result in an increase of some 15% of the death toll
over the baseline scenario (Fig. 6d), probably even more pronounced by a presumably overwhelmed
health care system having to sustain an even higher peak number (Fig. 6b) of infectives compared
to the baseline scenario. However, combining this partial rollback with significantly increased testing
activity, isolation of identified cases and reduced contacts with endangered persons (Scenario RBIO-IC-T1+) reduces the expected number of fatalities by a factor of nine (Fig. 6d) and the peak
number of known infectives by a factor of two (Fig. 6b), again many more of them only weakly afflicted
than in the baseline scenario. Even stricter isolation of cases but less severe restrictions on endangered persons (scenario RB IC+ IO- T1+) still results in reductions by a factor of six for fatalities
(Fig. 6d) and close to 40% for the maximal number of simultaneously active known infectives (Fig. 6b).
A close-to-total shutdown of any economic and social activities for three to four months
(scenario SD-T) is expected to merely postpone any of the described scenarios. This is at
least the case if we assume that an absolute isolation of Germany as a country will not be possible for
a substantial amount of time afterwards, so that the epidemic is bound to inadvertently resurge from
endemic reservoirs after the restrictions are being lifted. Even assuming the test activities remain
high after rolling back the shutdown, there is no significant effect on either the number of fatalities or
the peak number of cases when compared to the baseline scenario with increased testing alone (T1)
(results not shown in figures). The positive effect of a temporary shutdown would be to gain
time, which could be an advantage if health systems can be prepared to deal with the
disease better, if a vaccine can be developed in time, or if the virus is expected to become
less aggressive. Lacking any information, we did not include these aspects in the model so far.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) SD T1

(b) IO IC T1

(c) RB HO SC

(d) RB IO IC T1+

(e) RB IC+ IO- T1+

Figure 5: Model prediction for different model scenarios. (a) Temporary shut-down and increase
testing activity (SD T1); (b) Restricted contacts with elderly and risk groups, isolation of detected
cases, combined with increased testing activity (IO IC T1); (c) Partial rollback, reopening schools,
reintroducing contacts at workplaces and public transportation (RB HO SC); (d) Partial rollback as
in (c) coupled to strongly increased testing also of asymptomatic individuals, isolation of identified
cases, and reduced contacts with elderly and risk groups (e) Partial rollback as in (c) coupled to
strongly increased testing also of asymptomatic individuals, strict isolation of identified cases, and
partially reduced contacts with elderly and risk groups.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 6: Statistical comparison of model output for the baseline (BSL) scenario and the considered
possible alternatives. (a) Peak shifting (in days) compared to BSL; (b) Differences in reported cases
(%) at the day of the peak; (c) Differences in total detected cases (%); Differences in total deaths (%).
We should remark that the choice of parameters in our model rests on several assumptions that are not
particularly well founded in data. Firstly, there is significant uncertainty regarding the current
number of undetected cases and therefore the current detection ratio. This clearly affects
any assumptions on possible increases of that ratio. In scenarios without additional testing (T0), the
total number of infectives at a given time is supposed to be tenfold higher than the number of known
cases. Assuming increased testing (T1), the factor reduces to 1.7, while for vastly increased testing
(T1+) also of asymptomatic individuals we assume that only 25% of infectives remain undetected,
meaning that the number of infectives at a given time is 1.35 times the number of known active cases.
The limited capacity of the health care system, in particular of intensive care units, was not yet
directly considered as a parameter of our refined model. However, the predicted peak number of
infected individuals can be used as a proxy for the expected demand for health care resources at the
height of the epidemic. Assuming that a fixed proportion of infected individuals will require intensive
care, the maximal number of infectives for a given scenario directly indicates the maximal load on the
health care system for this scenario.
The aggressiveness of the virus and hence the mortality among all affected individuals (whether
diagnosed or not) is another unknown, but different assumptions about this parameter can be expected
to have similar impacts on all the scenarios discussed here.
Given the timing of this study, it is hard to judge the effects of the interventions already in place
(in particular CS, HO) on the contact rates with sufficient precision. This uncertainty also affects
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

any predictions about the implications of retracting these measures. Much will depend on the
compliance of the population. Finally, the effectiveness of case isolation, strongly depending on
the detection ratio, is hard to estimate for the above mentioned reasons.
Having said that, it is obvious from all the simulated scenarios that a combination of vastly
increased testing, isolation of known infectives, and restraint in contacts with persons of
high age or with relevant preconditions is the most promising approach if the severity of the
epidemic is to be limited to as low a level as possible. Using antibody tests, as far as available, in
addition to direct PCR tests for viral RNA will have the additional benefit of identifying
recovered, and hence presumably immune individuals who can then resume their normal
levels of activity without jeopardizing any efforts to contain the epidemic. That even the
most optimistic scenarios results in more than ten thousand fatalities and very high numbers of cases
is a result of the assumption that the detection ratio is still rather low, albeit increasing, and the
presumed number of infectives at the current point in time is already rather large. Any significant
increase in testing is therefore going to reveal a large number of infected individuals
already present but still in the dark. However, the prospect of reducing the number of fatalities by possibly 90% or even more should be a good reason to strongly consider the proposed measures.
Measuring the expected economic and social costs of upholding the current restrictions on movement and contacts and weighing them against the expected gains in terms of decreasing mortality
and limiting the excessive demands on the health care system is a very hard challenge that cannot be
answered in this study.
For every new unexpected epidemic outbreak long term predictions allow only for rough estimates
of the true disease dynamics, hence should be considered carefully. In order to significantly contribute
to the control the spread of COVID-19 in Germany, predictions shown in this study will be regularly
improved in the coming days and weeks, by enriching the data set, re-calibrating and refining the
mathematical model to produce more reliable forecasts.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Prof. Volker Lindenstruth (Frankfurt Institute of Advanced Studies –
FIAS) for the constructive discussions initiating this project and his valuable support. We thank Prof.
Gordon Pipa of the Institute of Cognitive Sciences at the University of Osnabrück and Dr. Alexander
Ullrich of the Robert Koch Institute for providing us with early access to data.

Contributions
Conceptualization: MVB; Modelling: JF, MVB, JH; Data curation and analysis: NC; Literature
research: HVV, JH, JM, NC; Calibration: JF, HVV, JH, MVB, JM. Numerical simulations: JF, JH,
HVV, JM, MVB, SK. Writing: MVB, JF, TL.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20056630; this version posted April 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
[1] WHO Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)Situation Report - 68 World Health Organisation 2020. Available online: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/
situation-reports/20200328-sitrep-68-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=384bc74c_2

(last ac-

cessed on 28 March 2020)
[2] RKI Table with the current COVID-19 infections per day (time series) from the Robert
Koch Institute. Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany 2020. Available online: https://
npgeo-corona-npgeo-de.hub.arcgis.com/datasets/dd4580c810204019a7b8eb3e0b329dd6_
0/

(last accessed on 27 March 2020)

[3] EpiCentro Daily Infographic. Integrated surveillance of COVID-19 in Italy. Istituto Superiore
di Sanitá, Rom, Italy 2020. Available online: https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/
bollettino/Infografica_27marzo%20ENG.pdf

(last accessed on 28 March 2020)

[4] Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. March 16th 2020. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.25561/77482
[5] K. Gostic et. al. Estimated effectiveness of symptom and risk screening to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 eLife 2020;9:e55570. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55570
[6] B. F. Maier, and D. Brockmann Effective containment explains sub-exponential growth in
confirmed cases of recent COVID-19 outbreak in Mainland China. medRxiv (2020) DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.18.20024414
[7] F. Brauer, C. Castillo-Chavez and Z. Feng Mathematical Models in Epidemiology, Springer (2019)

14

