Supercritical Water Gasification: Practical Design Strategies and
Operational Challenges for Lab-Scale, Continuous Flow Reactors
Brian R. Pinkard, David J. Gorman, Kartik Tiwari, Elizabeth G. Rasmussen, John C. Kramlich, Per G.
Reinhall, Igor V. Novosselov1
Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195

Abstract
Optimizing an industrial-scale supercritical water gasification process requires detailed knowledge of
chemical reaction pathways, rates, and product yields. Laboratory-scale reactors are employed to develop
this knowledge base. The rationale behind designs and component selection of continuous flow,
laboratory-scale supercritical water gasification reactors is analyzed. Some design challenges have
standard solutions, such as pressurization and preheating, but issues with solid precipitation and feedstock
pretreatment still present open questions. Strategies for reactant mixing must be evaluated on a systemby-system basis, depending on feedstock and experimental goals, as mixing can affect product yields,
char formation, and reaction pathways. In-situ Raman spectroscopic monitoring of reaction chemistry
promises to further fundamental knowledge of gasification and decrease experimentation time. Hightemperature, high-pressure spectroscopy in supercritical water conditions is performed, however, longterm operation flow cell operation is challenging. Comparison of Raman spectra for decomposition of
formic acid in the supercritical region and cold section of the reactor demonstrates the difficulty in
performing quantitative spectroscopy in the hot zone. Future designs and optimization of continuous
supercritical water gasification reactors should consider well-established solutions for pressurization,
heating, and process monitoring, and effective strategies for mixing and solids handling for long-term
reactor operation and data collection.

1. Introduction
Supercritical water exhibits unique, tunable physiochemical properties beneficial for waste treatment,
organic compound gasification, and material synthesis. At temperatures and pressures above the critical
point (374°C, 22.1 MPa), properties can be varied continuously from liquid-like to gas-like without a
phase change. A significant decrease in dielectric constant and quantity of hydrogen bonds across the
critical point causes water to transition from a polar to a non-polar solvent [1]. Industrial applications of
supercritical water require an understanding of physical phenomena linked to pressure, temperature,
1

Corresponding author, ivn@uw.edu

transport properties, compound solubility, and chemical reactions. Reactor optimization involves the
selection of components, material, geometry, mixing strategy, instrumentation, reactor control, and
catalyst introduction for an efficient and effective gasification process [1].
Supercritical water was first explored as a useful reaction medium in the 1970s for the hydrothermal
refining of organic compounds to gaseous products [2]. Laboratory-scale supercritical water reactors
(SCWRs) have been used to study supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) and gasification (SCWG) of
model compounds, biomass feedstocks, and chemical warfare agent (CWA) surrogates, and have led to
the development of pilot and industrial scale reactors [3]. SCWRs have also been constructed for
hydrothermal synthesis of metal oxides and metal-organic frameworks, although such particle formation
is undesirable in SCWO and SCWG reactors [4, 5].
SCWO is primarily used for neutralizing toxic waste. Under supercritical conditions, organic
compounds and oxygen become fully miscible in water, allowing oxidation to occur in a single fluid
phase with excellent transport properties. Many organic compounds are completely oxidized in under one
minute with optimized temperature. Processing wastewater and sewage has been a common application
for SCWO [6].
SCWG facilitates the decomposition of organic molecules in the absence of excess oxygen, through
reductive hydrothermal reactions. Figure 1 displays a generic reaction network for the gasification of
complex organic molecules. Desirable products from the SCWG of organic feedstocks include light fuel
gases, such as H2, CO, and CH4; these pathways are favored at high temperatures and low feedstock
concentrations. Common refractory products include phenolic compounds, furfurals, and char, which
manifest due to polymerization reactions or the inability to break aromatic rings [7]. Metal oxides and
inorganic acids can also form during SCWG, if heteroatoms or metals are present in the feedstock. Most
SCWG research is focused on processing biomass [3, 8, 9], sewage sludge [10-12], or other organic
wastes for conversion to drop-in fuels. An effectively designed SCWG reactor may be able to produce H 2
and CH4 from waste biomass with >20% solid content at an economically competitive cost [11]. Biomass
gasification in supercritical water is a carbon neutral process and requires no environmentally hazardous
chemicals [5]. One major advantage of SCWG is that wet biomass can be readily gasified without an
energy intensive drying step. The essential elements of a continuous SCWG reactor are presented with a
representative schematic in Figure 2. Water and reagent are pressurized and subsequently heated to
supercritical conditions, after which the reactor effluent is quenched and throttled back to ambient

2

Figure 1: Generalized reaction network for supercritical water gasification of complex organic molecules.
Desirable reaction pathways lead to high yields of gaseous products, while undesirable polymerization
reactions lead to the formation of char. Heteroatoms or metals present in the feedstock can form metal
oxides or inorganic acids, causing significant issues with reactor clogging and corrosion
conditions. While design choices vary considerably between individual reactors, the sequence of
pressurizing, heating, reacting, quenching, and throttling remains consistent across all continuous SCWG
reactors.
Despite similarities between SCWO and SCWG reactors, the design challenges are substantially
different. The SCWO environment is oxidative, while the SCWG environment is reductive, thus the
corrosion behavior of many materials differs between SCWO and SCWG [13, 14]. Some reactors have
been designed to operate with or without an oxidant, such as the Sandia Supercritical Fluids Reactor
(SFR) [15], but most are tailored towards a single processing regime.
SCWO is more promising commercially for hazardous waste treatment, as the exothermic oxidation
process reduces fuel value in favor of high reaction temperatures and efficient chemical destruction [16].
A properly functioning SCWO system may have destruction and removal efficiencies (DRE) in excess of
99.999% and can readily handle most organic waste streams [14]. SCWO is appropriate when highly
effective waste treatment, not fuel generation, is the primary goal. By contrast, SCWG allows for
recovering much of the fuel value in the waste stream. SCWG is less effective at handling complex waste
streams, due to issues with char formation and salt precipitation, but does promise economic benefits in
fuel reforming. For industrial systems, heat recovery is one clear example where the two technologies
require different approaches. Oxidation is an exothermic reaction scheme, while gasification facilitates
endothermic reactions; heat recovery in a SCWG system is vital to process economics [3, 13]. A partial
oxidation regime could improve gasification efficiency by facilitating internal reactor heating while some

3

fuel value of the waste can still be recovered, and could offer an ideal middle ground between the two
technologies [7, 17]. Advanced knowledge of heating values and chemical kinetic rates would
significantly improve process designs. Only design strategies for SCWG reactors are considered in this
paper. Some recommendations may be applicable to SCWO, but specific challenges will not be
addressed, such as methods for oxidant introduction and thermal management of the reactor. Table 1
presents common design challenges for SCWRs, and compares how the challenges are addressed in
SCWG and SCWO reactors.

Figure 2: Representative schematic of a continuous supercritical water gasification reactor with premixed
water and reagent
For SCWG, the yield of product gases is closely linked to reaction rates along competing pathways.
Maximizing H2 production is a common goal for biomass gasification; insight into reaction pathways and
rates allows for the optimization of reaction temperatures, residence times, and selected catalyst [6, 18,
19]. A recent review of reported gasification rates and pathways in supercritical water has summarized
how product composition and yields depend on reaction temperature, residence time, and feedstock
concentration [20].
Although not considered in this paper, batch reactors have also been employed for lab-scale studies.
Batch experiments require a fixed quantity of water and reagents to be pressurized, heated, and allowed to
react at fixed conditions for a set amount of time before product collection and analysis. Batch reactors
have different catalytic behavior than continuous flow reactors but offer insight into pure gasification

4

routes. Continuous reactors are predominantly constructed from nickel-base alloys, which are known to
catalyze gasification reactions. Catalytic behavior in batch reactors is either absent (i.e. quartz reactor) or
limited by mass transfer rates due to the absence of flow in a batch regime [21]. Chemical kinetic rates
determined in batch reactors are vastly different than rates determined in continuous flow reactors, and
designs of each are markedly separate.
Challenge

Supercritical Water Gasification

Supercritical Water Oxidation

Destruction of

High reaction temperatures and long

Oxygen free-radicals facilitate efficient

Refractory

residence times needed, high potential

destruction, less potential to polymerize

Compounds

to form char [7]

molecules and form char [16]

Reductive reactions allow for recovery

Oxidative reactions consume feedstock

of feedstock fuel value in gaseous form

fuel value in favor of compound

[1, 3, 6]

destruction [14, 16]

Endothermic reactions necessitate

Cooling system or sand bath needed to

additional heater(s) to maintain

prevent thermal runaway during

isothermal conditions

exothermic reactions

Fuel Value
Recovery
Reactor Thermal
Management

Corrosion

Heteroatoms and salts are highly
corrosive [13, 14]
Char formation likely from complex

Clogging

organic feedstocks, salt precipitation
and metal oxide formation commonly
causes clogging [1, 7]

Process
Economics

>20% solid content and efficient heat
recovery needed for cost-effective fuel
gas production [3, 11, 13]

Heteroatoms and salts are highly
corrosive, oxide layer forms on metal
reactor walls [13, 14]
Salt precipitation and metal oxide
formation commonly causes clogging
[16]
Regenerative heating minimizes need
for external energy input

Practical

Fuel gas production from wet organic

Destruction and removal of toxic

Application

wastes (e.g. sewage, biomass) [3, 8-12]

compounds (e.g. sewage, CWAs) [14]

Table 1: Comparison between operational challenges in continuous SCWG and SCWO reactors
This review provides thorough insight into known design solutions for lab-scale, continuous SCWG
reactors, which allows researchers to approach the design of new reactors with a clear understanding of
foundational knowledge. Discussion on reactor subsystems provide suggestions for specific components
and suppliers for effective pumps, heaters, and back pressure regulators. Common design challenges are

5

discussed, including (i) corrosion of reactor components, (ii) reaching and controlling supercritical
pressures and temperatures within the reactor, (iii) clogging due to char formation or salt precipitation,
and (iv) acquiring time-resolved chemical species information for process control or reaction rate
analysis. In this manuscript, we provide insight into potential solutions for each of these challenges. All
told, a state-of-the-art perspective on common designs, challenges, and uses of lab-scale, continuous
SCWG reactors is presented.

2. Main Text
Costs and research goals often influence design choices for lab-scale reactors. Corrosion mitigation,
pressurization, heating methods, effluent quenching, data acquisition, and mixing must be considered in
all designs; some generalized solutions have been identified in published scientific reports. Open
questions still remain in the best methods to pretreat solid feedstocks, and how to properly mitigate
clogging due to solid formation within the reactor.

2.1

Feed Pretreatment
Effective pretreatment of real gasification feedstocks is necessary to facilitate SCWG at the industrial

scale. Pretreatment is rarely necessary for model compound gasification, aside from the dissolution of the
compound into distilled, deionized water. For solid model compounds, gasification is performed at
feedstock concentrations at or below the saturation limit of the compound in room temperature water. For
liquid compounds the feedstock concentration can be as high as experimentally desired.
Insoluble solid or viscous feedstocks require pretreatment to facilitate gasification. For biomass
feedstocks, small particles are needed to create a pumpable slurry. These can be obtained by crushing or
milling the biomass [1, 3]. Subsequently, the biomass is sieved or filtered to remove large particles [22].
Water content can be adjusted to make the pressurization step easier and to reduce the potential for char
formation [3, 22]. Pump selection and dry matter content of the biomass slurry must be considered. Faires
[23] describes an approach where two cylinder piston pumps with a Y-coupler continuously pump a
biomass slurry with 15% solid content to 27 MPa at a flow rate of 5 g/s. The maximum particle size was
0.84 mm, as the ground biomass was sieved with mesh No. 20 before mixing with water.
Matsumura [24] has successfully used a liquefaction pretreatment to facilitate pumping complex
biomass, by heating the reactant stream to 200°C prior to pressurization. This hydrothermal pretreatment
softens the biomass by breaking down the cellulosic structure [25]. Alternatively, researchers at the
University of Hawaii have reported successful gasification of sawdust by suspending the sawdust in a
dilute starch gel before pressurization [25]. Finally, flash pyrolysis has been used by Penninger et al. [26,

6

27] as an effective biomass pretreatment. Flash pyrolysis involves rapid heating of the feedstock at 500°C
to 600°C for a few seconds, which allows for capturing sand and minerals in the produced char and ash.
Additionally, the resulting carbonaceous products are liquid and easily pressurized.

2.2

Corrosion Mitigation and Material Selection
Corrosion control methods in SCWRs have been extensively studied [13, 28-35]. In general, the high

pressure, high temperature (HTHP) supercritical water environment is corrosive to most materials,
particularly if heteroatoms or alkali salts are present [36]. The heat exchanger is the system component
most subject to corrosion, due to the transition through the highly corrosive critical region. Chlorinated
compounds are especially corrosive, although they are typically absent from standard SCWG feedstocks
[13]. Four primary categories of corrosion mitigation methods have been described in a review from
Marrone et al. [13]. These include (i) preventing corrosive species from interacting with the reactor
surface, (ii) forming a corrosion-resistant barrier, (iii) selecting materials resistant to corrosion, and (iv)
tuning operating conditions to avoid severe corrosion conditions. These approaches can be combined
within the same system. While useful in large-scale SCWRs, some of these techniques are not appropriate
for lab-scale reactors. For example, in a reactor designed for the study of decomposition rates, preventing
contact with reactor walls would introduce a concentration gradient within the flow, invalidating the
assumption of a plug-flow regime. Additionally, forming a corrosion resistant barrier on the interior of the
reactor wall would reduce the catalytic wall effect. For lab-scale reactors, the most practical corrosion
mitigation technique is appropriate material selection.
Certain nickel-base alloys resist corrosion in the presence of salt precipitates that are likely to form
during the gasification of complex feedstocks. The majority of continuous SCWRs have been constructed
from Hastelloy C-276 or Inconel 625 due to the combination of corrosion resistance, strength at high
temperatures, and commercial availability. Inconel or Hastelloy tubing and fittings can be purchased from
such companies as High Pressure Equipment Co. (Erie, PA) and Swagelok (Solon, OH). Tang et al. [14]
demonstrated that these alloys tend to gain mass in the presence of corrosive species, while stainless steel
alloys lose mass. A buildup of deposits can be cleaned periodically, but lost mass would eventually lead
to system failure. Titanium alloys were shown to resist corrosion under supercritical conditions, but
titanium does not provide beneficial catalytic activity [14].
Another solution to mitigate corrosion is to manufacture a removable reactor liner, which can be
cleaned or replaced periodically. Titanium liners were successfully used in SCWO reactors designed for
CWA destruction, and this solution could be applied to SCWG reactors [37, 38]. However, a liner would

7

provide additional resistance to heat transfer into the gasification environment [13]. The introduction of a
catalyst may reduce corrosion by lowering operating temperatures, but process complexity is increased.

2.3

Pressurization
Any pressurization method for SCWRs should be capable of reaching pressures above the critical

point, and allow for a range of user-specified flow rates. Among reviewed systems, the single method
used for independent mass flow and pressure control is to use constant flow rate pumps in conjunction
with a back-pressure regulator (BPR). Positive displacement pumps are effective at the laboratory scale
for consistent flow rates of simple feedstocks at high pressure.
Due to their compact size, commercial availability, integrated controls, and excellent reliability, highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) pumps are often used when pumping simple liquid
feedstocks at the lab-scale [18, 39-48]. Off-the-shelf HPLC pumps are available from Waters [46-48]
(Milford, MA), Eldex [18] (Napa, CA), Knauer [39] (Berlin, Germany), Teledyne SSI [42] (State College,
PA), and JASCO [43] (Easton, MD), among other companies. HPLC pumps offer precise control over
flow rates typically between 0.01 to 10 mL/min. HPLC pumps are not suited for large reactors and are not
effective for pumping slurries [46].
Diaphragm pumps are ideal for pressurizing slurries with high solid content or highly viscous
feedstocks. However, diaphragm pumps do not offer as precise of flow rate control as HPLC pumps.
Ondze et al. [23] report using a diaphragm pump from LEWA (Leonberg, Germany) in their experiments
gasifying beet residues, and Caputo et al. [39] report using a Milton Roy (Houston, TX) high-pressure
membrane pump to introduce a glucose solution into their gasification reactor. Klingler et al. [67] used
diaphragm pumps from Orlita and LEWA. Xu et al. [46] relied on a diaphragm pump to pressurize
sewage sludge for gasification, although an exact model was not specified.
Syringe and plunger pumps are sometimes used in lab-scale SCWG reactors [42, 49, 50]. While less
precise than HPLC pumps, syringe and plunger pumps offer higher flow rates, although they cannot
handle slurries with high solid content or large particle diameters [42, 50]. Molino et al. [50] report using
a Teledyne (Thousand Oaks, CA) syringe pump with flow rates up to 204 mL/min. Elliott et al. [49] detail
using a reciprocating plunger pump in their SCWG reactors, although flow rate capabilities, make, and
model are not specified.

2.4

Heating
At 25 MPa, increasing the temperature of water from 20°C to 400°C requires a heat input of 2483

kJ/kg [51, 52]. This can be accomplished in different ways, with three common strategies identified in
SCWG systems: immersive baths, resistive contact heaters, and radiative furnaces.

8

Supercritical water flowing through heated tubes can exhibit two irregular heat transfer regimes.
Enhanced heat transfer (HTE) and deteriorated heat transfer (HTD) are characterized by exceptionally
efficient or poor heat transfer to the flow, respectively. Near the critical point, HTE occurs due to an
optimal combination of thermophysical properties such as density and specific heat. Alternatively, HTD
occurs due to a sub-optimal combination of fluid properties. HTD can cause wall temperatures to increase
well above the fluid temperature, potentially damaging the reactor walls. Smaller laboratory scale reactors
operating at lower flow rates may suffer from HTD; the reduced heat-transfer coefficient at low mass
fluxes appears to arise due to buoyancy effects and flow acceleration due to property changes in the
heating section. Potential solutions for avoiding HTD include orienting the flow downward to take
advantage of buoyancy and optimizing mass flux to heat flux ratio through selection of tubing diameter
[53].
Electric furnaces can be purchased with high power ratings and built-in controls, making them a
convenient heating solution [15, 41, 42, 48-50, 54-56]. Some furnaces contain multiple, independent
heating zones for precise temperature control. Many come fully insulated. Due to the high operating
temperatures of the heating elements, electric furnaces are not likely to overheat. Care must be taken not
to exceed the safe operating temperatures of the reactor material, as many furnaces can heat the reactor
walls to unsafe temperatures. Some companies offering radiative tubular furnaces with power ratings
suitable for lab-scale SCWRs include Thermcraft [15, 41] (Winston Salem, NC), Applied Test Systems
[42] (Butler, PA), Vecstar [50] (Chesterfield, UK), and OMEGA [56] (Stamford, CT).
Contact electric resistive heaters transmit heat through conduction. Various form factors exist,
including band heaters, cartridge heaters, heating coils, and flexible heating cables. Contact heaters
require external insulation to minimize heat loss but tend to be cheaper and smaller than electric furnaces
or fluidized baths. Resistive heaters often contain embedded thermocouples for feedback temperature
control. As long as the temperature in the heating element is kept below the temperature limit of the wall
material, the system can operate safely. To make up for the low maximum temperature limit of many
resistive heaters, a second stage heater frequently provides additional energy [15, 39, 48, 54, 56, 57]. The
most significant drawback of this type of heater is an inability to operate at high temperatures in sections
of the reactor experiencing HTD. Typical solutions require either a longer heating section or the use of an
alternative heating method for the supercritical region. Resistive heaters are available from WATLOW
[15] (St. Louis, MO), OMEGA, and other companies.
A unique heating approach was used in heat transfer experiments in a vertical bare tube reactor at the
State Scientific Centre of the Russian Federation (Obninsk, Russia). The reactant was heated by passing

9

an electrical current through reactor walls [58, 59]. While efficient, the 4-meter vertical tube reactor
consumed large amounts of electrical power.
Immersion heating refers to heating the reactor section in a fluidized bath, ensuring isothermal
conditions and good heat transfer. Size and cost have prevented immersion heaters from being widely
adopted for lab-scale reactors. Some designs utilize a hybrid approach by bringing the water to the
supercritical state with a furnace or contact heater in the preheating section and using immersion heating
for the reactor section. Immersion heating can be implemented with a fluidized sand bath [43, 60, 61], a
molten salt bath [57], or another medium such as a fluidized alumina bath from Techne [40]
(Staffordshire, UK).

2.5

Reagent Mixing
Two mixing strategies have been reported: (i) mixing water and reagents before heating, and (ii)

injecting cold reagents into supercritical water. Post-critical injection can rapidly heat and mix reagents,
creating a definitive reaction start time for chemical kinetic experiments. The design of the mixing section
and operating conditions need to be considered to optimize the mixing rate. Numerical simulations can
assist in the design of an effective mixer, but ambiguity in supercritical fluid properties and diffusion
coefficients need to be considered [62].
Premixing allows for solid or viscous feedstocks to reach operating pressures as an emulsion. Water
is necessary as a transport media for gasification when feedstocks are solid, viscous, or insoluble in room
temperature water. One drawback to premixing is char and tar formation in the preheater, due to slow
heating of the reactant [13, 39]. Char formation is reduced by rapidly heating the reagents to supercritical
temperatures. A thorough understanding of char formation pathways and rates is needed to optimize
heating of premixed slurries.
Post-critical injection of reagents significantly reduces char formation and allows for reasonably
accurate calculations of residence time for chemical kinetic studies [8, 63, 64]. The design of an
appropriate post-critical mixing section introduces new challenges. In systems with low flow rates, the
high kinematic viscosity of supercritical water yields low Reynolds numbers, resulting in laminar mixing
limited by molecular diffusion rates. In early research, the SCWR at MIT yielded inconsistent results due
to inefficient mixing of water and reagents. When comparing SCWO rates of methanol with other
research groups, the assumption of fast-mixing was found to be inaccurate. The Reynolds number in the
original MIT reactor was around 3100; too low for consistent turbulent mixing [65]. A smaller diameter
(0.25 mm) injector reduced the mixing time [66]. Larger reactors and higher flow rates promote mixing
through an increase in the Reynolds number. In general, optimization of the operating conditions and the

10

critical reactor dimension is required to achieve adequate mixing profiles for plug flow conditions in the
reactor section. Most authors do not report mixing section design, but variation in mixing profiles could
explain discrepancies in reported reaction pathways and rates [20].
The two mixing scenarios have an analogy in combustion research where two types of mixing are
often used: (i) premixed flames and (ii) diffusion flames. The overall rate is often computed based on the
limiting rate approach, and careful evaluation is needed to ensure that the reaction rate, not the mixing
rate, is the limiting rate during experiments. Numerical and experimental studies could lead to
understanding of the optimal mixing section design, which could be standardized in future studies [39].
The mixing limit (both thermal and species concentration) is specifically important for high feed
concentrations and regions with competing reaction pathways and/or fast kinetic rates. The effect of the
mixing rate on the overall reaction can be significant for slow mixing and fast chemical rates. In laminar
flows, the mixing is driven by molecular diffusion and can be calculated from first principles. Since very
few experimental datasets are available [67], analytical modeling can be used for some properties based
on information from the NIST database [68]. In turbulent flow, molecular diffusion is relevant in the
viscous sublayer, especially when catalytic reactions may occur at the reactor wall.
The relationship between the mixing and kinetic rates can be described by the global and local
Damkohler (Da) and Karlovitz (Ka) numbers, which are based on the ratios of chemical and mixing
timescales and are often used in combustion modeling. The local Da is especially of interest as it shows
the regions where the reaction is dominated by mixing or kinetic rates [69]. In numerical simulations of
turbulent flows, the competition between the mixing and chemical kinetic rates in the presence of
turbulence can be evaluated using a model describing turbulence-chemistry interaction, such as the eddybreak-up model or the eddy dissipation concept presented in combustion literature [70-72]. The mixing
rate limit is specifically important in the design of a practical SCWG system. The application of limiting
rate models to the laboratory and industrial reacting systems can be found in [73-75].

2.6

Clogging and Salt Precipitation
A significant challenge with SCWG of real feedstocks is reactor clogging, either from char buildup or

precipitation of insoluble compounds. This issue is especially pronounced in reactors with a packed
catalyst bed, where the free flow diameter is significantly reduced [1]. Salts, either added as catalysts or
naturally present in biomass feedstocks, have low solubility in supercritical water [1]. Alkali metal salts
exist in a molten form at temperatures above 300°C, and tend to adhere to reactor surfaces, corroding the
metal and poisoning catalytic pores. Potassium is often present in biomass feedstocks, thus potassium
carbonate (K2CO3) and potassium bicarbonate (KHCO3) have been used as model salts in gasification

11

studies of model biomass compounds. Buildup can be cleaned by periodic flushing with cold water, but
frequent cooldown of the system is impractical. Salt precipitation can be suppressed by avoiding the
addition of alkali metal salts, or by pretreatment to remove alkali compounds.
Many biomass constituents react via two competing reaction pathways, one leading to gaseous
products and one to char [7]. The gas formation pathway is favored by fast mixing and heating to
supercritical temperatures, by the presence of effective catalysts, and by operating at temperatures well
above the critical point [7, 20]. Low feedstock concentrations suppress char formation, although reducing
feedstock concentrations is not practical for large-scale systems [20]. Char can be gasified slowly,
although the ideal solution is to avoid its formation altogether.
Researchers at the University of Texas at Austin investigated methods for separating solid particles
within the gasification environment in cases where solid formation is inevitable. Orienting the reactor
downward can help manage solid precipitation, however more involved separation methods may be
needed for some feedstocks [7]. In 1993, a hydrocyclone was tested for particle separation in the
supercritical environment, with separation efficiencies ranging from 80% to 99% depending on the tested
particulate [76]. Crossflow microfiltration was also tested for the removal of inorganic salts and metal
oxide particles. The crossflow microfilter was found to be 40% to 85% efficient at separating inorganic
salts, depending on the reactor temperature [77]. Separation efficiencies were well in excess of 99% for
the removal of metal oxide particles [78]. Any separation method in the supercritical environment must be
corrosion resistant and must minimize interaction of molten salts with reactor components.

2.7

Heat Exchanger and Back Pressure Regulator
Once the supercritical effluent exits the reactor section, it is typically quenched by a heat exchanger

and throttled to atmospheric pressure by a back pressure regulator (BPR). The design of the heat
exchanger is subtly important for chemical reaction studies. In-situ Raman spectroscopy has demonstrated
that for a heat exchanger that is not oriented vertically, flow separation can lead to accumulation of
insoluble gases within the heat exchanger. Separation occurs when the effluent transitions to a two-phase
flow below the critical point. At subcritical temperatures in the range of 240°C to 260°C, formic acid was
shown to be an intermediate of the water-gas shift (WGS) reaction [79]. The synthesis of formic acid in
the heat exchanger would lower H2 yields and would lead to inaccuracies in chemical kinetic studies. The
heat exchanger should be oriented vertically, taking advantage of buoyancy effects to allow insoluble
gases to exit [56].
For large scale systems, heat recovery is vital to process economics. For a feedstock with water
content above 80%, often the energy content of the feedstock is lower than the energy required for the

12

water to reach reaction conditions [3]. However, at the lab-scale, most groups separate the heating and
cooling systems, to simplify component selection.
BPR selection is important, as solid precipitates could clog the ports. The wetted material on the BPR
must be compatible with corrosive reaction products or refractory organic solvents in the effluent stream.
Diaphragm style BPRs are the most common choice for SCWG reactors, with pressure control from
spring loading or from dome loading. Dome loading offers precise control via an external pressure source,
such as compressed N2. Dome loaded BPRs are available from companies such as Equilibar [56]
(Fletcher, NC). However, the cost tends to be higher, and the reactor form factor increases due to the
external gas tank. Spring loaded BPRs offer less precise control but are less expensive and more compact.
Spring loaded BPRs are available commercially from TESCOM [42] (St. Louis, MO), Swagelok [57]
(Solon, OH), and other companies. Studies have shown that pressure plays a negligible role in
gasification rates, thus spring loaded BPRs are acceptable for most SCWG reactors [7, 57]. Highprecision pressure control is only necessary for studies performed near the critical point, where small
pressure fluctuations can impact the density of the supercritical water [80].

2.8

Reactor Monitoring, Control, and Data Acquisition
Real-time process monitoring allows for the safe operation of SCWG systems that are prone to

clogging, corrosion, leaks, or structural failure. Knowledge of temperature, pressure, residence time and
chemical composition are required for chemical reaction rate studies. Some standard approaches are
reported in the literature. Thermocouples immersed in the flow directly measure the reactor temperature
with a fast response time but are exposed to corrosion. Thermocouples affixed or embedded external to
the reactor avoid corrosion but respond slowly and do not directly measure fluid temperature. External
thermocouples can be used to monitor the temperature of heating elements and reactor walls to ensure that
safe operating temperatures are not exceeded. A combination of internal and external thermocouples
allows for thorough monitoring of reaction conditions and component temperatures.
Commercially available pressure sensors are not suited for supercritical water environments. Reactor
pressure must be monitored in the cold zones, preferably before the preheaters, where a sudden rise in
pressure would indicate a clog downstream. The installation of rupture discs or pressure relief valves on
the front end of the reactor is recommended to avoid system failure in the case of over-pressurization.

2.8.1

Residence Time

To estimate the reaction residence time, researchers typically assume a plug flow regime in the
reactor, removing the need to consider concentration gradients, fluid property variations, or residence
time variations. Molecular concentrations in the direction of the flow are assumed to be a function only of

13

residence time. In the absence of turbulence, species transport is governed by molecular diffusion, which
does not facilitate rapid mixing of reagents. Tiwari et al. described the mixing behavior of benzene in
supercritical water under laminar conditions [62]. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) were used to
compare the simulation results for the binary diffusion coefficient from experimental studies and kinetic
theory parameters presented in literature [67, 81]. The study demonstrated that variations in residence
time can exist in the reactor section with the fluid near the wall having greater residence times than the
fluid in the center of the tube (3.05 mm ID tube was modeled).
One strategy to obtain uniform residence time and species concentrations is to induce secondary Dean
flow by coiling the reactor. For Dean numbers (De) > 75, the secondary cross-sectional motion is
superposed on the primary flow as a pair of counter-rotating cells [82, 83]. Dean vortices in the crosssectional direction have been shown to enhance mixing [84-86], and more recently this approach was
applied to microfluidics where mixing is particularly challenging due to the very low Reynolds number
[87, 88]. Interestingly, the pipe curvature maintains laminar flow at greater Reynolds numbers than for
straight pipes, despite curvature being known to cause instability [89]. Optimization of operating
parameters is necessary to estimate mixing levels in the reactor. The use of an analytical or numerical
model is required to address these issues.

2.8.2

Ex-situ product collection and analysis

The vast majority of SCWG studies rely on ex-situ analysis to identify reaction products and
compound yields. Ex-situ analysis may simply involve quantifying gaseous product yields, or it may
involve identification and quantification of every product in the effluent. Researchers attempting to
determine underlying chemical mechanisms and kinetic rates must identify all reaction products for each
experimental condition. Typically, a gas-liquid separator exists after the back pressure regulator. Gas
products are often analyzed using gas chromatography (GC) with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD)
and flame ionization detector (FID), to quantify yields of H2, CO, CO2, CH4, and occasionally trace
amounts of C2H4 and C2H6 [9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19, 22, 26, 27, 39, 41-43, 46-48, 50, 60, 61, 98-104, 106].
GC is not sufficient for understanding chemical kinetics, as liquid product yields must also be
considered. A total organic carbon (TOC) analyzer allows for calculating carbon conversion efficiency by
quantifying the concentration of carbonaceous compounds in the liquid effluent [9, 12, 15, 18, 22, 39, 40,
44-48, 54, 63, 98-100, 103, 104, 107]. Identification and quantification of liquid products with HPLC,
NMR spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy or Raman spectroscopy allows for
identifying and quantifying liquid product yields, which can be used to understand chemical reaction
pathways and rates [12, 19, 40-42, 44-46, 50, 54, 57, 63, 102, 104]. Occasionally solid products are

14

analyzed with such measurement techniques as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), proton-induced Xray emission (PIXE), FTIR spectroscopy, and other methods [9, 11].
While straightforward, ex-situ analysis is time consuming, and not ideal for chemical kinetic studies.
Ex-situ analysis is most suited to studies where only gasification efficiency is measured, and a deeper
understanding of reactions mechanisms is not sought.

2.8.3

In-situ monitoring

In-situ analysis allows for analysis of reaction products in real time. Raman spectroscopy with an
excitation wavelength in the visible range is one of the most promising in-situ process monitoring
techniques for effluent composition analysis due to the large spectral window in supercritical water.
Raman spectroscopy in a continuous flow SCWR was first demonstrated by Sandia National Laboratories
to investigate the oxidation kinetics of methanol and isopropyl alcohol [15, 90, 91]. Data collection within
the reactor allowed for experimental residence times as low as 0.1 s. However, long-term use of the
optical cell in the HTHP environment led to cell failure due to thermal expansion and thermal cycling. Insitu Raman cells require optical access via one or more window. The optical cell in the SFR consisted of a
sapphire plug sealed using a gold gasket and a backing nut, but the gasket would creep during extended
use, or the sapphire window would break under thermal stresses. Bellville washers were added to relieve
thermal stress, but creep remained an issue. Use of the Raman cell in the HTHP environment was
ultimately abandoned [92].
The University of Tokyo utilized in-situ Raman to study the molecular structure of methanol [93] and
oxygen [94] in supercritical water, as well as to measure the kinetic rate of methanol oxidation [95]. The
authors did not report any difficulties with maintaining a seal in the optical cell, and details on the exact
design of the cell are sparse. From figures provided, it appears that the Raman cell uses a cylindrical
sapphire window, held in place by a gasket and a backing nut, which is very similar to the design used by
Sandia.
The prospects for Raman spectroscopy in HTHP environments were summarized in a recent review
[96]. Raman is acknowledged to be a promising technology for revealing qualitatively and quantitatively
how biomass decomposes in supercritical water, and how and when species form from intermediate
compounds. Raman is also identified as a possible tool for real-time pocess control, as it could be
integrated in a feedback control loop with control decisions based on product mixture composition. The
author acknowledged that optical access is a significant challenge, and suggested the use of micro
capillaries made of glass for optical access to the HTHP environment.

15

The University of Washington SCWG reactor uses an immersion Raman probe, where a sapphire ball
lens provides optical access and laser focusing. The sapphire ball is fixed in place by a backing nut and
two gold gaskets. High-resolution Raman spectra can be obtained in the backscatter configuration, and
this technology has been used to study formic acid gasification in near-critical and supercritical water.
Placing the Raman probe in the hot zone of the reactor allows for precise residence time calculations,
as data is collected at a defined location. Residual reactions occurring within the heat exchanger do not
affect collected data. Additionally, Raman monitoring in the hot section theoretically allows for
identification of unstable intermediate reaction compounds. However, no reliable HTHP optical cell is
commercially available. A suitable cell must be custom-built. Additionally, for quantitative spectroscopy,
concentration measurements are determined with models that must first be calibrated with known mixture
spectra. Due to non-linear spectral effects and variations in fluid density at supercritical temperatures,
calibration spectra would need to be collected at supercritical temperatures and pressures. For reactive
organic species, these calibration spectra would be practically difficult to generate.
Raman spectroscopy in the cold zone allows for data collection at a consistent temperature and
pressure. In-situ monitoring after the heat exchanger is sufficient for determining global decomposition
rates, as hydrolysis, decarboxylation, and dehydration reactions are quenched at low temperatures.
Calibration spectra must only be collected at high pressure. Thermal stresses are avoided. However,
residence time calculations are less precise due to the time necessary to quench the hot effluent. Low
temperature reactions will continue through the heat exchanger, such as water-gas shift and methanation
reactions, slightly affecting the observed product concentrations. Finally, flow separation in the heat
exchanger, as mentioned previously, can complicate concentration measurements of insoluble product
gases.
Formic acid was gasified in the University of Washington SCWG reactor at known temperatures and
flow rates, to determine the significance of placing the immersion Raman probe in the hot zone of the
reactor, compared to the cold zone after the heat exchanger. Figure 3 shows the baseline-corrected Raman
spectra collected in the cold zone, and in the hot zone at operating temperatures of 365°C, 380°C, and
400°C. Data collection in the hot zone did not identify additional intermediate reaction products. At
365°C reaction products are clearly visible, although peaks have shifted relative to known positions at
cold temperatures. At temperatures of 380°C and 400°C, the signal of reaction products is significantly
diminished. This is hypothesized to be caused by a loss of optical access to the reaction zone. Sapphire is
visible, proving that the optical path is still intact. Likely, thermal effects are altering the spectral
transmission of the Raman laser through the ball lens. Hanush et al. [15] note that realignment of the
Raman laser was frequently needed when operating the Sandia reactor at supercritical conditions, either

16

due to laser misalignment or loss of transmission through the sapphire window, supporting the theory that
loss of transmission is occurring through the sapphire ball lens. Regardless, collected spectra
demonstrates that extracting quantitative data from HTHP Raman spectra is practically difficult, due to
peak shifting and potential temperature-dependent optical effects. Any HTHP Raman system must allow
for laser realignment in case of difficulty with optically accessing the reaction environment.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3: Plots of baseline-subtracted Raman spectra from formic acid decomposition experiments with
(a) Raman probe in cold zone, (b) Raman probe in hot zone at 365°C, (c) Raman probe in hot zone at
380°C, and (d) Raman probe in hot zone at 400°C. Significant reduction in signal intensity appears to be
due to temperature-dependent optical effects, which significantly complicate quantitative spectroscopy

2.9

Catalysts
Motivated by the high temperatures and low concentrations needed to fully gasify biomass in

supercritical water, the introduction of homogenous or heterogenous catalysts has been investigated as a
method to improve process economics. A review by Guo et al. [97] highlights the effectiveness of
common catalysts. Most catalysts favor the WGS reaction, which improves H2 yield. However, some
catalysts do not speed underlying gasification reactions such as hydrolysis, decarboxylation, and

17

dehydration. Economic and life-cycle assessments are needed to determine whether catalyst integration
significantly improves process economics or system longevity.
Alkali metals (i.e. Na2CO3, KHCO3, and NaOH) are effective catalysts, however these compounds
cause issues with corrosion, reactor fouling, and clogging due to the insolubility of salts in supercritical
water. The mechanistic understanding of the catalyst is limited, due to the interaction of the salts with the
reactor walls. It is thought that the alkali salts may dissolve a protective metal oxide layer on the inside
reactor surface and resulting corrosion products themselves may act as catalysts [7]. The introduction of
alkali metals for catalysis is not recommended [97].
Activated carbon (AC) effectively catalyzes the WGS reaction and the gasification of simple
hydrocarbons, such as glycerol and glucose [46]. Yet it was found to be ineffective in catalyzing the
gasification of glycine [98]. AC itself decomposes in supercritical water and deactivates within two to
four hours of reactor use; it is not suitable for long-term reactor operation [46]. AC is often used as a
support for metal-based catalysts but would be a poor choice for a general gasification catalyst [97, 99].
Nickel is catalytic to gasification but tends to sinter and deactivate during long-term use [21, 47, 97,
99-101]. A layer of carbon or salt precipitates can adsorb on the nickel surface, poisoning the catalytic
effect [97]. Present in common reactor materials, the catalytic effect of nickel is typically active in
continuous flow SCWG reactors whether it is desired or not. Small diameter tubing used for lab-scale
reactors leads to higher surface-to-volume ratios (S/V), increasing the significance of the catalytic wall
effect. Inducing Dean vortices, maximizing S/V, or selecting materials high in nickel content can
maximize the beneficial catalytic activity of nickel components.
Ruthenium is the most catalytically active gasification catalyst, shown to effectively catalyze the
gasification of glucose, microalgae, and glycerol with high stability [100-105]. Ruthenium was
demonstrated to be effective in preventing the formation of char and refractory intermediate compounds
from the gasification of biomass constituents [104]. However, ruthenium is expensive, and sulfur is
known to poison the ability to catalytically cleave C-C bonds [97, 101]. Rhodium, platinum, cobalt,
molybdenum, iridium, and palladium based catalysts have all been investigated, but are less effective than
nickel or ruthenium in improving gasification efficiency or H2 yield [97, 101, 106]. Table 2 presents
further details on promising noble metal catalysts for SCWG.
Metal-based catalysts are most often impregnated on a support compound and packed into the reactor
as pellets, held in place by porous frits [43, 46, 47, 97, 99, 100, 102, 103]. Potential support compounds
include activated carbon, zirconium dioxide (ZrO2), titanium dioxide (TiO2), ceria (CeO2) and aluminum
oxide (α-Al2O3) [43, 47, 97, 99-103, 106]. During operation the catalyst is often depleted or deactivated
and cannot be replenished without complete shutdown and disassembly of the reactor. Depletion of the

18

catalyst leads to metal compounds in the effluent, which are often toxic and must be dealt with through
separation and/or neutralization [97].
Catalyst/Support

Synthesis Method

Properties & Performance

Source

Highest catalytic activity for
gasification of alkylphenols;
Ru/γ-Al2O3

Commercially obtained

decreased activity after transition
from γ- to α-phase alumina; high

[18, 100, 103,
104, 108, 109]

activity for C-C bond cleavage
Highest catalytic activity for
Ru/TiO2

Commercially obtained

gasification of lignin; high

[110-112]

activity for C-C bond cleavage
RuO2

Commercially obtained

Ru/C

Commercially obtained
Incipient wetness

Ni/γ-Al2O3

impregnation;
Ni(NO3)2‧6H2O precursor

Ni/SiO2

Pt/SiO2

by NiO, MoO3, and ZrO2
High catalytic activity; decreased
activity after repetitive use
selectivity of 17 supported
transition metal catalysts tested

Ni(NO3)2‧6H2O precursor

for C-C bond cleavage

Pt(NH4)4(NO3)2 precursor

generation of nanoparticles;
Cu(CH3COO)2 precursor

[109, 110]

[18, 100]

for SCWG of glucose in [18]
High H2 selectivity; high activity

Ion exchange at pH = 11;

[105]

Highest catalytic activity and H2

Evaporative deposition;

In-situ hydrothermal
CuO

Conversion superior to catalysis

[113]

High H2 selectivity; moderate
activity for C-C bond cleavage;

[113]

low methanation rate
High S/V ratio; effective catalyst
for methanol reforming; not
effective for cleaving C-C bonds

[107]

of larger molecules

Table 2: Promising metal catalysts for supercritical water gasification of complex organic feedstocks
A novel solution to the issue of catalyst depletion and deactivation is to continuously synthesize
catalytic nanoparticles in-situ. The supercritical water environment can facilitate rapid synthesis of metal

19

oxide nanoparticles, such as copper oxide (CuO), iron oxide (Fe 2O3), nickel oxide (NiO), and zirconium
dioxide (ZrO2). Typically, a water-soluble metal salt precursor is rapidly mixed with supercritical water to
facilitate synthesis. By synthesizing metal oxide nanoparticles upstream of the reactant, catalytically
active nanoparticles with high surface-to-volume ratios can be continuously replenished in the reactor
section. Gadhe and Gupta [107] demonstrated the efficacy of this process by continuously generating
copper oxide nanoparticles in-situ from a feed of cupric acetate solution. The nanoparticles were shown to
be catalytically active, with average diameters of ~140nm. Using a low-cost metal precursor to induce
catalysis could improve process economics over preloading the reactor with metal-impregnated catalytic
pellets. Nanoparticle separation and collection on the back end of the reactor is necessary, which adds
process complexity.

2.10 Process Economics and Performance Metrics
Optimizing the process economics of a continuous SCWG reactor is challenging yet necessary for
industrial applications. Competing priorities necessitate elegant and balanced design strategies. Heat
recovery is vital to process economics, most commonly accomplished by a heat exchanger used to quench
the effluent and preheat the reactor feed. Solid loading >20% is also needed for cost-effective production
of gaseous products [3, 11]. However, as noted previously, slow preheating of a premixed reactant feed
leads to polymerization and char formation, clogging reactor components and lowering gaseous yields. A
regenerative heat exchanger is best used to solely heat feedwater to supercritical conditions, followed by
injection of the feedstock. For optimal post-critical injection, a secondary preheater is necessary to heat
feedwater well past desired reaction temperatures. Post-critical injection also necessitates pumping the
feedstock at much higher solid loading percentage, which is technically challenging [3].
Catalyst integration could theoretically improve process economics, however a detailed technoeconomic assessment of catalyst use in SCWG is difficult due to the cost and complexity of catalyst
preparation, and uncertainty of catalyst lifetime due to sintering and depletion. Designers must balance
material cost of catalyst integration against process improvements, such as lower reaction temperatures,
higher viable solid loadings, and higher H2 yields.
Despite the technical challenges noted in this manuscript, there are some factors which are
economically favorable for SCWG. Financial incentives exist for effective waste processing, especially
for feedstocks such as sewage or toxic chemicals. In-situ metal oxide catalyst generation with particle
collection could allow for value addition. Finally, direct liquid CO2 capture in the product stream of a
reactor could be economically advantageous, as some countries offer tax incentives for carbon oxide
capture and sequestration.

20

From a system perspective, effective SCWG is best described as complete conversion of the mass and
energy content of the original feedstock into gaseous products. Three performance metrics are commonly
used in the literature to quantify this conversion: (i) gasification efficiency (GE), (ii) carbon conversion
efficiency (CE), and (iii) hydrogen efficiency (HE). GE is defined as the ratio of total mass of the gasoues
products to initial mass of the feedstock, expressed mathematically as:

𝐺𝐸(%) =

𝑚

𝑚

𝑚

𝑚

𝑚

𝑚

∗ 100

GE is an effective metric for quantifying the overall completeness of gasification reactions. CE is another
metric used to quantify completeness of gasification, defined as the ratio of moles of carbon in the gaseous
product to moles of carbon in the feedstock:

𝐶𝐸(%) =

2𝑛

𝑛
𝑛

𝑛

𝑛

∗ 100

,

Another, less frequently used, metric is HE, defined as the ratio of moles of hydrogen in the gaseous product
to moles of hydrogen in the feedstock:

𝐻𝐸(%) =

2𝑛

4𝑛
𝑛

𝑛

∗ 100

,

HE and GE values from SCWG can be well above 100%, due to the prominent role of the WGS reaction
during gasification. To demonstrate this, the gasification of methanol (CH 3OH) is considered, as shown in
Figure 4. Methanol first dehydrogenates to form H2 and formaldehyde (CH2O), which subsequently
decomposes into H2 and CO. Finally, CO and H2O are converted to CO2 and H2 via the WGS reaction. 6
mol of H are theoretically present after full gasification, compared to 4 mol of H present in the initial
methanol molecule, resulting in a maximum HE of 150%. Similarly the maximum GE is 156%, due to the
added molar mass of the water molecule.

21

Figure 4: Methanol gasification reactions in supercritical water, demonstrating the potential for hydrogen
efficiency and gasification efficiency to exceed 100% due to the water-gas shift reaction

3. Conclusions
To date, and to our knowledge, no commercial SCWG reactors exist. The reasons for this are twofold:
SCWO is more effective for waste destruction, and other methods for producing H2 and CH4 are currently
more cost effective. For SCWG to reach commercialization, reactors will need to neutralize waste as
efficiently as SCWO, or process economics must be improved. Standardization of reactor designs and
identification of solutions to common issues could aid in improving process economics of all SCWG
systems.
Studying gasification efficiencies and chemical kinetic rates in lab-scale reactor systems remains an
important step in optimizing SCWG reactors. The design of these systems varies with intended use, but
the basic requirements of all supercritical water reactor systems reported in the literature are consistent.
Pressurization, heating, corrosion mitigation, reactor monitoring and control of process parameters are
critical for any system; the solution and strategies for these have been well described in published
literature and can be achieved with commercial, off-the-shelf hardware.
Mixing of the reagent and water presents a significant challenge and methodology depends on the
design intent of the individual reactors. Laboratory systems will achieve accurate chemical kinetic studies
by injecting reagent into supercritical water. Systems processing viscous, heterogeneous feedstocks often
have no choice but to premix the water and the reagent prior to heating, which can lead to issues with char
formation. For chemical kinetic studies utilizing post-critical mixing, the mixing rate relative to the
reaction rate must be considered. Mixing, concentration gradient, and residence time uniformity (assumed
in the plug flow scenario) can be enhanced by inducing turbulence or Dean vortices in the reactor section.

22

Careful evaluation of the mixing process is needed to ensure that the chemical kinetic rate, not the mixing
rate, is the limiting rate in studies designed to determine chemical kinetics.
Ex-situ analysis methods such as gas chromatography and TOC analysis are not ideal for studying
fundamental reaction chemistry. In-situ Raman spectroscopic analysis promises to improve monitoring of
the gasification process through faster response time and reduced experimental uncertainty. Several
designs for optical access to the HTHP section of the reactor have been proposed and tested but
maintaining a pressure seal for the optical window remains a challenge.
The promise of recovering fuel value from organic waste in a single-step, environmentally benign
process continues to attract attention to supercritical water gasification. To date, the economic hurdle has
been significant enough to prevent commercialization, largely due to the technical challenges detailed
above. With continued research and development, it may be possible to bring SCWG into widespread
commercial use, similar to the emergence of SCWO systems in the industrial sphere.

23

References
[1]

Kruse, A., 2008. Supercritical water gasification. Biofuels Bioprod. Biorefin. 2, 415-437.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.93.
[2]
Amin, S., Reid R.C., Modell, M., 1975. Reforming and decomposition of glucose in an aqueous
phase, in Intersociety Conference on Environmental Systems, San Francisco, ASME Paper 75-ENAS-21.
[3]
Kruse, A., 2009. Hydrothermal biomass gasification. J. Supercrit. Fluids 47, 391-399.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2008.10.009.
[4]
Savage, P.E., Gopalan, S., Mizan, T.I., Martino, C.J., Brock, E.E., 1995. Reactions at
supercritical conditions: Applications and fundamentals. AIChE J. 41, 1723-1778.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690410712.
[5]
Savage, P.E., 1999. Organic Chemical Reactions in Supercritical Water. Chem. Rev. 99, 603-622.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cr9700989.
[6]
Bermejo, M.D., Cocero, M.J., 2006. Supercritical water oxidation: A technical review. AIChE
Journal 52, 3933-3951. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.10993.
[7]
Peterson, A.A., Vogel, F., Lachance, R.P., Fröling, M., Antal Jr, M.J., Tester, J.W., 2008.
Thermochemical biofuel production in hydrothermal media: a review of sub-and supercritical water
technologies. Energ. Environ. Sci. 1, 32-65. https://doi.org/10.1039/B810100K.
[8]
Reddy, S.N., Nanda, S., Dalai, A.K., Kozinski, J.A., 2014. Supercritical water gasification of
biomass for hydrogen production. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 39, 6912-6926.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.02.125.
[9]
Antal, M.J., Allen, S.G., Schulman, D., Xu, X., Divilio, R.J., 2000. Biomass Gasification in
Supercritical Water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 39, 4040-4053. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0003436.
[10]
Kamler, J., Soria, J.A., 2012. Supercritical Water Gasification of Municipal Sludge: A Novel
Approach to Waste Treatment and Energy Recovery. In Gasification for Practical Applications, Yun, Y.,
Ed. InTech: Rijeka, Ch.-06.
[11]
Gong, M., Nanda, S., Romero, M.J., Zhu, W., Kozinski, J.A., 2016. Subcritical and supercritical
water gasification of humic acid as a model compound of humic substances in sewage sludge. J.
Supercrit. Fluids 119, 130-138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2016.08.018.
[12]
Wang, C., Zhu, W., Gong, M., Su, Y., Fan, Y., 2017. Influence of H2O2 and Ni catalysts on
hydrogen production and PAHs inhibition from the supercritical water gasification of dewatered sewage
sludge. J. Supercrit. Fluids 130, 183-188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2017.08.009.
[13]
Marrone, P.A., Hong, G.T., 2009. Corrosion control methods in supercritical water oxidation and
gasification processes. J. Supercrit. Fluids 51, 83-103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2009.08.001.
[14]
Tang, X., Wang, S., Qian, L., Li, Y., Lin, Z., Xu, D., Zhang, Y., 2015. Corrosion behavior of
nickel base alloys, stainless steel and titanium alloy in supercritical water containing chloride, phosphate
and oxygen. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 100, 530-541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2015.05.003.
[15]
Hanush, R.G., Rice, S.F., Hunter, T.B., Aiken, J.D., 1995. Operation and performance of the
Supercritical Fluids Reactor (SFR); United States.
[16]
Tester, J.W., Cline, J.A., 1999. Hydrolysis and oxidation in subcritical and supercritical water:
connecting process engineering science to molecular interactions. Corrosion 55, 1088-1100.
https://doi.org/10.5006/1.3283946.
[17]
Casademont, P., García-Jarana, M.B., Sánchez-Oneto, J., Portela, J.R., de la Ossa, E.J.M., 2017.
Supercritical water gasification: a patents review. Rev. Chem. Eng. 33, 237-261.
https://doi.org/10.1515/revce-2016-0020.
[18]
Zhang, L., Champagne, P., Xu, C., 2011. Screening of supported transition metal catalysts for
hydrogen production from glucose via catalytic supercritical water gasification. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 36,
9591-9601. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.05.077.
[19]
Yu, J., Chen, Q., Guan, Q., Li, B., Ning, P., Gu, J., Lu, X., 2016. Characterization of the liquid
intermediates from gasification of lignite in supercritical water: Insights into the gasification process for

24

hydrogen production. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41, 17309-17322.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.08.034.
[20]
Pinkard, B.R., Gorman, D.J., Tiwari, K., Kramlich, J.C., Reinhall, P.G., Novosselov, I.V., 2018.
Review of Gasification of Organic Compounds in Continuous-Flow, Supercritical Water Reactors. Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 57, 3471-3481. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.8b00068.
[21]
DiLeo, G.J., Savage, P.E., 2006. Catalysis during methanol gasification in supercritical water. J.
Supercrit. Fluids 39, 228-232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2006.01.004.
[22]
Ondze, F., Boutin, O., Ruiz, J.-C., Ferrasse, J.-H., Charton, F., 2015. Supercritical water
gasification of beet residues: From batch to continuous reactor. Chem. Eng. Sci. 123, 350-358.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2014.11.026.
[23]
Faires, K.B., 2013. Gasification of in-Forest Biomass Residues. University of Washington.
[24]
Matsumura, Y., 2002. Evaluation of supercritical water gasification and biomethanation for wet
biomass utilization in Japan. Energ. Convers. Manage. 43, 1301-1310. https://doi.org/10.1016/S01968904(02)00016-X.
[25]
Matsumura, Y., Minowa, T., Potic, B., Kersten, S.R., Prins, W., van Swaaij, W.P., van de Beld,
B., Elliott, D.C., Neuenschwander, G.G., Kruse, A., Antal Jr, M.J., 2005. Biomass gasification in nearand super-critical water: status and prospects. Biomass Bioenergy 29, 269-292.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2005.04.006.
[26]
Penninger, J.M., Rep, M., 2006. Reforming of aqueous wood pyrolysis condensate in
supercritical water. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 31, 1597-1606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2006.06.027.
[27]
Penninger, J.M., Maass, G.J., Rep, M., 2007. Compressed hydrogen-rich fuel gas (CHFG) from
wet biomass by reforming in supercritical water. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 32, 1472-1476.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2006.10.026.
[28]
Boyd, W., Pray, H., 1957. Corrosion of stainless steels in supercritical water. Corrosion 13, 3342. https://doi.org/10.5006/0010-9312-13.6.33.
[29]
Coriou, H., Grall, L., Mahieu, C., Pelas, M., 1966. Sensitivity to stress corrosion and
intergranular attack of high-nickel austenitic alloys. Corrosion 22, 280-290. https://doi.org/10.5006/00109312-22.10.280.
[30]
Kritzer, P., 2004. Corrosion in high-temperature and supercritical water and aqueous solutions: a
review. J. Supercrit. Fluids 29, 1-29. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-8446(03)00031-7.
[31]
Viswanathan, R., Henry, J., Tanzosh, J., Stanko, G., Shingledecker, J., Vitalis, B., Purgert, R.,
2005. U.S. program on materials technology for ultra-supercritical coal power plants. J. Mater. Eng.
Perform. 14, 281-292. https://doi.org/10.1361/10599490524039.
[32]
Hayes, D. F., 1956. A summary of accidents and incidents involving radiation in atomic energy
activities, June 1945 through December 1955; Division of Organization and Personnel. Safety and Fire
Protection Branch, AEC.
[33]
Duffey, R.B., Pioro, I.L., Kuran, S., 2008. Advanced Concepts for pressure-channel reactors:
Modularity, Performance and Safety. J. Power Energy Sys. 2, 112-121. https://doi.org/10.1299/jpes.2.112.
[34]
Pioro, I., 2016. Handbook of generation IV nuclear reactors. Woodhead Publishing.
[35]
Was, G.S., Teysseyre, S., Jiao, Z., 2006. Corrosion of austenitic alloys in supercritical water.
Corrosion 62, 989-1005. https://doi.org/10.5006/1.3278237.
[36]
Thomason, T.B., Modell, M., 1984. Supercritical water destruction of aqueous wastes. Hazardous
Waste 1, 453-467. https://doi.org/10.1089/hzw.1984.1.453.
[37]
National Research Council, 2002. Analysis of engineering design studies for demilitarization of
assembled chemical weapons at Blue Grass Army Depot. National Academies Press.
[38]
National Research Council, 2001. Analysis of engineering design studies for demilitarization of
assembled chemical weapons at Pueblo Chemical Depot. National Academies Press.
[39]
Caputo, G., Rubio, P., Scargiali, F., Marotta, G., Brucato, A., 2016. Experimental and fluid
dynamic study of continuous supercritical water gasification of glucose. J. Supercrit. Fluids 107, 450-461.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2015.09.022.

25

[40]
González, G., Salvadó, J., Montané, D., 2004. Reactions of vanillic acid in sub- and supercritical
water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 31, 57-66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2003.09.015.
[41]
Ramayya, S., Brittain, A., DeAlmeida, C., Mok, W., Antal, M.J., 1987. Acid-catalysed
dehydration of alcohols in supercritical water. Fuel 66, 1364-1371. https://doi.org/10.1016/00162361(87)90183-9.
[42]
Nanda, S., Reddy, S.N., Hunter, H.N., Dalai, A.K., Kozinski, J.A., 2015. Supercritical water
gasification of fructose as a model compound for waste fruits and vegetables. J. Supercrit. Fluids 104,
112-121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2015.05.009.
[43]
Akizuki, M., Tomita, K., Oshima, Y., 2011. Kinetics of solid acid catalyzed 1-octene reactions
with TiO2 in sub- and supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 56, 14-20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2010.11.015.
[44]
Sasaki, M., Kabyemela, B., Malaluan, R., Hirose, S., Takeda, N., Adschiri, T., Arai, K., 1998.
Cellulose hydrolysis in subcritical and supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 13, 261-268.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-8446(98)00060-6.
[45]
Castello, D., Kruse, A., Fiori, L., 2015. Low temperature supercritical water gasification of
biomass constituents: Glucose/phenol mixtures. Biomass Bioenergy 73, 84-94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2014.12.010.
[46]
Xu, X., Matsumura, Y., Stenberg, J., Antal, M.J., 1996. Carbon-catalyzed gasification of organic
feedstocks in supercritical water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 35, 2522-2530. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie950672b.
[47]
Lee, I.G., 2011. Effect of metal addition to Ni/activated charcoal catalyst on gasification of
glucose in supercritical water. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 36, 8869-8877.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.05.008.
[48]
Lee, I.G., Kim, M.S., Ihm, S.K., 2002. Gasification of glucose in supercritical water. Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 41, 1182-1188. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie010066i.
[49]
Elliott, D.C., Phelps, M.R., Sealock, L.J., Baker, E.G., 1994. Chemical Processing in HighPressure Aqueous Environments. 4. Continuous-Flow Reactor Process Development Experiments for
Organics Destruction. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 33, 566-574. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie00027a013.
[50]
Molino, A., Migliori, M., Macrì, D., Valerio, V., Villone, A., Nanna, F., Iovane, P., Marino, T.,
2016. Glucose gasification in super-critical water conditions for both syngas production and green
chemicals with a continuous process. Renew. Energy 91, 451-455.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.01.065.
[51]
Lemmon, E.W., Huber, M.L., McLinden, M.O., 2013. NIST Standard Reference Database 23:
Reference Fluid Thermodynamic and Transport Properties-REFPROP, Version 9.1, National Institute of
Standards and Technology.
[52]
Wagner, W., Pruß, A., 2002. The IAPWS Formulation 1995 for the Thermodynamic Properties of
Ordinary Water Substance for General and Scientific Use. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 31, 387-535.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1461829.
[53]
Shen, Z., Yang, D., Wang, S., Wang, W., Li, Y., 2017. Experimental and numerical analysis of
heat transfer to water at supercritical pressures. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 108, 1676-1688.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.12.081.
[54]
Aida, T.M., Sato, Y., Watanabe, M., Tajima, K., Nonaka, T., Hattori, H., Arai, K., 2007.
Dehydration of d-glucose in high temperature water at pressures up to 80 MPa. J. Supercrit. Fluids 40,
381-388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2006.07.027.
[55]
Zhang, R., Zhang, X., Hu, S., 2015. Dissolution kinetics of quartz in water at high temperatures
across the critical state of water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 100, 58-69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2015.02.010.
[56]
Pinkard, B.R., Gorman, D.J., Rasmussen, E.G., Kramlich, J.C., Reinhall, P.G., Novosselov, I.V.,
2019. Kinetics of Formic Acid Decomposition in Subcritical and Supercritical Water – A Raman
Spectroscopic Study. ChemRxiv. Preprint. https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.7675928.v1.

26

[57]
Klingler, D., Berg, J., Vogel, H., 2007. Hydrothermal reactions of alanine and glycine in sub-and
supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids, 43, 112-119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2007.04.008.
[58]
Mokry, S., Pioro, I., Kirillov, P., Gospodinov, Y., 2010. Supercritical-water heat transfer in a
vertical bare tube. Nucl. Eng. Des. 240, 568-576. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2009.09.003.
[59]
Pioro, I.L., Duffey, R.B., 2007. Heat-Transfer Enhancement at Supercritical Pressures. ASME
Press.
[60]
Helling, R.K., Tester, J.W., 1987. Oxidation kinetics of carbon monoxide in supercritical water.
Energy Fuels 1, 417-423. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef00005a008.
[61]
DiNaro, J.L., Tester, J.W., Howard, J.B., Swallow, K.C., 2000. Experimental measurements of
benzene oxidation in supercritical water. AIChE Journal 46, 2274-2284.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690461118.
[62]
Tiwari, K., Pinkard, B.R., Gorman, D.J., Davis, J., Kramlich, J.C., Reinhall, P.G., Novosselov, I.
V., 2018. Computational Modeling of Mixing and Gasification in Continuous-Flow Supercritical Water
Reactor, Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Supercritical Fluids.
[63]
Aida, T.M., Shiraishi, N., Kubo, M., Watanabe, M., Smith Jr, R.L., 2010. Reaction kinetics of dxylose in sub- and supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 55, 208-216.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2010.08.013.
[64]
Hendry, D., Venkitasamy, C., Wilkinson, N., Jacoby, W., 2011. Exploration of the effect of
process variables on the production of high-value fuel gas from glucose via supercritical water
gasification. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 3480-3487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.11.003.
[65]
Helling, R.K., 1986. Oxidation Kinetics of Simple Compounds in Supercritical Water: Carbon
Monoxide, Ammonia and Ethanol, MIT.
[66]
Vogel, F., Blanchard, J.L.D., Marrone, P.A., Rice, S.F., Webley, P.A., Peters, W.A., Smith, K.A.,
Tester, J. W., 2005. Critical review of kinetic data for the oxidation of methanol in supercritical water. J.
Supercrit. Fluids 34, 249-286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2003.12.018.
[67]
Nieto-Draghi, C., Bonet Avalos, J., Contreras, O., Ungerer, P., Ridard, J., 2004. Dynamical and
structural properties of benzene in supercritical water. J. Chem. Phys. 121, 10566-10576.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1804942.
[68]
Lemmon, E.W., McLinden, M.O., Friend, D.G., NIST Chemistry WebBook, NIST Standard
Reference Database Number 69. In Linstrom, E. P. J.; Mallard, W. G., Eds. Gaithersburg MD.
[69]
Guan, Y., Novosselov, I.V., 2018. Damkohler Number Analysis in Lean Blow-Out of Toroidal
Jet Stirred Reactor. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 140, 104501. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4040091.
[70]
Spalding, D., 1971. Mixing and chemical reaction in steady confined turbulent flames,
Symposium (International) on Combustion, Elsevier, 649-657. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00820784(71)80067-X.
[71]
Magnussen, B.F., Hjertager, B.H., 1977. On mathematical modeling of turbulent combustion with
special emphasis on soot formation and combustion, Symposium (international) on Combustion, Elsevier,
719-729. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(77)80366-4.
[72]
Magnussen, B.F., 1981. On the structure of turbulence and a generalized eddy dissipation concept
for chemical reaction in turbulent flow. In 19th American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Aerospace Science Meeting, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1981-42.
[73]
Novosselov, I.V., Malte, P.C., Yuan, S., Srinivasan, R., Lee, J., 2006. Chemical reactor network
application to emissions prediction for industial dle gas turbine, ASME turbo expo 2006: Power for land,
sea, and air, ASME, 221-235. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2006-90282.
[74]
Novosselov, I.V., Malte, P.C., 2008. Development and application of an eight-step global
mechanism for CFD and CRN simulations of lean-premixed combustors. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power
130, 021502. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2795787.
[75]
Karalus, M.F., Fackler, K.B., Novosselov, I.V., Kramlich, J.C., Malte, P.C., 2012. Characterizing
the mechanism of lean blowout for a recirculation-stablized premixed hydrogen flame. In Turbine

27

Technical Conference and Exposition, ASME Turbo Expo: Copenhagen, Denmark.
https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2012-68060.
[76]
Dell'Orco, P.C., Li, L., Gloyna, E.F., 1993. The separation of particulates from supercritical water
oxidation processes. Sep. Sci. Technol. 28, 625-642. https://doi.org/10.1080/01496399308019511.
[77]
Goemans, M.G.E., Li, L., Gloyna, E.F., 1995. Separation of inorganic salts from supercritical
water by cross-flow microfiltration. Sep. Sci. Tech. 30, 1491-1509.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01496399508010359.
[78]
Goemans, M.G., Tiller, F.M., Li, L., Gloyna, E.F., 1997. Separation of metal oxides from
supercritical water by crossflow microfiltration. J. Memb. Sci. 124, 129-145.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-7388(96)00237-2.
[79]
Yoshida, K., Wakai, C., Matubayasi, N., Nakahara, M., 2004. NMR Spectroscopic Evidence for
an intermediate of formic acid in the water-gas-shift reaction. J. Phys. Chem. Letters 108, 7479-7482.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp047086t.
[80]
Yu, J., Savage, P.E., 1998. Decomposition of formic acid under hydrothermal conditions. Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 37, 2-10. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie970182e.
[81]
Mourits, F.M., Rummens, F.H., 1977. A critical evaluation of Lennard–Jones and Stockmayer
potential parameters and of some correlation methods. Can. J. Chem. 55, 3007-3020.
https://doi.org/10.1139/v77-418.
[82]
Dean, W.R., 1927. XVI. Note on the motion of fluid in a curved pipe. Lond. Edinb. Dubl. Phil.
Mag. 4, 208-223. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786440708564324.
[83]
Dean, W.R., 1928. LXXII. The stream-line motion of fluid in a curved pipe. Lond. Edinb. Dubl.
Phil. Mag. 5, 673-695. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786440408564513.
[84]
Chapman, D.R., 1949. Laminar mixing of a compressible fluid.
[85]
Jones, S.W., Thomas, O.M., Aref, H., 1989. Chaotic advection by laminar flow in a twisted pipe.
J. Fluid Mech. 209, 335-357. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112089003137.
[86]
Jiang, F., Drese, K., Hardt, S., Küpper, M., Schönfeld, F., 2004. Helical flows and chaotic mixing
in curved micro channels. AIChE J. 50, 2297-2305. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.10188.
[87]
Stone, H.A., Stroock, A.D., Ajdari, A., 2004. Engineering flows in small devices: microfluidics
toward a lab-on-a-chip. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 36, 381-411.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.36.050802.122124.
[88]
Di Carlo, D., 2009. Inertial microfluidics. Lab on a Chip 9, 3038-3046.
https://doi.org/10.1039/B912547G.
[89]
Taylor, G., 1928. The Criterion for Turbulence in Curved Pipes. Phil. Mag. 5, 684.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1929.0111.
[90]
Rice, S.F., Hunter, T.B., Rydén, Å.C., Hanush, R.G., 1996. Raman spectroscopic measurement of
oxidation in supercritical water. 1. Conversion of methanol to formaldehyde. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 35,
2161. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie950510f.
[91]
Hunter, T.B., Rice, S.F., Hanush, R.G., 1996. Raman spectroscopic measurement of oxidation in
supercritical water. 2. Conversion of isopropyl alcohol to acetone. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 35, 3984.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie9505118.
[92]
Rice, S.F., Steeper, R.R., LaJeunesse, C.A., Hanush, R.G., Aiken, J.D., 1997. Design strategies
for high-temperature, high-pressure optical cells. Sandia National Labs Livermore CA Combustion
Research Facility.
[93]
Ebukuro, T., Takami, A., Oshima, Y., Koda, S., 1999. Raman spectroscopic studies on hydrogen
bonding in methanol and methanol/water mixtures under high temperature and pressure. J. Supercrit.
Fluids 15, 73-78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-8446(98)00126-0.
[94]
Sugimoto, K., Fujiwara, H., Koda, S., 2004. Raman spectroscopic study on the local structure
around O2 in supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 32, 293-302.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2003.12.011.

28

[95]
Koda, S., Kanno, N., Fujiwara, H., 2001. Kinetics of supercritical water oxidation of methanol
studied in a CSTR by means of Raman spectroscopy. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 40, 3861-3868.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0101083.
[96]
Braeuer, A.S., 2018. Prospects: Facing current challenges in high pressure high temperature
process engineering with in situ Raman measurements. J. Supercrit. Fluids 134, 80-87.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2017.11.026.
[97]
Guo, Y., Wang, S.Z., Xu, D.H., Gong, Y.M., Ma, H.H., Tang, X.Y., 2010. Review of catalytic
supercritical water gasification for hydrogen production from biomass. Renew. Sus. Energ. Rev. 14, 334343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.08.012.
[98]
Samanmulya, T., Matsumura, Y., 2013. Effect of activated carbon catalytic on supercritical water
gasification of glycine as a model compound of protein. J. Japan Inst. Energy 92, 894-899. https://doi.org/
[99]
Lee, I.G., Ihm, S.K., 2008. Catalytic gasification of glucose over Ni/activated charcoal in
supercritical water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 48, 1435-1442. https://doi.org/10.3775/jie.92.894.
[100] Behnia, I., Yuan, Z., Charpentier, P., Xu, C., 2016. Production of methane and hydrogen via
supercritical water gasification of renewable glucose at a relatively low temperature: Effects of metal
catalysts and supports. Fuel Process. Technol. 143, 27-34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.11.006.
[101] Chakinala, A.G., Brilman, D.W., van Swaaij, W.P., Kersten, S.R., 2009. Catalytic and noncatalytic supercritical water gasification of microalgae and glycerol. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 49, 1113-1122.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie9008293.
[102] May, A., Salvadó, J., Torras, C., Montané, D., 2010. Catalytic gasification of glycerol in
supercritical water. Chem. Eng. J. 160, 751-759. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2010.04.005.
[103] Byrd, A.J., Pant, K.K., Gupta, R.B., 2007. Hydrogen production from glucose using Ru/Al2O3
catalyst in supercritical water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 46, 3574-3579. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie070241g.
[104] Osada, M., Sato, T., Watanabe, M., Adschiri, T., Arai, K., 2004. Low-temperature catalytic
gasification of lignin and cellulose with a ruthenium catalyst in supercritical water. Energy Fuels 18, 327333. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef034026y.
[105] Yamamura, T., Mori, T., Park, K.C., Fujii, Y., Tomiyasu, H., 2009. Ruthenium (IV) dioxidecatalyzed reductive gasification of intractable biomass including cellulose, heterocyclic compounds, and
sludge in supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids 51, 43-49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2009.07.007.
[106] Zhang, B., Tang, X., Li, Y., Xu, Y., Shen, W., 2007. Hydrogen production from steam reforming
of ethanol and glycerol over ceria-supported metal catalysts. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 32, 2367-2373.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2006.11.003.
[107] Gadhe, J.B., Gupta, R.B., 2007. Hydrogen production by methanol reforming in supercritical
water: catalysis by in-situ-generated copper nanoparticles. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 32, 2374-2381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2006.10.050.
[108] Osada, M., Sato, O., Arai, K., Shirai, M., 2006. Stability of supported ruthenium catalysts for
lignin gasification in supercritical water. Energy Fuels 20, 2337-2343. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef060356h.
[109] Sato, T., Osada, M., Watanabe, M., Shirai, M., Arai, K., 2003. Gasification of Alkylphenols with
Suppoerted Noble Metal Catalysts in Supercritical Water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 42, 4277-4282.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie030261s.
[110] Osada, M., Hiyoshi, N., Sato, O., Arai, K., Shirai, M., 2007. Effect of Sulfur on Catalytic
Gasification of Lignin in Supercritical Water. Energy Fuels 21, 1400-1405.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef060636x.
[111] Osada, M., Hiyoshi, N., Sato, O., Arai, K., Shirai, M., 2007. Reaction Pathway for Catalytic
Gasification of Lignin in Presence of Sulfur in Supercritical Water. Energy Fuels 21, 1854-1858.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef0701642.
[112] Kersten, S.R.A., Potic, B., Prins, W., Van Swaaij W.P.M., 2006. Gasification of Model
Compounds and Wood in Hot Compressed Water. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 45, 4169-4177.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0509490.

29

[113] Davda, R.R., Shabaker, J.W., Huber, G.W., Cortright, R.D., Dumesic, J.A., 2003. Aqueous-phase
reformin of ethylene glycol on silica-supported metal catalysts. Appl. Catal., B. 43, 13-26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-3373(02)00277-1.

30

Figure Captions
Figure 1: Generalized reaction network for supercritical water gasification of complex organic molecules.
Desirable reaction pathways lead to high yields of gaseous products, while undesirable polymerization
reactions lead to the formation of char. Heteroatoms or metals present in the feedstock can form metal
oxides or inorganic acids, causing significant issues with reactor clogging and corrosion
Figure 2: Representative schematic of a continuous supercritical water gasification reactor with
premixed water and reagent
Figure 3: Plots of baseline-subtracted Raman spectra from formic acid decomposition
experiments with (a) Raman probe in cold zone, (b) Raman probe in hot zone at 365°C, (c)
Raman probe in hot zone at 380°C, and (d) Raman probe in hot zone at 400°C. Significant
reduction in signal intensity appears to be due to temperature-dependent optical effects, which
significantly complicate quantitative spectroscopy
Figure 4: Methanol gasification reactions in supercritical water, demonstrating the potential for hydrogen
efficiency and gasification efficiency to exceed 100% due to the water-gas shift reaction

31

