The need for single-mode fiber-fed spectrographs
March 2018
A white paper submitted to the National Academy of Sciences Exoplanet Science Strategy
Lead Author:
Jonathan Crass

Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA

+1 574-631-2712
j.crass@nd.edu

Co-authors:
Andrew Bechter
Eric Bechter
Charles Beichman

Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA

Cullen Blake

Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA

David Coutts
Tobias Feger
Sam Halverson

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

Robert J. Harris
Nemanja Jovanovic

Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
NASA Exoplanet Science Institute, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East
California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive,
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA
NASA Sagan Fellow
Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Landessternwarte Königstuhl,
Königstuhl 12, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA

Peter Plavchan

Department of Physics and Astronomy, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030,
USA

Christian Schwab

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Australian Astronomical Observatory, Australia

Gautam Vasisht

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive,
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA

James K. Wallace

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive,
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA

Ji Wang

California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Blvd, Pasadena, CA, 91125,
USA

MOTIVATION
Precise Doppler radial-velocity (RV) instruments will continue to play an essential role in advancing our
holistic understanding of exoplanetary systems. The combination of orbital parameters from transit surveys
and follow-up RV measurements is vital to unlock mass and density estimates of detected planets, giving
us insight into their environment and structure. However, the exoplanet field is reaching a critical juncture:
the measurement sensitivity of existing radial-velocity instruments is becoming the limiting factor in further
increasing our knowledge. Without improvement in delivered RV measurement precision, we will not be
able to provide dynamical mass and density estimates for some of the most exciting (and consequently
most challenging) discoveries expected from new transit missions including the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite (TESS) (Plavchan et al. 2015, Ricker et al. 2014). RV precisions at the 10cm/s level are
required to fully confirm earth-like analogues, provide masses and measure density to the 1-5% level from
these missions. Additionally, this RV capability will also be important to allow for efficient target selection
for facilities such as the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST).
While stability is vital for achieving RV precision, instrument systematics are only one of the drivers behind
current limitations. Perhaps one of the most daunting challenges is how to address the effects of stellar
activity. This term encompasses the effects of many different stellar phenomena (including photospheric
velocities, star spots, faculae and plage), and each process can introduce errors at the 1m/s level over a
variety of timescales (Cegla et al. 2013, Oshagh et al. 2017). Currently, it is commonplace for observations
affected by stellar activity to be identified by known indicator lines, such as the Ca II H and K lines, and
there is no way to correct for the stellar imprecision imposed on these measurements. Data obtained at
these times is of limited use when searching for sub-m/s RV amplitude signatures and may exclude some
of the most important RV observations, specifically those at times of maximum RV amplitude. It is
therefore prudent to develop instruments and techniques that can utilize these times of activity, overcoming
observing inefficiencies and increasing the likelihood of detections.
Simulations indicate that asymmetries in spectral line profiles resulting from stellar activity can be measured
in high resolution spectra (R>150,000) (Davis et al. 2017). If asymmetries can be measured, they can be
removed in the data reduction process. The challenge with this technique is that to achieve an acceptable
signal-to-noise at these high resolutions, a large collecting area and an efficient end-to-end instrument is
required. Seeing-limited spectrographs require large instrument volumes to achieve this high spectral
resolution due to their intrinsic properties. They are also expensive to build, difficult to stabilize
(Strassmeier et al., 2008), and are challenging to design for the upcoming ELTs. Therefore another solution
must be found. A promising way forward is to use single-mode fibers to inject light to a spectrograph. This
mitigates many of the error terms facing current generation seeing-limited RV instruments while
simultaneously offering the capability of high resolution spectroscopy within a small optical footprint
(Schwab et al. 2012, Crepp 2014, Jovanovic et al. 2016a).

SINGLE-MODE FIBERS AND PRECISION RV
One of the key contributors to radial velocity systematic errors are changes in the illumination profile of
the spectrograph (Spronck et al. 2015). State-of-the-art seeing limited instruments typically use multimode fibers (MMFs) to transport light from the telescope to a remotely-located spectrograph for stability
reasons. These MMFs however suffer from modal noise and incomplete image scrambling, even after
correction via agitation and other methods. Single-mode fibers overcome this effect entirely: irrespective of
the illumination of the fiber, the spatial output is always a fixed Gaussian beam intensity profile.
1

While SMFs offer distinct advantages, they also pose a key challenge for use within astronomy: how do
you efficiently couple light from a large telescope into tiny optical fibers? This has, until recently, been
challenging to accomplish with the only option being to use small aperture telescopes to minimize the
overall effects of atmospheric turbulence on the incident beam as has been adopted by MINERVA-RED
(Blake et al. 2015) and RHEA (Feger et al. 2016). However, with the technological advancement and
maturity of facility adaptive optics (AO) systems and their ability to deliver routine near-infrared (NIR)
diffraction-limited beams, several groups are now developing systems to efficiently couple infrared beams
into SMFs (Bechter et al. 2015, Bechter et al. 2016, Jovanovic et al. 2014, Jovanovic et al. 2016b, Jovanovic
et al. 2017). Coupling efficiencies ranging from 25-47% have been demonstrated on-sky at the Subaru
and Large Binocular Telescopes. With expected performance improvements through enhanced incident
beam stabilization, overall AO system performance and beam reshaping technologies, efficiencies
approaching their theoretical limit are expected in the next few years. These systems are ideal for feeding
to an astronomical spectrograph over a wide range of seeing conditions, airmasses and in broadband light.
They have the potential to deliver telescope-to-spectrograph throughputs that are comparable to seeinglimited instruments when accounting for the losses experienced during MMF scrambling.

PRECISION RVS IN THE INFRARED
Previous exoplanet studies have predominantly focused on early- and mid-type stars as they are well suited
to current visible wavelength RV instruments (Fischer et al. 2016). Observations of later type K- and Mstars, with their peak emission at wavelengths approaching 1 micron, offer advantages over studies of earlier
type stars: they are abundant in number, have long stellar lifetimes and offer an increased RV amplitude
for the same mass of planet in the (closer-in) habitable zone. However, to study planets around late-type
stars requires a high-precision infrared (IR) instrument, necessitating a thermally stabilized cryogenic
environment and costly and potentially noisy IR detectors (Mahadevan et al. 2014, Hearty et al. 2014,
Stefansson et al. 2016, Gao et al. 2016, Gagne et al. 2016). This has previously been beyond either the
state-of-the-art technical capabilities (or project budgets) leaving these intrinsic benefits untapped.
Today, with the advancement of infrared detector technologies and the ability to couple NIR light into
SMFs using AO efficiently, the exoplanet community is beginning to develop instruments specifically for
this near-infrared bandpass. There is a growing demand to study later-type stars and at the Third Workshop
on Extremely Precise Radial Velocities, numerous instruments covering the NIR/IR (whether under
design, development or commissioning) were presented: SPIROU, CARMENES, iSHELL, NIRPS,
HPF, IRD, GIARPS, iLocater, PARVI, RHEA and MINERVA-RED (Wright & Robertson 2017). These
will benefit from infrared technology advances in recent years which have facilitated the ability to study
exoplanets around previously inaccessible late-type stellar populations. In particular, the final four listed
instruments offer additional unique capabilities – the use of single-mode fibers (SMFs) to inject light into
the instrument spectrograph.

HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTION WITH A SMALL INSTRUMENT FOOTPRINT
The design of SMF-fed spectrographs is driven by different factors compared to their seeing-limited
counterparts. As the size of the illumination input approaches the diffraction limit at the instrument
operating wavelength (for example a SMF operating at a wavelength of 1 micron has an effective size of
around 6 microns), the system becomes insensitive to the diameter of the telescope which feeds it
(Jovanovic 2016a). Compared to the large input aperture required for seeing-limited instruments, which
in turn drives the need for large optical systems (made worse when requiring high spectral resolution),
SMF-fed instruments can be compact and simultaneously achieve high resolution. To maintain image
2

quality at the diffraction limit, an SMF-fed system requires precision optics that deliver high wavefront
quality, a requirement not present in the current generation of instruments. However, the optical surfaces
are small, and the spectrograph camera is optically slow as the spectrograph input must be magnified onto
the detector to achieve appropriate sampling (Crepp et al. 2016, Schwab et al. 2016). This makes the optics
well within current fabrication capabilities and relatively inexpensive. The small beam diameter and slow
camera focal ratio relaxes alignment tolerances for a given design, adding to the inherent stability of SMF
spectrograph designs. Additionally, the ability to have a compact instrument design allows a cost-effective
way to manufacture instruments from intrinsically stable materials such as Invar, Zerodur or Silicon
Carbide.

PRECISION RVS WITH A SMF-FED SPECTROGRAPH
While SMFs immediately remove the errors induced by modal noise, they also facilitate the mitigation of
several other systematic effects. Instrument thermal stability at the milli-Kelvin level or better is required
for any precision RV instrument to reduce optical changes within the spectrograph to suitable levels (e.g.
grove density changes on diffraction gratings). This type of stability is simpler to achieve on a small volume
compared to a seeing-limited instrument for a large aperture telescope, particularly if aided by the use of
intrinsically stable materials (see previous section). It would be immensely challenging to develop a seeinglimited instrument with the high spectral resolution (R>150,000) needed to measure and correct stellar
activity effects while also achieving sub-mK thermal stability. With SMFs, this becomes both achievable
and affordable.
An additional source of error for seeing-limited instruments is sky-background due to the large angle
subtended by their fibers on the sky. For an SMF-fed spectrograph which uses AO, the angular-size on sky
is at the diffraction limit of the telescope, providing several orders of magnitude suppression in skybackground compared to their seeing-limited counterparts and reducing it to negligible levels.

SINGLE-MODE FIBERS AND POLARIZATION
SMFs provide an ideal solution for eliminating modal noise by propagating only a single spatial mode.
However, for each allowed spatial mode there exists two orthogonal polarization modes (s- and p- modes)
resulting from the vector wave equation (Halverson et al. 2015). Thus a standard `single-mode' fiber is,
strictly speaking, bi-modal. Mechanical stresses such as bending or twisting of the fiber during an
observation cause the net polarization state exiting the fiber to evolve in time. This behavior of SMFs
presents a problem for RV spectrographs as polarization changes manifest as spectral intensity modulations
when interacting with polarization sensitive diffraction gratings. Uncontrolled changes in the state of
polarization result in systematic radial velocity errors, the magnitude of which scales with the degree of
polarization. This means that strongly polarized sources (e.g. calibrators including laser frequency combs
or etalons) are more greatly impacted by these effects as opposed to stars which are typically very weakly
polarized. It is expected this effect can be reduced to acceptable levels either in the data reduction process
(continuum normalization) or by effectively scrambling the polarization state to a determined average over
the course of an exposure (much like scrambling for multi-mode fibers). This is an active area of research
and as the first generation of precision SMF-fed spectrographs come online, strategies can be developed,
tested and optimized.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
Seeing-limited instruments are often unable to resolve individual stars within close-binaries making it
challenging to undertake studies of exoplanets in these types of systems (Wright et al. 2013). The
3

diffraction-limited input delivered from telescope AO systems provides the opportunity to obtain RV
measurements on each binary component separately, allowing studies to be undertaken which are currently
impossible. Additionally, in the NIR, the use of a detector with continuous readout allows direct
measurements required for chromatic barycentric correction of the Earth’s motion, reducing complexity
and ensuring consistency between science and calibration data, which is needed to achieve <1 m/s precision.

CHALLENGES AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS NEEDED
The use of NIR detectors for precision RV work is still a relatively new area and an ongoing effort.
Additionally, unlike visible light detectors, where there is a large commercial market to drive technology
advancement, NIR detectors suffer from a limited market to drive investment and a small pool of suppliers.
A high resolution spectrograph with a large bandpass requires a large number of detector pixels. The largest
IR focal plane array commercially available today is the H4RG detector from Teledyne (4k×4k pixels).
While showing very promising noise characteristics through investment from missions such as WFIRST,
a compromise must still be made between resolution, pixel sampling and wavelength coverage. To facilitate
high resolution with a wide bandpass, the total number of available detector pixels needs to be increased
either through larger physical detector sizes, higher pixel densities or by making detectors close-buttable,
while also improving or maintaining noise properties. Investing in this technology will improve observing
efficiencies and measurement precisions.
The requirement to obtain high resolution spectra to correct for stellar activity forces RV instruments to
work in the photon-limited regime. Therefore, to improve signal-to-noise of individual measurements,
increasing end-to-end instrument efficiency is vital. A key driver of this is the performance of the AO
system injecting light into the instrument SMF. Continued improvements in AO capabilities are being
driven by the needs of the upcoming ELTs. The precision exoplanet field will significantly benefit from
this (both in terms of RV as well as high-contrast imaging) and as such, it should strongly be supported.
Additionally, by developing automated and minimal overhead AO systems such as Robo-AO, SMF-fed
spectrograph could be utilized routinely on a wide-range of telescopes worldwide, offering increased
cadence of observations of targets and the possibility for increasing the number of RV instruments in a
cost-effective way (Baranec et al. 2014).
Seeing-limited instruments typically use replicated gratings for their dispersing elements. These are
fabricated by copying a master grating into an epoxy layer applied onto an intrinsically stable substrate
(typically Zerodur). While sufficient for seeing-limited instrument where imaging quality is less important,
for diffraction-limited SMF-fed spectrographs, wavefront errors induced by the grating surface may be the
key contributor to image degradation through the instrument. This has the potential to limit final RV
precision by inducing errors when fitting a PSF. Additionally, as changes in the line spacing of the grating
directly drives instrument stability requirements, the effective coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of
the replicated grating surface and its impact on RV precision should understood. If replicated gratings are
shown to limit precision, direct ruled gratings with low CTE values will be required. However, as beam
diameters and gratings are small for SMF-fed systems, these are affordable and commercially available.
Spectral contamination resulting from telluric absorption lines will be present in ground-based
spectrographs (both SMF-fed or seeing-limited), especially those operating in the NIR. This may be one
of the largest obstacles preventing NIR instruments achieving their expected RV precision and therefore
requires improved methods and strategies for mitigation. Significant work has been undertaken by many
instrument teams to address this, however, it remains a major problem. The only certain way to overcome
this challenge is through a space-based mission, as is being studied as part of the Earthfinder probe study.
4

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
While the current capabilities of AO systems limit the use of SMF-fed instruments to the NIR, developing
SMF-fed spectrographs at visible wavelengths offers several advantages: The need for a cryogenic
environment is eliminated, challenges of NIR detectors are bypassed while the ability to have high spectral
resolution in a compact volume is maintained. To facilitate this however, visible light AO needs to become
commonplace and routine which requires improved wavefront sensing techniques and correction
capabilities. This type of development is ongoing through test-bed systems which aim to reach maximal
AO performance, such as SCExAO (Jovanovic 2015, Guyon 2017).
Until such a time when visible light AO is routinely possible, the use of photonic lanterns coupled to a
current generation AO systems may offer an interim solution (Robertson & Bland-Hawthorn 2012,
Schwab et al. 2012, Jovanovic et al. 2017). These photonic devices take a multi-mode input and output it
into several single-mode beams, each of which could illuminate an SMF-fed spectrograph. This offers an
avenue to deliver the benefits of using SMFs for precision RV measurements to telescopes worldwide.

SUMMARY
Without improvement, radial-velocity instruments will limit our ability to study some of the most
interesting planetary systems from future transit missions. To provide the masses and precise densities of
these systems, RV precisions at the 10cm/s level are required. Without this level of precision, the ability of
the exoplanet field to continue to develop a holistic picture of planetary systems will stall.
Instrument stability is only a part of the challenge; we must develop techniques to overcome the intrinsic
RV signatures imposed on spectra by stellar activity to detect planetary signatures below 1m/s. Simulations
show promise that this can be achieved by using high-resolution spectra (R>150,000), however this
requires a large telescope aperture to achieve sufficient signal-to-noise. For seeing-limited designs, this
cannot be easily achieved in a cost-effective way while also maintaining the required instrument stability.
The use of single-mode fibers fed by adaptive optics offers a viable solution and provides a pathway to
study some of the most exciting systems soon to be detected.

REFERENCES
Baranec, C. et al., 2014, ApJL, 790, L8
Bechter, A. et al., 2015, Proc. SPIE, 9605, 96051U
Bechter, A. et al., 2016, Proc. SPIE, 9909, 99092X
Blake, C. et al., 2015, AAS Meeting #225
Cegla, H. et al., 2013, ApJ, 763, 95
Crepp, J.R., 2014, Science, 346, 809
Crepp, J.R. et al. 2016, Proc. SPIE, 9908, 990819
Davis, A. et al., 2017, ApJ 846, 59
Feger, T. et al., 2016, Exp Astron 42, 285
Fischer, D. et al., 2016, PASP, 128, 066001
Gagne, J. et al., 2016, ApJ, 822, 40
Gao, P. et al., 2016 PASP, 128, 4501
Guyon, O. & Males, J., 2017, arXiv:1707.00570
Halverson, S. et al., 2015, ApJL, 814, L22
Hearty, F. et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9147, 914752
Jovanovic, N. et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9147,
91477P
Jovanovic, N. et al, 2015, PASP, 127, 890
Jovanovic, N. et al. 2016a, PASP, 128, 121001

Jovanovic, N. et al., 2016b, Proc. SPIE, 9908,
99080R
Jovanovic, N. et al., 2017, A&A, 604, A112
Mahadevan, S. et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9147,
91471G
Oshagh, M. et al., 2017, A&A, 606, A107
Plavchan, P. et al., 2015, arXiv:1503.01770
Ricker, G.R. et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9143, 914320
Robertson, J.G. & Bland-Hawthorn, J., 2012, Proc.
SPIE, 8446, 844623
Schwab, C. et al., 2012, Proc. IAU, 293
Schwab, C. et al., 2016, Proc. SPIE, 9912, 991274
Spronck, J.F.P. et al., 2015, PASP, 127, 1027
Stefansson, G. et al., 2016, ApJ, 833, 175
Strassmeier, K.G. et al., 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7014,
70140N
Wright, J.T. et al., 2013, ApJ, 770, 119
Wright, J.T. & Robertson, P., 2017, Res. Notes
AAS, 1,
5

