arXiv:1901.04145v4 [math.AG] 9 Jun 2021

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS
JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN
Abstract. We study large groups of birational transformations Bir(X), where
X is a variety of dimension at least 3, deﬁned over C or a subﬁeld of C.
Two prominent cases are when X is the projective space Pn , in which case
Bir(X) is the Cremona group of rank n, or when X ⊂ Pn+1 is a smooth cubic
hypersurface. In both cases, and more generally when X is birational to a
conic bundle, we produce inﬁnitely many distinct group homomorphisms from
Bir(X) to Z/2, showing in particular that the group Bir(X) is not perfect and
thus not simple. As a consequence we also obtain that the Cremona group of
rank n > 3 is not generated by linear and Jonquières elements.

Contents
1. Introduction
1.A. Higher rank Cremona groups
1.B. Normal subgroups
1.C. Generators
1.D. Overwiew of the strategy
1.E. Construction of the groupoid homomorphism
1.F. Non-equivalent conic bundle structures
Aknowledgements
2. Preliminaries
2.A. Divisors and curves
2.B. Maps
2.C. Mori dream spaces and Cox sheaves
2.D. Minimal model programme
2.E. Singularities
2.F. Two-rays game
2.G. Gonality and covering gonality
3. Rank r fibrations and Sarkisov links
3.A. Rank r fibrations
3.B. Sarkisov links
3.C. Rank r fibrations with general fibre a curve
3.D. Sarkisov links of conic bundles
4. Relations between Sarkisov links
4.A. Elementary relations

2
2
3
5
7
7
8
9
9
10
10
12
13
14
17
18
21
21
24
27
30
33
33

Date: June 11, 2021.
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 14E07, 14E30, 20F05; 20L05, 14J45, 14E05.
Key words and phrases. Cremona groups; normal subgroups; conic bundles; Sarkisov links;
BAB conjecture.
The ﬁrst author acknowledges support by the Swiss National Science Foundation Grant “Birational transformations of threefolds” 200020_178807. The second author was partially supported
by the UMI-CRM 3457 of the CNRS in Montréal, and by the Labex CIMI. The third author
was supported by Projet PEPS 2018 "JC/JC" and is supported by the ANR Project FIBALGA
ANR-18-CE40-0003-01.
1

2

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

4.B. Geography of ample models
4.C. Generation and relations in the Sarkisov programme
4.D. Examples of elementary relations
5. Elementary relations involving Sarkisov links of conic bundles of type II
5.A. A consequence of the BAB conjecture
5.B. Some elementary relations of length 4
5.C. Proof of Theorem D
6. Image of the group homomorphism given by Theorem D
6.A. A criterion
6.B. The case of trivial conic bundles and the proof of Theorem A
6.C. The case of non-trivial conic bundles and the proof of Theorem B
7. Non-equivalent conic bundles
7.A. Studying the discriminant locus
7.B. Conic bundles associated to smooth cubic curves
7.C. Proofs of Theorems E and C
8. Complements
8.A. Quotients and SQ-universality
8.B. Hopfian property
8.C. More general fields
8.D. Amalgamated product structure
8.E. Cubic varieties
8.F. Fibrations graph
References

35
41
47
50
50
53
56
56
56
58
61
64
64
69
72
73
73
74
74
75
76
77
77

1. Introduction
1.A. Higher rank Cremona groups. The Cremona group of rank n, denoted
by Birk (Pn ), or simply Bir(Pn ) when the ground ﬁeld k is implicit, is the group of
birational transformations of the projective space.
The classical case is n = 2, where the group is already quite complicated but is
now well described, at least when k is algebraically closed. In this case the NoetherCastelnuovo Theorem [Cas01, Alb02] asserts that Bir(P2 ) is generated by Aut(P2 )
and a single standard quadratic transformation. This fundamental result, together
with the strong factorisation of birational maps between surfaces helps to have a
good understanding of the group.
The dimension n > 3 is more diﬃcult, as we do not have any analogue of the
Noether-Castelnuovo Theorem (see §1.C for more details) and also no strong factorisation. Here is an extract from the article “Cremona group” in the Encyclopedia
of Mathematics, written by V. Iskovskikh in 1982 (and translated in 1987) (who
uses the notation Cr(Pnk ) for the Cremona group):
One of the most difficult problems in birational geometry is that
of describing the structure of the group Cr(P3k ), which is no longer
generated by the quadratic transformations. Almost all literature
on Cremona transformations of three-dimensional space is devoted
to concrete examples of such transformations. Finally, practically
nothing is known about the structure of the Cremona group for
spaces of dimension higher than 3.
[Isk87]
More than thirty years later, there are still very few results about the group
structure of Bir(Pn ) for n > 3, even if there were exciting recent developments using

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

3

a wide range of techniques. After the pioneering work [Dem70] on the algebraic
subgroups of rank n in Bir(Pn ), we should mention the description of their lattices
via p-adic methods [CX18], the study of the Jordan property [PS16], and the fact
that Cremona groups of distinct ranks are non-isomorphic [Can14].
For n = 3, there is also a classiﬁcation of the connected algebraic subgroups
[Ume85, BFT17], and partial classiﬁcation of ﬁnite subgroups [Pro11, Pro12, Pro14].
There are also numerous articles devoted to the study of particular classes of examples of elements in Bir(Pn ), especially for n small (we do not attempt to start a
list here, as it would always be very far from exhaustive).
The question of the non-simplicity of Cremona groups of higher rank was up
to now left open. Using modern tools such as the Minimal model programme and
factorisation into Sarkisov links, we will be able in this text to give new insight on
the structure of the Cremona groups Bir(Pn ) and of its quotients.
1.B. Normal subgroups. The question of the non-simplicity of Bir(Pn ) for each
n > 2 was also mentioned in the article of V. Iskovskikh in the Encyclopedia:
It is not known to date (1987) whether the Cremona group is simple.
[Isk87]
The question was in fact asked much earlier, and is explicitly mentioned in a book
by F. Enriques in 1895:
Tuttavia altre questioni d’indole gruppale relative al gruppo Cremona nel piano (ed a più forte ragione in Sn n > 2) rimangono
ancora insolute; ad esempio l’importante questione se il gruppo Cremona contenga alcun sottogruppo invariante (questione alla quale
sembra probabile si debba rispondere negativamente).
[Enr95, p. 116]1
The feeling expressed by F. Enriques that the Cremona group should be simple
was perhaps supported by the analogy with biregular automorphism groups of
projective varieties, such as Aut(Pn ) = PGLn+1 (k). In fact in the trivial case of
dimension n = 1, we have Bir(P1 ) = Aut(P1 ) = PGL2 (k), which is indeed a simple
group when the ground ﬁeld k is algebraically closed. Another evidence in favour
of the simplicity of the Cremona groups is that one can endow BirC (Pn ) with two
topologies: the Zariski or the Euclidean one (see [Bla10, BF13]), and that in both
cases all closed normal subgroups are either trivial or the whole group, as proven
in [Bla10] for n = 2 and generalised in [BZ18] to any dimension.
The non-simplicity of Bir(P2 ) as an abstract group was proven, over an algebraically closed ﬁeld, by S. Cantat and the second author [CL13]. The idea of proof
was to apply small cancellation theory to an action of Bir(P2 ) on a hyperbolic space.
A ﬁrst instance of roughly the same idea was [Dan74], in the context of plane polynomial automorphisms (see also [FL10]). The modern small cancellation machinery
as developed in [DGO17] allowed A. Lonjou to prove the non simplicity of Bir(P2 )
over an arbitrary ﬁeld, and the fact that every countable group is a subgroup of a
quotient of Bir(P2 ) [Lon16].
1“However, other group-theoretic questions related to the Cremona group of the plane (and,
even more so, of Pn , n > 2) remain unsolved; for example, the important question of whether
the Cremona group contains any normal subgroup (a question which seems likely to be answered
negatively).”

4

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Another source of normal subgroups for Bir(P2 ), of a very diﬀerent nature, was
discovered by the third author, when the ground ﬁeld is R [Zim18]. In contrast
with the case of an algebraically closed ﬁeld where the Cremona group of rank 2 is
a perfect group, she proved that the abelianisation of BirR (P2 ) is an uncountable
direct sum of Z/2. Here the main idea is to use an explicit presentation by generators and relations. In fact a presentation of Bir(P2 ) over an arbitrary perfect
ﬁeld is available since [IKT93], but because they insist in staying inside the group
Bir(P2 ), they obtain very long lists. In contrast, if one accepts to consider birational maps between non-isomorphic varieties, the Sarkisov programme provides
more tractable lists of generators. Using this idea together with results of A.-S.
Kaloghiros [Kal13], the existence of abelian quotients for Bir(P2 ) was extended to
the case of many non-closed perfect ﬁelds by the second and third authors [LZ20].
The present paper is a further extension in this direction, this time in arbitrary
dimension, and over any ground ﬁeld k which is a subﬁeld of C. Our ﬁrst result is
the following:
Theorem A. For each subfield k ⊆ C and each n > 3, there is a group homomorphism
Birk (Pn )

⊕ Z/2
I

where the indexing set I has the same cardinality as k, and such that the restriction
to the subgroup of birational dilatations given locally by
{(x1 , . . . , xn )

(x1 α(x2 , · · · , xn ), x2 , . . . , xn ) | α ∈ k(x2 , . . . , xn )∗ }

is surjective. In particular, the Cremona group Birk (Pn ) is not perfect and thus not
simple.
We give below a few immediate comments, and a quick preview of the rest of the
introduction where we will present several statements that generalise or complement
Theorem A in diﬀerent directions.
First we emphasise that this result contrasts with the situation in dimension 2
(over C). Indeed, as BirC (P2 ) is generated by the simple group Aut(P2 ) = PGL3 (C)
and one quadratic map birationally conjugated to a linear map, every non-trivial
quotient of BirC (P2 ) is non-abelian and uncountable.
Another intriguing point at ﬁrst sight is the indexing set I. We shall be more
precise later, but the reader should think of I as a kind of moduli space of some
irreducible varieties of dimension n − 2. Indeed to construct the group homomorphism we will see Pn as being birational to a P1 -bundle over Pn−1 , and each factor
Z/2 is related to the choice of a general hypersurface in Pn−1 of suﬃciently high
degree, up to some equivalence. Observe that in dimension n = 2 an irreducible hypersurface of Pn−1 is just a point, and so cannot be of high degree, at least over C:
this explains why the homomorphism of Theorem A becomes trivial in the case of
BirC (P2 ).
The next natural question is to understand the kernel of the group homomorphism. As will soon become clear, it turns out that Aut(Pn ) = PGLn+1 (k) is contained in the kernel. This implies that the normal subgroup generated by Aut(Pn )
and any ﬁnite subset of elements in Birk (Pn ) is proper. Theorem C below will
be a stronger version of this fact. We also point out that because of the already
mentioned result from [BZ18], the kernel of all our group homomorphisms is dense

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

5

Z/2 that we construct are not
in Bir(Pn ), so the group homomorphisms Bir(Pn )
continuous (when putting the non-trivial topology on Z/2).
One can also ask about the possibility to get a homomorphism to a free product
of Z/2, instead of a direct sum. We will see that is is indeed possible, and is related
to the existence of many conic bundle models for Pn which are not pairwise square
birational. See Theorems D and E below.
Finally, one can ask about replacing Pn by a nonrational variety. In this direction, we will prove the following result about the group Bir(X) of birational
transformations of a conic bundle X/B.
Theorem B. Let B ⊆ Pm be a smooth projective complex variety with dim B >
2, P
Pm a decomposable P2 -bundle (projectivisation of a decomposable rank 3
vector bundle) and X ⊂ P a smooth closed subvariety such that the projection to
Pm gives a conic bundle η : X
B. Then there exists a group homomorphism
Bir(X)

⊕ Z/2,
Z

the restriction of which to Bir(X/B) = {ϕ ∈ Bir(X) | η ◦ ϕ = η} is surjective.
Moreover, if there exists a subfield k ⊆ C over which X, B and η are defined,
the image of elements of Bir(X/B) defined over k is also infinite.
Theorem B applies to any product X = P1 × B, to smooth cubic hypersurfaces
X ⊆ Pn+1 (see Section 8.E and in particular Corollary 8.8 and Proposition 8.9), and
to many other varieties of dimension n > 3 which are very far from being rational
(see for instance [Kol17, Theorem 3] and [AO18, Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2]).
Of course it also includes the case of X = P1 × Pn−1 which is birational to Pn , but
observe that Theorem A is slightly stronger in this case, since there the set indexing
the direct sum has the same cardinality as the ground ﬁeld, and also because we
can give an explicit subgroup, easy to describe, whose image is surjective.
1.C. Generators. As already mentioned, the Noether-Castelnuovo theorem provides simple generators of Bir(P2 ) when k is algebraically closed. Using Sarkisov
links, there are also explicit (long) lists of generators of Bir(P2 ) for each ﬁeld k
of characteristic zero or more generally for each perfect ﬁeld k [Isk91, Isk96]. In
dimension n > 3, we do not have a complete list of all Sarkisov links and thus are
far from having an explicit list of generators for Bir(Pn ). The lack of an analogue
to the Noether-Castelnuovo Theorem for Bir(Pn ) and the question of ﬁnding good
generators was already cited in the article of the Encyclopedia above, in [HM13,
Question 1.6], and also in the book of Enriques:
Questo teorema non è estendibile senz’altro allo Sn dove n > 2;
resta quindi insoluta la questione capitale di assegnare le più sempilici trasformazioni generatrici dell’intiero gruppo Cremona in Sn
per n > 2.
[Enr95, p. 115]2
A classical result, due to H. Hudson and I. Pan [Hud27, Pan99], says that Bir(Pn ),
for n > 3, is not generated by Aut(Pn ) and ﬁnitely many elements, or more generally
by any set of elements of Bir(Pn ) of bounded degree. The reason is that one needs
at least, for each irreducible variety Γ of dimension n − 2, one birational map that
2“This theorem can not be easily extended to Pn where n > 2; therefore, the main question of
ﬁnding the most simple generating transformations of the entire Cremona group of Pn for n > 2
remains open.”

6

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

contracts a hypersurface birational to P1 × Γ. These contractions can be realised in
Bir(Pn ) by Jonquières elements, i.e. elements that preserve a family of lines through
a given point, which form a subgroup
PGL2 (k(x2 , . . . , xn )) ⋊ Bir(Pn−1 ) ⊆ Bir(Pn ).
Hence, it is natural to ask whether the group Bir(Pn ) is generated by Aut(Pn )
and by Jonquières elements (a question for instance asked in [PS15]).
We answer this question by the negative, in the following stronger form:
Theorem C. Let k be a subfield of C, and n > 3. Let S be a set of elements
in the Cremona group Birk (Pn ) that has cardinality smaller than the one of k (for
example S finite, or S countable if k is uncountable), and let G ⊆ Birk (Pn ) be the
subgroup generated by Autk (Pn ), by all Jonquières elements and by S.
Then, G is contained in the kernel of a surjective group homomorphism
Birk (Pn )

Z/2.

In particular G is a proper subgroup of Birk (Pn ), and the same is true for the
normal subgroup generated by G.
It is interesting to make a parallel between this statement and the classical
Tame Problem in the context of the aﬃne Cremona group Aut(An ), or group of
polynomial automorphisms. This is one of the “challenging problems” on the aﬃne
spaces, described by H. Kraft in the Bourbaki seminar [Kra96]. Recall that the
tame subgroup Tame(An ) ⊆ Aut(An ) is deﬁned as the subgroup generated by
aﬃne automorphisms and by the subgroup of elementary automorphisms of the
(ax1 + P (x2 , . . . , xn ), x2 , . . . , xn ). This elementary subgroup
form (x1 , . . . , xn )
is an analogue of the PGL2 (k(x2 , . . . , xn )) factor in the Jonquières group, and of
course the aﬃne group is PGLn+1 (k) ∩ Aut(An ). The Tame Problem asks whether
the inclusion Tame(An ) ⊆ Aut(An ) is strict in dimension n > 3. It was solved
in dimension 3 over a ﬁeld of characteristic zero in [SU04], and remains an open
problem otherwise.
On the one hand, one could say that our Theorem C is much stronger, since
we consider the normal subgroup generated by these elements, and we allow some
extra generators. It is not known (even if not very likely) whether one can generate
Aut(A3 ) with linear automorphisms, elementary automorphisms and one single
automorphism, and not even whether the normal subgroup generated by these is the
whole group Aut(A3 ) (this last statement, even without the extra automorphism,
seems more plausible).
On the other hand, even in dimension 3 we should stress that Theorem C does
not recover a solution to the Tame Problem. Indeed, it seems plausible that the
whole group Aut(An ) lies in the kernel of the group homomorphism to Z/2 of Theorem C. In fact, every element of Bir(Pn ) that admits a decomposition into Sarkisov
links that contract only rational varieties (or more generally varieties birational to
P2 × B for some variety B of dimension n − 3) is in the kernel of all our group homomorphisms (all are given by the construction of Theorem D below), and it seems
natural to expect that elements of Aut(An ) are of this type, but we leave this as
an open question. In fact we are not aware of any element of Aut(A3 ) which has
been proved to lie outside the group generated, in Bir(P3 ), by linear and Jonquières
maps: see [BH15, Proposition 6.8] for the case of the Nagata automorphism, which

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

7

can be generalised to any other automorphism given by a Ga action, as all algebraic
subgroups of Bir(P3 ) isomorphic to Ga are conjugate [BFT19].
1.D. Overwiew of the strategy. To give an idea of the way we construct group
homomorphims from birational groups to Z/2, ﬁrst consider as a toy model the
signature homomorphism on the symmetric group Sn . One possible proof of the
existence of the signature goes as follows. A presentation by generators and relations
of Sn is
Sn = τi = (i i + 1) | τi2 = 1, (τi τi+1 )3 = 1, (τi τj )2 = 1
where the relations are for all i = 1, . . . , n − 1 and all n > j > i + 2. Then by
sending each τi to the generator of Z/2, one gets a group homomorphism because
each relation has even length and so is sent to the trivial element.
Now we would like to apply the same strategy for a group Bir(Z) of birational
transformations: use a presentation by generators and relations, send some of the
generators to the generator of Z/2, and check that all relations are sent to the
trivial element. The trick is that we do not apply this strategy directly to Bir(Z),
but to a larger groupoid containing Bir(Z), where we are able to produce a nice
presentation (as a groupoid) by generators and relations.
To deﬁne this groupoid, ﬁrst recall that by the Minimal model programme, every
variety Z which is covered by rational curves is birational to a Mori ﬁbre space,
and every birational map between two Mori ﬁbre spaces is a composition of simple
birational maps, called Sarkisov links (see Deﬁnition 3.8). We are also able to give a
description of the relations between Sarkisov links, in terms of elementary relations
(see Deﬁnition 4.4 and Theorem 4.28). We associate to Z the groupoid BirMori(Z)
of all birational maps between Mori ﬁbre spaces birational to Z. The main idea
is that even if we are primarily interested in describing homomorphisms from the
group Bir(Z) to Z/2, it turns out to be easier to ﬁrst deﬁne such a homomorphism
on the larger groupoid BirMori(Z), and then restrict to Bir(Z).
1.E. Construction of the groupoid homomorphism. Now we describe Theorem D, our main technical result, which is the base for all other theorems in this
paper.
We concentrate on some special Sarkisov links, called Sarkisov links of conic
bundles of type II (see Deﬁnitions 3.8 and 3.9). To each such link, we associate a
marked conic bundle, which is a pair (X/B, Γ), where X/B is a conic bundle (a
terminal Mori ﬁbre space with dim B = dim X − 1) and Γ ⊂ B is an irreducible
hypersurface (see Deﬁnition 3.22 and Lemma 3.23). We also deﬁne a natural equivalence relation between marked conic bundles (Deﬁnition 3.22).
For each variety Z, we denote by CB(Z) the set of equivalence classes of conic
bundles X/B with X birational to Z, and for each class of conic bundles C ∈ CB(Z)
we denote by M(C) the set of equivalence classes of marked conic bundles (X/B, Γ),
where C is the class of X/B.
The Sarkisov programme is established in every dimension [HM13] and relations
among them are described in [Kal13]. Inspired by the latter, we deﬁne rank r fibrations X/B (see Deﬁnition 3.1); rank 1 ﬁbrations are terminal Mori ﬁbre spaces and
rank 2 ﬁbrations dominate Sarkisov links (see Lemma 3.7). We prove that the relations among Sarkisov links are generated by elementary relations (Deﬁnition 4.4),
which we deﬁne as relations dominated by rank 3 ﬁbrations (see Theorem 4.28).

8

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

We associate to each such Sarkisov link χ an integer cov. gon(χ) that measures
the degree of irrationality of the base locus of χ (see §2.G). The BAB conjecture,
proven in [Bir19, Bir16], tells us that the set of weak Fano terminal varieties of
dimension n form a bounded family and the degree of their images by a (universal)
multiple of the anticanonical system is bounded by a (universal) integer d (see
Proposition 5.1). As a consequence, we show that any Sarkisov link χ of conic
bundles of type II appearing in an elementary relation over a base of small dimension
satisﬁes cov. gon(χ) 6 d (see Proposition 5.3). This and the description of the
elementary relations over a base of maximal dimension and including a Sarkisov
link of conic bundles of type II (Proposition 5.5) allows us to prove the following
statement in §5.C. (Here we use the notation ˚ for a free product of groups).
Theorem D. Let n > 3. There is an integer d > 1 depending only on n, such
that for every conic bundle X/B, where X is a terminal variety of dimension n,
we have a groupoid homomorphism


BirMori(X)
˚
⊕ Z/2
C∈CB(X)

M(C)

that sends each Sarkisov link of conic bundles χ of type II with cov. gon(χ) >
max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)} onto the generator indexed by its associated marked conic
bundle, and all other Sarkisov links and all automorphisms of Mori fibre spaces
birational to X onto zero.
Moreover it restricts to group homomorphisms


⊕ Z/2 ,
Bir(X/B)
˚
⊕ Z/2.
Bir(X)
C∈CB(X)

M(C)

M(X/B)

In order to deduce Theorem A, we study the image of the group homomorphisms
from Bir(X) and Bir(X/B) provided by Theorem D, for some conic bundle X/B.
In particular, we must check that these restrictions are not the trivial morphism.
We give a criterion to compute the image in §6.A. We apply this criterion to show
that the image is very large if the generic ﬁbre of X/B is P1 (or equivalently if
X/B has a rational section, or is equivalent to (P1 × B)/B). This is done in §6.B
and allows us to prove Theorem A. Then in §6.C we study the more delicate case
where the generic ﬁbre X/B is not P1 (or equivalently if X/B has no rational
section), and show that for each conic bundle X/B, the image of Bir(X/B) by
the group homomorphism of Theorem D contains an inﬁnite direct sum of Z/2
(Proposition 6.9). This allows to prove Theorem B.
Finally, let us mention that [Zim18, LZ20, Sch19] construct homomorphisms from
plane Cremona groups over certain non algebraically closed perfect ﬁelds, which we
can see as two-dimensional special cases of the homomorphisms from Theorem D.
The homomorphism in [LZ20, Sch19] is in fact constructed with the same strategy
as the one employed here, replacing the covering gonality with the size of Galois
orbits, while [Zim18] works with generators and relations inside BirR (P2 ).
1.F. Non-equivalent conic bundle structures. Coming back to the case of Pn ,
we study the free product structure appearing in Theorem D. We want to prove
that the indexing set CB(Pn ) is large. This is equivalent to the question of existence of many non-equivalent conic bundle structures on Pn : Indeed it follows from
our description of relations (Proposition 5.5) that two Sarkisov links of suﬃciently
high covering gonality on non-equivalent conic bundles cannot be part of a same

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

9

elementary relation, as reﬂected also in Theorem D. Using conic bundles over P2
with discriminant an elliptic curve, we manage to produce such examples, and we
get the following.
Theorem E. Let n > 3 and let k ⊆ C be a subfield. There is a surjective group
homomorphism
Birk (Pn )
˚ Z/2,
J

where the indexing set J has the same cardinality as k. In particular, every group
generated by a set of involutions with cardinality smaller or equal than |k| is a
quotient of Birk (Pn ). Moreover, the group homomorphism that we construct admits
a section, so Birk (Pn ) is a semi-direct product with one factor being a free product.
A ﬁrst consequence is Theorem C. Other complements are given in Section 8.
First we get the SQ-universality of Birk (Pn ), meaning that any countable group
is a subgroup of a quotient of Birk (Pn ). But in fact, many natural subgroups are
quotients of Birk (Pn ), with no need to passing to a subgroup: this includes dihedral
and symmetric groups, linear groups, and the Cremona group of rank 2 (see §8.A).
Another consequence of our results is that the group Birk (Pn ) is not hopﬁan
if it is generated by involutions, for each subﬁeld k ⊆ C and each n > 3 (Corollary 8.5). This is another diﬀerence with the dimension 2, as BirC (P2 ) is hopﬁan
and generated by involutions (see §8.B).
All our results hold over any ﬁeld abstractly isomorphic to a subﬁeld of C (§8.C).
This is the case of most ﬁeld of characteristic zero that are encountered in algebraic geometry: for instance, any ﬁeld of rational functions of any algebraic variety
deﬁned over a subﬁeld of C.
Another feature of the Cremona groups in higher dimension is that the group
BirC (Pn ) is a free product of uncountably many distinct subgroups, amalgamated
over the intersection of the subgroups, which is the same for any two subgroups.
This strong version of an amalgamated product (Theorem 8.6) is again very diﬀerent
from BirC (P2 ) (which is not a non-trivial amalgam, as already explained) and
generalises to other varieties as soon as they have two non-equivalent conic bundle
structures. Again this result can be generalised to subﬁelds of C.
Theorem 8.6 implies that Bir(Pn ) acts non-trivially on a tree. More generally,
for each conic bundle X/B, we provide a natural action of Bir(X) on a graph
constructed from rank r ﬁbrations birational to X (see §8.F).
Aknowledgements. We thank Hamid Ahmadinezhad, Marcello Bernardara, Caucher Birkar, Christian Böhnig, Hans-Christian Graf von Bothmer, Serge Cantat,
Ivan Cheltsov, Tom Ducat, Andrea Fanelli, Enrica Floris, Jean-Philippe Furter,
Marat Gizatullin, Philipp Habegger, Yang He, Anne-Sophie Kaloghiros, Vladimir
Lazić, Zsolt Patakfalvi, Yuri Prokhorov, Miles Reid and Christian Urech for interesting discussions related to this project.
2. Preliminaries
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, all ambient varieties are assumed to be projective, irreducible, reduced and deﬁned over the ﬁeld C of complex numbers.
This restriction on the ground ﬁeld comes from the fact that this is the setting of
many references that we use, such as [BCHM10, HM13, Kal13, KKL16]. It seems to
be folklore that all the results in these papers are also valid over any algebraically

10

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

closed ﬁeld of characteristic zero, but we let the reader take full responsibility if he
is willing to deduce that our results automatically hold over such a ﬁeld. However,
in Sections 6 and 7, see also §8.C, we will show how to work over ﬁelds that can be
embedded in C.
General references for this section are [KM98, Laz04, BCHM10].
2.A. Divisors and curves. Let X be a normal variety, Div(X) the group of
Cartier divisors, and Pic(X) = Div(X)/ ∼ the Picard group of divisors modulo
linear equivalence. The Néron-Severi space N 1 (X) = Div(X) ⊗ R/ ≡ is the space
of R-divisors modulo numerical equivalence. This is a ﬁnite-dimensional vector
space whose dimension ρ(X) is called the Picard rank of X. We denote N1 (X) the
dual space of 1-cycles with real coeﬃcients modulo numerical equivalence. We have
a perfect pairing N 1 (X) × N1 (X)
R induced by intersection. If we need to work
with coeﬃcients in Q we will use notation such as N 1 (X)Q := Div(X) ⊗ Q/ ≡ or
Pic(X)Q := Pic(X) ⊗ Q. We say that a Weil divisor D on X is Q-Cartier if mD
is Cartier for some integer m > 0. The variety X is Q-factorial if all Weil divisors
on X are Q-Cartier. An element in Div(X) ⊗ Q is called a Q-divisor.
First we recall a few classical geometric notions attached to a Q-divisor D. Let
m be a suﬃciently large and divisible integer. D is movable if the base locus of the
linear system |mD| has codimension at least 2. D is big if the map associated with
|mD| is birational. Similarly, D is semiample if |mD| is base point free, and D is
ample if furthermore the associated map is an embedding. Finally, D is nef if for
any curve C we have D · C > 0.
Now we recall how the numerical counterparts of these notions deﬁne cones in
N 1 (X). The eﬀective cone Eﬀ(X) ⊆ N 1 (X) is the cone generated by eﬀective
Ď
divisors on X. Its closure Eﬀ(X)
is the cone of pseudo-effective classes. Similarly
Ě
we denote NE(X) ⊆ N1 (X) the cone of eﬀective 1-cycles, and NE(X)
its closure.
By Kleiman’s criterion, a divisor D is ample if and only if D · C > 0 for any 1-cycle
Ě
C ∈ NE(X).
It follows that the cone Ample(X) of ample classes is the interior
of the closed cone Nef(X) ⊆ N 1 (X) of nef classes. Similarly, the interior of the
Ď
pseudo-eﬀective cone Eﬀ(X)
is the big cone Big(X): Indeed a class D is big if and
only if D ≡ A + E with A ample and E eﬀective. A class is semiample if it is the
Ę
pull-back of an ample class by a morphism. Finally the movable cone Mov(X)
is the
closure of the cone spanned by movable divisors, and we will denote by IntMov(X)
its interior.
One should keep in mind the following inclusions between all these cones:
=

=

Ę
Ď
Ample(X) ⊆ Semiample(X) ⊆ Nef(X) ⊆ Mov(X)
⊆ Eﬀ(X)
Ğ
Ample(X)

Ě
Big(X)

Ě
We say that a 1-cycle C ∈ NE(X)
is extremal if any equality C = C1 + C2 inside
Ě
NE(X)
implies that C, C1 , C2 are proportional.
2.B. Maps. Let π : X
Y be a surjective morphism between normal varieties.
We shall also denote X/Y such a situation. The relative Picard group is the quotient
Pic(X/Y ) := Pic(X)/π ∗ Pic(Y ).
We say that a curve C ⊆ X is contracted by π if π(C) is a point. The subsets NE(X/Y ) ⊆ N1 (X/Y ) ⊆ N1 (X) are respectively the cone and the subspace
generated by curves contracted by π. The relative Néron-Severi space N 1 (X/Y )

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

11

is the quotient of N 1 (X) by the orthogonal of N1 (X/Y ). The dimension ρ(X/Y )
of N 1 (X/Y ), or equivalently N1 (X/Y ), is the relative Picard rank of π. If π has
connected ﬁbres, then ρ(X/Y ) = 0 if and only if π is an isomorphism, because a
bijective morphism between normal varieties is an isomorphism.
Ę
We denote by Eﬀ(X/Y ), Nef(X/Y ), Ample(X/Y ), Big(X/Y ), Mov(X/Y
) the
1
1
images of the corresponding cones of N (X) in the quotient N (X/Y ). If D ∈
N 1 (X) is a class that projects to an element in Nef(X/Y ), we says that D is π-nef.
Equivalently, D is π-nef if D ·C > 0 for any C ∈ NE(X/Y ). Similarly, we deﬁne the
notion of π-ample, π-big, π-eﬀective. In particular a class D is π-ample if D · C > 0
Ě
for any C ∈ NE(X/Y
).
Geometrically, a Q-divisor D is π-ample if the restriction of D to each ﬁbre is
ample, and D is π-big if the restriction of D to the generic ﬁbre is big. We have
the following characterisation for this last notion:
Y be a surjective morphism
Lemma 2.1 ([KM98, Lemma 3.23]). Let π : X
between normal varieties. A Q-divisor D on X is π-big if and only if we can write
D as a sum
D = π-ample + effective.
When the morphism π : X
Y is birational, the exceptional locus Ex(π) is the
set covered by all contracted curves. Assume moreover that ρ(X/Y ) = 1, and that
X is Q-factorial. Then we are in one of the following situations [KM98, Prop 2.5]:
either Ex(π) is a prime divisor, and we say that π is a divisorial contraction, or
Ex(π) has codimension at least 2 in X, and we say that π is a small contraction.
In this case, Y is not Q-factorial.
Given three normal varieties X, Y, W together with surjective morphisms X/W ,
Y is a rational map over W if we have a commutative
Y /W , we say that ϕ : X
diagram
X

ϕ

Y

W
Now let ϕ : X
Y be a birational map. Any Weil divisor D on X is sent to a
well-deﬁned cycle ϕ(D) on Y , and by removing all components of codimension > 2
we obtain a well-deﬁned divisor ϕ∗ D: one says that ϕ induces a map in codimension 1. If codim ϕ(D) > 2 (and so ϕ∗ D = 0), we say that ϕ contracts the divisor D.
A birational contraction is a birational map such that the inverse does not contract
any divisor, or equivalently a birational map which is surjective in codimension 1. A
pseudo-isomorphism is a birational map which is an isomorphism in codimension 1.
Birational morphisms and pseudo-isomorphisms (and compositions of those) are
examples of birational contractions.
We use a dashed arrow
to denote a rational (or birational) map, a plain
for a morphism, and a dotted arrow
, or simply a dotted line
,
arrow
to indicate a pseudo-isomorphism.
We denote by Bir(X) the group of birational transformations of X. Given a
B, we denote by Bir(X/B) the subgroup of Bir(X)
surjective morphism η : X
consisting of all birational transformations over B, i.e.
Bir(X/B) := {ϕ ∈ Bir(X) | η ◦ ϕ = η} ⊆ Bir(X).

12

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

2.C. Mori dream spaces and Cox sheaves. We shall use a relative version of
the usual deﬁnition of Mori dream space (compare with [KKL16, Deﬁnition 2.2]).
Before giving the deﬁnition we recall the following notions.
Y be a surjective morphism, and F a sheaf on X. The higher direct
Let π : X
images of F are the sheaves Ri π∗ F , i > 0, which are deﬁned on each aﬃne subset
U ⊂ Y as Ri π∗ F (U ) = H i (π −1 (U ), F ).
We say that a normal variety Y has rational singularities if for some (hence any)
desingularisation π : X
Y , we have Ri π∗ OX = 0 for all i > 0.
Recall also that a variety is rationally connected if any two general points are
contained in a rational curve (see [Kol96, IV.3]).
Definition 2.2. Let η : X
B be a surjective morphism between normal varieties.
We say that X/B is a Mori dream space if the following conditions hold:
(MD1) X is Q-factorial, and both X, B have rational singularities.
(MD2) A general ﬁbre of η is rationally connected and has rational singularities.
(MD3) Nef(X/B) is the convex cone generated by ﬁnitely many semiample divisors;
Xi over B, such
(MD4) There exist ﬁnitely many pseudo-isomorphisms fi : X
that each Xi is a Q-factorial variety satisfying (MD3), and
[
Ę
Mov(X/B)
=
fi∗ (Nef(Xi /B)).
Lemma 2.3. Let η : X
B be a surjective morphism between normal varieties,
and F a general fibre. Assume that X and B have rational singularities, and assume:
(i) F is rationally connected and has rational singularities.
Then the following properties hold true:
(ii) H i (F, OF ) = 0 for all i > 0;
(iii) η∗ OX = OB and Ri η∗ OX = 0 for all i > 0;
(iv) H 1 (η −1 (U ), Oη−1 (U) ) = 0 for each affine open set U ⊂ B;
(v) Pic(X/B)Q = N 1 (X/B)Q .

Remark 2.4. Condition (i) from Lemma 2.3 is our condition (MD2). The lemma
implies that we would obtain a more general deﬁnition replacing (MD2) by Condition (iv), which is the choice of [BCHM10], or by Condition (v), which is a relative
version of the choice made in [KKL16]. However our more restrictive deﬁnition
suits to our purpose and seems easier to check in practice.
F . Since F
Proof. (i) =⇒ (ii). Consider a resolution of singularities π : F̂
has rational singularities, we have Ri π∗ OF̂ = 0 for i > 0. Then [Har77, III,
Ex.8.1] implies that H i (F̂ , OF̂ ) ≃ H i (F, π∗ OF̂ ) = H i (F, OF ) for all i > 0. Finally
H i (F, OF ) = H i (F̂ , OF̂ ) = 0 by [Kol96, IV.3.8].
(i) =⇒ (iii). Since X has rational singularities, without loss in generality we
can replace X by a desingularisation and assume X smooth. Since η has connected
ﬁbres, we get η∗ OX = OB . We just saw that H i (F, OF ) = 0 for all i > 0, and
since we assume that B has rational singularities, the result follows from [Kol86,
Theorem 7.1].
(iii) =⇒ (iv). This is just the deﬁnition of R1 η∗ OX = 0.
(iii) =⇒ (v). Let D ∈ Div(X)Q a divisor which is numerically trivial against
the contracted curves. We want to show that D is trivial in Pic(X/B)Q , that is, a

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

13

multiple of D is a pull-back. This is exactly the content of [KM92, 12.1.4]. Observe
that here again we only need the vanishing assumption for i = 1.

B be a surjective morphism between normal varieties, and L1 , . . . ,
Let η : X
Lr some Q-divisors on X. We deﬁne the divisorial sheaf R(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr ) to be
the sheaf of graded OB -algebras deﬁned on every open aﬃne set U ⊂ B as
R(X/B; L1, . . . , Lr )(U ) =

⊕

(m1 ,...,mr )∈Nr

H 0 (η −1 (U )/U, m1 L1 + · · · + mr Lr ),

where for any D ∈ Pic(X)Q
H 0 (η −1 (U )/U, D) =

f ∈ k(η −1 (U ))∗ | ∃L ∈ PicQ (U ), div(f ) + D + η ∗ L > 0 ∪ {0}.
P
If moreover Eﬀ(X/B) ⊆
R+ Li , which ensures that we would get the same
algebras using a Zr -grading instead of Nr , then we say that the sheaf is a Cox
sheaf, and we denote
Cox(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr ) := R(X/B; L1, . . . , Lr ).
We say that a divisorial sheaf R(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr ) is ﬁnitely generated if for every aﬃne set U the Nr -graded OB (U )-algebra R(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr )(U ) is ﬁnitely
generated.
As the following lemma shows, for Cox sheaves this property of ﬁnite generation
is independent of the choice of the Li , and therefore we shall usually omit the
reference to such a choice and denote a Cox sheaf simply by Cox(X/B).
B be a surjective morphism
Lemma 2.5 ([ADHL15, I.1.2.2]). Let η : X
P + between normal varieties, L1 , . . . , Lr ∈ Pic(X)Q such that Eﬀ(X/B) ⊆
R Li ,
and Cox(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr ) the associated Cox sheaf. Let L′1 , . . . , L′s ∈ Pic(X)Q . If
Cox(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr ) is finitely generated, then the divisorial sheaf R(X/B; L′1 , . . . ,
L′s ) also is finitely generated. In particular, the property of finite generation of a
Cox sheaf of X/B does not depend on the choice of the Li .
Lemma 2.6. Let X/B be a surjective morphism between normal varieties, whose
general fibres are rationally connected. Assume that X is Q-factorial, and that X,
B and the general fibres have rational singularities. Then X/B is a Mori dream
space if and only if its Cox sheaf is finitely generated.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proofs in the non-relative setting of [KKL16,
Corollaries 4.4 and 5.7].

Example 2.7. Standard examples of Mori dream spaces in the non relative case
(i.e. when B is a point) are toric varieties and Fano varieties. Both of these classes
of varieties are special examples of log Fano varieties, which are Mori dream spaces
by [BCHM10, Corollary 1.3.2]. If F is a log Fano variety, and B is any smooth
variety, then (F × B)/B is a basic example of relative Mori dream space.
2.D. Minimal model programme. Let X be a normal Q-factorial variety, and
Ě
C ∈ NE(X)
an extremal class. We say that the contraction of C exists (and
in that case it is unique), if there exists a surjective morphism π : X
Y with
connected ﬁbres to a normal variety Y , with ρ(X/Y ) = 1, and such that any curve
contracted by π is numerically proportional to C. If π is a small contraction, we
say that the log-flip of C exists (and again, in that case it is unique) is there exists

14

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

X ′ a pseudo-isomorphism over Y which is not an isomorphism, such that
X
′
X is normal Q-factorial and X ′
Y is a small contraction that contracts curves
proportional to a class C ′ . For each D ∈ N 1 (X), if D′ is the image of D under
the pseudo-isomorphism, we have a sign change between D · C and D′ · C ′ . We
X ′ is a D-flip, resp. a D-flop, resp. a D-antiflip when D · C < 0,
say that X
resp. D · C = 0, resp. D · C > 0.
If D is nef on X, we say that X is a D-minimal model. If there exists a contraction
X
Y with ρ(X/Y ) = 1, dim Y < dim X and −D relatively ample, we say that
X/Y is a D-Mori fibre space.
A step in the D-Minimal Model Programme (or in the D-MMP for short) is the
removal of an extremal class C with D · C < 0, either via a divisorial contraction,
or via a D-ﬂip. In this paper we will ensure the existence of each step in a D-MMP
by working in one the following contexts. Either D = KX + ∆ will be an adjoint
divisor with ∆ ample and we can apply the main result of [BCHM10], or we will
assume that X is a Mori dream space, and rely on Lemma 2.8 below (which is
the reason for the name). By running a D-MMP from X, we mean performing a
sequence of such steps, replacing each time D by its image, until reaching one of
the following two possible outputs: a D-minimal model or a D-Mori ﬁbre space.
In particular, observe that for us the output of a D-MMP is always of the same
dimension as the starting variety, and the whole process makes sense even for D
not pseudo-eﬀective (in contrast with another possible convention which would be
to deﬁne the output of a D-MMP as Proj(⊕n H 0 (X, nD)).
We will often work in a relative setting where all steps are maps over a base
variety B, and we will indicate such a setting by saying that we run a D-MMP over
B.
When D = KX is the canonical divisor, we usually omit the mention of the divisor in the previous notations. So for instance given a small contraction contracting
the class of a curve C, we speak of the ﬂip of C only if KX · C < 0, of the D-ﬂip of
C if D · C < 0, and of the log-ﬂip of C when we do not want to emphasise the sign
of the intersection against any divisor.
Lemma 2.8 (see [HK00, Proposition 1.11] or [KKL16, Theorem 5.4]). If X/B is
a Mori dream space, then for any class D ∈ N 1 (X) one can run a D-MMP from
X over B, and there are only finitely many possible outputs for such MMP.
2.E. Singularities. Let X be a normal variety, and let π : Z
X be a resolution
of singularities, with exceptional divisors E1 , . . . , Er . We say that X has terminal
singularities, or that X is terminal, if KX is Q-Cartier and in the ramiﬁcation
formula
X
KZ = π ∗ KX +
ai Ei ,
we have ai > 0 for each i. Similarly we say that X has Kawamata log terminal
(klt for short) singularities, or that X is klt, if ai > −1 for each i. Each coeﬃcient
ai , which is often called the discrepancy of Ei , does not depend on a choice of
resolution in the sense that it is an invariant of the geometric valuation associated
to Ei . Let ∆ an eﬀective Q-divisor on X. We call (X, ∆) a klt pair if KX + ∆ is
X such
Q-Cartier and if for a (and hence any) resolution of singularities π : Z
that the divisor (π −1 )∗ ∆ ∪ Ex(π) has normal crossing support we have
X
KZ = π ∗ (KX + ∆) +
ai Ei

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

15

P
where π∗ ( ai Ei ) + ∆ = 0 and ai > −1 for all i. Observe that if (X, ∆) is a klt
pair and X is Q-factorial, then for any ∆ > ∆′ > 0 the pair (X, ∆′ ) also is klt. In
particular taking ∆′ = 0 we get that X is klt.
Lemma 2.9. Let X, Y be Q-factorial varieties, and π : X
Y the divisorial contraction of an extremal curve C, with exceptional divisor E = Ex(π). If D ∈ Div(X)
and D′ = π∗ D, then in the ramification formula
D = π ∗ D′ + aE,
the numbers a and D · C have opposite signs. In particular, if X is terminal, then
Y is terminal if and only if KX · C < 0.
Proof. We have D · C = aE · C, so the claim follows from E · C < 0. For this,
see for instance [BCHM10, Lemma 3.6.2(3)]. The last assertion follows by taking
D = KX and D′ = KY .

If we start with a Q-factorial terminal variety and we run the classical MMP
(that is, relatively to the canonical divisor), then each step (divisorial contraction
or ﬂip) of the MMP keeps us in the category of Q-factorial terminal varieties (for
divisorial contractions, this follows from Lemma 2.9). Moreover, when one reaches
a Mori ﬁbre space X/B, the base B is Q-factorial as mentioned above, but might
not be terminal. However by the following result B has at worst klt singularities.
Proposition 2.10 ([Fuj99, Corollary 4.6]). Let X/B be a Mori fibre space, where
X is a Q-factorial klt variety. Then B also is a Q-factorial klt variety.
We will also use the following related result:
Proposition 2.11 ([Fuj15, Theorem 1.5]). Let (X, ∆) be a klt pair, and consider
the log canonical model


Y = Proj ⊕ H 0 (X, m(KX + ∆))
m

where the sum is over all positive integers m such that m(KX +∆) is Cartier. Then
there exists an effective Q-divisor ∆Y such that the pair (Y, ∆Y ) is klt.
The following class of Mori ﬁbre spaces will be of special importance to us.
Definition 2.12. A conic bundle is a Q-factorial terminal Mori ﬁbre space X/B
with dim B = dim X − 1. The discriminant locus of X/B is deﬁned as the union of
irreducible hypersurfaces Γ ⊂ B such that the preimage of a general point of Γ is
not irreducible. We emphasise that the terminology of conic bundle is often used in
a broader sense (for instance, for any morphism whose general ﬁbre is isomorphic
to P1 , with no restriction on the singularities of X or on the relative Picard rank),
but for our purpose we will stick to the above more restricted deﬁnition.
We say that two conic bundles X/B and X ′ /B ′ are equivalent if there exists a
commutative diagram
X
B

ψ

X′

θ

B′

where ψ, θ are birational.
The singular locus of a terminal variety has codimension at least 3 ([KM98,
5.18]). This fact is crucial in the following result.

16

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Y be a divisorial contraction between Q-factorial terLemma 2.13. Let π : X
minal varieties, with exceptional divisor E, and assume that Γ = π(E) has codimension 2 in Y . Then, the following hold:
(1) There is an open subset U ⊆ Y such that U ∩Γ, U and π −1 (U ) are non-empty
and contained in the smooth locus of Γ, Y and X respectively.
(2) For each choice of U as in (1), π|π−1 (U) : π −1 (U )
U is the blow-up of U ∩Γ
(with reduced structure). In particular, for each p ∈ U , the fibre f = π −1 ({p}) is a
smooth rational curve such that KX · f = E · f = −1.
Proof. Assertion (1) follows from the fact that X and Y are smooth in codimension 2.
Let U be as in (1), let p ∈ Γ ∩ U and take a general smooth surface S ⊆ U
containing p. Up to shrinking U we can assume that p is the only intersection point
of S and Γ. The strict transform S̃ of S is again a smooth surface. Let C1 , . . . , Cm
S, which
be the irreducible curves contracted by the birational morphism S̃
is the composition of m blow-ups. We now show that m = 1. The condition
ρ(X/Y ) = 1 implies that all Ci are numerically equivalent in X, so for each i, j we
have
(Ci2 )S̃ = Ci · E = Cj · E = (Cj2 )S̃ .
Since at least one of the self-intersection (Ci2 )S̃ must be equal to −1, and the
S is connected, we conclude that m = 1. So S̃
S is
exceptional locus of S̃
the blow-up of p, hence π −1 (U )
U is the blow-up of U ∩ Γ, which gives (2). 
Lemma 2.14. Let η : X
B be a morphism between normal varieties with X
terminal (resp. klt). Then for a general point p ∈ B, the fibre η −1 (p) also is
terminal (resp. klt), so in particular it has rational singularities.
Proof. The fact that η −1 (p) is terminal (resp. klt) follows from [Kol97, 7.7] by taking
successive hyperplane sections on B locally deﬁning p. As already mentioned klt

singularities are rational, see [KM98, 5.22].
Lemma 2.15.
(1) Let (X, ∆) be a klt pair, and π : X
Y be a morphism with connected fibres
such that −(KX + ∆) is π-big and π-nef. Then for every p ∈ Y the fibre π −1 (p)
is covered by rational curves, and for a general p ∈ Y the fibre π −1 (p) is rationally
connected with klt singularities.
(2) Let (Y, ∆Y ) be a klt pair, and π : X
Y a birational morphism. Then every
fibre of π is covered by rational curves.
X ′ be a sequence of log-flips between Q-factorial klt varieties,
(3) Let ϕ : X
and Γ ⊂ X a codimension 2 subvariety contained in the base locus of ϕ. Then Γ is
covered by rational curves.
Proof. (1) and (2) follow from [HM07, Corollary 1.3(1) and Corollary 1.5(1)]. Then
(3) is a straightforward consequence of (1) applied in the case of a small contraction.

Lemma 2.16. Let X
Y be a morphism that factorises as X
W and W
Y,
where W is a Q-factorial klt variety. If X/Y is a Mori dream space then W/Y also
is a Mori dream space.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

17

Proof. The general ﬁbres of W/Y are rationally connected because they are images
of the rationally connected ﬁbres of X/Y , and they have rational singularities by
Lemma 2.14. For any aﬃne open subset U ⊂ Y , the algebra Cox(W/Y )(U ) embeds
by pull-back as a subalgebra of Cox(X/Y )(U ), hence is ﬁnitely generated by Lemma
2.5. We conclude by Lemma 2.6.

2.F. Two-rays game. A reference for the notion of two-rays game is [Cor00, §2.2].
We use a slightly diﬀerent setting in the discussion below. Namely, ﬁrst we ensure
that all moves do exist by putting a Mori dream space assumption, and secondly we
do not put strong restrictions on singularities (this will come later in Deﬁnition 3.1).
Let Y
X be a surjective morphism between normal varieties, with ρ(Y /X) =
2. Assume also that there exists a morphism X/B such that Y /B is a Mori dream
space. In particular, by Lemma 2.8 for any divisor D on Y one can run a D-MMP
over B, hence a fortiori over X. Then NE(Y /X) is a closed 2-dimensional cone,
generated by two extremal classes represented by curves C1 , C2 . Let D = −A where
A is an ample divisor on Y , so that a D-minimal model does not exist. Then by
Lemma 2.8 for each i = 1, 2 we can run a D-MMP from Y over X, which starts
by the divisorial contraction or log-ﬂip of the class Ci , and produce a commutative
diagram that we call the two-rays game associated to Y /X (and which does not
depend on the choice of D):
Y1

Y

X1

Y2
X2

X
Here Y
Yi is a (possibly empty) sequence of D-ﬂips, and Yi
Xi is either a
divisorial contraction or a D-Mori ﬁbre space.
Now we give a few direct consequences of the two-rays game construction.
X1 a morphism over B with
Lemma 2.17. Let Y1 /B be a Mori dream space, Y1
ρ(Y1 /X1 ) = 1, and X1
X2 a sequence of relative log-flips over B. Then there
exists a sequence of log-flips Y1
Y2 over B such that the induced map Y2
X2
is a morphism, of relative Picard rank 1 by construction. Moreover if Y1 /X1 is a
divisorial contraction (resp. a Mori fibre space), then Y2 /X2 also is.
Proof. By induction, it is suﬃcient to consider the case where X1
X2 is a single
log-ﬂip over a non Q-factorial variety X dominating B, given by a diagram
X1

X2
X
B

In this situation, the two-rays game Y1 /X gives a diagram
Y1

Y2

X1

X′
X

18

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Y2 is a sequence of log-ﬂips and Y2
X ′ is a morphism of relative
where Y1
′
Picard rank 1, with X a Q-factorial variety. If Y1 /X1 is a divisorial contraction,
then Y2 /X ′ must be birational hence also is a divisorial contraction. On the other
hand if Y1 /X1 is a Mori ﬁbre space, then Y2 /X ′ cannot be birational, otherwise
X ′ /X would be a D-Mori ﬁbre space for some divisor D; impossible since X ′ is Qfactorial but not X. By uniqueness of the log-ﬂip associated to the small contraction
X, we conclude in both cases that X ′ = X2 .

X1
Lemma 2.18. Let ϕ : Y
Y ′ be a pseudo-isomorphism over X, where X, Y, Y ′
are Q-factorial varieties, and assume we are in one of the following situations:
(1) Y /X and Y ′ /X are Mori fibre spaces;
(2) Y /X and Y ′ /X are divisorial contractions.
Then ϕ is an isomorphism.
Proof. Assertion (1) is [Cor95, Proposition 3.5] (the proof given there extends verbatim in the higher dimensional case). We now give a proof of (2), which is very
similar. Let E and E ′ be the exceptional divisors of π : Y
X and π ′ : Y ′
X,
′
respectively. Observe that ϕ∗ E = E . Pick A a general ample divisor on X and
∗
0 < ε ≪ 1, and consider H = π ∗ A − εE, H ′ = π ′ A − εE ′ . Both H and H ′ are
ample, and we have H ′ = ϕ∗ H, so by [Cor95, Proposition 2.7] we conclude that
Y ′ is an isomorphism.

Y
Lemma 2.19. Let T
Y and Y
X be two divisorial contractions between Qfactorial varieties, with respective exceptional divisors E and F . Assume that there
B such that T /B is a Mori dream space. Then there exist
exists a morphism X
two others Q-factorial varieties T ′ and Y ′ , with a pseudo-isomorphism T
T′
′
′
Y
X, with respective exceptional divisors the
and birational contractions T
strict transforms of F and E, such that the following diagram commutes:
T′

T
E

Y

Y
F

X

F
′

E

Proof. The diagram comes from the two-rays game associated to T /X. The only
thing to prove is that the divisors are not contracted in the same order on the
two sides of the two-rays game. Assume that both π : Y
X and π ′ : Y ′
X
Y and T ′
Y′
contract the strict transforms of the same divisor F . Then T
both contract a same divisor E and T
T ′ descends to a pseudo-isomorphism
′
Y . By Lemma 2.18(2) the pseudo-isomorphism Y
Y ′ is an isomorphism.
Y
Then applying again Lemma 2.18(2) to the two divisorial contractions from T, T ′
to Y ≃ Y ′ , with same exceptional divisor E, we obtain that T
T ′ also is an
′
isomorphism. The morphisms T /Y and T /Y are then divisorial contractions of
the same extremal ray, contradicting the assumption that the diagram was produced
by a two-rays game.

2.G. Gonality and covering gonality. Recal that the gonality gon(C) of a (possibly singular) curve C is deﬁned to be the least degree of the ﬁeld extension associated to a dominant rational map C
P1 .
Note that gon(C) = 1 if and only if C is rational. Moreover, for each smooth
curve C ⊂ P2 of degree > 1 we have gon(C) = deg(C) − 1. Indeed, the inequality

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

19

gon(C) 6 deg(C) − 1 is given by the projection from a general point of C and the
other inequality is given by a result of Noether (see for instance [BDE+ 17]).
The following deﬁnitions are taken from [BDE+ 17] (with a slight change, see
Remark 2.21).
Definition 2.20. For each variety X we deﬁne the covering gonality of X

There is a dense open subset U ⊆ X such

that each point x ∈ U is contained in an
cov. gon(X) = min c > 0

irreducible curve C ⊆ X with gon(C) 6 c.

to be


.


Similarly we deﬁne the connecting gonality of X to be

There is a dense open subset U ⊆ X such



that any two points x, y ∈ U are contained
conn. gon(X) = min c > 0
in an irreducible curve C ⊆ X with



gon(C) 6 c.






.





Remark 2.21.
(1) Our deﬁnitions of the covering and connecting gonality slightly diﬀer from
those of [BDE+ 17], as we ask gon(C) 6 c where they ask gon(C) = c. Lemma 2.23
shows that the covering gonality is the same for both deﬁnitions. A similar argument should also work for the connecting gonality, but we do not need it here, as
we will not use any result of [BDE+ 17] involving the connecting gonality.
(2) The covering gonality and connecting gonality are integers which are invariant under birational maps.
(3) For each variety X, we have
cov. gon(X) 6 conn. gon(X).
Moreover, if dim(X) = 1, then cov. gon(X) = conn. gon(X) = gon(X).
(4) If cov. gon(X) = 1 one says that X is uniruled. This corresponds to asking
that the union of all rational curves on X contains an open subset of X. Similarly,
X is said to be rationally connected if conn. gon(X) = 1. As already mentioned in
§2.C, this corresponds to asking that a rational curve passes through two general
points.
(5) Each rationally connected variety is uniruled. However, the converse does
not hold in general. Indeed, for each variety B, we have cov. gon(B × Pn ) = 1 for
each n > 1, but conn. gon(B × Pn ) = conn. gon(B) as the following lemma shows:
Lemma 2.22(2) applied to B × Pn /B gives conn. gon(B × Pn ) > conn. gon(B), and
the other inequality is given by taking sections in B × Pn of curves in B.
We recall the following classical facts:
Lemma 2.22. Let X, Y be varieties and ϕ : X
Y a surjective morphism.
(1) If X and Y have dimension 1, then gon(X) > gon(Y ).
(2) We have conn. gon(X) > conn. gon(Y ) (but not cov. gon(X) > cov. gon(Y )
in general, see Remark 2.21(5)).
(3) If dim X = dim Y , denote by deg(ϕ) the degree of the associated field extension C(Y ) ⊆ C(X). Then
cov. gon(X) 6 cov. gon(Y ) · deg(ϕ).
n

(4) If X ⊆ P is a closed subvariety, then cov. gon(X) 6 deg(X).

20

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Proof. (1). See for instance [Poo07, Proposition A.1(vii)].
(2). We take two general points y1 , y2 ∈ Y , choose then two general points
x1 , x2 ∈ X with ϕ(xi ) = yi for i = 1, 2, and take an irreducible curve C ⊂ X of
gonality 6 conn. gon(X) which contains x1 and x2 . The image is an irreducible
curve ϕ(C) of gonality 6 conn. gon(X) (by (1)), containing y1 and y2 .
(3). By deﬁnition of cov. gon(Y ), the union of irreducible curves C of Y with
gon(C) 6 cov. gon(Y ) covers a dense open subset of Y . Taking the preimages of
general such curves, we obtain a covering of a dense open subset of X by irreducible
curves D of X with gon(D) 6 cov. gon(Y ) · deg(ϕ).
(4). If X ⊆ Pn is a closed subvariety, we apply (3) to the projection onto a
general linear subspace Y ⊆ Pn of dimension dim(Y ) = dim(X).

Lemma 2.23. Let X be a variety with cov. gon(X) = c. There is a smooth proT over a quasi-projective irreducible base variety T , with
jective morphism C
irreducible fibres of dimension one and of gonality c, together with a dominant
morphism C
X such that a general fibre of C/T is birational to its image in X.
In particular, there is a dense open subset U of X such that through every point
p ∈ U there is an irreducible curve C ⊆ X with gon(C) = c.
Proof. The proof is analogue to the one of [GK19, Lemma 2.1]. We consider the
Hilbert Scheme H of all one-dimensional subschemes of X, which is not of ﬁnite
type, but has countably many components. One of the irreducible components
contains enough curves of gonality 6 cov. gon(X) to get a dominant map to X.
We then look at the set of gonality i for each i and obtain algebraic varieties
parametrising these, as in [GK19, Lemma 2.1]. Having ﬁnitely many constructible
subsets in the image, at least one integer i 6 cov. gon(X) gives a dominant map to
X parametrising curves of gonality i. By deﬁnition of cov. gon(X), this integer i
has to be equal to cov. gon(X).

The following result gives a bound from below that complements the easy bound
from above from Lemma 2.22.
Theorem 2.24 ([BDE+ 17, Theorem A]). Let X ⊂ Pn+1 be an irreducible hypersurface of degree d > n + 2 with canonical singularities. Then, cov. gon(X) > d − n.
We now recall the following deﬁnition of [BDE+ 17], which is a birational version
of the classical p-very ampleness criterion, which asks that every subscheme of
length p + 1 imposes independent conditions on the sections of a line bundle.
Definition 2.25. Let X be variety and let p > 0 be an integer.
A line bundle L on X satisfies property BVAp if there exists a proper Zariskiclosed subset Z = Z(L) $ X depending on L such that the restriction map
H 0 (X, L)
H 0 (X, L ⊗ Oξ ) is surjective for every ﬁnite subscheme ξ ⊂ X of length
p + 1 whose support is disjoint from Z.
The line bundle is moreover p-very ample if one can choose Z to be empty.
The property BVA0 corresponds to asking that L is eﬀective, and BVA1 is usually
called “birationally very ample”. This explains the notation. This notion is related
to the covering gonality via the following result, which essentially follows from the
fact that if the canonical divisor KC of a smooth irreducible curve C satisﬁes BVAp ,
then gon(C) > p + 2 (see [BDE+ 17, Lemma 1.3]):

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

21

Theorem 2.26 ([BDE+ 17, Theorem 1.10]). Let X be a variety, and p > 0 an
integer. If KX satisfies BVAp , then cov. gon(X) > p + 2.
We will use the following observations of [BDE+ 17] to check the hypothesis of
Theorem 2.26:
Lemma 2.27. Let X be a variety, L a line bundle on X and p > 0 an integer.
(1) If L satisfies BVAp and E is an effective divisor on X, then OX (L + E)
satisfies BVAp .
X is a morphism which is birational onto its image,
(2) Suppose that f : Y
that L satisfies BVAp and that the closed set Z ⊆ X from Definition 2.25 does not
contain the image of f . Then, f ∗ L satisfies BVAp .
(3) For each d > 0, OPn (p) is p-very ample, i.e. satisfies BVAp with an empty
closed set Z ⊆ Pn .
Proof. The three assertions follow from the deﬁnition of BVAp , as mentioned in
[BDE+ 17, Example 1.2].

3. Rank r fibrations and Sarkisov links
In this section we introduce the notion of rank r ﬁbration, recovering the notion
of Sarkisov link for r = 2. Then we focus on rank r ﬁbrations and Sarkisov links
with general ﬁbre a curve.
3.A. Rank r fibrations. The notion of rank r ﬁbration is a key concept in this
paper. Essentially these are (relative) Mori dream spaces with strong constraints
on singularities. The cases of r = 1, 2, 3 will allow us to recover respectively the
notion of terminal Mori ﬁbre spaces, of Sarkisov links, and of elementary relations
between those. The precise deﬁnition is as follows.
Definition 3.1. Let r > 1 be an integer. A morphism η : X
B is a rank r
fibration if the following conditions hold:
(RF1) X/B is a Mori dream space (see Deﬁnition 2.2);
(RF2) dim X > dim B > 0 and ρ(X/B) = r;
(RF3) X is Q-factorial and terminal, and for any divisor D on X, the output of
any D-MMP from X over B is still Q-factorial and terminal (recall that such an
output has the same dimension as X by deﬁnition, see §2.D);
(RF4) There exists an eﬀective Q-divisor ∆B such that (B, ∆B ) is klt.
(RF5) The anticanonical divisor −KX is η-big (see Lemma 2.1).
We say that a rank r ﬁbration X/B factorises through a rank r′ ﬁbration X ′ /B ′ ,
or that X ′ /B ′ is dominated by X/B, if the ﬁbrations X/B and X ′ /B ′ ﬁt in a
commutative diagram
X

B
X′

B′

where X
X ′ is a birational contraction, and B ′
nected ﬁbres. This implies r > r′ .

B is a morphism with con-

The notion of rank r ﬁbration bears some resemblance with the notion of ﬁbration
of Fano type in [Bir19]. Note however that our condition (RF3) imposing strong
restriction on singularities does not seem to appear previously in the literature.

22

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Example 3.2.
(1) If X is a Q-factorial terminal Fano variety of rank r, then X/pt is a rank r
ﬁbration. Indeed as already mentioned in Example 2.7, X is a Mori dream space,
and moreover for any divisor D the output of a D-MMP is Q-factorial and terminal.
Both assertions follow from the fact that we can pick a small rational number ε > 0
such that −KX + εD is ample, and then writing εD = KX + (−KX + εD) we see
that a D-MMP is also a (KX + ample)-MMP.
(2) Let p1 , p2 be two distinct points on a ﬁbre f of P1 × P1 /P1 , and consider
S
P1 × P1 the blow-up of p1 and p2 . Then S is a weak del Pezzo toric surface
of Picard rank 4, hence in particular S/pt is a Mori dream space. However S/pt
is not a rank 4 ﬁbration, because when contracting the strict transform of f one
gets a singular point (hence non terminal as we work here with surfaces), which is
forbidden by condition (RF3) of Deﬁnition 3.1.
Other basic examples are terminal Mori ﬁbre spaces:
Lemma 3.3. Let η : X
B a surjective morphism between normal varieties.
Then X/B is a rank 1 fibration if and only if X/B is a terminal Mori fibre space.
Proof. Observe that if ρ(X/B) = 1, the notions of η-ample and η-big are equivalent.
So the implication
X/B is a rank 1 ﬁbration =⇒ X/B is a terminal Mori ﬁbre space
is immediate from the deﬁnitions, and we need to check the converse.
Assume that X/B is a terminal Mori ﬁbre space. Then dim X > dim B and
ρ(X/B) = 1, which is (RF2), by Proposition 2.10 the base B is klt, which gives
(RF4), and −KX is η-ample, which gives (RF5).
We now prove that X/B is a Mori dream space, which is (RF1). Condition
(MD1) holds by assumption. By Lemma 2.15(1) the general ﬁbre of X/B is rationally connected with rational singularities, which gives (MD2). Moreover since
Ę
ρ(X/B) = 1, we have Ample(X/B) = Nef(X/B) = Mov(X/B)
equal to a single
ray, and so conditions (MD3) and (MD4) are immediate.
Finally we prove (RF3). By assumption X is terminal and Q-factorial. For any
divisor D, either D is η-nef and X/B is a D-minimal model, or −D is η-ample and
X/B is a D-Mori ﬁbre space. So X is the only possible output for a D-MMP, which
proves the claim.

Lemma 3.4. Let X/B be a rank r fibration.
(1) If X ′ is obtained from X by performing a log-flip (resp. a divisorial contraction) over B, then X ′ /B is a rank r fibration (resp. a rank (r − 1)-fibration).
(2) Assume that X/B factorizes through a rank s fibration X ′ /B ′ such that the
X ′ is a morphism. Let t = ρ(X/B ′ ). Then X/B ′ is a rank t
birational map X
fibration.
Proof. (1). Let π : X
X ′ be a divisorial contraction over B, with exceptional
divisor E (the case of a log-ﬂip, which is similar and easier, is left to the reader).
(RF1). The general ﬁbre of X ′ /B remains rationally connected, and is terminal
by Lemma 2.14, so it remains to show that a Cox sheaf of X ′ /B is ﬁnitely generated
(Lemma 2.6).
′
′
′
Q and L1 , . . . , Lq ∈ PicQ (X ) such that Eﬀ(X/B) ⊆
P Let L1 , . . . , Lp ∈′ Pic(X)P
′
R+ Li and Eﬀ(X /B) ⊆ R+ Li . For each open set U ⊆ B, by pulling-back we

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

23

get an injective morphism of algebras
Cox(X ′ /B; L′1 , . . . , L′q )(U )

Cox(X/B; E, π ∗ L′1 , . . . , π ∗ L′q , L1 , . . . , Lp )(U ).

Since X/B is a rank r ﬁbration, its Cox sheaf is ﬁnitely generated by Lemma 2.6,
and so Cox(X ′ /B; L′1 , . . . , L′q ) also is ﬁnitely generated by Lemma 2.5.
(RF2). By deﬁnition of a divisorial contraction we have dim X ′ = dim X >
dim B, and ρ(X ′ ) = ρ(X) − 1, so ρ(X ′ /B) = r − 1.
(RF3). The output of any MMP from X ′ also is the output of a MMP from X,
and so is Q-factorial and terminal by assumption.
(RF4) holds by assumption.
(RF5). Follows from the fact that the image of a big divisor by a birational
morphism is still big.
(2). The conditions of (RF2) and (RF4) hold by assumption. (RF3) follows
because any MMP over B ′ also is a MMP over B. For (RF5) we observe that a
curve contracted by X/B ′ also is contracted by X/B, so a divisor relatively ample
for X/B also is relatively ample for X/B ′ . Then we can restrict a decomposition
−KX = η-ample + eﬀective for X/B to get a similar decomposition for X/B ′ .
P Finally we show (RF1). Let L1 , .′ . . , LrPbe Q-divisors on X ′such that Eﬀ(X/B) ⊆
R+ Li , which implies Eﬀ(X/B ) ⊆
R+ Li . Let ϕ : B
B the morphism
given by assumption. Then for each aﬃne open set U ′ ⊂ B ′ , we have
Cox(X/B ′ ; L1 , . . . , Lr )(U ′ ) = Cox(X/B; L1 , . . . , Lr )(ϕ(U ′ )),
and the latter is ﬁnitely generated by assumption. A general ﬁbre of X/B ′ is
rationally connected because it is birational to a ﬁbre of X ′ /B ′ , and it has rational
singularities by Lemma 2.14. We conclude by Lemma 2.6.

Lemma 3.5. Any rank r fibration X/B is pseudo-isomorphic, via a sequence of
antiflips over B, to another rank r fibration Y /B such that −KY is relatively nef
and big over B.
Proof. We run a (−K)-MMP from X over B (recall that by Lemma 2.8, one can
run a D-MMP for an arbitrary divisor D). It is not possible to have a divisorial
contraction, because by Lemma 2.9 the resulting singularity would not be terminal,
in contradiction with assumption (RF3) in the deﬁnition of rank r ﬁbration. If
there exists an extremal class that gives a small contraction, we anti-ﬂip it. After
ﬁnitely many such steps, either −K is relatively nef, or there exists a ﬁbration
such that K is relatively ample. But this last situation contradicts the assumption
(RF5) that the anti-canonical divisor is big over B. So ﬁnally −K is also relatively
nef over B, as expected.

B be a rank r fibration, p ∈ B a general point, and
Corollary 3.6. Let η : Y
Yp = η −1 (p) the fibre over p.
(1) If −KY is relatively nef and big over B, then the curves C ⊂ Yp such that
KYp · C = 0 cover a subset of codimension at least 2 in Yp .
(2) Without assumption on −KY , the fibre Yp is pseudo-isomorphic to a weak
Fano terminal variety, and the curves C ⊂ Yp that satisfy KYp · C > 0 cover a
subset of codimension at least 2 in Yp .
Proof.
(1) By Lemma 2.14 there is a dense open subset U ⊆ B such that for
each p ∈ U the ﬁbre Yp is terminal. As KYp = KY |Yp is big and nef for each p ∈ U ,
[Kol93, Theorem 1.1] gives an integer m such that −mKYp is base-point free for each

24

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

PN × B is a morphism
p ∈ U . In particular, the rational ϕ := |−mKY | × η : Y
−1
on YU := η (U ), and ϕ induces a birational contraction over U from YU onto its
image XU ⊂ PN × U . Let Γ ⊂ YU be the subset covered by curves contracted
P by
YU /U that are trivial against the canonical divisor. Write KYU = ϕ∗ KXU + ai Ei ,
where the Ei run over all the divisors contained in Γ. Each ai is positive because X
is terminal by deﬁnition of a rank r ﬁbration, but since KY is ϕ-nef the Negativity
Lemma also says that ai < 0 for all i. In conclusion Γ does not contain any divisor.
So Γ has codimension at least 2 in YU , hence Γp = Γ ∩ Yp has codimension at least
2 in Yp for a general p.
(2) By Lemma 3.5, the rank r ﬁbration Y /B is pseudo-isomorphic, via a sequence
of antiﬂips over B, to another rank r ﬁbration Y ′ /B such that −KY ′ is relatively
nef and big over B. For a general p ∈ B, the ﬁbre Yp ⊂ Y is pseudo-isomorphic
to the ﬁbre Yp′ ⊂ Y ′ . Denote by F ⊆ Yp (respectively F ′ ⊆ Yp′ ) the closure of
the union of the curves C ⊂ Yp that satisfy C · KYp > 0 (respectively C ⊂ Yp′ that
satisfy C ·KYp′ > 0). We want to prove that the codimension of F in Yp is at least 2.
By (1), the set F ′ has codimension at least 2 in Yp′ . As −KY is relatively big, the
divisor −KYp is big. Hence, for some large m > 0, the base-locus B of −mKYp has
codimension > 2. It remains to see that each curve C ⊂ Yp such that C · KYp > 0 is
contained either in B or is the strict transform of a curve C ′ ⊂ F ′ . If C · KYp > 0,
then C ·(−mKYp ) < 0, so C is contained in B. If C ·KYp = 0 and C is not contained
in B, then C is disjoint from a general member of the linear system |−mKY |, and
so is not aﬀected by the sequence of antiﬂips. Hence, the strict transform of C is
a curve C ′ ⊂ Yp′ that is also disjoint from a general member of |−mKYp′ | whence
C ′ · KYp′ = 0.

3.B. Sarkisov links. The notion of rank 2 ﬁbration recovers the notion of Sarkisov
link:
Lemma 3.7. Let Y /B be a rank 2 fibration. Then Y /B factorises through exactly
two rank 1 fibrations X1 /B1 , X2 /B2 , which both fit into a diagram
Y

B
where the top dotted arrows are sequences of log-flips, and the other four arrows are
morphisms of relative Picard rank 1.
Proof. The diagram comes from the two-rays game associated to Y /B, as explained
in §2.F. Morever, since dim Y > dim B, on each side of the diagram exactly one
of the two descending arrows corresponds to a morphisms Xi
Bi with dim Y =
dim Xi > dim Bi . If Bi = B then Xi /Bi is a rank 1 ﬁbration by Lemma 3.4(1). If
ρ(Bi /B) = 1, we can use Lemma 3.4(2), or alternatively use the following simpler
argument. Since −KXi is relatively big over B we have −KXi · C > 0 for a general
contracted curve of Xi /Bi (write −KXi = A + E with A relatively ample and
E eﬀective, and take C not contained in E.) So −KXi is relatively ample over
Bi , hence Xi /Bi is a terminal Mori ﬁbre space, or equivalently a rank 1 ﬁbration

(Lemma 3.3).
Definition 3.8. In the situation of Lemma 3.7, we say that the birational map
X2 is a Sarkisov link. The diagram is called a Sarkisov diagram. Observe
χ : X1

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

25

that a rank 2 ﬁbration uniquely deﬁnes a Sarkisov diagram, but such a diagram
does not have a canonical “left side” or “right side”. In other words, when χ is
not an involution, the rank 2 ﬁbration only deﬁnes the unordered pair {χ, χ−1 } of
a Sarkisov link and its inverse. Nevertheless we will commit the slight abuse of
speaking of the Sarkisov link associated to a rank 2 ﬁbration.
If a rank r ﬁbration factorises through Y /B, we equivalently say that it factorises
through the Sarkisov link associated to Y /B.
We say that the Sarkisov link associated with a rank 2 ﬁbration Y /B is a Sarkisov
link of conic bundles if dim B = dim X − 1. Observe that in this situation both
X1 /B1 and X2 /B2 are indeed conic bundles in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.12.
Definition 3.9. In the diagram of Lemma 3.7, there are two possibilities for the
sequence of two morphisms on each side of the diagram: either the ﬁrst arrow is
already a Mori ﬁbre space, or it is divisorial and in this case the second arrow is a
Mori ﬁbre space. This gives 4 possibilities, which correspond to the usual deﬁnition
of Sarkisov links of type I, II, III and IV, as illustrated on Figure 1.

X2
div

f ib

χ

X1

B2
f ib

div

X1

B1 = B

X1
div

χ

B1

X2

III

B1 = B = B2

f ib

II

X1

B = B2

X2

χ
f ib

I
f ib

div

f ib

χ

f ib

X2
f ib

B1

B2
B
IV

Figure 1. The four types of Sarkisov links.

Remark 3.10. The deﬁnition of a Sarkisov link in the literature is usually not very
precise about the pseudo-isomorphism involved in the top row of the diagram. An
exception is [CPR00, Deﬁnition 3.1.4(b)], but even there they do not make clear that
there is at most one ﬂop, and that all varieties admit morphisms to a common B.
Observe that our deﬁnition is a priori more restrictive, notably because we assume
the anticanonical divisor of a rank 2 ﬁbration to be relatively big. However one
could check that the deﬁnition is equivalent to the usual one.
It follows from our deﬁnition that there are strong constraints about the sequence of antiﬂips, ﬂops and ﬂips (that is, about the sign of the intersection of
the exceptional curves against the canonical divisor). Precisely, the top row of a

26

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Sarkisov diagram has the following form:
Ym

...

Y0′

Y0

...

Yn′

B
where Y0
Y0′ is a ﬂop over B (or an isomorphism), m, n > 0, and each Yi
Yi+1 ,
′
′
Yi
Yi+1 is a ﬂip over B. This follows from the fact that for Y = Yi or Yi′ , a
general contracted curve C of the ﬁbration Y /B satisﬁes KY · C < 0, hence at least
one of the two extremal rays of the cone NE(Y /B) is strictly negative against KY .
Observe also that both Y0 /B and Y0′ /B are relatively weak Fano (or Fano if the
ﬂop is an isomorphism) over B, as predicted by Lemma 3.5. All other Yi /B and
Yi′ /B are not weak Fano over B, but still each is a rank 2 ﬁbration that uniquely
deﬁnes the Sarkisov diagram.
Example 3.11. We give some simple examples of Sarkisov links of each type in
dimension 3. Here all varieties are smooth, and the pseudo-isomorphisms in the
top rows of the Sarkisov diagrams are isomorphisms. For more complicated (and
typical) examples, see §4.D. Observe that (1) and (2) are examples of Sarkisov links
of conic bundles, while (3) and (4) are not.
X1 be the blow-up of one ﬁbre.
(1) Let X1 /B1 = P1 × P2 /P2 , and let X2
Then X2 = P1 × F1 is a Mori ﬁbre space over the Hirzebruch surface B2 = F1 . The
map χ : X1 /B1
X2 /B2 is a link of type I, or equivalently χ−1 : X2 /B2
X1 /B1
is a link of type III.
(2) Take again X1 /B1 = P1 ×P2 /P2 , let L ⊂ P2 be a line, and Γ = {0}×L ⊂ X1 .
Let Y
X1 be the blow-up of Γ, and denote by D the strict transform on Y of
P1 × L ⊂ X1 . Then there is a divisorial contraction Y
X2 that contracts D
to a curve, and X2 /P2 is still a P1 -bundle (but not a trivial product). The map
X2 /P2 is a link of type II.
χ : X1 /P2
(3) A general cubo-cubic map in Bir(P3 ) provides an example of link of type II
with X1 , X2 equal to P3 and B1 = B2 = pt a point. Indeed the resolution of such
a map consists in blowing-up a smooth curve of genus 3 and degree 6 in X1 , and
then contracting a divisor onto a curve of the same kind in X2 . This is the only
example of a link of type II from P3 to P3 starting with the blow-up of a smooth
curve where the pseudo-isomorphism is in fact an isomorphism: see [Kat87].
(4) Finally, take X1 = X2 = P1 × P2 , B1 = P1 , B2 = P2 , and let X1 /B1 and
X2 /B2 be respectively the ﬁrst and second projection. Then the identity map
id : X1 /B1
X2 /B2 is a link of type IV.
Lemma 3.12. Consider a Sarkisov link of type II:
Y1

ϕ

π1

X1

Y2
π2

χ

X2

B
and denote E1 , E2 the respective exceptional divisors of π1 , π2 . Then ϕ∗ E1 6= E2 .
X2 is a pseudo-isomorphism,
Proof. Assume that ϕ∗ E1 = E2 . Then χ : X1
hence an isomorphism by Lemma 2.18(1). Then Lemma 2.18(2) implies that the

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

27

Y2 also is an isomorphism. The morphisms Y1 /X1
pseudo-isomorphism ϕ : Y1
and Y1 /X2 are then divisorial contractions of the same extremal ray, contradicting
the assumption that the diagram was the result of the two-rays game from Y1 /B.

Lemma 3.13. Let X/B be a rank 2 fibration that factorises through a rank 1
B ′ , with dim X − 1 = dim B ′ > dim B (i.e. through a conic
fibration σ : X
′
bundle X/B ). Then η : B ′
B is a klt Mori fibre space, and in particular for
each p ∈ B, the fibre η −1 (p) is covered by rational curves.
Proof. Note that B ′ is Q-factorial and klt (Proposition 2.10). We need to show
that −KB ′ is η-ample, and then the ﬁbre η −1 (p) is covered by rational curves for
each p ∈ B by Lemma 2.15(1), applied with ∆ = 0.
By assumption ρ(B ′ /B) = 1, so we only need to show that there exists a contracted curve C ⊆ B ′ such that −KB ′ ·C > 0. Since dim B ′ > dim B, the contracted
curves cover B ′ , so we can choose C suﬃciently general in a ﬁbre η −1 (q) of a general
point q ∈ B such that the following holds:
(i) C is not contained in the discriminant locus ∆′ ⊂ B ′ of the conic bundle
σ: X
B′;
(ii) The surface σ −1 (C) does not contain any of the curves C ′ ⊆ X contracted
by η ◦ σ with −KX · C ′ 6 0.
B containing the surface σ −1 (C)
(iii) The ﬁbre F = (η ◦ σ)−1 (q) of η ◦ σ : X
is general, so that (−KX )|F is big
More precisely, for (i) is suﬃces to choose η −1 (q) not contained in the hypersurface
∆′ ⊂ B ′ . We can ensure (ii) because by Corollary 3.6 such curves cover at most a
codimension 2 subset of F . Finally for (iii) recall ﬁrst that since X/B is a rank 2
ﬁbration, −KX is relatively big by (RF5). Moreover the intersection (−KX )|F ·
σ −1 (C) is a non-trivial eﬀective 1-cycle. Indeed, since (−KX )|F is big, we can
take a large integer m > 0 and ﬁnd that (−mKX )|F induces a rational morphism
contracting no curve on the complement of a divisor of F . It suﬃces then to choose
C such that σ −1 (C) is not contained in this divisor.
As in [MM85, Corollary 4.6], we have −4KB ′ ≡ σ∗ (−KX )2 + ∆. Intersecting
with C, we obtain
−4KB ′ · C = σ∗ (−KX )2 · C + ∆ · C
> (−KX )|F · (−KX )|F · σ ∗ C
> 0 by our choice of C.



B be a rank r
3.C. Rank r fibrations with general fibre a curve. Let η : T
ﬁbration, with dim B = dim T −1. If Γ ⊂ B is an irreducible hypersurface, we deﬁne
η ♯ (Γ) ⊆ T to be the Zariski closure of all ﬁbres of dimension 1 over Γ. The reason
for introducing this notion is twofold: ﬁrst B might not be Q-factorial, so we cannot
consider the pull-back of Γ as a Q-Cartier divisor, and second the preimage η −1 (Γ)
might contain superﬂuous components (see Example 3.15).
Now we distinguish two classes of special divisors in T , and we shall show in
Proposition 3.16 below that they account for the relative rank of T /B. Let D ⊂ T
be a prime divisor. If η(D) has codimension at least 2 in B, we say that D is a
divisor of type I. If η(D) is a divisor in B, and the inclusion D ( η ♯ (η(D)) is strict,
we say that D is a divisor of type II.

28

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Remark 3.14. The similarity between the terminology for Sarkisov links and for
special divisors of type I or II is intentional. See Lemma 3.19(2) below.
Example 3.15. We give an example illustrating the deﬁnitions above, which also
shows that the inclusion η ♯ (Γ) ⊆ η −1 (Γ) might be strict. For B an arbitrary smooth
variety, consider Y = P1 × B with Y /B the second projection. Let Γ ⊂ B be any
irreducible smooth divisor, D = P1 × Γ the pull-back of Γ in Y , Γ′ = {t} × Γ ⊂ D
a section and p ∈ D r Γ′ a point. Let T
Y be the blow-up of Γ′ and p, with
′
respective exceptional divisors D and E, and denote again D the strict transform
B is a
of P1 × Γ in T . Then one can check that the induced morphism η : T
rank 3 ﬁbration (see Example 4.33 for the case B = P2 ), E is a divisor of type I,
D ∪ D′ is a pair of divisors of type II, and
η ♯ (Γ) = D ∪ D′ ( D ∪ D′ ∪ E = η −1 (Γ).
B be a rank r fibration, with dim B = dim T − 1.
Proposition 3.16. Let η : T
(1) For any rank r′ fibration T ′ /B ′ such that T /B factorises through T ′ /B ′ , any
divisor contracted by the birational contraction T
T ′ is a divisor of type I or II
for T /B.
(2) Divisors of type II always come in pairs: for each divisor D1 of type II, there
exists another divisor D2 of type II such that
D1 ∪ D2 = η ♯ (η(D1 )) = η ♯ (η(D2 )).
(3) If D1 ∪ D2 is a pair of divisors of type II, and p a general point of η(D1 ) =
η(D2 ), then η −1 (p) = f1 ∪ f2 with fi ⊆ Di , i = 1, 2, some smooth rational curves
satisfying
KT · fi = −1,

Di · fi = −1,

D1 · f2 = D2 · f1 = 1.

(4) Let D ⊂ T be a divisor of type I or II. Then there exists a birational contraction over B
X
B
T
that contracts D and such that ρ(X) = ρ(T ) − 1.
(5) Assume B is Q-factorial. Let d1 (resp. d2 ) be the number of divisors of type I
(resp. the number of pairs of divisors of type II). Then
r = 1 + d1 + d2 .
T ′ , which is neither
Proof. (1). Assume D is a prime divisor contracted by T
of type I nor of type II for T /B. So η(D) ⊂ B is a divisor, and D = η ♯ (η(D)). By
T1 , and then a
running a D-MMP over B we produce a sequence of log-ﬂips T
divisorial contraction π : T1
T2 contracting D. Since a log-ﬂip does not change
the type of special divisors, without loss of generality we can assume T = T1 . Since
η(D) ⊂ B is a divisor, π(D) has codimension 2 in T2 . By Lemma 2.13, a general
ﬁbre f of π is an irreducible curve, and since D = η ♯ (η(D)), we have f = η −1 (p)
for some p ∈ η(D). So f is proportional to a general ﬁbre of η, in contradiction
with the fact that the extremal contraction of f is divisorial.
(2) and (3). Let D1 be a divisor of type II, and let D2 , . . . , Ds be the other
divisors of type II such that η ♯ (η(D1 )) = D1 ∪· · ·∪Ds . By deﬁnition of η ♯ , for each i
the general ﬁbres of Di
η(Di ) are curves. Hence, Γ = η(Di ) is a hypersurface
in B, which does not depend on i. Let p ∈ Γ be a general point, and write
f := η −1 (p) = f1 + · · · + fs with fi a curve in Di . We have Di · η −1 (p) = 0 for each
i, Di · fj > 0 for at least one j by connectedness of f , which gives Di · fi < 0.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

29

Then by running a Di -MMP from T over B, we obtain a sequence of log-ﬂips
that does not aﬀect f , and then a divisorial contraction of Di to a center of codimension 2. By Lemma 2.13, this implies that fi is smooth with KT · fi = Di · fi =
−1. But KT · f = −2, so we conclude that s = 2 as expected. The equality
D1 · f2 = D2 · f1 = 1 follows immediately from Di · f = 0.
To prove (4), we show that the divisor D is covered by curves ℓ such that D·ℓ < 0,
and then we get the expected birational contraction by running a D-MMP. When
D has type II we showed in (3) that D is covered by such curves. Now let D be
a divisor of type I, p a general point in η(D), and let d > 0 be the dimension of
η(D). By deﬁnition of a divisor of type I we have n − 3 > d, where n = dim T .
Now consider a surface S ⊂ T obtained as
S=

n−2−d
\
i=1

Hi ∩

d
\

η ∗ Hj′ ,

j=1

where the Hi are general hyperplane sections of T , and the Hj′ general hyperplane
sections of B through p. By construction, ℓ := S ∩ D is an irreducible curve
contracted to p by η. Moreover η(S) is a surface; indeed each Hi is transverse
to the general ﬁbres of η, which are curves, and n − 2 − d > 1. Since a curve
contracted by a morphism between two surfaces has negative self-intersection, we
obtain D · ℓ = (ℓ · ℓ)S < 0 as expected.
To prove (5), ﬁrst observe that the contraction of a divisor of type I does not
aﬀect the other special divisors, and the contraction of a divisor of type II only
aﬀects the other divisor in the pair, which is not special anymore. So by applying
several times (4), we may assume d1 = d2 = 0, and we want to show r = 1, or
equivalently, that T /B is a terminal Mori ﬁbre space. Now we run a MMP from T
over B. A ﬂip does not change d1 nor d2 , so we can assume that we have a divisorial
contraction or a Mori ﬁbre space. By (1), a divisorial contraction would contradict
B ′ is a Mori ﬁbre space,
our assumption d1 = d2 = 0. On the other hand, if T
′
then both B and B are (n − 1)-dimensional varieties, and B ′ is Q-factorial klt by
Proposition 2.10. If the birational morphism B ′
B is not an isomorphism, it
must contracts at least one divisor D because B is Q-factorial by assumption. By
Lemma 2.16 B ′ /B is a Mori dream space, so we can run a D-MMP from B ′ over B.
After a sequence of D-ﬂips this produces a divisorial contraction, hence a divisor
of type I on T by pulling-back, and again a contradiction. In conclusion, B ′ ∼ B
is an isomorphism and T /B is a Mori ﬁbre space, as expected.

B be a rank r fibration with dim B = dim T −1. Assume
Lemma 3.17. Let η : T
that D is a divisor of type II for T /B, with cov. gon(η(D)) > 1 (i.e. η(D) is not
uniruled). Then for any rank r′ fibration T ′ /B ′ that factorises through T /B, with
dim B ′ = dim T ′ − 1 = dim B, the strict transform of D is a divisor of type II for
T ′ /B ′ .
Proof. Recall that T ′
T is a birational contraction and π : B
B ′ is a morphism with connected ﬁbres between klt pairs (Deﬁnition 3.1(RF4)), which in
our situation is birational as dim(B) = dim(B ′ ). We write D = D1 and by
Proposition 3.16(2) we have a pair D1 ∪ D2 of divisors of type II for T /B, where
Γ = η(D1 ) = η(D2 ) is a divisor of B and D1 ∪ D2 = η ♯ (Γ).
We ﬁrst observe that the image of Γ in B ′ is again a divisor Γ′ ⊂ B ′ . Indeed
otherwise, the divisor Γ ⊂ B is one of the divisors contracted by the birational

30

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

B ′ . By Lemma 2.15(2), this implies that Γ is covered by rational
morphism π : B
curves, in contradiction with our assumption cov. gon(Γ) > 1.
B ′ the rank r′ ﬁbration, one observe that the strict transforms
Writing η ′ : T ′
D̃1 and D̃2 of D1 and D2 are such that D̃1 ∪ D̃2 ⊆ η ♯ (Γ′ ). Hence, D̃1 and D̃2 are
divisors of type II for T ′ /B ′ .

Lemma 3.18. Let T /B be a rank r fibration with dim B = dim T − 1 and B
Q-factorial. Assume that for each divisor D of type II for T /B, we have
cov. gon(η(D)) > 1.
Then T /B factorises through a rank 1 fibration T ′ /B ′ such that T
T ′ is a pseudoisomorphism if and only if T /B does not admit any divisor of type II.
If this holds, then dim B ′ = dim T − 1, B ′
B is a birational morphism and
ρ(B ′ /B) = r − 1.
Proof. If T /B factorises through a rank r′ ﬁbration T ′ /B ′ such that T
T ′ is a
′
′
′
B is birational,
pseudo-isomorphism, ﬁrst observe that ρ(B /B) = r −r , and B
since dim(B) = dim(B ′ ), which follows from
dim(T ) = dim(T ′ ) > dim(B ′ ) > dim(B) = dim(T ) − 1.
If D1 ∪ D2 is a pair of divisors of type II for T /B, then their strict transforms
D̃1 , D̃2 have the same image in B ′ , which is a divisor because B ′
B is birational.
So if T /B admits at least one divisor of type II, then by Proposition 3.16(3) some
ﬁbres of T ′ /B ′ have the form f1 + f2 with f1 , f2 non proportional. In particular
r′ = ρ(T ′ /B ′ ) > 2 and so T ′ /B ′ is not a Mori ﬁbre space.
To prove the converse, we assume that T /B does not admit any divisor of type II,
and we proceed by induction on the number d1 of divisors of type I. If d1 = 0 then by
Proposition 3.16(5), T /B is already a rank 1 ﬁbration, so we just take T ′ /B ′ = T /B.
Now if d1 > 0, by Proposition 3.16(4) there exists a birational contraction over B,
X1
B, which contracts one divisor D of type I. Since the contraction is obT
tained by running a D-MMP, in fact it factorises as T
T1
X1 , where T
T1
is a sequence of D-ﬂips and T1
X1 is a divisorial contraction. Then by induction hypothesis X1 /B factorises through a rank 1 ﬁbration X2 /B2 with X1
X2
a pseudo-isomorphism (here we use Lemma 3.17, which shows that X1 /B does not
admit any divisor of type II). By Lemma 2.17, there exist a pseudo-isomorphism
T1
T2 and a divisorial contraction T2
X2 that makes the diagram on Figure 2 commute. Finally we play the two-rays game T2 /B2 . Since T2 /B2 admits
one divisor of type I and no divisor of type II (by our assumption on the covering
gonality and by Lemma 3.17), the other side of the two-rays game must be a Mori
ﬁbre space, which gives the expected rank 1 ﬁbration T ′ /B ′ .

3.D. Sarkisov links of conic bundles. In this subsection, by applying Proposition 3.16 to the case r = 2, we classify Sarkisov links of conic bundles.
Lemma 3.19. Let Y /B be a rank 2 fibration with dim B = dim Y − 1, and χ the
associated Sarkisov link, well-defined up to taking inverse.
(1) χ has type IV if and only if B is not Q-factorial.
(2) If B is Q-factorial, let d1 (resp. d2 ) be the number of special divisors of type
I (resp. of type II) for Y /B. Then
• χ has type I or III if and only if (d1 , d2 ) = (1, 0).

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

T

T1

T2

T′

X1

X2

B′

31

B2
B
Figure 2
•

χ has type II if and only if (d1 , d2 ) = (0, 1).

Proof. (1). If B is not Q-factorial, then it follows directly that χ has type IV,
from the fact that the base of a terminal Mori ﬁbre space if always Q-factorial
(Proposition 2.10), and by inspection of the diagrams in Figure 1. Conversely,
X2 /B2 is a link of type IV, we show that B is not
assuming that χ : X1 /B1
Q-factorial. As dim B = dim Y − 1, the morphisms B1 /B, B2 /B are birational. If
B is Q-factorial, then B1 /B and B2 /B are birational contractions with respective
B2 sends E1 onto E2 ,
exceptional divisors E1 and E2 . If the birational map B1
then the map is a pseudo-isomorphism, hence an isomorphism by Lemma 2.18(2),
and then X1
X2 also is an isomorphism by Lemma 2.18(1), a contradiction.
Otherwise, the pull-backs of E1 , E2 together with the choice of any ample divisor
give three independent classes in N 1 (Y /B), in contradiction with ρ(Y /B) = 2.
To prove (2), ﬁrst we observe that Proposition 3.16(5) gives d1 + d2 = 1, hence
the two possibilities (d1 , d2 ) = (1, 0) or (0, 1). Recall also from Proposition 3.16(1)
that any divisor contracted by a birational contraction from Y over B must be
of type I or II. If the link χ is of type II, then Lemma 3.12 gives two birational
contractions from Y contracting distinct prime divisors, and this is possible only
in the case (d1 , d2 ) = (0, 1) where there is a pair of divisors of type II available.
Conversely, if (d1 , d2 ) = (0, 1), we have two distinct prime divisors, that we can
contract via two distinct birational contractions (Proposition 3.16(4)). These are
the two starting moves of a 2-ray game which provides a link of type II.

Corollary 3.20. Let χ be a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type I:
Y1

X2

π1

χ

X1

η2

B2
η1

B1

Let E1 be the exceptional divisor of the divisorial contraction π1 . Then η1 ◦ π1 (E1 )
has codimension at least 2 in B1 .
Proof. Follows from the fact that E1 is a divisor of type I for Y1 /B1 .



Remark 3.21. There are examples of link of type IV as in Lemma 3.19(1) only
when dim B > 3, hence dim Y > 4. See the discussion on the two subtypes of
type IV links in [HM13, p. 391 after Theorem 1.5]. For instance, take B1 and B2
that diﬀer by a log-ﬂip, and B the non Q-factorial target of the associated small

32

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

contractions. Then the birational map from (P1 × B1 )/B1 to (P1 × B2 )/B2 induced
by the log-ﬂip is a link of type IV.
Now we focus on the case of Sarkisov links of conic bundles of type II. First we
introduce the following deﬁnition.
Definition 3.22. A marked conic bundle is a triple (X/B, Γ), where X/B is a conic
bundle in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.12, and Γ ⊂ B is an irreducible hypersurface,
not contained in the discriminant locus of X/B (i.e. the ﬁbre of a general point of
Γ is isomorphic to P1 ). The marking of the marked conic bundle is deﬁned to be Γ.
We say that two marked conic bundles (X/B, Γ), and (X ′ /B ′ , Γ′ ) are equivalent
if there exists a commutative diagram
X
B

ψ

X′

θ

B′

where ψ, θ are birational and such that the restriction of θ induces a birational
Γ′ between the markings. In particular, if (X/B, Γ), and (X ′ /B ′ , Γ′ ) are
map Γ
equivalent, then the conic bundles X/B and X ′ /B ′ are equivalent in the sense of
Deﬁnition 2.12.
For each variety Z, we denote by CB(Z) the set of equivalence classes of conic
bundles X/B with X birational to Z and denote, for each class of conic bundles
C ∈ CB(Z) by M(C) the set of equivalence classes of marked conic bundles (X/B, Γ)
where C is the class of X/B.
The next lemma explains how a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type II gives
rise to an equivalence class of marked conic bundles.
Lemma 3.23. Let χ be a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type II between varieties
of dimension n > 2. Recall that χ fits in a commutative diagram of the form
ϕ

Y1

Y2

π1

π2
χ

X1
η1

B

X2
η2

where X1 , X2 , Y1 , Y2 are Q-factorial terminal varieties of dimension n, B is a Qfactorial klt variety of dimension n − 1, ϕ is a sequence of log-flips over B, and
each πi is a divisorial contraction with exceptional divisor Ei ⊂ Yi and centre
Γi = πi (Ei ) ⊂ Xi .
Then there exists an irreducible hypersurface Γ ⊂ B (of dimension n − 2) such
that
(1) for i = 1, 2, the centre Γi = πi (Ei ) has codimension 2 in Xi , and the restriction ηi |Γi : Γi
Γ is birational. In particular, for each i we have ηi ◦ πi (Ei ) = Γ,
and the marked conic bundles (X1 /B, Γ) and (X2 /B, Γ) are equivalent.
(2) Let Y be equal to Y1 , Y2 , or any one of the intermediate varieties in the
sequence of log-flips ϕ. Then E1 ∪ E2 is a pair of divisors of type II for Y /B.
(3) Γ is not contained in the discriminant locus of η1 , or equivalently of η2 ,
which means that a general fibre of ηi : ηi−1 (Γ)
Γ is isomorphic to P1 .
(4) At a general point x ∈ Γi , the fibre of Xi /B through x is transverse to Γi .

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

33

Proof. (1) and (2). By Lemma 3.19, Y1 /B admits no divisor of type I, and exactly
one pair of divisors of type II. By Lemma 3.12 we have ϕ∗ E1 6= E2 , so the birational
X1 and Y1
X2 contract distinct divisors. It follows from
contractions Y1
Proposition 3.16 that the pair of divisors of type II is E1 ∪ E2 . So by deﬁnition
E1 and E2 projects to the same hypersurface Γ ⊂ B. By Proposition 3.16(3) both
Γ are birational, otherwise the ﬁbre in Yi over a general point of
ﬁnite maps Γi
Γ would have more than two components.
(3) and (4) follow from Proposition 3.16(3). Indeed if Γ was in the discriminant
locus of η1 then the preimage in Y1 of a general point p ∈ B would have 3 irreducible
components, instead of 2. Moreover writing f1 ∪f2 the ﬁbre through x, with fi ⊆ Ei ,
the fact that the ﬁbre is transverse to Γi is equivalent to f1 · E2 = f2 · E1 = 1. 
Definition 3.24. By Lemma 3.23(1), to each Sarkisov link of conic bundles of
type II χ : X1
X2 , we can associate the equivalence class of the marked conic
bundle (X1 /B, Γ) given in this lemma. We deﬁne the marking of χ to be Γ ⊂ B.
We say that two Sarkisov links of conic bundles of type II are equivalent if their
corresponding marked conic bundles are equivalent.
We also extend the notion of covering gonality (see §2.G) to Sarkisov links of
conic bundles of type II.
Definition 3.25. Let χ be a Sarkisov of conic bundles of type II between varieties
of dimension n > 3. We deﬁne cov. gon(χ) to be cov. gon(Γ), where Γ is the marking
of χ.
Remark 3.26. If two Sarkisov links of conic bundles of type II are equivalent, then
their markings are birational to each other. In particular the number cov. gon(χ)
only depends on the equivalence class of χ.
The above deﬁnition makes sense if the varieties Xi have dimension > 2, but it
is not a very good invariant if the dimension is 2, as the centre is always a point,
and there is only one class of marked conic bundles, given by a point in the base
of a Hirzebruch surface. However, the analogue deﬁnition over Q or over a ﬁnite
ﬁeld, instead of over C, is interesting even for surfaces.
4. Relations between Sarkisov links
The fact that one can give a deﬁnition of Sarkisov links in terms of relative
Mori dream spaces of Picard rank 2 as in the previous section was independently
observed in [AZ16, §2] and [LZ20, §2.3]. Our next aim is to extend this observation
to associate some relations between Sarkisov links to each rank 3 ﬁbration. First
we deﬁne elementary relations, and then we relate this notion to the work of A.-S.
Kaloghiros about relations in the Sarkisov programme.
4.A. Elementary relations.
Definition 4.1. Let X/B and X ′ /B ′ be two rank r ﬁbrations, and T
X,
X ′ two birational maps from the same variety T . We say that X/B and
T
X ′ /B ′ are T -equivalent (the birational maps being implicit) if there exist a pseudoX ′ and an isomorphism B ∼ B ′ such that all these maps ﬁt
isomorphism X

34

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

in a commutative diagram:
T
X′

X
B

∼

B′

X and T
X ′ as providing a marking
One should think of the maps T
with respect to a prefered model variety T . See §8.F for an illustration of this point
of view. In particular, we do not assume T
X and T
X ′ to be birational
contractions, even if it happens to be the case in the proof of the following lemma.
Lemma 4.2. Let X3 /B3 be a rank 3 fibration that factorises through a rank 1
fibration X1 /B1 . Then up to X3 -equivalence there exist exactly two rank 2 fibrations
that factorise through X1 /B1 , and that are dominated by X3 /B3 .
Proof. We distinguish three cases according to ρ(B1 /B3 ).
If ρ(B1 /B3 ) = 2, then B1 – being the base of a klt Mori ﬁbre space – is Q-factorial
klt (Proposition 2.10), and B1 /B3 is a Mori dream space by Lemma 2.16. The associated two-rays game yields exactly two non-isomorphic B2 , B2′ with ρ(B2 /B3 ) =
X2
ρ(B2′ /B3 ) = 1. Then Lemma 2.17 provides sequences of log-ﬂips over B3 , X1
and X1
X2′ , such that X2 /B2 , X2′ /B2′ are the expected rank 2 ﬁbrations.
If ρ(B1 /B3 ) = 1, then the base B2 of any of the expected rank 2 ﬁbrations must
be equal to B1 or B3 , because by assumption we have morphisms B1
B2
B3 .
By Lemma 3.4(1) X1 /B3 is the ﬁrst expected rank 2 ﬁbration, and up to equivalence it is the only one with base B3 , because any rank 2 ﬁbration X2 /B3 satisﬁes
ρ(X2 ) = ρ(X1 ), so the birational contraction X2
X1 is a pseudo-isomorphism.
Let D be the pull-back on X3 of an ample divisor on X1 . The birational contraction
X1 is a D-MMP over B3 , and as ρ(X3 ) − ρ(X1 ) = 1, it decomposes as a
X3
X3′ , a divisorial contraction X3′
X1′ , and a sequence
sequence of D-ﬂips X3
′
of D-ﬂips X1
X1 . Then Lemma 2.17 provides a sequence of log-ﬂips over B3 ,
X3′
X2 , such that X2
X1 is a divisorial contraction, and by Lemma 3.4 X2 /B1
is the second expected rank 2 ﬁbrations. Any other rank 2 ﬁbration X2′ /B1 satisfying the lemma is equivalent to X2 /B1 , because as before the condition on Picard
X2′ to be a pseudo-isomorphism.
numbers forces X2
If ρ(B1 /B3 ) = 0, then ρ(X3 )−ρ(X1 ) = 2, and B1 = B3 must be the base of any of
the expected rank 2 ﬁbrations. By applying several times Lemma 2.17 we construct
X3′ , such that X3′
X1 is a morphism. The
a sequence of log-ﬂips over B3 , X3
associated two-rays game yields exactly two divisorial contractions X2
X1 and
X2′
X1 . Moreover X2 and X2′ are not pseudo-isomorphic by Lemma 2.19, and
are uniquely determined up to equivalence by Lemma 2.18(2). Then X2 /B1 and
X2′ /B1 are the expected rank 2 ﬁbrations.

Proposition 4.3. Let T /B be a rank 3 fibration. Then there are only finitely many
Sarkisov links χi dominated by T /B, and they fit in a relation
χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 = id.
Proof. Since T /B is a Mori dream space, by Lemma 2.8 there are only ﬁnitely
many rank 1 or 2 ﬁbrations dominated by T /B. We construct a bicolored graph
Γ as follows. Vertices are rank 1 or 2 ﬁbrations dominated by T /B, up to T equivalence, and we put an edge between X2 /B2 and X1 /B1 if X2 /B2 is a rank

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

35

2 ﬁbration that factorises through the rank 1 ﬁbration X1 /B1 . By construction,
two vertices of rank 1 of Γ are at distance 2 if and only if there is a Sarkisov link
between them. Then by Lemmas 3.7 and 4.2 we obtain that Γ is a circular graph,
giving the expected relation.

Definition 4.4. In the situation of Proposition 4.3, we say that
χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 = id
is an elementary relation between Sarkisov links, coming from the rank 3 ﬁbration
T /B. Observe that the elementary relation is uniquely deﬁned by T /B, up to
taking the inverse, cyclic permutations and insertion of isomorphisms.
4.B. Geography of ample models. In this section, we recall some preliminary
material from [BCHM10, HM13, KKL16]. The aim is to explain the construction of
a polyhedral complex attached with the choice of some ample divisors on a smooth
variety, and to state some properties (Proposition 4.14 and Lemma 4.18) that we
will use in the next section to understand relations between Sarkisov links.
Definition 4.5 ([BCHM10, Deﬁnition 3.6.5]). Let Z be a terminal Q-factorial
Y a dominant rational map to a
variety, D be a R-divisor on Z and ϕ : Z
normal variety Y . We take a resolution
p

Z

W
ϕ

q

Y

where W is smooth, p is a birational morphism and q a morphism with connected
ﬁbres. We say that ϕ is an ample model of D if there exists an ample divisor H
on Y such that p∗ D is linearly equivalent to q ∗ H + E where E > 0, and if for each
eﬀective R-divisor R linearly equivalent to p∗ D we have R > E.
If ϕ is a birational contraction, we say that ϕ is a semiample model of D if
H = ϕ∗ D is semiample (hence in particular R-Cartier) and if p∗ D = q ∗ H + E
where E > 0 is q-exceptional.
We recall some properties related to these notions. The ﬁrst lemma gives some
direct consequences of the deﬁnition of a semiample model, we leave the proof to
the reader (hint: use the Negativity Lemma).
Lemma 4.6. Let ϕ : Z
Y be a birational contraction between Q-factorial varieties.
(1) For any DY ∈ Nef(Y ), ϕ is a semiample model of ϕ∗ DY .
(2) If {Di } is a finite collection of classes in N 1 (Z) such that ϕ is a semiample
model of each, then ϕ is a semiample model for any convex combination of the Di .
Y ′ is a birational contraction to a Q-factorial varietiy, and ϕ′ ◦ϕ
(3) If ϕ′ : Y
is the ample model of a divisor D on Z, then ϕ′ is the ample model of ϕ∗ D.
Lemma 4.7 ([BCHM10, Lemma 3.6.6]). Let Z be a terminal Q-factorial variety
and D a R-divisor on Z.
Yi , i = 1, 2, are two ample models of D, there exists an isomor(1) If ϕi : Z
phism θ : Y1 ∼ Y2 such that ϕ2 = θ ◦ ϕ1 .
X is a semiample model of D, the ample model
(2) If a birational map ψ : Z
ϕ: Z
Y exists and ϕ = θ ◦ ψ for some morphism θ : X
Y . Moreover, ψ∗ D =
θ∗ H, where H is the ample divisor H = ϕ∗ D.

36

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Y is the ample model of D if and only if it is a
(3) A birational map ϕ : Z
semiample model of D and ϕ∗ D is ample.
Note that composing with an isomorphism of the target does not change the
notion of ample or semiample model, so it is natural to say that two ample or
semiample models ϕ1 : Z
Y1 , ϕ2 : Z
Y2 are equivalent if there is an isomorphism θ : Y1 ∼ Y2 such that ϕ2 = θ ◦ ϕ1 . Then Lemma 4.7(1) says that up to
equivalence, if an ample model exists then it is unique. This justiﬁes that we can
speak of the ample model of a divisor D.
Definition 4.8. We say that two divisors D and D′ are Mori equivalent if they
have the same ample model.
Remark 4.9. For a Q-divisor, the ample model of D, if it factorises through a
semiample model, is the rational map ϕD associated with the linear system |mD|
for m ≫ 0, whose image is ZD = Proj(⊕m H 0 (Z, mD)), where the sum is over all
positive integers m such that mD is Cartier (see [KKL16, Remark 2.4(ii)]). It does
exist if the ring ⊕m H 0 (Z, mD) is ﬁnitely generated, which is for instance true if
D = KZ +A for some ample Q-divisor A (follows from [BCHM10, Corollary 1.1.2]).
Set-Up 4.10. Let Z be a smooth variety with KZ not pseudo-eﬀective and let
A1 , . . . , As be ample Q-divisors that generate the R-vector space N 1 (Z). Assume
that there exist ample eﬀective Q-divisors A, A′1 , . . . , A′s such that for each i, Ai =
A + A′i . Deﬁne
s
n
X
ai Ai ,
C = D ∈ Div(Z)R D = a0 KZ +
i=1

o
a0 , . . . , as > 0 and D is pseudo-eﬀective .

Then every element of C has an ample model, and the Mori equivalence classes give
a partition
a
C=
Ai .
i∈I

For each i ∈ I we denote by ϕi : Z

Zi the common ample model of all D ∈ Ai .

Let VQ be a Q-vector space, and VR = VQ ⊗ R the associated real vector space.
Recall that a rational polytope in VR is the convex hull of ﬁnitely many points lying
in VQ . In particular, it is convex and compact.
Proposition 4.11. Assume Set-Up 4.10. Then the index set I is finite, the set C
is a cone over a rational polytope, and each Ai is a finite union of relative interiors
of cones over rational polytopes.
Proof. This follows from [HM13, Theorem 3.3]. Indeed, we can apply their result
with (in their notation) the aﬃne subspace V ⊂ Div(Z)R generated by A′1 , . . . , A′s
and −A. Observe that they normalise their divisors by a0 = 1, and they put a logcanonical condition on the log-pairs, so they work with an aﬃne section of a subset
of our cone C. Precisely, by choosing representatives for the Ai with simple normal
crossing support and very small positive coeﬃcients, we can obtain all divisors of
the form
s
X
ai
D = a0 (KZ +
Ai )
a
i=1 0

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

37

for a0 greater than a given constant ε0 > 0. When ε0 is suﬃciently small the
missing divisors are all ample, so our cone C minus a small portion of the chamber
containing the ample divisors correspond to their cone. In a moment we will work
up to numerical equivalence, and this awkward issue will disappear: see Set-Up 4.15
and Remark 4.16.

We say that a Mori chamber has maximal dimension if it spans N 1 (Z).
Recall that a fan is a collection of rational strongly convex polyhedral cones,
such that each face (of any dimension) of a cone is also part of the collection, and
such that the intersection of two cones is a face of each.
Lemma 4.12. The closures of the chambers of maximal dimension yield a fan
structure on C, which is the same as the fan structure considered in [KKL16, Theorems 3.2 & 4.2].
Proof. The fan structure in [KKL16], which slightly generalises [ELM+ 06, Theorem
4.1], S
is constructed as follows. One considers the coarsest polyhedral decomposition
C = Ci such that for any geometric valuation Γ, the asymptotic order function oΓ
is linear in restriction to each Ci .`
Moreover this decomposition is a fan by convexity
of the oΓ . Then one writes C = A′i as the disjoint union of the relative interiors
of the faces of this fan. The Mori chamber Aj of ample divisors corresponds to one
of the A′i , since its closure Aj = Nef(Z) ∩ C is characterised as the set of divisors
in C on which all oΓ vanish. Then the result follows from [KKL16, Lemma 2.11]
combined with the following fact, which can be extracted from the proof of [KKL16,
Corollary 4.4] or [HM13, Theorem 3.3(4)]: for each Mori chamber Ai of maximal
Zi , the closure of Ai is
dimension, associated to a birational contraction ϕi : Z
the intersection of C with the closed convex cone generated by ϕ∗i Nef(Zi ) and by
the exceptional divisors of ϕi .

Notation 4.13. We will usually denote F a face of the fan C given by Lemma
4.12, and F̊ its relative interior. We emphasise that [HM13] and [KKL16] use the
notation Ai in a non compatible way, so the reader should be aware of the following
convention when checking these references.
• First, our Ai are the same as in [HM13], and are the Mori chambers deﬁned
above.
Ďi the closure of Ai in the ambiant real vector space, these are the
• We denote A
Ci of [HM13].
• The relative interior F̊ of faces are the Ai of [KKL16] (and also the A′ in the
i
proof of Lemma 4.12).
Ďi in [KKL16].
• Our faces F are the A
Proposition 4.14. Assume Set-Up 4.10. Then, the following holds (each i, j is
always assumed to be in I in the next statements):
(1) For each i, the following are equivalent:
(i) The image of Ai in N1 (Z) has non-empty interior;
(ii) ϕi is birational and Zi is Q-factorial;
(iii) ϕi is a birational contraction that is the output of a (KZ + ∆)-MMP for
some KZ + ∆ ∈ C;
Ďj is a cone over a rational polytope, and we have
(2) If ϕj is birational, then A
Ďj = {D ∈ C | ϕj is a semiample model of D}.
A

38

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Ďj ∩ Ai 6= ∅, there exists a morphism ϕji : Zj
Zi with
(3) If i, j are such that A
connected fibres such that ϕi = ϕji ◦ ϕj . If moreover ϕj is birational, we have
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi = {D ∈ A
Ďj | ϕj∗ D · C = 0 for each C ∈ N1 (Zj /Zi )}.
A
(4) For each i, the variety Zi is normal, and there exists an effective Q-divisor
∆i such that (Zi , ∆i ) is klt. In particular, it has rational singularities.
(5) For each numerically equivalent divisors D, D′ ∈ C and each i, we have
Ďi ⇐⇒ D′ ∈ A
Ďi .
D ∈ Ai ⇐⇒ D′ ∈ Ai
and
D∈A
Proof. (1). [HM13, Theorem 3.3(3)].
(2). [KKL16, Theorem 4.2(1)&(4)].
(3). The ﬁrst claim is [HM13, Theorem 3.3(2)] or [KKL16, Theorem 4.2(3)] The
second claim follows from (2) and the Negativity Lemma.
(4). The variety Zi is normal by deﬁnition of an ample model. If Ai satisﬁes
the equivalent conditions of (1), then Zi is terminal as the output of a (KZ + ∆)MMP. Otherwise, there exists a chamber Aj satisfying the conditions of (1), such
Ďj ∩ Ai 6= ∅. So Zj is Q-factorial and terminal, by (3) there is a contraction
that A
ϕji : Zj
Zi , and so the claim follows from Proposition 2.11 and Remark 4.9.
(5). [KKL16, Lemma 3.11] is the big case. In the non-big case, we pick Aj of
Ďj ∩ Ai 6= ∅. By (3) there exists ϕji : Zj
maximal dimension such that A
Zi , so
we reduce to the big case by pulling back divisors to Zj .

Set-Up 4.15. Let Z be a smooth variety with KZ not pseudo-eﬀective and let
A1 , . . . , As be ample Q-divisors that generate the R-vector space N 1 (Z). We still
denote
s
n
X
ai Ai ,
C = D ∈ N 1 (Z) D = a0 KZ +
i=1

o
a0 , . . . , as > 0 and D is pseudo-eﬀective .

N 1 (Z) of the cone from
This is the image under the natural map Div(Z)R
Proposition 4.14, for some choice of ample eﬀective Q-divisors A, A′1 , . . . , A′s such
′
that
Proposition 4.14(5), the decomposition C =
` for each i, Ai ≡ A + Ai . By
1
A
(hence
also
its
image
in
N
(Z))
does not depend on such a choice of eﬀeci
i∈I
tive representatives. So from now on we will work directly in the ﬁnite dimensional
R-vector space N 1 (Z), and use the notation C, Ai in this context only.
Remark 4.16. One advantage of working up to numerical equivalence is that
we can always assume that the pairsP(Z, ∆) in Set-Up 4.15 are klt with arbitrary
s
small discrepancies, where ∆ = a10 i=1 ai Ai . Indeed, by expressing each Ai as
PN
Ai ≡ N1 j=1 Hi,j for some large integer N and some general members Hi,j ∈ |Ai |,
we can ensure that the union of the supports of the Hi,j is a simple normal crossing
divisor and that all coeﬃcients appearing in the convex combination ∆ are positive
and very small.
Assuming Set-Up 4.15, we introduce some terminology. Recall that we say that
a chamber Ai has maximal dimension if it has non-empty interior in N 1 (Z), which
corresponds to the equivalent assertions of Proposition 4.14(1). We say that a
chamber Ai is big if all divisors (or equivalently, one divisor) in Ai are big. By the
codimension of a face in C we always mean the codimension in N 1 (Z) of the smallest

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

39

vector subspace containing it. We will usually denote F r a face of codimension r
in C, and F̊ r its relative interior.
We denote by ∂ + C the set of non-big divisors in C. As ∂ + C is the intersection
of C with the boundary of the pseudo-eﬀective cone, the set ∂ + C is a closed subset
of the boundary of C. We have Ai ⊆ ∂ + C if dim Zi < Z and Ai ⊆ C r ∂ + C if
dim Zi = Z.
By deﬁnition, the cone C ⊂ N 1 (Z) is equal to the intersection of two convex
Ď
closed cones, namely C = C ′ ∩ Eﬀ(Z)
with C ′ the convex cone generated by KZ and
the Ai . We will say that a face F ⊆ C is inner if it meets the interior of C ′ . In
particular, F is inner if for any D′ ∈ F̊ , there exists a neighborhood V of D′ in
Ď
N 1 (Z) such that Eﬀ(Z)
∩ V = C ∩ V . Equivalently, a face is inner if it meets either
the interior of C or the relative interior of ∂ + C.
Ď
Remark 4.17. If F is an inner face, then for any D ∈ Eﬀ(Z)
and any D′ ∈ F̊ , we
have D′ + εD ∈ C for suﬃciently small ε > 0. Indeed with the notation above one
Ď
can choose V ⊂ C ′ a neighborhood of D′ such that Eﬀ(Z)
∩ V = C ∩ V . Then it
suﬃces to choose ε such that D′ + εD ∈ V . Since D, D′ are both pseudo-eﬀective,
Ď
the segment [D, D′ ] also is contained in the convex cone Eﬀ(Z),
and the claims
follows.
Lemma 4.18.
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi for some chamber
(1) Any inner face F r ⊆ C is of the form F r = Fji := A
Aj of maximal dimension, and some chamber Ai containing F̊ r .
(2) If Fji is such an inner face, then the vector space
Vji := {D ∈ N 1 (Z) | ϕj∗ D · C = 0 for each C ∈ N1 (Zj /Zi )}
is spanned by Ex(ϕj ) and ϕ∗i Nef(Zi ), has codimension ρ(Zj /Zi ) in N 1 (Z), and Vji
is also the vector space spanned by Fji .
Proof. (1) follows from [KKL16, Theorem 4.2(2)].
(2) can be extracted from the proof of [HM13, Theorem 3.3(4)]. (In particular
the k in their statement is the number of prime divisors in Ex(ϕj )).

Notation 4.19. Lemma 4.18(1) provides the following indexing system for faces.
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi , for some chamber Aj of maximal
Any inner face can be written Fji := A
dimension and some chamber Ai such that F̊ ji ⊆ Ai . The index i is uniquely
deﬁned by this last property, but there might be several possible choices for the
index j. For instance, if we have a log-ﬂip from Zj to Zk , over a non Q-factorial
Zi , we have Fji = Fki .
Example 4.20. We illustrate the deﬁnition of Mori chambers and faces on the
P2 at two distinct points p1 and p2 . Using
simple example of the blow-up Z
the notation above, there are eight Mori chambers A0 , . . . , A7 , corresponding to
morphisms ϕi : Z
Zi , i = 0, . . . , 7 to the varieties Z0 = Z, Z1 = Z2 = F1 ,
Z3 = F0 , Z4 = P2 , Z5 = Z6 = P1 and Z7 = pt in the commutative diagram
P2 are
on Figure 3 (ϕ0 being the identity). The two morphisms ϕ14 , ϕ24 : F1
2
the blow-ups of p1 , p2 ∈ P respectively, and ϕ1 , ϕ2 : Z
F1 are the blow-ups of
the images of p1 and p2 . The morphisms ϕ15 , ϕ26 : F1
P1 correspond to the
1
1
1
F0 = P × P .
P -bundle of F1 and ϕ3 = ϕ5 × ϕ6 : Z
We give the detail of the relation between these Mori chambers and the faces
of the cone C in Figure 3. We denote by E1 , E2 ⊂ Z the curves contracted onto

40

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

p1 , p2 ∈ P2 respectively, by L the strict transform of the line through p1 and p2 ,
and by H = L + E1 + E1 the pull-back of a general line. The cone Eﬀ(Z) is the
closed convex cone generated by E1 , E2 and L, which are the only (−1)-curves on
Z, while the cone Nef(Z) is the closed convex cone generated by H, H − E1 and
H − E2 . The anti-canonical divisor −KZ = 3H − E1 − E2 = 3L + 2E1 + 2E2 is
ample. In the ﬁgure we represent an aﬃne section of the cone, and all divisors
must be understood up to rescaling by an adequate homothety: for instance this is
really − 17 KZ that is in the same aﬃne section as E1 , E2 and L, but for simplicity
we write −KZ . Since −KZ is ample, one can choose the Ai in Set-Up 4.10 such
that −KZ is contained in the cone generated by the Ai , and then C = Eﬀ(Z).
Ďi , i = 0, . . . , 4 are the faces of maximal dimension, the faces
The faces Fi0 = A
r
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi .
Fji (written Fji where r is the codimension as usual) are as above Fji = A
Every face of C = Eﬀ(Z) is inner. We can notice that the ample chamber A0 is
the only open one and that A7 is the only closed one. Moreover, as a hint that
the behaviour of non maximal Mori chambers can be quite erratic, observe that
Ď7 is not connected, and that neither A
Ď5 nor A
Ď6 is a single face.
A7 = A
This example will be continued in Example 4.26 below.
Z0 = Z
ϕ1

Z1 = F1

ϕ3

ϕ14

Z3 = F0
ϕ35

ϕ15

Z5 = P1

ϕ2

ϕ24

ϕ26

Z4 = P2
ϕ47

ϕ57

Z2 = F1

ϕ36

Z6 = P1
ϕ67

A0
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7

F̊ 00 .
F̊ 01 ∪ F̊ 101 .
F̊ 02 ∪ F̊ 102 .
F̊ 03 ∪ F̊ 103 .
F̊ 04 ∪ F̊ 114 ∪ F̊ 124 ∪ F̊ 204
F̊ 115 ∪ F̊ 135 ∪ F̊ 205 .
F̊ 126 ∪ F̊ 136 ∪ F̊ 206 .
F̊ 147 ∪ F̊ 217 ∪ F̊ 227 ∪ F̊ 237 .

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

Z7 = pt

2
F37

L
•

•
1
F35

1
F36

F30 = Ě
A3

L + E2 •
= H − E1

−K
• Z
•
H

• L + E1
= H − E2

1
F03

2
•
F05
1
F01
1
F15

F10 = Ě
A1
1
F14

E2 •

• E1

2
•
F17

F00 = Ě
A0

•

2
F04

2
• F06
1
F02

F20 = Ě
A2

F40 = Ě
A4

1
F26

1
F24

1
F47

2
• F27

Figure 3. Ample models and faces in Example 4.20.
As a warm-up before the next section, we let the reader check that Proposition 4.14 implies the following facts about codimension 1 faces of C.
Remark 4.21. Let F 1 be an inner codimension 1 face of the cone C ⊆ N 1 (Z) from
Set-Up 4.15, and Ai the Mori chamber containing F̊ 1 given by Lemma 4.18(1).

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

41

Then F 1 is contained in the closure of exactly one or two chambers of maximal
dimension, depending whether F 1 is in the boundary of C or not.
Ďj for a unique chamber Aj of maximal dimension,
(1) Assume ﬁrst that F 1 ⊂ A
1
so F is in the boundary of C. Moreover since F 1 is inner we have F 1 ⊆ ∂ + C,
Zi satisﬁes ρ(Zj /Zi ) = 1.
so dim Zi < dim Zj . The associated map ϕji : Zj
Moreover −KZj is relatively ample, so that Zj /Zi is a terminal Mori ﬁbre space
([Kal13, Lemma 3.2], see also Proposition 4.25 below for a generalisation).
Ďj ∩ A
Ďk for some distinct chambers
(2) Now consider the case where F 1 = A
Aj , Ak of maximal dimension. We distinguish two subcases.
(i) If Ai is of maximal dimension, up to renumbering we can assume Ai = Ak , so
Ďj ∩Ai ⊇ F̊ 1 . In this situation both Zj and Zi are Q-factorial and terminal, so
that A
the morphism ϕji : Zj
Zi with relative Picard rank 1 given by Proposition 4.14
is a divisorial contraction.
(ii) Finally if Ai is not of maximal dimension, both birational morphisms ϕji
and ϕki given by Proposition 4.14 have relative Picard 1 and target variety Zi
which is not Q-factorial, so ϕji and ϕki are small contractions. By uniqueness of
Zk must be the associated log-ﬂip.
the log-ﬂip, the induced birational map Zj
Remark 4.22. Let ∆ ∈ C be an ample divisor. Then the successive chambers
of maximal dimension that are cut by the segment [∆, KZ ] can be interpreted as
successive steps in a KZ -MMP from Z. In [BCHM10, Remark 3.10.10] this is
called a KZ -MMP with scaling of ∆. Moreover by perturbing ∆ we can assume
that the segment is transverse to the polyhedral decomposition. Then as mentioned
in Remark 4.21, each intermediate face of codimension 1 that the segment meets
corresponds either to a ﬂip or to a divisorial contraction, and the last codimension 1
face in the boundary of the pseudo-eﬀective cone corresponds to a Mori ﬁbre space
structure on the output of the MMP.
4.C. Generation and relations in the Sarkisov programme. The goal of
this section is to prove Theorem 4.28, which will allow us to deﬁne the group
homomorphisms of the main theorems. The main technical intermediate step is
Proposition 4.25, which explains the relation between our notion of rank r ﬁbration
and the combinatorics of the non-big boundary of the cone C as given in [Kal13].
The following lemma can be extracted from [HM13, Lemma 4.1] and [Kal13,
Proposition 3.1(ii)].
Proposition 4.23. Let t > 2 be an integer. For i = 1, . . . , t, let ηi : Xi
Bi be a
terminal Mori fibre space and let θi : Xi
Xi+1 be a birational map (here θt goes
from Xt to Xt+1 := X1 ). We assume moreover that θt ◦ · · · ◦ θ1 = idX1 .
Xi ,
There exists a smooth variety Z, together with birational morphisms πi : Z
i = 1, . . . , t, and ample Q-divisors A1 , . . . , Am on Z such that the following hold:
(1) The divisors A1 , . . . , Am generate the R-vector space N 1 (Z).
(2) For i = 1, . . . , t, the birational morphism πi and the morphism ηi ◦ πi are
ample models of an element of
m
o
n
X
Ď
C = a0 K Z +
ai Ai a0 , . . . , am > 0 ∩ Eﬀ(Z).
i=1

(3) For i = 1, . . . , t we have θi ◦ πi = πi+1 (with πt+1 := π1 ). We then have a
commutative diagram as in Figure 4.

42

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

θ1
X2
θ2
X3

Xt

π1

πt

π2
Z

π3
π4

θ3

θt

X1

X4
θ4

π5

θt−1

πt−1

..

Xt−1
.

X5

Figure 4. The commutative diagram in Proposition 4.23
In the following discussion (and until Corollary 4.27) we work with the setting
given by Proposition 4.23, that is, the commutative diagram of Figure 4 and an
associated choice of cone C ⊂ N 1 (Z). Also recall that ∂ + C ⊂ C is the subset of
non-big divisors.
Lemma 4.24. ∂ + C is the cone over a polyhedral complex homeomorphic to a disc
or a sphere of dimension ρ(Z) − 2.
Proof. Consider the auxiliary cone C ′ of classes of the form
X
ai Ai where ai > 0 for all i.

In other words, C ′ is the cone over the convex hull of the Ai , and in particular C ′ is
a closed subcone of the ample cone of Z. Let ∂ + C ′ be the points in the boundary
of C ′ that are visible from the point KZ . Formally:
∂ + C ′ = {D ∈ C ′ | [D, KZ ] ∩ C ′ = {D}} .
By an elementary convexity argument (using the fact that a closed convex set with
non empty interior is homeomorphic to a ball), this cone ∂ + C ′ is homeomorphic
to the cone over a sphere or a disc of dimension ρ(Z) − 2, the ﬁrst case occurring
precisely if −KZ is in the interior of C ′ . Then we have a continuous map
π : ∂+C ′
D

∂ +C
π(D)

that sends D to the intersection of the segment [D, KZ ] with ∂ + C. The intersecĎ
tion exists because KZ 6∈ Eﬀ(Z),
while D ∈ C, and the intersection is unique by
convexity of C. The injectivity of π follows directly from the deﬁnition of ∂ + C ′ , and
π is also surjective, because by deﬁnition the cone C in contained in the cone over
the convex hull of KZ and the Ai , which is the same as the cone over the convex
hull of KZ and C ′ . In conclusion π is a homeomorphism, as expected.

Recall that the codimension of a face is taken relatively to the ambient space
N 1 (Z), so in particular if F k ⊆ ∂ + C we have k > 1.
By Remark 4.21, a face F 1 of codimension 1 in ∂ + C corresponds to a Mori ﬁbre
space, or equivalently a rank 1 ﬁbration (Lemma 3.3). More generally, we now
prove that inner codimension r faces in ∂ + C correspond to rank r ﬁbrations.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

43

Proposition 4.25. Let F r ⊆ ∂ + C be an inner codimension r face. By Lemma 4.18(1),
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi with Aj a chamber of maximal dimension and Ai ⊆ ∂ + C
we can write F r = A
the Mori chamber containing the interior of F r . Then
(1) The associated morphism ϕji : Zj
Zi is a rank r fibration.
(2) If F s ⊆ ∂ + C is an inner codimension s face and F r ⊆ F s , then the rank r
fibration associated to F r from (1) factorises through the rank s fibration associated
to F s .
Proof. (1) We check the assertions of Deﬁnition 3.1:
(RF2). By Lemma 4.18(2), ϕji : Zj
Zi is a morphism with relative Picard
rank equal to r, and dim Zi < dim Zj because Ai ⊆ ∂ + C.
(RF4). This is Proposition 4.14(4).
Ďj ∩ Ai . By Proposi(RF5). To show that −KZj is ϕji -big, we take D ∈ A
tion 4.14(2), we have D = KZ + ∆ for some ample divisor ∆, and ϕj∗ D ∈ Nef(Zj )
is ϕji -trivial. By Lemma 4.7(3) ϕj is a semiample model of any element of Aj .
So ϕj is a birational contraction and ϕj∗ KZ = KZj , which we rewrite as −KZj =
ϕj∗ ∆ − ϕj∗ D. Since ∆ is ample and ϕj is birational, the divisor ϕj∗ ∆ is big , which
means we can write it as a sum of an ample and an eﬀective divisor. So −KZj is
the sum of a ϕji -ample and an eﬀective divisor and hence is ϕji -big by Lemma 2.1.
(RF1). We prove that Zj /Zi is a Mori dream space:
(MD1) and (MD2). By Proposition 4.14, Zj is Q-factorial terminal, Zi has
rational singularities and dim Zj > dim Zi . A general ﬁbre of ϕji has rational
singularities by Lemma 2.14. By Remark 4.16 we can assume that (Z, ∆), and also
(Zj , ϕj∗ ∆), are klt pairs. By Proposition 4.14(3) the divisor KZj + ϕj∗ ∆ = ϕj∗ D
is ϕji -trivial. We have just seen that −KZj is ϕji -big. Then it follows from Lemma
2.15(1) that a general ﬁbre of ϕji is rationally connected.
(MD3). We show that the nef cone Nef(Zj /Zi ) is generated by ﬁnitely many
semiample divisors.
We take Dj ∈ Nef(Zj ) and set D = ϕ∗j Dj ∈ N 1 (Z). We choose D′ ∈ F̊ r ⊆
Ďj . By Remark 4.17, for t ≫ 0 we have D + tD′ ∈ C. By Lemma 4.6(1)&(2),
Ai ∩ A
Ďj . Since ϕj∗ D′ is ϕji -trivial by Proposition 4.14(3), we get that
we have D+tD′ ∈ A
′
ϕj∗ (D + tD ) = Dj + tϕj∗ D′ is equivalent to Dj in Nef(Zj /Zi ). Hence, any class in
Ďj . We conclude that Nef(Zj /Zi )
Nef(Zj /Zi ) can be represented by a divisor in ϕj∗ A
is generated by ﬁnitely many divisors of the form ϕj∗ (KZ + ∆), where KZ + ∆ runs
Ďj , and the ϕj∗ (KZ + ∆) are
over the vertices of a polytope generating the cone A
semiample by Proposition 4.14(2).
(MD4). Let Dj ∈ IntMov(Zj ), in particular Dj is big. Set D = ϕ∗j Dj and pick
′
Ďj . By Remark 4.17, for t ≫ 0 we have D̂ := D + tD′ ∈ C.
D ∈ F̊ r ⊆ Ai ∩ A
Replacing D by an arbitrary close class in C we can assume that D̂ = D + tD′ ∈
Ak where Ak is of maximal dimension. We also replace Dj by ϕj∗ D, which is
a small perturbation of the initial class hence still in IntMov(Zj ). We keep the
same notation for simplicity. (Observe that after perturbation we lose the property
D = ϕ∗j Dj , but we will not need it). By ﬁniteness of the chamber decomposition,
Ďk ∩Ai .
Ak does not depend on the choice of the large real t, which also implies D′ ∈ A
So we have Fji ⊆ Fki , hence a similar inclusion for the vector subspaces spanned
by these faces. By Lemma 4.18(2) this implies that all divisors contracted by ϕj are
also contracted by ϕk , hence fk := ϕk ◦ ϕ−1
Zk is a birational contraction.
j : Zj

44

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

As above Dj and D̂j := Dj + tϕj∗ D′ represent the same class in N 1 (Zj /Zi ).
Moreover by Lemma 4.7(2) we have ϕj∗ D′ = ϕ∗ji Di , and the pull-back of an ample
Ę j ). So we have D̂j ∈ IntMov(Zj ),
divisor being movable we have ϕj∗ D′ ∈ Mov(Z
and ϕj∗ D̂ = D̂j with D̂ ∈ Ak .
Zk is the ample model of
By Lemma 4.6(3), the birational contraction fk : Zj
D̂j . Since D̂j ∈ IntMov(Zj ), its ample model fk is a pseudo-isomorphism. Finally
D̂j ∈ fk∗ (Ample(Zk /Zi )) where Zk is Q-factorial, and by taking closures we obtain
[
Ę j /Zi ) ⊆
Mov(Z
fl∗ (Nef(Zl /Zi ))

for some ﬁnite collection of pseudo-isomorphisms fl : Zj
Zl over Zi to Q-factorial
varieties.
Zl
For the other inclusion, we note that for any pseudo-isomorphism fl : Zj
over Zi , we have fl∗ Ample(Zl /Zi ) ⊂ Mov(Zl /Zi ) and the claim follows by taking
closures.
(RF3). Let Dj ∈ N 1 (Zj ) be a divisor. We now show that the output of any
Dj -MMP from Zj over Zi can be obtained by running a KZ -MMP from Z. Let
Ďj . Then by Proposition 4.14(2), ϕj is a semiample model of D′ , ϕi is
D′ ∈ F r ⊆ A
its ample model, and by Lemma 4.7(2) ϕj∗ D′ = ϕ∗ji Hi for some ample divisor Hi
on Zi . To run a Dj -MMP from Zj over Zi , we pick Hj ∈ Ample(Zj ) and consider
all pseudo-eﬀective convex combinations Dt := ε(tDj + (1 − t)Hj ) + ϕ∗ij Hi for some
1 ≫ ε > 0. The set of the ϕ∗j Dt is a segment in a small neighborhood of D′ inside
C. Therefore, any intermediate variety in this Dj -MMP over Zi can be obtained by
running a KZ -MMP from Z. In particular the output of this MMP has the form
Proj H 0 (Zj , Dt0 ) = Proj H 0 (Z, ϕ∗j Dt0 ) for some t0 ∈ (0, 1), and by Proposition
4.14(1), this is a Q-factorial and terminal variety, as expected.
(2) (Analogous to [LZ20, Proposition 3.10(2)]): Let Ai , Ak ⊆ ∂ + C be the chambers containing the interior of F r , F s respectively. By Lemma 4.18(1) there exist
Ďj ∩ A
Ďi and F s = A
Ďl ∩ A
Ďk . Since
maximal chambers Aj and Al such that F r = A
r
s
Ď
moreover F ⊆ F implies that Al ∩ Ai 6= ∅, by Proposition 4.14(3) we have a
commutative diagram induced by the maps from Z:
Zj

Zl

Zi

Zk

We want to prove that the birational map Zj
Zl is a birational contraction.
Let D ∈ F̊ r ⊆ Ai . There exists an ample class ∆ ∈ C and t1 > 0 such that
D = (1 − t1 )∆ + t1 KZ . For t1 > t0 > 0 suﬃciently close to t0 , any chamber of
Ě
maximal dimension Aj0 such that (1 − t0 )∆ + t0 KZ ∈ Aj0 satisﬁes F r ⊂ A
j0 . Now
′
′
there exists a small perturbation ∆ of ∆ such that the segment [∆ , KZ ] meets
successively a chamber Aj0 and then the chamber Al . Indeed, t1 > t0 and the
ordering is preserved under a small perturbation. Up to replacing j by this j0 ,
by Remark 4.22 this segment corresponds to a KZ -MMP with scaling of ∆′ , and
provides the expected birational contraction from Zj to Zl .

Example 4.26. On Figure 5 we label the boundary faces from Example 4.20 with
their corresponding rank r ﬁbration, as given by Proposition 4.25 (r = 1 or 2 here).
We also indicate the images of ample models corresponding to chambers of maximal
dimension.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

2
F37

Z3 /Z7 = pt

•

•

1
F35

1
F36

Z3 /Z5 = P1

F30 = Ě
A3
2
2
•
• F06
F05
0
Ě
1 F0 = A0
1
F01
F02

F10 = Ě
A1
1
F14

2
F17

•

•

2
F04

F20 = Ě
A2

F40 = Ě
A4
1
F47

Z3 /Z6 = P1
Z3 = F0

1
F03

1
F15

45

Z0 /Z5 = P1 •
1
F26

Z1 /Z5 = P1

• Z0 /Z6 = P1

Z0 = Z

Z1 = F1

1
F24

•

Z2 = F1

Z2 /Z6 = P1

Z4 = P2
2
• F27

•
Z1 /Z7 = pt

Z4 /Z7 = pt

•
Z2 /Z7 = pt

Figure 5. rank r ﬁbrations in Example 4.20.
Applying Proposition 4.25 to faces of codimension 2 or 3, we obtain the following
corollary. Observe that the ﬁrst point is well known (see e.g. [HM13, Theorem 3.7]),
and the second one is a natural generalisation.
Corollary 4.27.
(1) If the intersection Fi1 ∩Fj1 of non-big codimension 1 faces has codimension 2,
then there is a Sarkisov link between the corresponding Mori fibre spaces.
(2) Let F 3 be a face in ∂ + C of codimension 3 and T /B be the associated rank 3
fibration, as given in Proposition 4.25. Then the elementary relation associated to
T /B corresponds to the finite collection of codimension 1 faces F11 , . . . , Fs1 contain1
ing F 3 , and ordered such that Fj1 and Fj+1
share a codimension 2 face for all j
(where indexes are taken modulo s).
Proof. (1) By Proposition 4.25 there is a rank 2 ﬁbration corresponding to the
codimension 2 face F 2 := Fi1 ∩ Fj1 that factorises through the rank 1 ﬁbrations
associated to Fi1 and Fj1 . This is exactly the deﬁnition of a Sarkisov link (Deﬁnition 3.8).
(2) This is just a rephrasing of Proposition 4.3, using Proposition 4.25 to associate a rank 1 or 2 ﬁbration dominated by T /B to each codimension 1 or 2 face
containing F 3 , and using (1) to associate a Sarkisov link to each pair of codimension
1 faces sharing a common codimension 2 face.

Let X/B be a terminal Mori ﬁbre space. We denote by BirMori(X) the groupoid
of birational maps between terminal Mori ﬁbre spaces birational to X. The group
of birational selfmaps Bir(X) is a subgroupoid of BirMori(X). The motivation for
introducing the notion of elementary relation is the following result. The ﬁrst part
is a reformulation of [HM13, Theorem 1.1]. The second part is strongly inspired
by [Kal13, Theorem 1.3], observe however that our notion of elementary relation is
more restrictive, and so Theorem 4.28(2) does not follow from [Kal13].
In the statement we use the formalism of presentations by generators and relations for groupoids. This is very similar to the more familiar setting of groups: we
have natural notions of a free groupoid, and of a normal subgroupoid generated by
a set of elements. We refer to [Bro06, §8.2 and 8.3] for details.
Theorem 4.28. Let X/B be a terminal Mori fibre space.

46

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

(1) The groupoid BirMori(X) is generated by Sarkisov links and automorphisms.
(2) Any relation between Sarkisov links in BirMori(X) is generated by elementary relations.
Proof. (1) is the main result of [HM13]. The idea of the proof is to take Z a resoluX2 /B2 , and to consider the cone C with
tion of a given birational map ϕ : X1 /B1
a choice of ample divisors as given by Proposition 4.23 (applied with t = 2, θ1 = ϕ,
θ2 = ϕ−1 ). Then one takes a general 2-dimensional aﬃne slice of C that passes
through the codimension 1 faces associated to X1 /B1 and X2 /B2 . The intersection of this slice with ∂ + C is a polygonal path corresponding to successive pairwise
neighbour codimension 1 faces, and by Corollary 4.27(1) this gives a factorisation
of ϕ into Sarkisov links.
(2). The proof is essentially the same as in [LZ20, Proposition 3.15], we repeat
the argument for the convenience of the reader.
Let
χ2
χt
χ1
X1 /B1
...
Xt /Bt
X0 /B0
be a relation between t Sarkisov links, meaning that χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 is the identity
on X0 = Xt . We take a smooth resolution Z dominating all the Xi /Bi , and
consider the cone C ⊂ N 1 (Z) constructed from a choice of ample divisors as in
Proposition 4.23. We may assume ρ(Z) > 4 (otherwise we simply blow-up some
points on Z), so that by Lemma 4.24 the non-big boundary ∂ + C is a cone over a
polyhedral complex S homeomorphic to a disc or a sphere of dimension ρ(Z)−2 > 2.
In particular, the section S is simply connected. Now we construct a 2-dimensional
simplicial complex B embedded in S as follows. Vertices are the barycenters p(F k )
of codimension k faces F k for k = 1, 2 or 3. We call k the type of the vertex.
We put an edge between p(F j ) and p(F k ) if F j is a proper face of F k , and a 2simplex for each sequence F 3 ⊂ F 2 ⊂ F 1 . The complex B is homeomorphic to the
barycentric subdivision of the 2-skeleton of the dual cell complex of S. It follows
that B is simply connected (recall that the 2-skeleton of a simply connected complex
is again simply connected, see e.g. [Hat02, Corollary 4.12]). Then we restrict to the
subcomplex I ⊆ B corresponding to inner faces, which are the ones that intersect
the relative interior of S. The simplicial complex I is a deformation retract of
the interior of B, so I again is simply connected. By Proposition 4.25 we can
associate a rank r ﬁbration to each vertex of type r, and two vertices are connected
by an edge if and only if the corresponding ﬁbrations factorise through each other.
By Corollary 4.27(2), around each vertex of type 3 there is a unique disc whose
boundary loop encodes an elementary relation. The 2-dimensional components of
the complex I are unions of these discs. The initial relation corresponds to a loop in
I that only passes through vertices of types 1 and 2. We can realise the homotopy of
this loop to the constant loop inside the simply connected complex I by using these
elementary relations, and this translates as a factorisation of the initial relation as
a product of conjugates of elementary relations.

The whole construction leading to the previous theorem can be made in a relative
setting, that is, where all involved varieties admit a morphism to a ﬁxed base variety
B. In fact the paper [BCHM10] on which relies [HM13] is written with this level of
generality. In the particular case where the base B has dimension n − 1, we obtain
the following statement, slightly more precise than Theorem 4.28(1).

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

47

ϕ

X = X0

χ1

X1

χ2

···

χt−1

Xt−1

χt

ηX

B0 = B

Xt = Y
ηY

B1
id

···

Bt−1

Bt = B

id

B

Figure 6. The diagram of Lemma 4.29
Lemma 4.29. Let ηX : X
B and ηY : Y
B be two conic bundles over the
same base. Then any birational map ϕ : X
Y over B decomposes into a sequence
of Sarkisov links of conic bundles over B. More precisely, we have a commutative
diagram as in Figure 6, such that for each i = 1, . . . , t, Bi /B is a birational morphism, Xi /Bi is a conic bundle and χi is a Sarkisov link.
4.D. Examples of elementary relations. In this section we give examples of
elementary relations, mostly in dimension n = 3.
Example 4.30. Let X be a Fano variety with Q-factorial terminal singularities
and Picard rank 3. Then X/pt is a rank 3 ﬁbration (Example 3.2(1)), hence there
is an associated elementary relation. In the case where X is smooth of dimension 3,
these relations were studied systematically by Kaloghiros, using a classiﬁcation
result by Mori-Mukai: see [Kal13, Example 4.9 and Figures 3,4 & 5]. With respect
to the setting of §4.C, in these examples we have Z = X, N 1 (Z) ≃ R3 and ∂ + C is
the cone over a complex homeomorphic to a circle, which encodes the elementary
relation. Observe that the simple 2-dimensional Example 4.26 also belongs to this
family of examples.
Example 4.31. Let L ∪ L′ ⊂ P3 be two secant lines, and P the plane containing
P3 be the blow-up of L with exceptional divisor E, let ℓ ⊂ E be
them. Let X
the ﬁbre intersecting the strict transform of L′ , and let T
X be the blow-up of
L′ , with exceptional divisor E ′ .
From T we can ﬂop ℓ to get a 3-fold T ′ , which is obtained by the same two
blow-ups in the reverse order: ﬁrst the blow-up X ′
P3 of L′ ⊂ P3 and then the
′
′
′
blow-up T
X of (the strict transform of) L on X .
From T or T ′ one can contract the strict transform of P onto a smooth point,
obtaining two 3-folds Y and Y ′ also related by the ﬂop of ℓ.
The elementary relation associated to the rank 3 ﬁbration T /pt (or equivalently
to T ′ /pt), is depicted on Figure 7. There are ﬁve links in the relation, where χ1
has type I, χ2 and χ4 have type II, χ3 has type IV, and χ5 has type III.
Example 4.32. Consider the blow-up F1
P2 of a point, with exceptional curve
1
1
Γ ⊂ F1 . In P × F1 , write D = P × Γ, and C = {0} × Γ. Let T be the blow-up
of C, with exceptional divisor E. Then T /P2 is a rank 3 ﬁbration, and we now
describe the associated elementary relation (see Figure 8). We let the reader verify
the following assertions (since all varieties are toric, one can for instance use the
associated fans).
First the two-rays game T /F1 gives a link of type II
χ1 : P 1 × F 1

P1 ⊠ F1 ,

48

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

flop

χ1
E

X

E′

χ5

P3
E′

X′

E

pt

T

T′
χ4

χ2
P

P

P1
Y

Y′

χ3
flop

Figure 7. The elementary relation from Example 4.31.
where P1 ⊠ F1 denotes a smooth Mori ﬁbre space over F1 that is a non-trivial but
locally trivial P1 -bundle. The link χ1 involves the pair D ∪ E of divisors of type II
for T /F1 .
The divisor D on T can be contracted in two ways to a curve P1 , that is, T
dominates a ﬂop between P1 ⊠ F1 and another variety X. This variety X admits
a divisorial contraction to P1 × P2 , with exceptional divisor the strict transform of
E, which here is a divisor of type I for X/P2 . This corresponds to a link of type III
χ2 : P 1 ⊠ F 1

P1 × P2 .

Finally the two-rays game P1 × F1 /P2 , which factorises via F1 and P1 × P2 , gives
a link of type I
χ3 : P 1 × P 2
P1 × F1 .
In conclusion we get an elementary relation χ3 ◦ χ2 ◦ χ1 = id.
In contrast with Lemma 3.17, observe that D and E are divisors of type II for
T /F1 , but divisors of type I for T /P2 .
Example 4.33 (Example 3.15 over B = P2 ). Consider P1 × P2 , and let Γ ⊂ P2 be
a line, D ≃ P1 × Γ the pull-back of Γ in P1 × P2 , Γ′ = {t} × Γ ⊂ D a section and
P1 × P2 be the blow-up of Γ′ and p, with respective
p ∈ D r Γ′ a point. Let T
exceptional divisors D′ and E, and denote again D the strict transform of P1 × Γ
in T . Then the induced morphism η : T
P2 is a rank 3 ﬁbration that gives rise
to the relation on Figure 9.
The ﬁgure was computed using toric fans in Z3 , starting from the standard fan
of P1 × P2 with primitive vectors (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (−1, −1, 0), (0, 0, 1), (0, 0, −1),
and with the following choices
D′ : (1, 0, 1),

D : (1, 0, 0),
′

′

E : (1, 1, −1).

The varieties T and W both have one terminal singularity, all other varieties
T and
are smooth. There are two distinct Francia ﬂips from T ′ , which are T ′
T′
T ′′ . Observe also that the link χ1 is exactly Example 3.11(2).

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

χ3

P1 × F1
DI

EI /EII

χ1

T

49

F1

P1 × P2

P2

EI

DII

χ2

P1 ⊠ F1

X

flop
DI

Figure 8. The elementary relation from Example 4.32. We indicate the type of contracted divisors in index.

T′

flip

D
X

D
W′
E

E

P1 ⊠ P2

D′

χ1
flip

flip

P1 × P2

P2

χ2
F1

W

E

χ4

D′

χ3

Y
P1 ⊠ F1

D
T ′′

T

flop

D′

Figure 9. Elementary relation from Example 4.33.
Example 4.34. The article [AZ17] contains a beautiful example of an elementary
relation involving ﬁve Sarkisov links. In Figure 10 we reproduce the diagram from
[AZ17, §5.2], and we refer to their paper for a detailed description of the varieties.
The Sarkisov links χ1 and χ3 have type II, χ2 has type I, χ4 has type IV and χ5
type III. The relation is associated to the rank 3 ﬁbration Z1′ /pt, or equivalently
to Z2′ /pt. In fact other equivalent choices of varieties of Picard rank 3 are omitted
from the picture (dominating respectively Y1′ , X3′ , X1′ and X1′′ ). The morphisms
from Z, Z̄ and Z̃ to P1 are ﬁbrations in cubic surfaces. Observe that the top rows of

50

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Y1′

9 flops

X3′

χ5

flip

Y
Z
χ1

X2′

pt

P1
χ3

X

11 flops

≃

χ4

Z̄

Z2′

χ2

X1′

Z̃
6 flops

X1′′

X2′′
7 flops

flip

Z1′

Figure 10. Elementary relation from Example 4.34.
the Sarkisov diagrams display non trivial pseudo-isomorphisms, involving ﬂips and
ﬂops. Note that each pseudo-isomorphism labeled “n ﬂops” really corresponds to a
single ﬂop with n components (which by deﬁnition are all numerically proportional),
in accordance with Remark 3.10.
5. Elementary relations involving Sarkisov links of conic bundles of
type II
This section is devoted to the study of elementary relations involving Sarkisov
links of conic bundles of type II that are complicated enough, meaning their covering
gonality is large. We give some restriction on such relations that will allow us to
prove Theorem D. Firstly in Proposition 5.3 we cover the case of relations over
a base of dimension 6 n − 2, where n is the dimension of the Mori ﬁbre spaces,
using the BAB conjecture and working with Sarkisov links of large enough covering
gonality. Secondly, the case of relations over a base of dimension n − 1 is handled
in Proposition 5.5, using only the assumption that the covering gonality is > 1.
5.A. A consequence of the BAB conjecture. The following is a consequence
of the BAB conjecture, which was recently established in arbitrary dimension by
C. Birkar.
Proposition 5.1. Let n be an integer, and let Q be the set of weak Fano terminal
varieties of dimension n. There are integers d, l, m > 1, depending only on n, such
that for each X ∈ Q the following hold:
(1) dim(H 0 (−mKX )) 6 l;
(2) The linear system |−mKX | is base-point free;
|−mK |

0

X
Pdim(H (−mKX ))−1 is birational onto its image
(3) The morphism ϕ : X
and contracts only curves C ⊆ X with C · KX = 0;
(4) deg ϕ(X) 6 d.

Proof. By [Bir16, Theorem 1.1], varieties in Q form a bounded family (here we use
the observation that for a given X ∈ Q, the pair (X, ∅) is ε-lc for any 0 < ε < 1). In

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

51

particular, by [Bir19, Lemma 2.24], the Cartier index of such varieties is uniformly
bounded. Then [Kol93, Theorem 1.1] gives the existence of m = m(n) such that
|−mKX | is base-point free for each X ∈ Q. By [Bir19, Theorem 1.2], we can
increase m if needed, and assume that the associated morphism
ϕ: X

|−mKX |

Pdim(H

0

(−mKX ))−1

is birational onto its image. As it is a morphism, this implies that it contracts only
curves C ⊆ X with C · KX = 0. Finally, since Q is a bounded family, the two
integers dim(H 0 (−mKX )) and deg ϕ(X) are bounded.

X be the blow-up of a reduced but not necessarily
Corollary 5.2. Let π : Y
irreducible codimension 2 subvariety Γ ⊂ X, Y
Ŷ a pseudo-isomorphism, and
assume that both X and Ŷ are weak Fano terminal varieties of dimension n > 3,
whose loci covered by curves with trivial intersection against the canonical divisor
have codimension at least 2. Let ϕ be the birational morphism associated to the
linear system |−mKX |, with m given by Proposition 5.1, and assume that Γ is not
contained in the exceptional locus Ex(ϕ). Then through any point of Γ r Ex(ϕ)
there is an irreducible curve C ⊆ Γ with gon(C) 6 d and C · (−mKX ) 6 d, where
d is the integer from Proposition 5.1.
Proof. We choose the integers d, l, m > 1 associated to the dimension n in Proposition 5.1. We write a = dim(H 0 (−mKX )) − 1 and b = dim(H 0 (−mKY )) − 1. Using
the pseudo-isomorphism Y
Ŷ , we also have b = dim(H 0 (−mKŶ )) − 1. By
Proposition 5.1 the morphisms given by the linear systems |−mKX | and |−mKŶ |
are birational onto their images and are moreover pseudo-isomorphisms onto their
images, because of the assumption that the locus covered by curves with nonpositive intersection against the canonical divisor has codimension at least 2.
X is the blow-up of Γ, each eﬀective divisor equivalent to −mKY is
Since Y
the strict transform of an eﬀective divisor equivalent to −mKX passing through Γ
(with some multiplicity). In particular, we have b 6 a and obtain a commutative
diagram
X
ϕ |−mKX |
a

P

Y

Ŷ

|−mKY |
π

Pb

|−mKŶ |

where π is a linear projection away from a linear subspace L ≃ Pr of Pa containing
Pa the morphism given by |−mKX |.
the image of Γ. Recall that we write ϕ : X
a
The variety ϕ(X) ⊆ P has dimension n and degree 6 d (Proposition 5.1), and is
not contained in a hyperplane section. Since by assumption Γ ( Ex(ϕ), we get that
ϕ induces a birational morphism from Γ to ϕ(Γ).
We now prove that there is no (irreducible) variety S ⊆ ϕ(X) ∩ L of dimension
n − 1 (recall that ϕ(Γ) ⊆ ϕ(X) ∩ L has dimension n − 2). Indeed, otherwise the
strict transform of S on X would be a variety SX ⊂ X birational to S, so its strict
transform in Ŷ , and in Pb is again birational to S (as the birational map from
Y to its image in Pb is a pseudo-isomorphism). The linear system of the rational
map X
Pb is obtained from the linear system associated to X
Pa by taking
the subsystem associated to hyperplanes through L. Hence, if S ⊆ L, then every
element of the linear system |−mKY | contains the strict transform SY of S in Ŷ .
This is impossible, as |−mKŶ | is base-point free (Proposition 5.1).

52

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Now, the fact that ϕ(X) ∩ L ⊆ Pa does not contain any variety of dimension
> n−1 implies, by Bézout Theorem, that all its irreducible components of dimension
n − 2 have degree 6 d (indeed, ϕ(X) is irreducible of degree 6 d and dimension
n − 1, and L is a linear subspace). Therefore, each of the irreducible components
of ϕ(Γ) (birational to Γ) has degree 6 d.
We are now able to ﬁnish the proof, by showing that through any point q ∈
Γ r Ex(ϕ) there is an irreducible curve C ⊆ Γ with gon(C) 6 d and C · (−KX ) 6 d.
Since Γ
ϕ(Γ) is a local isomorphism at q, it suﬃces to take a general linear
projection from Pa to a linear subspace of dimension n − 2, and to take C equal to
the preimage of a line through the image of ϕ(q).

Proposition 5.3. For each dimension n > 3, there exists an integer dn > 1 depending only on n such that the following holds. If χ is a Sarkisov link of conic bundles
of type II that arises in an elementary relation induced by rank 3 fibration T /B with
dim(T ) = n and dim(B) 6 n − 2, then cov. gon(χ) 6 max{dn , 8 conn. gon(T )}.
Proof. We choose dn > 8 to be bigger than the integers d given by Proposition 5.1
for the dimensions 3, . . . , n, and prove the result for this choice of dn .
The Sarkisov link χ, which is dominated by T /B by assumption, has the form
Y1
X1

T
χ

Y2
X2

B̃
B
where X1 , X2 , Y1 , Y2 have dimension n and B̃ has dimension n − 1. Since dim B 6
n − 2, we have ρ(B̃/B) > 1, and on the other hand ρ(Yi /B) 6 3, for i = 1, 2, which
implies that ρ(B̃/B) = 1, and that the birational contractions T
Y1 , T
Y2
X1 contracts a divisor E onto a variety
are pseudo-isomorphisms. Moreover, Y1
Γ1 ⊂ X1 of dimension n − 2, birational to its image Γ̃ ⊂ B̃ via the morphism
B̃ (Lemma 3.23). We need to check that cov. gon(Γ1 ) = cov. gon(Γ̃) 6 dn ,
X1
where dn is chosen as above. We may then assume that cov. gon(Γ̃) > 1.
Now, B̃/B is a klt Mori ﬁbre space by Lemma 3.13 and X1 /B is a rank 2 ﬁbration
by Lemma 3.4(1). By Lemma 3.5, the rank 2 ﬁbration X1 /B is pseudo-isomorphic,
via a sequence of log-ﬂips over B, to another rank 2 ﬁbration X/B such that −KX is
relatively nef and big over B. We then use Lemma 2.17 to obtain a sequence of logﬂips Y1
Y over B such that the induced map Y
X is a divisorial contraction.
By Lemma 3.5 again, we get a sequence of log-ﬂips over B from Y /B to another
rank 3 ﬁbration Ŷ /B such that −KŶ is relatively nef and big over B.
Y1

Y

X1

X
B

Ŷ

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

53

As cov. gon(Γ̃) > 1, by Lemma 2.15(3) the codimension 2 subvariety Γ1 ⊂ X1 is
not contained in the base-locus of the pseudo-isomorphism X1
X. So the image
Γ ⊂ X of Γ1 is birational to Γ1 , and it suﬃces to show that cov. gon(Γ) 6 dn .
We take a general point p ∈ B, and consider the ﬁbres over p in X, Y and Ŷ
respectively, that we denote by Xp , Yp and Ŷp , and which are varieties of dimension
n0 = n − dim B ∈ {2, . . . , n}.
By Corollary 3.6 the two varieties Xp and Ŷp are weak Fano terminal varieties.
Ŷ is a sequence of log-ﬂips
Moreover, Yp and Ŷp are pseudo-isomorphic, as Y
over B.
Observe that Γ̃ ⊂ B̃ is a hypersurface and that Γ̃
B is surjective. Indeed, otherwise Γ̃ would be the preimage of a divisor on B, and we would have
B is covered by rational
cov. gon(Γ̃) = 1, as the preimage of each point of B̃
curves (Lemma 3.13), in contradiction with our assumption. This implies that the
B induced by the restriction of X/B is again surjective.
morphism Γ
We then denote by Γp ⊂ Xp the codimension 2 subscheme Γp = Γ ∩ Xp , which
B over p, and which is not necessarily irreducible. Observe
is the ﬁbre of Γ
that Yp
Xp is the blow-up of Γp , as Y
X is locally the blow-up of Γ (by
Lemma 2.13) and because the ﬁbre over p is transverse to Γ (Lemma 3.23(4)).
Suppose ﬁrst that n0 = 2, which corresponds to dim(Γ) = dim(B). In this case,
Xp and Yp ≃ Ŷp are smooth del Pezzo surfaces, because by Corollary 3.6 the locus
covered by curves trivial against the canonical divisor has codimension 2, hence is
empty in the case n0 = 2. Moreover Γp is a disjoint union of r points, where r
is the degree of the ﬁeld extension C(B) ⊆ C(Γ1 ). As Yp is obtained from Xp by
blowing-up Γp , the degree of the ﬁeld extension is at most 8, which implies that
cov. gon(Γ) 6 8 · cov. gon(B) 6 8 conn. gon(T ) (Lemma 2.22).
We now consider the case n0 > 3, which implies that Γp has dimension n0 −2 > 1.
We consider the morphism ϕ := |−mKX | × η : X
PN × B, where η : X
B
is the morphism already considered and m is given by Proposition 5.1 applied
in dimension n0 . The restriction of ϕ to the ﬁbre of p is a birational morphism
PN , described in Proposition 5.1. We apply Corollary 5.2 to the blowϕp : Xp
up Yp
Xp of Γp , the pseudo-isomorphism Yp
Ŷp . The fact that the loci on Xp
or Ŷp covered by curves with trivial intersection against the canonical divisor has
codimension at least 2 follows from Corollary 3.6. Lemma 2.15(3) implies that Γp
is not contained in Ex(ϕp ) because cov. gon(Γp ) > 1. We obtain from Corollary 5.2
that for a general p, Γp r Ex(ϕp ) is covered by curves of gonality at most dn .
In conclusion, we have found an open set U ⊆ Γ r Ex(ϕ) covered by curves of
gonality at most dn , as expected.

Remark 5.4. It is not clear to us whether Proposition 5.3 could also hold for a
link χ of type II between arbitrary Mori ﬁbre spaces.
For instance in the case of threefolds, if χ is a link of type II between del Pezzo
ﬁbrations that starts with the blow-up a curve of genus g contained in one ﬁbre,
we suspect that g cannot be arbitrary large but we are not aware of any bound in
the literature.
5.B. Some elementary relations of length 4.
Proposition 5.5. Let χ1 be a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type II with
cov. gon(χ1 ) > 1. Let T /B be a rank 3 fibration with dim B = dim T − 1, which

54

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

factorises through the Sarkisov link χ1 . Then, the elementary relation associated to
T /B has the form
χ4 ◦ χ3 ◦ χ2 ◦ χ1 = id,
where χ3 is a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type II that is equivalent to χ1 .

T4′
E1

Y1

G

E1

χ1

Y2

X4

E1

X3

χ2

E2

Y4

E1

G

χ3

B

B̂
X2

T4

χ4

X1

χ4

Y1

Y4′

Y4

X1

χ1

X4

B

B̂

E1

χ3

B̂ ′

E2

Y3

G

T3

G

E2

Y3′

X2

X3

Y2

χ2

E2

Y3

E2

T3′
T1′

T4′

E1

E1

Y1′
T1

F1

F1

Y1

E1

Y2
F1

E2

χ4

F2

X4

X1

χ1

T2

Y4′

F1

X3
χ2

Y2′

F2

T4

F2

T3

Y4

χ3

B
X2

E1

E2

F2

Y3

Y3′

E2

E2

T2′

T3′

Figure 11. The elementary relation associated to T /B in
cases (1), (2) and (3) of the proof of Proposition 5.5. Varieties
are organized in circles according to their Picard rank over B.

Proof. The Sarkisov link χ1 is given by a diagram
Y1

Y2

π1

X1

π2
χ1

B̂

X2

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

55

where X1 , X2 , Y1 , Y2 are varieties of dimension n, and dim B̂ = n − 1. Denote by
E1 ⊂ Y1 and E2 ⊂ Y2 the respective exceptional divisors of the divisorial contractions π1 and π2 . We denote again by E1 , E2 ⊂ T the strict transforms of
Y1 and T
Y2 . Then by
these divisors, under the birational contractions T
Lemma 3.23(2), E1 ∪ E2 is a pair of divisors of type II for Y1 /B̂, hence also for T /B
by Lemma 3.17. By Proposition 3.16(5), we are in one of the following mutually
exclusive three cases:
(1) B is Q-factorial, and there exists a divisor G of type I for T /B.
(2) B is not Q-factorial.
(3) B is Q-factorial, and there exists another pair F1 ∪ F2 of divisors of type II
for T /B.
We denote {Xi /Bi } the ﬁnite collection of all rank 1 ﬁbrations dominated by
T /B. In each case we are going to show that this collection has cardinal 4.
Suppose ﬁrst that (1) holds. By Proposition 3.16(1)&(4) and Lemma 3.18, we
can obtain such an Xi /Bi by a birational contraction contracting one the following
four sets of divisors: {E1 }, {E2 }, {E1 , G} or {E2 , G}. Moreover Xi /Bi is determined up to isomorphism by such a choice of contracted divisors:
• If T
Xi contracts {E1 , G} or {E2 , G}, then ρ(Xi ) = ρ(T ) − 2 which implies
B is an isomorphism. Then Xi is uniquely determined
ρ(Bi /B) = 0, that is, Bi
by Lemma 2.18(1).
• If T
Xi contracts {E1 } or {E2 }, then ρ(Bi /B) = 1, and Bi
B is a
birational contraction contracting the image of the divisor G. Then such a Bi is
uniquely determined by Lemma 2.18(2).

In conclusion the relation given by Proposition 4.3 has the form
χ4 ◦ χ3 ◦ χ2 ◦ χ1 = id,
and more precisely, up to a cyclic permutation exchanging the role of χ1 and χ3 ,
we have a commutative diagram as in Figure 11, top left, where χ2 and χ4 have
respectively type III and I, and χ1 and χ3 are equivalent Sarkisov links of type II.
Now consider Case (2). As B̂ is Q-factorial (Proposition 2.10), we have B̂ 6= B,
B is a small contraction. By uniqueness
hence ρ(B̂/B) = 1 and the morphism B̂
of log-ﬂip, there are exactly two small contractions from a Q-factorial variety to
B. Denote B̂ ′
B the other one. Then for each Xi /Bi , we have Bi ≃ B̂ or B̂ ′ ,
and ρ(Xi /B) = 2. Hence the birational contraction T
Xi contracts exactly one
divisor, which must be E1 or E2 . Again this gives four possibilities. The actual
existence of X3 /B̂ ′ and X4 /B̂ ′ arises from the two-rays games X1 /B and X2 /B.
We get a relation as in Figure 11, top right, with χ1 , χ3 of type II and χ2 , χ4 of
type IV.
Finally consider Case (3). Then by Proposition 3.16(1)(4), each birational conXi contracts one divisor among E1 ∪ E2 , and another one among
traction T
F1 ∪ F2 . Again this gives four possibilities. In each case ρ(Bi /B) = 0 hence Bi is
isomorphic to B, and then Lemma 2.18(1) says that Xi is determined up to isomorphism by such a choice. We obtain a relation with four links of type II, as on

Figure 11, bottom.
Remark 5.6. Example 4.32 illustrates why the assumption on the covering gonality
is necessary in Proposition 5.5.

56

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

5.C. Proof of Theorem D. In order to prove Theorem D, we use the generators
and relations of BirMori(X) which are given in Theorem 4.28. The key results are
then Propositions 5.3 and 5.5.
Proof of Theorem D. We choose the integer d associated to the dimension n by
Proposition 5.3, and set M = max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)}. By Theorem 4.28(1), the
groupoid BirMori(X) is generated by Sarkisov links and automorphisms of Mori
ﬁbre spaces. By Theorem 4.28(2), the relations are generated by elementary relations, so it suﬃces to show that every elementary relation is sent to the neutral
element in the group


˚

C∈CB(X)

⊕ Z/2 .

M(C)

Let χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 = id be an elementary relation, coming from a rank 3 ﬁbration
T /B. We may assume that one of the χi is a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type
II with cov. gon(χi ) > M , otherwise the relation is sent onto the neutral element as
all χi are sent to the neutral element. We may moreover conjugate the relation and
assume that χ1 is a Sarkisov link of conic bundles of type II with cov. gon(χ1 ) > M .
By Proposition 5.3, we have dim(B) = n − 1. Then, Proposition 5.5 implies that
t = 4 and that χ1 and χ3 are equivalent Sarkisov links of conic bundles of type II.
Applying the same argument to the relation χ1 ◦ χ4 ◦ χ3 ◦ χ2 = id we either ﬁnd that
both χ2 and χ4 are sent to the neutral element or are equivalent Sarkisov links of
conic bundles of type II (again by Proposition 5.5). Moreover, all the conic bundles
involved in this relation are equivalent. This proves the existence of the groupoid
homomorphism.
The fact that it restricts to a group homomorphism from Bir(X) is immediate,
and the fact that it restricts as a group homomorphism
Bir(X/B)

⊕

Z/2

M(X/B)

follows from Lemma 4.29.



6. Image of the group homomorphism given by Theorem D
In this section, we study the image of Bir(X) under the group homomorphism
given by Theorem D, and more precisely the image of Bir(X/B)
⊕M(X/B) Z/2
for some conic bundles X/B.
6.A. A criterion. Given a birational map between conic bundles over a curve B,
for each point p ∈ B one can deﬁne the number of base-points that lies on the ﬁbre
p, as proper or inﬁnitely near points. This amounts to counting how many links
one has to perform above the point. In the next deﬁnition we generalise this to any
dimension, by replacing the point p with an irreducible hypersurface of B. As the
targets of our group homomorphisms are direct sums of Z/2Z, it is natural to only
count the parity of the multiplicity.
Y /B a
Definition 6.1. Let (X/B, Γ) be a marked conic bundle, and ϕ : X/B
birational map over B between conic bundles. For a general point p ∈ Γ, and an
irreducible curve C ⊆ B transverse to Γ at p, let b ∈ N be the number of base−1
ηY−1 (C) induced by ϕ that are equal
points of the birational surface map ηX
(C)
or inﬁnitely near to a point of the ﬁbre of p. We call the class b̄ ∈ Z/2 the parity
of ϕ along Γ.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

57

The following lemma shows that this deﬁnition does not depend on the choice
of p or C. We shall use it to compute the image of the group homomorphism of
Theorem D by studying locally a birational map near a hypersurface Γ of the base.
Lemma 6.2. Let ηX : X
B and ηY : Y
B be two conic bundles, ϕ : X
Y
a birational map over B, and Γ ⊂ B an irreducible hypersurface not contained in
the discriminant locus of X/B.
For any decomposition ϕ = χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 as in Lemma 4.29, the parity of ϕ along
Γ is equal to the parity of the number of indexes i ∈ {1, . . . , t} such that χi is a
Sarkisov link of type II whose marking Γi ⊂ Bi is sent to Γ via Bi /B.
Proof. Fix a decomposition ϕ = χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 as in Lemma 4.29, a general point
p ∈ Γ and an irreducible curve C ⊆ B transverse to Γ at p. In particular p is a
B the
smooth point of both Γ and C. For i = 0, . . . , t, we denote by ηi : Xi
Bi
B.
morphism given by the composition Xi
It suﬃces to prove, for i = 0, . . . , t, that the following holds:
(a) The morphism ηi−1 (C)
C has general ﬁbre P1 , and the ﬁbre over p is P1
(this means that Γ is not in the discriminant locus).
(b) If i > 1, then χi ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 induces a birational map between surfaces over C
ηi−1 (C)

−1
η0−1 (C) = ηX
(C)

and the number of base-points that are equal or inﬁnitely near to a point of the
ﬁbre of p has the same parity as the number of integers j ∈ {1, . . . , i} such that χj
is a Sarkisov link of type II with marking Γj ⊂ Bj , sent to Γ via Bj /B.
We proceed by induction on i. If i = 0, (a) follows from the assumption that Γ
is not contained in the discriminant locus of X/B, and (b) is clear.
For i > 1, the birational map χi induces a birational map over C
−1
θi : ηi−1
(C)

ηi−1 (C).

If χi is a Sarkisov link of type II with marking Γi ⊂ Bi , sent to Γ via Bi /B, it
follows from the description of χi given in Lemma 3.23 that the restriction θi is the
composition of the blow-up of a point on the ﬁbre of p, the contraction of the strict
transform of the ﬁbre and of a birational map that is an isomorphism over an open
subset of C that contains the ﬁbre of p. This achieves the proof of (a) and (b) in
this case, using the induction hypothesis.
If χi is a Sarkisov link of type II with a marking not sent to Γ or if χi is a
Sarkisov link of type I or III, then the restriction θi of χi is an isomorphism over an
open subset of C that contains the ﬁbre of p. This follows again from Lemma 3.23
if the Sarkisov link is of type II and from Corollary 3.20 if it is of type I or III. As
before, this gives the result by applying the induction hypothesis.

To simplify the notation in the group ⊕M(X/B) Z/2, we will identify an equivalence class of marked conic bundles in M(X/B) with the associated generator of
Z/2. We can then speak about sums of elements of M(X/B), which we see in
⊕M(X/B) Z/2, twice the same class being equal to zero.
Corollary 6.3. Let X/B be a conic bundle, where dim(X) > 3, and ϕ ∈ Bir(X/B).
The image of ϕ under the group homomorphism
Bir(X/B)

⊕
M(X/B)

Z/2

58

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

of Theorem D is equal to the sum of equivalence classes of marked conic bundles
(X/B, Γ) with cov. gon(Γ) > max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)} such that the parity of ϕ along
Γ is odd.
Proof. Set M = max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)}. Using Lemma 4.29, we decompose ϕ as
ϕ = χt ◦ · · · ◦ χ1 where each χi is a Sarkisov link of conic bundles from Xi−1 /Bi−1
to Xi /Bi . Denote by J ⊆ {1, . . . , t} the subset of indexes i such that the Sarkisov
link χi is of type II and satisﬁes cov. gon(χi ) > M . By deﬁnition of the group
homomorphism
Bir(X/B)
⊕ Z/2
M(X/B)

of Theorem D, the image of ϕ is the sum of the equivalence classes of marked conic
bundles of χi where i runs over J. For each i ∈ J, the marked conic bundle of
χi is equal to (Xi /Bi , Γ̂i ) for some irreducible hypersurface Γ̂i ⊂ Bi (see Deﬁnition 3.24); moreover, one has with cov. gon(χi ) = cov. gon(Γ̂i ) (Deﬁnition 3.25), so
cov. gon(Γ̂i ) > M . Hence, (Xi /Bi , Γ̂i ) is equivalent to (X/B, Γi ), where Γi ⊂ B is
the image of Γ̂i ⊂ Bi via Bi /B. This implies that the image of ϕ is the sum of the
classes of (X/B, Γi ), where i runs over J.
By Lemma 6.2, this sum is equal to the sum of equivalence classes of marked
conic bundles (X/B, Γ) with cov. gon(Γ) > M and such that the parity of ϕ along
Γ is odd.

6.B. The case of trivial conic bundles and the proof of Theorem A. Given
a variety B, let X = P1 × B, and X/B the second projection. The group Bir(X/B)
is canonically isomorphic to PGL2 (C(B)), via the action
PGL2 (C(B)) × X



a(t)
b(t)
, ([u : v], t)
c(t)
d(t)

X
([a(t)u + b(t)v : c(t)u + d(t)v], t).

For B = Pn−1 , the group Bir(X/B) corresponds, via a birational map X
Pn
n
sending the ﬁbres of X/B to lines through a point p ∈ P , to the subgroup of
the Jonquières group associated to p consisting of birational maps of Pn that preserves a general line through p (in general a Jonquières element permutes such
lines). Hence, Bir(X/B) corresponds to the factor PGL2 (C(x2 , . . . , xn )) of the
group PGL2 (C(x2 , . . . , xn )) ⋊ Bir(Pn−1 ) ⊆ Bir(Pn ) described in §1.C.
For B general, we obtain many diﬀerent varieties X = P1 ×B. It can also be that
X is rational even if B is not (in [BCTSSD85, Théorème 1] a non-rational variety
Y of dimension 3 is given such that Y × P3 is rational, so B = Y or B = Y × P1
or B = Y × P2 gives such an example), but then the conic bundle X/B is not
equivalent to the trivial one Pn × P1 /Pn .
Lemma 6.4. Any surjective group homomorphism τ : PGL2 (C(B))
not an isomorphism factorises through the quotient

G that is

PGL2 (C(B))/ PSL2 (C(B)) ≃ C(B)∗ /(C(B)∗ )2 ,
where the isomorphism corresponds to the determinant. In particular the target
group G is abelian of exponent 2.
Proof. There exists a non trivial element A ∈ Ker τ by assumption. Since the
group PGL2 (C(B)) has trivial centre, we can ﬁnd N ∈ PGL2 (C(B)) that does

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

59

not commute with A. Then id 6= AN A−1 N −1 ∈ PSL2 (C(B)) ∩ Ker τ , and since
PSL2 (C(B)) is a simple group we get PSL2 (C(B)) ⊆ Ker τ , which gives the result.

Write div : C(B)∗
Div(B) the classical group homomorphism that sends a
rational function onto its divisor of poles and zeros, and whose image is the group
of principal divisors on B. Denoting by PB the set of prime divisors on B, the
group homomorphism div naturally gives a group homomorphism
PGL2 (C(B))/ PSL2 (C(B)) ≃ C(B)∗ /(C(B)∗ )2

⊕ Z/2.

PB

We project onto the sum of prime divisors with large enough covering gonality and
identify the ones which are equivalent up to a birational map of B. This identiﬁcation corresponds to taking orbits of the action of AutC (C(B)) on C(B). The following lemma shows that the resulting group homomorphism extends from Bir(X/B)
to Bir(X), and coincides with the group homomorphism from Theorem D.
Observe that for each A ∈ PGL2 (C(B)), we can speak about the parity of
the multiplicity of det(A) ∈ C(B)∗ /(C(B)∗ )2 as pole or zero along an irreducible
hypersurface Γ ⊂ B, as the multiplicity of an element of (C(B)∗ )2 is always even.
Lemma 6.5. Let B be a smooth variety of dimension at least 2, X = P1 × B, and
let ϕM ∈ Bir(X/B) ≃ PGL2 (C(B)) be the birational map
ϕM : ([u : v], t)

([a(t)u + b(t)v : c(t)u + d(t)v], t),

where
M=


a(t)
c(t)


b(t)
∈ PGL2 (C(B)).
d(t)

The image of ϕM under the group homomorphism
⊕

Bir(X/B)

Z/2

M(X/B)

of Theorem D is equal to the sum of the equivalence classes of marked conic bundles
(X/B, Γ) such that Γ ⊂ B is a irreducible hypersurfaces of B with cov. gon(Γ) >
max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)} and such that the multiplicity of det(M ) along Γ is odd.
Proof. We ﬁrst observe that the image of PSL2 (C(B)) ⊆ PGL2 (C(B)) ≃ Bir(X/B)
under the group homomorphism
⊕

Bir(X/B)

Z/2

M(X/B)

is trivial, since PSL2 (C(B)) is simple and not abelian. Hence, the image of an
element ϕ ∈ Bir(X/B) ≃ PGL2 (C(B)) is uniquely determined by its determinant
δ ∈ C(B)∗ /(C(B)∗ )2 (Lemma 6.4), and is the same as the image of the dilatation
ψδ : ([u : v], t)

([δ(t)u : v], t).

So we only need to prove the result for M equal to such a dilatation.
We denote as before by PB the set of prime divisors on B. For δ ∈ C(B)∗ and
Γ ∈ PB , we denote by mδ (Γ) ∈ Z the multiplicity of δ along Γ, so that
X
div(δ) =
mδ (Γ) Γ.
Γ∈PB

60

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

We also denote by Pδ (Γ) ∈ {0, 1} the parity of ψδ along Γ as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 6.1
and Lemma 6.2. The image of the dilatation ψδ ∈ Bir(X/B) under the group
homomorphism
⊕ Z/2
Bir(X/B)
M(X/B)

is equal to the sum of equivalence classes of marked conic bundles (X/B, Γ) such
that Γ ⊂ B is an irreducible hypersurface with
cov. gon(Γ) > max{d, 8 conn. gon(X)}
and such that Pδ (Γ) is odd (Corollary 6.3). To prove the result, it suﬃces to show
that Pδ (Γ) and mδ (Γ) have the same parity. For all δ, δ ′ ∈ C(B)∗ , we have
mδ (Γ) + mδ′ (Γ) = mδ·δ′ (Γ)

and

Pδ (Γ) + Pδ′ (Γ) ≡ Pδ·δ′ (Γ) (mod 2).

Indeed, the ﬁrst equality follows from the deﬁnition of the multiplicity and the
second follows from Lemma 6.2, since ψδ ◦ ψδ′ = ψδ·δ′ . The local ring OΓ (B) being
a DVR, the group C(B)∗ is generated by elements δ ∈ C(B)∗ with mδ (Γ) = 0, and
by one single element δ0 which satisﬁes mδ0 (Γ) = 1. It therefore suﬃces to consider
the case where mδ (Γ) ∈ {0, 1}.
We take a general point p ∈ Γ, an irreducible curve C ⊆ B transverse to Γ at p,
P1 × C
and compute the number of base-points of the birational map θ : P1 × C
([δ(t)u : v], t) that are equal or inﬁnitely near to a point of
given by ([u : v], t)
the ﬁbre of p. If mδ (Γ) = 0, then δ is well deﬁned on p, so the birational map
θ induces an isomorphism P1 × {p}
P1 × {p}, which implies that Pδ (Γ) = 0.
If mδ (Γ) = 1, then δ has a zero of multiplicity one at p, so θ has exactly one
base-point on P1 × {p}, namely ([1 : 0], p). The composition of θ with the blow-up
P1 × C of ([1 : 0], p) yields a birational map Z
P1 × C with no more
of Z
base-point on the exceptional divisor, as the multiplicity of both δ and v/u at the
point is 1, so Pδ (Γ) = 1. This achieves the proof.

We can now give the proof of Theorem A.
Proof of Theorem A. We denote by Dilk the subgroup of birational dilatations
Dilk = {(x1 , . . . , xn )

(x1 α(x2 , · · · , xn ), x2 , . . . , xn ) | α ∈ k(x2 , . . . , xn )∗ }

⊆ Birk (Pn ) ≃ Autk (k(x1 , . . . , xn )).
We denote B = Pn−1 and use the birational map (deﬁned over k)
X = P1 × B

Pn

([u : 1], [t1 , . . . , tn−1 : 1])

[1 : u : t1 : · · · : tn−1 ]

that conjugates Bir(X) to Bir(Pn ), sending elements of the form
{([u : v], t)

([α(t)u : v], t) | α ∈ C(B)∗ }

(x1 α(x2 , · · · , xn ), x2 , . . . , xn ).
onto elements locally given by (x1 , . . . , xn )
Now we pick a large enough integer D and consider the set HD of degree D
irreducible hypersurfaces in Pn−1 . For each element Γ ∈ HD , we consider an
irreducible polynomial P ∈ k[x0 , . . . , xn ] of degree D deﬁning the hypersurface Γ,
n−1
choose α = P/xD
) and associate to Γ the element ϕα ∈ Bir(X/B) given
0 ∈ k(P
by
ϕα : ([u : v], t)
([α(t)u : v], t).

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

61

By Lemma 6.5, the image of ϕα under the group homomorphism
Bir(X/B)

⊕

Z/2

M(X/B)

of Theorem D is the unique marked conic bundle (X/B, Γ) (as the hypersurface
Γ0 ⊂ B given by x0 = 0 satisﬁes cov. gon(Γ0 ) = 1). It remains to observe that we
have enough elements in HD , up to birational maps of Pn−1 , namely as much as in
the ﬁeld k. Indeed, if we take two general hypersurfaces Γ1 , Γ2 ⊂ Pn−1 of degree
Γ2 extends to a linear automorphism
> n + 1, then every birational map Γ1
of Pn−1 ; this can be shown by taking the suitable Veronese embedding of Pn−1
such that the canonical divisors of Γ1 and Γ2 become hyperplane sections. The
dimension of PGLn (k) being bounded, for a large enough degree D we obtain a
quotient of HD by PGLn (k) which has positive dimension, hence which has the
same cardinality as the ground ﬁeld k. This quotient can be taken as the indexing

set I in the statement of Theorem A.
Remark 6.6.
(1) As all birational dilatations in Theorem A belong to the Jonquières subgroup of elements preserving a pencil of lines, the restriction of the
⊕I Z/2 to the Jonquières subgroup also is surgroup homomorphism Bir(Pn )
jective. We will need other conic bundle structures on rational varieties to obtain
Theorem C.
(2) The proof of Theorem A uses Lemma 6.5 in the case where B = Pn−1 . For
a general basis B we can prove along the same lines that the image of the subgroup
of Bir(X/B) given by
{([u : v], t)

([δ(t)u : v], t) | δ ∈ C(B)∗ }

under the group homomorphism Bir(X/B)
⊕M(X/B) Z/2 of Theorem D is inﬁnite. We omit the proof here, as it is similar to the case of B = Pn−1 , and moreover
we will prove a more general result in Proposition 6.9.
6.C. The case of non-trivial conic bundles and the proof of Theorem B.
Recall that given a smooth conic C ⊂ P2 and a point p ∈ P2 r C, there is an
involution ι(p, C) ∈ Bir(P2 ) that preserves the conic C. It is deﬁned on each general
line L through p as the involution that ﬁxes p and exchange the two intersection
points L ∩ C. We say that ι(p, C) is the involution induced by the projection from p.
We now use this construction in family to produce interesting involutions on some
conic bundles.
B a locally trivial P2 -bundle,
Lemma 6.7. Let B be a smooth variety, η̂ : P
and X ⊂ P a closed subvariety such that the restriction of η̂ is a conic bundle
η: X
B. Let s : B
P be a rational section (i.e. a rational map, birational
to its image, such that η̂ ◦ s = idB ), whose image is not contained in X. Let
ι ∈ Bir(X/B) be the birational involution whose restriction to a general fibre η −1 (b)
is the involution induced by the projection from s(b). Let Γ ⊂ B be an irreducible
hypersurface not contained in the discriminant locus of η, and let F be a local
equation of X in P .
If the multiplicity of F (s) along Γ is equal to 0 or 1, then the parity of ι along Γ
(in the sense of Definition 6.1) is equal to this multiplicity (modulo 2).
Proof. We choose a dense open subset U ⊆ B that intersects Γ and trivialises
the P2 -bundle. Inside P2 × U , a local equation of X is given by F ∈ C(B)[x, y, z],

62

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

B over a general point of Γ
homogeneous of degree 2 in x, y, z. The ﬁbre of η : X
(respectively of B) is a smooth conic. The section s corresponds to [α : β : γ], where
α, β, γ ∈ C(B) are not all zero and are uniquely determined up to multiplication by
an element of C(B)∗ . As Γ is a hypersurface of B, the local ring OΓ (B) is a DVR.
One can choose α, β, γ ∈ OΓ (B), not all vanishing on Γ: this deﬁnes α, β, γ uniquely,
up to multiplication by an element of OΓ (B)∗ . The evaluation F (α, β, γ) ∈ C(B)
at s is then uniquely determined by s up to multiplication by the square of an
element of OΓ (B)∗ , so that the multiplicity of F (α, β, γ) along Γ is well deﬁned.
The restriction of α, β, γ gives an element (ᾱ, β̄, γ̄) ∈ C(Γ)3 r {0}. There exists
a matrix in GL3 (C(Γ)) that sends (ᾱ, β̄, γ̄) to (1, 0, 0). By extending this matrix
as an element of GL3 (OΓ (B)), we can assume that (α, β, γ) = (1, 0, 0). We write
the equation of X as
F = ax2 + bxy + cxz + dy 2 + eyz + f z 2
where a, b, c, d, e, f ∈ C(B) have no pole along Γ and are not all simultaneously
zero on Γ, and obtain that F (α, β, γ) = F (1, 0, 0) = a. As s is not contained in
X, a ∈ C(B) is not identically zero. With these coordinates, one checks that the
involution ι ∈ Bir(P/B) is given by the simple expression
ι : [x : y : z]

[−(x + ab y + ac z) : y : z].

Now we proceed to show that the parity of the multiplicity r ∈ {0, 1} of F (s) = a
along Γ is equal to the parity of ι along Γ. For this, we take as in Deﬁnition 6.1 a general point p ∈ Γ and an irreducible curve C ⊆ B transverse to Γ at p, and show that
η −1 (C)
r is the number of base-points of the birational surface map ιC : η −1 (C)
induced by ι that are equal or inﬁnitely near to a point of the ﬁbre of p.
If r = 0, then a does not vanish on Γ, hence the involution ι is a local isomorphism
above a general point of Γ, so ιC is an isomorphism on the ﬁbre of p. This achieves
the proof in this case.
We now assume that r = 1, or equivalently that a is a generator of the maximal
ideal m of OΓ (B). It implies that either b or c is not zero on Γ, otherwise Γ would
be contained in the discriminant locus of η. As Γ is an irreducible hypersurface
of B, the local ring OB,Γ of rational functions of B deﬁned on an open subset of
Γ is a DVR. We write ιC ∈ Bir(η −1 (C)) as the restriction of ν −1 ◦ θ ◦ ν, where
θ, ν ∈ AutC(C) (P2 ) ⊂ Bir(C × P2 ) are the birational maps
ν : [x : y : z]

[ax : y : z] and θ : [x : y : z]

[−(x + by + cz) : y : z] .

We denote S = ν(η −1 (C)) ⊂ P2 × C, and one checks that S is the surface with
equation
x2 + bxy + cxz + a(dy 2 + eyz + f z 2 ) = 0.
The ﬁbre η −1 (p) ⊂ η −1 (C) is a smooth conic. On the other hand the ﬁbre of
p in S is ℓ ∪ ℓ′ , where ℓ and ℓ′ are the lines given by x = 0 and x + by + cz = 0
respectively. Observe that ℓ 6= ℓ′ since (b(p), c(p)) 6= (0, 0).
Since S is the image of η −1 (C) by ν, the map θ induces a birational involution
S. The map θS is a local isomorphism in a neighborhood of the ﬁbre of
θS : S
p, which exchanges ℓ and ℓ′ . Moreover, ν maps the conic η −1 (p) to the line ℓ, ν is
[x : ay : az] contracts
not deﬁned at the point q = [1 : 0 : 0], and ν −1 : [x : y : z]
ℓ′ on q. As a has multiplicity 1, ν is simply the blow-up of q, so the birational map
η −1 (C) is given, in a neighbourhood of η −1 (p), by the blow-up of q
ιC : η −1 (C)

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

63

followed by the contraction of the strict transform of η −1 (p). So the parity of ιC
along Γ is 1, as desired.

Definition 6.8. We say that a conic bundle X/B is a decomposable conic bundle
Pm and X
P
if X and B are smooth, and if we have closed embeddings B
2
m
where P is a P -bundle over P that is the projection of a decomposable vector
bundle of rank 3, i.e. P = P(OPm ⊕ OPm (a) ⊕ OPm (b)) for some a, b ∈ Z. We
moreover ask that the morphism X/B comes from the restriction of the P2 -bundle
P
Pm and that X ⊂ P is locally given by equations of degree 2 in the P2 -bundle.
Proposition 6.9. For each decomposable conic bundle η : X
B with dim B > 2,
there are infinitely many involutions in Bir(X/B) which have distinct images via
the group homomorphism Bir(X/B)
⊕M(X/B) Z/2 of Theorem D. In particular,
the image is infinite.
Proof. We can see B as a closed subset B ⊆ Pm , and obtain that X ⊂ P , where
η̂ : P
Pm is the projectivisation of a rank 3 vector bundle. We can thus write
P = P(OPm ⊕ OPm (a) ⊕ OPm (b)) for some a, b > 0 (up to twisting and exchanging
the factors). We view P as the quotient of (A3 r {0}) × (Am+1 r {0}) by (Gm )2
via
((λ, µ), (x0 , x1 , x2 , y0 , . . . , ym ))

(λx0 , λµ−a x1 , λµ−b x2 , µy0 , . . . , µym )

and denote by [x0 : x1 : x2 ; y0 : . . . : ym ] the class of (x0 , x1 , x2 , y0 , . . . , ym ) (see
[AO18, Deﬁnition 2.3, Remark 2.4] for more details).
Then X is equal to the preimage of B cut by the zero locus of an irreducible polynomial G ∈ C[x0 , x1 , x2 , y0 , . . . , ym ], that has degree 2 in x0 , x1 , x2 (and suitable
degree in y0 , . . . , ym so that the polynomial is homogeneous for the above action).
For each integer d > 1, and for general homogeneous polynomials
u0 , v0 ∈ C[y0 , . . . , ym ]d , u1 , v1 ∈ C[y0 , . . . , ym ]d+a , u2 , v2 ∈ C[y0 , . . . , ym ]d+b ,
(the subscript corresponding to the degree), the closed subvariety Γ̂ ⊂ X of codimension 2 given by
2
2
o
n
X
X
xi vi = 0
xi ui =
Γ̂ = ([x0 : x1 : x2 ; y0 : . . . : ym ]) ∈ X ⊆ P
i=0

i=0

is smooth, by Bertini theorem.
We now prove that the projection X
B induces a birational morphism from
Γ̂ to its image Γ ⊂ B, an irreducible hypersurface of B. Solving the linear sysP2
P2
tem
i=0 xi ui =
i=0 xi vi = 0 in x0 , x1 , x2 , we obtain that the preimage of
[y0 : . . . : ym ] is [u1 v2 − u2 v1 : u2 v0 − u0 v2 : u0 v1 − u1 v0 ; y0 : . . . : ym ], so the
projection induces a birational morphism from Γ̂ to the hypersurface Γ ⊂ B given
by the polynomial G(P0 , P1 , P2 , y0 , . . . , ym ), where P0 , P1 , P2 ∈ C[y0 , . . . , ym ] are
the polynomials P0 = u1 v2 − u2 v1 , P1 = u2 v0 − u0 v2 and P2 = u0 v1 − u1 v0 .
We now show that the covering gonality cov. gon(Γ̂) = cov. gon(Γ) is large if d
is large enough. We denote by Hi , Fj ⊂ P the hypersurfaces given respectively by
xi = 0 and yj = 0, and obtain that Pic(P ) = ZHi ⊕ ZFj for all i ∈ {0, 1, 2}, j ∈
{0, . . . , m}. The class of all Fj is the same and denoted by F and H0 ∼ H1 +
aF ∼ H2 + bF . Note that Γ̂ is a complete intersection in η̂ −1 (B) ⊆ P of 3
hypersurfaces equivalent to H0 +dF, H0 +dF, 2H0 +d0 F for some d0 ∈ Z (depending
on the equation of X). The canonical divisor of P being equivalent to −H0 − H1 −

64

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

H2 − F0 − . . . − Fm = −3H0 − (m + 1 − a − b)F , we obtain by adjunction that
the canonical divisor of Γ̂ is the restriction to Γ̂ of a divisor of P equivalent to
H0 + (2d + d0 − m − 1 + a + b)F . The morphism associated to F is simply the
Pm , which is birational onto its image. By Lemma 2.27(2)-(3), the
projection Γ̂
divisor pF satisﬁes BVAp , for each integer p > 0, and thus KΓ̂ satisﬁes BVAp for
p = 2d + d0 − m − 1 + a + b > 0 if d is large enough, by Lemma 2.27(1). This implies
that cov. gon(Γ̂) > p + 2 by Theorem 2.26. By choosing d large enough we obtain
that cov. gon(Γ) = cov. gon(Γ̂) is large.
We now use the construction in Lemma 6.7 of the involution ι ∈ Bir(X/B)
associated with the P2 -bundle P/B and the rational section s : B
P given by
[y0 : . . . : ym ]

[u1 v2 − u2 v1 : u2 v0 − u0 v2 : u0 v1 − u1 v0 ; y0 : . . . : ym ].

By Lemma 6.7, the parity of ι along Γ is one and the parity of ι along any other
irreducible hypersurface of B is zero (as Γ is the zero locus of G(s) by construction).
For a large integer d, the image of ι under the group homomorphism
⊕

Bir(X/B)

Z/2

M(X/B)

of Theorem D is the equivalence class of (X/B, Γ). Taking larger and larger d,
we obtain inﬁnitely many involutions in the image of the group homomorphisms,
which are distinct and thus generate a group isomorphic to an inﬁnite direct sum
of Z/2, as the covering gonality of the hypersurfaces goes to inﬁnity with d.

Proof of Theorem B. We use the group homomorphism


⊕ Z/2
˚
Bir(X)
C∈CB(X)

M(C)

of Theorem D. By assumption, X/B is a decomposable conic bundle (in the sense
of Deﬁnition 6.8). By Proposition 6.9, the image of Bir(X/B) contains a group
isomorphic to an inﬁnite direct sum of Z/2.
To ﬁnish the proof of Theorem B, we take a subﬁeld k ⊆ C over which X, B and
η are deﬁned, and check that the involutions in Bir(X/B) that are used to provide
the large image are deﬁned over k. Firstly, the involutions provided by Lemma 6.7
are deﬁned over k as soon as the rational section s : B
P is. Secondly, the
construction of Proposition 6.9 works for general polynomials in C[y0 , . . . , ym ] of
some ﬁxed degrees.
Since a dense open subset of an aﬃne space AnC contains inﬁnitely many k-points
for each subﬁeld k ⊆ C (follows from the fact that the Q-points of An are dense),
we can assume that the polynomials, and thus the section, are deﬁned over k. 
7. Non-equivalent conic bundles
In this section, we construct inﬁnitely many non-equivalent conic bundles on Pn ,
showing that the set CB(Pn ) is inﬁnite for n > 3 (by contrast, observe that CB(P2 )
consists of one element). This allows us to prove Theorems E and C.
7.A. Studying the discriminant locus. The main result of this section is Proposition 7.10. We prove in particular that if two standard conic bundles (deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 7.3) X1 /P2 and X2 /P2 with discriminants ∆1 and ∆2 such that the conic
bundles (X1 × Pn )/(P2 × Pn ) and (X1 × Pn )/(P2 × Pn ) are equivalent, then there
∆2 and ∆2
∆1 . The standard conic bundles
exist surjective morphisms ∆1

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

65

are classical in the literature and are conic bundles having nice properties. They
can be in particular embedded in a P2 -bundle, as it was the case for the decomposable conic bundles (Deﬁnition 6.8). This notion is deﬁned below as embedded conic
fibration. See remark 7.4 for a comparison of the diﬀerent notions.
The following notion is called an embedded conic in [Sar82, page 358].
Definition 7.1. Let V be a smooth quasi-projective variety. An embedded conic
fibration is a projective morphism η : X
V that is the restriction of a locally
V , and such that X ⊂ P is a closed subvariety, given
trivial P2 -bundle η̂ : P
locally by an equation of degree 2. Precisely, for each p ∈ V , there exists an aﬃne
open subset U ⊆ V containing p such that η̂ −1 (U ) is isomorphic to U × P2 , and the
image of η −1 (U ) ⊂ U × P2 is a closed subvariety, irreducible over C(U ), and deﬁned
by a polynomial F ∈ C[U ][x, y, z] homogeneous of degree 2 in the coordinates x, y, z.
Remark 7.2. Let η : X
V be a ﬂat projective morphism between smooth quasiprojective varieties, with generic ﬁbre an irreducible conic. Then, η is an embedded
conic ﬁbration in a natural way. This is done by taking the locally trivial P2 -bundle
−1
P = P(η∗ (ωX
)) over V , where ωX is the canonical line bundle of X (see [Sar82,
§1.5]). If η is not ﬂat, this is false, as some ﬁbres can for instance have dimension > 3
even if X/V is a Mori ﬁbre space and thus a conic bundle (see [AR04, Example 5]).
The following deﬁnition is equivalent to the one of [Sar82, Deﬁnition 1.4].
B which is a conic
Definition 7.3. A standard conic bundle is a morphism η : X
bundle (in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.12), and which is moreover flat with X and B
smooth. This implies that η is also an embedded conic fibration in the P2 -bundle
−1
B (see Remark 7.2).
P(η∗ (ωX
))
Remark 7.4. Let us make some comparisons between the above deﬁnitions.
An embedded conic fibration (Deﬁnition 7.1) over a projective base is not necessarily a conic bundle (Deﬁnition 2.12), as the relative Picard rank can be > 1.
Conversely, a conic bundle X/B is not necessarily an embedded conic ﬁbration (for
instance when some ﬁbres have dimension > 3), but it is one if the conic bundle is
standard (Deﬁnition 7.3) (as explained just above) or decomposable (Deﬁnition 6.8).
Moreover, a decomposable conic bundle is not always standard, as some ﬁbres
can be equal to P2 . It is not clear to us if there exist standard conic bundles which
are not decomposable.
V a ﬂat
Definition 7.5. Let V be a smooth quasi-projective variety and η : X
embedded conic ﬁbration.
For each irreducible closed subset Γ ⊆ V , we deﬁne the multiplicity of the discriminant of η along Γ as follows. We take an open subset U ⊆ V that intersects Γ
and such that η −1 (U ) is a closed subset of U × P2 , of degree 2, and consider a symmetric matrix M ∈ Mat3×3 (C(U )) that deﬁnes the equation of η −1 (U ). We choose
M such that all coeﬃcients of M are contained in the local ring OΓ (U ) ⊂ C(U ) of
rational functions deﬁned on a general point of Γ, and such that the residue matrix
Ď ∈ Mat3×3 (C(Γ)) is not zero. This is possible as the morphism is ﬂat, and deﬁnes
M
M uniquely, up to multiplication by an invertible element of OΓ (U ).
Now we deﬁne the multiplicity of the discriminant of η along Γ to be the least
integer m > 0 such that the determinant lies in mΓ (U )m , where mΓ (U ) is the
C(Γ).
maximal ideal of OΓ (U ), kernel of the ring homomorphism OΓ (U )

66

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

P
We deﬁne the discriminant divisor of η to be
mD D, where the sum runs over
all irreducible hypersurfaces D ⊂ V and where mD ∈ N is the the multiplicity of
the discriminant of η along D as deﬁned above.
Remark 7.6. If η : X
V is moreover a conic bundle, the deﬁnition of the discriminant given in Deﬁnition 7.5 is compatible with the deﬁnition of discriminant
locus given in Deﬁnition 2.12: the discriminant locus is the reduced part of the discriminant divisor of η. Moreover, if η is a standard conic bundle, the discriminant
divisor is reduced [Sar82, Corollary 1.9]. The multiplicity of the discriminant divisor
along irreducible hypersurfaces of V is always 0 or 1 in this case. We will however
not only consider hypersurfaces but also closed subvarieties of lower dimension.
Using the local description of the matrix that deﬁnes η as a ﬂat embedded conic
ﬁbration, one can prove the following:
Proposition 7.7 ([Sar82, Proposition 1.8]). Let V be a smooth quasi-projective
V be a flat embedded conic fibration, such that X is smooth.
variety, let η : X
The discriminant divisor ∆ of η has the following properties: for each point p ∈ V ,
the fibre fp = η −1 (p) is given as follows:




a smooth conic
not on ∆
fp is the union of two distinct lines
⇐⇒ p is a smooth point of ∆




a double line
a singular point of ∆.
We shall need the following folklore result:

Lemma 7.8. Let V be a smooth quasi-projective variety and let η1 : X1
V and
η2 : X2
V be two flat embedded conic fibrations. Let ψ : X1
X2 be a birational
map over V . Let ∆ ⊆ V be a closed irreducible subvariety such that η1−1 (∆ is not
contained in the base-locus of ψ, that the preimage η2−1 (∆) is irreducible and that
∆ is the union of two distinct lines. We moreover
a general fibre of η2−1 (∆)
assume that the multiplicity of the discriminant of η2 along ∆ is 1. Then, one of
the following holds:
(1) Every fibre of η1−1 (∆)
∆ is a double line (non-reduced fibre).
∆ is
(2) The preimage η1−1 (∆) is irreducible and a general fibre of η1−1 (∆)
the union of two distinct lines.
Proof. Replacing V by an open subset that intersects ∆, we can assume that X1
and X2 are closed subvarieties of V × P2 given by a polynomial of degree 2 in the
coordinates of P2 . We denote by O∆ (V ) ⊂ C(V ) the subring of rational functions
that are deﬁned on a general point of ∆ and consider the surjective residue homomorphism O∆ (V )
C(∆). The quadratic equations of X1 and X2 correspond to
symmetric matrices M1 , M2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C(V )), deﬁned up to scalar multiplication.
Since both η1 and η2 are ﬂat, we can choose M1 , M2 ∈ Mat3×3 (O∆ (V )) such that
Ď1 , M
Ď2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C(∆)) are not zero.
the residue matrices M
−1
The fact that η2 (∆) is irreducible and that a general ﬁbre of η2−1 (∆)
∆
is the union of two distinct lines is equivalent to asking that the quadratic form
associated to M2 corresponds to a singular irreducible conic over the ﬁeld C(∆).
It then corresponds to the union of two lines deﬁned over an extension of degree
2 of C(∆), which intersect into a point deﬁned over C(∆). After a change of
coordinates on X2 ⊂ V × P2 , applying an element of PGL3 (C(V )) which restricts
to an element of PGL3 (C(∆)), we can assume that the point is [0 : 0 : 1] and

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

67

completing the square we assume that the restriction is given by F = ax2 + by 2 for
some a, b ∈ C(∆)∗ , where − ab ∈ C(∆)∗ is not a square. This corresponds to saying
Ď2 is equal to the diagonal matrix diag(a, b, 0).
that M
The birational map ψ is given by
 h x i

h x i
v, y
v, A(v) · y
z

z

for some A ∈ GL3 (C(V )). This implies that M1 and tA · M2 · A are collinear in
Mat3×3 (C(V )).
As η1−1 (∆) is not contained in the base-locus of ψ, we can assume that A ∈
s ∈ Mat3×3 (C(∆)) is not zero. We can
Mat3×3 (O∆ (V )) is such that its residue A
moreover choose an element S ∈ GL3 (O∆ (V )), with residue Ss ∈ GL3 (C(∆)), and
replace A with A · S. This corresponds to a coordinate change of P2 × V at the
source, which only aﬀects X1 and not X2 . We can then reduce to the following
s according to the rank of the 2 × 3 matrix obtained from the ﬁrst
possibilities for A,
s
two rows of A:






1
0
0
α 0
0
0
0
0
0
β
0
1
0 ,
0
0 ,
0
0 ,
µ1 µ2 µ3
µ1 µ2 µ3
µ1 µ2 µ3
where α, β, µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ∈ C(∆) and (α, β) 6= (0, 0).
s· M
Ď2 · A
s=M
Ď2 , so η −1 (∆) has the same properties as η −1 (∆),
In the ﬁrst case, tA
2
1
which gives (2).
s·M
Ď2 · A
s = diag(α2 a + β 2 b, 0, 0). As (α, β) 6= (0, 0) and
The second case gives tA
− ab ∈ C(∆)∗ is not a square, we have α2 a+β 2 b 6= 0. The quadratic form associated
to this matrix is then a double line, and we obtain (1).
s·M
Ď2 · A
s = 0. This means
It remains to study the last case, which yields tA
that all coeﬃcents of tA · M2 · A belong to the maximal ideal m = m∆ (V ) of
C(∆). Applying S as
O∆ (V ), kernel of the residue homomorphism O∆ (V )
s is 1.
before, we can assume that µ1 = 1, µ2 = µ3 = 0, since the rank of A
We write M2 = diag(a, b, 0) + (νi,j )16i,j63 where νi,j ∈ m for all i, j, and obtain
det(M2 ) ≡ a · b · ν3,3 (mod m2 ). As the multiplicity of the discriminant of η2 along
∆ is 1, this implies that ν3,3 ∈ m r m2 . We compute tA · M2 · A ≡ diag(ν3,3 , 0, 0)
(mod m2 ). The quadratic form associated to this matrix is a double line, so again
we obtain (1).

We give two examples to illustrate the need for all the assumptions in Lemma 7.8:
Example 7.9. We work over the aﬃne plane V = A2 and consider
X1 = {([x : y : z], (u, v)) ∈ P2 × A2 | x2 v + y 2 − z 2 = 0},
X2 = {([x : y : z], (u, v)) ∈ P2 × A2 | x2 v + y 2 − u2 z 2 = 0},
X2′ = {([x : y : z], (u, v)) ∈ P2 × A2 | x2 uv + y 2 − z 2 = 0}.
The projection onto the second factor gives three ﬂat embedded conic ﬁbrations
A2 , η2 : X2
A2 , η2′ : X2′
A2 , with discriminant divisors being reη1 : X1
2
spectively given by v = 0, u v = 0 and uv = 0. The birational maps of P2 × A2
([xu : yu : z], (u, v)) and ([x : y : z], (u, v))
([2x :
given by ([x : y : z], (u, v))
(u + 1)y + (u − 1)z : (u − 1)y + (u + 1)z], (u, v)) provide two birational maps
X2 and ψ ′ : X1
X2′ over A2 .
ψ : X1

68

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Choosing ∆ ⊂ A2 to be the line {u = 0}, the result of Lemma 7.8 does not
hold for ψ and for ψ ′ , because a general ﬁbre of η1−1 (∆)
∆ is a smooth conic.
In both cases, exactly one hypothesis is not satisﬁed. Namely, the multiplicity of
the discriminant of η2 along ∆ is 2 instead of 1, and the surface η2′−1 (∆) is not
irreducible.
The idea of the proof of the following statement was given to us by C. Böhnig
and H.-C. Graf von Bothmer.
B
Proposition 7.10. Let B be a smooth surface, and for i = 1, 2, let ηi : Xi
be a standard conic bundle with discriminant a smooth irreducible curve ∆i ⊂ B.
Assume that there exists a commutative diagram
ψ

X1 × Y

X2 × Y

η1 ×id

η2 ×id
θ

B×Y

B×Y

where Y is smooth and ψ, θ are birational.
Then, for a general point p ∈ Y , the image of ∆1 × {p} is contained in ∆2 × Y
and the morphism ∆1
∆2 obtained by composing
∆1

∼

∆1 × {p}

is surjective (here pr1 : ∆2 × Y

θ

∆2 × Y

pr1

∆2

∆2 is the first projection).

Proof. For i = 1, 2, the discriminant divisor of ηi is reduced [Sar82, Corollary 1.9],
so consists of ∆i . As ∆i is smooth, ηi−1 (p) is the union of two distinct lines for each
p ∈ ∆i (Proposition 7.7). Since ρ(Xi /Bi ) = 1, the preimage ηi−1 (∆i ) is irreducible.
The morphism (Xi × Y )/(B × Y ) is a standard conic bundle whose discriminant
divisor is reduced, consisting of the smooth hypersurface ∆i × Y ⊂ B × Y .
We choose a dense open subset U ⊆ B × Y on which θ is deﬁned and whose
complement is of codimension 2 (since B ×Y is smooth). In particular, U ∩(∆1 ×Y )
is not empty, so U ∩ (∆1 × {p}) 6= ∅ for a general point p ∈ Y . After restricting the
open subset, we can moreover assume that η1−1 (U ) is a closed subset of U ×P2, given
by the quadratic form induced by a matrix M1 ∈ GL3 (C(U )). The coeﬃcients of
the matrix can moreover be chosen in C(B) ⊆ C(B × Y ) = C(U ), as the equation
of X1 × Y in P2 × Y is locally the equation of X1 in P2 , independent of Y .
We deﬁne C ⊂ B × Y to be image of ∆1 × {p} by θ, which is a point or an
irreducible curve, as ∆1 is an irreducible curve. The aim is now to show that
C ⊆ ∆2 × Y and that pr1 (C) = ∆2 . We choose an open subset V ⊆ B × Y
intersecting C such that η2−1 (V ) is contained in P2 ×V and is given by the quadratic
form given by a symmetric matrix M2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C(V )). The morphism η2 being
ﬂat, we can choose the coeﬃcients of M2 to be deﬁned on C and such that the
Ď2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C(C)) is not zero. The birational map ψ is locally
residue matrix in M
given by
U × P2
 h x i
u, yz

V × P2

h x i
θ(u), A(u) · yz

for some A ∈ GL3 (C(U )). The explicit form of the map ψ gives
λ · M1 = tA · θ∗ (M2 ) · A

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

69

where λ ∈ C(U )∗ is a scalar and θ∗ (M2 ) is the matrix obtained from M2 by applying
C(U ). As the rational map θ
to its coeﬃcients the ﬁeld isomorphism θ∗ : C(V )
C, we have a ﬁeld homomorphism
induces a dominant rational map ∆1 × {p}
C(∆1 × {p}) ≃ C(∆1 ), that we denote by θ̄∗ . It induces a commutative
C(C)
diagram
OC (V )
C(C)

θ∗

θ̄ ∗

O∆1 ×{p} (U )
C(∆1 × {p}) ≃ C(∆1 ).

We denote by X ′ ⊂ U × P2 the subvariety given by the quadratic form associated
to the matrix θ∗ (M2 ). We observe that the coeﬃcients of θ∗ (M2 ) are deﬁned over
∗ (M ) ∈ Mat
∆1 × {p} and that the residue gives a matrix θĞ
2
3×3 (C(∆1 )) which is
∗
s
Ď2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C).
obtained by applying the ﬁeld homomorphism θ to the entries of M
′
U is then an embedded conic ﬁbration, which is ﬂat after
The morphism pr1 : X
maybe reducing the open subset U (but still having U ∩ (∆1 × {p}) 6= ∅).
X given by
We can apply Lemma 7.8 to the birational map X ′
 h x i

h x i
u, yz
u, A(u)−1 · yz
and to ∆ = ∆1 × {p}. Indeed, (η1 × id)−1 (∆1 × {p}) is irreducible as η1−1 (∆1 )
is irreducible, and every ﬁbre of (η1 × id)−1 (∆1 × {p})
∆1 × {p} is the union
∆1 by Proposition 7.7.
of two distinct lines, as the same holds for η1−1 (∆1 )
Lemma 7.8 gives two possibilities for the matrix θ̄∗ (M2 ) ∈ Mat3×3 (C(∆1 )): either
it is of rank 1 (case (1)) or it is of rank 2, corresponding to a singular irreducible
Ď2 ∈ Mat3×3 (C) as θ̄∗
conic (case (2)). This gives the same two possibilities for M
is a ﬁeld homomorphism. As the rank of M2 is smaller than 3, the variety C is in
the discriminant of (X2 × Y )/(B × Y ) and is thus contained in ∆2 × Y as desired.
It remains to see that C is not contained in {q} × Y for some point q. Indeed,
the preimage (η2 × id)−1 ({q} × Y ) is isomorphic to η2−1 ({q}) × Y , which is not
irreducible, as η2−1 ({q}) is the union of two lines (again by Proposition 7.7), but
which is reduced.

7.B. Conic bundles associated to smooth cubic curves. The principal result
in this section is Proposition 7.15, which provides a family of conic bundles that we
shall use in the next section to prove Theorem E.
Lemma 7.11. For each p = [α : β] ∈ P1 , the set
Sp = {[x0 : x1 : x2 ] ∈ P2 | αx20 + βx1 x2 = αx21 + βx0 x2 = αx22 + βx0 x1 = 0}
consists of three points if α(α3 + β 3 ) = 0 and is empty otherwise.
Proof. As S[0:1] = {[1 : 0 : 0], [0 : 1 : 0], [0 : 0 : 1]} and S[1:0] = ∅, we may
assume that α ∈ C∗ and β = 1. If [x0 : x1 : x2 ] ∈ Sp , then α(x30 − x31 ) =
x0 (αx20 + x1 x2 ) − x1 (αx21 + x0 x2 ) = 0. The equations being symmetric, we get
x30 = x31 = x32 . In particular x0 x1 x2 6= 0, so the three equations are equivalent to
x1 x2
x0 x1
x0 x2
α=− 2 =− 2 =− 2 ,
x0
x2
x1
which implies that α3 = −1. For the three possible values of α, we observe that
S[α:1] = {[1 : x1 : −α/x1 ] | x31 = 1} consists of three points.


70

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Lemma 7.12. For each ξ ∈ C such that ξ 3 6= − 81 , the hypersurface Xξ ⊂ P2 × P2
of bidegree (2, 1) given by
2
n
o
X
x0 x1 x2
(x2i + 2ξ
Xξ = ([x0 : x1 : x2 ], [y0 : y1 : y2 ]) ∈ P2 × P2
)yi = 0
xi
i=0

is smooth, irreducible, rational over Q(ξ), and satisfies ρ(Xξ ) = 2. The second
projection gives a standard conic bundle Xξ /P2 . The discriminant curve ∆ξ ⊂ P2
is given by
−ξ 2 (y03 + y13 + y23 ) + (2ξ 3 + 1)y0 y1 y2 = 0
and is the union of three lines if ξ = 0 or if ξ 3 = 1, and is a smooth cubic otherwise.
Proof. To show that Xξ is smooth, irreducible, rational over Q(ξ) and that ρ(Xξ ) =
2, it suﬃces to show that the ﬁrst projection Xξ
P2 is a (Zariski locally trivial)
1
P -bundle. This amounts to showing that the coeﬃcients of the linear polynomial
in the variables yi deﬁning Xξ are never zero, i.e. that for each [x0 : x1 : x2 ] ∈ P2
we cannot have x20 + 2ξx1 x2 = x21 + 2ξx0 x2 = x22 + 2ξx0 x1 = 0. This follows from
Lemma 7.11 and from the hypothesis ξ 3 6= − 81 .
The equation of Xξ is given by
 


x0
y0 ξy2 ξy1
(x0 x1 x2 ) · M · x1  = 0 with M = ξy2 y1 ξy0  ∈ Mat3×3 (C[y0 , y1 , y2 ]).
x2
ξy1 ξy0 y2
The polynomial det(M ) is equal to
det(M ) = λ(y03 + y13 + y23 ) + µy0 y1 y2 , with λ = −ξ 2 and µ = 2ξ 3 + 1.
In particular, the ﬁbres of the second projection Xξ /P2 are all conics (the coeﬃcients
of x2i is yi so not all coeﬃcients can be zero) and a general one is irreducible. As the
threefold Xξ is smooth, irreducible and satisﬁes ρ(Xξ ) = 2, the morphism Xξ /P2 is
a standard conic bundle. Its discriminant is given by the zero locus of det(M ), which
is a polynomial of degree 3 which has the classical Hesse Form. The discriminant
corresponds to a smooth cubic if λ(27λ3 + µ3 ) 6= 0, and to the union of three lines
in general position otherwise. To prove this classical fact, we compute the partial
derivatives of det(M ), which are (3λy02 + µy1 y2 , 3λy12 + µy0 y2 , 3λy22 + µy0 y1 ). By
Lemma 7.11, this has no zeroes in P2 if λ(27λ3 + µ3 ) 6= 0 and has three zeroes
otherwise. It remains to observe that 27λ3 + µ3 = (8ξ 3 + 1)(ξ 3 − 1)2 .

Remark 7.13. Let k be a subﬁeld of C and ξ ∈ k. Then the curve ∆ξ of
Lemma 7.12 is deﬁned over k and has a k-rational point, namely the inﬂexion
point [0 : 1 : −1]. When k = C, one can prove that all elliptic curves are obtained
in this way; for smaller ﬁelds this does not seem to be true. We will however show
that there are enough such curves.
We thank P. Habegger for helpful discussions concerning the next lemma.
Lemma 7.14. Let k ⊆ C be a subfield.
(1) For each ξ ∈ k, with ξ 3 ∈
/ {0, − 81 , 1}, we denote (as in Lemma 7.12) by ∆ξ
the smooth cubic curve defined over k given by
−ξ 2 (y03 + y13 + y23 ) + (2ξ 3 + 1)y0 y1 y2 = 0.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

71

The j-invariant of ∆ξ is equal to
3

16ξ 12 + 464ξ 9 + 240ξ 6 + 8ξ 3 + 1
.
ξ 2 (8ξ 9 − 15ξ 6 + 6ξ 3 + 1)
(2) There is a subset J ⊆ k having the same cardinality as k such that for all
ξ, ξ ′ ∈ J, the following are equivalent:
(i) There exist surjective morphisms ∆ξ
∆ξ′ and ∆ξ′
∆ξ defined over
C;
(ii) ξ = ξ ′ .
/ {0, − 81 , 1}. We
Proof. (1). By Lemma 7.12, ∆ξ is a smooth cubic curve if ξ 3 ∈
choose the inﬂexion point [0 : 1 : −1] ∈ ∆ξ to be the origin, make a coordinate
change so that the inﬂexion line is the line at inﬁnity, and thusly obtain a Weierstrass form. Then we compute the j-invariant as in [Sil09, III.1 page 42]; this is
tedious but straightforward. This can also be done using the formulas from [AD09,
page 240].
(2). Let ξ, ξ ′ ∈ k be such that ξ 3 , (ξ ′ )3 ∈
/ {0, − 81 , 1}. We see the curves ∆ξ and
∆ξ′ as elliptic curves deﬁned over k with origin O = [0 : 1 : −1]. Suppose that
there is a surjective morphism ϕ : ∆ξ
∆ξ′ deﬁned over C. It sends the origin of
∆ξ onto a C-rational point of ∆ξ′ . Applying a translation at the target, we can
assume that ϕ(O) = O, which means that ϕ is an isogeny, and that ∆ξ and ∆ξ′
are isogenous over C (see [Sil09, Deﬁnition, §III.4 page 66]).
We now choose a sequence p1 , p2 , . . . of increasing prime numbers such that for
each i > 2, the prime number pi does not appear in the denominator of the jinvariant of ∆pi′ for each i′ < i. For each i > 1, the j-invariant of ∆pi is an element
of Q having a denominator divisible by pi (follows from (1)), so ∆pi does not have
potential good reduction modulo pi but this does not hold for ∆pi′ for i′ > i, which
then has potential good reduction modulo pi [Sil09, Proposition 5.5, §VII.5, page
197]. This implies that there is no isogeny ∆pi
∆pi′ deﬁned over any number
ﬁeld K and where one curve has good reduction and the other has bad reduction
[Sil09, Corollary 7.2, §VII.7, page 202], and thus no isogeny deﬁned over C [MW90,
Lemma 6.1]. If k is countable, this achieves the proof of (2).
It remains to consider the case where k is an uncountable subﬁeld of C. The
set of j-invariants of curves ∆ξ , where ξ ∈ k is such that ξ 3 ∈
/ {0, − 81 , 1}, is then
uncountable too.
s 2 such that the
We denote by Ω ⊆ C2 the set consisting of pairs (j1 , j2 ) ∈ Q
curves of j-invariants j1 and j2 are isogenous. The set Ω is a countable union of
algebraic curves deﬁned over Q, given by the zero set of the so-called modular
transformation polynomials (see [Lan87, 5§3] and in particular [Lan87, Theorem 5,
Chapter 5§3, page 59]). Moreover, these curves are irreducible and invariant under
the exchanges of variables (x, y)
(y, x) [Lan87, Theorem 3, Chapter 5§3, page
55], so are not vertical or horizontal lines in C2 .
We write S = {ξ ∈ k | ξ 3 ∈
/ {0, − 81 , 1}}. Then, by the previous paragraph,
for each element ξ ∈ S the curve ∆ξ is isogeneous (over C) to only countably
many isomorphism classes of ∆ξ′ with ξ ′ ∈ k. Putting an equivalence relation on
S saying that two elements are equivalent if the curves are isogeneous over C (see
[Sil09, III.6, Theorem 6.1(a)]), we obtain that each equivalence class is countable,
so the set of equivalence classes has the cardinality of S, or equivalently of k. This
achieves the proof.


72

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Proposition 7.15. Let k be a subfield of C. For each n > 3, there is a set
J having the cardinality of k indexing decomposable conic bundles Xi /Bi defined
over k, where Xi , Bi are smooth varieties rational over k, and such that two conic
bundles Xi /Bi and Xj /Bj are equivalent (over C) if and only if i = j.
Proof. We choose the set J ⊆ k of Lemma 7.14(2), and consider, for each ξ ∈ J,
the hypersurface Xξ ⊂ P2 × P2 of Lemma 7.12, which is given by
2
o
n
X
x0 x1 x2
)yi = 0
(x2i + 2ξ
Xξ = ([x0 : x1 : x2 ], [y0 : y1 : y2 ]) ∈ P2 × P2
xi
i=0

P2
By Lemma 7.12, the second projection gives a standard conic bundle Xξ
2
2 3
3
3
3
whose discriminant curve ∆ξ ⊂ P is given by −ξ (y0 + y1 + y2 ) + (2ξ + 1)y0 y1 y2 .
Note that (Xξ × Pn−3 )/(P2 × Pn−3 ) (or simply Xξ /P2 if n = 3) is a decomposable
conic bundle deﬁned over k, as it is embedded in the trivial P2 -bundle (P2 × P2 ×
Pn−3 )/(P2 × Pn−3 ) by construction. Moreover, Xξ × Pn−3 is birational to Pn over
k (Lemma 7.12). By Proposition 7.10, two conic bundles (Xξ × Pn−3 )/(P2 × Pn−3 )
and (Xξ′ ×Pn−3 )/(P2 ×Pn−3 ) are equivalent only if there exist surjective morphisms
∆ξ′ and ∆ξ′
∆ξ . This is only possible if ξ = ξ ′ , by Lemma 7.14(2). 
∆ξ
7.C. Proofs of Theorems E and C.
Proof of Theorem E. By Theorem D, we have respectively a group homomorphism
and a groupoid homomorphism:

Bir(Pn )
˚C∈CB(Pn ) ⊕M(C) Z/2
∩
BirMori(Pn )
n
n
For each subﬁeld k ⊆ C, we can
 embed Birk (P ) into BirC (P ) and look at the image in ˚C∈CB(Pn ) ⊕M(C) Z/2 . We consider the set of decomposable conic bundles
Xi /Bi deﬁned over k indexed by J of Proposition 7.15, which give pairwise distinct elements of Ci ∈ CB(Pn ), and associate to these birational maps ψi : Xi
Pn
−1
deﬁned over k. For each i ∈ J, there is an involution ιi ∈ ψi Birk (Xi /Bi )ψi ⊆
Birk (Pn ) whose image in ⊕M(Ci ) Z/2 is not trivial by Proposition 6.9. One can thus
take a projection ⊕M(Ci ) Z/2
Z/2 such that the image of ιi is non-trivial. We
obtain a surjective group homomorphism from Birk (Pn ) to ˚i∈J Z/2 where J has
the cardinality of k and such that each involution ιi ∈ Birk (Pn ) is sent onto the
generator indexed by i. There is thus a section of this surjective group homomorphism.


Remark 7.16. As Proposition 7.15 gives an inﬁnite image, the above proof naturally gives a surjective homomorphism to the group ˚J (⊕Z Z/2), but since there
is an abstract surjective homomorphism from ˚J Z/2 to this group, we chose not
to mention the direct sum in the statement of the theorem.
Moreover, with the alternative form the existence of a section would be far less
clear. Indeed, (Z/2)3 does not embed in Bir(X/B) and (Z/2)7 does not embed
in Bir(X), for X rationally connected of dimension 3 [Pro11, Pro14], so it seems
probable that ⊕Z Z/2 does not embed in Bir(X) for any variety X.
Proof of Theorem C. We consider a subﬁeld k of C, an integer n > 3, and a subset
S ⊂ Birk (Pn ) of cardinality smaller than the one of k. We want to construct a

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

73

Z/2 such that the group G generated by
surjective homomorphism Birk (Pn )
Autk (Pn ), by all Jonquières elements and by S is contained in the kernel. We use
the group homomorphism
τ : Birk (Pn )

˚ Z/2
J

given by Theorem E. Each j ∈ J corresponds to a conic bundle Xj /Bj . The group
Autk (Pn ) is in the kernel of τ . The group of Jonquières elements is conjugated to
the subgroup J ⊂ Bir(P1 × Pn−1 ) consisting of elements sending a general ﬁbre of
P1 × Pn−1 /Pn−1 onto another one. The action on the base yields an exact sequence
1

Bir(P1 × Pn−1 /Pn−1 )

J

Bir(Pn−1 )

1.

This gives J = Bir(P1 × Pn−1 /Pn−1 ) ⋊ J ′ , where J ′ ⊂ J is the group isomorphic
to Bir(Pn−1 ) that acts on P1 × Pn−1 with trivial action on the ﬁrst factor. We
can assume that P1 × Pn−1 /Pn−1 = Xj0 /Bj0 for some j0 ∈ J. The image of
Bir(P1 × Pn−1 /Pn−1 ) by τ is contained in the group Z/2 indexed by j0 . Now
observe that J ′ ⊂ Ker τ . Indeed, we ﬁrst decompose an element of J ′ ≃ Bir(Pn−1 )
Si , where
as a product of Sarkisov links between terminal Mori ﬁbre spaces Yi
Yi has dimension n − 1, and observe that taking the product with P1 gives Sarkisov
Si × P1 of dimension n. Each of the
links between the Mori ﬁbre spaces Yi × P1
Sarkisov links of type II arising in such decomposition has covering gonality 1, as
cov. gon(Γ × P1 ) = 1 for each variety Γ.
˚Jr{j0 } Z/2 obtained by
We consider the group homomorphism τ̂ : Birk (Pn )
composing τ with the projection ˚J Z/2
˚Jr{j0 } Z/2 obtained by forgetting the
factor indexed by j0 .
The image by τ̂ of all Jonquières elements is trivial, hence the group τ̂ (G) has at
most the cardinality of S, which by assumption is strictly smaller than the cardinality of J. We construct the expected morphism by projecting from τ̂ (Birk (Pn ))
onto a factor Z/2 which is not in the image of G.

8. Complements
8.A. Quotients and SQ-universality. A direct consequence of Theorem E is
that we have a lot of quotients of Birk (Pn ) for n > 3.
Firstly, we can have quite small quotients (which is not the case for BirC (P2 )
which has no non-trivial countable quotient, as mentioned before):
Corollary 8.1. For each n > 3, each subfield k ⊆ C, and each integer m > 1,
there are (abstract) surjective group homomorphisms from Birk (Pn ) to the dihedral
group D2m of order 2m and the symmetric group Symm . In particular, there is a
normal subgroup of Birk (Pn ) of index r for each even integer r > 1.
Proof. Follows from Theorem E and the fact that D2m and Symm are generated
by involutions.

Secondly, we get much larger quotients:
Corollary 8.2. For any n > 3, any subfield k ⊆ C and any integer m > 1, there
are (abstract) surjective group homomorphisms
Birk (Pn )

SLm (k),

Birk (Pn )

BirQ (P2 ).

74

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

Proof. We observe that SLm (k) has the cardinality of k and that BirQ (P2 ) is countable. Hence, both groups have at most the cardinality of k. Both groups are
generated by involutions: for BirQ (P2 ) this is by the Noether-Castelnuovo Theorem which says that BirQ (P2 ) is generated by the standard quadric involution
and by AutQ (P3 ) ≃ PGL3 (Q) = PSL3 (Q), and thus is generated by involutions.
Hence, the two groups are quotients of ˚J Z/2. The result then follows from The
orem E.
Similarly, over C we get:
Corollary 8.3. For any n > 3, there exists a surjective group homomorphism
BirC (Pn )

BirC (P2 ).

Recall that a group G is SQ-universal if any countable group embeds in a quotient
of G. The free group Z ∗ Z was an early example of SQ-universal group. More
generally any nontrivial free product G1 ∗G2 distinct from Z/2∗Z/2 is SQ-universal,
see [Sch73, Theorem 3]. From a modern point of view, this also follows from [MO15],
by looking at the action of any loxodromic isometry on the associated Bass-Serre
tree. In particular, taking G1 = Z/2∗Z/2 and G2 = Z/2, we get that Z/2∗Z/2∗Z/2
is SQ-universal.
Corollary 8.4. For any field k ⊆ C and any n > 3, the Cremona group Birk (Pn )
admits a surjective morphism to the SQ-universal group Z/2 ∗ Z/2 ∗ Z/2. In particular, Birk (Pn ) also is SQ-universal.
Proof. Follows from Theorem E and from the fact that Z/2 ∗ Z/2 ∗ Z/2 is SQuniversal.

8.B. Hopfian property. Recall that a group G is hopfian is every surjective group
G is an isomorphism. It was proven in [Dés07] that the group
homomorphism G
BirC (P2 ) is hopﬁan. An open question, asked by I. Dolgachev (see [Dés17]), is
whether the Cremona group BirC (Pn ) is generated by involutions for each n, the
answer being yes in dimension 2 and open in dimension > 3. Theorem E relates
these two notions and shows that we cannot generalise both results at the same
time (being hopﬁan and generated by involutions) to higher dimension.
Corollary 8.5. For each n > 3 and each subfield k ⊆ C, the group Birk (Pn ) is
not hopfian if it is generated by involutions.
Proof. Follows from Theorem E, as the group homomorphisms provided by Theorem E is not injective, and because Birk (Pn ) has the same cardinality as k (the
set of all polynomials of degree n with coeﬃcients in k has the same cardinality as
k).

8.C. More general fields. Every ﬁeld isomorphism k ∼ k′ naturally induces an
isomorphism Birk (Pn ) ∼ Birk′ (Pn ). More generally, it associates to each variety
and each rational map deﬁned over k, a variety and a rational map deﬁned over
k′ . It then induces an isomorphism between the group of birational maps deﬁned
over k and k′ of the varieties obtained. This implies that the ﬁve Theorems A-E
also hold for each ground ﬁeld which is abstractly isomorphic to a subﬁeld of C.
This includes any ﬁeld of rational functions of any algebraic variety deﬁned over
a subﬁeld of C as these ﬁelds have characteristic zero and cardinality smaller or
equal than the one of C.

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

75

8.D. Amalgamated product structure. We work over the ﬁeld C. In the next
result, an element of CB(X) is said to be decomposable if it is the class of a decomposable conic bundle (in the sense of Deﬁnition 6.8).
Theorem 8.6. For each integer n > 3, and let X/B be a conic bundle, where X
is a terminal variety of dimension n. We denote by ρ the group homomorphism


⊕ Z/2
ρ : Bir(X)
˚
C∈CB(X)

M(C)

given by Theorem D. For each C ∈ CB(X) we fix a choice of representative XC /BC ,
and we denote GC = ρ−1 (ρ(Bir(XC /BC ))) ⊆ Bir(X). Then, the following hold:
(1) For all C 6= C ′ in CB(X), the group A = GC ∩ GC ′ contains ker ρ and does
not depend on the choice of C, C ′ ;
(2) The group Bir(X) is the free product of the groups GC , C ∈ CB(X), amalgamated over their common intersection A:
Bir(X) = ˚ GC .
A

(3) For each decomposable C ∈ CB(X) we have A ( GC . Moreover, the free
product of (2) is non-trivial (i.e. A ( GC ( Bir(X) for each C) as soon as CB(X)
contains two distinct decomposable elements. This is for instance the case when X
is rational, as CB(X) then contains uncountably many decomposable elements.

Proof. (1). For each C ∈ CB(X), we denote by HC = ⊕M(C) Z/2 the factor
indexed by C in the free product ˚C∈CB(X) ⊕M(C) Z/2 = ˚C∈CB(X) HC . By deﬁnition of the group homomorphism, for each C ∈ CB(X) we have ρ(Bir(XC /BC )) ⊆
HC . As HC is a F2 -vector space with basis M(C) and ρ(Bir(XC /BC )) is a linear
ρ(Bir(XC /BC )). We then denote by
subspace, there exists a projection HC
ρ′ : Bir(X)

˚
C∈CB(X)

ρ(Bir(XC /BC ))

the group homomorphism induced for each C by the projection
HC

ρ(Bir(XC /BC )).

By deﬁnition of the free product, we obtain HC ∩ HC ′ = id for all C 6= C ′ . This
implies that GC ∩ GC ′ = ker ρ′ ⊇ ker ρ.
(2). We ﬁrst observe that by construction the groups GC generate the group
Bir(X). The fact that Bir(X) = ˚A GC corresponds to saying that all relations in
Bir(X) lie in the groups GC . This follows from the group homomorphism ρ to a
free product, where no relation between the groups HC exists.
(3). The fact that A ( GC for each decomposable C follows from Proposition 6.9.
Hence, the free product of (2) is non-trivial if there are least two C corresponding to
decomposable conic bundles. If X is rational, then we moreover have uncountably

many such elements by Proposition 7.15.
In Theorem 8.6, one could be tempted to say that A = ker ρ, but this is not
clear. Indeed, it could be that some elements of ⊕M(C) Z/2 are in the image of
Bir(X) but not in the image of Bir(X/B).

76

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

8.E. Cubic varieties. Here again we work over C. We recall the following result,
which allows to apply Theorem B to any smooth cubic hypersurface of dimension
> 3:
Lemma 8.7. Let n > 4 and let ℓ ⊂ X ⊂ Pn be a line on a smooth cubic hypersurface. We denote by X̂ and P the respective blow-ups of X and Pn along ℓ.
Then, the projection prℓ away from ℓ gives rise to a decomposable conic bundle and
a decomposable P2 -bundle
X̂ ⊂ P = P(OPn−2 ⊕ OPn−2 ⊕ OP2 (1))

prℓ

Pn−2 .

Moreover, the discriminant of the conic bundle is a hypersurface of degree 5.
Proof. We take coordinates [y0 : y1 : · · · : yn−2 : u : v] on Pn and assume that
ℓ ⊂ Pn is the line given by y0 = y1 = · · · = yn−2 = 0. The equation of X is then
given by
Au2 + 2Buv + Cv 2 + 2Du + 2Ev + F = 0
where A, B, C, D, E, F ∈ C[y0 , . . . , yn−2 ] are homogeneous polynomials of degree
1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3 respectively.
As in the proof of Proposition 6.9, we view P = P(OPn−2 ⊕ OPn−2 ⊕ OPn−2 (1))
as the quotient of (A2 r {0}) × (An−1 r {0}) by (Gm )2 via
((λ, µ), (x0 , x1 , x2 , y0 , y1 , · · · , yn−2 ))

(λx0 , λx1 , λµ−1 x2 , µy0 , · · · , µyn−2 )

and denote by [x0 : x1 : x2 ; y0 : · · · : yn−2 ] ∈ P the class of (x0 , x1 , x2 , y0 , · · · , yn−2 ).
The birational morphism
P
[x0 : x1 : x2 ; y0 : y1 : y2 : · · · : yn−2 ]

Pn
[x2 y0 : · · · : x2 yn−2 : x0 : x1 ]

is the blow-up of ℓ, so X̂ is given by
Ax20 + 2Bx0 x1 + Cx21 + 2Dx2 x0 + 2Ex2 x1 + F x22 = 0,
which is then a conic bundle over P2 . The discriminant of the curve
 gives a hyperA B D
2

surface ∆ ⊂ P of degree 5, given by the determinant of B C E .
D E F

Corollary 8.8. For each n > 4 and each smooth cubic hypersurface X ⊂ Pn , there
exists a surjective group homomorphism Bir(X)
⊕Z Z/2
Proof. Follows from the application of Theorem B to the conic bundle associated

to blow-up of a line of X (Lemma 8.7).
Every smooth cubic threefold X ⊂ P4 is not rational, and moreover two such
cubics are birational if and only if they are projectively equivalent, i.e. equal up to
an element of Aut(P4 ) = PGL5 (C) [CG72]. We moreover get the following:
Proposition 8.9. Let X ⊂ P4 be a general smooth cubic hypersurface. We have
˚J Z/2, where J has the cardinality
a surjective group homomorphism Bir(X)
of C.
Proof. The map of Lemma 8.7 associates to each smooth cubic threefold X and
each line ℓ ⊂ X a quintic curve ∆ ⊂ P2 and also a theta-characteristic; this induces
a birational map between the pairs (ℓ, X) of lines on smooth cubic threefolds, up
to PGL5 (C), and the pairs (θ, ∆), where ∆ ⊂ P2 is a smooth quintic and θ is a

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

77

theta-characteristic, again up to PGL3 (C) [CMF05, Theorem 4.1 and Proposition
4.2].
In particular, taking a general smooth cubic hypersurface X ⊂ P4 and varying
the lines ℓ ⊂ X (which form a 2-dimensional family), we obtain a family J of dimension 2 of smooth quintics ∆ ⊂ P2 , not pairwise equivalent modulo PGL3 (C). This
yields conic bundles that are not pairwise equivalent, parametrised by a complex
algebraic variety of dimension 2. Applying the group homomorphism of Theorem D
and projecting on the corresponding factors provides a surjective group homomorphism Bir(X)
˚J Z/2, similarly as in the proof of Theorem E.

8.F. Fibrations graph. We explain how to get a natural graph structure from
the set of rank r ﬁbrations, similarly as in [LZ20].
Let Z be a variety birational to a Mori ﬁbre space. We construct a sequence of
nested graphs Gn , n > 1, as follows. The set of vertices of Gn are rank r ﬁbrations
X, and modulo
X/B, for any r 6 n, with a choice of a birational map ϕ : Z
Z-equivalence (Deﬁnition 4.1). We denote (X/B, ϕ) such an equivalence class. We
put an oriented edge from (X/B, ϕ) to (X ′ /B ′ , ϕ′ ) if ρ(X ′ /B ′ ) = ρ(X/B) − 1 and
the birational maps from Z induce a factorisation of X/B through X ′ /B ′ , that is,
B and a birational contraction X
X ′ such that the
if there is a morphism B ′
following diagram commutes
ϕ

Z

ϕ′

X

X′

B
S

B′

We call the graph G := n Gn the fibrations graph associated with Z. The group
Bir(Z) naturally acts on each graph Gn , and so also on G, by precomposition :
g · (X/B, ϕ) := (X/B, ϕ ◦ g −1 ).
The fact that Sarkisov links generate BirMori(Z) is equivalent to the fact that
G2 is a connected graph. Lemma 4.2 implies that G3 is the 1-skeleton of a square
complex, where each square has one vertex of rank 3, one vertex of rank 1 and
two vertices of rank 2. The fact that elementary relations generate all relations in
BirMori(Z) is equivalent to the fact that this square complex is simply connected.
It is not clear to us if for n > 4 the graph Gn is still the 1-skeleton of a cube
complex.
References
[AO18]
[AZ16]
[AZ17]
[Alb02]
[AR04]
[AD09]

H. Ahmadinezhad & T. Okada. Stable rationality of higher dimensional conic bundles. Épijournal Geom. Algébrique, 2:Art. 5, 13, 2018. 5, 63
H. Ahmadinezhad & F. Zucconi. Mori dream spaces and birational rigidity of Fano
3-folds. Adv. Math., 292:410–445, 2016. 33
H. Ahmadinezhad & F. Zucconi. Circle of Sarkisov links on a Fano 3-fold. Proc.
Edinb. Math. Soc. (2), 60(1):1–16, 2017. 49
M. Alberich-Carramiñana. Geometry of the plane Cremona maps, volume 1769 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. 2
A. Alzati & F. Russo. Some extremal contractions between smooth varieties arising
from projective geometry. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 89(1):25–53, 2004. 65
M. Artebani & I. Dolgachev. The Hesse pencil of plane cubic curves. Enseign. Math.
(2), 55(3-4):235–273, 2009. 71

78

[ADHL15]

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

I. Arzhantsev, U. Derenthal, J. Hausen & A. Laface. Cox rings, volume 144 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2015. 13
[BDE+ 17]
F. Bastianelli, P. De Poi, L. Ein, R. Lazarsfeld & B. Ullery. Measures of irrationality
for hypersurfaces of large degree. Compos. Math., 153(11):2368–2393, 2017. 19, 20,
21
[BCTSSD85] A. Beauville, J.-L. Colliot-Thélène, J.-J. Sansuc & P. Swinnerton-Dyer. Variétés
stablement rationnelles non rationnelles. Ann. of Math. (2), 121(2):283–318, 1985.
58
[Bir16]
C. Birkar. Singularities of linear systems and boundedness of Fano varieties.
Preprint arXiv:1609.05543, 2016. 8, 50
[Bir19]
C. Birkar. Anti-pluricanonical systems on Fano varieties. Ann. of Math. (2),
190(2):345–463, 2019. 8, 21, 51
[BCHM10]
C. Birkar, P. Cascini, C. D. Hacon & J. McKernan. Existence of minimal models
for varieties of log general type. J. Am. Math. Soc., 23(2):405–468, 2010. 9, 10, 12,
13, 14, 15, 35, 36, 41, 46
[Bla10]
J. Blanc. Groupes de Cremona, connexité et simplicité. Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér.
(4), 43(2):357–364, 2010. 3
[BFT17]
J. Blanc, A. Fanelli & R. Terpereau. Automorphisms of P1 -bundles over rational
surfaces. Preprint arXiv:1707.01462, 2017. 3
[BFT19]
J. Blanc, A. Fanelli & R. Terpereau. Connected algebraic groups acting on 3dimensional Mori ﬁbrations. manuscript in preparation, 2019. 7
[BF13]
J. Blanc & J.-P. Furter. Topologies and structures of the Cremona groups. Ann. of
Math. (2), 178(3):1173–1198, 2013. 3
[BH15]
J. Blanc & I. Hedén. The group of Cremona transformations generated by linear
maps and the standard involution. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 65(6):2641–2680,
2015. 6
[BZ18]
J. Blanc & S. Zimmermann. Topological simplicity of the Cremona groups. Amer.
J. Math., 140(5):1297–1309, 2018. 3, 4
[Bro06]
R. Brown. Topology and groupoids. BookSurge, LLC, Charleston, SC, 2006. Third
edition of Elements of modern topology [McGraw-Hill, New York, 1968],. 45
[Can14]
S. Cantat. Morphisms between Cremona groups, and characterization of rational
varieties. Compos. Math., 150(7):1107–1124, 2014. 3
[CL13]
S. Cantat & S. Lamy. Normal subgroups in the Cremona group. Acta Math.,
210(1):31–94, 2013. With an appendix by Yves de Cornulier. 3
[CX18]
S. Cantat & J. Xie. Algebraic actions of discrete groups: The p-adic method. Acta
Math., 220(2):239–295, 2018. 3
[CMF05]
S. Casalaina-Martin & R. Friedman. Cubic threefolds and abelian varieties of dimension ﬁve. J. Algebraic Geom., 14(2):295–326, 2005. 77
[Cas01]
G. Castelnuovo. Le trasformazioni generatrici del gruppo cremoniano nel piano. Atti
della R. Accad. delle Scienze di Torino, (36):861–874, 1901. 2
[CG72]
C. H. Clemens & P. A. Griﬃths. The intermediate Jacobian of the cubic threefold.
Ann. of Math. (2), 95:281–356, 1972. 76
[Cor95]
A. Corti. Factoring birational maps of threefolds after Sarkisov. J. Algebraic Geom.,
4(2):223–254, 1995. 18
[Cor00]
A. Corti. Singularities of linear systems and 3-fold birational geometry. In Explicit
birational geometry of 3-folds, volume 281 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.,
pages 259–312. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2000. 17
[CPR00]
A. Corti, A. Pukhlikov & M. Reid. Fano 3-fold hypersurfaces. In Explicit birational
geometry of 3-folds, pages 175–258. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
25
[DGO17]
F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel & D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and
rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc.,
245(1156), 2017. 3
[Dan74]
V. I. Danilov. Non-simplicity of the group of unimodular automorphisms of an aﬃne
plane. Mat. Zametki, 15:289–293, 1974. 3
[Dem70]
M. Demazure. Sous-groupes algébriques de rang maximum du groupe de Cremona.
Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4), 3:507–588, 1970. 3

QUOTIENTS OF HIGHER DIMENSIONAL CREMONA GROUPS

[Dés07]
[Dés17]
[ELM+ 06]
[Enr95]
[Fuj99]
[Fuj15]
[FL10]
[GK19]
[HM07]
[HM13]
[Har77]
[Hat02]
[HK00]
[Hud27]
[Isk91]
[Isk96]
[IKT93]

[Isk87]
[Kal13]
[KKL16]

[Kat87]
[Kol86]
[Kol93]
[Kol96]
[Kol97]

[Kol17]
[KM92]
[KM98]

79

J. Déserti. Le groupe de Cremona est hopﬁen. C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris,
344(3):153–156, 2007. 74
J. Déserti. Cremona maps and involutions. Preprint arXiv:1708.01569, 2017. 74
L. Ein, R. Lazarsfeld, M. Mustaţă, M. Nakamaye & M. Popa. Asymptotic invariants
of base loci. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 56(6):1701–1734, 2006. 37
F. Enriques. Conferenze di Geometria: fundamenti di una geometria iperspaziale.
Bologna, 1895. 3, 5
O. Fujino. Applications of Kawamata’s positivity theorem. Proc. Japan Acad. Ser.
A Math. Sci., 75(6):75–79, 1999. 15
O. Fujino. Some remarks on the minimal model program for log canonical pairs. J.
Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo, 22(1):149–192, 2015. 15
J.-P. Furter & S. Lamy. Normal subgroup generated by a plane polynomial automorphism. Transform. Groups, 15(3):577–610, 2010. 3
F. Gounelas & A. Kouvidakis. Measures of irrationality of the Fano surface of a
cubic threefold. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 371(10):7111–7133, 2019. 20
C. D. Hacon & J. Mckernan. On Shokurov’s rational connectedness conjecture. Duke
Math. J., 138(1):119–136, 2007. 16
C. D. Hacon & J. McKernan. The Sarkisov program. J. Algebraic Geom., 22(2):389–
405, 2013. 5, 7, 9, 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 45, 46
R. Hartshorne. Algebraic geometry. Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1977.
Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 52. 12
A. Hatcher. Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. 46
Y. Hu & S. Keel. Mori dream spaces and GIT. Michigan Math. J., 48:331–348, 2000.
14
H. P. Hudson. Cremona transformations in plane and space. Cambridge, University
Press, 1927. 5
V. A. Iskovskikh. Generators of the two-dimensional Cremona group over a nonclosed ﬁeld. Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov., 200:157–170, 1991. 5
V. A. Iskovskikh. Factorization of birational mappings of rational surfaces from the
point of view of Mori theory. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk, 51(4(310)):3–72, 1996. 5
V. A. Iskovskikh, F. K. Kabdykairov & S. L. Tregub. Relations in a two-dimensional
Cremona group over a perfect ﬁeld. Izv. Ross. Akad. Nauk Ser. Mat., 57(3):3–69,
1993. Translation in Russian Acad. Sci. Izv. Math. 42 (1994), no. 3, 427–478. 4
V. A. Iskovskikh. Cremona group. In Encyclopedia of Mathematics. 1987. 2, 3
A.-S. Kaloghiros. Relations in the Sarkisov program. Compos. Math., 149(10):1685–
1709, 2013. 4, 7, 9, 41, 45, 47
A.-S. Kaloghiros, A. Küronya & V. Lazić. Finite generation and geography of models. In Minimal models and extremal rays (Kyoto, 2011), volume 70 of Adv. Stud.
Pure Math., pages 215–245. 2016. 9, 12, 13, 14, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39
S. Katz. The cubo-cubic transformation of P3 is very special. Math. Z., 195(2):255–
257, 1987. 26
J. Kollár. Higher direct images of dualizing sheaves. I. Ann. of Math. (2), 123(1):11–
42, 1986. 12
J. Kollár. Eﬀective base point freeness. Math. Ann., 296(4):595–605, 1993. 23, 51
J. Kollár. Rational curves on algebraic varieties, volume 32. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1996. 12
J. Kollár. Singularities of pairs. In Algebraic geometry—Santa Cruz 1995, volume 62
of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 221–287. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
1997. 16
J. Kollár. Conic bundles that are not birational to numerical Calabi-Yau pairs.
Épijournal Geom. Algébrique, 1:Art. 1, 14, 2017. 5
J. Kollár & S. Mori. Classiﬁcation of three-dimensional ﬂips. J. Amer. Math. Soc.,
5(3):533–703, 1992. 13
J. Kollár & S. Mori. Birational geometry of algebraic varieties, volume 134 of Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998. With
the collaboration of C. H. Clemens and A. Corti, Translated from the 1998 Japanese
original. 10, 11, 15, 16

80

JÉRÉMY BLANC, STÉPHANE LAMY & SUSANNA ZIMMERMANN

[Kra96]
[LZ20]
[Lan87]
[Laz04]
[Lon16]
[MW90]
[MO15]
[MM85]
[Pan99]
[PS15]
[Poo07]
[Pro11]

[Pro12]
[Pro14]

[PS16]
[Sar82]
[Sch19]
[Sch73]
[SU04]
[Sil09]
[Ume85]

[Zim18]

H. Kraft. Challenging problems on aﬃne n-space. Astérisque, (237):Exp. No. 802,
5, 295–317, 1996. Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 1994/95. 6
S. Lamy & S. Zimmermann. Signature morphisms from the Cremona group over a
non-closed ﬁeld. JEMS, 22(10):3133–3173, 2020. 4, 8, 33, 44, 46, 77
S. Lang. Elliptic functions, volume 112 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. SpringerVerlag, New York, second edition, 1987. With an appendix by J. Tate. 71
R. Lazarsfeld. Positivity in algebraic geometry. I. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004.
Classical setting: line bundles and linear series. 10
A. Lonjou. Non simplicité du groupe de Cremona sur tout corps. Ann. Inst. Fourier
(Grenoble), 66(5):2021–2046, 2016. 3
D. W. Masser & G. Wüstholz. Estimating isogenies on elliptic curves. Invent. Math.,
100(1):1–24, 1990. 71
A. Minasyan & D. Osin. Acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on trees. Math.
Ann., 362(3-4):1055–1105, 2015. 74
S. Mori & S. Mukai. Classiﬁcation of Fano 3-folds with B2 > 2. I. In Algebraic and
topological theories (Kinosaki, 1984), pages 496–545. Kinokuniya, Tokyo, 1985. 27
I. Pan. Une remarque sur la génération du groupe de Cremona. Bol. Soc. Brasil.
Mat. (N.S.), 30(1):95–98, 1999. 5
I. Pan & A. Simis. Cremona maps of de Jonquières type. Canad. J. Math., 67(4):923–
941, 2015. 6
B. Poonen. Gonality of modular curves in characteristic p. Math. Res. Lett.,
14(4):691–701, 2007. 20
Y. Prokhorov. p-elementary subgroups of the Cremona group of rank 3. In Classification of algebraic varieties, EMS Ser. Congr. Rep., pages 327–338. Eur. Math.
Soc., Zürich, 2011. 3, 72
Y. Prokhorov. Simple ﬁnite subgroups of the Cremona group of rank 3. J. Algebraic
Geom., 21(3):563–600, 2012. 3
Y. Prokhorov. 2-elementary subgroups of the space Cremona group. In Automorphisms in birational and affine geometry, volume 79 of Springer Proc. Math. Stat.,
pages 215–229. 2014. 3, 72
Y. Prokhorov & C. Shramov. Jordan property for Cremona groups. Amer. J. Math.,
138(2):403–418, 2016. 3
V. G. Sarkisov. On conic bundle structures. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.,
46(2):371–408, 432, 1982. 65, 66, 68
J. Schneider. Relations in the Cremona group over perfect ﬁelds.
Preprint arXiv:1906.05265, 2019. 8
P. E. Schupp. A survey of SQ-universality. pages 183–188. Lecture Notes in Math.,
Vol. 319, 1973. 74
I. P. Shestakov & U. U. Umirbaev. The tame and the wild automorphisms of polynomial rings in three variables. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 17(1):197–227, 2004. 6
J. H. Silverman. The arithmetic of elliptic curves, volume 106 of Graduate Texts in
Mathematics. Springer, Dordrecht, second edition, 2009. 71
H. Umemura. On the maximal connected algebraic subgroups of the Cremona group.
II. In Algebraic groups and related topics (Kyoto/Nagoya, 1983), volume 6 of Adv.
Stud. Pure Math., pages 349–436. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985. 3
S. Zimmermann. The Abelianization of the real Cremona group. Duke Math. J.,
167(2):211–267, 2018. 4, 8

Departement Mathematik und Informatik, Universität Basel, Spiegelgasse 1, 4051
Basel, Switzerland
Email address: jeremy.blanc@unibas.ch
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse UMR 5219, Université de Toulouse, UPS
F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France
Email address: slamy@math.univ-toulouse.fr
Univ Angers, CNRS, LAREMA, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France
Email address: susanna.zimmermann@univ-angers.fr

