Smart-Lock Security Re-engineered using
Cryptography and Steganography

arXiv:1901.06381v1 [cs.CR] 18 Jan 2019

Chaitanya Bapat, Shivani Inamdar, Ganesh Baleri and Anant V Nimkar
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology
University of Mumbai, India
chaitanya.bapat@spit.ac.in, shivani.inamdar@spit.ac.in,
ganesh.baleri@spit.ac.in, anant nimkar@spit.ac.in

Abstract. After the rise of E-commerce, social media and messenger
bots, rapid developments have been made in the field of connecting
things, gadgets, and devices, i.e, the Internet of Things (IoT). In the
fast-paced lifestyle, it is very difficult to maintain multiple keys for traditional mechanical locks. Electromagnetic smart locks are a possible
solution to this problem. To connect a smart lock with a key, Bluetooth
Low Energy (BLE) protocol can be used. BLE protocol is vulnerable to
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack. Ensuring security over BLE is an
ongoing challenge. This paper aims to analyze the MITM vulnerability
of BLE and develop a possible solution for designing smart-locks with
an increased level of security. The observation shows that the combination of Image Steganography and Cryptography helps to overcome the
vulnerabilities of BLE protocol.
Keywords: Internet of Things, Security, Steganography, Cryptography,
Bluetooth Low Energy protocol

1

Introduction

The domain of Internet of Things (IoT) has shown significant capability to drastically change the technological world. IoT systems include computing and household devices, as well as sensors. It is possible to control household devices with
a tap on the mobile screen, thanks to IoT. In addition, Ciscos Internet Business
Solutions Group has predicted that the number of IoT devices will be about
20.4 billion by the year 2020 [1]. IoT devices have made people’s lives easier in
a number of ways. Nonetheless, security experts have expresses their concerns
about the threats and vulnerabilities that these devices bring along, termed as
the ’Insecurity of Things’.
Mobile devices that connect to Smart Locks using the Bluetooth Low Energy(BLE) protocol are vulnerable to various security attacks like the Man-inthe-Middle(MITM) attack. BLE is a power efficient technology which is capable of transferring data between smart-phones and IoT devices. Basically, an
intruder/attacker tries to impersonate a receiver and takes hold of the communication between two parties. Such an attack is called MITM attack and is found
to be carried out in BLE protocol.

When home automation and security are under consideration, locks -either
mechanical or electronic- are a necessity. However, the problem associated with
any physical lock is about the key handling and management. Humans tend to
be forgetful and multiple keys need to be managed hence it was replaced by
electromagnetic locks. However, it still didn’t address the issue of remote accessibility. In the age of smart-phones and a hyper-connected world, it is essential
to control locks remotely, using hand-held devices. Hence, smart-locks have been
introduced to address this concern. But the issue is, despite the promise of accessibility, ease of use and comfort associated with smart-locks, security is an
imminent and constant threat. So the problem is to tackle the security threats
and attacks on IoT based smart-locks.
The ongoing research in the field of Internet of Things and BLE protocol relies
heavily on the usage of Cryptography. The algorithm of Advanced Encryption
Standard is used for encryption and decryption. However, the research has found
out problems associated with cryptography algorithms like MITM attack, masquerade attack, etc. Moreover, few papers involve usage of one-time passwords
for securing the communication. However, OTP generation is an intensive task
and depends on network bandwidth thus suffering from latency issues.
This paper aims at investigating the working of BLE protocol and highlights
the underlying architecture designed for communication using BLE protocol. In
addition, its vulnerabilities have been studied and a synthesis of cryptographic
and steganographic techniques has been implemented so as to prevent MITM
attack on BLE protocol. Such a combined approach tackles the shortcomings
of the individual methods of cryptography and steganography whilst preserving
the advantages of each of them.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2.1 focuses on the architecture of
BLE. as well as the vulnerabilities existing in BLE. Section 2.2 throws more light
on the MITM attack and its relevance in BLE protocol. Section 2.3 is a review of
Steganography as a possible solution to existing problems in BLE protocol. The
existing solutions in the sphere of IoT devices and BLE protocol are presented
in Section 3. In Section 4, a combination of Steganography with Cryptography
as a possible solution is proposed. The actual implementation of the system is
included in Section 5 followed by discussion of the results in Section 6. Ultimately,
the article is concluded in Section 7.

2
2.1

Related Work
Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol

BLE is a wireless technology which consumes less energy and supports short
range communication. This technology has can be used in various fields such as
Entertainment, Health and Sports. BLE devices have easy maintenance and can
work for years on coin-cell batteries [3]. Although low-power technologies such
as Zigbee, 6 LoWPAN and Z-wave have made their mark in the market, BLE
has greater deployment expectations [2].

Security at the Link Layer Authentication and encryption is done using the
Cipher Block Chaining-Message Authentication Code (CCM) algorithm and a
128-bit AES block cipher. When connection is based on encryption as well as
authentication, a 4-byte Message Integrity Check (MIC) gets appended to the
data channel PDU. The Payload and MIC fields are then encrypted. Authenticated data is passed over an unencrypted channel by using digital signatures.
An algorithm which makes use of a 128-bit AES block cipher helps generate the
signature [2]. A counter is given as one of the inputs to this algorithm, that gives
protection against various replay attacks. It is assumed that a trusted source has
sent the data in case the receiver successfully verifies the signature.
For communication over BLE, pairing is an important task. Pairing in BLE
is done in 3 phases. In first phase, devices announce their input-output capabilities. Subsequently, STK (Short Term Key) is generated for secure distribution
of key materials that are required for next phase. At first, both the devices agree
on Temporary Key (TK). It is done using Out of Band communication, Passkey
Entry or JustWorks. Based on the TK and random values generated by both
the devices, STK is generated. Later, in the next phase each end-point sends
to every other end-point , three 128-bit keys: Long-term key, Connection Signature Resolving Key, Identity Resolving Key. Long term key is for Link Layer
Encryption and authentication. Connection resolving key performs data signing
at ATT layer while Identity Resolving Key generates a private address based on
the public address of the device. The STK generated in PHASE II is used for
encryption while distributing these 3 keys. In all the three phases, the message
exchange is carried out by the Security Manager Protocol (SMP).

Vulnerabilities In BLE Protocol Though BLE provides modes of security,
it is still prone to a number of vulnerabilities.
– Eavesdropping: Although BLE consists of security modes to protect it against
vulnerabilities, there are still some loopholes in the pairing phases. A BLE
device is susceptible to being tracked by a third party and subsequent eavesdropping.
– Man-in-theMiddle Attacks: An MITM attack takes place when an intruder
secretly relays and possibly alters the communication between two devices
which are communicating with each other. If an attacker could somehow trick
the devices into assuming that they have been disconnected from each other,
then he/she could use two Bluetooth modules to act as the master and slave
devices. This would thus enable packet injection and authentication attacks.
– Denial of Service: Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks typically flood servers, systems or networks with traffic, thereby overwhelming the victim resources. As
the victims resources are exhausted, it becomes difficult or nearly impossible
for legitimate users to use them. In DoS attacks, a server or system providing
some service is attacked with a large number of requests, which results in a
system crash and eventual draining of the systems battery life.

2.2

Man-In-The-Middle Attack

In order to better understand the working of MITM attacks, the paper [4] was
reviewed. MITM attack is a prominent attack in computer security, which represents a pressing concern for security experts and the academia. MITM targets
the data flowing between two victims, thereby attacking the confidentiality and
integrity of the data itself.
In the MITM attack, the
intruder possesses access to
the communication channel
between two victims, enabling
him to manipulate messages
flowing through the communication channel. The visualization of MITM attacks is
as shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, victims try to establish a secure communication
by exchanging their own public keys (P1 and P2) with each
Fig. 1. MITM Exchange Methodology
other. Attacker intercepts the
public keys P1 and P2, and as a response sends its own public key (P3) to both
the victims. Consequently, victim 1 encrypts its message using the attackers
public key (P3), and sends it to victim 2 (E1). Here, as the public key used for
encryption was attackers public key, decryption needs to be carried out using
attackers private key. The attacker intercepts E1, and decrypts it using the corresponding private key. The attacker later encrypts some plain-text message using
victim 2s public key, and transmits it to victim 2 (message E2). When victim 2
is able to decrypt the messages sent by victim 1, it means that the attacker has
been able to deceive both the victim parties that they are communicating over
a secure channel.
MITM attack can be carried out in various communication channels such as
UMTS, Long-Term Evolution (LTE), Wi-Fi, GSM, Bluetooth, and Near Field
Communication (NFC). MITM attack aims to compromise:
1. Confidentiality- by eavesdropping on the communication.
2. Integrity- by intercepting and modifying the exchanged data .
3. Availability- by intercepting, destroying and/or modifying messages, causing
one of the victims to terminate communication [5].
There are minimum three ways of characterizing MITM attacks, based on:
1. Impersonation techniques
2. Communication channel in which the attack is executed.
3. Location of intruder and victim in the network.

2.3

Steganography

Techniques Unlike cryptography, steganography does not transform the structure of the message but instead, hides it in such a way that its existence remains
unidentified. There are several types of steganography, but the difference between
them lies in the technique of hiding data. It is difficult to label one mechanism
as the best one since each technique is chosen as per the application it is being
used for.
Hiding a message is the basis of any steganographic technique. Steganography
can be classified into 2 types- technical and text. With technical steganography,
confidential information can be hidden in image/audio/video files.
Text steganography, on the other hand, refers to the technique of concealing
text data within a larger text. Linguistic methods are further classified into
numerous categories depending on the way in which the stego-text is exploited
for embedding the secret message in it. One such type of text steganography is
format-based methods. These methods usually manipulate the text by changing
its formatting, intentional misspelling or changing the text size. Another method
is the random and statistical generation method. It can be used to prevent any
comparison with the original text since based on a randomized algorithm.

3

Existing Solutions

Application of security techniques in the field of Internet of Things is a rather
new concept. However, it has been implemented in Internet Banking. It is a
field where security holds prime importance and like IoT devices vulnerable to
security attacks.
The AES encryption algorithm is assumed to be the most effective for highend security applications However, in 2011, researchers at Microsoft discovered
that AES is not completely secure [6]. Hence,alternative techniques for high-end
security were studied. One such technique found was Steganography. Steganography is an approach of concealing secret information by embedding it in an
image, text, audio or video. The motive of steganography is to hide the very
existence of the data in any given form.
Steganography has been
applied in various domains.
The paper [7] proposes a
stego-layer method which provides a solution for MITM
attack and Session hijacking. In the proposed method,
a new stego-layer was introduced. All the information
flowing through the client or
Fig. 2. Stego-layer method
the server passes through the

stego-layer. Dynamic Pattern based Image Steganography algorithm is implemented by the stego-layer for inserting and retrieving the message. Its functionality is to conceal the data to be sent between the communicating parties in an
image, prior to transmission.
The authors in paper [8] propose to improve the security of Mobile banking
through Steganography. Here, the generated key determines which pixels are
selected for embedding the secret message bits. The secret message bits are
then planted into the selected pixels at a steady rate. However, if data bits are
embedded serially in all the selected pixels, it may lead a hacker to easily hack
the message.
Hiltgen, in his paper focuses on solving MITM attack by a short-time password based on a password generating hardware token which is available from
various manufacturers such as RSA Security, Active Card or VeriSign [9]. For
example, RSAs SecureID solution consists of an LCD display and one button
which enables the user to calculate the succeeding short-time password. [10].
Short Message Service (SMS) [11] based One-Time Passwords (OTP) were
introduced to fight phishing and other threats against authentication and authorization. The attacker’s target is the possession of the password. He has various
means to do so, such as a wireless interception or mobile phone Trojans. Although not very famous, the SIM Swap Attack [12] can also be used. Through
such attacks, the attacker can obtain the OTP. AES encryption algorithm along
with Steganography ensures secure and guaranteed delivery of OTP to the user.
Thus, sending an OTP which is embedded in an image makes it difficult for an
attacker to detect the presence of private information.
Several studies conducted on mobile malware [13] [14] show that the authentication credential stealing mobile malware exists in the wild.
Through all the solutions that exist, all of them fail to achieve a sure-fire way
of security. May it be encryption using AES or steganography, attackers tend
to find loopholes and hence pose a security threat. Usage of short-term memory
passwords is limited by the hardware malfunctions and wireless interceptions.
The following section proposes a solution that circumvents the given problems.

4

Proposed Solution

The security and privacy of any information traveling across a channel that promotes open communication results into a major problem. Hence, in order to
prevent unauthenticated and unwarranted access and usage, confidentiality and
integrity is needed. Of the many methods available, steganography and cryptography are two of the most used ones. The first one hides the sheer existence of
the information while the second one twists the data itself [14].
The data is transformed into another incomprehensible format which is then
sent over the network, in case of cryptography. However, in case of steganography, stego-files such as image, text, audio, video is used as a platform for
embedding the message. Later, the stego-file is transferred over the communication channel. This paper is based on harnessing the advantages of both the

methods - steganography and cryptography which will facilitate an increase in
the level of security.
4.1

Workflow Design

Once the system was designed, the next step in the
implementation stage was to
design the workflow. As depicted in Fig. 3 below, the
techniques of Cryptography
and Steganography are used
hand in hand to provide security to smart-lock. User first
enters the passkey via the
Android smart-phone application. Later, the image is selected in which the passkey
would be embedded. Using
AES encryption, the passkey
is first encrypted and then
the encrypted cipher-text is
Fig. 3. Workflow diagram
encoded in the image. All
this happens at the client-side
(Android smart-phone application). Client-server architecture is utilized where
server is the Raspberry Pi. Image is sent over the Bluetooth 4.0 (BLE) protocol.
From the received image, cipher-text is then decoded. It is then decrypted to
get the passkey entered by the user. The algorithm checks for valid passkey and
accordingly takes the decision whether to open the lock or not.
In the cryptographic method, once a third party attacker or an intruder gains
access to the secret key, the data gets revealed. In case of steganography, the
presence of message itself gets concealed but the form of the message is not
changed. As a result, the moment the attacker understands the existence of a
concealed data in whichever stego-file, the message again gets revealed.
If a combination of both the methods is used, security gets enhanced considerably as both steganalysis and cryptanalysis would be needed to be carried
out in synchronization so as to identify the location of original information and
the actual content itself. Combination of such techniques in the domain of security is a relatively new direction. However, one can search for similar works in
the literature. Primarily, this work can be found in the paper [15]. A system
which enhances the least significant bit (LSB) method has been proposed by the
authors.
In the domain of integrating steganography and cryptography, the paper
[16] lends some real insight. Here, the key that is important for deciphering the
original message is also implanted in the stego-file.

5
5.1

Implementation
System Design

In order to create a remote-controlled
system for accessing the electromagnetic lock, the system was first
designed, as shown in Fig. 4. It consisted of 4 main components - Android
smart-phone, Raspberry Pi, Electromagnetic lock and Server. The Bluetooth and WiFi modules in Android
Fig. 4. System Design
are fairly robust with good documentation support. Of the multiple versions of Raspberry Pi, the latest Pi 3 Model
B has inbuilt WiFi and Bluetooth 4.0 (BLE). Server would be needed to log
the system usage so as to provide future scope for performing analytics and
understand usage patterns and statistics.
5.2

Circuit Design

The hardware requirements involved designing the Circuit with main components being smart-lock i.e. an electro-magnetic lock with Raspberry Pi 3 Model
B. As shown in Fig. 5, the mains 230V alternating current is fed to the miniature circuit breaker (MCB) which breaks the circuit during power failure or
short-circuit. It prevents any damage to the internal circuit components. Power
adapter facilitates conversion of 230 V power supply to 5V as needed by Raspberry Pi. Raspberry Pi provides 3.3V with respect to its ground as an output to
general-purpose input output(GPIO) pins. A relay acts as a switch for accessing
the lock. However, the relay circuit works on 12V supply provided by SMPS.
The circuit is completed by connecting electromagnetic lock in series with the
relay and joining the grounds of Raspberry Pi and electromagnetic lock.

6

Results and Discussion

The graph 6 shows the relationship between image size and total time taken.
Total time taken is the time needed for image to be encoded, encrypted, sent
over BLE protocol, received, decoded and decrypted. Thus, lesser the image file
size, faster the communication and processing.
To find out the efficiency of the BLE protocol, the time needed only for
transferring image was first tracked. The BLE transfer time takes into account
the time needed to send the image from Android smart-phone to the Raspberry
Pi 3 over BLE protocol. It was found that there exists a fairly linear relationship
between the image size and BLE transfer time. Hence lesser image sizes would
be transferred faster, as per Fig. 7.

Fig. 5. Circuit diagram

Table 1. Dimension table
Dimensions Image Size (kb) Time (sec)
225 * 400
6.97
19.8
225 * 400
21.85
22.85
720 * 1280
43
36
720 * 1280
79.7
36.01
720 * 1280
224
52.27
720 * 1280
557
64
720 * 1280
1070
120.7
1200 * 1200
1100
137

Table 1 summarizes the relationship between the image size, its dimensions
and the time needed. It shows direct relationship between the image size and
the time needed for processing the image.
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the difficulty an attacker will experience to find out
differences between the 2 images. With absolutely no visual differences in the preprocessing and post-processing image, it satisfies the requirement of providing
an additional layer of security to the existing system in IoT devices.

Fig. 6. Image size vs Total Time taken

(a) Preprocessing

Fig. 7. Image size vs BLE Transfer time

(b) Post-processing

Fig. 8. Wallpaper

(a) Preprocessing

(b) Post-processing
Fig. 9. Airplane

7

Conclusion

This paper is an effort to review existential security threats in the sphere of IoT,
vulnerabilities of BLE protocol and related work around MITM attacks. Having
studied the BLE protocol, various issues were found including the possibility
of MITM attack. Although existing solutions involve SMS One-Time-Password,
Cryptography, Steganography, still few vulnerabilities persist. According to the
study of these techniques, a combination of both (Cryptography and Steganography) ensures elimination of the disadvantages of the individual methods while
retention of the advantages that these principles possess. An implementation of
such a methodology can possibly aid research in the field of Security in IoT and
fortify the future of BLE enabled IoT devices.

References
1. ”Gartner Says 8.4 Billion Connected”. Gartner.com. N.p., 2017. Web. 8 June 2017.
2. Gomez, C., Oller, J., & Paradells, J. (2012). Overview and evaluation of Bluetooth low energy: An emerging low-power wireless technology. Sensors, 12(12),
1173411753. doi:10.3390/s120911734
3. Shamsaa Hilal Al. Hosni, Bluetooth Low Energy: A Survey, International Journal
of Computer Applications (0975 8887),Volume 162 No 1, March 2017
4. Conti, Mauro, Nicola Dragoni, and Viktor Lesyk. ”A Survey of Man In The Middle
Attacks.” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 18, no. 3 (2016): 2027-2051.
5. I. Green. (2005) Dns spoofing by the man in the middle. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sans.org/rr/whitepapers/dns/1567.php
6. Fisher, Dennis et al. ”New Attack Finds AES Keys Several Times Faster Than
Brute Force”. Threatpost — The first stop for security news. N.p., 2017. Web. 25
January 2017.

7. Thiyagarajan, P., G. Aghila, and V. Prasanna Venkatesan. ”Stepping up internet
banking security using dynamic pattern based image steganography.” International
Conference on Advances in Computing and Communications, pp. 98-112. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
8. Navale, G.S., Joshi, S.S., Deshmukh, A.A.: M-banking Security a futuristic improved Security approach. International Journal of Computer Science Issues 7(1,2)
(January 2010)
9. Hiltgen, A., Kramp, T., Weigold, T.: Secure Internet Banking Authentication.
IEEE Security and Privacy 4(2) (2006)
10. A. Karia, A. B. Patankar, and P. Tawde, ”SMS-Based One time Password vulnerabilities and safeguarding OTP over network”, International Journal of Engineering
Research and Technology, Vol. no. 3 - Issue 5 (May - 2014), Jan. 2017. [Online].
11. Mulliner, C., Borgaonkar, R., Stewin, P. and Seifert, J.-P. (2013) SMS-Based OneTime passwords: Attacks and defense, in Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and
Vulnerability Assessment. Springer Nature, pp. 150159.
12. ”Online Safe Banking - SIM Swap - ICICI Bank”. Icicibank.com. N.p., 2017. Web.
1 Apr. 2017.
13. Felt, A.P., Finifter, M., Chin, E., Hanna, S., Wagner, D.: A Survey of Mobile
Malware in the Wild. In: Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Security and
Privacy in Mobile Devices, SPSM (2011)
14. Zhou, Y., Jiang, X.: Dissecting Android Malware: Characterization and Evolution.
In: 33rd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (May 2012)
15. Mamta Juneja, Parvinder Sandhu, An improved LSB based Steganography with
Enhanced Security and Embedding/Extraction, 3rd International Conference on
Intelligent Computational Systems, Hong Kong, China, January 2013
16. Chander Kant, Rajender Nath, Sheetal Chaudhary, Biometrics Security using
Steganography, International Journal of Security, Volume 2, Issue 1, February 2008

