Published in ApJ (2019), 871:245
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 12/16/11

THE ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND CLIMATE OF TERRESTRIAL PLANETS ORBITING SUN-LIKE
AND M-DWARF STARS OVER A BROAD RANGE OF PLANETARY PARAMETERS
Thaddeus D. Komacek and Dorian S. Abbot

arXiv:1901.00567v3 [astro-ph.EP] 8 Feb 2019

Department of the Geophysical Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637
tkomacek@uchicago.edu
Published in ApJ (2019), 871:245

ABSTRACT
The recent detections of temperate terrestrial planets orbiting nearby stars and the promise of characterizing their atmospheres motivates a need to understand how the diversity of possible planetary
parameters affects the climate of terrestrial planets. In this work, we investigate the atmospheric
circulation and climate of terrestrial exoplanets orbiting both Sun-like and M-dwarf stars over a wide
swath of possible planetary parameters, including the planetary rotation period, surface pressure,
incident stellar flux, surface gravity, planetary radius, and cloud particle size. We do so using a
general circulation model (GCM) that includes non-grey radiative transfer and the effects of clouds.
The results from this suite of simulations generally show qualitatively similar dependencies of circulation and climate on planetary parameters as idealized GCMs, with quantitative differences due to
the inclusion of additional model physics. Notably, we find that the effective cloud particle size is a
key unknown parameter that can greatly affect the climate of terrestrial exoplanets. We confirm a
transition between low and high dayside cloud coverage of synchronously rotating terrestrial planets
with increasing rotation period. We determine that this cloud transition is due to eddy-driven convergence near the substellar point and should not be parameterization-dependent. Finally, we compute
full-phase light curves from our simulations of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars, finding that changing
incident stellar flux and rotation period affect observable properties of terrestrial exoplanets. Our
GCM results can guide expectations for planetary climate over the broad range of possible terrestrial
exoplanets that will be observed with future space telescopes.
Subject headings: hydrodynamics - methods: numerical - planets and satellites: terrestrial planets planets and satellites: atmospheres
1. INTRODUCTION

We are approaching an era in which the atmospheres of
terrestrial exoplanets can be characterized by astronomical observations. This is enabled by the recent detection
of a variety of nearby stellar systems with temperate terrestrial exoplanets, including TRAPPIST-1 (Gillon et al.
2017), Proxima Centauri (Anglada-Escudé et al. 2016),
and GJ 1132 (Berta-Thompson et al. 2015). These discoveries are timely, as the James Webb Space Telescope
will be launched in the coming years and will have the
capability to detect whether or not terrestrial planets orbiting M-dwarf stars have atmospheres (Seager & Deming 2009) and could potentially characterize the atmospheres of these planets (Kreidberg & Loeb 2016, Morley et al. 2017, Diamond-Lowe et al. 2018, de Wit et al.
2018). Additionally, planned future space-based telescopes (e.g. LUVOIR, HabEx ) would have the ability
to detect reflected light spectra of temperate terrestrial
planets orbiting Sun-like stars and constrain their atmospheric properties (Feng et al. 2018).
Motivated by the prospect of future observations, it is
crucial to develop a theoretical understanding of the atmospheres of terrestrial planets. This includes knowing
how properties of exoplanet atmospheres vary over the
wide potential phase space and how physical changes in
atmospheric properties manifest in observations. In principle, there are a variety of a priori unknown planetary
parameters that could affect the atmospheric dynamics.
For example, the rotation period affects the width of
the tropical circulation (Held 2000, Kaspi & Showman

2015), the size and distribution of extratropical eddies
(Eady 1949, Charney 1967, Kaspi & Showman 2015),
and the number of extratropical jets (Williams 1978, Cho
& Polvani 1996, Chemke & Kaspi 2015b). Meanwhile,
the atmospheric mass affects the strength of the atmospheric circulation and the surface temperature distribution (Chemke et al. 2016, Chemke & Kaspi 2017). Additionally, the spin state of terrestrial exoplanets orbiting
M-dwarf stars varies substantially from that of planets
orbiting Sun-like stars, as the spins of planets orbiting
M-dwarfs are affected by tidal dissipation due to their
close-in orbits (Leconte et al. 2015).
How the atmospheric dynamics and climate of planets orbiting Sun-like stars vary with planetary parameters has been explored in a wide variety of circulation
models. As a first step, many modeling studies utilize
idealized general circulation models (GCMs) which have
reduced complexity in radiative transfer and cloud treatment relative to full physics simulations in order to understand the basic physics controlling atmospheric properties (Schneider 2006, Kaspi & Showman 2015, Chemke
& Kaspi 2017). Notably, Kaspi & Showman (2015) varied a wide swath of planetary parameters (rotation period, incident stellar flux, surface pressure, surface gravity, and radius) and found that each parameter can significantly alter the atmospheric circulation of exoplanets.
Yang et al. (2014) used the more complex Community
Atmosphere Model GCM, which includes non-grey radiative effects and cloud parameterizations. Yang et al.
found that in the Venus-like case of very long rotation

2

Komacek & Abbot

periods high cloud coverage builds up on the dayside of
the planet, significantly increasing the planetary albedo
and therefore the incident stellar flux at which the planet
can stay habitable (i.e., the inner edge of the habitable
zone, Kasting et al. 1993). Similarly, Jansen et al. (2018)
found using the ROCKE-3D GCM (Way et al. 2017) that
the surface temperature of Earth-like planets decreases
with increasing rotation period. The inner edge of the
habitable zone for planets around Sun-like stars has been
studied using a variety of complex GCMs (Leconte et al.
2013a, Wolf & Toon 2015, Popp et al. 2016, Way et al.
2016b, Wolf et al. 2017), with all models finding inner
edges that are at higher incident stellar flux relative to
1D models (e.g., Kopparapu et al. 2013) due to the effects of clouds and reduced relative humidity.
The atmospheric circulation of planets orbiting Mdwarf stars is vastly different from that of planets orbiting Sun-like stars due to the likely spin-synchronized or
otherwise tidally damped nature of their spin states. A
wide variety of GCM work has been performed to study
planets orbiting M-dwarfs (Joshi et al. 1997, Merlis &
Schneider 2010, Selsis et al. 2011, Leconte et al. 2013b,
Yang et al. 2013, Hu & Yang 2014, Wang et al. 2014,
Koll & Abbot 2015, Carone et al. 2015, Koll & Abbot
2016, Kopparapu et al. 2016, Turbet et al. 2016, Boutle
et al. 2017, Del Genio et al. 2018, Kopparapu et al. 2017,
Noda et al. 2017, Wolf 2017, Haqq-Misra et al. 2018,
Lewis et al. 2018), studying both synchronous rotators
and planets in a 3:2 spin-orbit resonance. As for planets orbiting Sun-like stars, the rotation period has been
found to play a key role in the atmospheric circulation
of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars. The effect of rotation period on the circulation of planets orbiting M-dwarf
stars has been analyzed using models with a hierarchy of
radiative schemes, from those with radiative relaxation
(Carone et al. 2015) to a double-grey radiation scheme
without clouds (Noda et al. 2017), and models including sophisticated radiative transfer (Yang et al. 2013,
Kopparapu et al. 2017). The latter simulations have
found that, as for Venus-like planets, dayside cloud coverage on slowly rotating M-dwarf planets is large enough
to significantly increase the planetary albedo. This increased albedo moves the inner edge of the habitable
zone closer in for planets orbiting M-dwarf stars. In general, slowly rotating planets tend to have larger-scale atmospheric features due to the broader latitudinal scale
of their mean circulation and larger eddy length scales,
which provides a heuristic explanation why slowly rotating M-dwarf planets have greater dayside cloud coverage
(Leconte et al. 2013b, Haqq-Misra et al. 2018). This effect is especially strong for planets orbiting earlier-type
(hotter) M-dwarfs, as these planets have wider orbits for
a given incident stellar flux, with correspondingly longer
rotation periods (assuming synchronous rotation).
In this work, we study how the atmospheric circulation
and climate of planets orbiting both Sun-like stars and
M-dwarfs vary with planetary parameters. We utilize a
complex GCM (ExoCAM, a modified version of the Community Atmosphere Model with an improved radiation
scheme for exoplanet atmospheres and cloud and sea ice
parameterizations) and conduct simulations over a wide
region of planetary parameter space, varying the incident
stellar flux, rotation period, surface pressure, planetary
radius, surface gravity, and effective liquid water cloud

particle size. Our simulations of planets around Sun-like
stars can hence be thought of as a more complex rendition of the simulations of Kaspi & Showman (2015),
now including the effects of clouds, non-grey radiative
transfer, and sea ice. Additionally, we vary the effective
cloud particle size, as the cloud particle size is a priori
unknown in exoplanet atmospheres and can greatly modify the cloud radiative effect. Our simulations for synchronously rotating planets orbiting M-dwarf stars with
varying rotation period are comparable to the idealized
works of Carone et al. (2015) and Noda et al. (2017), and
explore how the conclusions of Kaspi & Showman (2015)
extend to synchronously rotating planets. We also calculate model phase curves from our simulations of planets
orbiting M-dwarfs to show how varying planetary parameters can affect astronomically observable properties
of the planet.
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes our model setup and the parameter space studied
by our large suite of numerical circulation models. In
Section 3, we show our results for simulations of planets orbiting Sun-like stars and how their climate varies
with rotation period, surface pressure, and effective liquid cloud particle size. In Section 4, we show how the
climate of spin-synchronized planets orbiting M-dwarf
stars varies as the incident stellar flux and rotation period are consistently changed, the rotation period alone is
changed, and the surface pressure alone is changed. Note
that we show further results from our suite of simulations
in the Appendix. Then, in Section 5 we compare our results to previous work, discuss the transition between
small to large dayside cloud coverage in our simulations
of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars, and compute model
full-phase light curves from our simulations of planets
orbiting M-dwarf stars. Lastly, we summarize the main
points of our work in Section 6.
2. METHODS
2.1. Model setup

To simulate the atmospheres of terrestrial exoplanets,
we use ExoCAM1 (Wolf & Toon 2015, Kopparapu et al.
2016, 2017, Wolf et al. 2017, Wolf 2017). ExoCAM is a
modified version of the Community Atmosphere Model
version 4 (CAM4) with correlated-k radiative transfer,
updated spectral coefficients using the HITRAN 2012
database, and a novel treatment of water vapor continuum absorption. ExoCAM has been used to simulate the
climates of Earth (Wolf & Toon 2015), the TRAPPIST1 system (Wolf 2017), and exoplanets near the inner
edge of the habitable zone (Kopparapu et al. 2017, HaqqMisra et al. 2018).
In this work, we use the same version of ExoCAM as in
Kopparapu et al. (2017) and Haqq-Misra et al. (2018),
which has a finite volume dynamical core with a horizontal resolution of 4◦ × 5◦ and 40 vertical levels from
the surface to a top pressure of 1 mbar. This resolution is the same as that used in previously published
ExoCAM simulations (Kopparapu et al. 2017, Wolf et al.
2017, Haqq-Misra et al. 2018), but note that it is necessarily lower than the resolution of some idealized models
that have been applied to study exoplanet climate (e.g.,
1

https://github.com/storyofthewolf/ExoCAM

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
Planetary Parameter
Rotation period
Surface pressure
Incident stellar flux
Planetary radius
Surface gravity
Liquid cloud effective radius

Unit
Earth Days
Bars
Earth flux
Earth radii
Earth surface gravity
µm

Parameter Values
0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16
0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4
0.544, 0.667, 0.816, 1
0.5, 0.707, 1, 1.414, 2
0.5, 0.707, 1, 1.414
7, 14, 21

TABLE 1
Values of planetary parameters used in the suite of
general circulation model experiments of planets
orbiting both Sun-like and M-dwarf stars.

Kaspi & Showman 2015, Koll & Abbot 2015, Chemke &
Kaspi 2017) due to the complexity of the ExoCAM model.
We assume an atmosphere that is comprised purely of
N2 and H2 O overlying an aquaplanet slab ocean with
a depth of 50 m. As in Kopparapu et al., we neglect
ocean heat transport and allow sea ice to form. We
use sub-grid parameterizations for clouds from Rasch &
Kristjánsson (1998) and for convection from Zhang &
McFarlane (1995). Note that our results may quantitatively differ from those of other GCMs with different
cloud parameterizations. As a result, we focus on broad
qualitative changes in how the climate depends on planetary parameters due to robust physical mechanisms. We
assume that planets have zero obliquity and that their
orbit has zero eccentricity. For all of the simulations
presented here, we use a time step of 30 minutes, with
16 dynamical substeps per time step and the radiative
transfer calculated every 3 time steps. We run simulations until they reach a statistically steady state, typically 45 − 50 Earth years. All results shown in this work
are time-averaged over the last ten years of model time.
2.2. Large suite of circulation models

We compute a large suite of general circulation models for planets orbiting both Sun-like stars and M-dwarf
stars. For planets orbiting Sun-like stars, we use the incident stellar spectrum of the Sun from Pickles (1998)
as in Wolf et al. (2017). For the incident spectrum onto
planets orbiting M-dwarf stars we use the BT-SETTL
models of Allard et al. (2007) as in Kopparapu et al.
(2017) and Haqq-Misra et al. (2018). Our simulations
of planets around Sun-like stars are not synchronously
rotating, so the rotation period is not equal to the orbital period. In all of our simulations of planets orbiting
Sun-like stars, we use an orbital period equal to that of
Earth. For planets orbiting Sun-like stars, we vary planetary parameters separately to isolate the dependence of
atmospheric circulation and climate on each parameter,
keeping all other parameters fixed to an Earth-like value.
Specifically, we separately vary the rotation period, surface pressure, incident stellar flux, planetary radius, surface gravity, and effective liquid cloud particle size as
shown in Table 1, for a total of 23 simulations for planets orbiting Sun-like stars. Each parameter considered
could vary over a wide range for possible terrestrial exoplanets, and the parameter space explored here is only
a small slice of the possible parameter space. We vary
the effective liquid cloud particle size from the Earth-like
value of 14 µm to 7 µm and 21 µm because the expected
cloud particle size distribution of terrestrial exoplanets is
currently unknown. We choose the liquid cloud particle
size rather than other parameters in our cloud scheme

3

because it has been shown by Yang et al. (2013, 2014) to
significantly affect global climate. Other parameters in
the cloud scheme only affect the global-mean climate by
∼ 1 − 2 K, but the liquid cloud particle size was shown
by Yang et al. (2014) to affect climate by tens of Kelvin.
Note that we do not consider planets near the inner edge
of the habitable zone in this work. We show our results
for planets orbiting Sun-like stars in Section 3.
In our models for planets orbiting an M-dwarf star,
we run two separate grids of models. In one grid, we
use the spectrum of M-dwarf stars with effective temperatures of 2600 K, 3300 K, and 4000 K. We assume
that the planets are spin-synchronized and set the rotation period of the planet equal to the orbital period the
planet should have for a given incident stellar flux using
Kepler’s 3rd law, as in Kopparapu et al. (2016, 2017),
Haqq-Misra et al. (2018). We vary the incident stellar
flux from 0.544 − 1 F as shown in Table 1, totaling 12
simulations with consistently varying incident stellar flux
and rotation period.
In our second grid of models for planets orbiting Mdwarf stars, we consider planets around M-dwarfs with
effective temperatures of 2600 K and 4000 K and assume spin synchronization but do not vary the rotation
period in a physically consistent way. Instead, in this
suite of models we individually adjust the rotation period, incident stellar flux, planetary radius, surface pressure, gravity, and effective cloud particle size. This is
the spin-synchronized equivalent to our simulations of
planets orbiting Sun-like stars, resulting in a total of 23
simulations for each M-dwarf stellar type. We acknowledge that this parameter sweep uses unphysical incident
stellar fluxes for varying rotation period (and vice versa),
as we conduct this grid of simulations purely to isolate
the dynamical effects of varying each planetary parameter considered. Additionally, we do so in order to directly compare our results for planets orbiting M-dwarfs
to those orbiting Sun-like stars. We show our results from
this grid in Section 4, focusing on results from our simulations of planets orbiting an M-dwarf with Teff = 2600 K.
3. CIRCULATION AND CLIMATE OF TERRESTRIAL
PLANETS ORBITING SUN-LIKE STARS

3.1. Zonally averaged temperature and circulation

strength
In the following sections, we show how varying the
rotation period, surface pressure, effective liquid cloud
particle size, incident stellar flux, planetary radius, and
surface gravity affects the atmospheric circulation and
climate of planets orbiting Sun-like stars.
3.1.1. Rotation period

We show the zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal wind, and mass streamfunction for planets orbiting Sun-like stars with varying rotation period
from 0.5-16 Earth days2 in Figure 1. We find that the
equator-to-pole temperature difference decreases with increasing rotation period (decreasing rotation rate), indicative of enhanced latitudinal heat transport at higher
rotation period. The reduced equator-to-pole temperature difference at higher rotation period is due to the
2 Throughout this work, we express orbital periods in units of
Earth days, or 86,400 s.

4

Komacek & Abbot

Fig. 1.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sunlike star with varying rotation periods from 0.5 - 16 Earth days.
The left-hand panels show zonal-mean temperature (colors) and
potential temperature (contours). All panels share a color scale,
and the potential temperature contours run from 200-500 K, in
30 K intervals. The y-axis of each panel is normalized pressure
σ = p/ps , and the x-axis is latitude. The right-hand panels show
mass streamfunction (colors) and zonal-mean zonal wind (contours). The zonal-mean zonal wind is shown in 10 m s−1 intervals
with a maximum of ±100 m s−1 , and with solid contours representing positive values and dashed contours representing negative
values. The left-hand panels show that the width of the warm
equatorial region increases with increasing rotation period, leading
to a decrease in the equator-to-pole temperature contrast. The
right-hand panels show that the Hadley circulation increases in
width with increasing rotation period, leading to extratropical jets
that lie at higher latitudes.

increase in eddy length scale with increasing rotation
period (Eady 1949, Pedlosky 1987, Chemke & Kaspi
2015a), which more efficiently carry heat poleward than
smaller eddies (Kaspi & Showman 2015), along with the
expansion of the Hadley cell with increasing rotation period (Held & Hou 1980). Additionally, the peak zonal
wind speed moves to higher latitudes with increased rotation period due to the increased size of the Hadley
cell, with the peak zonal wind occurring poleward of the
Hadley cell edge. Lastly, the speed of the subtropical
zonal jets does not increase with increasing mass streamfunction, instead reaching a maximum wind speed at a
rotation period of 1 day.
As discussed in Kaspi & Showman (2015), the nonmonotonic trend in subtropical jet speed with rotation
period is due to a trade-off between the increase in rotation rate leading to an increase in angular momentum

Fig. 2.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sunlike star with varying surface pressure from 0.25 − 4 bars. The
potential temperature and zonal-mean zonal wind contour intervals
are the same as in Figure 1. We find that the atmosphere cools
with increasing surface pressure, leading to a snowball state for
planets with surface pressures of ≥ 2 bars.

of poleward-moving air in the Hadley cell and the narrowing of the Hadley cell causing the jet to acquire less
mean angular momentum. Ignoring the effect of eddies,
air moving poleward on slowly rotating planets does not
have as much angular momentum as on faster rotating
planets. As a result, the angular momentum-conserving
jet speed is slower on more slowly rotating planets, since
it scales with the inverse of the rotation period (Held &
Hou 1980). However, for very fast rotating planets the
jet speed is inhibited by eddies, leading to a jet speed
that is weaker than the angular-momentum conserving
limit (Kaspi & Showman 2015). As a result, there is a
transition between the slowly rotating and fast rotating
regimes in which the jet speeds go from increasing to decreasing in strength with increasing rotation period.
The findings discussed above all agree qualitatively
with the results of Kaspi & Showman (2015), who used
an idealized GCM with double-grey radiative transfer
and no clouds to determine how the atmospheric dynamics of planets orbiting Sun-like stars are affected by varying planetary parameters. We will quantitatively compare our results for planets with varying rotation period
to those of Kaspi & Showman (2015) in Section 5.1.
3.1.2. Surface pressure

In Figure 2 we show how the climate and circulation
of planets orbiting Sun-like stars depends on varying the
surface pressure from 0.25 − 4 bars. We find that planets
with lower surface pressures are hotter, and that planets with surface pressures ≥ 2 bars are so cold that they

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
are in a fully glaciated (snowball) state. This is because
the Rayleigh scattering of N2 increases with increasing
atmospheric mass, as was shown to affect the inner edge
of the habitable zone by Kopparapu et al. (2014). As a
result, here we show that Rayleigh scattering also affects
the outer edge of the habitable zone by potentially leading planets with no CO2 and zero obliquity to be fully
ice-covered at large surface pressures.
Note that our result of surface cooling with increasing
atmospheric mass differs from that of Goldblatt et al.
(2009), Li et al. (2009), Charnay et al. (2013), Wolf
& Toon (2014), Chemke et al. (2016), who found that
higher atmospheric masses early in Earth’s history would
increase the surface temperature. However, we are not
considering an Earth-like setup and ignore CO2 , so even
though we include the pressure broadening effect of H2 O
the combined scattering effect of clouds and the background N2 gas leads to cooling. This also agrees with the
expectation that pressure broadening of CO2 is dominant
over the pressure broadening of H2 O for Earth (Li et al.
2009). Note that we do not expect that our results are
generally applicable due to the lack of CO2 in our simulations. However, we show that without the pressure
broadening effect of CO2 the climate of terrestrial planets should not warm with increasing surface pressure, the
opposite of what is expected to occur on early Earth.
We also find that the Hadley cell strength is nonmonotonic with increasing surface pressure, due to the
greatly reduced Hadley cell strength in our fully glaciated
simulations with surface pressures of 2 and 4 bars.
Though as in Chemke & Kaspi (2017) we find that above
a pressure of 1 bar, more massive atmospheres have reduced Hadley cell strengths, we also find evidence for an
increase in the Hadley cell strength from surface pressures of 0.25 - 1 bar. Lastly, note that our simulations
include the effect of pressure broadening while those in
Chemke & Kaspi (2017) do not. The inclusion of pressure broadening in our simulations may be the cause of
the warmer equator and relatively larger equator-to-pole
temperature contrasts in our simulations relative to those
of Chemke & Kaspi (2017).
3.1.3. Liquid cloud particle size

The effect of varying the effective liquid cloud particle
radius from 7 − 21 µm on the circulation and climate of
planets orbiting Sun-like stars is shown in Figure 3. The
liquid water cloud particle size is a fixed parameter in our
suite of simulations, with no assumed distribution, with
the standard value of 14 µm taken to tune the model
to an Earth-like climate. One might expect the effective
cloud particle size to change the albedo of the planet
due to the dependence of particle scattering properties
on particle size and the wavelength of incident radiation.
We find that increasing the effective cloud particle size
from the canonical value of 14 µm to 21 µm causes the
planet to warm by ≈ 7.5 K in the global mean, as the
planet receives more incident stellar light. Given that the
cloud coverage is greater at the equator than the pole the
equator warms up relative to the polar regions causing a
larger equator-to-pole temperature contrast, with a correspondingly stronger Hadley circulation and subtropical
jet. Note that our simulations are not warm enough for
moist effects to cause a reduction in the strength of the
Hadley cell due to the amount of saturated water vapor

5

Fig. 3.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sun-like
star with varying liquid cloud particle radius from 7 − 21 µm. The
potential temperature and zonal-mean zonal wind contour intervals are the same as in Figure 1. The atmosphere warms with
increasing cloud particle size due to reduced scattering of incident
stellar radiation, leading to more vigorous atmospheric circulation
for larger cloud particle sizes.

increasing faster than it can be precipitated (Held & Soden 2006).
Conversely, decreasing the particle size from 14 µm to
7 µm leads to a ≈ 19 K cooler global-mean surface, with
a significantly reduced Hadley cell strength and subtropical jet speed. This is because smaller effective particle
sizes scatter more incident stellar light, leading to much
less downward visible flux reaching the surface. Note
that the exact value of the warming and cooling due to
varying cloud particle size depends on the base state of
the atmosphere, and in a warmer base climate the cloud
particle effect may be larger in magnitude.
Based on the results shown in Figure 3, we find that
the effective cloud particle size is a key unknown in the
study of terrestrial exoplanet atmospheres. The effective
cloud particle size directly affects how much incident radiation reaches the surface to drive circulation, which
then feeds back on the cloud distribution. In reality,
the cloud particle size distribution itself may also be affected by the circulation, including the spatial pattern
of vertical mixing and heating/cooling. As a result, future work on the atmospheric circulation of terrestrial
exoplanets should consider the effect of cloud parameterizations on climate and work toward building models
that couple cloud microphysics and the radiative effect
of clouds with atmospheric circulation.
3.1.4. Incident stellar flux

Figure 4 shows the zonal-mean circulation and climate
for planets orbiting Sun-like stars with varying incident
stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F . We find that the surface temperature increases sharply with increasing incident flux, with a corresponding increase in the strength
of the mass streamfunction and peak zonal wind speed.
Kaspi & Showman (2015) also found an increase in zonal
wind speed with increasing incident stellar flux, due to
the greater energy input to drive atmospheric circulation. Additionally, we find a decrease in the pressure
level at which the subtropical jet reaches its maximum
with increasing incident stellar flux, also found by Kaspi
& Showman (2015).

6

Komacek & Abbot

Fig. 4.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sunlike star with varying incident stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F . The
potential temperature and zonal-mean zonal wind contour intervals
are the same as in Figure 1. The climate warms and the circulation
strengthens with increasing incident stellar flux.

Fig. 6.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sun-like
star with varying surface gravity from 0.5−1.414 g . The potential
temperature and zonal-mean zonal wind contour intervals are the
same as in Figure 1. The planet cools with increasing gravity due
to the lower atmospheric mass, while the Hadley cell strengthens
with increasing gravity.

from 0.5 − 2 R . We find that the equatorial temperature increases with increasing radius, indicative of reduced equator-to-pole heat transport in the atmospheres
of larger planets. We also find that the peak magnitude
of the subtropical jet is more equatorward for higher
radius, with a corresponding narrowing of the Hadley
cell. Note that we find a reduction in the strength of the
Hadley cell and subtropical jets at a radius of 0.707 R ,
where the circulation transitions from being characterized by subtropical jets that peak in strength at approximately ±60◦ latitude to being more like the Earth with
subtropical jets that peak near ±30◦ latitude. In general, the trend we find of decreased equator-pole heat
transport with increasing radius agrees with the simulations of Kaspi & Showman (2015), who found that the
equator-to-pole temperature contrast of larger planets is
enhanced due to the reduced eddy length scale relative
to the radius of the planet.
3.1.6. Surface gravity

Fig. 5.— Zonal-mean temperature, potential temperature, zonal
wind, and streamfunction for simulated planets orbiting a Sun-like
star with varying planetary radius from 0.5 − 2 R . The potential
temperature and zonal-mean zonal wind contour intervals are the
same as in Figure 1. The equatorial temperature and equator-topole temperature contrast increase with increasing radius due to
reduced eddy heat transport.

3.1.5. Planetary radius

Figure 5 shows how the circulation of planets orbiting Sun-like stars varies with changing planetary radius

Figure 6 shows how the climate of simulated planets orbiting a Sun-like star depends on varying surface gravity
from 0.5 − 1.414 g . Note that we keep surface pressure fixed in this set of experiments and hence allow the
atmospheric mass to vary. However, this suite of simulations differs from the simulations with varying pressure in
Section 3.1.2 due to the inclusion of pressure broadening
in our radiative transfer scheme and the effects of gravity on the vertical static stability and convection due to
the increase of convective available potential energy with
gravity. We find that the equator-to-pole temperature
contrast increases with increasing surface gravity. As a
result, our simulated planets with larger surface gravities
have stronger Hadley cells and correspondingly stronger
subtropical jets. This is consistent with the simulations
of Kaspi & Showman (2015) who found that the Hadley

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
cell intensity increases with increasing surface gravity,
qualitatively in accord with the theory of Held & Hou
(1980). Note that our simulations do not cover as broad
a range as Kaspi & Showman (2015), who found that
this increase in Hadley cell strength with gravity continues up to a surface gravity 16 times that of Earth. Additionally, simulations with reduced gravity are hotter,
in accord with the simulations of Chemke et al. (2016)
who found that a larger atmospheric mass on early Earth
would lead to warmer surface temperatures.
4. CIRCULATION AND CLIMATE OF
SPIN-SYNCHRONIZED TERRESTRIAL PLANETS
ORBITING M-DWARF STARS
4.1. Temperature & cloud coverage

In the following sections, we show how varying the rotation period and incident stellar flux together, rotation
period alone, and surface pressure affect the climate of
planets orbiting M-dwarf stars. We defer a discussion of
how the incident stellar flux, planetary radius, surface
gravity, and effective cloud particle size affect the climate of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars to Appendix A,
as they are broadly similar to their impact on the climate
of planets orbiting Sun-like stars.
4.1.1. Consistently varying rotation period and incident
stellar flux

To analyze the climate of simulations of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars with consistently varying incident
stellar flux and rotation period, we show maps of the temperature, total cloud fraction, and integrated cloud water
(liquid and ice) path in Figures 7 and 8. Figure 7 shows
results for planets orbiting an early type M-dwarf with
an effective temperature of 4000 K, while Figure 8 shows
results from simulations for planets orbiting a late-type
M-dwarf star with an effective temperature of 2600 K.
In both cases, we find that the temperature increases
monotonically with increasing incident flux, as expected.
However, in the case of planets orbiting a late M-dwarf
star, we find that there is a transition between large substellar cloud cover for our cases with lower incident flux
and slower rotation and reduced cloud cover at higher
flux and faster rotation.
This decrease in dayside cloud coverage with faster rotation corresponds to a dynamical transition of the atmosphere from a Rhines-rotator (with the Rossby deformation radius greater than the planetary radius, but the
Rhines scale less than the planetary radius) regime to
a rapidly rotating regime (Haqq-Misra et al. 2018). In
the rapidly rotating regime, both the Rhines length scale
and Rossby deformation radius are smaller than the planetary radius. Given that the Rhines length scale determines the length scale of the turbulent energy cascade,
turbulence can lead to the formation of mid-latitude
zonal jets and departure from day-night symmetry in this
rapidly rotating regime. The Rossby deformation radius
sets the characteristic length scale of the mean zonal circulation (Haqq-Misra et al. 2018). Consequently if the
Rossby deformation radius is smaller than the planetary
radius, the equatorial zonal circulation is confined to an
equatorial strip, the length scale of which is set by the
Rossby deformation radius. The shift in the dynamical state of the atmosphere from Rhines to rapidly rotating affects the dayside cloud distribution by reducing

7

the latitudinal extent of the zonal circulation, leading to
a reduction in the equatorward fluxes of momentum and
moisture that cause vigorous convection at the substellar
point, which is needed to form dayside clouds (Yang et al.
2013). The transition from Rhines rotating to rapidly
rotating planets is not seen in our more slowly rotating
simulations of planets orbiting an early M-dwarf star, as
all of those simulations are in a slowly rotating regime
(Haqq-Misra et al. 2018), where both the Rhines length
scale and Rossby deformation radius are larger than the
planetary radius. Note that all of our simulations of planets orbiting an early type M-dwarf star show significant
dayside cloud coverage due to their slow rotation periods
of 74.3-117.4 days. We will discuss the effects of rotation
on dayside cloud coverage further in Section 5.3.
4.1.2. Rotation period

To analyze the effects of varying rotation alone, in Figure 9 we show maps of surface temperature and cloud
coverage from simulations of planets orbiting a late Mdwarf star with varying rotation period from 0.5-16 Earth
days. These simulations all use the same incident stellar
flux of 1 F . Note that these experiments are unrealistic, as the rotation period is not varied consistently with
the incident stellar flux. In Section 4.1.1, we took into
account the decrease in rotation period with increasing
incident stellar flux, but in this section we vary the rotation period alone to isolate its effect on the atmospheric
circulation. We can see that as the rotation period is decreased, the length scales of the circulation correspondingly decrease. With slow rotation, dynamical structures
are large-scale, with a hot dayside hemisphere and cold
nightside hemisphere. With faster rotation, the dayside
temperature (and cloud) pattern is sheared out at high
latitudes due to the effect of rotation, resulting in midlatitude jets for Earth-like rotation periods (Noda et al.
2017).
As in the case with consistently varying rotation period
and incident stellar flux, we see a transition in the dayside cloud coverage with increasing rotation period. For
fast rotating planets, the dayside is relatively cloud-free,
causing the planet to have a smaller top-of-atmosphere
albedo and a hotter surface. As the rotation period is
increased, the planet surface cools due to the enhanced
dayside cloud coverage. Then, between a rotation period
of 8 and 16 days, the dayside cloud coverage increases
drastically, with clouds centered on the substellar point
for the 16 day rotation period case. The centering of the
cloud pattern on the substellar point increases the topof-atmosphere albedo, leading to a significantly cooler
surface. We will discuss the dynamics of this cloud transition in more detail in Section 5.3.
4.1.3. Surface pressure

We show the effects of varying surface pressure on the
climate of M-dwarf planets in Figure 10 for simulations
of planets orbiting a late M-dwarf planet with an incident stellar flux and rotation period set equal to that of
Earth. We use this unrealistically short rotation period
in order to contrast our simulations with those of planets
orbiting Sun-like stars (see Section 5.5). However, even
in this fast-rotating regime with mid-latitude jets identified by Noda et al. (2017) and Haqq-Misra et al. (2018),

8

Komacek & Abbot

Fig. 7.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting an early M-dwarf star with varying incident stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F , corresponding to varying rotation periods from
117.4 − 74.3 days. The center of each map corresponds to the substellar point of the planet. All simulations are in the slowly rotating
regime, with a hot dayside and cold nightside and large dayside cloud coverage.

Fig. 8.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying incident stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F , corresponding to varying rotation periods from
6.49 − 4.11 days. The center of each map corresponds to the substellar point of the planet. A transition between reduced cloud coverage at
the substellar point with faster rotation (larger incident fluxes) and enhanced cloud coverage with slower rotation (lower incident fluxes)
can be seen.

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets

9

Fig. 9.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying rotation periods from 0.5 - 16 days. The center of each map corresponds to the substellar
point of the planet. Faster-rotating planets have smaller dynamical lengthscales, while slow rotators have large dynamical lengthscales and
a large day-night temperature contrast. The dayside cloud cover increases with increasing rotation period, with an abrupt transition in the
substellar cloud cover between a rotation period of 8 and 16 days.

10

Komacek & Abbot

we can see the effect of atmospheric pressure on the Mdwarf cloud transition.
In our suite of simulations, planets with lower surface
pressures have reduced dayside cloud coverage relative
to those with higher surface pressures. We find that
increasing the surface pressure (and hence atmospheric
mass) leads to enhanced dayside convective fluxes. Additionally, we find that the surface relative humidity increases with increasing surface pressure, leading to more
available condensate. Note that the enhanced convective fluxes and increase in surface relative humidity are
linked, as convection moistens the atmosphere in the
limit of weak subsidence (Romps 2014). The larger cloud
coverage on the dayside of M-dwarf planets with higher
surface pressures is a result of the increased dayside convective fluxes and relative humidity in our simulations
with large surface pressures. Conversely, we find that
the combination of reduced dayside cloud coverage along
with the reduced Rayleigh scattering from the background atmospheric N2 (Kopparapu et al. 2014) causes
the surfaces of M-dwarf planets with thinner atmospheres
to be hotter relative to those with thicker atmospheres.
5. DISCUSSION
5.1. Comparison with Kaspi & Showman (2015)

In this section, we compare our simulation results for
how the Hadley circulation and equator-to-pole temperature contrast of terrestrial exoplanets varies with planetary parameters to the results of Kaspi & Showman
(2015). Kaspi & Showman used the GCM of Frierson
et al. (2006), Frierson et al. (2007) to investigate how
varying planetary parameters affects the atmospheric dynamics of terrestrial exoplanets. This GCM has an ideal-

Latitude of max wind speed [◦]

Fig. 10.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying surface pressure from 0.25 − 4 bars. The center of each map corresponds to the substellar
point of the planet. Increasing surface pressure leads to larger dayside cloud coverage, with a corresponding decrease in the global-average
temperature for more massive atmospheres.

80

This work
Idealized GCM

60
40
20
0

10−1
100
Rotation rate [ΩE ]

Fig. 11.— Comparison of dependence of the latitude of the maximum in the latitude of the maximum of zonal wind speed between
this work and that of Kaspi & Showman (2015). We generally
find good agreement between the two models over a broad range
of rotation rates.

ized radiative transfer scheme with a double-grey opacity,
that is, one visible and one infrared band, parameterized
moist convection, and no clouds (Betts 1986, Betts &
Miller 1986). Our simulations are therefore a more complex version of those performed by Kaspi & Showman.
In Figure 11 we show that the latitude of maximum
zonal wind speed in our simulations tracks very well the
latitude of maximum wind speed in Kaspi & Showman.

Normalized eq-pole temp. diff. [K]

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
1.75

1.4

This work
Idealized GCM

1.4

1.2

1.2

1.50

1.2

1.25

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.00

0.8

0.8

0.8
0.75
0.50

11

0.6

0.6
0.6
10−1
100
Rotation rate [ΩE ]

101

100
101
Surface pressure [bars]

100
Radius [RE ]

10−1

100
Flux [FE ]

Fig. 12.— Comparison of the dependence of the normalized equator-to-pole temperature difference on rotation rate, surface pressure,
radius, and incident stellar flux between this work and that of Kaspi & Showman (2015). Note that each plot has a different y-axis scale.
The two sets of simulations find similar trends in the equator-pole temperature contrast with rotation rate, surface pressure, radius, and
incident stellar flux. However, the cooler climates on our simulations cause much greater absolute equator-pole temperature contrasts than
in the simulations of Kaspi & Showman (2015).

5.2. Sea ice coverage

All simulations of planets orbiting Sun-like stars shown
in this work have significant sea ice cover due to the idealized assumptions of zero obliquity, no atmospheric CO2 ,

50
Mean thickness [m]

The latitude of maximum zonal wind speed corresponds
to the location of the subtropical jets that form at the
flanks of the Hadley cell. Hence, the overall width of the
Hadley cell and its dependence with rotation rate are
similar between the two models.
In Figure 12 we show how the equator-to-pole temperature contrast depends on rotation rate, surface pressure, planetary radius, and incident stellar flux in our
simulations and those of Kaspi & Showman. Because
our simulations are not tuned to Earth, include sea ice,
have zero obliquity, and do not include CO2 , the absolute
equator-to-pole temperature contrasts in our simulations
are up to ≈ 100 K larger than those in Kaspi & Showman. As a result, we normalize the equator-to-pole temperature contrast to the average of the equator-to-pole
temperature contrast for each model parameter variation in order to directly compare results from the two
models. We generally find similar trends in the equatorto-pole temperature contrast with varying planetary parameters: the equator-to-pole temperature contrast increases with increasing rotation rate, decreasing surface
pressure, increasing radius, and increasing flux. However, as discussed in Section 3.1.2 our simulations with
surface pressures of 2 and 4 bars are fully ice-covered,
leading to greatly reduced equator-to-pole temperature
contrasts (due to the cooler equatorial region) relative to
our simulations with lower pressures. We find very good
agreement with Kaspi & Showman that planets with bigger radii have larger equator-to-pole temperature contrasts due to a decreased ratio of the eddy length scale
to the planetary radius. Similarly to Kaspi & Showman,
we find a general trend of increasing equator-to-pole temperature contrast with increasing incident flux (due to
the decreasing radiative time constant) until a critical
flux at which the equator-to-pole temperature contrast
begins to decrease with increasing flux (due to moist energy transport). By running a simulation with higher
incident flux (1.225 F , see the last panel of Figure 12),
we find that the decrease in the equator-to-pole temperature contrast begins at higher values of incident stellar
flux than was found by Kaspi & Showman due to the significant glaciation in our model with incident flux equal
to that of Earth.

Ice
Snow

40
30
20
10
0

−90

−60

−30
0
30
◦
Latitude [ ]

60

90

Fig. 13.— Our simulations for planets orbiting a Sun-like star
have ice-free equatorial regions. Shown is the mean thickness of sea
ice (solid line) and snow (dashed line) from a simulation with all
planetary parameters set equal to the Earth and with zero obliquity. The snow cover drops just poleward of the sea ice edge. Because snow has a much higher albedo than sea ice in ExoCAM, the
increase in absorbed insolation in these snow-free regions causes
the sea ice there to melt. This mechanism was proposed by Abbot et al. (2011) to explain a possible climate state for Earth (the
“Jormungand” global climate state). We find that similar climate
states can occur for exoplanets with zero obliquity.

and no ocean heat transport. As a result, we find that
the planet reaches a snowball in our simulations below an
incident flux of 0.816F . Note that this is lower than the
snowball limit for modern Earth, which is 0.91 − 0.96F
(Voigt & Marotzke 2010, Voigt et al. 2011). The reduced
critical incident flux to reach a snowball in our simulations is due to the assumption of zero obliquity, which
causes the equatorial regions to be ice-free at a lower incident flux. Very few of our simulations with an Earth
value of incident stellar flux have sea ice that encompasses the entire planet (i.e., reach a snowball), as this
only occurs with surface pressures greater than that of
Earth.
Though the majority of simulations with Earth’s
value of incident flux are not snowballs, only the nearequatorial region of the planet is ice-free. Figure 13
shows the zonal-mean ice and snow thickness for our

12

Komacek & Abbot

simulation with all parameters set equal to that of Earth.
The planet is only ice-free in a small latitudinal strip near
the equator, with up to ∼ 45 m of sea ice cover at the
poles. We find that the snow cover peaks poleward of the
ice edge, and aligns with a region where the sea ice cover
does not change much with latitude (at ±30◦ ). Snow
has a much higher albedo than sea ice in CAM, which
protects the ice sheet from melting in the mid-latitudes.
The snow cover decreases to zero toward the equator,
which reduces the top-of-atmosphere albedo and leads
to melting. This climate state is the exoplanet equivalent to the “Jormungand” global climate state proposed
for Earth (Abbot et al. 2011), and here we show that
similar feedback processes as found for Earth-like simulations can occur in the zero-obliquity state. As a result,
the reason that we find a lower incident flux limit for
the snowball state in our simulations relative to modern
Earth is because of the reduced snow-albedo feedback in
equatorial regions in the low obliquity regime. We find
that this mechanism is the same that may have kept the
equatorial region of Earth ice-free during Neoproterozoic
glaciations.
5.3. M-dwarf cloud transition
In our simulations of planets orbiting late M-dwarf
stars, we find that there is a clear transition between low
and high dayside cloud coverage between orbital periods
of 8 and 16 days (see Figure 9), with further analysis
showing that this transition occurs at ≈ 10 days. For
simulations of planets orbiting early M-dwarf stars, we
find that the transition occurs between orbital periods of
4 and 8 days. To analyze this cloud transition in more
detail, in Figure 14 we show the total cloud fraction, vertical wind speed, zonal wind speed, and meridional flux
of zonal momentum (u0 v 0 ) from our simulations of planets orbiting late M-dwarfs with orbital periods of 8 and
16 days.
Figure 14 shows that the faster rotating simulation
with an orbital period of 8 days (left hand panels) has
relatively low dayside cloud coverage, while the more
slowly rotating simulation with an orbital period of 16
days (right hand panels) has larger dayside cloud coverage and an associated strong dayside updraft that occurs near the substellar point of the planet. The dayside updraft in the simulation with a rotation period
of 16 days corresponds to the location where there is
strong zonal convergence between eastward winds west
of the substellar point and westward winds east of the
substellar point. The strong zonal convergence is due to
meridional transport of eddy momentum from higher latitudes toward the equator. This can be seen in the strong
phase tilts in the meridional flux of eddy momentum that
are northwest-southeast in the northern hemisphere and
southwest-northeast in the southern hemisphere. The
eddy phase tilts lead to negative eddy momentum flux
north of the equator and positive eddy momentum flux
south of the equator, combining to transport eastward
momentum toward the equator (Held 2000, Vallis 2006,
Showman & Polvani 2011). This eastward eddy momentum then accelerates the flow west of the substellar point,
leading to enhanced convergence at the substellar point.
This strong convergence implies transport of moisture
and momentum to the substellar point, which leads to a
strong updraft and dayside cloud cover.

The eddy phase tilts that transport momentum toward
the equator in the 16 day period case are not seen in the
8 day period case, leading to much weaker dayside cloud
coverage. Additionally, the region west of the substellar point (where there are strong updrafts) is very dry
in the 8 day period model. In general, a positive correlation between upward vertical velocity and moisture
is needed for net upward moisture transport (Zhang &
Showman 2018). This correlation is not found in our
8 day period simulation, which is instead moist east of
the substellar point where there are weak downdrafts.
Note that our simulation with a period of 8 days lies in
the rapidly rotating regime demarcated by Haqq-Misra
et al. (2018) (where the Rhines and Rossby deformation
scales are smaller than the planetary radius), while the 16
day period case is in a slowly rotating regime, where the
relevant dynamical length scales are similar to or larger
than the planetary radius. As a result, we find that the
dynamical transition found by Haqq-Misra et al. (2018)
between rapid and slow rotators leads to a transition in
substellar cloud coverage due to eddy-mean flow interactions.
Previous authors have shown that the dayside cloud
transition for M-dwarf planets is not affected significantly
by changing planetary parameters (Yang et al. 2013)
or by changing the model convective parameterizations
(Way et al. 2018). Notably, Way et al. (2018) showed
that dayside cloud coverage of slowly rotating planets
is still large even when all upwelling condensate is assumed to rain out, showing that continuous convective
transport of condensate is not required for large dayside
cloud coverage. Our finding that the cloud transition is
due to a shift in the dynamical state of the atmosphere
with increasing rotation period is further evidence that
the M-dwarf cloud transition is not parameterization dependent. Instead, the cloud transition of slowly rotating
planets orbiting M-dwarfs is due to a robust dynamical
mechanism that should not be dependent on the details
of model cloud and convective parameterizations.
5.4. Observational consequences
To analyze the observational consequences of our simulations of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars, we show fullphase light curves (“phase curves”) in Figure 15. These
phase curves are bolometric, using the upwelling top-ofatmosphere longwave flux (i.e., the OLR) from our simulations of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars with varying
effective temperature and insolation, using the correct rotation period for a given value of insolation (Kopparapu
et al. 2017). The flux is then weighted by the cosine
of the angle between the grid point and the observer to
take into account planetary limb darkening (Cowan &
Agol 2008).
We find that slower-rotating planets that receive less
incident flux have phase curves that peak near secondary
eclipse and have large dayside-to-nightside flux contrasts,
evident in the large amplitude of the phase curve. Hotter planets that are faster rotating have larger offsets of
the maximum of the phase curve from secondary eclipse,
with the phase curve maximum even occurring near the
eastern limb for planets orbiting earlier-type M-dwarfs
that receive the same incident flux as Earth. The phase
curve offset is likely determined by a combination of wave
dynamics and cloud coverage, as wave-mean flow inter-

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets

13

Fig. 14.— A shift in the dynamical state of the atmosphere causes the transition in dayside cloud coverage between rotation periods of 8
(left) and 16 (right) days for planets orbiting M-dwarfs. The top panel shows the total cloud fraction, the second panel shows the vertical
wind speed at the lowest vertical level (in pressure units of milli-Pascals per second), the third panel shows the zonal wind speed at the
lowest vertical level, and the bottom panel shows the meridional flux of zonal momentum u0 v 0 at the lowest vertical level. Over-plotted
contours range from the minimum to maximum value shown on the colorbar, and panels on the same row share a color scale. In the
simulation with a rotation period of 16 days, there are strong phase tilts of the meridional flux of zonal eddy momentum west of the
substellar point. These phase tilts are northwest-southeast in the northern hemisphere and southwest-northeast in the southern hemisphere
and therefore flux zonal momentum from higher latitudes toward the equator. This equatorward momentum flux causes strong eastward
winds west of the substellar point, which leads to zonal convergence at the substellar point. The zonal convergence forces a strong updraft
centered on the substellar point, leading to high cloud coverage on the dayside.

14

Komacek & Abbot

Te↵ = 2600 K

actions provide an explanation of the phase curve offsets of larger tidally locked planets (Zhang & Showman
2017, Komacek et al. 2017, Hammond & Pierrehumbert
2018), and clouds can affect the outgoing infrared flux.
However, we leave a detailed understanding of the phase
curve offset of tidally locked terrestrial planets to future
work. Additionally, we find that faster rotating planets
have smaller relative day-to-night flux contrasts. As a
result, we agree with the findings of Haqq-Misra et al.
(2018) that phase curves can be used to infer the dynamical state of the atmosphere for terrestrial planets
orbiting M-dwarf stars. In future work, we will investigate how transmission, emission and reflectance spectra
vary over the broad suite of our simulations, with implications for future observations with the James Webb
Space Telescope and LUVOIR/HabEx.

<latexit sha1_base64="yZSjmCFSgz6659apNwGlxcWd9RM=">AAACCXicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqEs3g0VwVSZF1I1QdCO4qdAXtCFMppN26GQSZiZCCXXpxl9x40IRt/6BO//GSRtBWw9cOJxzL/fe48ecKY3Ql1VYWl5ZXSuulzY2t7Z37N29looSSWiTRDySHR8rypmgTc00p51YUhz6nLb90VXmt++oVCwSDT2OqRvigWABI1gbybNhw+uFWA9lmNIgmMALWD1F6P5Hu5l4dhlV0BRwkTg5KYMcdc/+7PUjkoRUaMKxUl0HxdpNsdSMcDop9RJFY0xGeEC7hgocUuWm008m8MgofRhE0pTQcKr+nkhxqNQ49E1ndqGa9zLxP6+b6ODcTZmIE00FmS0KEg51BLNYYJ9JSjQfG4KJZOZWSIZYYqJNeCUTgjP/8iJpVSsOqji3J+XaZR5HERyAQ3AMHHAGauAa1EETEPAAnsALeLUerWfrzXqftRasfGYf/IH18Q2LwJmX</latexit>

0.544 FE, 6.49 PE
0.667 FE, 5.57 PE

0.816 FE, 4.79 PE
1 FE, 4.11 PE

1.3

F/Fav

1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
180

120

60
0
60
Substellar longitude [ ]

120

180

Te↵ = 3300 K
<latexit sha1_base64="AVAQPOSeBPgA+AX0k3KDBgFb7Vk=">AAACCXicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqEs3g0VwVSZW0I1QdCO4qdAXtCFMppN26GQSZiZCCXXpxl9x40IRt/6BO//GSRtBWw9cOJxzL/fe48ecKY3Ql1VYWl5ZXSuulzY2t7Z37N29looSSWiTRDySHR8rypmgTc00p51YUhz6nLb90VXmt++oVCwSDT2OqRvigWABI1gbybNhw+uFWA9lmNIgmMALWK0idP+j3Uw8u4wqaAq4SJyclEGOumd/9voRSUIqNOFYqa6DYu2mWGpGOJ2UeomiMSYjPKBdQwUOqXLT6ScTeGSUPgwiaUpoOFV/T6Q4VGoc+qYzu1DNe5n4n9dNdHDupkzEiaaCzBYFCYc6glkssM8kJZqPDcFEMnMrJEMsMdEmvJIJwZl/eZG0TioOqji3p+XaZR5HERyAQ3AMHHAGauAa1EETEPAAnsALeLUerWfrzXqftRasfGYf/IH18Q2In5mV</latexit>

0.544 FE, 35.78 PE
0.667 FE, 30.70 PE

0.816 FE, 26.39 PE
1 FE, 22.66 PE

1.4

F/Fav

1.2

1.0

0.8
180

120

60
0
60
Substellar longitude [ ]

120

180

Te↵ = 4000 K
<latexit sha1_base64="zbTEX/xlEHKDSRlLpSTc+c0s+6s=">AAACCXicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqEs3g0VwVSZS0I1QdCO4qdCH0IYwmU7aoTNJmJkIJcSlG3/FjQtF3PoH7vwbJ20EbT1w4XDOvdx7jx9zpjRCX1ZpaXllda28XtnY3NresXf3OipKJKFtEvFI3vpYUc5C2tZMc3obS4qFz2nXH1/mfveOSsWisKUnMXUFHoYsYARrI3k2bHl9gfVIipQGQQbPYR0hdP+jXWeeXUU1NAVcJE5BqqBA07M/+4OIJIKGmnCsVM9BsXZTLDUjnGaVfqJojMkYD2nP0BALqtx0+kkGj4wygEEkTYUaTtXfEykWSk2EbzrzC9W8l4v/eb1EB2duysI40TQks0VBwqGOYB4LHDBJieYTQzCRzNwKyQhLTLQJr2JCcOZfXiSdk5qDas5Nvdq4KOIogwNwCI6BA05BA1yBJmgDAh7AE3gBr9aj9Wy9We+z1pJVzOyDP7A+vgGFfpmT</latexit>

0.544 FE, 117.4 PE
0.667 FE, 100.7 PE

0.816 FE, 86.6 PE
1 FE, 74.3 PE

1.4

F/Fav

1.2
1.0
0.8

180

120

60
0
60
Substellar longitude [ ]

120

180

Fig. 15.— Calculated phase curves from our simulations with
consistent rotation period and incident stellar flux for spinsynchronized planets orbiting M-dwarf stars with effective temperatures of Teff = 2600, 3300, and 4000 K and varying incident
stellar flux F and rotation period P (shown in Earth units). The
phase curves are normalized to compare the shape of emitted phase
curves for planets with significantly different incident stellar fluxes.
In general, planets that receive greater incident stellar flux have
reduced phase curve amplitudes and increased shifts in the maximum of the phase curve away from secondary eclipse (shown by
the vertical dashed lines).

5.5. Comparison between the climates of planets

orbiting Sun-like stars and M-dwarfs
Our suite of simulations is unique in that we utilized
the same GCM setup to study planets orbiting both Sunlike stars and M-dwarf stars. We used the same model
parameters in the two suites, but assumed a different
spin-state (spin-synchronized for M-dwarf planets, zero
obliquity and Earth’s rotation period for Sun-like star
planets) and used a different incident stellar spectrum.
We find that the spin state greatly changes the dynamics and resulting climate. Increasing the rotation period
causes a sharp decrease in the globally averaged surface
temperature for simulations of planets orbiting M-dwarf
stars (∼ 45 K with increasing rotation period from 0.5-16
days for planets orbiting late M-dwarfs), whereas the surface temperature for planets orbiting Sun-like stars varies
by . 10 K with varying rotation period. This is due to
the dayside cloud transition that enhances the top-ofatmosphere albedo of slowly rotating M-dwarf planets,
but does not occur in our suite of simulations for planets
orbiting Sun-like stars. Note that in our suite of simulations we did not exceed a rotation period of 16 days for
simulations of Earth-like planets orbiting Sun-like stars.
However, planets orbiting Sun-like stars will reach a similar cloud transition at very long rotation periods relevant
to early Venus (Yang et al. 2014, Way et al. 2016a).
We also find that M-dwarf planets are uniformly
warmer than planets orbiting Sun-like stars. This corresponds with a lower top-of-atmosphere albedo for planets orbiting M-dwarf stars relative to planets orbiting
Sun-like stars. This lowered albedo for planets orbiting
M-dwarf stars is due to both the greater absorption of
incident near-infrared radiation by atmospheric water vapor and significantly reduced dayside sea ice coverage in
these simulations. This reduced dayside sea ice coverage
for planets orbiting M-dwarf stars is due to two effects:
first, the decrease in the ice-albedo feedback due to the
relatively red incident stellar radiation at which sea ice
absorbs more incoming radiation (Joshi & Haberle 2012),
and second, the pattern of incident flux ensures that the
daysides of M-dwarf planets that receive similar flux to
Earth will have an ice-free region centered on the substellar point (Pierrehumbert 2011). Note that we do not
include a dynamical ocean in these simulations, which
would act to increase the amount of ice-free ocean due
to heat transport (Hu & Yang 2014). Hence, the conclusion that M-dwarf planets are uniformly hotter than

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
planets orbiting Sun-like stars is likely to be robust to
changing our assumption of zero ocean heat transport.
6. CONCLUSIONS

We find that the climates of exoplanets are sensitive
to planetary parameters, with the incident stellar flux,
rotation period, and surface pressure all able to greatly
affect the surface temperature and determine whether or
not a planet is habitable. Planetary parameters impact
climate differently for planets around Sun-like stars and
synchronously rotating planets orbiting M-dwarf stars.
Most notably, increasing the rotation period leads to significant cooling for planets orbiting M-dwarf stars but
does not greatly affect the surface temperature of planets orbiting Sun-like stars. Here we list important results
from this work for planets orbiting Sun-like and M-dwarf
stars.
The key takeaways from our simulations of planets orbiting Sun-like stars are:
1. The scaling of Hadley cell width and equator-topole temperature differences from our sophisticated
general circulation modeling broadly match those
of Kaspi & Showman (2015) using an idealized
GCM with double-grey radiative transfer and no
clouds. The width of the Hadley circulation of
Earth-like planets increases with increasing rotation period, leading to an increase in the latitude
at which the magnitude of the subtropical jet peaks
with increasing rotation period. However, we find
large differences in the absolute value of equatorto-pole temperature differences between our simulations and those of Kaspi & Showman (2015) because we include sea ice and do not tune our simulations to match Earth.
2. The globally averaged temperature of terrestrial
planets increases with increasing incident stellar
flux, planetary radius, and effective liquid cloud
particle size and decreases with increasing surface pressure and surface gravity. The equatorto-pole temperature contrast correlates with the
globally averaged temperature except for varying
rotation period and surface gravity, in which case
the equator-to-pole temperature contrast increases
with decreasing rotation period and increasing surface gravity. Our findings broadly agree with previous theoretical and numerical work which finds that
the equator-to-pole temperature contrast should
increase with increasing planetary radius and gravity and decrease with increasing surface pressure
and rotation period.
3. We find that the effective cloud particle size is a key
unknown in the study of the climate of terrestrial
exoplanets. With the assumption of uniform effective cloud particle sizes, larger particle sizes lead to
warmer climates, with a correspondingly more vigorous atmospheric circulation. Future work is necessary to understand the expected cloud particle
size distribution in the atmospheres of terrestrial
exoplanets and how it affects climate.
The key points from our simulations of planets orbiting
M-dwarf stars are:

15

1. We find that a transition between small and large
dayside cloud coverage of synchronously rotating
planets occurs with increasing rotation period. For
planets that receive the same incident flux as Earth
and orbit a late M-dwarf star with an effective temperature of 2600 K, the transition between low and
high dayside cloud coverage occurs at a rotation
period of ≈ 10 days. We find a similar transition between low and high dayside cloud coverage
for planets orbiting late-type M-dwarfs with consistently varying rotation period and incident stellar flux, but in this case the transition occurs at a
smaller rotation period of ≈ 5 days. For planets
orbiting early type M-dwarf stars with an effective
temperature of 4000 K, we find extensive dayside
cloud coverage for all combinations of rotation period and incident stellar flux that we consider.
2. We find that the transition between small and large
dayside cloud coverage is due to a shift in the dynamical state of the atmosphere with increasing rotation period. As the rotation period is increased,
the meridional eddy flux of zonal momentum shows
northwest-southeast phase tilts in the northern
hemisphere (southwest-northeast phase tilts in the
southern hemisphere) that flux zonal momentum
from higher latitudes toward the equator. This
equatorward momentum flux causes strong eastward flow west of the substellar point that leads
to convergence of the zonal winds near the substellar point. This convergence causes a strong updraft on the dayside of the planet, leading to large
dayside cloud coverage. As a result, we find that
the transition in dayside cloud coverage is due to
a largely dynamical mechanism and should not be
parameterization-dependent. This agrees with the
previous results of Yang et al. (2013) and Way et al.
(2018), who have shown that dayside cloud coverage is not significantly affected when varying model
parameters and convective schemes.
3. We computed full-phase light curves from our numerical circulation models of terrestrial exoplanets
orbiting M-dwarf stars with varying effective temperatures from 2600 − 4000 K and with varying
incident stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F . We find
that the phase curve amplitude increases with decreasing incident stellar flux due to the larger dayto-night temperature differences of cooler planets.
We additionally find that faster-rotating planets
that receive a greater amount of incident stellar
flux have larger phase curve offsets. Hence, as proposed by Haqq-Misra et al. (2018), we find that
phase curves can be used to infer the dynamical
state of terrestrial exoplanet atmospheres.

We thank Eric Wolf for sharing the ExoCAM code with
the community and for providing insight on the model
and comments on an early version of this manuscript.
We thank Rei Chemke for a thorough review, which
greatly improved the manuscript. T.K. acknowledges
funding from the 51 Pegasi b Fellowship in Planetary

16

Komacek & Abbot

Astronomy sponsored by the Heising-Simons Foundation. We acknowledge support from the NASA Astrobiology Institutes Virtual Planetary Laboratory, which
is supported by NASA under cooperative agreement

NNH05ZDA001C. We thank the University of Chicago
Research Computing Center Legacy Simulation Allocation Program for computing resources supporting this
work.

REFERENCES
Abbot, D., Voigt, A., & Koll, D. 2011, Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 116, D18103
Allard, F., Allard, N., Homeier, D., Kielkopf, J., McCaughrean,
M., & Spiegelman, F. 2007, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 474,
L21
Anglada-Escudé, G., Amado, P., Barnes, J., Berdiñas, Z., Butler,
R., Coleman, G., de la Cueva, I., Dreizler, S., Endl, M.,
Giesers, B., Jeffers, S., Jenkins, J., Jones, H., Kiraga, M.,
Kürster, M., López-González, M., Marvin, C., Morales, N.,
Morin, J., Nelson, R., Ortiz, J., Ofir, A., Paardekooper, S.,
Reiners, A., Rodrı́guez, E., Rodrı́guez-López, C., Sarmiento, L.,
Strachan, J., Tsapras, Y., Tuomi, M., & Zechmeister, M. 2016,
Natures, 536, 437
Berta-Thompson, Z., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., Newton, E.,
Dittman, J., Astudillo-Defru, N., Bonfils, X., Gillon, M., Jehin,
E., Stark, A., Stalder, B., Bouchy, F., Delfosse, X., Forveille,
T., Lovis, C., Mayor, M., Neves, V., Pepe, F., Santos, N., Udry,
S., & Wünsche, A. 2015, Nature, 527, 204
Betts, A. 1986, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society, 112, 677
Betts, A. & Miller, M. 1986, Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 112, 693
Boutle, I., Mayne, N., Drummond, B., Manners, J., Goyal, J.,
Lambert, F., Acreman, D., & Earnshaw, P. 2017, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 601, A120
Carone, L., Keppens, R., & Decin, L. 2015, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 453, 2412
Charnay, B., Forget, F., Wordsworth, R., Leconte, J., Millour, E.,
Cordon, F., & Spiga, A. 2013, Journal of Geophysical Research,
118, 10
Charney, J. 1967, Journal of Meteorology, 4, 136
Chemke, R. & Kaspi, Y. 2015a, Journal of Atmospheric Sciences,
72, 3891
—. 2015b, Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 7,
1457
—. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 841, 1
Chemke, R., Kaspi, Y., & Halevy, I. 2016, Geophysical Research
Letters, 43, 11414
Cho, J. & Polvani, L. 1996, Physics of Fluids, 8, 1531
Cowan, N. & Agol, E. 2008, The Astrophysical Journal Letters,
678, L129
de Wit, J., Wakeford, H., Lewis, N., Delrez, L., Gillon, M., Selsi,
F., Leconte, J., Demory, B., Bolmont, E., Bourrier, V.,
Burgasser, A., Grimm, S., Jehin, E., Lederer, S., Owen, J.,
Stamenković, V., & Triaud, A. 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, 214
Del Genio, A., Way, M., Amundsen, D., Aleinov, I., Kelley, M.,
Kiang, N., & Clune, T. 2018, Astrobiology, 19, 1
Diamond-Lowe, H., Berta-Thompson, Z., Charbonneau, D., &
Kempton, E. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 42
Eady, E. 1949, Tellus, 1, 33
Feng, Y., Robinson, T., Fortney, J., Lupu, R., Marley, M., Lewis,
N., Macintosh, B., & Line, M. 2018, The Astronomical Journal,
155, 200
Frierson, D. M. W., Held, I., & Zurita-Gotor, P. 2007, J. Atmos.
Sci., 64, 1959
Frierson, D. M. W., Held, I. M., & Zurita-Gotor, P. 2006, Journal
of Atmospheric Sciences, 63, 2548
Gillon, M., Triaud, A., Demory, B., Jehin, E., Agol, E., Deck, K.,
Lederer, S., de Wit, J., Burdanov, A., Ingalls, J., Bolmont, E.,
Leconte, J., Raymond, S., Selsis, F., Turbet, M., Barkaoui, K.,
Burgasser, A., Burleigh, M., Carey, S., Chaushev, A.,
Copperwheat, C., Delrez, L., Fernandes, C., Holdsworth, D.,
Kotze, E., Grootel, V. V., Almleaky, Y., Benkhaldoun, Z.,
Magain, P., & Queloz, D. 2017, Nature, 542, 456
Goldblatt, C., Claire, M., Lenton, T., Matthews, A., Watson, A.,
& Zahnle, K. 2009, Nature Geoscience, 2, 891
Hammond, M. & Pierrehumbert, R. 2018, arXiv
e-prints:1810.11231

Haqq-Misra, J., Wolf, E., Josh, M., Zhang, X., & Kopparapu, R.
2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 852, 67
Held, I. 2000, in Program in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (Woods
Hole, MA: Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute)
Held, I. & Hou, A. 1980, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 37,
515
Held, I. & Soden, B. 2006, Journal of Climate, 19, 5686
Hu, Y. & Yang, J. 2014, PNAS, 111, 629
Jansen, T., Scharf, C., Way, M., & Genio, A. D. 2018, arXiv
e-prints:1810.05139
Joshi, M. & Haberle, R. 2012, Astrobiology, 12, 3
Joshi, M., Haberle, R., & Reynolds, R. 1997, Icarus, 129, 450
Kaspi, Y. & Showman, A. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 804,
60
Kasting, J., Whitmire, D., & Reynolds, R. 1993, Icarus, 101, 108
Koll, D. & Abbot, D. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 802, 21
—. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 825, 99
Komacek, T., Showman, A., & Tan, X. 2017, The Astrophysical
Journal, 835, 198
Kopparapu, R., Ramirez, R., Kasting, J., Eymet, V., Robinson,
T., Mahadevan, S., Terrien, R., Domagal-Goldman, S.,
Meadows, V., & Deshpande, R. 2013, The Astrophysical
Journal, 765, 131
Kopparapu, R., Ramirez, R., SchottelKotte, J., Kasting, J.,
Domagal-Goldman, S., & Eymet, V. 2014, The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 787, L29
Kopparapu, R., Wolf, E., Arney, G., Batalha, N., Haqq-Misra, J.,
Grimm, S., & Heng, K. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 845, 5
Kopparapu, R., Wolf, E., Haqq-Misra, J., Yang, J., Kasting, J.,
Meadows, V., Terrien, R., & Mahadevan, S. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 819, 84
Kreidberg, L. & Loeb, A. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 832, L12
Leconte, J., Forget, F., Charnay, B., Wordsworth, R., & Pottier,
A. 2013a, Nature, 504, 268
Leconte, J., Forget, F., Charnay, B., Wordsworth, R., Selsis, F.,
Millour, E., & Spiga, A. 2013b, Astronomy & Astrophysics,
554, A69
Leconte, J., Wu, H., Menou, K., & Murray, N. 2015, Science, 347,
632
Lewis, N., Lambert, F., Boutle, I., Mayne, N., Manners, J., &
Acreman, D. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 854, 171
Li, K., Pahlevan, K., Kirschvink, J., & Yung, Y. 2009, PNAS,
106, 9576
Merlis, T. & Schneider, T. 2010, Journal of Advances in Modeling
Earth Systems, 2, 13
Morley, C., Kreidberg, L., Rustamkulov, Z., Robinson, T., &
Fortney, J. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 850, 121
Noda, S., Ishiwatari, M., Nakajima, K., Takahashi, Y., Takehiro,
S., Onishi, M., Hashimoto, G., Kuramoto, K., & Hayashi, Y.-Y.
2017, Icarus, 282, 1
Pedlosky, J. 1987, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, 2nd edn. (New
York: Cambridge University Press)
Pickles, A. 1998, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific, 110, 863
Pierrehumbert, R. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 726,
L8
Popp, M., Schmidt, H., & Marotzke, J. 2016, Nature
Communications, 7, 10627
Rasch, P. & Kristjánsson, J. 1998, Journal of Climate, 11, 1587
Romps, D. 2014, Journal of Climate, 27, 7432
Schneider, T. 2006, Annual Reviews in Earth and Planetary
Sciences, 34, 655
Seager, S. & Deming, D. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 703,
1884
Selsis, F., Wordsworth, R., & Forget, F. 2011, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 532, A1
Showman, A. & Polvani, L. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 738,
71

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets

17

Fig. 16.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying incident stellar flux from 0.544−1 F . The center of each map corresponds to the substellar
point of the planet.

Turbet, M., Leconte, J., Selsis, F., Bolmont, E., Forget, F., Ribas,
I., Raymond, S., & Anglada-Escudé, G. 2016, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 596, A112
Vallis, G. 2006, Atmospheric and Oceanic Fluid Dynamics:
Fundamentals and Large-Scale Circulation (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press)
Voigt, A., Abbot, D., Pierrehumbert, R., & Marotzke, J. 2011,
Climate of the Past, 7, 249
Voigt, A. & Marotzke, J. 2010, Climate Dynamics, 35, 887
Wang, Y., Tian, F., & Hu, Y. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 791, L12
Way, M., Aleinov, I., Amundsen, D., Chandler, M., Clune, T.,
Genio, A. D., Fujii, Y., Kelley, M., Kiang, N., Sohl, L., &
Tsigaridis, K. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series, 231, 12
Way, M., Del Genio, A., Kiang, N., Sohl, L., Grinspoon, D.,
Aleinov, I., Kelley, M., & Clune, T. 2016a, Geophysical
Research Letters, 43, 8376
Way, M., Genio, A. D., Aleinov, I., Clune, T., Kelley, M., &
Kiang, N. 2018, arXiv e-prints:1808.06480

Way, M., Genio, A. D., Kelley, M., Aleinov, I., & Clune, T.
2016b, arXiv e-prints:1511.07283
Williams, G. 1978, Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 35, 1399
Wolf, E. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 839, L1
Wolf, E., Shields, A., Kopparapu, R., Haqq-Misra, J., & Toon, O.
2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 837, 107
Wolf, E. & Toon, O. 2014, Astrobiology, 14, 241
—. 2015, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 120,
5775
Yang, J., Boue, G., Fabrycky, D., & Abbot, D. 2014, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 787, L2
Yang, J., Cowan, N., & Abbot, D. 2013, The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 771, L45
Zhang, G. & McFarlane, N. 1995, Atmosphere-Ocean, 33, 407
Zhang, X. & Showman, A. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 836,
73
—. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 866, 1

APPENDIX

A. PLANETS ORBITING M-DWARF STARS: FURTHER RESULTS
A.1. Incident stellar flux

Figure 16 shows how the surface temperature and cloud coverage for synchronously rotating planets around M-dwarf
stars vary with increasing incident stellar flux from 0.544 − 1 F . As expected, the surface temperatures increase with
increasing incident flux, with a relatively larger increase in the nightside temperature than dayside temperature. The
cloud pattern also changes drastically, from broad equatorial cloud coverage with low flux to large dayside cloud
coverage with moderate flux and then reduced dayside and enhanced nightside cloud coverage at an Earth-like value
of flux. Comparing these results to the simulations with consistent incident stellar flux and rotation period (Figures
7 and 8), one can see visually the importance of slow rotation for the habitability of planets orbiting M-dwarf stars.
In the fast-rotating simulations shown in Figure 16, the dayside cloud albedo mechanism is not present to reduce the
amount of incident flux reaching the surface. This leads these simulations with the rotation period fixed at 1 Earth
day to be much hotter than those with consistent (slower) rotation.

18

Komacek & Abbot

Fig. 17.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying planetary radius from 0.5 − 2 R . The center of each map corresponds to the substellar
point of the planet.

A.2. Planetary radius
Figure 17 shows how the surface temperature and cloud coverage for planets orbiting M-dwarf stars varies with
increasing radius from 0.5 − 2 R . We find that the surface temperature increases with increasing planetary radius,
largely due to decreasing dayside cloud cover (and increasing nightside cloud cover). In Section 5.3, we showed that the
large dayside cloud coverage of M-dwarf planets is due to a wave-mean flow interaction that leads to zonal convergence
near the substellar point. Given that the relative ratio of the Rossby deformation radius (which controls the length
scale over which gravity waves can interact with the flow) and the planetary radius decreases with increasing planetary
radius, one might expect that the wave-mean flow interactions driving this convergence decrease in efficacy with
increasing radius.
A.3. Surface gravity

Figure 18 shows the effect of varying surface gravity from 0.707−1.414 g on the climate of planets orbiting M-dwarf
stars. We find that simulations of planets with smaller surface gravity are hotter, the same result found for planets
orbiting Sun-like stars. This is because reduced surface gravity increases the atmospheric mass, leading to a larger
total atmospheric heat capacity. Additionally, we find that the nightside cloud coverage is much larger in simulations
with lower gravity due to their hotter nightsides causing more water vapor to be present in the nightside atmosphere.
A.4. Liquid cloud particle size

Figure 19 shows the effect of varying the effective liquid cloud radius from 7−21 µm on the climate of planets orbiting
M-dwarf stars. As for planets orbiting Sun-like stars, larger effective cloud particle sizes lead to hotter surfaces due to
the decreased scattering of the incoming stellar radiation (see Figure 3). The cloud particle size also significantly affects
the cloud distribution, with reduced dayside cloud coverage and enhanced nightside cloud coverage for simulations
with larger cloud particle size.
B. TABLES OF SIMULATION OUTPUT

Here we show tables of output from all of our simulations. In Table 2 we show the globally averaged surface temperature, equator-to-pole temperature contrast, top-of-atmosphere net shortwave flux, top-of-atmosphere net longwave

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets

19

Fig. 18.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying surface gravity from 0.707−1.414 g . The center of each map corresponds to the substellar
point of the planet.

Fig. 19.— Maps of surface temperature, integrated cloud coverage, and integrated cloud water path from simulations of spin-synchronized
planets orbiting a late M-dwarf star with varying liquid cloud particle radius from 7 − 21 µm. The center of each map corresponds to the
substellar point of the planet.

flux, and albedo from our simulations of planets orbiting Sun-like stars. In Tables 3, 4, and 5 we show the globally
averaged temperature, day-night temperature difference, top-of-atmosphere net shortwave flux, top-of-atmosphere net
longwave flux, and albedo for our simulations of tidally locked planets orbiting M-dwarf stars. We also show the
equivalent orbital distance from the host star, in AU, for all of our assumed incident stellar fluxes for a given stellar
type. Table 3 shows the results from our simulations of planets orbiting an M-dwarf star with Teff = 2600 K, Table
4 shows data for planets orbiting an M-dwarf with Teff = 3300 K, and Table 5 shows results for planets orbiting an
M-dwarf with Teff = 4000 K.

20

Komacek & Abbot
Simulation parameters
Reference:
Earth parameters (1 AU)
Varying rotation period:
0.5 days
2 days
4 days
8 days
16 days
Varying surface pressure:
0.25 bars
0.5 bars
2 bars
4 bars
Varying incident stellar flux:
0.544 F (1.36 AU)
0.667 F (1.22 AU)
0.816 F (1.11 AU)
1.225 F (0.904 AU)
Varying planetary radius:
0.5 R
0.707 R
1.414 R
2 R
Varying surface gravity:
0.5 g
0.707 g
1.414 g
Varying liquid cloud particle radius:
7 µm
21 µm

Global-average T [K]

Eq-pole ∆T [K]

TOA net SW [Wm−2 ]

TOA net LW [Wm−2 ]

Albedo

231.79

139.37

151.72

154.96

0.55

220.85
218.86
217.63
220.89
222.41

128.37
109.45
97.76
93.93
75.04

123.29
116.61
114.74
118.13
118.96

129.30
121.50
119.82
123.00
123.96

0.64
0.66
0.66
0.65
0.65

234.89
235.19
211.24
211.49

149.20
147.19
96.06
85.36

164.29
162.10
106.43
102.07

167.07
164.44
111.27
108.28

0.52
0.52
0.69
0.70

182.42
191.93
200.81
268.85

94.29
104.31
108.22
110.27

58.09
70.81
86.24
225.97

63.04
75.68
91.02
227.70

0.69
0.69
0.69
0.46

239.06
216.89
236.09
244.65

112.42
104.15
147.65
161.95

168.21
113.50
158.47
171.02

171.52
118.27
161.42
173.62

0.51
0.67
0.53
0.50

236.72
232.49
231.23

118.03
130.18
142.14

148.98
147.36
153.37

152.10
151.02
156.94

0.56
0.57
0.55

213.05
239.22

110.93
138.15

107.31
167.46

113.41
170.33

0.69
0.51

TABLE 2
Key simulation quantities for the simulations of planets orbiting Sun-like stars, averaged over the last ten years of
model time.

Simulation parameters
Reference:
Earth parameters (0.022 AU)
Varying rotation period:
0.5 days
2 days
4 days
8 days
16 days
Varying surface pressure:
0.25 bars (unstable)
0.5 bars
2 bars
4 bars
Varying incident stellar flux:
0.544 F (0.030 AU)
0.667 F (0.027 AU)
0.816 F (0.025 AU)
Varying planetary radius:
0.5 R
0.707 R
1.414 R
2 R
Varying surface gravity:
0.5 g (unstable)
0.707 g
1.414 g
Varying liquid cloud particle radius:
7 µm
21 µm
Varying incident stellar flux
and rotation period:
0.544 F , 6.49 days
0.667 F , 5.57 days
0.816 F , 4.79 days
1 F , 4.11 days

Global-average T [K]

Day-night ∆T [K]

TOA net SW [Wm−2 ]

TOA net LW [Wm−2 ]

Albedo

281.25

18.25

263.59

263.63

0.23

308.26
303.94
298.12
286.00
262.24

9.76
12.08
13.36
23.20
24.18

307.19
313.28
301.09
280.35
229.78

298.47
312.64
300.44
280.48
230.78

0.10
0.08
0.12
0.18
0.33

322.18
284.56
283.38
279.89

5.44
15.51
19.62
23.61

315.16
267.50
266.40
269.93

301.28
267.38
265.91
270.39

0.07
0.21
0.22
0.21

209.55
229.98
250.26

48.05
39.36
35.20

120.31
159.11
203.57

124.31
162.35
206.10

0.35
0.30
0.27

273.16
275.99
289.53
317.08

20.29
19.45
15.56
10.42

259.41
259.99
267.43
304.15

260.50
260.79
266.94
302.90

0.24
0.24
0.22
0.11

362.44
290.19
274.11

0.89
13.94
23.42

313.33
269.07
256.37

294.64
270.09
257.28

0.08
0.21
0.25

266.25
284.42

23.64
18.96

234.86
274.03

236.79
273.89

0.31
0.20

214.58
227.32
246.97
300.16

48.68
42.06
32.58
14.12

130.59
157.22
205.44
304.57

133.75
160.14
208.24
304.55

0.29
0.31
0.26
0.11

TABLE 3
Key simulation quantities for the simulations of planets orbiting an M-dwarf star with an effective temperature of
2600 K, averaged over the last ten years of model time. Simulations marked “unstable” do not reach an equilibrated
state, but are shown for comparison.

Climate of terrestrial exoplanets
Simulation parameters
0.544 F , 35.8 days (0.134 AU)
0.667 F , 30.7 days (0.121 AU)
0.816 F , 26.4 days (0.109 AU)
1 F , 22.7 days (0.099 AU)

Global-average T [K]
214.09
224.19
234.61
251.84

Day-night ∆T [K]
57.67
55.26
50.66
34.89

TOA net SW [Wm−2 ]
129.17
147.74
172.81
204.65

21
TOA net LW [Wm−2 ]
134.21
151.70
175.11
206.39

Albedo
0.30
0.35
0.38
0.40

TABLE 4
Key simulation quantities for the simulations of planets orbiting an M-dwarf star with an effective temperature of
3300 K with consistently varying incident stellar flux and rotation period, averaged over the last ten years of model
time.

Simulation parameters
Reference:
Earth parameters (0.296 AU)
Varying rotation period:
0.5 days
2 days
4 days
8 days
16 days
Varying surface pressure:
0.25 bars
0.5 bars
2 bars
4 bars
Varying incident stellar flux:
0.544 F (0.402 AU)
0.667 F (0.363 AU)
0.816 F (0.328 AU)
Varying planetary radius:
0.5 R
0.707 R
1.414 R
2 R
Varying surface gravity:
0.5 g
0.707 g
1.414 g
Varying incident stellar flux
and rotation period:
0.544 F , 117.4 days
0.667 F , 100.7 days
0.816 F , 86.6 days
1 F , 74.3 days

Global-average T [K]

Day-night ∆T [K]

TOA net SW [Wm−2 ]

TOA net LW [Wm−2 ]

Albedo

260.26

31.20

220.25

222.57

0.35

267.81
267.91
260.65
244.33
242.89

29.28
26.17
28.62
53.45
48.47

230.82
237.14
229.19
199.18
191.96

232.68
239.78
231.79
201.34
193.94

0.33
0.30
0.33
0.42
0.44

261.13
259.34
262.43
271.05

30.26
32.19
28.69
24.04

223.32
222.96
226.11
243.16

227.60
226.06
228.18
244.69

0.34
0.35
0.34
0.29

201.58
220.22
246.17

51.87
43.49
36.81

103.05
136.31
187.78

108.31
140.70
191.10

0.44
0.40
0.32

261.24
263.40
262.93
268.11

27.90
27.60
32.06
31.30

226.89
230.58
221.73
226.33

229.37
233.05
223.80
228.11

0.33
0.32
0.35
0.34

277.23
269.13
255.80

18.73
23.10
36.71

240.67
230.16
215.68

241.56
232.00
218.13

0.29
0.32
0.37

210.58
220.61
229.46
240.57

65.36
61.92
54.78
47.26

122.20
139.92
160.48
185.13

126.78
143.30
163.16
186.79

0.34
0.38
0.42
0.46

TABLE 5
Key simulation quantities for the simulations of planets orbiting an M-dwarf star with an effective temperature of
4000 K, averaged over the last ten years of model time.

