A Reference Architecture for Smart
and Software-defined Buildings
Manuel Mazzara

Ilya Afanasyev

Smruti R. Sarangi

Salvatore Distefano

Innopolis University, Russia
m.mazzara@innopolis.ru

Innopolis University, Russia
i.afanasyev@innopolis.ru

IIT Delhi, India
srsarangi@cse.iitd.ac.in

University of Messina, Italy
sdistefano@unime.it

Vivek Kumar

arXiv:1902.09464v1 [cs.SE] 25 Feb 2019

NUST-MiSiS, Russian Federation
vivekkumar0416@gmail.com
Abstract—The vision encompassing Smart and Softwaredefined Buildings (SSDB) is becoming more and more popular
and its implementation is now more accessible due to the
widespread adoption of the IoT infrastructure. Some of the most
important applications sustaining this vision are energy management, environmental comfort, safety and surveillance. This
paper surveys IoT and SSB technologies and their cooperation
towards the realization of Smart Spaces. We propose a fourlayer reference architecture and we organize related concepts
around it. This conceptual frame is useful to identify the current
literature on the topic and to connect the dots into a coherent
vision of the future of residential and commercial buildings.
Index Terms—Smart Cities, IoT, Building Operating Systems,
Software Defined Systems

I. I NTRODUCTION
Smart and Software-defined Buildings (SSDB) represent
the introduction of hardware, software and sensing into the
places where we live, in the same way as electronics has been
introduced into cars and vehicles over the last twenty years.
It is therefore the new frontier for what concerns housing
solutions [8]. Advanced technology was introduced in cars
in 80s initially in expensive models for then becoming the
normality for small-size cars, and eventually legal frameworks
adjusted in order to make formally mandatory the presence
of certain sensing and acting functions [6]. In the same way,
technology will possibly enter the market starting from highend housing and public places to then move to more popular
solutions. This paper surveys IoT and SSDB technologies and
their cooperation towards the realization of Smart Cities and
Smart Environments. We propose a four-layer reference architecture for SSDB and we organize related concepts around it.
This conceptual frame is useful to identify the current literature
on the topic and to connect the dots into a coherent vision of
the future of residential and commercial buildings.
The manuscript is organized as follows: after this introduction of the domain in Section I, we first define Smart
and Software Defined Buildings (Section II) and discuss the
hardware infrastructure (Section III) and the communication
networks and protocols (Section IV) that are necessary for
their realization. We then overview the SSDB management in
Section V, their applications and services in Section VI and

crosscutting concerns in Section VII. Finally, in Section VIII
we present our conclusion.
II. S MART AND S OFTWARE D EFINED B UILDINGS
Smart buildings (SB) are structures that use automated
processes to control operations such as heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, lighting, and security, and allowing sophisticated
monitoring and control over their functions [23]. One of the
major set of functionalities that can be managed is the one
concerning the environment and users’ comfort. This includes
temperature, light, and humidity. More complex functions
can also be performed such as presence monitoring, identity
recognition and detection of users’ emotional states [29],
under concomitant legal and ethical considerations. SB also
represent an important element in a Smart City ecosystem,
and are therefore often considered as drivers for the urban
smartization process.
A Software Defined Building (SDB) [18] is a “programmable” building abstracting and virtualizing [11] the
underlying (ICT) physical infrastructure to make it available
(through specific API) for third party applications and services.
SDB provide a Building Service Layer to implement an
interoperable and programmable environment for their management and to control applications and services, following
a software defined approach also adopted in Smart Cities
[27]. Smart and Software Defined Building are two related
concepts, even if not strictly dependent on each other. An
SB can be either based on an SDB or not, and an SDB
does not necessarily imply an SB. In the former case of
an SB established on top of an SDB, specific SB services
and applications for the building management are deployed
on the SDB infrastructure by injecting their codes on the
SDB programmable devices and nodes. An SDB-powered SB
inherits the benefits of programmability from SDB, allowing to
reuse and share existing physical resources and infrastructure
through different services and applications. This allows that
existing applications and services can be easily evolved and/or
maintained or even extended with new ones, always exploiting
the same SDB infrastructure.
In the SSDB domain we can identify at least three different
concepts that can be related to SB: smart home, smart office

Smart Buildings
Domotics
OS

Smart
Home

Analytics

Smart
Grid

Smart
Spaces

Smart
Shop

Business Augmented
Mobile
Reality
agility
Comp.
RFID
Automation

Smart Oﬃce

Fig. 1. Relationships among Smart Home, Office, Shop, Building concepts.

and smart shop. Their interactions and overlapping are shown
in Fig. 1. The overall idea lying behind all these concepts is the
one of smart space, i.e. a technology-equipped environment
(residential, commercial or governmental) that facilities life
and operations of the people who are living it. Domotics and
Automation are essential parts of smart spaces, as well as data
management and Analytics.
SSDB Reference architecture

Software Defined
Buildings

Smart Buildings

Management
Network
Hardware

Crosscutting Concerns

Application & Service

Fig. 2. Smart Building ICT Reference architecture

One of the contributions of this paper is the identification
of a conceptual frame useful to organize concepts around the
idea of SSDB. We propose a four-layer reference architecture
shown in Fig. 2. At the bottom of the stack, the Hardware layer
deals with all aspects related to the SSDB ICT infrastructure,
ranging from devices, sensors, actuators and IoT smart objects
to network, storage and processing hardware facilities deployed in the building for automation and smart management
purposes. Such SSDB nodes, devices, objects and things have
to be properly interconnected, exploiting mechanisms and
solutions provided by the Network layer. On top of the latter,
the Management layer implements facilities for managing
Smart Buildings ICT resources and data, dealing with interoperability issues arising from heterogeneous devices, as well as
data management issues. Such mechanisms, technologies and
solutions allow to implement proper applications and services
for a smart building such as those related to smart energy,
surveillance, billing, and so on, which are grouped in the
Application & Service layer. Finally, Crosscutting Concerns
and issues such as security, privacy, AAA, quality of service
and similar, spanning the full stack of this Smart Building

ICT architecture, are grouped altogether in the corresponding
vertical layer. All such layers and modules are detailed in
following sections.
The reference architecture of Fig. 2 covers both SDB
and SB, highlighting their relationship. An SDB can mainly
provide to an SB the ICT infrastructure, thus including the
3 bottom layers and the corresponding crosscutting concerns,
while an SB also implements applications and services thus
including the corresponding layer. As stated above, SB can
even be deployed on SDB, by mainly injecting specific application codes on the programmable building infrastructure.
Anyway, the SDB management level is usually more complex
than the one of non SDB-powered SB, since it includes specific
mechanisms for hardware abstraction through softwarization
(API), and control mechanisms on top of this to manage, deploy and orchestrate tasks into pooled resources. This is often
implemented through specific Building Operating Systems. In
the remaining of the paper we will describe in details each
layer above introduced.
III. H ARDWARE
The hardware components that allow the management of the
SSDB environment and the data collection are usually referred
as Internet of Things (IoT). The advantages of the introduction
of this technology seem to overcome the disadvantages and
its application becomes easier every year since the price of
hardware components is decreasing fast and the power of
microprocessors is growing [34]. IoT kept growing for several
years now [4]. It has been defined in multiple ways [36],
but IoT is now usually used to refer to a set of objects that
are connected to the internet and can possibly communicate
with each other via different protocols. These objects are
sensors, actuators and, more generally, embedded systems.
Latest statistics state that there are around 22 billion of IoT
devices in the the world [3] and enable the creation of a vast
range of scenarios where devices communicate and cooperate
[26]. These different scenarios regard many fields of our
life, for example home automation, health, transportation and
logistics. With regard to smart buildings, IoT sensing and
actuation components can be categorized as follows:
Occupancy Detectors: these are specialized circuits that
are placed in light bulbs, doors, and parking lots. They have
dedicated motion sensors for sensing if there are individuals in
the vicinity. If they detect motion, then the room is activated,
which means switching on light bulbs, opening doors, and
marking the parking slot as busy.
Positioning and Tracking : these sensors are placed on
the person of individuals or are placed at different parts of
a room to track the position of a person. They are typically
used to track the movements of geriatric patients. We can have
specialized activity detectors that detect if a patient is falling
down, or has suddenly become immobile.
Ambient Control Building automation is typically used
in controlling the environment such as the air conditioning
systems, heaters, humidity controllers, and for measuring the
pollution, and ambient noise. They can be used to optimize

the air conditioning cooling/heating only those parts of buildings that are populated. Most buildings with centralized air
conditioning waste a lot of power because they assume that
the entire building is populate at all times.
Measurement of Usage: home automation systems are
being extensively used as of today to measure the consumption
of electricity, gas, and water. The power bill or the water bill
based on analyses of usage patterns.
Security: starting from early burglar alarm systems security
has been an important user of home automation technologies.
Modern smart homes have an array of sensors at important
entry points, and integrate this information with the motion
detected from CCTV cameras.
This wide variety of sensors, actuators and devices, is
complemented by networking, storage and processing infrastructure facilities such as local switches, routers, NATs, and
firewalls for networking, NAS and/or storage servers for storage as well as servers for processing. Of course, storage and
processing servers could even be virtual or remote, provided
by Cloud services.
IV. N ETWORKING
From a technical point of view, communication between
devices is an important aspect in building automation systems
[35], which can operate at different levels of abstraction. At the
same time, a fully distributed system can be implemented in
the building, in which the smart nodes interact only with each
other to accomplish the task together. Given that the energy
for communication is expensive, such peer-to-peer interactions
are not preferable. Instead, the standard model is that the IoT
nodes send their data to a centralized controller that collates
all the data, performs some analysis, and then communicates
with other upstream gateways.
Network protocols for Smart Buildings solutions are divided into smart device networks and traditional networks
designed for high-speed data transfer. It is reasonable that
the protocols of smart home networks will use the protocols
already established in wireless sensor networks (WSN) and
machine-to-machine communications (M2M). Since adding
advanced features to a protocol increases the cost and reduces usability, developing an attractive protocol is not a
trivial task and usually represents a trade-off between cost
and performance. In terms of the topology used, the mesh
network is the most suitable choice of network topology for
wireless communication due to the presence of obstacles in
the house, such as walls, furniture, etc. [39]. Double mesh,
which means that the network is both wired and wireless,
providing a suitable solution for buildings in which a wired
home automation system was previously installed. There are
many communication networks and protocols designed for
exchanging information with multiple devices, components,
and sensors. Such communication protocols are created by
various organizations, consortia or associations, or can be
developed privately when a protocol is applied only by specific
manufacturer(s) who must first obtain a license to use it. Com-

monly used protocols for communication in smart buildings
via wireless or wired levels are described below [9], [25]:
InfraRed Data Association (IrDA): simple protocol, usually offering one-way communication. It has a limited range
and requires direct visibility of a pair of receiver-transmitter.
Ethernet: Fast and robust wired communication with a
range of up to 100m, enabling high noise immunity and the
ability to power supply via cable for low power nodes.
UWB: an indoor short-range high-speed wireless communication (up to 10 m) with the bandwidth of over 110 Mbps (up
to 480 Mbps), which can satisfy most multimedia applications,
such as audio and video delivery in home networks.
WiFi: Fast and reliable wireless IPv6 with a transmission
distance of about 25m. Its main feature is the existing broad
support: almost every new electronic device comes with WiFi
technology installed. As a rule, this is a upper level protocol,
where IP is the most predominant protocol that allows communications over the Internet without using a protocol translator.
WLAN: Wireless local area network (WLAN), also known
as Wireless Ethernet, is capable to provide reliable communication with low latency for both point-to-point and point-tomulti-point transmissions up to 250m. WLAN applies spread
spectrum technology, so users can occupy the same frequency
bands with minimal interference to each other.
Bluetooth: a short-range wireless protocol (up to 10 m),
the main characteristics of which are low power consumption (especially Bluetooth low energy - BLE) and fast data
exchange, as well as widespread availability. Its adaptive
frequency hopping system detects existing signals, such as
WiFi, and coordinates the channel map for Bluetooth devices
to minimize interference. It also implements node discovery
services.
6LoWPAN: the IPv6 low power adaptation for devices
with limited resources, combining the advantages of both IP
and Bluetooth and enabling mesh networks for energy-saving
applications in smart buildings with a distance up to 200m.
Thread: the IPv6-based, low-power technology for IoT
networks designed to provide security and meet future requirements. The specification of the Thread protocol is available
free of charge, however, this requires consent and permanent
adherence to the license agreement. Thread exploits 6LoWPAN, which is based on the use of a connecting router,
called an edge router. This means that 6LoWPAN does not
know about application protocols and changes that reduces
the load on the computing power at the edge routers. Thread
is designed to exchange data between devices, even when the
WiFi network is turned off.
Zigbee: a wireless mesh network that has proven its efficiency and cost-effectiveness when strengthening and expanding the network, having a transmission distance of 10-75m.
ZigBee offers low data rates for personal area networks (PAN).
It can be widely used in device control, reliable messaging,
building automation, consumer electronics, remote monitoring,
healthcare, and many other areas.
Z-Wave: a mesh network protocol standard designed for
remote control applications in residential and business areas,

whose bandwidth is about 6 times lower than for Zigbee.
This, however, requires less energy to cover the same range
as Zigbee. The main advantages of this technology come
from a simple command structure, freedom from domestic
interference, a low frequency bandwidth control environment
and IP support. Z-Wave has typically 30m indoor range, which
extends up to 100 m outdoors.
KNX: one of the most popular open protocols for automation. It operates on several physical levels, such as twisted
pair, network power line, infrared, Ethernet and RF channel.
Subscribers (devices) connected to the bus (network) can
exchange information through a common transmission channel
(bus). In this case, the information to be transmitted is packed
in a telegram and transmitted via cable from a sensor to
actuators. Upon successful transmission and reception, each
receiving device confirms the receipt of the telegram, otherwise the transmission is repeated only two more times. If
there is no confirmation, the transmission process ends. That
is why the KNX protocol is not used in the critical industrial
applications. In the decentralized topology, the system does not
work from the central unit, which means that each individual
unit is connected to the most intelligent device of the KNX
ecosystem and does not depend on the functioning of other
parts. Therefore, if one unit fails, others may continue to work.
V. M ANAGEMENT
The Smart Building Management layer is in charge of
managing the ICT infrastructure. Management functionalities
form two groups: resource management and data management.
A. Resource Management
Smart buildings are melting pots of different, heterogeneous
technologies, especially concerning sensing and actuation
devices. To deal with such heterogeneity issues in Smart
buildings, specific solution have been developed, mostly in
form of operating systems. A first attempt in this direction
is implemented by building management system (BMS) or
building automation system (BAS) [19] providing an automation solution for controlling heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC), security, fire, power, water supply and
elevator systems of a building in a coordinated way. Extending
the scope beyond automation, some attempts in defining
more general building operating systems (BOS) have been
performed, most of them reported and compared in [21], which
also proposes a quite advanced BOS solution named XBOS.
However, among them, one of the most relevant is the Building
Operating System Services (BOSS) [17], since it defined a new
approach to deal with smart buildings: through programmable
buildings. This way, the idea of SDB is slowly affirming
in the smart building context, even if its potential is still
untapped and should be further investigated and implemented.
Even the concept of virtualization and virtualized buildings
have been recently defined in [11], but there is still room
for Building Function Virtualization (BFV) and new Virtual
Building Functions (VBF).

The basic design philosophy of a building operating system
is the plurality of possibly unrelated applications, high requirements of fault tolerance, and a very flexible specification for
interacting with a plethora of applications. Some of the major
issues to address by a BOS are related to interoperability,
scheduling, placement, pooling and orchestration.
B. Data Management
The storage and analysis of Smart Building data is challenging in several ways. First, due to the diversity of systems [31]
and technologies, the building automation technique faces a
long relation with interoperability, leading to data integration
concerns [28]. Secondly, for a better perception and control
of instruments, the density of sensors, promptly increases,
generating a vast amount of data. Bashir et al [14] propose a
big data analytic framework for smart buildings. Let us divide
a typically data processing architecture into several layers.
Sensor layer: This layer consists of sensors that generate
data, and record ambient parameters.
Data storage: This information is communicated to routing
nodes that collect the data and store it. Bashir et al. propose a
TCP based protocol for communicating data and storing it in
a cloud based database. Often no-SQL databases are used to
store such streaming data such as Apache Flume, and HDFS.
Analytics: Some of the common engines that are used on
such platforms are based on the classic Spark toolkit such as
PySpark. PySpark can be used to set alerts and thresholds such
as: once the level of oxygen dips in a room, oxygen pumps
can be automatically started.
Rule Engine: This is an engine that has a set of pre-written
rules. Every rule has a set of pre-conditions, and a set of
actions. If the conditions for firing a rule exist, then the rule
is fired, and appropriate action is taken.
Visualization: The last component, where users can visualize all the elements in the SSDB, the data that are generated,
and the actions that are being performed.
VI. A PPLICATIONS , S ERVICES AND A MBIENT
I NTELLIGENCE
From an end-user/application perspective, the idea of SB
belongs to a wider concept: Ambient Intelligence (AmI)
[33]. According to AmI vision, the environment is able to
anticipate the needs of its inhabitants therefore responding in
a timely and user-friendly way. Implementing the vision of
AmI is highly ambitious, however to reach this objective it
is necessary to realize at least a basic set of services that
should be part of normal Smart Buildings’ behavior. In this
section, we will discuss the main application and services
that Smart Building should offer towards this vision. We
identify three major areas where benefits may soon appear:
Energy Management, Environmental Comfort and Safety and
Surveillance
A. Energy Management
Given rising energy costs, energy management in modern
buildings is vitally important. Almost all new constructions

need be green buildings. The reasons are that modern houses
and buildings consume a lot of energy, which can be reduced
by efficient management. Consumption in residential buildings
accounts for about 40% of the total energy consumption in
the world. In comparison, commercial and business buildings
(offices, shops, shopping malls, hotels...) and spaces with
public functions (schools, hospitals...) use approximately 30%
of energy resources [1]. In recent years there has been a
growing number of energy regulations and certifications, so
the necessity to reduce energy consumption has became more
urgent. At the same time, rising energy costs have made
efficient energy management a matter of survival.
It is not surprising that in such a growing market the major
IT corporations have realized the importance of home and
building automation, in particular the aspects that concern
energy management. Intel, for example, provides an IoT
platform with analytics to offer building operators and managers the possibility of keeping systems functional and costeffective [7]. The Nokia smart building energy management
application has been designed to monitor and control critical
building systems and ensure efficient operation. Reporting
and alerts help managers in determining the areas where
there is high energy consumption, and the energy use can
be optimized [5]. Academic research has also focused on the
topic of identifying open issues and possible solutions [32]
and characterizing energy management systems (EMS) [37].
An energy management system is defined as a computer-aided
tool used by operators of electric utility grids to monitor,
control, and optimize the performance of the generation and/or
transmission system. Some researchers have gone beyond the
identification of issues and have proposed approaches and
technology stacks, and in fact designed functioning energy
management systems for smart homes [38].
A Home/Building Energy Management System (H/BEMS)
is a system that incorporates sensors in household appliances through a home/building network to optimize energy
consumption. Most of the academic and industrial solutions
are defined according to a general architecture for H/BEMS.
This is composed of a Home/Building Area Network (H/BAN),
a local residential network interconnecting devices (sensors,
smart plugs, intelligent thermostats, cameras). It could be
a wireless wired network. Then, Monitoring and Control
Devices are responsible for monitoring and controlling the
energy consumption of appliances and devices. Processors are
in charge of concentration, storage and management of the
information. The server and the database are in this central
module. Gateways ensure connection between the H/BEMS
and the outside to allow remote access.
B. Environmental Comfort
The basic function of Smart Building is to regulate environment parameters such temperature, humidity, lightning
to maximize comfort. This problem has been considered in
literature in non-trivial way. For example, in [30] a dynamic
thermal model of occupants has been proposed. The model
is based on the heat balance equation of human body and

thermal characteristics of the occupants. In the context of
Smart Offices, occupant satisfaction with indoor environmental
conditions has been studied in [13]. This application area is
broader than just regulating temperature and similar parameter.
While some of the results of environmental regulation have to
be immediate and promptly perceivable, sometime well-being
of space inhabitants may depend on factor that require deeper
attention. In [16] the authors introduce a real system deployed
in the offices of four Microsoft campuses in China in order to
monitor indoor air quality enabling employees to enquire the
air quality of a place by using a mobile phone or checking a
website and then make informed decisions.
C. Safety and Surveillance
Maximal safety conditions are guaranteed by Smart Buildings through surveillance operated by IoT technology. Cameras are just one of the basic instruments of surveillance, but
it is certainly not the only one. Access authorization can be
performed via biometric parameter and face recognition can
be used for security reason. It is important to emphasize that,
although the device infrastructure is an important element
to ensure safety, it is the software playing a major role
here. In [12] the authors realized that information provided
by single sensor and surveillance technology may not be
sufficient to understand the whole context of the monitored
environment, and therefore propose the Smart Building Suite,
where independent and different technologies are developed
in order to realize a multimodal surveillance system.
VII. C ROSSCUTTING CONCERNS
Crosscutting Concerns are issues spanning the full stack
of our reference architecture. Each of these would require a
separate investigation. Given the limited space we will here
scratch the surface and identify two of these concerns:
Security: The more a building is connected the more
security threats it is subject to. Given the experiences with
automotive or other devices, building owner may be aware
of it [?], [20]. The problem has to be addressed from two
different point of view: technical and communication.
Adaptability: Information internally and externally gathered from a range of sources can be used to prepare buildings
for a particular event before that event actually happens [15].
This is a radical shift from the idea of reactive building to
the one of proactive. Smart Buildings should be adaptive. For
example a building can adapt to different times of year and
different people’s perceptions of comfort.
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper we surveyed SSDB and related technologies,
and looked into the major solutions proposed by industry
and academia. We would like here to emphasize the major
concerns for the widespread adoption of such technologies:
Skilled Operators: people do not know the existence
of the described frameworks. In general, operators have no
experience and skills in managing Smart Buildings and analyzing large amounts of performance data. Even adopting

the technology, it will take a significant training effort before
operating buildings in the optimal way [10].
Costs of startup and maintenance: installing such technologies and maintaining them is at the moment expensive
and we are not aware of tax incentives in most of the
countries. Without some kind of incentives it will be hard
to convince building owners that the investment is worth the
cost, especially for small- and medium-sized buildings [2].
Interoperability: as mentioned before in this paper, not all
smart devices are interoperable with each other and making
things work could be a challenge. Standard protocols to
connect all devices do not exist at the moment [23].
There are several aspects that we did not cover here, but
that would deserve a separate discussion. First, Autonomous
Cars and Smart Buildings are two emerging technologies
that are destined to cooperate [22], [40]. Second, the use
of cryptocurrencies for payments and financial interactions
between smart entities will soon emerge as a consuetude, and
most likely Blockchain may be the enabling backbone [24].

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] X. Chen, Y. Zheng, Y. Chen, Q. Jin, W. Sun, E. Chang, and W.-Y. Ma.
Indoor air quality monitoring system for smart buildings. In Int. Conf.
on Perv. & Ubiq. Comp., UbiComp, pages 471–475. ACM, 2014.
[17] S. Dawson-Haggerty, A. Krioukov, J. Taneja, S. Karandikar, G. Fierro,
N. Kitaev, and D. Culler. {BOSS}: Building operating system services.
In USENIX Net. Sys. Design & Impl. (NSDI 13), pages 443–457, 2013.
[18] S. Dawson-Haggerty, J. Ortiz, J. Trager, D. Culler, and R. H. Katz.
Energy savings and the software-defined building. IEEE Design Test of
Computers, 29(4):56–57, Aug 2012.
[19] P. Domingues, P. Carreira, R. Vieira, and W. Kastner. Building automation systems: Concepts and technology review. Computer Standards &
Interfaces, 45:1–12, 2016.
[20] N. Dragoni, A. Giaretta, and M. Mazzara. The internet of hackable
things. In SEDA, volume 717 of Adv. in Intel. Sys. & Comp., pages
129–140. Springer, 2016.
[21] G. Fierro and D. E. Culler. Xbos: An extensible building operating
system. In BuildSys, pages 119–120. ACM, 2015.
[22] R. Gmehlich, K. Grau, A. Iliasov, M. Jackson, F. Loesch, and M. Mazzara. Towards a formalism-based toolkit for automotive applications. In
Formal Methods in Software Engineering (FormaliSE), 2013.
[23] A. Khusnutdinov, D. Usachev, M. Mazzara, A. Khan, and I. Panchenko.
Open source platform digital personal assistant. In WAINA, 2018.
[24] C. Lazaroiu and M. Roscia. Smart district through iot and blockchain.
In ICRERA, pages 454–461, Nov 2017.
[25] G. Lobaccaro, S. Carlucci, and E. Löfström. A review of systems and
technologies for smart homes and smart grids. Energies, 9(5):348, 2016.
[26] P. Mekikis, A. Antonopoulos, E. Kartsakli, A. S. Lalos, L. Alonso,
R EFERENCES
and C. Verikoukis. Information exchange in randomly deployed dense
wsns with wireless energy harvesting capabilities. IEEE Transactions
How iot technology is changing building energy management
on Wireless Communications, 15(4):3008–3018, April 2016.
systems.
https://internet-of-things-innovation.com/insights/the-blog/
[27] G. Merlino, D. Bruneo, F. Longo, A. Puliafito, and S. Distefano.
how-iot-technology-is-changing-building-energy-management-systems/.
Software defined cities: A novel paradigm for smart cities through iot
Accessed: 2018-02-10.
clouds. In 2015 IEEE 12th Intl Conf on Ubiquitous Intelligence and
How
to
conquer
common
smart
building
hurdles.
Computing and 2015 IEEE 12th Intl Conf on Autonomic and Trusted
https://www.buildings.com/article-details/articleid/21098/title/
Computing and 2015 IEEE 15th Intl Conf on Scalable Computing and
scale-the-smart-technology-barriers. Accessed: 2018-02-10.
Communications and Its Associated Workshops (UIC-ATC-ScalCom),
Internet of things (iot) connected devices installed base worldwide from
pages 909–916, Aug 2015.
2015 to 2025 (in billions). https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/
[28] M. Moreno. Applicability of big data techniques to smart cities
iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/. Accessed: 2018-02-09.
deployments. IEEE Trans. on Industrial Informatics, 13:800–809, 2017.
Iot platforms: Market report 2015-2021. https://iot-analytics.com/
[29] M. Nalin, I. Baroni, and M. Mazzara. A holistic infrastructure to
product/iot-platforms-market-report-2015-2021-3/. Accessed: 2018-02support elderlies’ independent living. Encyclopedia of E-Health and
09.
Telemedicine, IGI Global, 2016.
Nokia
smart
building
energy
management.
https:
[30] H. Park and S.-B. Rhee. Iot-based smart building environment service
//internet-of-things-innovation.com/iot-solutions/
for occupants thermal comfort. Journal of Sensors, 2018.
smart-building-energy-management/. Accessed: 2018-02-09.
[31] J. Ploennigs. A modular, adaptive building automation system ontology.
In 38th Ann. Conf. on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society. IEEE, 2012.
The role of electronics in automotive advancements.
https:
[32] P. Rocha, A. Siddiqui, and M. Stadler. Improving energy efficiency via
//auto.howstuffworks.com/car-driving-safety/safety-regulatory-devices/
smart building energy management systems: A comparison with policy
new-technologies-cars-less-safe1.html. Accessed: 2018-02-09.
measures. Energy and Buildings, 88:203 – 213, 2015.
Smart building energy management solutions.
https:
[33] F. Sadri. Ambient intelligence: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv.,
//www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/energy/solutions/
43(4):36:1–36:66, 2011.
smart-building-energy-management.html. Accessed: 2018-02-09.
[34] D. Salikhov, K. Khanda, K. Gusmanov, M. Mazzara, and N. Mavridis.
Smart
buildings:
Forming
the
foundation
of
smart
Jolie good buildings: Internet of things for smart building infrastructure
cities.
www.forbes.com/sites/insights-inteliot/2018/10/24/
supporting concurrent apps utilizing distributed microservices. In 1st
smart-buildings-forming-the-foundation-of-smart-cities/.
Accessed:
Int. Conf. ”Convergent”, pages 48–53, 2016.
2018-02-09.
[35] D. Salikhov, K. Khanda, K. Gusmanov, M. Mazzara, and N. Mavridis.
Smart home protocols explained.
https://medium.com/iotforall/
Microservice-based iot for smart buildings. In Int. Conf. WAINA, 2017.
smart-home-protocols-thread-zigbee-z-wave-knx-and-more-71efa4b410e1.
[36] J. Santos, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, J. Casal, K. Saleem, and V. Denisov.
Accessed: 2018-02-09.
Intelligent personal assistants based on internet of things approaches.
Smart operators for smart buildings.
http://www.cunybpl.org/
IEEE Systems Journal, 12(2):1793–1802, June 2018.
wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Smart-Operators-Smart-Buildings.pdf. Ac[37] I. D. Serna-Surez, G. Ordez-Plata, and G. Carrillo-Caicedo. Microgrid’s
cessed: 2018-02-10.
energy management systems: A survey. In EEM, pages 1–6, 2015.
M. A. Abid and H. De Meer. Virtualized software defined buildings: a
[38] M. Shakeri, M. Shayestegan, H. Abunima, S. S. Reza, M. Akhtaruzkey enabler of the future smart cities. In SmartGridComm, 2018.
zaman, A. Alamoud, K. Sopian, and N. Amin. An intelligent system
G. Amato, P. Barsocchi, F. Falchi, E. Ferro, C. Gennaro, G. R. Leone,
architecture in home energy management systems (hems) for efficient
D. Moroni, O. Salvetti, and C. Vairo. Towards multimodal surveillance
demand response in smart grid. Energy&Buildings, 138:154–164, 2017.
for smart building security. Proceedings, 2(2), 2018.
[39] B. L. R. Stojkoska and K. V. Trivodaliev. A review of internet of
A. Aryal, F. Anselmo, and B. Becerik-Gerber. Smart iot desk for
things for smart home: Challenges and solutions. Journal of Cleaner
personalizing indoor environmental conditions. In 8th Int. Conf. on IoT,
Production, 140:1454–1464, 2017.
IOT ’18, pages 35:1–35:6. ACM, 2018.
[40] D. Strugar, R. Hussain, M. Mazzara, V. Rivera, I. Afanasyev, and J. Lee.
M. R. Bashir and A. Q. Gill. Towards an iot big data analytics frameAn architecture for distributed ledger-based m2m auditing for electric
work: smart buildings systems. In Int. Conf. on HPCC/SmartCity/DSS,
autonomous vehicles. In 33rd Int. Conf. WAINA, 2019.
pages 1325–1332. IEEE, 2016.
A. Buckman, M. Mayfield, and S. BM Beck. What is a smart building?
Smart and Sustainable Built Environment, 3(2):92–109, 2014.

