Possible Realization and Protection of Valley-Polarized Quantum
Hall Effect in Mn/WS2
Jie Li, Lei Gu and Ruqian Wu*
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, California 92697-4575,
USA.

ABSTRACT: By using the first-principles calculations and model analyses, we found that the
combination of defected tungsten disulfide monolayer and sparse manganese adsorption may give
a KKÂ´ valley spin splitting up to 210 meV. This system also has a tunable magnetic anisotropy
energy, a clean band gap, and an appropriate band alignment, with the Fermi level sitting right
above the top of valence bands at the K-valleys. Therefore, it can be used for the realization of the
valley-polarized anomalous Hall effect and for the exploration of other valley related physics
without using optical methods. A protective environment can be formed by covering it with a
hexagonal BN layer, without much disturbance to the benign properties of Mn/WS2.

1

Valley-dependent electronics and optoelectronics have attracted extensive research interest in
recent years due to their potential applications in novel quantum information technologies. Like
charge and spin, valley is a new degree of freedom of carriers as those from opposite valleys in
the Brillouin zone (BZ) counter-propagate along the edges of a two-dimensional material without
dissipation.1,2 Transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with inversion symmetry breaking and
strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) are the prototypical platforms for studies of the valley-spin
physics. Many intriguing phenomena such as Valley Hall effect in monolayer MoS2 transistors,3
small valley splitting in monolayer WSe2,4,5 valley-polarized electroluminescence in
light-emitting van der Waals heterojunction6,7 have been reported recently. Furthermore, more
possibilities of observing valley-dependent electronics and optoelectronics have been proposed
theoretically.8-12 However, most measurements and manipulations of the valley related
phenomena rely on optical excitation, which is inconvenient for operations at a small length scale.
For the development of the valley-spin based devices, lifting the valley degeneracy is one of the
most important tasks so that carriers in inequivalent valleys can be selectively produced with
easier and more localized means such as gating. With an adequately large valley splitting, the
valley Hall effect can manifest as we move the Fermi level to touch the valence band maximum
(VBM) or the conduction band minimum (CBM) of one type valleys (e.g., either K or KÂ´).
As the valley and spin degrees of freedom are interlocked, 13-15 the valley degeneracy can be
lifted by using external magnetic field, magnetic doping or through contact with magnetic
materials. The valley exchange splitting under an external magnetic field is typically very small as
the Zeeman splitting is only ~0.11 meV/T.16-18 Furthermore, it is not practical and energetically
efficient to apply a strong magnetic field in devices. Therefore, recent theoretical research has
focused on finding substrates and dopants that may produce large valley exchange splittings.
2

However, many large valley splittings predicted by theory have not been observed in experiment.
One possible reason might be that the weak van der Waal (vdW) interlayer interaction is
inadequate to grasp TMD layers on the substrate as tightly as assumed in theory, particularly with
the existence of surface steps and kinks. The others possibility is the poor thermal stability of
magnetization against thermal fluctuation which reduces the spin coherence. Naturally, it is better
to implement magnetic sources in the TMD monolayers and it is hence important to seek for
possible dopants that produce large valley splitting and have highly stable structural and magnetic
properties. To this end, some recent experiments have shown the possibility of controlling dopants
on high-quality samples.19-22
In this paper, we systematically investigate the structural and electronic properties of 3d
metal adatoms on a defected tungsten disulfide monolayer (WS2) by using the first-principles
calculations and model simulations. While four of them have valley splitting larger than 100 meV,
only Mn/WS2 has a clean band gap and hence can be an excellent valley Hall system. Mn/WS2
also has a large and tunable magnetic anisotropy energy to combat the thermal fluctuation and can
be used at a high temperature. We further propose to use a hexagonal BN (hex-BN) overlayer to
protect the novel magnetic and valley properties of Mn/WS2. Our findings make a major step
forward for the realization and utilization of the valley Hall effect in TMDs.
The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out with the Vienna ab-initio
simulation package (VASP) at the level of the spin-polarized generalized-gradient approximation
(GGA).28 A Hubbard U = 2.0 eV was added to take account of the correlation effect among
d-electrons of 3d metals. The van der Waals correction was included for the description of
dispersion forces. The interaction between valence electrons and ionic cores was considered
within the framework of the projector augmented wave (PAW) method.29,30 The energy cutoff for
3

the plane wave basis expansion was set to 700 eV. To sample the two-dimensional Brillouin zone,
we used a 7Ã—7 k-grid mesh. All atoms were fully relaxed using the conjugated gradient method
for the energy minimization until the force on each atom became smaller than 0.01 eV/Ã….

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Three diffusion pathways for Mn atoms (inset) and the corresponding energy profiles.
(b) Side and top views of charge density difference for Mn/WS2, blue and red colors represent
charge accumulation and depletion, respectively. (inset) Side and top views of spin density of
Mn/WS2, red and blue colors represent the minority and majority spin parts, respectively.

As shown in Figure S1, the pristine WS2 monolayer is a semiconductor with the CBM and
VBM locating at the corners (K points) of the 2D hexagonal Brillouin zone13,23 and a band gap of
~2eV. The strong SOC mostly originated from the 5d orbitals of W and the inversion symmetry
breaking leads to noteworthy spin splitting, especially at the top of valence band near at K (KËŠ),
~0.4 eV. The VBMs at opposite valleys have different spins due to the time-reversal symmetry,
and the Berry curvatures around the two valleys have opposite signs, leading to an exact
4

cancellation of the valley Hall currents and a vanishing anomalous Hall conductivity. To generate
valley splitting, we use magnetic transition metal atoms (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) which
may break the time-reversal symmetry and lift the valley degeneracy.
As the segregation energy barrier for these adatoms on flat TMD monolayers are small, we
adopt a 4Ã—4 defected WS2 monolayer as the template from which a sulfur atom is taken away. As
known, sulfur cavities (Vs) may either naturally formed during the fabrication or deliberately
produced in post processes.24-26 To show the interaction between adatoms and the defected WS2
monolayer, the energy cost of Mn diffusion and the charge density difference of Mn/WS2 are
shown in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. One may see that Mn adatom takes the Vs site and stays
almost in the same plane as the topmost sulfur atoms, i.e. the upper surface still appears to be
reasonably flat. Electrons transfer out of Mn and its nearest W atoms to their intermediate regions,
indicating the formation of strong chemical bonds between Mn and W atoms. Quantitatively, the
binding energies of TM adatoms are calculated as:
âˆ†ð¸
where ð¸

, ð¸

and ð¸

/

/

=ð¸

+ð¸

âˆ’ð¸

/

are the total energies of defected WS2, an isolated TM atom

and TM/WS2, respectively. As shown in Table Î™, values of âˆ†E

/

are mostly larger than 2 eV

except for Cr, indicating that TM adatoms are strongly anchored at the VS site. Meanwhile, three
different pathways were considered for the diffusion of Mn atoms, as shown in the inset of Figure
1a. The energy barriers are overall large, 1.87 eV, 3.72 eV and 2.47 eV along P1, P2 and P3,
respectively. It is conceivable that the adsorption geometry depicted in Figure 1 is rather stable
against segregation.

5

Table Î™. The binding energy (Î”E), total spin magnetic moments (Ms), magnetic anisotropy energy
(MAE) and valley splitting (Î”KKËŠ) of different TM adatoms on the defected WS2 monolayer.
Î”E
MS/ÂµB
MAE/meV
Î”KKËŠ/ meV

V
3.63
1.0
2.41
188

Cr
1.93
3.99
0.25
-119

Mn
2.94
2.97
-0.50
210

Fe
3.44
2.0
1.04
100

Co
3.85
1.05
2.66
27

Ni
4.26
0.0
0.0
0.0

Cu
2.44
1.0
2.71
18

Now we check whether these 3d TM atoms can introduce strong valley splitting. Their
electronic band structures are shown in Figure 2a and Figure S2. The presence of TM adatoms
produces opposite effects on bands at the K and KËŠ valleys. Quantitatively, we define valley
splitting as Î”KKËŠ=EK-EKËŠ, where EK (EKËŠ) represents VBM at K (KËŠ). As shown in Table I, (V, Cr,
Mn, Fe)/WS2 have huge valley splittings, especially for Mn/WS2 which has the valley splitting as
large as 210 meV, equivalent to the splitting induced by an external magnetic field of ~2000 T.
Meanwhile, it has eminent advantage that the VBM is close to Fermi level for the realization of
the valley spin Hall effect. Apparently, only Mn/WS2 satisfies this requirement with a clean band
gap, where all other systems have gap states from orbitals of adatoms. Furthermore, the key
features of Mn/WS2 retain in reasonably large ranges of Hubbard U (0-3eV, see Figure S3 in the
Supplementary Information) and adsorption density (2-6.25%, see Figure S4 and the inset in
Figure 2a). The robustness of the large valley splitting is also observed as we randomize the
distribution of two Mn adatoms in a 7Ã—7 supercell (see Figures S5 and S6 in the Supplementary
Information). Hence, we believe that the giant valley splitting for Mn/WS2 with sparse Mn atoms
dopants can be realized. Below we take the case of 4Ã—4 supercell with one Mn atom as example to
further explore the corresponding electronic and valley properties of these systems.

6

(a)

(b)

Î”KK`

Figure 2. (a) The band structure of Mn/WS2 with SOC included. The red (blue) line represents the
spin up (down) components. (The inset is the effect of dopants concentration on the valley
splitting of Mn/WS2. These four dopants concentration are corresponding to the case of one Mn
atom periodic doping in 7Ã—7, 6Ã—6, 5Ã—5 and 4Ã—4 defected WS2, respectively). (b) The
corresponding projected density of states of all atoms, where dash-red lines and solid-blue lines
are for the spin-up and spin-down channels, respectively.

The curves of projected density of states (PDOS) of all atoms in Mn/WS2 are shown in
Figure 2b. One can see a strong magnetization locating at the Mn site, and a significant
spin-polarization is also induced around the W atoms adjacent to Mn (MW â‰ˆ 0.3 ÂµB). This is also
shown by the spin density in the insets of Figure 1b. The strong hybridization between Mn-t2g and
W-eg orbitals imprint both large exchange and spin orbit coupling in the valence bands of WS2.
Even the ð‘

/

orbitals of S atoms are strongly spin-polarized, as shown in Figure 2b, which are

the essential causes for the valley splitting.
As a further step, we construct a simple Hamiltonian for WS2 by fitting the DFT results as
7

ð» =ð» +ð»
where ð» , ð»

and ð»

(1)

+ð»

represent two band k.p gapped Dirac states, spin-orbit coupling and

exchange interactions. Explicitly, these terms can be expressed in Pauli matrices as
ð» = â„ð‘£ ðœð‘˜ ðœŽ + ð‘˜ ðœŽ
ð»
ð»

+

(2)

ðœŽ

(3)

= ðœð‘  (ðœ† ðœŽ + ðœ† ðœŽ )

(4)

= âˆ’ð‘  ðœ‡ (ðµ ðœŽ + ðµ ðœŽ )

where ð‘£ is the Fermi velocity of the Dirac electrons, ð›¥

is the gap, ð‘˜

and ð‘˜

are the

electron wave vector, ðœ = 1(-1) for K (KËŠ) valley, ð‘  is the spin matrix along the z direction and
ðœ† (ðœ† ) and ðµ (ðµ ) are the SOC parameters and exchange fields for the conduction (valence)
band, respectively. The Pauli matrices,
ðœŽ =

1 0
0
and ðœŽ =
0 0
0

ðœŽ =

0 1
1 0

0
ð‘–

, ðœŽ =

âˆ’ð‘–
1
, ðœŽ =
0
0

0
,
âˆ’1

0
, represent the valley pseudospins. The corresponding fitting
1

parameters of Mn ( V, Cr, Fe)/WS2 are shown in Table S1. The strong SOC (ðœ† ) mostly comes
from W atoms in the valence band, and the large negative effective exchange fields for conduction
bands mean that an opposite spin polarization is induced near the TM atoms as shown in Fig 1b.
Meanwhile, the large range of exchange fields for these four cases suggests that we can mix TM
adatoms to tune the valley splitting.
With the giant valley splitting, we may selectively create valley polarization by shifting the
Fermi level to slightly below the VBM. A transverse spin current arises as an in-plane electric
field, E, is applied.13,27 The anomalous Hall velocity of an electron in the nth band at a k-point
depends on E and â„¦n(k) as v ~ E Ã— â„¦n(k), where â„¦n(k) is the Berry curvature of Bloch electrons
determined according to â„¦ (ð‘˜) = ð‘§Ì‚ âˆ™ ð›» Ã— âŸ¨ð‘¢ (ð‘˜)|ð‘–ð›» |ð‘¢ (ð‘˜)âŸ© from the periodic part of Bloch
wave functions, |ð‘¢ (ð‘˜)âŒª. For Mn/WS2, the distribution of the Berry curvature in Brillouin zone is
shown in the left panel of Fig 3a. Obviously, â„¦(k) (=âˆ‘ ð‘“ ðœ€

,

â„¦ (ð‘˜) , with ð‘“ ðœ€

,

the
8

Fermi-Dirac distribution function for the nth band at a k-point in the two-dimensional BZ) has
opposite signs around the K and KËŠ points, typical for pristine and magnetized TMD monolayers.
The large valley exchange splitting nevertheless allows us to use carriers only at K or KËŠ by
shifting the Fermi level below VBM at the K-points with a bias. Indeed, the new distributions of
Berry curvature with the Fermi level lying below the VBM at K but above the VBM at KÂ´ only
has the negative parts in the right panel of Figure 3a. The net Hall current can hence be produced
in this circumstance.

(c)

(a)
K
Î“

M
K`

E

K
Î“

M
K`

(b)
E

Figure 3. (a) Left and right panels are the distributions of Berry curvature in the whole Brillouin
zone of Mn/WS2 with the Fermi level lying in the gap and intervalley, respectively. (b) The
anomalous Hall conductivity Ïƒxy as a function of Fermi level. (c) The variation of valley splitting
Î”KKÕœ as the magnetization of Mn/WS2 rotates. The insets show the schematics of the anomalous
valley Hall effect (insets).

Quantitatively, the Hall conductivity as a function of the position of the Fermi level is given
9

by the integral of the Berry curvature of occupied states over the Brillouin zone.
Ïƒ

=

e
â„

â„¦(k)

ð‘‘ð‘˜
(2ðœ‹)

While Ïƒxy is zero in a broad energy range as we move the Fermi level in the band gap due to the
mutual cancellation between valleys, the presence of Mn induces a large valley splitting, i.e., a
non-zero anomalous Hall conductivity can be observed right below the VBM at K. This is
encouraging as one may use the degree of valley without the assistance of light. In addition, we
also show the valley splitting as function of magnetization direction in Figure 3(c). One can see
that the valley splitting can change continuously from 210 meV to -210 meV, following the
rotation of magnetization direction. This is also useful for applications as one may reset the
direction of magnetic moment with a pulse of magnetic field or a THz wave.
For the realization of valley anomalous Hall effect, it is important to have ferromagnetic
ordering among magnetic sources and perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Unfortunately, Mn/WS2,
has an in-plane easy axis, as indicated by its negative magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE= -0.50
meV), and a weak antiferromagnetic ordering among Mn adatoms in the ground state (c.f., Figure
S5 in the supplementary information). However, the rigid band model analysis indicates that the
MAE can be tuned to the positive side as soon as we move the Fermi level to slightly below the
VBM, as shown in Figure 4(a). The curves in the lower panel indicate that crossing the VBM at
the K-valley produces a positive blip of MAE, due to the removal of these spin-down (DD) states
from the occupied region. This break the balance between contributions from different spin
channels (UU, DD, UD and DU) and lead to a rapid change of MAE right below the Fermi level.
The possibility of changing MAE in sign by moving down the Fermi level is actually in good
coherence with the need of producing non-zero Ïƒxy and it can be done by applying an external
10

electric field (EEF, downward to surface as positive). Because of the weak screening between Mn
and WS2, adequate electron transfer between Mn and WS2 can be easily achieved with a small
field, as seen in the inset of Figure 4(b). Note that the calculated MAE curve closely follows the
trend predicted by the rigid band model in Figure 4(a), and MAE increases rapidly to +6 meV
(perpendicular easy axis) with a negative EEF (Îµ â‰¤ 0.5 V/â„«). Moreover, the same EEF also
changes the weak antiferromagnetic coupling between Mn adatoms to the ferromagnetic regime,
so all conditions for the realization of valley spin Hall effect are satisfied. It is plausible that the
value of valley splitting and overall the band structure of Mn/WS2 are barely affected by the EEF,
as shown in Figure S7 in the Supplementary Information. Therefore, Mn/WS2 is an excellent
platform for the observation of valley Hall effect.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. (a) The Fermi level dependent total and spin channel decomposed MAEs of Mn/WS2
from the rigid band model analyses. (b) The MAE and valley splitting of Mn/WS2 as a function of
external electric field (Îµ). The inset show the charge density difference of Mn/WS2 caused by the
external electric field of -0.2 and 0.2V/â„«, and blue and red colors represent charge accumulation
and depletion, respectively.
11

Finally, we noted that Mn/WS2 is chemically active and hence can be easily damaged by
adsorbates such and H2O and O2 in the environment. Therefore, we propose to protect its valley
features by putting a layer of hexagonal BN (hex-BN) on the top. Due to the van der Waals
interaction, the Mn atoms are slightly pulled upward by 0.09 Ã… after hex-BN is added.
Nevertheless, the hex-BN monolayer is a semiconductor with a band gap larger than 5 eV so its
disturbance on the electronic property of Mn/WS2 is negligible, as seen from the band structure of
this van der Waals heterostructure in Figure S8 in the Supplementary Information. We further
propose a conceptual device, as shown in Figure S9, to detect the valley anomalous Hall effect in
experiments. The silicon substrate and hex-BN cover-layer provide a protective environment for
Mn/WS2 as well as channels for applying the bias. The Hall bar pattern with four Au electrodes
allows the measurement of transvers voltage and longitudinal current.
In summary, we systematically investigated the possibility of achieving large valley splitting
(> 100 meV) by using of 3d transition metal adatoms on the defected WS2 monolayer. Mn/WS2 is
identified as a potential system for the realization of valley spin Hall effect without the assistance
of light as it gives a valley splitting as large as 210 meV and, more importantly, has a clean band
gap and appropriate band alignment with the Fermi level. Furthermore, we proposed to cover
Mn/WS2 with a hex-BN monolayer for the protection of its excellent valley and transport
properties. Our studies suggest a realistic system for experimental verification and one practical
avenue for exploring valley-spin physics.

12

AUTHOR INFORMAYION
Corresponding Author
* E-mail: wur@uci.edu.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Work was supported by DOE-BES (Grant No. DE-FG02-05ER46237). Calculations were
performed on parallel computers at NERSC.

13

References
(1) Kane, C. L.; Mele, E. J. Quantum spin Hall effect in graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95,
226801.
(2) Zhang, F.; Jung, J.; Fiete, G. A.; Niu, Q.; MacDonald, A. H. Spontaneous quantum Hall
states in chirally stacked few-layer graphene systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 156801.
(3) Mak, K. F.; McGill, K. L.; Park, J.; McEuen, P. L. The valley Hall effect in MoS2 transistors.
Science 2014,344, 1489.
(4) Zhong, D.; Seyler, K. L.; Linpeng, X.; Cheng, R.; Sivadas, N.; Huang, B.; Schmidgall, E.;
Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; McGuire, M. A.; Yao, W.; Xiao, D.; Fu, K.-M. C.; Xu, X. Van der
Waals engineering of ferromagnetic semiconductor heterostructures for spin and valleytronics. Sci.
Adv. 2017, 3, e1603113.
(5) Zhao, C.; Norden, T.; Zhang, P.; Zhao, P.; Cheng, Y.; Sun, F.; Parry, J. P.; Taheri, P.; Wang, J.;
Yang, Y.; Scrace, T.; Kang, K.; Yang, S.; Miao, G.-X.; Sabirianov, R.; Kioseoglou, G.; Huang, W.;
Petrou, A.; Zeng, H. Enhanced valley splitting in monolayer WSe2 due to magnetic exchange field.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 757âˆ’762
(6) Sanchez, O. L.; Ovchinnikov, D.; Misra, S.; Allain, A.; Kis, A. Valley polarization by spin
injection in a light-emitting van der Waals heterojunction. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 5792.
(7) Ye, Y.; Xiao, J.; Wang, H.; Ye, Z.; Zhu, H.; Zhao, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, J.; Yin, X.; Zhang, X.
Electrical generation and control of the valley carriers in a monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenide. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11, 598âˆ’602.
(8) Akhmerov, A. R.; Beenakker, C. W. J. Detection of valley polarization in graphene by a
superconducting contact. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 157003.
(9) Xiao, D.; Yao, W.; Niu, Q. Valley-contrasting physics in graphene: magnetic moment and
topological transport. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 236809.
(10) Yao, W.; Xiao, D.; Niu, Q. Valley-dependent optoelectronics from inversion symmetry
breaking. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 77, 235406.
(11) Recher, P.; Nilsson, J.; Burkard, G.; Trauzettel, B. Bound states and magnetic field induced
valley splitting in gate-tunable graphene quantum dots. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 2009, 79, 085407.
(12) Freisen, M.; Chutia, S.; Tahan, C.; Coppersmith, S. N. Valley splitting theory of
14

SiGe/Si/SiGe quantum wells. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2007, 75, 115318.
(13) Xiao, D.; Liu, G. B.; Feng, W.; Xu, X.; Yao, W. Coupled spin and valley physics in
monolayers of MoS2 and other group-VI dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 196802.
(14) Xu, X.; Yao, W.; Xiao, D.; Heinz, T. F. Spin and pseudospins in layered transition metal
dichalcogenides. Nat. Phys. 2014, 10, 343.
(15) Mak, K. F.; Shan, J. Photonics and optoelectronics of 2D semiconductor transition metal
dichalcogenides. Nat. Photonics. 2016, 10, 216.
(16) MacNeill, D.; Heikes, C.; Mak, K. F.; Anderson, Z.; Kormanyos, A.; Zolyomi, V.; Park, J.;
Ralph, D. C. Breaking of valley degeneracy by magnetic field in monolayer MoSe2. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2015, 114, 037401.
(17) Srivastava, A.; Sidler, M.; Allain, A. V.; Lembke, D. S.; Kis, A.; ImamoÄŸlu, A. Valley
Zeeman effect in elementary optical excitations of monolayer WSe2. Nat. Phys. 2015, 11, 141.
(18) Aivazian, G.; Gong, Z.; Jones, A. M.; Chu, R.-L.; Yan, J.; Mandrus, D. G.; Zhang, C.;
Cobden, D.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. Magnetic control of valley pseudospin in monolayer WSe2. Nat.
Phys. 2015, 11, 148.
(19) Movva, H. C. P.; Fallahazad, B.; Kim, K.; Larentis, S.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe,
K.; Banerjee, S. K.; Tutuc, E. Density-dependent quantum Hall states and zeeman splitting in
monolayer and bilayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118 (24), 247701.
(20) Back, P.; Sidler, M.; Cotlet, O.; Srivastava, A.; Takemura, N.; Kroner, M.; Imamoglu, A.
Giant paramagnetism induced valley polarization of electrons in charge tunable monolayer MoSe2.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 237404.
(21) Wang, Z.; Mak, K. F.; Shan, J. Strongly Interaction-enhanced valley magnetic response in
monolayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 066402.
(22) Gustafsson, M. V.; Yankowitz, M.; Forsythe, C.; Rhodes, D.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.;
Hone, J.; Zhu, X.; Dean, C. R. Ambipolar Landau levels and strong band-selective carrier
interactions in monolayer WSe2. Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 411âˆ’415.
(23) Zhu, Z.Y.; Cheng, Y. C.; Schwingenschlogl, U. Giant spin-orbit-induced spin splitting in
two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenide semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 153402.
(24) Li, J.; Wang, H.; Wang D. S.; Wu, R. Q. Protected giant magnetic anisotropy in
two-dimensional materials: transition-metal adatoms on defected tungsten disulfide monolayer. J.
15

Magn. Magn. Mater. 2018, 462, 167.
(25) Lin, Z.; Carvalho, B. R.; Kahn, E.; Lv, R.; Rao, R.; Terrones, H.; Pimenta, M. A.; Terrones,
M. Defect engineering of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. 2D Mater. 2016, 3,
022002.
(26) Zhou, W.; Zou, X.; Najmaei, S.; Liu, Z.; Shi, Y.; Kong, J.; Lou, J.; Ajayan, P. M.; Yakobson,
B. I.; Idrobo, J. C. Intrinsic structural defects in monolayer molybdenum disulfide. Nano Lett.
2013, 13, 2615.
(27) Xiao, D.; Chang, M. C.; Niu, Q. Berry phase effects on electronic properties. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 2010, 82, 1959.
(28) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865.
(29) Blochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 1994, 50, 17953.
(30) Kresse, G.; Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented- wave
method. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59, 1758.

16

