Fundamental insights to topological quantum materials:
A real-space view of 13 cases by supersymmetry of valence bonds approach
F. C. Chou1, 2, 3, 4
1

arXiv:1902.02589v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 7 Feb 2019

Center for Condensed Matter Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
2
National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 30076, Taiwan
3
Taiwan Consortium of Emergent Crystalline Materials,
Ministry of Science and Technology, Taipei 10622, Taiwan
4
Center of Atomic Initiative for New Materials, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
(Dated: February 8, 2019)
We present a real-space view of one-dimensional (1D) to three-dimensional (3D) topological materials with 13 representative samples selected from each class, including 1D trans-polyacetylene,
two-dimensional (2D) graphene, and 3D topological insulators, Dirac semimetals, Weyl semimetals,
and nodal-line semimetals. This review is not intended to present a complete up-to-date list of
publications on topological materials, nor to provide a progress report on the theoretical concepts
and experimental advances, but rather to focus on an analysis based on the valence-bond model
to help the readers gain a more balanced view of the real-space bonding electron characteristics at
the molecular level versus the reciprocal-space band picture of topological materials. Starting from
a brief review of low-dimensional magnetism with “toy models” for a 1D Heisenberg antiferromagnetic (HAF) chain, 1D trans-polyacetylene and 2D graphene are found to have similar conjugated
π-bond systems, and the Dirac cone is correlated to their unconventional 1D and 2D conduction
mechanisms. Strain-driven and symmetry-protected topological insulators are introduced from the
perspective of material preparation and valence-electron sharing in the valence-bond model analysis.
The valence-bond models for the newly developed Dirac semimetals, Weyl semimetals, and nodal
line semimetals are examined with more emphasis on the bond length and electron sharing, which
is found consistent with the band picture. The real-space valence-bond analysis of topological materials with a conjugated π-bond system suggests that these topological materials must be classified
with concepts borrowed from group theory and topology, so that a supersymmetry may absorb the
fluctuating broken symmetry. Restoration of a thermodynamic system with higher entropy (i.e., the
lower Gibbs free energy) is more appropriate to describe such topological materials instead of the
traditional material classification with the lowest enthalpy for the presumed rigid crystal structure.

2
CONTENTS

I. General introduction
A. Brief review of topological materials
B. Valence-bond perspective of one-dimensional Heisenberg antiferromagnetic chain
II. Polyacetylene: one-dimensional topological material
A. One-dimensional trans-polyacetylene as Majumdar–Ghosh chain
B. Structure evolution from one-dimensional trans-polyacetylene to two-dimensional graphene
III. Graphene: two-dimensional topological material
A. Valence-bond model of graphene
B. Two-dimensional electron crystal and Dirac cone of graphene
IV. Topological insulators
A. Hg1−x Cdx Te: Tensile-strain-driven topological insulator state
B. α-Sn: Compressive-strain-driven topological insulator state
C. Bi1−x Sbx : Compressive-strain-driven topological insulator state
D. Bi2 Se3 : Time-reversal-symmetry–protected topological insulator state
E. Pb1−x Snx Se: Crystalline-symmetry–protected topological insulator state

3
3
4
5
5
6
7
7
8
9
10
12
14
14
17

V. Topological Dirac semimetals
A. Na3 Bi
B. Cd3 As2

18
19
19

VI. Topological Weyl semimetals
A. TaAs
B. Y2 Ir2 O7

21
21
22

VII. Nodal-line semimetals
A. ZrSiS
B. PbTaSe2

24
24
25

VIII. Reflection and outlook

26

Acknowledgments

26

References

27

3
I.

GENERAL INTRODUCTION

A common theme of Nobel prizes in chemistry and physics for the past two decades has been the discovery and
interpretation of the unusual physical properties of condensed matter originating from reduced electronic dimensionality, including the 2000 chemistry award for one-dimensional (1D) conducting polymers,1,2 the 2010 physics award
for two-dimensional (2D) graphene,3,4 and the 2016 physics award for topological quantum materials.5 Starting from
the surprising discovery of 1D conducting polymers and the first isolation of graphene from graphite as a perfect
mono-atomic 2D material, the study of “toy models” for the 1D Heisenberg spin chain system turns out to build
the foundation for newly developed topological materials having topologically nontrivial 2D electronic edge states in
three-dimensional (3D) condensed matter.6
Since 2005, more and more topological materials have been predicted and categorized through the combination
of theoretical prediction and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments,7 and the search of
topological materials has lately shifted to using existing materials databases with designed algorithms in a massive
hunt for new topological materials.8 The understanding of this new class of material has mostly relied on their
calculated band structure with added variables, including spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and strain, and the categorization
of materials with terminology borrowed from the mathematics of topology and group theory, not to mention the
increasing number of involved physical concepts introduced to address the emerging quantum phenomena from the
theoretical perspective of the band picture, including the quantum spin Hall effect, topological order, Dirac cones,
Chern invariants, Berry phase, fractional charge, and many more to come. Clearly, the required intuitive interpretation
from the real-space chemical-bond perspective is missing, which has created an unnecessary barrier for the materials
scientists who focus on new material development and device applications.
Here, we provide a brief historical review of topological material development from the chemical perspective with a
simple valence-bond model interpretation and make a concise comparison between the similar concepts with confusingly different names given by chemists and physicists. By using the selected representative topological materials with
their calculated or ARPES-detected band pictures, a valence-bond symmetry analysis is provided to assist the reader
to intuitively understand the concept of “topologically nontrivial” categorization. This review is not intended to collect
and list all topological materials reported to date following the path of theoretical physicists; instead, we pick representative topological materials from each major class in the mode of an experimental materials physicist who focuses
on crystal growth and material design. A total of 13 samples are selected from the simplest 1D trans-polyacetylene
(trans-PA), to 2D graphene, to 3D topological materials including topological insulators (TIs), topological crystalline
insulators, topological Dirac semimetals, topological Weyl semimetals, and nodal-line semimetals. The crystal and
electronic structures are analyzed with a proposed valence-bond model based on the symmetry of atomic coordination
at the molecular level and the atomic electron configuration. A comparative interpretation is provided for topological
materials between the real-space valence-bond supersymmetry and the band picture in reciprocal space.

A.

Brief review of topological materials

The 2016 Nobel Prize in Physics went to David J. Thouless, F. Duncan, M. Haldane, and J. Michael Kosterlitz
for their contribution to the understanding of topological quantum materials, mostly to recognize their important
theoretical effort that paved the way to understand the recently verified “topological states of matter” (i.e., materials
having entangled quantum states that can be transformed smoothly with protected symmetries).5 The understanding
and categorization of topological quantum materials has relied heavily on the conceptual and mathematical approach
via the topological analogy of band pictures. Many such approaches involved physical concepts, including the Berry
phase, Hall conductance, the quantum spin Hall effect, spin-orbit coupling, time-reversal symmetry, and Z2 topological
invariants, were used to interpret and classify topological quantum materials.6,7 In fact, the concept of topology has
already been applied to categorize isomers for chemicals in real space in the field of chemistry,9,10 but physicists focus
more on the band picture of topological invariance. A classic isomorphic first-order phase transition in the band
picture was demonstrated by Lifshitz in 1960 on metal under pressure and was named the “Lifshitz transition.”11
The discovery of topological quantum materials is closely related to the effort made to understand the lowdimensional materials that are 1D conducting polymers and 2D graphene, mostly because of the commonality of
the reduced electronic dimensionality due to the emerging types of valence-electron sharing, as reflected by the existence of conjugated π-bond systems in real space and the Dirac-cone-shaped band pictures found in graphene.12 We
believe that the fundamental connection between these classes of material should be re-examined from the valencebond perspective, which emphasizes electronic dimensionality and coordination at the molecular level. The 2D band
picture of the Dirac-cone shape indicates a 2D conduction mechanism via massless Dirac fermion tunneling, but the
increasing complexity of mixed bulk and surface bands for topological materials has reached such a level that a reliable
analysis of experimental data becomes difficult. In addition, the topological orders in 2D have been mathematically

4

+(,
(
(%δ( (1δ(

+-,
0(

+&,

+/,
(
(%δ(

+.,

FIG. 1.
Toy models of 1D Heisenberg antiferromagnetic (HAF) chains. (a) 1D S = 21 HAF spin chain or one valence
electron per atom in a chain before the interaction is turned on. (b) A dimerized ground state of the S = 21 HAF spin chain
with the translational-symmetry breaking via periodicity change from a to 2a induced by the spin-Peierls condensation, where
valence bonds are formed at the singlet ground state with wave function ΨS . (c) An alternative and degenerate valence-bond
arrangement to that shown in panel (b). (d) 1D S = 1 spin chain or two valence electrons per atom in triplet state before
the interaction is turned on. (e) Valence-bond ground state of 1D S = 1 HAF spin chain with Peierls condensation without
breaking the symmetry.

described mostly in analogy to the quantum spin Hall effect of gapless edge states and the k-space band topology. To
understand the essential effect of topological indexing on topological material classification in real space, a reasonable
valence-bond model is needed to serve as a complementary tool in research. The topological order can be understood
in real space by considering a valence-bond model that shows novel electron-sharing mechanisms of limited and degenerate configurations governed by a specific supersymmetry, so that the perturbation from local symmetry breaking
due to Peierls condensation is absorbed (i.e., the instantaneous symmetry-breaking and restoration under quantum
fluctuation is “protected” by a supersymmetry). In this review, we summarize major groups of 1D and 2D topological
materials with representative 1D trans-PA and 2D graphene. We first apply a more pedagogical manner, and many
predicted or verified 3D topological materials are discussed by comparing their real-space valence-bond analysis and
the reciprocal-space band picture.

B.

Valence-bond perspective of one-dimensional Heisenberg antiferromagnetic chain

In the field of low-dimensional magnetism, the 1D Heisenberg spin chain has served as a standard toy model for
the study of quantum phenomenon (see Fig. 1), mainly because the quantum fluctuation is most pronounced in low
dimensions. Bethe’s pioneering work (the Bethe ansatz) made a breakthrough for solving the gapless ground state
of a S = 12 Heisenberg antiferromagnet (HAF) chain with nearest-neighbor coupling.13 A dimerized S = 12 HAF
chain must break the translational symmetry as a result of antiferromagnetic (AF) spin pairing with concomitant
Peierls condensation; i.e., a 1D spin-Peierls phase transition that opens a gap at the Brillouin zone boundary after the
real-space periodicity is doubled from a to 2a, which could also be viewed as the origin of chemical bonding. The 1D
HAF chain solved by Bethe’s ansatz could be viewed as a resonating-valence-bond state under quantum fluctuation
to restore the translational symmetry broken by the dimerized condensation.14 Bonner and Fisher’s attempt to solve
the 1D HAF chain digitally has become the standard tool to estimate the spin-exchange coupling constant without
exactly solving the Hamiltonian.15 With added next-nearest-neighbor coupling of Jnnn = 12 Jnn to the S = 12 HAF
chain, Majumdar and Ghosh obtained two degenerate dimerized ground states (MG chain), as illustrated in Figs. 1(b)
and 1(c), under quantum fluctuation.16 Haldane conjectured that an integer HAF chain must have a spin gap in the
limit of an infinitely long chain (Haldane chain),17 and many S = 1 spin-chain compounds have been explored to
support this claim.18 Affleck, Kennedy, Lieb, and Tasaki (AKLT) later used the concept of a valence bond [i.e., a spin
pair in singlet form with wave function ΨS = √12 (| ↑↓i − | ↓↑i)] to solve for a unique ground state called a valence-bond
solid without broken symmetries for the Haldane chain, as illustrated in Fig. 1(e). This shows an entangled Peierls

5
%0&

%/&

π
σ

!"#

%1&
' (#

%2&

σ
! "#

σ∗

"$

"$

σ% "&
! "#

π/2

π∗

!"#

π∗
π

π
!"#

"$

"$

!"#
σ

FIG. 2. (a) Crystal structure of 1D trans-polyacetylene (CH)n . Two σ bonds form among two neighboring C–C via sp2
hybridized orbital overlap and a third σ bond forms with H. (b) Two degenerate configurations of broken symmetry as a result
of π-bond-induced Peierls condensation, but the conjugated nature allows the distortion-restoration to be absorbed by a timereversal symmetry, which is a real-life example of the theoretical MG chain, as shown in Figs. 1(b) and 1(c). (c) Valence-bond
model proposed for 1D trans-PA. (d) The molecular orbital energy diagram for the σ- and π-bonding relationship, where the
conjugated π-bond system is equivalent to the SOC mechanism of energy exchange between magnetic and phonon origins.

condensate among atoms of S = 1.14 It was unexpected that playing with these simple toy models in low-dimensional
magnetism would pave the way to understanding both graphene and topological materials, as recalled by F. Haldane
in his Nobel lecture.5
Most low-dimensional materials classified as 1D or 2D have unavoidable interchain or interplane interactions as
condensed matter of higher dimension, so it is nearly impossible to identify compounds that can be viewed as a true
realization of a MG- or a Haldane-chain system. The successful isolation of graphene from graphite as a prototype
mono-atomic layered 2D material is particularly inspiring,3 mostly because of the close relationship between the
conjugated π-bond system in real space and the observed Dirac-cone band picture also seen in most topological
materials.5,6 Upon tracing the critical role played by the conjugated π-bond system in 1D compounds, we find that
1D trans-PA as a conducting polymer, which led to the Nobel prize in chemistry in 2000, could be a perfect real-life
example of an 1D MG chain. This system provides the best bridge between the theory-experiment and the chemistryphysics divides. Following the three milestone material classes awarded by the Nobel prize (i.e., 1D conducting
polymers, 2D graphene, and 3D topological quantum materials), we selected representative materials in three classes
and use the valence-bond symmetry analysis to provide a consistent interpretation of why these materials are classified
to show characteristics of unique conducting properties. In particular, the real-space valence-bond symmetry and the
band picture in reciprocal space are compared repeatedly to test the consistency between the two views, so that the
understanding of topological materials no longer remains at the level of a conceptual analogy of topology.

II.

POLYACETYLENE: ONE-DIMENSIONAL TOPOLOGICAL MATERIAL
A.

One-dimensional trans-polyacetylene as Majumdar–Ghosh chain

Although the S = 12 HAF spin chain system has been tackled by physicists in the field of quantum magnetism, it
seems difficult to identify a real compound that exactly fits the criteria shown in the Hamiltonian, such as a chain of
atoms with one electron in the valence shell per atom to connect via the valence bond of electron pairs in a spin-singlet
state only. However, we find that 1D trans-PA with the chemical formula (CH)n may be the closest real-life example
of a MG chain—provided that we focus only on the π-bond electrons and leave out the σ-bond electrons which are
responsible for the molecular structure of the zigzag chain coordination [see Fig. 2(a)]. In fact, without actually

6

!$#

!%#

!"#

FIG. 3. The similar electronic configuration and physical properties between 2D graphene (C2 )n and 1D trans-PA are expected
from the evolution of dimensionality. Starting from (a) 1D trans-PA, we substitute H with C to form a virtual compound of
1D (C2 )n , as shown in panel (b). Next, 2D graphene is constructed with 1D (C2 )n along the interchain direction, as shown in
panel (c).

solving in detail for the ground state from the Hamiltonian, the variational method implemented in the Hückel theory
can satisfactorily handle the π-electron system with topological indexing for conjugated hydrocarbon compounds.9
Starting from the atomic electron configuration of carbon ([He]2s2 2p2 ), each carbon has a triangular coordination
with two neighboring carbon atoms and one hydrogen in the (CH)n chain, which suggests that σ bonds are formed
among C-C and C-H pairs via orbital overlap of half-filled sp2 hybrid orbitals in σ bonds, as shown in Fig. 2(c).
Considering that the unpaired electron in 2pz per carbon may form a weaker π bond with the neighboring 2pz of
carbon via side-to-side orbital overlap and dimerize as a result of Peierls condensation, translational symmetry must
be broken, as revealed by the periodicity change from a to 2a [see Figs. 1(b) and 1(c)], which is also described as
bond-length alternation, with supporting experimental evidence.2
Because there are two equivalent choices of π-bond formation for each carbon atom on either side of the neighboring
carbon in a 1D trans-PA chain, as shown in Fig. 2, either configuration is implied to exist with a 50% chance
statistically under quantum or thermal fluctuation; and the configurations are entangled. The π bond is weaker than
the σ bond because of the side-to-side orbital overlap of unpaired electrons in 2pz with much higher energy, as shown in
Fig. 2(d). It is likely that the statistical choice of the π-bond configuration is because it not only has local symmetrybreaking and restoration spontaneously as a conjugated system, but also because it is entangled throughout the whole
chain in real space under quantum fluctuation. Experimentally, undoped 1D trans-PA is gapped with identified bond
alternation of broken translational symmetry and therefore falls into a nondegenerate dimerized ground state, and
doped 1D trans-PA via intercalation has enhanced conductivity as a unique conducting polymer. If the interchain
van der Walls-type coupling is ignored completely, it is reasonable to view the role of hole doping being used to close
the 1D band gap via breaking the permanently dimerized ground state and shifting the system into a chain having a
conjugated π-bond system as a gapless ground state, which has been described in detail via concepts of soliton and
fractional charge to explain why doped 1D trans-PA shows the unexpected enhanced conductivity.19,20 In fact, 1D
trans-PA could be viewed as the first 1D topological phase identified, which has also been hinted by the analogy found
in the Bi2 Se3 -Inx Bi2−x Se3 superlattice built from the well-known 3D topological insulator Bi2 Se3 .21
In a thermodynamic system, the existence of a conjugated π-bond system indicates a contribution of positive
entropy change (∆S > 0) moving from the dimerized nondegenerate ground state to the degenerate ground state
of multiple configurations in fluctuation. That is, although it seems that the spontaneous π-bond breaking and
restoration is unfavorable to stay at the lower enthalpy H of a thermodynamic system, it may become favorable when
the enhanced entropy reduces the Gibbs free energy of the thermodynamic system via G = H − T S. Above all, the
small and instantaneous distortion-restoration mechanism that temporarily breaks the translational symmetry could
be absorbed by a supersymmetry that contains a larger basis of three neighboring (spins) atoms in a group for 1D
trans-PA. The supersymmetry can be identified to be the time-reversal symmetry, so that a new gapless ground state
of symmetry-protected topological order is established.

B.

Structure evolution from one-dimensional trans-polyacetylene to two-dimensional graphene

The crystal structure of graphene is well known for its honeycomb lattice composed of triangular coordinated carbon
atoms. It is interesting to note the close relationship between 1D trans-PA and 2D graphene, which have identical
carbon triangular coordination, both crystallographically and electronically. While the four valence electrons of 2s2 2p2
per carbon are distributed in the sp2 hybrid orbitals for the σ bond responsible for the triangular coordination in

7

0'1

021
"$
!"#

π
σ

, -.

-(

σ( /)
, -.

π/3

-(
!"#

FIG. 4. (a) Crystal structure of 2D graphene, where the hybridized sp2 orbital per carbon is constructed into a honeycomb
lattice of CN = 3 via σ-bond formation, and the remaining valence electron in 2pz forms a π bond with one of the three
neighboring carbons to form a conjugated π-bond system.

both 1D trans-PA and 2D graphene, the remaining unpaired electron in 2pz is free to form a π bond between the
nearest-neighbor carbon atoms for both, and sharing, depending on the coordination numbers, of two for 1D transPA and three for 2D graphene. If we substitute the H in 1D trans-PA of (CH)n with C and link the imaginary
1D “(C2 )n ” compounds along the interchain direction, it is clear that 1D trans-PA (CH)n is transformed into 2D
graphene of (C2 )n .22 In particular, the original conjugated π-bond system shared by two neighboring C-C pairs
along the chain direction for 1D trans-PA is now shared by three neighboring C-C pairs in a plane, as illustrated in
Fig. 3(c). Considering the similarity in π-bond distribution due to limited paths of electron sharing, 1D trans-PA
and 2D graphene may also share the identical conducting mechanism due to the existence of similar conjugated πbond systems, where the term of “fractional charge” in the 1D and 2D conduction bands could be interpreted as the
tunneling of massless Dirac fermions across the Dirac point or π-bond sharing.20,23

III.

GRAPHENE: TWO-DIMENSIONAL TOPOLOGICAL MATERIAL
A.

Valence-bond model of graphene

Following the same valence-bond analysis for 1D trans-PA shown in Fig. 2, the valence-bond model for graphene
is illustrated in Fig. 4. The valence-shell electrons in 2s2 2p2 hybridize into an sp2 orbital for the σ-bond formation
among three neighboring carbon atoms in the honeycomb network, and the remaining unpaired electron in 2pz per
carbon is proposed to form a side-to-side orbital overlap as a π bond. Since the π bond must be shared by three
equivalent neighboring carbon pairs in addition to the skeleton of a honeycomb lattice built by the three covalent σ
bonds, distortion from the original triangular symmetry due to condensation is expected when the conjugated σ + π
double bond exists randomly among one of three C-C pairs at any instance.4 The broken local triangular symmetry
could be absorbed into a 2D triangular supersymmetry when the distortion-restoration of the π-bond condensate
fluctuates in time as a result of quantum or thermal fluctuations.
To explain the origin of the Dirac cone from the valence-bond perspective, we should first distinguish the atomic
crystal and electronic crystal for graphene, as compared in Fig. 5. Consider the valence electrons distributed near
the C-C center: the electron cloud of σ-bond electrons form a 2D electronic crystal with a symmetry identical to
that of the undistorted atomic crystal, as seen by the crystals formed with atoms (circles) and bonds (bars) of
30◦ rotation around the honeycomb center, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Conversely, the conjugate nature of the π bond
with concomitant Peierls condensation would break the crystal symmetry under thermal or quantum fluctuation, as
illustrated in Fig. 5(b) for one of the infinite degenerate and entangled configurations. In fact, ripples of suspended
graphene have been shown to be a common phenomenon as a result of the mixture of σ and σ + π bonding of different
degrees of condensation, and the strain induced by the bond-length difference has also been demonstrated by an
atomistic Monte Carlo simulation,23 as seen in Fig. 5(c). However, the slight distortion-restoration could be absorbed
by the choice of a new basis highlighted by the red triangle of C3 symmetry [see Fig. 5(d)], instead of the static basis
of 2C without distortion in the honeycomb network of the rhombic (hexagonal) Bravais lattice. In addition, the C3
symmetry can be viewed as a supersymmetry to protect the degenerate configurations in real space, which must be
reflected in the band picture as a topological nontrivial state having symmetry-protected topological orders. The
C3 crystalline-symmetry–protected topological orders in real space are similar to the time-reversal symmetry that
protects the topological orders of the 1D MG chain in real space [see Figs. 1(b) and 1(c)].

8
.,/

.0/

.1/

.2/

FIG. 5. (a) When only σ-bond electron clouds are considered among all C-C pairs in graphene, the 2D electronic crystal of
homogeneous condensation has a symmetry identical to that of a 2D atomic crystal. (b) One of the infinite replicas of σ + π
double-bond-induced inhomogeneous condensation to break the original symmetry. (c) Atomistic Monte Carlo simulation of
bond length due to multiplicity of chemical bonding among carbon in graphene (reproduced from Ref. [23] with permission;
copyright 2007, Springer Nature). (d) One of the infinite configurations of π-bond electrons shown by the red line, and the
conjugated system requires a C3 supersymmetry to absorb the constant distortion-restoration of an entangled network under
quantum fluctuation.

B.

Two-dimensional electron crystal and Dirac cone of graphene

For graphene having a honeycomb lattice, its reciprocal lattice is identical to the real-space lattice of (rhombic)
hexagonal symmetry, except that each real-space lattice point represents a 2C basis, so there is no need to distinguish
the 2C basis into A and B carbons leading to two separate K and K 0 points.25 The reason that the honeycomb lattice
is not a 2D Bravais lattice is that the direct choice of unit vectors a1 and a2 for the two carbon atoms oriented at
120◦ would not generate all atomic positions via an integer number of translations along the unit axes [see Fig. 6(a)].
Crystallographically, a honeycomb lattice should be described with a Bravais lattice having a proper choice of basis;
i.e., a 60◦ or 120◦ rhombic (hexagonal) Bravais lattice plus 2C as the basis for graphene, as shown in Fig. 6(a).
Since the reciprocal lattice must preserve its real-space symmetry via Fourier transformation, it is expected that the
reciprocal lattice has an identical hexagonal unit cell. Considering a 2D electron crystal formed only with σ- and
π-bond electrons, a dynamic form factor for the 2C basis may tune the diffraction-peak intensity at each k point of
the reciprocal lattice of hexagonal symmetry. Although the confusing relationship between K and K 0 points has been
resolved by using a term named “pseudospin” to take care the bonding-nonbonding degeneracy,26 we believe that a
detailed valence-bond analysis for graphene is still needed for a more intuitive understanding, especially regarding the
origin of the Dirac cone.
Based on the 2D symmetry of graphene in real and reciprocal lattices, the 2D constructive diffraction spot shown
at the K point is coming from the integrated intensity of σ- and π-bond electrons in lines, as illustrated in Fig. 6(a).
The Dirac-cone-shaped E(k) dispersion relationship for graphene at the K point can be mapped with the tunable
incident beam energy. Although both σ and π bonds contribute to the 2D constructive diffraction at the K point, it is
expected that the σ-bond electrons have a larger binding energy at the level of a few eV deeper in the valence band. The
significantly lower binding-energy dispersion of the Dirac-cone shape near ∼0.3–0.5 eV mapped by ARPES strongly
suggests a massless tunneling phenomenon across the Dirac point is the description mainly of π-bond electrons.24 The
conjugated nature of the π bond is due to the sharing among three neighboring C-C pairs under quantum fluctuation,
which are responsible for the tunneling (bonding-nonbonding) behavior of π-bond electrons with an instantaneous
symmetry breaking due to the bond-length change following condensation. The supersymmetry of C3 can absorb such

9
.(0

.1/!0

.50

!#"

(

!"

2
3
2 .!/!0

Γ

!#$

!$

2
.!/10

.!/10

45

.90
.!/!0

.)0
67/8
"$
!"#

π
σ
π

"$
!"#

FIG. 6. (a) The crystal structure of graphene in a honeycomb lattice should be described with a 2D Bravais lattice of rhombic
(hexagonal) unit cell with 2C (in red circle) as the basis. (b) The reciprocal lattice of graphene is identical to the real-space
lattice with symmetry preserved by the Fourier transform in 2D, where each k point corresponds to the normal of lines of 2C
bases in real space with specified dhk spacing. (c) The graphene band picture are commonly taken out from a 2D cut of bulk
band picture of graphite near the Dirac points labeled with two sets of K and K 0 points. (d) The Dirac cone is interpreted
as the E(k) linear dispersion for the binding energy of π-bond electrons from sitting near the bond center (lowest) to near the
atom center (highest). [Panel (c) is reproduced from Ref. [24] with permission; copyright 2007 Elsevier Ltd.]

a distortion when the original 2C basis is extended to 4C, as highlighted by the red triangle shown in Fig. 5(d).
Although the electrons of positive binding energy sitting below the Fermi level means localization without metallic
conduction following the Fermi-liquid theory, it does not apply to the 2D conduction mechanism for graphene. The
nonbonding state of π electrons are not itinerant electrons acting as the charge carriers for metallic conduction.
We find that graphene has a confirmed 2D conduction mechanism with a Dirac point sitting below the Fermi level,
which suggests that the 2D conduction does not rely on the migration of itinerant electrons but rather on energy
exchange through entangled bonding-nonbonding electrons of the conjugated π-bond system. In particular, we should
consider the particle-wave duality of electrons for the interpretation of the pairing and tunneling phenomenon via
wave-function overlap. Based on the argument above, we propose that the Dirac-cone-shaped band for graphene
could be a description of the E(k) dispersion relationship for the electrons in π bonds distributed above and below
the 2D basal plane, as shown in Fig. 6(d). For each C-C pair, the binding energy of π-bond electrons changes from
near zero at the C-C midpoint to a maximum near the carbon center, as indicated by the proximity to the defined
K point of the linear E-k dispersion (E ∝ k) drawn in a cone. In addition, there are two lobes per pz orbital for the
π-bond bonding-nonbonding fluctuation, which is also consistent with the massless tunneling across the Dirac point
to form two inverted cones. Most importantly, the existence of gapless Dirac cones simply suggests that all electrons
are confined in a plane via π bonding-nonbonding with constant tunneling behavior under quantum fluctuation of the
lowest Gibbs free energy, in contrast with electrons in the bulk (E ∝ k 2 ) that are either localized in the valence band
or free in the conduction band via σ bonding of lowest enthalpy.

IV.

TOPOLOGICAL INSULATORS

The unusual low-dimensional conductivity found in 1D trans-PA and 2D graphene has been attributed to the
existence of a conjugated π-bond system having an energy band with a linear energy-momentum dispersion relationship
in the shape of a Dirac cone. The key component of this finding is the identification of a conjugated π-bond system via
a valence-bond analysis. In particular, the formation of a conjugated π-bond system requires special conditions that

10

*+,

*-,

*.,

FIG. 7. (a) The crystal structure of Hg1−x Cdx Te is a zinc-blende type fcc structure of space group F 4̄3m, with Hg at (0, 0, 0)
and Te at ( 14 , 14 , 41 ). (b) Band inversion occurs near the HgTe-CdTe interface of the quantum well. (c) HgTe-CdTe binary phase
diagram shows the full solubility, and the liquid + solid mixture between the liquidus and solidus indicates that a strain energy
is stored in the system. [Panel (b) is reproduced from Ref. [27], and panel (c) is from Ref. [28] with permission; Copyright
2018, Elsevier.]

allow a supersymmetry-protected electron sharing and structure distortion-restoration due to Peierls condensation,
including atomic size, number of valence-shell electrons, bond length, and symmetry of local coordination. More 3D
TIs showing both insulating properties for the bulk and conducting properties for the surface have since been proposed
and identified.6 While the key signature of a 3D TI is the gapless Dirac-cone-shaped 2D band besides the gapped bulk
band, the question remains of whether a direct link exists between the 3D TI and low-dimensional materials, such as
1D trans-PA and 2D graphene, with common signatures. In particular, if similar conjugated π-bond systems can also
be identified in the known 3D TIs via valence-bond analysis in real space, it would provide the missing link to justify
why and how a conjugated π-bond system is responsible for the surface-conduction mechanism of 3D TIs. In the
following, we discuss four representative classes of materials in the developmental history of TIs, including the CdTeHgTe-CdTe quantum well that was used to probe the quantum spin Hall effect at the edge state, the strain-driven
TIs of α-Sn and Bi1−x Sbx , the Z2 -type TI Bi2 Se3 , and the topological crystalline insulator Pb1−x Snx Se.

A.

Hg1−x Cdx Te: Tensile-strain-driven topological insulator state

The quantum spin Hall effect has been proposed to distinguish TIs from conventional insulators for their dissipationless spin current carried by helical edge states, as was theoretically proposed and later verified with the
CdTe-HgTe-CdTe quantum-well experiment.29,30 The normal band gap between the s-type Γ6 and the p-type Γ8 for
semiconducting CdTe is inverted at xc ∼ 0.16 for Hg1−x Cdx Te toward semimetal HgTe, and the quantum spin Hall
effect is confirmed by the measured contact conductance of 2e2 /h for a quantum well with thickness only larger than
∼64 Å, i.e., showing surface electron states without being smeared by the bulk state of the CdTe-CdTe wave function
tunneling across the well at the interface near xc ∼ 0.16, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The main reason for this experimental
design is for its tunable band of Hg1−x Cdx Te solid solution with band inversion at a critical level and the heavy
elements of inherited strong SOC. For the purpose of valence-bond analysis, it is instructive to examine the evolution
of crystal symmetry, lattice size, and melting point as a function of x, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Because both HgTe
and CdTe have the identical zinc blende type fcc crystal structure with Hg or Cd at (0, 0, 0) and Te at ( 14 , 41 , 14 ),
both Hg and Cd are in group 12 with similar electronic configuration so that the solubility of Hg1−x Cdx Te is high
from x = 0 to 1 without undergoing a structural phase transition.31 It is important to note that the semimetal HgTe
has an indirect band overlap (negative gap of ∼ − 0.26 eV) and CdTe is a semiconductor of larger gap of ∼1.49 eV,

11

A9B

*+'(
'( $%
!"#
*+ ,%

$&

σ (./)))
,&

%(676(89:

*+!/0"#0'(120345!,
$&

$%

'(

!"$
*+
"#

,%
$%

σ(

-)
,&
$&

%(67;<=#>;8<?
'(

π/3

$%

"#'(
$&

!"#

σ(

"# $%

$&

)))

ACB

FIG. 8. (a) The evolution of electronic configuration from HgTe to CdTe with enhanced tensile strain. (b) For Hg1−x Cdx Te
2
of x>
∼0.16 with a narrow band gap, 2D states of conjugated π-bond system via sp orbital hybridization becomes possible.

which is also consistently reflected in the low melting point of ∼680 ◦ C for HgTe and the much higher melting point
of ∼1090 ◦ C for CdTe. In particular, band inversion occurs smoothly near the critical level of xc ∼ 0.16 to transform
the system from a semimetal with a single Fermi node to a system with a narrow band gap of strong SOC, which is
favorable for the formation of a topological state. We might consider the SOC mechanism across the narrow gap to be
analogous to a two-level system under thermal fluctuation; i.e., the electrons at the top of the valence band exchange
energy between the triplet Zeeman energy gain (loss) and the electron potential loss (gain), as if the edge state (2D
plane for the 3D system) is threaded via chiral electrons (spins). For the TI having a topologically nontrivial state,
a hidden supersymmetry must be present to absorb the impact of distortion-restoration of the bond lengths that
instantaneously break the local crystal symmetry.
To explore why and how band inversion occurs near xc ∼ 0.16 for the solid solution of Hg1−x Cdx Te, several
valence-bond models of HgTe-CdTe are proposed, as shown in Fig. 8(a). Based on the atomic electron configurations
of Hg([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 ), Cd([Kr]4d10 5s2 ), and Te([Kr]4d10 5s2 5p4 ), the gapped CdTe of fcc structure with a higher
melting point is proposed to have stronger covalent σ bonds among the tetrahedrally coordinated Cd-Te via hybridized
sp3 orbitals (with two electrons donated from Te to Cd). HgTe is categorized as a semimetal because of indirect band
overlap,31 which corresponds to the two electrons donated from Te being partially localized in the sp3 hybridized
orbital of Hg. The difference in bonding character between HgTe and CdTe is also closely related to the same
principal quantum number of n = 5 for Cd and Te for more congruency, in contrast with Hg and Te, which have
different n. Whereas the lattice constant increases with x for a more rigid σ-bond formation, increasing tensile-strain
energy is expected for higher x until reaching the critical level of Cd substitution at xc ∼ 0.16, which could be used
to initiate the SOC mechanism for samples with x >
∼ 0.16 having narrow gaps to become TIs.
In the topologically nontrivial state, an electronic dimensional crossover is proposed to be responsible for the 2D
conduction mechanism as a result of the existence of the conjugated π-bond system, which requires that the electronic
configuration shift statistically from the 3D sp3 hybridization to the 2D sp2 hybridization along the (111) direction,
so that the unpaired electron per pz of both Hg or Cd and Te may form a π bond via side-to-side orbital overlap of
neighboring half-filled pz orbitals. However, each π bond must be shared statistically by three neighboring identical
Hg(Cd)-Te pairs as a conjugated system [Fig. 8(b)]. Because of the coexisting Peierls condensation for π-bond
formation of paired electrons in singlet state, the induced crystal-symmetry breaking in the form of local distortionrestoration in time can be absorbed by a C3 supersymmetry. Comparing the similar electronic configurations of (111)
projection of corrugated Hg1−x Cdx Te at the x ∼ 0.16 plane with that of graphene (Fig. 5), it is not surprising that
Kane and Mele earlier identified the quantum spin Hall effect in graphene.32

12

'0)

'3)
"#

$&

!"#
"#

$&

$%
σ ' ()
$%

"#

$&

!"$
"#

$&

$%
σ ' +)

π*+

$%

'4)

FIG. 9. (a) The crystal structure of α-Sn is similar to that of diamond with the space group F d3̄m. (b) The valence-bond
models using valence electrons distributed in sp3 hybrid and sp2 hybrid plus a conjugated π-bond system. (c) Under uniaxial
compressive strain, 2D-like electronic crossover is preferred with the help of added quasi-2D π bonds.

B.

α-Sn: Compressive-strain-driven topological insulator state

α-Sn has a crystal structure similar to that of diamond and Si in a fcc-type of space group F d3̄m (No. 227).
The cubic degeneracy of α-Sn can be removed under uniaxial compression along the (111) direction to exhibit band
anisotropy,33 and this material has also been predicted to be a strong TI under uniaxial strain.34 We find that α-Sn
is a perfect example to demonstrate the generation of a topological state via electronic dimensional crossover. The
atomic electron configuration of Sn ([Kr]4d10 5s2 5p2 ) and its tetrahedral coordination suggests that the four valenceshell electrons are hybridized into sp3 to form four weak σ bonds with neighboring Sn atoms, as reflected by its
narrow band gap. This is also consistent with the low-temperature phase of semiconducting α-Sn (gray tin) to the
high-temperature metallic phase of β-Sn (white tin) across the structural transition temperature near ∼13 ◦ C.35 The
valence-bond models of α-Sn with and without uniaxial strain are compared in Fig. 9(b), where the original narrowgap semiconducting state has a covalent σ-bond system of tetrahedral shape with the help of sp3 hybridization, so
the weak covalent-bond nature must come from its high principal quantum number of n = 5 with low binding energy.
As a uniaxial pressure is applied along the (111) direction, the system may be viewed as a quasi-2D system with
weakened interlayer coupling as a result of the added Coulomb repulsion among layers, which leads to a reasonable
assumption that σ bonds with sp2 hybridization in the (111) plane are favored statistically, as shown in Fig. 9(c).
Interestingly, the remaining unpaired electron in 5pz may still form a π bond as a result of concomitant Peierls
condensation, which breaks the crystal symmetry, but the three identical Sn-Sn pairs in the quasi-2D layer with
electrons undergoing quantum fluctuation must force the π bond to be shared statistically as a conjugated system.
The current description of α-Sn under compressive strain as a quasi-2D system is nearly identical to that of perfect
2D graphene (Fig. 5), except that the plane is corrugated for the former. In fact, we may extend the same valencebond analysis to the isolation of quasi-2D compounds from the typical semiconductors Si and Ge of similar electron
configuration and sp3 tetrahedral coordination via a uniaxial compression or mechanical exfoliation, i.e., the parallel
compounds of graphene called silicene and germanene are proposed,36 respectively. However, it is more difficult to
generate the 2D compounds of silicene and germanene due to their much stronger σ bonds, which lead to the larger
band gap and higher melting point. To obtain the topological state of a covalent compound with cubic structure
by applying a uniaxial compression along the (111) direction for the close-packing planes, one must choose a weak
σ-bond system or create an internal strain via intercalation or layer mismatch.

13

)*+

),+

)(+

FIG. 10. (a) The bulk band energy evolution of Bi1−x Sbx as a function of x. Band inversion occurs near x ∼ 0.04 and
0.07. (b) The lattice parameter decreases with increasing x, but the c axis is shown deviating above Vegard’s prediction, which
suggests weakened interlayer coupling. (c) Bi-Sb binary phase diagram indicates the full solubility and that Sb has a stronger
σ bond, as reflected by the higher melting point. The liquid + solid mixture suggests that strain energy is stored in the system.
(Reproduced from Refs. [37–39] with permission; copyright 1997, published by Elsevier, Ltd.; copyright 2006, John Wiley
and Sons; copyright 1994, The Metallurgical of Society of AIME.)

TABLE I. Bond length and bond angle of Bi octahedron for Bi1−x Sbx .40 Bond lengths li and bond angles θi are defined in
Fig. 11(a).
Sample
Bond lengths l1 , l2 (Å) Bond angles θ1 , θ2 (◦ )
Category
Bi
3.064, 3.516
95.48, 80.31
Semimetal
Bi0.8 Sb0.2
3.010, 3.563
97.23, 78.66
Semiconductor
Bi1−x Sb0.04−0.21
Topological insulator

012
!#
$&
$%
!"
0%2
"#

!"$%#
&'

&)

&+

032

!"#
"# &'
$% ('

σ *

σ (5−6)
"#

&'

&)

&)
()
)

&+

"# &'
$% ('

π/3
/

&)
()

FIG. 11. (a) The crystal structure of Bi1−x Sbx has a subtle 2D character via the slightly flattened lower half of each Bi
octahedral coordinated layer. See also Table I. (b) The valence-bond model for Bi crystal with covalent σ bonds via sp3 d2
hybridization. (c) The valence-bond model for Bi1−x Sbx (x∼0.04-0.21) having a topological state, where covalent σ bonds are
formed via sp2 hybridization with a conjugated π-bond system in quasi-2D.

14
C.

Bi1−x Sbx : Compressive-strain-driven topological insulator state

Together with α-Sn and HgTe under uniaxial strain, the Bi1−x Sbx alloy has also been predicted to be a strong 3D
TI,34 as was verified by ARPES experiments.41,42 The Bi-Sb alloy is similar to that of HgTe-CdTe with full solubility
and without an intermediary structural phase transition. Bi as a semimetal of indirect band overlap is converted
to a semiconductor for x ∼ 0.07–0.22 with band inversion at the critical levels of x ∼ 0.04 and 0.07, as shown in
Fig. 10(a). Pure Bi has a rhombohedral crystal structure of space group R3̄m, which is a common space group
to describe a layered compound of close packing per layer along the (111) direction. However, the strong SOC for
heavy Bi ([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 6p3 ) with a half-filled 6p orbital creates a distortion within each layer via a Peierls-like
dimerization, as seen by the flattened layer with the Bi octahedron of broken mirror symmetry (Fig. 11), which could
also contribute to the unusually large diamagnetism and spin Hall conductivity.43
The electronic structure of the Bi-Sb alloy is complex due to strong SOC among the narrowly split energy levels
of weak binding energy for orbitals of high principal quantum number (n >
∼ 5), but a trend of dimensional crossover
for the electronic structure from 3D to 2D is revealed by the evolution of bond length and bond angle with x,40 as
illustrated in Fig. 11(a) and Table I. The slight c-axis deviation that is greater than that predicted by Vegard’s law
also suggests a weakened interlayer coupling, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The comparison of bond length, bond angle,
and lattice parameters between Bi and Bi0.8 Sb0.2 is summarized in Table I, which suggests that Peierls condensation
occurs for the lower-three σ bonds of the octahedral sp3 d2 hybrid orbital for pure Bi, increasing the level of smaller Sb
([Kr]4d10 5s2 5p3 ) substitution and creating stronger σ bonding (higher melting point) to provide additional internal
compressive strain energy due to atomic-size mismatch, which must be stored in the system and used to initiate the
SOC mechanism for samples of band inversion or narrow the gap in the range x ∼ 0.04–0.21 as a TI.
Because the Bi-Sb alloy is too complex, having various degrees of instantaneous local distortion that break the
local crystal symmetry, we propose a valence-bond model for the two extreme cases of a 3D semimetal and a 2D
semiconductor for the Bi-Sb alloy system, as shown in Fig. 11(b)-(c). It is important to note that Bi and Sb have
five electrons in the valence shell, so that the sp3 d2 hybridization in octahedral coordination must have one empty
bond out of the six σ bonds [Fig. 11(b)]; i.e., limited electron sharing (local charge transfer) is expected for the
semimetal character for the bulk. Following a similar argument of electronic dimensional crossover from 3D to 2D for
the topological state of Hg1−x Cdx Te and α-Sn under compressive strain, we expect that a similar conjugated π-bond
system could also be identified in this x range, with the Dirac cone mapped by ARPES experiments. Figure 11(c)
shows an ideal 2D configuration with a possible conjugated π-bond system for Bi1−x Sbx (x∼0.04-0.21), where the
valence-shell electrons are prone to form sp2 hybridization so that the remaining two electrons per pz could either
be filled or form a π-bond with the three neighboring Bi or Sb atoms under quantum fluctuation, which leads to a
configuration similar to that of graphene but corrugated in quasi-2D. The broken mirror symmetry within each layer
[Fig. 11(a)] is a reflection of the progressive electron dimensional crossover as a function of increasing Sb substitution
of added internal compressive strain.

D.

Bi2 Se3 : Time-reversal-symmetry–protected topological insulator state

Bi2 Se3 is the most widely researched TI and is categorized as a Z2 -type TI with time-reversal-symmetry–protected
(TRS–protected) topological orders with confirmed Dirac-cone existence along the Γ-Z direction, where quintuple
layers composed of Se1-Bi-Se2-Bi-Se1 have van der Waals gaps in between, as described by the 3D crystal symmetry
of space group R3̄m in the hexagonal family,6,44,45 as shown in Fig. 12(a)-(b). The TRS-protected topological orders
suggest that the spins in 2D are spin-momentum-locked helical spins of fixed chirality, as illustrated in Fig. 12(c), so
that the TI state is robust against the impact of nonmagnetic-impurity inclusion. However, once the TRS is broken
by applying a local magnetic field from the ferromagnetic impurities on the surface of a Bi2 Se3 crystal, the Dirac-cone
gap is open for the whole system to indicate the disruption of surface conduction under entanglement, as illustrated
in Fig. 12(d).6 Although the nature of the Z2 -type TI has been described in mathematical rigor by first-principles
calculations and a parity analysis46 and by a spin-resolved ARPES experiment that confirmed the chirality of the Dirac
cone,44 it is still too abstract without the supportive understanding of the topological character via a valence-bond
analysis, especially with regards to the meaning of the TRS-protected topological orders.
Several valence-bond models for Bi2 Se3 have been proposed since 1958,47,48 but none of the proposed orbital hybridizations have been capable, until recently, of allowing a discussion of the surface properties.45 In this discussion,
valence bonds are analyzed via octahedral coordination for all five elements in each quintuple layer with sp3 d2 hybridization for the valence-shell electrons, as shown in Fig. 13. The electron configurations for Bi ([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 6p3 )
and Se ([Ar]3d10 4s2 4p4 ) having octahedral coordination prefers to form σ bonds via sp3 d2 hybridization for all atoms
in each quintuple layer. The five electrons in the valence shell for Bi suggest that limited charge transfer is available
within each quintuple layer without crossing the van der Waals gap in 3D, which is consistent with a narrow bulk

15
1(2

1=2

"#

D
"

1%2 #(4)566789:684';<5%<538=,890>

132 #(44537890>8"68=';*5?

0./

-./

!

*+

*,

*,

*,
@?35'
AB(?<BC
!)B%<B(<";?

*+

*+

FIG. 12. (a) Bi2 Se3 can be described by the rhombohedral space group R3̄m, as seen by the rhombohedral primitive unit cell
and its bulk Brillouin zone with surface projection in the Γ-Z direction. (b) The typical energy-momentum dispersion at the Γ
point shows the gapped bulk band and the gapless spin-polarized surface band as a Dirac cone. (c) Topological surface states
are protected by time-reversal symmetry (TRS), where spin chirality changes sign across the Dirac point. (d) When the TRS
is broken by a magnetic field, the Dirac cone becomes gapped for the nondegenerate ground state. [Panel (b) is reproduced
from Ref. [44] with permission; copyright 2009, Springer Nature.]

π
π

, -(./0#*1231+4

σ

,

!"#$%

σ

,

!"#$%

"#!

%&

"#$

'(

')

'*
σ

%&

+(

!"#$%

,

+)

+*
σ

,

!"#$%

,

!"#$%

"#!
π

%&
"#$
%&
"#!
%&
"#$
%&
"#!
"#!

FIG. 13. The valence-bond model of Bi2 Se3 , where all atoms in the quintuple layer are hybridized into sp3 d2 for octahedral
coordination and form σ bonds in the bulk. The remaining three unpaired electrons per Se1 form three π bonds with the six
neighboring Se1 atoms as a conjugated system. (Reproduced from Ref. [45] with permission; copyright 2018, APS.)

16
!"#

!$#

!%#

FIG. 14. (a) The three degenerate and entangled configurations of π-bond electrons (dashed orange ovals) and unpaired electrons (dashed blue circles) for the Se1 layer. The three π-bond electron clouds form a trimer, where the first two configurations
can be viewed as TRS–protected topological orders and the third one is obtained via translation. (b) An electron density map
cut for the Se1 layer obtained from the inverse Fourier transform of the diffraction data, where unexpected electron clouds
(in dashed oval circles) among Se1-Se1 atoms are proposed to come from the π-bond electron contribution reflected by the
time-average data of x-ray diffraction. (c) An integrated simulation for the electron density mapping of the Se1 layer made
by using the three entangled configurations shown in panel (a), which is actually composed of infinite replicas under quantum
fluctuation but protected by time-reversal symmetry in real space. [Panel (b) is reproduced from Ref. [45] with permission;
copyright 2018, APS.]

band gap of ∼0.3 eV. In addition, the remaining three unpaired electrons per Se1 facing the van der Waals gap or
crystal surface after cleaving must seek additional chemical bonding for further stability. We proposed three possible
valence-bond arrangements for the three dangling sp3 d2 lobes as a trimer to form π bonds via side-to-side orbital
overlap on the Se1-layer surface, as shown in Figs. 14(a)–14(c). Because there are six identical Se1 atoms but only
three unpaired sp3 d2 electrons per Se1 in one plane, the π-bond system must form a conjugated system because of
sharing, similar to the case of graphene with one π bond shared by three neighboring C-C pairs at any instance.
Unlike the σ bonds that do not change the crystal symmetry, a lattice distortion is expected for shared π bonds
that induce a Peierls condensation to break the local crystal symmetry. However, the broken symmetry from three
shorter bonds at any instance could be absorbed by a supersymmetry that contains both distortion and restoration in
resonance with the choice of a larger basis. The TRS-protected topological orders can be understood by the randomly
selected π-bond trimer configuration in either right-hand chirality or left-hand chirality under quantum fluctuation;
i.e., no difference occurs if a pattern is observed, like a film played backward. Conversely, when a ferromagnetic
impurity sits near Se1, the spins of the unpaired electrons are expected to be polarized by the local magnetic field
and to be pinned in either chirality [see Fig. 12(d)], and the TRS is broken. A gap is opened after the TRS is broken,
because no supersymmetry to absorb the distortion from the entangled condensation in real space, and the system
falls back to the topologically trivial state without the required symmetry protection.
Finally, the π-bond electrons can also be mapped similar to the σ-bond electrons as an electron crystal but,
unlike the σ-bond electrons that share identical symmetry to the crystal structure, the π-bond electrons not only
escape from the radar of conventional band calculations due to additional instantaneous crystal-symmetry breaking
from the entangled and distorted condensation. Instead, they also constitute a conjugated system in dynamic form,
which must include the discussion of entropy. In other words, the Gibbs free energy must be considered beyond the
limitations of traditional band calculations which consider enthalpy reduction under the assumption of fixed crystal
symmetry, at most using an additional term of SOC to relax the rule of band filling. A good example is the electron
density mapping of the Se1-layer obtained from the inverse Fourier transform of integrated diffraction data from x-ray
diffraction experiments,45 as shown in Fig. 14(b). The additional electron clouds among the Se1 atoms cannot come
from any σ bond but are assigned to π-bond electrons, and the integrated pattern shown in Fig. 14(c) being composed
of the three possible orders shown in Fig. 14(a) agrees with the electron density map satisfactorily.

17

!$#

!"#

!%#

!&#

!'#

FIG. 15. (a) The crystal structure of Pb1−x Snx Se has the rock-salt-type cubic space group F m3̄m. (b) The surface Brillouin
zone has pairs of Dirac nodes across the X̄ point in momentum space. Panels (c)–(e) show the PbSe-SnSe binary phase diagram,
lattice parameters, and the bulk band gap of Pb1−x Snx Se as a function of x. The L + α mixture below x ∼ 0.4 in the phase
diagram suggests that strain energy is stored in the system. (Reproduced from Refs. [49–51] with permission; copyright 2013,
AAAS; copyright 1995, ASM International; copyright 2018, APS.)

E.

Pb1−x Snx Se: Crystalline-symmetry–protected topological insulator state

Pb1−x Snx Se (PSS) has been proposed as the first example of a TI with crystalline-symmetry–protected topological
orders.49,52–54 The TI state of PSS is attributed to the cubic symmetry of rock-salt type [Fig. 15(a)] that protects
topological orders as a topological crystalline insulator (TCI). The PbSe-SnSe binary is fully soluble for x <
∼ 0.4 with
linearly decreasing lattice parameters following Vegard’s law because of the substitution of the smaller Sn into Pb sites
[Fig. 15(c)-(d)], which leads to the evolution from PbSe of rock-salt–type structure to SnSe of B29-type orthorhombic
structure with a similar valence-shell electron distribution in the heavy elements.51 The size difference between Sn
and Pb introduces compressive strain for the Pb1−x Snx Se alloy system, until the SnSe of the orthorhombic layered
structure (space group P bnm) is formed with severe Sn vacancies. Band inversion occurs near x ∼ 0.23 and the
material is confirmed to be a TCI to separate the narrow-gap semiconducting and the narrow-band-overlap semimetal
states [Fig. 15(e)].54 A similar TCI property has also been confirmed in the PbTe-SnTe alloy system of Pb1−x Snx Te
in the inverted-band regime for x ∼ 0.4.53 In contrast to the TI materials discussed so far, PSS shows a pair of Dirac
cones straddling the X̄ point for the (001) surface-state projection [Fig. 15(b)], instead of a single Dirac cone, which
was attributed to the Lifshitz transition as a result of (110) mirror-symmetry-protected topological orders.49 From the
materials point of view, it is also interesting and puzzling to notice that PSS with a fcc cubic lattice does not cleave
along the (111) planes that are in 2D close packing, but cleave easily to show (001) planes instead, which implies that
a relatively stronger chemical bonding exists within the (001) planes.
Consider the evolution of the PbSe-SnSe binary phase diagram based on the integrated information including atom
size, lattice parameters, melting points, and band inversion: the compressive strain driven by the Sn substitution
should not be ignored, which is similar to the strain-driven TI states of α-Sn and Bi1−x Sbx , as shown above (Figs. 9

18
345
")

3%5

")

π

!"

"$
"#

σ

$%
"#

!"
!

"#
$%

&+
(+

*'
σ

"#
$%

$%,"#

&+
(+

2
"% "$ "#

&
&'
('

!"

π

365

*+

π/4 π/4
&'
('

375

π
$%,"#

")

FIG. 16. (a), (b) The cubic crystal structure of Pb1−x Snx Se is built by the σ bonds from the orbital overlap of Pb(Sn)-Se
sp hybrid orbitals in chain, and two conjugated π-bond systems in orthogonal planes among Pb(Sn) using unpaired electrons
in px,y of Pb(Sn) separately, which are shared by four neighboring Pb(Sn) atoms in each square plane of 3D. (c) The electron
density mapping for a single layer cut from the (001) plane, where the π-bond electron cloud is confirmed among Pb(Sn). (d)
Consider the Peierls condensation due to π-bond formation, one of the infinite replicas for the Pb(Sn) sublattice is shown with
π-bond electrons indicated by red bars, and the cubic-symmetry–protected (C4 square symmetry in 2D) topological orders are
revealed in real space. (Reproduced from Ref. [55] with permission; copyright AIP publishing.)

and 10). Starting from the atomic electron configurations of Pb ([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 6p2 ), Sn ([Kr]4d10 5s2 5p2 ), and
Se ([Ar]3d10 4s2 4p4 ), the cubic structure for all atoms with six neighbors in octahedral coordination is proposed to
have a valence-bond model, as shown in Fig. 16. Consider only one (001) plane: the four valence-shell electrons of
Pb(Sn) and Se are hybridized into sp orbitals to form σ bonds bridging Pb(Sn)-Se in the z direction, and the two
remaining unpaired px,y electrons can simultaneously form π bonds via side-to-side overlap in two orthogonal planes
after the proper tuning of the strain energy and bond length. For a sample of x ∼ 0.23 with confirmed existence of
a Dirac cone, electron density mapping for a single (001) layer has shown evidence of contributions from the π-bond
electrons among Pb(Sn)-Pb(Sn), as shown in Fig. 16(c). Assuming that σ bonds are in the z direction, two π bonds
shared by four neighboring Pb(Sn) atoms in each orthogonal plane are slightly above and below the xz and yz planes
where σ bonds reside [Fig. 16(a)]. Although the π bond is a conjugated system under quantum fluctuation with
expected instantaneous distortion-restoration due to condensation, as illustrated by one of the infinite replicas shown
in Fig. 16(d), no clear symmetry breaking from the cubic symmetry (square symmetry in 2D) is found from the
time-averaged diffraction data [Fig. 16(c)], which is consistent with the theoretical prediction that these topological
orders are protected by the crystalline symmetry, i.e., all real-space dynamic local distortions are absorbed by the
cubic supersymmetry. Note also that the pair of Dirac nodes being identified near the X̄ points are not just protected
by the (110) mirror symmetry, which is actually coming from the side view of π bond electrons positioning slightly
above and below all orthogonal (001) planes, i.e., coming from the side view of π bond electrons of (100) and (010). In
other words, it would show similar double Dirac cones near the K point for graphene as well—if the graphene sample
were flipped 90◦ vertically in the ARPES experiment for the E(k) mapping.

V.

TOPOLOGICAL DIRAC SEMIMETALS

A semimetal is defined for materials with finite band overlap (direct or indirect) between the conduction and valence
bands for the bulk, and a Dirac semimetal denotes materials with the conduction and valence bands touching at a
single Dirac node. Conversely, topological Dirac semimetals are defined for materials with surface states in a pair of

19

-'.

-/.

FIG. 17. (a) The bulk Brillouin zone of Na3 Bi of space group P 63 /mmc having layers of Na-Bi honeycomb lattice with apical
Na above and below each Bi, which is shown to have two Dirac nodes along the Γ-A direction. (b) The two Dirac nodes are
connected by the two Fermi arcs of the surface state at the Fermi level. (Reproduced from Ref. [56] with permission; copyright
2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

Fermi arcs that connect the two bulk Dirac nodes.56 Only a few topological Dirac semimetals have been confirmed
by ARPES experiments, including Na3 Bi and Cd3 As2 .57,58
A.

Na3 Bi

Na3 Bi has been confirmed by ARPES experiments to be a topological Dirac semimetal showing both bulk Dirac
nodes and the connecting Fermi arc pair for the surface state at the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 17.56,59 For a
topologically trivial Dirac semimetal, a bulk Dirac node represents a single point touching between the conduction
and valence bands, so that 3D metallic conduction is possible for the valence electrons moving to the conduction band
in a specific direction defined by the k point of the Dirac node. Conversely, for a topological Dirac semimetal such
as Na3 Bi, two Dirac nodes are connected by two one-way Fermi arcs for the spin-polarized surface electrons at the
Fermi level. The question remains on how to interpret such a band picture in real space.
The crystal structure of Na3 Bi is actually a derivative of graphite composed of 2D (BiNa)n honeycomb lattices
coupled to a Na double layer, as shown in Fig. 17(a). There are three slightly different bond lengths for Bi-Na based
on the refined crystal structure,60 including a1 = 3.153 Å among the nearest-neighboring Bi-Na in the honeycomb
layer, a2 = 3.222 Å between Bi-Na for Na sitting directly above and below Bi, and a3 = 3.542 Å between Bi-Na
for Na sitting above and below each Bi-Na honeycomb center. Following the requirements of (i) σ-bond formation
via sp2 orbital hybridization for Bi in each honeycomb lattice and (ii) the strongest bond strength implying the
shortest bond length, a valence-bond model is proposed for Na3 Bi (Fig. 18). The five valence-shell electrons of Bi
([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 6p3 ) are likely to distribute three valence electrons into a hybridized sp2 orbital to form three σ bonds
with Na in a honeycomb lattice, as shown by the shortest bond length a1 . For the two remaining valence electrons
in Bi-6p, one is likely to share an electron with two apical Na-3s orbitals in metallic bonding of limited freedom, as
reflected by the intermediate a2 . The remaining unpaired Na-3s electron can form a conjugated π-bond system with
the three Bi-6pz orbitals in the neighboring layer, as suggested by the weakest bonding from the longest bond length
a3 . Comparing the crystal structure with the first Brillouin zone shown in Fig. 17, the two bulk Dirac nodes clearly
correspond to the two layers of σ-bond electrons among Na(up)-Bi-Na(dn) along the Γ-A direction in the Brillouin
zone. The electrons in the conjugated π-bond systems are used to bridge the bulk of the Bi-Na honeycomb layers
via a quasi-2D electron conjugated π-bond network (a3 ) and are connected by the Na(up)-Bi-Na(dn) channels (a2 )
in resonance, which is consistent with the description of a band picture having Fermi arcs enter and leave the bulk
Dirac node singularity, especially with a fixed chirality as a result of the one-way choice of σ-bond sharing among the
Na-Bi-Na route.

B.

Cd3 As2

As one of the very few confirmed topological Dirac semimetals, the band picture for Cd3 As2 is similar to that of
Na3 Bi having two Dirac nodes at the Fermi level, and ultrahigh mobility has also been identified.58,61,62 Conversely,
the space group assignment for Cd3 As2 has been under debate for a long time, mostly because the large unit cell
of over 80 atoms makes it difficult to determine whether the space group is centrosymmetric (I41 acd No.142) or

20

5&6

576

536

586

%&
π/3
!"

)3(2

#$
/01&22"34.

&.+',...

!" #$
)*+,-./+012

σ

#

!"

%&

'
'(

'
'$

!"#

/01&22"34.

&*+',*-'

!"

)4,2

#$

π/3
%&

FIG. 18. (a), (b) The crystal structure of Na3 Bi is composed of a Bi-Na honeycomb lattice with apical Na (orange color)
above and below each Bi. (c) There are three different Na-Bi bond lengths: a1 = 3.153 Å in the honeycomb layer, a2 = 3.222
Å between Bi and the upper and lower Na, and the interlayer a3 = 3.542 Å. (d) The proposed valence-bond model for Na3 Bi,
including a1 corresponds to the three σ bonds for the honeycomb lattice, a2 corresponds to the metallic bonding of electron
sharing between the two Na above and below Bi in resonance, and a3 corresponds to the π bond being shared by the three Bi
in the neighboring layer as a conjugated system.

noncentrosymmetric (I41 cd No.110).60? However, recently Ali et al. confirmed the centrosymmetric space group of
I41 acd (No. 142) with single-crystal diffraction.64 The crystal structure of Cd3 As2 should be viewed as a defect-type
fluorite CaF2 structure (F m3̄m No. 225) with a slightly distorted Cd-As honeycomb lattice in the (112) direction, as
shown in Fig. 19(a). The building block of the Cd3 As2 crystal is CdAs4 -tetrahedron, but it is greatly distorted from
the ideal tetrahedron, as shown by the bond lengths in one of the CdAs4 -tetrahedra [Fig. 19(a)], presumably due to the
statistical arrangement of empty Cd sites along the body diagonal line within each defective fluorite unit.? Conversely,
it is interesting to find the systematic change of symmetry identified by Ali et al. from the high-temperature phase
of F m3̄m (No. 225), to the intermediate-temperature phase of P 42 nmc (No.137), and to the low-temperature phase
of I41 /acd (No.142), which seems to violate the expected reduction of symmetry under reduced thermal fluctuation.
Such a violation could imply the emergence of a supersymmetry to protect the topological nature of the material,
i.e., lower Gibbs free energy state is achieved via an increased entropy to absorb the fluctuating local distortion and
restoration.
Based on the atomic electron configuration and the coordination for both Cd ([Kr]4d10 5s2 ) and As ([Ar]3d10 4s2 4p3 ),
the coordination of the CdAs4 -tetrahedron expects sp3 hybridization for Cd and the AsCd6 -octahedron expects sp3 d2
hybridization for As. The valence-bond model for the bulk is shown in Fig. 19(c). However, since the Dirac cone
is observed along the (112) direction from a slightly distorted honeycomb network, the valence electrons can be
distributed among the three σ bonds in the honeycomb lattice via sp2 orbital hybridization, as illustrated in Fig. 19(d).
Note that the fifth valence electron in the valence shell of As could participate in either the 3D σ-bond formation or
the 2D honeycomb σ-bond network with additional conjugated π-bond system. The large unit cell and strain-induced
local distortion makes it difficult to determine the exact crystal and band structures, but the current proposed valencebond model can be used to improve our understanding of why Cd3 As2 is named a topological Dirac semimetal. In
an overly simplified description, the holes in the hybridized orbitals of Cd and As could be viewed as the origin of
local charge transfer in 3D, but the conjugated π-bond system shown in the (112) plane becomes the middle ground
for 2D-to-3D electron exchange, which corresponds to the band picture of a topological Dirac semimetal having 2D

21

+6-

+7*.040(
*.321(

*.210(

+,,*-

*./01(

%69 *
+,,*-

+8-

+&%&

4)
!"$

()

/)

%&

45

45

!"#

σ
/5

4)

()

/&

/)

σ(2−3)

π/2

/5

!"#

!"$%#

FIG. 19. (a) The crystal structure of Cd3 As2 can be viewed as a defect-type fluorite structure (CaF2 ) of systematic vacancies in
a large unit cell. The bond length and angle suggest severe distortion from the ideal CdAs4 tetrahedron or AsCd6 octahedron.60
(b) The (112) plane shows a slightly distorted honeycomb lattice. (c) The valence-bond models for Cd3 As2 as a semimetal,
and (d) as a topological Dirac semimetal. To create a 2D conjugated π-bond system in Cd3 As2 , the valence-bond model is
likely to switch from the 3D σ-bond system formed with Cd-sp3 and As-sp3 d2 hybridized orbitals to quasi-2D σ bonding with
sp2 hybridized orbitals for both, and a conjugated π-bond system becomes possible.

Fermi arcs interchangeably connecting the two Dirac nodes for the bulk at the Fermi level.58

VI.

TOPOLOGICAL WEYL SEMIMETALS

Theoretically, the topological Weyl semimetal is distinguished from the topological Dirac semimetal by the missing
inversion or time-reversal symmetry of the former, so that the Dirac point splits into Weyl points.65 Because Cd3 As2
has been confirmed to be a topological Dirac semimetal, it should have a centrosymmetric space group I41 acd instead
of the noncentrosymmetric space group I41 cd, as supported by the latest refinement by Ali et al. using single-crystal
samples.64 Because of the less stringent requirement on centrosymmetry, the potential of using topological Weyl
semimetals in device application has been noticed.66 The first topological Weyl semimetal was proposed by Wan et al.
in the form of the pyrochlore compound of Y2 Ir2 O7 ,67 which was then verified experimentally in the binary systems
TaAs, TaP, NbS, and NbP.68–71

A.

TaAs

The crystal structure of TaAs is tetragonal of space group I41 md, which lacks inversion symmetry, as expected
for the requirement of a topological Weyl semimetal (Fig. 20). The conventional view for the crystal structure of
TaAs is layers of TaAs6 or AsTa6 trigonal prismatic stacked at right angles between layers along the c direction of a
tetragonal system. However, upon examining the bond-length distribution among Ta-As, one sees that two types of
valence-bond models are possible for the distribution of five electrons per valence shell for both Ta ([Xe]4f 14 5d3 6s2 )
and As ([Ar]3d10 4s2 4p3 ). If we distribute the five electrons in an trigonal prismatic coordination of six neighboring
atoms, hybridized d2 sp3 orbitals for Ta and sp3 d2 orbitals for As are expected to satisfy the required six σ bonds
[Fig. 20(a)], but one electron is missing in both hybridized orbitals, thereby suggesting further electron or hole sharing
as a typical semimetal. Conversely, the Ta-centered trigonal prismatic is actually composed of a square of longer bond
(2.616 Å) and a larger bond angle with two apices of a shorter bond (2.597 Å), which strongly suggests an alternative

22

3)4

*+&-.!

%!
%,
*+

%!
%,
+
*

() &'
$%!"#
!" #"

%$

%"

#$

σ!"#$%
#'
!"#$%

354
()

&'

%"
$!"% σ!

*+
&.!

π/2
!"

*+%,%!

#"

#$

%$

&%

π/2

#'
!"%$

FIG. 20. The crystal structure and valence-bond models for TaAs. (a) In view of the TaAs6 trigonal prismatic stacked in
orthogonal arrangement, six σ-bonds are formed with Ta-d2 sp3 and As-sp3 d2 hybrid orbitals having bond lengths taken from
Ref. [72]. (b) In view of the TaAs4 square pyramid arrangement, four σ bonds are formed with Ta-dsp2 and As-sp2 d hybrid
orbitals. An additional conjugated π-bond system becomes possible as a result of dd-type Ta-5d and As-4d side-to-side orbital
overlap being shared by the two Ta-As of slightly shorter bond length (2.597 Å). The Fermi arc connected splitted Dirac (Weyl)
nodes in the band picture is reflected on the 90◦ turn plus glide operation of the shorter Ta-As bonds (dashed cylinder).

valence-bond model of square planar coordinated hybridization of dsp2 for Ta and sp2 d for As to form four σ bonds.
In the model for square planar coordination, note that the fifth valence electron per Ta and As would leave one of
the d-orbitals (dx2 −y2 ) half filled in both [Fig. 20(b)], which is expected to form a dd-type π bond among Ta-As in
quasi-2D, similar to the pp-type π bond identified in graphene in 2D. In particular, the π bond must be shared by
the two apical As atoms of equal bond length (2.597 Å) as a conjugated system under quantum fluctuation. The two
unpaired electrons and holes in these two valence-bond models are allowed to transfer charge between the 2D plane
of the conjugated π-bond system and the σ bonds of the 3D bulk, which is consistent with the band picture showing
chiral electrons of 2D states emerging from one Weyl point and sinking into the neighboring Weyl point via the
designated path of Fermi arcs.71 The band picture for the spin-polarized description of a topological Weyl semimetal
is complex, but the real-space view provides a more intuitive understanding that these complex band pictures are
actually a description of the electron transfer between the 2D conjugated π-bond system in the square-coordinated
plane and the 3D σ-bond system in a trigonal prismatic-coordinated bulk in resonance. In particular, there is always
a 90◦ turn between neighboring trigonal prismatic layers in conjunction with the 2D square containing the conjugated
π-bond system that requires a translation operation, as shown by the glide operation in the xy plane, which is
described consistently by the momentum transfer showing Weyl points at different k points for a typical topological
Weyl semimetal with split Dirac nodes.

B.

Y2 Ir2 O7

When Wan et al. first proposed the topological Weyl semimetal state in the pyrochlore iridate Y2 Ir2 O7 via
local density approximation + U calculations,67 it was truly difficult to realize that it could be viewed as a 3D analog
of graphene from the band picture alone. Based on the understanding of the valence-bond model of graphene and the
successful modeling of topological materials discussed so far, applying the same valence-bond approach is desirable to
interpret why and how 2D electron states coexist with the 3D bulk state via symmetry-protected topological orders
for Y2 Ir2 O7 . The crystal structure of Y2 Ir2 O7 is presented in Fig. 21(a), with corner-sharing IrO6 -octahedra and Y
in the interstitial sites arranged in the cubic symmetry of space group F d3̄m. The view along the (111) direction of
close-packing plane helps to reveal that the actual building block is a honeycomb ring composed of corner-sharing
IrO6 -octahedra with Y in the honeycomb center. Seven honeycomb rings form two inverted pyramids along the (111)
direction without inversion symmetry, as shown in Fig. 22(a). The Brillouin zone with three Weyl nodes along the
Γ-L direction are proposed by the calculations, as shown in Fig. 21(b).

23

./0

.10

.*0

FIG. 21. (a) The crystal structure of pyrochlore iridate Y2 Ir2 O7 has the space group F d3̄m of cubic symmetry. (b) The Weyl
points are indicated by the sign symbols shown on the surface of the first Brillouin zone. (c) Energy bands in the plane of
kz = 0.6π/a to show a predicted Weyl point at the Fermi level. (Reproduced from Ref. [67] with permission; copyright 2018,
APS.)

021

031
0!!!1

041

)

*%

*
*&

σ
"#

'(

$%
$

$&

$
$(

!"#$%

"#

'(

$%
$

π/2
$&

$(

FIG. 22. (a) The building block of Y2 Ir2 O7 is the honeycomb ring composed of IrO6 octahedra with Y in each honeycomb
ring center. (b) A conjugated π-bond (red dashed line) system is formed among Ir using one of the half-filled 6d orbitals. (c)
The valence-bond model of Y2 Ir2 O7 with three electrons donated from Y to Ir.

The valence-bond model of Y2 Ir2 O7 can be constructed based on the atomic electron configurations of Y
([Kr]4d1 5s2 ), Ir ([Xe]4f 14 5d7 6s2 ), and O ([He]2s2 2p4 ), and the honeycomb rings are composed of corner-sharing
IrO6 -octahedra and interstitial Y, as shown in Fig. 22(a). Y donates three valence-shell electrons to the hybridized
sp3 d orbital of Ir to allow six σ-bond formations with the neighboring O of unpaired 2p, and the Ir 5d5 orbital has
a half-filled special stability, so that one unpaired electron per Ir remains in the 6d orbital. Along the close-packing
(111) direction, three edge-shared honeycomb rings are seen above and below the base honeycomb ring, as illustrated
in Figs. 22(b). The unpaired 6d electron per Ir could form side-to-side orbitals overlapping as dd-type π bonds among
the six Ir per honeycomb ring, which leads to a conjugated π-bond system under quantum fluctuation between the
two cages, as illustrated by the six red dashed lines to represent π bonds among the twelve Ir atoms [Fig. 22(b)],
which is similar to the situation of the 2D conjugated π-bond system for graphene having each π bond shared by
three C-C pairs [Fig. 5(d)], this is why we might view Y2 Ir2 O7 to be a 3D analog of graphene. Most importantly,

24

=6>

/0 12

=?>

π/2
* ,-

,.

,2
!"%$

σ& '(
!%
#$
!"

!"#!$%

03-4567+58

(-

/0 12

$!"%

σ& '(
*+ ,-

!"#!&%

(.

,.

!"'(
)%

!"#

FIG. 23. (a) The crystal structure of ZrSiS has a symmetry of space group P 4/nmm, which is a nonsymmorphic symmetry,
as reflected on the glide and fourfold screw operation for ZrS4 and SZr4 . (b) The covalent ZrSiS of σ bonds are formed with
Zr dsp2 , S sp2 d, and Si sp3 hybrid orbitals based on the coordination. The filled S 3dx2 −y2 and empty Zr 4dx2 −y2 could form
a conjugated π-bond system to bridge ZrSiS quintuple layers. Note that the four valence electrons of Zr cannot satisfy both
ZrS4 and SiZr4 layers simultaneously but are forced to share in resonance as resonating valence bonds.

the electrons in the sp3 d2 hybrid orbital for σ-bond formation and those in the π bond are interchangeable, and the
exchange must follow the specific 2D π-bond path in clockwise or counterclockwise path of chiral nature, which is
consistent with the band picture for Y2 Ir2 O7 as a topological Weyl semimetal having 2D electrons emerging from and
entering the 3D bulk Fermi nodes via k-dependent spin-momentum-locked Fermi arcs.
VII.

NODAL-LINE SEMIMETALS

A nodal-line semimetal is distinguished from a topological Dirac semimetal and a topological Weyl semimetal by
having the Fermi or Weyl nodes extended into a line (or a ring) in k space. The typical nodal-line semimetal includes
ZrSiS having Dirac nodal rings protected by nonsymmorphic symmetry,73 and PbTaSe2 having Weyl nodal rings
protected by reflection symmetry.74 In particular, PbTaSe2 has also been confirmed to be a superconductor, with
Tc ∼ 3.8 K.75 On the surface, the crystal structures of both ZrSiS and PbTaSe2 seem to involve the van der Waals
gap as quasi-2D materials with quintuple and triple atomic layers, respectively; however, the calculated band picture
strongly suggests otherwise. The implication of nodal lines with accompanied surface bands deserves a detailed
analysis from the viewpoint of valence-bond symmetry.
A.

ZrSiS

The crystal structure of ZrSiS is composed of S-Zr-Si-Zr-S stacked in quintuple layers, as shown in Fig. 23.76
Compared with TI Bi2 Se3 having a similar quintuple layer with van der Waals gaps (Fig. 13), it is tempting to
categorize the quintuple layers of ZrSiS as also having van der Walls gaps between S layers. However, note that the
Zr-S layers within each quintuple layer are particularly thin and the bond length of Zr-S across the quintuple layer gap
is only slightly longer than those within the quintuple layer, which implies that an addition chemical bond emerges
between Zr-S across the quintuple layer gap. The coordinations of Zr-Si-S are displayed in Fig. 23(a), where the Zr layer
is shared between the SiZr4 layer in tetrahedral coordination and the ZrS4 layer in a square pyramid coordination.
Starting from the atomic electron configurations of Zr ([Kr]4d2 5s2 ), Si ([Ne]3s2 3p2 ), and S ([Ne]3s2 3p4 ), the four
valence-shell electrons of Zr must be shared between the SiZr4 layer and the ZrS4 layer in resonance as resonating
valence bonds, as illustrated by the proposed valence-bond model shown in Fig. 23(b), where the four valence-shell
electrons of Zr are distributed in half-filled dsp2 hybrid orbitals of square-pyramid coordination, the four electrons of
Si are distributed in half-filled sp3 hybrid orbitals of tetrahedral coordination, and the six valence-shell electrons for S
are distributed in half-filled square-coordinated sp2 d orbitals with two unpaired electrons remaining in 3d orbitals. All
σ-bond electrons among Zr-Si-S are reasonably satisfied to form a covalent quintuple layer, except for two unpaired
electrons that remain in S 3d at the edge. We propose that additional π bonds can be formed for Zr-S by crossing
the gap between quintuple layers via side-to-side orbital overlap of the empty Zr 4dx2 −y2 and the filled S 3dx2 −y2

25

'()&

'+)&

'*)&

',)&
34&

78&

79&

7,&
σ:;

!"#$#%&
2(&

!"#$$%&

=,&

<8&

!"#$%&
<9&
$%!"#&

σ:;
34&

78&

79&

7,&
π&>;

1*& <8&

!"#$%&

<9&
π&>;

FIG. 24. (a) The crystal structure of PbTaSe2 can be viewed as a van der Walls material of TaSe2 with an intercalated Pb
layer. (b), (c) Top view of TaSe2 layer to show that edge sharing of the TaSe6 trigonal prismatic of space group P 6̄m2 is
preferred, instead of P 6/mmm with face-sharing trigonal prismatic of half occupancy for Ta. (d) The proposed valence-bond
model indicates that, in addition to the σ-bond formation with half-filled Ta-d2 sp3 and Se-sp3 d2 hybrid orbitals, an additional
conjugated π-bond system is formed among the Se-Pb-Se layer across the original van der Walls gap of TaSe2 .

orbitals. Note that the σ bonds across the SiZr4 and ZrS4 units cannot be satisfied simultaneously and are forced
to share in sync with the bridging π-bond system among the Zr-S across the quintuple layer, similar to the concept
of a resonating valence bond, which was first proposed by L. Pauling for the discussion of Li metallic bonding and
superconductivity,77 and later by P. Anderson to explain the high-Tc superconductor of doped La2 CuO4 .78 Supporting
evidence of such resonating σ-bond character is also hinted by the latest discovery that the Si surface can also be
isolated via mechanical cleaving in addition to the expected S surface in the STM experiments.79
The proposed dd-type π bond across the Zr-S gap (bond length 2.827 Å) must be conjugated as a result of resonating
σ bonds between SiZr4 and ZrS4 layers, because the two electrons in S 3dx2 −y2 , being responsible for the π bond,
would preferably not stay in the nonbonding state of S when the valence electrons of Zr are used in SiZr4 σ bonding.
The resonating σ bonds among SiZr4 and ZrS4 layers are consistent with the semimetal character predicted by the
band calculation. The 2D conjugated π-bond systems exchange electrons with the bulk resonating σ bond to bridge
not only the intralayer ZrSiS but also the quintuple layer across the gap. Experimental observation for ZrSiS as a
topological nodal-line semimetal has been confirmed with ARPES on multiple pockets in various shapes with linearly
dispersive surface states.73 In addition, the generation of nodal-line rings for ZrSiS by nonsymmorphic symmetry is
attributed to the screw operation of the ZrS4 square pyramid, which was discussed in detail by Yan et al. in the
review about the symmetry of nodal-line materials.80

B.

PbTaSe2

PbTaSe2 can be viewed as a layered van der Walls material of TaSe2 with intercalated layers of Pb, as shown
in Fig. 24(a). Based on diffraction techniques alone, it is difficult to distinguish the two possible space groups
of centrosymmetric P 6/mmm (Fig. 24(c)) and noncentrosymmetric P 6̄m2 (Fig. 24(b));75 i.e., the former has half
occupancy for Ta at ( 13 , 23 , 12 ) in P 6/mmm of higher symmetry. The band calculations and ARPES results support
the conclusion that PbTaSe2 is a Weyl nodal-line semimetal with broken centrosymmetry,74 and the mirror symmetry
for the Ta plane plays an essential role in protecting the topological nodal line.80 Based on the trigonal prismatic
coordination for Ta in the center, and the atomic electron configurations of Ta ([Xe]4f 14 5d3 6s2 ), Se ([Ar]3d10 4s2 4p4 ),
and Pb ([Xe]4f 14 5d10 6s2 6p2 ), it is reasonable to hybridize the valence-shell electrons for both Ta and Se into d2 sp3
and sp3 d2 , respectively, to form six required σ bonds per Ta, as shown in Fig. 24(d). TaSe2 layer with one hole must
induce electron sharing among the six expected σ bonds, which is consistent to the semimetal nature within each

26
TaSe2 layer.
It is interesting to note that three unpaired electrons appear on both sides of the Se-Ta-Se triatomic layer per Se,
similar to those shown on the surface of each quintuple layer in the typical topological insulator Bi2 Se3 (see Fig. 13).
Since there are two unpaired electrons in 6p of Pb, one can be donated to Ta to satisfy the requirement of covalency
for TaSe2 layer, and leave one unpaired electron in 6pz , which strongly suggests the possibility of π-bond formation
between Pb 6pz and the three half-filled sp3 d2 lobes of Se on either top or bottom side, as suggested by the slightly
unequal bond length for Pb-Se shown in Fig. 24(a). Alternatively, the two electrons in Pb 6pz may both form π
bond with the top and bottom Se simultaneously without donating to Ta to stabilize the TaSe2 layer, however, the π
bond between Pb and Se must still be shared among the three unpaired Se-sp3 d2 lobes as a conjugated system. The
observed BCS type superconductivity could be closely related to the Pb rattling involved electron-phonon coupling for
the Cooper pair exchange within and across layers.75 To understand the momentum translation among Weyl points
for electrons moving from the bulk valence band to the conduction band following the designated 2D Fermi arcs,73,74
it can be translated into a real-space view of π bond electrons exchange between the σ-bonds in the bulk of TaSe6
octahedron and the conjugated quasi-2D π-bond system in Se-Pb-Se layer via the directional routes of σ and π bonds.

VIII.

REFLECTION AND OUTLOOK

Based on a valence-bond symmetry analysis, the conjugated π-bond system identified in topological materials
clearly constitutes a common signature in the real-space view, and its energy-momentum dispersion is described by
the gapless Dirac cone showing the tunneling process of massless Dirac fermions. The conjugated π-bond system in
real space could be viewed as a supersymmetry system which is sufficient to absorb the instantaneous and spontaneous
crystalline symmetry breaking and restoration, or as a thermodynamic system defined not only by its order parameters
but also by its order indices. This is reflected by the additional dimensionality to include a topological classification in
addition to the topologically trivial materials defined beforehand only by the rigid crystalline symmetry. We believe
the chemistry-physics divide can be removed once the understanding of topological materials is explored from both
the real-space valence-bond model and from the reciprocal-space band pictures. In particular, in the learning curve of
topological materials from 1D to 3D, we find that the ground state of a thermodynamic system can no longer be limited
to the lowest enthalpy of presumably fixed crystalline symmetry. The increased entropy from the conjugated π-bond
system with constant breaking and restoration of the broken symmetry, i.e., the turned-on spin-orbital coupling (SOC)
in band calculation, can also lead to the hidden ground state of topological materials, which is why more topological
materials are waiting to be found beyond the traditional path of presumed rigid crystalline symmetry.
Following the valence-bond analysis for a series of prototype topological materials discussed above, from the simplest
1D trans-PA to 2D graphene, and to the 3D TIs and semimetals containing electronic 2D edge states, the conjugated
π-bond system as a common thread is identified. The 1D or 2D π-bond conjugated system is attributed to the
distortion and restoration of broken symmetry due to electron pairing with concomitant Peierls condensation. These
conducting edge states have real-space configurations of high entropy but can be simplified with a supersymmetry
that absorbs the perturbation of the original broken crystalline symmetry. Whereas the novel 2D electronic state
is commonly found in the 3D bulk of topological materials, the observed Dirac-cone signature detected by ARPES
experiments should not be attributed solely to the physical surface of a condensed-matter state, but should be
interpreted as coming from the conjugated π-bond electrons confined within a plane in the 3D bulk in general. From
the materials-preparation perspective, besides picking out topological materials from the huge chemical database
with a designed algorithm through symmetry and parity analyses, strain engineering at the interface of semimetalsemiconductor binaries through the adjustment with substitution and epitaxial-growth techniques seems to be more
accessible experimentally to harness the unique low-dimensional transport character of chiral electrons for device
applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

F.C.C. would like to thank G. J. Shu, Raman Sankar and M. Hayashi for many helpful discussions. The support
provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan under project number MOST-106-2119-M-002 -035
-MY3 is acknowledged.

27

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

28
29
30

31
32
33
34
35
36
37

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54

H. Shirakawa, Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals 171, 235 (1989).
C. R. Fincher Jr., C. E. Chen, A. J. Heeger, A. G. MacDiarmid, and J. B. Hastings, Physical Review Letters 48, 100 (1982).
A. Geim, Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 851 (2011).
K. Novoselov, Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 837 (2011).
F. D. M. Haldane, Reviews of Modern Physics 89, 040502 (2017).
M. Z. Hasan and C. Kane, Reviews of Modern Physics 82, 3045 (2010).
A. Bansil, H. Lin, and T. Das, Reviews of Modern Physics 88, 021004 (2016).
E. Gibney, Nature 560, 151 (2018).
H. Hosoya, K. Hosoi, and I. Gutman, Theoretica Chimica Acta 38, 37 (1975).
J. C. Dobrowolski, Croatica Chemica Acta 76, 145 (2003).
I. M. Lifshitz, Soviet Physics JETP 11, 1130 (1960).
A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, Reviews of Modern Physics 81, 109 (2009).
H. Bethe, Zeitschrift Fur Physik 71, 205 (1931).
I. Affleck, T. Kennedy, E. H. Lieb, and H. Tasaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 799 (1987).
J. C. Bonner and M. E. Fisher, Physical Review 135, A640 (1964).
C. K. Majumdar and D. K. Ghosh, Journal of Mathematical Physics 10, 1388 (1969).
F. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1153 (1983).
A. Vasil’ev, M. Markina, and E. Popova, Low Temperature Physics 31, 203 (2005).
D. Baeriswyl and E. Jeckelmann, Materials Science Forum 191, 71 (1995).
S. A. Kivelson, Synthetic Metals 125, 99 (2001).
I. Belopolski et al., Science Advances 3, e1501692 (2017).
R. Gutzler and D. F. Perepichka, Journal of the American Chemical Society 135, 16585 (2013).
A. Fasolino, J. H. Los, and M. I. Katsnelson, Nature Materials 6, 858 (2007).
M. I. Katsnelson, Materials Today 10, 20 (2007).
P. R. Wallace, Physical Review 71, 622 (1947).
M. S. Fuhrer, C. N. Lau, and A. H. Macdonald, MRS bulletin 35, 289 (2010).
A. V. Galeeva, A. I. Artamkin, A. S. Kazakov, S. N. Danilov, S. A. Dvoretskiy, N. N. Mikhailov, L. I. Ryabova, and D. R.
Khokhlov, Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 9, 1035 (2018).
P. Moskvin, V. Khodakovsky, L. Rashkovetskyi, and A. Stronski, Journal of Crystal Growth 310, 2617 (2008).
B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S. C. Zhang, Science 314, 1757 (2006).
M. Konig, S. Wiedmann, C. Brune, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 318, 766
(2007).
A. Rogalski, Reports on Progress in Physics 68, 2267 (2005).
C. Kane and E. J. Mele, Physical Review Letters 95, 226801 (2005).
B. J. Roman and A. W. Ewald, Physical Review B 5, 3914 (1972).
L. Fu and C. Kane, Physical Review B 76, 045302 (2007).
F. Bassani and L. Liu, Physical Review 132, 2047 (1963).
S. Z. Butler et al., ACS Nano 7, 2898 (2013).
B. Lenoir, A. Dauscher, M. Cassart, Y. I. Ravich, and H. Scherrer, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 59, 129
(1998).
H. Berger, B. Christ, and J. Troschke, Crystal Research and Technology 17, 1233 (1982).
H. Ohtani and K. Ishida, Journal of Electronic Materials 23, 747 (1994).
P. Cucka and C. S. Barrett, Acta Crystallographica 15, 865 (1962).
D. Hsieh, D. Qian, L. Wray, Y. Q. Xia, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, Nature 452, 970 (2008).
F. Nakamura et al., Physical Review B 84, 235308 (2011).
F. Yuki, O. Masao, and F. Hidetoshi, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 84, 012001 (2014).
D. Hsieh et al., Nature 460, 1101 (2009).
G. J. Shu, S. C. Liou, S. K. Karna, R. Sankar, M. Hayashi, and F. C. Chou, Physical Review Materials 2, 044201 (2018).
H. Zhang, C. Liu, X. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S. Zhang, 5, 438 (2009).
J. Drabble and C. Goodman, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 5, 142 (1958).
V. Bhide and B. Patki, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 32, 1565 (1971).
Y. Okada et al., Science 341, 1496 (2013).
S. D. Corso, B. Liautard, and J. C. Tedenac, Journal of Phase Equilibria 16, 308 (1995).
A. J. Strauss, Physical Review 157, 608 (1967).
L. Fu, Physical Review Letters 106, 106802 (2011).
S.-Y. Xu, C. Liu, N. Alidoust, and M. Neupane, Nature 3, 1192 (2012).
P. Dziawa et al., Nature Materials 11, 1 (2012).

28
55

56
57
58
59
60
61
62

63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75

76
77
78
79

80

G. J. Shu, S. C. Liou, S. Karna, R. Sankar, M. Hayashi, M.-W. Chu, and F. C. Chou, Applied Physics Letters 106, 122101
(2015).
S.-Y. Xu et al., SCIENCE 347, 294 (2015).
Z. Liu et al., Science 343, 864 (2014).
M. Neupane et al., Nature communications 5, 3786 (2014).
Z. Wang, Y. Sun, X.-Q. Chen, C. Franchini, G. Xu, H. Weng, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Physical Review B 85, 195320 (2012).
G. A. Steigmann and J. Goodyear, 24, 1062 (1968).
T. Liang, Q. Gibson, M. N. Ali, M. Liu, R. Cava, and N. Ong, Nature materials 14, 280 (2015).
S.-T. Guo, R. Sankar, Y.-Y. Chien, T.-R. Chang, H.-T. Jeng, G.-Y. Guo, F. C. Chou, and W.-L. Lee, Scienticfic Reports 6,
27487 (2016).
E. K. Arushanov, Progress in Crystal Growth and Characterization 3, 211 (1980).
M. N. Ali, Q. Gibson, S. Jeon, B. B. Zhou, A. Yazdani, and R. J. Cava, Inorganic Chemistry 53, 4062 (2014).
A. Burkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 127205 (2011).
R. D. Y. Hills, A. Kusmartseva, and F. V. Kusmartsev, Physical Review B 95, 214103 (2017).
X. Wan, A. M. Turner, A. Vishwanath, and S. Y. Savrasov, Physical Review B 83, 205101 (2011).
S.-Y. Xu et al., Science Advances 1, e1501092 (2015).
S.-Y. Xu et al., Science 349, 613 (2015).
L. Yang et al., Nature physics 11, 728 (2015).
S.-M. Huang et al., Nature Communications 6, 7373 (2015).
H. Boller and E. Parthe, Acta Crystallographica 16, 1095 (1963).
M. Neupane et al., Physical Review B 93, 201104 (2016).
G. Bian et al., Nature Communications 7, 1 (2016).
R. Sankar, G. N. Rao, I. P. Muthuselvam, T.-R. Chang, H. T. Jeng, G. S. Murugan, W.-L. Lee, and F. C. Chou, Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 095601 (2017).
A. J. Klein Haneveld and F. Jellinek, Recueil des Travaux Chimiques des Pays-Bas 83, 776 (1964).
L. Pauling, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 60, 59 (1968).
P. W. Anderson, Science 235, 1196 (1987).
C. C. Su, C. S. Li, T. C. Wang, S. Y. Guan, R. Sankar, F. C. Chou, C. S. Chang, W. L. Lee, G. Y. Guo, and T. M. Chuang,
New J. Phys., to be published (2018).
S.-Y. Yang, H. Yang, E. Derunova, S. S. P. Parkin, B. Yan, and M. N. Ali, Advances in Physics: X 3, 1414631 (2018).

