A general model of focal adhesion orientation
dynamics in response to static and cyclic stretch
Rumi De1,*
1 Department

arXiv:1902.00939v1 [physics.bio-ph] 3 Feb 2019

of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata, Mohanpur –
741246, West Bengal, India
* Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.D. (email: rumi.de@iiserkol.ac.in).

ABSTRACT
Understanding cellular response to mechanical forces is immensely important for a plethora of biological processes. Focal
adhesions are multi-molecular protein assemblies that connect the cell to the extracellular matrix and play a pivotal role in
cell mechanosensing. Under time varying stretches, focal adhesions dynamically reorganize and reorient and as a result,
regulate the response of cells in tissues. Here, I present a simple theoretical model based on, to my knowledge, a novel
approach in the understanding of stretch sensitive bond association and dissociation processes together with the elasticity of
the cell-substrate system to predict the growth, stability and the orientation of focal adhesions in the presence of static as well
as cyclically varying stretches. The model agrees well with several experimental observations; most importantly, it explains
the puzzling observations of parallel orientation of focal adhesions under static stretch and nearly perpendicular orientation in
response to fast varying cyclic stretch.

Introduction

stretches14, 15 . Moreover, another puzzling experimental observation is that focal adhesions respond differently to static
stretch compared to rapidly varying cyclic stretch. Subjected
to static or quasi-static stretch, FAs tend to orient along the
stretch direction7, 16–18 , whereas, under fast varying stretch,
FAs opt to orient away from the stretch direction; for high
frequency cyclic stretch, FAs align nearly perpendicular to
the applied stretch direction8–12, 19–21 .

Mechanical forces have long been known to play an important role in determining cellular functions and behaviours1.
Living cells actively respond to the mechanical properties of
the extracellular matrix, its rigidity, also to the presence of
external forces by regulating various processes such as cell
adhesion, orientation, migration, differentiation, alteration in
morphology and even apoptosis1–4 . Moreover, the effect of
time varying cyclic stretch is particularly striking where each
cycle of contraction and relaxation leads to dynamic changes
that affect a wide range of activities involving cardiovascular cells, muscle cells, stem cells, connective tissue cells to
name a few1, 5–7 . It is not yet well understood how the stretch
induces reorganization of the cellular cytoskeleton, assembly
and disassembly of focal adhesions, or how it alters the gene
expression, and affects the whole tissue adaptation in general. A deeper insight into the mechanical stretch induced
responses is thus envisaged to have wide impact in many cellular processes, wound healing, tissue engineering, and also
regenerative medicine1.
Recent researches have established that focal adhesions
(FAs) play a crucial role in cell mechanotransduction1–4 . FAs
are micron-sized complex multimolecular protein assemblies
linked on one side to the extracellular matrix via membranebound receptors and on other side to the actin stress fibers
in the cell cytoskeleton. Experiments show that in response
to substrate stretch, focal adhesions reorganize and reorient
and as a result, regulate the response of the cell2, 7–12 . It
is also found that external force strongly affects the growth
and the stability of focal adhesion contacts1–4 . FAs grow in
the direction of tensile stretch13 and the stability increases
with the increase in applied stretch magnitude upto an optimal value, however, eventually become unstable at higher

There are many theoretical studies that have contributed
significantly to the understanding of how cells actively respond to the mechanical forces and regulate force transmission3, 4 . Quite a few studies have also been carried out to
understand the stability and growth of focal adhesions in response to forces. In a seminal work by Bell, the stability
of adhesion cluster, modelled as a collection of molecular
bonds, was first addressed using kinetic theory of chemical
reactions. In Bell’s model the rupture rate of ligand-receptor
bonds was proposed to increase exponentially with the mechanical force22. Later, the bond dissociation pathways have
been studied in the framework of Kramers theory as thermally assisted escape over an energy barrier under applied
forces23, 24 . Also, the stochasticity in bond breaking and
binding processes has been incorporated through the onestep master equation to investigate the stability of focal adhesions under constant loading25. However, relatively few
studies have been performed on the orientational response of
focal adhesions to substrate stretching. Moreover, existing
theories, which have provided many insights into the cellular orientation problem, including our earlier works, mostly
dealt with the orientation of the whole cell modelled as a contractile force dipole in a coarse-grained picture26–28 ; or studied the reorientation of 2D cells emphasizing on passively
stored elastic energy29; else described the formation and re1

alignment of stress fibers in response to cyclic stretch21, 30 .
Recently, Qian et. al. constructed rate equations of the density of stress fibers and adhesive receptor-ligand bonds to describe the dynamics of cell realignment in response to cyclic
stretch31 . It has been hypothesized that cells tend to orient
in the direction where the formation of stress fibers is energetically most favourable. Moreover, the frequency dependent force generated within the stress fibers solely obtained
from the structural considerations of the filament and does
not depend on the description of assembly or disassembly of
focal adhesions bonds. However, recent experiments have
shown that orientation specific activation of stretch sensitive
proteins in FAs controls the orientation specific responses of
FAs growth and disassembly7 . Also, other studies on FAs
attempted till now, have ignored the parallel orientation of
FAs and focused only on the perpendicular orientation under
cyclic stretching32–34 . Moreover, these studies predict that
the orientational response of FAs remains unaffected under
low frequency or quasi-static stretch32–34 . Therefore, though
the previous studies have provided many insights into the orientation specific response, however, so far the focus mainly
remained on the dynamics of the cell, or the stress fibers, or
the perpendicular orientation of focal adhesions. Thus, a single theory which explains the parallel orientation of FAs towards the static stretch direction as well as the perpendicular
orientation under fast varying cyclic stretch, remains elusive.
In this paper, a theoretical model is presented to study
the orientation-specific response of focal adhesions in the
presence of static as well as time varying stretches within an
unified framework. The crux of this model lies on a novel
approach in the understanding of stretch sensitive bond
association and dissociation processes of focal adhesions
assembly which play a crucial role in determining the
orientational response of FAs. It also takes into account
the elasticity of the cell-matrix system and the stochastic
behaviour of ligand-receptor bonds breaking and binding
processes of focal adhesions assembly. In particular, the
force sensitive catch-bond behaviour and also the timedependent binding rates under substrate stretching have
been incorporated, that allow to capture the experimentally
observed puzzle of the parallel alignment of focal adhesions
in response to static applied stretch, whereas, nearly perpendicular alignment under fast varying cyclic stretch7–12, 16–21 .
In addition, this theory predicts several other experimental
observations such as the growth and the stability of focal
adhesions in the direction of tensile stretch13–15 and also
the existence of threshold frequency and magnitude of the
applied stretch that triggers reorganization of focal adhesions19, 21, 35 . Moreover, it also elucidates the experimental
observations where orientational responses have been found
to vary across cell types as a function of frequency of the
substrate stretch19–21 .

Results
Theoretical model of focal adhesions
SF

L

Cell

FA
Substrate
Stretching

(b)

Cell

θ
Stretching

Substrate

Figure 1. (a) Schematic view of the cell and the stress fiber
(SF) adhering through two focal adhesions (FA) under
substrate stretching. The inset (dotted box) illustrates the
ligand-receptor bonds modelled as Hookian springs. (b)
Illustration of instantaneous orientation of the cell at an
angle θ relative to applied stretching direction.
The model takes the cue from the fact that FAs are clusters
of ligand-receptor molecular bonds that provide the physical
connection between the cell and the extracellular matrix. Figure 1a shows a schematic representation of a cell adhering to
a substrate through two focal adhesions. In a minimal model,
it could be thought of an actin stress fiber (SF) adhered via
two FAs. Figure 1b illustrates the instantaneous position of
the cell, and hence of the focal adhesion, oriented at an angle θ relative to the applied stretch direction. Each focal adhesion site consists of uniformly distributed ligand-receptor
bonds connected in parallel to the substrate. These bonds are
considered as Hookian elastic springs of stiffness, kb . Moreover, in this model, for simplicity, the elasticity of the cell
or the stress fiber is represented by a spring of rigidity kc (is
referred as cellular spring). The ligand-receptor bonds are
considered to be either in closed or in open state. Due to
substrate stretching, the closed bonds, attached at one side
to the substrate, get elongated and thus, experience an additional tension (as illustrated in Fig. 1a); since the other
side of the bonds is connected to the stress fiber, the cellular spring also gets stretched. Thus, if the bond displacement along the stretch direction is denoted by ub and the
cell spring displacement as uc , then the geometric constraint
relation of elastic displacements is given by, ub + uc = Lε .
Here, ε is the strain magnitude and L is the distance of the
FA site from the cell center as shown in Fig. 1a (also, see
2/8

the supplementary Fig. 1). Moreover, considering the force
balance condition, kc uc = ∑n kb ub ; the total force summing
over all closed bonds must be balanced by the tension in the
stretched cellular spring. The above elasticity modelling enables us to determine the single bond force, fb , calculated
as, fb = kb ub = Lε kb kc /(kc + nkb); n denotes the number of
closed bonds at any instant.
Moreover, the dynamics of focal adhesions is subjected
to fluctuations in the surrounding micro-environment, thus,
bonds can also undergo stochastic breaking or rebinding. To
study the time evolution of the focal adhesion cluster, a master equation has been written by coupling the elasticity of the
cell-matrix system with the statistical behaviour of bond association and dissociation processes3, 25, 36 ,
dPn
= Kon Pn−1 + Koff Pn+1 − (Kon + Koff )Pn ,
dt

(1)

where Pn (t) is the probability that n bonds are formed at time
t. The first two terms in the right hand side represent the gain
term, i.e., the tendency for the number of bonds in state n to
increase due to the formation of new bond in state (n − 1) and
the dissociation of bond in state (n + 1), respectively. The last
term represents the loss of bonds in state n, whereas Kon and
Koff denote the total association and total dissociation rate
of bonds at the respective state, n, at any instant of time t.
This is further to note here that for mathematical simplicity,
it has been considered that all bonds in the adhesion cluster
experience the same elastic force or deformation. However,
since the rates are subjected to fluctuations during stochastic
simulation of the model, thus, it also takes care of the nonuniformity that may arise in bond forces across the adhesion
cluster.
Moreover, during the time evolution, the bond reaction
rate strongly depends on the instantaneous bond configuration. Recent single molecule experiments have revealed
that the external force increases the lifetime of many FAs
molecules37, 38 . Tensile force, upto an optimal value, is found
to strengthen and reinforce the molecular bonds; and bonds’
lifetime decreases with further increase in force14. These
type of force strengthening bonds are called catch bonds and
are believed to play a crucial role in stabilizing the focal adhesion cluster15 . Motivated by the experimental findings, in
this model, it is assumed that the FA cluster consists of catch
bonds and thus, the dissociation rate, koff , of the closed bond
is proposed to demonstrate the catch behavior as15, 39 ,
koff = kslip e fb / f0 + kcatch e− fb / f0 ;

(2)

where kslip and kcatch denote the rate constants for dissociation of the ligand-receptor pair via a slip pathway promoted
by the force and a catch pathway opposed by the force respectively39; these rate constants depend on the type of the
adhesion molecules. The total dissociation rate, Koff , is thus,
Koff = ∑n koff , where n is the number of closed bonds at any
given instant and f0 denotes a molecular force scale, typically
of the order of piconewton.

On the other hand, it has generally been considered that
the association or rebinding rate, kon , increases with the number of available unbound bonds at any instant; thus, kon =
γ (N −n), where N is the total number of binding sites, n is the
number of closed bond, and γ is the binding rate constant25.
However, in this model, motivated by the experiments40, 41 , it
is considered that during the rebinding process, to facilitate
the ligand-receptor bond formation, the pair needs to be in
close proximity within a reaction radius, lR , and for a characteristic contact time, tR . Thus, the ligand-receptor bond
has an intrinsic reaction rate, v0 = lR /tR , for binding to occur. Therefore, in the presence of a cyclically varying substrate stretch, as the substrate moves back and forth, the ligand attached to the substrate also moves back and forth from
the cell receptor and hence the association or rebinding rate
strongly depends on the time variation of the applied stretch.
Thus, under a cyclic strain, ε (t) = ε0 (1 − cos ω t), where ε0 is
the average magnitude and ω is the frequency of the applied
stretch; the ligand which was initially at a distance lR from
the cell receptor would now undergo a cyclically varying displacement, u(t) = lR ε (t); and hence, continuously moves
away back and forth from the cell receptor. Therefore, the
displacement rate, |u̇(t)| = lR |ε̇ (t)| has to be much smaller
compared to the intrinsic binding rate, v0 , so that the ligand
receptor pair gets sufficient time to rebind. If the absolute
magnitude of the displacement rate, vω = lR ε0 ω << v0 , the
ligand-receptor pair is in contact for long enough time so
that the reaction can take place and binding can easily occur.
However, as the displacement rate increases with increase in
stretching magnitude or frequency of the external stretch, the
ligand-receptor pair gets to spend less and less contact time
as the ligand moves away rapidly from the cell receptor and
therefore the probability of bond formation decreases. To incorporate these effects, in this model, the association rate is
proposed to be rate-dependent and described by
2

2

kon = γ (N − n)e−vω /v0 .

(3)

Also, this is to note here that even though, lR , does not
explicitly appeared in the expression of kon , however, the effect of the reaction radius could be seen through its dependence on the strain magnitude, ε0 . This dependence solely
appears due to the consideration of the reaction radius. Therefore, in this model, the effective time scale turns out to be,
tω = 1/(ε0 ω ). Thus, the competition between the two time
scales, the time variation of the substrate displacement, tω ,
and the intrinsic binding time scale, tR , determines the probability of bond formation.
Now, in the presence of a static stretch, the association
rate turns out to be, kon = γ (N − n), as ω = 0. Under a
static stretch, the distance between the ligand-receptor pair
increases with the external stretch; however, since the pair
spends sufficiently long time in close contact, thus, there
is always chances of ligand-receptor rebinding to occur and
hence the adhesion bonds could be formed. In case of a static
stretch, the dissociation rate, koff , plays a major role in deter3/8

Orientational response in the presence of static
stretch
Figure 2a shows the typical simulation trajectories of instantaneous number of closed bonds for three different magnitudes of static strain. It is observed that the number of closed
bonds stochastically varies around a mean value depending
on the applied stretch magnitude and the cluster eventually
becomes unstable above a threshold stretch. The effective
strain magnitude along the FA cluster oriented at an angle θ
is εa = ε0 cos2 θ (as in Fig. 1b). The stability and the growth
of the adhesion cluster (represented by the mean number of
closed bonds) along the direction of the applied static stretch
(i.e., θ = 0) have been studied as a function of strain magnitude as shown in Fig. 2b. It is found, as observed in ex-

Closed bonds (n)

Numerical simulation method
All parameters of the model have been rewritten in dimensionless units. The scaled time is defined as τ = k0t, where
k0 is the spontaneous dissociation rate in the absence of any
external force. Similarly, all other rates have been scaled,
such as, Ks = kslip /k0 , Kc = kcatch /k0 , Γ = γ /k0 , TR = k0tR
and the scaled frequency, ω = ω0 /k0 . The normalised bond
force is defined as Fb = fb / f0 . Moreover, all displacements
have been scaled by the characteristic length, lR , such that
Ub = ub /lR , Uc = uc /lR , and Ls = L/lR .
The master equation has been numerically solved to investigate the time evolution, growth, stability and the orientation of adhesion clusters in response to static as well as time
varying cyclic stretch. Monte-Carlo method has been used
based on Gillespie’s algorithm42. In simulations, the FA cluster consisting of N binding sites, starts from an initial state
with all bonds at closed state and proceeds until all bonds
become open. Thus, the stochastic trajectories are simulated
which share many similarities with experimental realizations.
Averaging has been done over many such trajectories to extract useful statistical information. In case of stable clusters,
each simulation has run for at least one million events. The
overall statistics have been accumulated from 500 such simulation results. In this model, following the existing literature,
stability and growth of the adhesion cluster is represented by
the mean number of closed bonds under different conditions
such as varying stretch, frequency etc. Dynamics have been
studied for a wide range of parameter values. Here, the results presented for a cluster of size N=200. The length L is
taken as 20µ m and lR ∼ 1nm. The ratio of single bond stiffness to cellular spring is taken as kb /kc = 5. The other scaled
parameter values are kept at Γ = 2, Ks = 0.10, and Kc = 120
(following39). The magnitude and frequency of the applied
stretch and TR remain variable parameters in the model.

(a) 200
150

100

50

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

(b) 200
Closed bonds (n)

mining the stability of the adhesion cluster. Due to the catch
bond behaviour of the dissociation rate, FAs get strengthen
with tensile stretch, however, above a threshold stretch value,
the dissociation rate start increasing and eventually wins over
the association rate and hence the cluster becomes unstable
and thus, disassemble.

150

100

50

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Figure 2. Simulation results for static stretch. (a) Time
evolution of mean number of closed bonds for three
different strain magnitudes: 1% (pink), 10% (red) (stable
cluster), and 20% (blue: unstable). (b) Mean number of
closed bonds as a function of strain magnitude for Γ = 1
(open blue circles) and Γ = 2 (solid red dots). Cluster size
increases with increase in Γ value.

periments, the adhesion cluster grows with increasing strain;
reaches a maximum under an optimal strain value, however,
a further increase in stretch eventually results in disassembly
of the cluster. This could be attributed to the catch behaviour
of FA molecules. Since the catch bonds in FAs get strengthen
with tensile stretch, the dissociation rate decreases and that,
in turn, promotes the growth and stability of FAs. The cluster becomes most stable for an optimal stretch at which the
bond dissociation rate is minimum. Thus, in the presence
of a static stretch, below the threshold magnitude, parallel
to the stretch direction becomes the most stable direction for
FAs growth; whereas perpendicular direction is the least stable (as εa = 0) associated with high dissociation rate of bonds.
Therefore, FAs tend to align along the parallel direction of the
applied stretch. The findings, thus, explain the recent exper4/8

(a)
120

Closed bonds (n)

Closed bonds (n)

120
90
60

40

30
0
0

0
0

30

60

30

60

90

90

Figure 4. Effect of intrinsic binding time scale, TR , on the
cluster orientation for different values of TR = 10 (solid blue
dots), 5 (open red circles), 2 (open green triangle), and 1
(open magenta square); for 10% stretch and frequency,
ω = 10.

(b) 140
Closed bonds (n)

80

130

120

110
0

30

60

90

Figure 3. Simulation results for time varying stretch. (a)
Stability of the adhesion cluster as a function of orientation
angle, θ (in degree), under fast varying cyclic stretch (when
Tω < TR ) with ω = 10 (solid blue dots), and ω = 5 (open
red circles). (b) The plot shows the cluster stability with
decrease in stretching frequency for ω = 1 (open magenta
square), ω = 0.5 (open black triangle), ω = 0.1 (solid red
dots), and ω = 0.01 (open blue circles), keeping TR = 10
and for 10% stretch.

imental observation where FAs initially oriented at perpendicular direction, disassemble under a static stretch and reorient towards the parallel direction of higher stability; whereas
FAs initially oriented parallel to the applied stretch direction
remain stable7 .
Orientational response in the presence of dynamic
stretch
However, in the presence of a high frequency cyclic stretch,
orientational response of focal adhesions is found to be quite
different8–12, 19–21 . Under a cyclically varying stretch, ε (τ ) =
ε0 (1 − cos ωτ ), the competition between the two time scales,
Tω = 1/ε0 ω , the time variation of the substrate displacement

compared to TR , the intrinsic binding time scale of the ligandreceptor pair determines the formation and stability of FAs
cluster. For high frequency stretch, if Tω << TR , the ligandreceptor pairs do not get sufficient contact time to rebind
as the ligand on the substrate moves away rapidly from the
cell receptor. Therefore, the chances of new bond formation
decreases with increasing frequency and the FA cluster becomes unstable along the stretch direction. However, if FA
orients, away from the stretch direction, at an angle θ , then
the effective strain magnitude, εa = ε0 cos2 θ , acting along the
FA decreases and hence the contact time between the ligandreceptor pairs, Tω increases with Tω ∝ 1/εa . Therefore, as
the cluster orients away from the stretch direction, it becomes
more and more stable with increase in probability of bond formation. At perpendicular direction, which is the zero strain
direction, the binding of ligand-receptor pair is no longer affected by the fast varying stretch and thus, FAs become stable. Figure 3a shows the stability of the adhesion cluster as
a function of orientation angle, θ , under a high frequency
(for Tω << TR ) cyclic stretch. As seen from the figure, cluster grows in size as it orients near perpendicular direction.
There exists a distribution of orientation angles towards the
perpendicular direction as found in experiments. However, as
the stretching frequency decreases, ligand-receptor pairs get
longer contact time and the ratio of the two time scales, Tω
and TR , determines the most stable orientation angle. When
Tω >> TR , as the substrate moves slowly, ligand-receptor
pairs get sufficient time to form new bonds and therefore,
FAs, due to strengthening of the catch bonds, tend to align
along the maximal stretch direction (εa = ε0 for θ = 0), i.e.,
parallel to the applied stretch, as shown in Fig. 3b.
5/8

cluster becomes stable. However, above the threshold stretch,
as Tω < TR , ligand-receptor pairs do not get sufficient contact
time to rebind with the fast varying substrate; thus, the cluster becomes unstable and so orients away from the stretch
direction. Therefore, orientational response of FAs becomes
prominent above a threshold stretch value. Moreover, with
increase in stretching frequency, as shown in Fig. 5, since Tω
decreases with increasing ω , (Tω ∝ 1/ω ), the magnitude of
the threshold stretch shifts to a lower value.

Closed bonds (n)

120

80

40

Discussion
0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

Figure 5. The stability of the adhesion cluster as a function
of strain magnitude, ε0 , with varying frequency as, ω = 10
(solid blue dots), 5 (open red circles), 3 (open green
triangle), 2 (open magenta square), and 1 (open black
diamond); keeping TR = 10.
Effect of intrinsic binding time scale on focal adhesion orientation
Moreover, this theory also elucidates the experimental observations where orientational responses have been found to
vary from cell type to cell type under time-dependent cyclic
stretches. It is observed that some cell types prefer near perpendicular alignment, whereas some orient at different angles, or some do not exhibit considerable reorientation below
a certain frequency19–21 . In this model, it could be attributed
to different intrinsic time scales, TR , characteristic to different cell types. Figure 4 shows the orientational stability of
the adhesion cluster for different TR values while keeping the
magnitude and the frequency of the cyclic stretch constant.
As seen from the figure, with decrease in the characteristic rebinding time, TR , the cluster becomes stable at a wide range
of orientation angles. As TR decreases, since the binding occurs at a faster rate, ligand-receptor pairs could increasingly
cope up with the varying substrate stretch; and thus, the cluster becomes stable. Therefore, focal adhesions and thus, cells
with fast binding rates do not show significant reorientation.
Existence of threshold stretch magnitude
Moreover, as found in experiments, this theory also captures
the existence of a threshold stretch magnitude above which
the orientational response becomes prominent19, 21, 35 . Figure 5 shows the stability of the adhesion cluster, oriented parallel to the applied stretch direction (θ = 0), as a function
of strain magnitude and for different stretching frequencies.
While keeping the frequency constant, if the magnitude of
the applied stretch decreases, since (Tω ∝ 1/εa ), this leads to
increase in the contact time between the ligand-receptor pair.
As a result, for smaller stretch magnitudes, below a threshold
value, when Tω > TR , since the probability of bond formation
increases with increasing contact time, hence, the adhesion

In summary, the theoretical model presented, by incorporating the catch-bond behaviour of focal adhesion assembly and
the time dependent binding rates under substrate stretching,
agrees well with several experimental observations. Apart
from capturing the force sensitive stability of focal adhesion
clusters under tensile stretch, this model in an unified framework, also unravels the puzzling observation of orientation
of FAs along the parallel direction in response to static and
quasi-static stretch, as well as the perpendicular orientation
under fast varying cyclic stretch. Moreover, it explains the
variation in alignment angles in different cell types and also
predicts the existence of threshold stretch as observed in experiments. As discussed, the competition between the time
scales involved in the process, namely, the time variation of
the substrate displacement and the intrinsic binding time of
the ligand-receptor pairs determines the stability of focal adhesions under time varying stretches. Importantly, it is shown
that the sole consideration of the stretch dependent association and dissociation processes of adhesion clusters could
successfully predict the orientational response of focal adhesions. Indeed, it has been shown in recent experiments that
the orientation specific activation of stretch sensitive proteins
in FAs play a crucial role in determining the orientation specific focal adhesions growth and disassembly7 . This is also to
note that the complex mechanisms of viscoelasticity of stress
fibers and actin-myosin contraction may affect the overall cellular mechanosensing processes43, 44 . Thus, adding these effects one would get an inclusive picture, however, it is outside the present theory. While this model correctly predicts
the major experimental features on the orientation of focal adhesions reported so far, the finer predictions could be further
tested by suitable experiments.

References
1. Iskratsch, T., Wolfenson, H. & Sheetz, M. P. Appreciating force and shape - the rise of mechanotransduction
in cell biology. Nature Rev. Mol Cell Biol. 12, 825-833
(2014).
2. Geiger, B., Spatz, J. P. & Bershadsky, A. D. Environmental sensing through focal adhesions. Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 10, 21-33 (2009).
3. Schwarz, U.S. & Safran, S. A. Physics of adherent cells.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 1327-1381 (2013).
6/8

4. Ladoux, B. & Nicolas, A. Physically based principles of
cell adhesion mechanosensitivity in tissues. Rep. Prog.
Phys. 72, 116601-116625 (2012).
5. De, R., Zemel, A. & Safran, S. A. Theoretical Concepts
and Models of Cellular Mechanosensing. Methods Cell
Biol. 98, 143-175 (2010).
6. Tamada, M., Sheetz, M. P. & Sawada, Y. Activation of a
Signalling Cascade by Cytoskeleton Stretch. Dev. Cell 7,
709-718 (2004).
7. Chen, Y., Pasapera, A. M., Koretsky, A. P. & Waterman,
C. M. Orientation-specific responses to sustained uniaxial stretching in focal adhesion growth and turnover.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, E2352-E2361 (2013).
8. Goldyn, A. M., Rioja, B. A., Spatz, J. P., Ballestrem,
C. & Kemkemer, R. Force-induced cell polarization is
linked to RhoA-driven microtubule-independent focaladhesion sliding. J. Cell Sci. 122, 3644-3651 (2009).

19. Jungbauer, S., Gao, H.J., Spatz, J. P. & Kemkemer, R.
Two characteristic regimes in frequency-dependent dynamic reorientation of fibroblasts on cyclically stretched
substrates. Biophys. J. 95, 3470-3478 (2008).
20. Wang, J. H.-C., Goldschmidt-Clermont, P., Wille, J. &
Yin, F. C. P. Specificity of endothelial cell reorientation in response to cyclic mechanical stretching. J. of
Biomech. 34, 1563–1572 (2001).
21. Hsu, H-J., Lee, C-F., & Kaunas, R. A dynamic stochastic model of frequencydependent stress fiber alignment
induced by cyclic stretch. PLoS ONE 4, e4853-e4860
(2009).
22. Bell, G. I. Models for the specific adhesion of cells to
cells. Science 200, 618-627 (1978).
23. Evans, E. & Ritchie, K. Dynamic Strength of Molecular
Adhesion Bonds. Biophys. J. 72, 1541-1555 (1997).

9. Carisey, A. et al.. Vinculin Regulates the Recruitment
and Release of Core Focal Adhesion Proteins in a ForceDependent Manner. Curr. Biol. 23, 271-281 (2013).

24. Evans, E. A. & Calderwood, D. A. Forces and Bond
Dynamics in Cell Adhesion. Science 316 1148-1153
(2007).

10. Greiner, A. M., Chen, H., Spatz, J. P. & Kemkemer, R.
Cyclic tensile strain controls cell shape and directs actin
stress fiber formation and focal adhesion alignment in
spreading cells. PLoS One 8, e77328-e77336 (2013).

25. Erdmann, T. & Schwarz, U. S. Stability of Adhesion
Clusters under Constant Force. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
108102-108105 (2004).

11. Huang, W., Sakamoto, N., Miyazawa, R. & Sato, M.
Role of paxillin in the early phase of orientation of the
vascular endothelial cells exposed to cyclic stretching.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 418, 708-713 (2012).
12. Yoshigi. M., Hoffman, L. M., Jensen, C., Yost, H. J.
& Beckerle, M. C. Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin
from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates
cytoskeletal reinforcement. J. Cell Biol. 171, 209-215
(2005).
13. Balaban, N. Q. et al.. Force and focal adhesion assembly:
a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned
substrates. Nature Cell Biol. 3, 466-472 (2001).
14. Marshall, B. T. et al.. Direct observation of catch bonds
involving cell-adhesion molecules. Nature 423, 190-193
(2003).
15. Thomas, W. E., Vogel, V. & Sokurenko, E. Biophysics of
Catch Bonds. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 37, 399-416 (2008).
16. C. Liu et al., Effect of Static Pre-stretch Induced Surface
Anisotropy on Orientation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells.
Cell Mol. Bioeng. 7, 106-121 (2014).

26. De, R., Zemel, A. & Safran, S. A. Dynamics of cell orientation. Nature Physics 3, 655-659 (2007).
27. De, R. & Safran, S. A. Dynamical theory of active cellular response to external stress. Phys. Rev. E 78, 031923031940 (2008).
28. De, R., Zemel, A. & Safran, S. A. Do cells sense stress or
strain? Measurement of cellular orientation can provide
a clue. Biophys J. 94, L29-L31 (2008).
29. Livne, A., Bouchbinder, E. & Geiger, B. Cell orientation under cyclic stretching. Nature Comm. 5, 3938-3945
(2014).
30. Wei, Z., Deshpande, V. S., McMeeking, R. M. & Evans,
A. G. Analysis and interpretation of stress fiber organization in cells subject to cyclic stretch. J. Biomech. Eng.
130, 031009-031017 (2008).
31. Qian, J., Liu, H., Lin, Y., Chen, W. & Gao, H. A
mechanochemical model of cell reorientation on substrates under cyclic stretch. PloS ONE 8, e65864-e65876
(2013).

17. Eastwood, M., Mudera, V. C., McGrouther, D. A. &
Brown, R. A. Effect of precise mechanical loading on
fibroblast populated collagen lattices: morphological
changes. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 40, 13-21 (1998).

32. Chen, B., Kemkemer, R., Deibler, M., Spatz, J. & Gao,
H. Cyclic Stretch Induces Cell Reorientation on Substrates by Destabilizing Catch Bonds in Focal Adhesions.
PloS ONE 7, e48346-e48356 (2012).

18. Collinsworth, A. M., et al. (2000) Orientation and length
of mammalian skeletal myocytes in response to a unidirectional stretch. Cell and Tissue Research 302, 243-251
(2000).

33. Zhong, Y., Kong, D., Dai, L. & Ji, B. Frequencydependent focal adhesion instability and cell reorientation under cyclic substrate stretching. Cell. Mol. Bioeng.
4, 442-456 (2011).
7/8

34. Kong, D., Ji, B. & Dai, L. Stability of adhesion clusters
and cell reorientation under lateral cyclic tension. Biophys. J. 95, 4034-4044 (2008).

Additional information

35. Dartsch, P. C. & Hammerle, H. Orientation response of
arterial smoothmuscle cells to mechanical stimulation.
Eur. J. Cell Biol. 41, 339-346 (1986).

Competing interests: The author declares no competing
interests.

36. Van Kampen, N. G. Stochastic Processes in Physics and
Chemistry. Elsevier (2011).

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper.

Data availability: The data supporting the findings of this
study are available within the paper and its supplementary
information file.

37. Kong, F., Garcı́a, A. J., Paul Mould, A., Humphries, M. J.
& Zhu, C. Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand. J Cell Biol. 185, 1275–1284 (2009)
38. Roca-Cusachs, P., Gauthier, N. C., Rio, A. & Sheetz,
M. P. Clustering of α 5β 1 integrins determines adhesion strength whereas α vβ 3 and talin enable mechanotransduction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 16245–16250
(2009).
39. Pereverzev, Y. V., Prezhdo, O. V., Forero, M., Sokurenko,
E. V. & Thomas, W. E. The two-pathway model for the
catch-slip transition in biological adhesion. Biophys. J.
89, 1446-–1454 (2005).
40. Robert, P., Limozin, L., Pierres, A. & Bongrand, P.
Biomolecule association rates do not provide a complete
description of bond formation. Biophys. J. 96, 46424650 (2009).
41. Robert, P., Nicolas, A., Aranda-Espinoza, S., Bongrand,
P. & Limozin, L. Minimal encounter time and separation
determine ligand-receptor binding in cell adhesion. Biophys. J. 100, 2642-2651 (2011).
42. Gillespie, D. T. Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions. J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340-2361
(1977).
43. Deguchi, S., Ohashi, T. & Sato, M. Tensile properties
of single stress fibers isolated from cultured vascular
smooth muscle cells. J. Biomech 39, 2603–2610 (2006).
44. Kumar, S. et al. Viscoelastic Retraction of Single Living
Stress Fibers and Its Impact on Cell Shape, Cytoskeletal
Organization, and Extracellular Matrix Mechanics. Biophys. J. 90, 3762–3773 (2006).

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Dr. Rangeet Bhattacharyya for insightful
discussions and also acknowledges the financial support from
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Grant No.
SR/FTP/PS-105/2013, Department of Science & Technology
(DST), India.

Author contributions
R.D. developed the model, carried out the entire work, and
wrote the manuscript.
8/8

