Science Quality and the Value of Inventions
Felix Poege a b

Dietmar Harhoff acd †
a

Stefano Baruffaldi a f

Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition, Munich
b
c
d

Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn

Ludwig Maximilian University (LMU), Munich

Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), London
e

arXiv:1903.05020v2 [econ.GN] 3 Apr 2019

Fabian Gaessler ae

Technical University of Munich, Munich
f

University of Bath, Bath

April 4, 2019

ABSTRACT
Despite decades of research, the relationship between the quality of science and the value of inventions has remained unclear. We present the result of a large-scale matching exercise between 4.8 million patent families and
43 million publication records. We find a strong positive relationship between quality of scientific contributions
referenced in patents and the value of the respective inventions. We rank patents by the quality of the science they
are linked to. Strikingly, high-rank patents are twice as valuable as low-rank patents, which in turn are about
as valuable as patents without direct science link. We show this core result for various science quality and patent
value measures. The effect of science quality on patent value remains relevant even when science is linked indirectly through other patents. Our findings imply that what is considered “excellent” within the science sector also
leads to outstanding outcomes in the technological or commercial realm. KEYWORDS: science, citations,

non-patent literature, patents, patent value, patent families.
JEL Classification: L20, O31, O33, O34

The authors are listed in reverse alphabetical order. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Max Planck Society
and the German Science Foundation (DFG, CRC TRR 190). We thank Wolfgang Knaus, Birgit Palzenberger and Frank
Sander for their support in matching WoS data to patent NPL references and Jian Wang for helpful comments on the
computation of citation metrics. Earlier results from this research were presented at the Web of Science Data Workshop at
EPFL and the 2018 Annual Conference of EPIP (European Policy for Intellectual Property). The Web of Science data are
available via Thomson Reuters. The patent data are available via the PATSTAT dataset provided by the European Patent
Office. Supplementary materials: attached below. Figs. S-F1 to S-F7. Tables S-T1 to S-T13.
†
Corresponding author: Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition, Marstallplatz 1, D-80539 Munich. Mail:
dietmar.harhoff@ip.mpg.de.

1

Introduction

The relationship between science and technology has been subject to intense discussions for centuries. Science was largely funded via patronage during the Renaissance, and a separation of public
funding for fundamental research and private, industrial funding for applied research and commercial innovation efforts only emerged in the 19th century (Scotchmer, 2004; Mokyr, 2002). Since
the aftermath of World War II, policy-makers have relied on the notion that science helps to generate knowledge and information which will ultimately contribute to the emergence of new technical
and organizational capabilities, improvements in the quality of life and economic growth (Bush,
1945). Vannevar Bush’s vision of a publicly funded science system that feeds into privately organized innovation channels became the blueprint for most of the Western national systems of science
funding, R&D and innovation. This notion has recently come under scrutiny again as voters increasingly demand evidence on the benefits of science spending. For policy-makers and scientists alike,
it is tantamount to improve the understanding of the impact of science on technical progress and
innovation.
The most pertinent form of output delivered by the science sector are publications, which are
known to vary widely in quality. While some scientific publications will reach and inspire large
numbers of researchers, others are never read or referenced. Measures of science quality, such
as citation counts or impact factors, are used to make this heterogeneity visible and have become
increasingly important in the governance of the science sector. Science governance and science
funding seek to promote excellent over more mediocre science output by allocating resources to
those researchers and institutions from which outstanding results can be expected.
But it has been argued that this logic does not take tangible results from technology transfer and
commercialization into account. Science is inward-looking according to these voices. This raises
the question to what extent science output that is considered “excellent” within the science sector
can lead to outstanding outcomes in the technological or commercial realm. This paper seeks to
contribute new insights toward the understanding of this nexus.
We provide evidence that the quality of scientific publications – as commonly assessed in science
via citations – is a strong predictor of their relevance for and impact on technology development
as documented in patents. We document two main results. First, publications with high scientific
quality are vastly more likely to be cited in patent documents, and cited at a higher rate. Second,
among patents directly building on science, the value of patents increases monotonically with science
quality. These results hold across scientific disciplines, technology areas and time.

2

Data

Our analysis starts from the universe of scientific publications in Web of Science (WoS) from the
year 1980 onwards, corresponding to approximately 43 million scientific publications. In terms
of patents, we consider a sample of more than 4.8 million patent families, comprising all patent
families from the database DOCDB with at least one grant publication at the European Patent Office
(EPO) or the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), with first filing date between
1

1985 and 2012, included. Subsequently, our unit of analysis is the patent family, to which we also
interchangeably refer as patents. The patents protect inventions in developed countries with in total
more than one billion inhabitants.
Patents reference various types of documents which relate to the protected material either by
determining novelty (prior art) or by explaining the content of the underlying invention. These
documents include foremost other patents, but frequently also non-patent literature (NPL). (Callaert
et al., 2006) A subset of the latter are references to scientific articles, which we dub Scientific NonPatent Literature (SNPL).
To link patents to publications, we leverage a highly precise and comprehensive match of NPL
references in patents with scientific publications in WoS.1 The NPL references in patents that were
successfully link to scientific publications comprise our set of SNPL references. Around 1 million
patents were linked to at least one scientific publication via a total of about 7.0 million SNPL references. Out of all scientific publications, about 2.2 million figure in this list of SNPL references.
In our core set of analyses, we rely on established measures of scientific quality and patent
value. The quality of scientific publications is measured by the number of citations from other
scientific publications over a period of three years from publication. We define a patent’s SNPL
science quality as the quality of the patent’s SNPL references. A patent can reference zero, one or
several scientific articles, in the same way as a scientific article can be referenced by zero, one or
many patents. Figure 1a illustrates this setup. When more than one SNPL reference is present, we
consider by default only the publication with the highest quality. Patent value is measured by the
number of forward patent citations over a period of five years from the patent’s first filing date. We
use citations by US patents as our first measure of patent value. Our results are robust to alternative
choices. We replace citations as science quality measure by the journal impact factor. We replace
our aggregation method of the quality of multiple SNPL references with several other options. We
replace US patent citations as value measure by a host of alternatives.

3

2

Results

As a first-order question, we explore the selection of scientific publications into the patent realm, i.e.,
the relationship between science quality and the likelihood that a scientific publication is referenced
in a patent (Hicks et al., 2000). We look at the probability and intensity of referencing, i.e., if
any and how many patented inventions refer to a given scientific contribution. We present results
for publications below the median (all receiving 0 science citations), for publications between the
median and the 70th percentile, and at the percentiles 80, 90, 95, 99 (top 1 percent), 99.9 (top 1
permille), and 99.99 (top permyriad) of scientific quality. Figure 1b presents these results; the line
plots the share of scientific publications appearing as SNPL reference in at least one patent, and the
size of the circles indicates the average number of times they appear as SNPL references.
1
The match is based on a methodology documented in detail in Knaus and Palzenberger (2018) and summarized in
the supplementary material.
2
The supplementary material provides further detailed information on data sources, discusses the use of citations as
indicators of relatedness between technology and science and elaborates on alternative measures of patent value as well
as scientific quality that we use for robustness analyses.

2

We find a remarkably strong positive selection of scientific publications of high scientific quality
into SNPL references. Below the median, scientific publications are almost never SNPL references.
This number increases up to 40% at the top 1% of publications by scientific quality. A staggering
majority of publications at the top 1 permille (>60%) and beyond the top 1 permyriad (80%) are
referenced in patents. The average number of times they appear as SNPL references in distinct
patent families is 7.7 and 21.9, respectively. We emphasize that these results are not due to a
feedback from important patents to citations of the underlying science. By restricting our measure
for scientific citations to the first three years after publication, we have effectively excluded this bias.
Science - Papers

Technology - Patents

SNPL references:
Patent-to-Paper
Patent Citations:
Patent-to-Patent

Science Citations:
Paper-to-Paper

Value proxies:
Patent Citations, $/€ Estimates, Claim Length

Quality proxies:
Science Citations, Impact Factor

(a) Setting: The domains of science (left), technology (right) and patent-paper references
12
Probability of SNPL citation
Number of SNPL citations
.8

21.90

Patent Value (Citations)

Probability: Article referenced by patent

1

7.66

.6

2.27

.4

0.75

.2

8

Patents without SNPL references

4

0.38
0.04

0
<50%

0.10

>50%

0.15

>70%

SNPL Science Quality - Maximum (Default)
SNPL Science Quality - Average

0.23

>80%

>90%

>95%

>99%

0

>99.9% >99.99%

Science Quality

Low Quality

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

(b) SNPL references by science quality

(c) Patent value by SNPL science quality

Figure 1: Setting and main results
Notes: Science quality is the 3-year citation count from other scientific publications. b) The patent count is not conditional
on appearing as a SNPL reference. Blue shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals around the mean. N = 42,962,463.
c) SNPL science quality is the quality of publications referenced by a patent. When there are multiple patent-paper
references, we by default use the highest-quality reference (orange). In comparison, we use the average quality (blue).
Patent value is measured as the 5 year count of patent forward citations by US patents. Patent value and science quality
are residualized using technology field × first filing year FEs. Shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals around the
respective means. N = 4,767,844 patents (952,932 with SNPL references).

We move on to our main analysis and investigate the extent to which SNPL science quality is

3

a predictor of patent value. The main figures account for level differences across technology fields
and over time. We estimate econometric models that absorb variation across these dimensions with
pair-level fixed-effect (FE) controls and graphically present the resulting residual values. In effect,
we transform deviations from the technology field and year specific mean to deviations from the
overall mean. This ensures that structural differences across technological fields and over time do
not drive the results. The relationships discussed are backed up by econometric models that allow
quantifying their average magnitude, assessing their statistical significance, and controlling for a
full set of confounding factors.
The relationship between SNPL science quality and patent value is depicted in figure 1c. We plot
the average patent value across the distribution of SNPL science quality. As a first measure of patent
value we use the number of patent citations from US patents. We later on consider alternatives.
As a benchmark level, the figure shows the average value of patents without any SNPL reference
(dashed line). We contrast two possible aggregation methods of SNPL science quality. When a
patent references multiple scientific articles, we in a first variant use highest-quality reference as
our measure (orange). Here, we juxtapose a second variant, where we consider the average quality
of all references. Clearly, top science matters much more, considering scientific material beyond the
best one dilutes the science quality-technology value relationship. In the supplementary material,
we show that this extends to using other aggregation methods which focus on the top of the quality
distribution. Consequently, we continue by only considering the highest-quality SNPL reference.
Previous studies have encountered a higher value of patents with SNPL references or references
to other technical literature, in limited samples or specific fields (Branstetter, 2005; Harhoff et al.,
2003). We are able to confirm this finding, on a large scale, in our data: the value of patents with
SNPL references is higher, or equal than the value of patents without SNPL references, for any level
of SNPL science quality except the very bottom.
Notably, SNPL science quality fully explains the difference in value between patents with and
without SNPL references. Patent value increases rapidly, and almost monotonically, for a higher
level of SNPL science quality. Patents with SNPL references at the bottom of the SNPL science
quality distribution are on average as valuable as patents without SNPL references. Compared to
this group, patents at the top of the SNPL science quality distribution receive more than twice as
many forward patent citations. This core result suggests that scientific activities of high quality lead
to the development of highly valuable technologies.
Possibly, high quality research and technology development are undertaken by the same individuals or organizations, which may drive the result. Companies, startups, inventors and academic
scientists can perform scientific activities that may lead directly to both scientific and technological
outcomes (Gittelman and Kogut, 2003). Therefore, we complement this finding exploring how our
results vary considering separately SNPL self-references. Figure 2a describes the corresponding results. The line in orange indicates the patent value of patents with SNPL self-references. The line
in blue describes the value of patents excluding SNPL self-references. The latter presents close to
identical results to those obtained in figure 1c. Note that part of the SNPL science quality distribution, with the exception of the very top, patent value is higher if patents with SNPL self-references

4

are excluded. In fact, the share of SNPL self-references is roughly similar and, if anything, tends to
decrease for higher levels of SNPL science quality. Overall this is supportive of the idea that highquality science is linked to high-value technology also, and especially, beyond the organizational
boundaries within which it is developed.
12

Patent Value (Citations)

Patent Value (Citations)

12

8

Patents without SNPL references

4

8

Patents without SNPL references

4
Short time lag
Medium time lag
Long time lag

Patents without SNPL self-references
Patents with SNPL self-references
0

Low Quality

0

High Quality

Low Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

(a) SNPL self-references

(c) Patent value by SNPL science quality and time

10
Top 10% Patents by SNPL Quality
All Patents
Bottom 10% Patents by SNPL Quality

Patent Value (Citations)

8

6

4

2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Shortest distance to the science-technology frontier

(b) Patent value by distance to the scientific frontier and SNPL science quality

Figure 2: Additional results
Notes: SNPL science quality is the maximum 3 year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patent value is measured as the 5 year count of patent forward citations by US patents. Patent value
and science quality are residualized using technology field × first filing year FEs. Shaded areas show 95% confidence
intervals around the respective means.
a) SNPL self-references of the highest-quality SNPL reference are considered. N = 4,767,844 patents (952,932 with SNPL
references).
b) The distance to the science frontier (x-axis) is measured as the shortest path to a patent with SNPL references in the
patent references network. For patents not at the science frontier, SNPL science quality is the maximum SNPL science
quality in patents at the frontier to which they are linked. N = 3,816,176
c) Time-distance is measured as the lag between the first filing year of the patent and the publication year of the scientific publication in SNPL references with the the highest science quality. N = 4,767,844 patents (952,932 with SNPL
references).

5

Our analysis so far has focused on patents at the frontier with science, i.e., linked directly to a
scientific publication via an SNPL reference. To generalize our findings, we also consider patents
connected to scientific publications indirectly via references to other patents. Patents for which the
shortest path in the citation network is longer are said to be more distant from the science-technology
frontier. Recent studies have used this concept of distance between science and technology, and
demonstrate that the value of patents monotonically decreases for higher distances to the science
frontier (Ahmadpoor and Jones, 2017). In Figure 2b we consider this dimension and describe the
value of patents at different levels of distance from the science-technology frontier. We distinguish
patents linked (directly or indirectly) to SNPL references at the top 10% and bottom 10% of quality.
We also report the average value of all patents, at different distances. Patents linked to more than
one patent with SNPL references at the same distance are assigned to the patent with the highestquality SNPL reference.
We find that the correlation between patent value and SNPL science quality largely propagates
to patents at higher distances from the science-technology frontier. The increase in patent value
for a change from the average patent to patents at the top 10% (patents citing other patents with
SNPL references to scientific publications of high quality) is approximately equal to the increase
in patent value for a step closer to the frontier. For instance, patents at one step of distance from
the top 10% have the same value than the average patent at the frontier with science. Patents at
any distance from the top 10% always have higher values than patents at the bottom 10%. The
difference persists also at a high distance from the frontier, approximately constant and equal to
about a 3 times higher value. Regression results in the supplementary material confirm that the
positive correlation between SNPL science quality and patent value starts fading only after a degree
of distance higher than 6. We can conclude that science of high quality spurs technological progress
of high value far beyond the science-technology frontier.
In figure 2c we also consider time as a related dimension to distance from science. Time is
measured as the lag between the first filing year of a patent family and the publication year of the
highest-quality SNPL reference. We study how patent value varies along the SNPL science quality
distribution and for different levels of time lag. Interestingly, shorter time lags are always associated
with higher patent value. The correlation with SNPL science quality remains strongly positive for
all levels of time-distance, but is stronger for patents with short time-distance. As a consequence,
at high levels of SNPL science quality, patent value is high, on average, but increases also sharply
for shorter time lags. Conversely, at low levels of SNPL science quality the marginal effect of timedistance is small.
So far, we have measured patent value with US forward patent citations. However, the results are
robust across a broad set of alternative measures of patent value. First, we consider the count of citations from the EPO. Second, we adopt two indicators of monetary value, available for a subsample
of patents. We use estimates from Kogan et al. (Kogan et al., 2017), who propose a measure based
on abnormal stock market returns at the patent’s grant event as a proxy for its private value. We
further obtain inventor survey-based value estimates of patented inventions from the PatVal survey
(Giuri et al., 2007). These two measures are only available for a limited sample of patents of about

6

899k and 11k, respectively. Third, we measure patent scope by the length of the text of the first independent claim. This relies on evidence showing that longer descriptions of the claimed invention
implies more narrow legal protection and, therefore, a lower patent value (Kuhn and Thompson,
2019). We consider separately, and when available, the length of the first independent claim in the
patent grant publication at the USPTO or the EPO. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics based on the
average of all these alternative patent value indicators for patents without SNPL references, and for
patents in the top 10% and bottom 10% of SNPL science quality. We replicate regression results for
all these alternative measures of patent value in the supplementary material.
Table 1: SNPL science quality and alternative measures of patent value
No SNPL

Bottom 10%

Top 10%

US citations
Mean
Standard Error
N

5.122

4.906

10.107

(0.004)

(0.022)

(0.057)

3,466,695

84,839

85,262

EP citations
Mean

0.947

0.746

2.068

(0.001)

(0.012)

(0.016)

3,466,695

84,839

85,262

13.322

12.411

16.796

Standard Error

(0.044)

(0.622)

(0.475)

N

699,752

8,899

13,665

Standard Error
N

Kogan et al. (2017) (USD)
Mean

PatVal (EUR)
Mean

11.859

8.401

23.923

Standard Error

(0.449)

(3.209)

(4.891)

8,482

351

232

Mean

185.547

179.163

177.672

Standard Error

(0.082)

(0.455)

(0.491)

1,952,410

66,313

70,738

143.926

140.834

128.968

(0.084)

(0.333)

(0.454)

1,157,166

42,849

30,109

N

US claim length

N

EP claim length
Mean
Standard Error
N

Notes: The table presents descriptive statistics for all considered measures of patent value. It reports average values for
patents without SNPL references, with SNPL references in the bottom 10% and in the top 10% of science quality. Patent
value and science quality are residualized using technology field × year FEs. Elasticities from corresponding regression
analysis are available in the supplementary material.

7

4

Conclusions

The quality of scientific contributions is often measured in terms of their impact within the scientific
community. Yet, scientists also need to gauge and acknowledge of their contributions for society and
future technical and social advancements. The fact that science quality is practically defined within
the realm of science itself, contributes to a perception of science as being an independent upstream
activity, at times detached from technological progress, with an indirect and delayed impact on
society at best.
To the contrary, our study suggests that such an interpretation of the relationship between science
quality and technology would largely be a misconception. We show that excellent science is directly
linked to inventions of particularly high value. More specifically, our findings demonstrate that
there is a robust and strong relationship between the scientific quality of a publication referenced
in a patent and the patent’s impact and commercial value.
Our results are descriptive, and the exact causes of the strong correlation will have to be analyzed
in future work. At this point, it seems most reasonable to presume that industrial users of scientific
insights scan the science sector for novel results and employ the ones that are most promising for
applications in their industrial fields. We doubt that they do so merely on the basis of science
citation counts or impact measures. Rather, we expect that they apply their own complex logic and
assessments, and that they may even avoid using the classical metrics of the science sector altogether.
Commercial investments are unlikely to be made on the premise the citation-measured interest in the
scientific community was sufficiently high. Hence, the high correlation between quality measures
used in the science sector and those used in the commercial (patent) realm are fortuitous. They are
highly unlikely to reflect a spurious selection result.
Leaving aside the exact causal links, our results provide intriguing evidence for the governance
system of science, e.g. at universities and public research organizations, as well as for funding agencies and science policy-makers. The current system steers researchers to strive for success measured
in terms of citations and impact. According to our findings, the outcomes of such a system are wellaligned with later stages of technology development and translation of science results. Our study
does not provide evidence on the optimality of the alignment. However, it clearly contradicts the notion that the application of scientific criteria in science funding decisions would lead researchers to
engage in exercises that are of little value to society at large. Quite to the contrary, science quality (as
measured by scientists) is a strong predictor of applicability and practical value of the technologies
developed as the fruits of scientific endeavor. Paradoxically, when making commercial investment
decisions, taking academic measures such as citation counts or impact factors into account may not
be a bad idea.

8

Supplementary material for:
Science Quality and the Value of Inventions

This document includes:
• Sections S-1 to S-4
– Data
– Methods (incl. literature review)
– Regression analyses
– Supplementary graphs and tables
• Figs S-F1 to S-F7
• Tables S-T1 to S-T13
• References

S-1

Data

In the following we briefly introduce the scientific literature and patent data. Table S-T1 provides
details on the structure of the merged dataset. Figure S-F2 shows descriptive statistics over time on
the samples of patents and SNPL references.
Scientific literature data
Scientific literature data comes from 43 million scientific publications, corresponding to all research
articles indexed in the Thomson Reuters Web of Science (WoS) database that were published between 1980 and 2016. WoS is the largest bibliographic database of scientific literature and provides
all main information for each scientific publication, including authors, affiliations, research field and
citations.3
Patent data
The main source of patent data in our study is the database DOCDB, a database maintained and
updated on a weekly basis by the European Patent Office (EPO).4 It includes records from more than
90 patent offices. We base our study on a sample of more than 4.8 million patent families in DOCDB,
comprising all patent families with at least one grant publication at the European Patent Office (EPO)
or the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), with first filing date between 1985
and 2012, included. We include references generated during the search and examination phase of
patents filed at the EPO, USPTO or the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Note that
at the WIPO, there is no grant procedure and WIPO examinations are typically conducted by the
EPO.
DOCDB contains all information digitally available on these patents. An advantage with respect
to non-patent literature (NPL) citations data, as compared to other databases, is the availability
of enriched xml text comprising separate fields for title, authors, year, journals title, pages, volume
and number. This allows matching this information separately with bibliographic scientific literature
information, substantially improving the quality of the match (see section S-2.1).
Whenever we refer to technology field, we use the classification of IPC patent codes in the 34
technology fields provided by WIPO.5
Data transformation
Whenever we use logarithmic transformations on variables with natural zero values (e.g. citation
counts), we use a log(x + 1) transformation. When unifying patent attributes at the patent family
level, several decisions have to be taken. For technology fields, we use the modal technology field
of member patents. In case of ties, we use the numerically lowest field. When no field classification
3

More extensive information on the WoS is available at www.webofknowledge.com.
More extensive information on DOCDB is available at www.epo.org/searching-for-patents/data/bulk-datasets/docdb
5
WIPO Classification: https://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/classifications/en/ipc_ce_41/ipc_ce_41_5-annex1.pdf
4

12

Table S-T1: Structure of the dataset
Scientific publications (1980-2012)

Scientific publications
Scientific publications in SNPL references
Scientific publications in SNPL references
(within five years)

Total

42,962,463
2,248,563
1,627,872

Patent families (1985-2012)
Patent family - SNPL reference combinations
Unique SNPL references
Patent families

Total

Excluding
social/humanities
35,874,824
2,203,035
1,597,426
EPO

Excluding
self-references

2,079,713
1,465,312
USPTO

6,962,239
2,229,658
4,767,844

1,009,481
575,637
1,960,772

6,177,977
2,017,694
4,442,742

952,932

490,848

921,929

Patent families with SNPL references

Notes: Observation counts in the dataset. Discrepancies originate from the different views on the data. The first part of
the table also considers SNPL citations from the 1980-1984 range, whereas the second part does not.

is available, we drop the patent family. When multiple patent value estimates from Kogan et al.
(2017) or PatVal (Giuri et al., 2007) are available, we use the highest one. Some variables with
extreme values are winsorized. Backward reference counts, the number of times a patent references
to other patents, are winsorized at the 95th percentile. The same is applied for the number of
inventors and SNPL references. Lengths of the first independent claim are winsorized at the 1st and
99th percentile. When assigning scientific fields to scientific publications, in case of multiple fields,
we retain the scientific field whose codes are first in the alphabet. We restrict our sample to SNPL
citations where the publication year of the scientific article was at or before the first filing year of
the patent family.

S-2
S-2.1

Methods
Linking Scientific and Patent Literature Data

“Science” usually refers to the creation and organization of knowledge, often in the form of testable
hypotheses and predictions regarding natural phenomena. In a stark simplification, academic scientists (who are mostly employed in the public sector) live in a world governed by the quest for
making pioneering contributions to knowledge, hence striving for novelty of insight and for a better
understanding of fundamental issues (Merton, 1968, 1973). According to this view, scientists also
follow norms of disclosing newly generated knowledge and information in scientific publications.
The societal or private benefit from applications is considered less important, but also hard to assess
directly. In principle, the science could thus be decoupled from the economic pursuit of wealth and
monetary gain.
Conversely, “technology” refers to the realm of the artificial and to artifacts which may have, or
may have not, been constructed with the help of scientific insights. Technology is defined in the

13

OECD Frascati Manual as the collection of techniques, skills, methods, and processes used when
producing goods and services. Applications of new insights are largely brought about by engineers
(Allen, 1977). Engineers (who mostly work in the private sector) are governed by rules and incentives that are very different from those guiding the behavior of scientists. They seek to contribute
new technologies, use secrecy to protect the market positions of their employers and are involved in
strategic considerations of market rivalry. Engineers thus turn knowledge into marketable products
which then generate monetary returns for owners. This by now classical view of the relationship
between science and technology is described, inter alia, by Allen (1977) and Brooks (1994).
Initially understood as two distinct and independent realms, science is now viewed to directly
facilitate the application of new knowledge (Stokes, 2011), and that science and technology may
follow a process of co-evolution (Murray, 2002). Science has also been described as a kind of map
used in the process of devising new technologies (Fleming and Sorenson, 2004). This new view
acknowledges that the realms of science and commercial technology development overlap and that
their relationship is not necessarily a linear one. While universities mostly generate knowledge, they
also file patent applications and license intellectual property. And corporate entities mostly seek to
commercialize new products and services, but also engage in basic research not immediately tied to
product development and in publication of research results.
SNPL references as a measure of knowledge input
We use non-patent literature references to scientific publications (SNPL) as an indicator of relatedness of a technology, as described in a patent, to scientific contributions, as reported in scientific
publications. Numerous studies have proposed patent citations as an indicator of knowledge flows
(Jaffe, 1986, 1989). While some authors have raised concerns on the validity of this approach for
general patent citations (Thompson and Fox-Kean, 2005; Alcacer and Gittelman, 2006), SNPL references have been consistently found to be more related to actual knowledge flows than other types of
references (Roach and Cohen, 2013). In the context of our study, it is not necessary to interpret SNPL
references as a direct indicator of knowledge flows: we assume more broadly that a cited scientific
paper contains relevant information for the understanding and the development of a technology.
SNPL matching methodology
The dataset we adopt to link patents to cited scientific publications is a full match of DOCDB patent
data with bibliographic information included in WoS. The matching process is documented in detail
in Knaus and Palzenberger (2018). Here we present a brief overview.
The matching consists of three steps, target selection, search and quality control. In the target
selection step, cleaning steps are undertaken to exclude NPL strings which are no scientific articles
or are outside of the available WoS data. For the remaining entries, a search engine was employed to
look up NPL full-text strings in a full-text index of the complete WoS or Scopus content. The search
engine returns a ranked list of match candidates. During the quality control stage, the topmost
candidate is examined and the match quality is judged according to a field-based scoring. Only
high-quality matches are considered valid matches for the final dataset.
14

The matching procedure is applied on a first set of roughly 37 million NPL references. 27 million
(71.8%) entries were selected as a potential target and linked to WoS entries. However, not all of
these constitute a valid match after taking the quality of the match into account. The quality of a
match is judged by six quality indicators (year, volume, page(s), first author, journal title, article
title). Each of these indicators equals one if the information from the matched scientific article can
be found in the non-patent literature citation string. The quality score is the sum of the indicators
and ranges from zero to six.
To validate the matching quality, random subsamples of 1,000 NPL references each were drawn.
An NPL string is considered a valid target if it could be found in the WoS using a manual search.
Figure S-F1 plots precision and recall, where precision is computed as the share of correct matches
out of all matches delivered by the algorithm. Recall is the share of all targets which could be
recovered successfully. The graph reveals that when accepting a quality score of three and higher as
high-quality matches, precision scores of 0.99 and recall scores of 0.96 (EPO) and 0.92 (USPTO)
can be achieved.6 Table S-T2 shows the final quality achieved.
We, therefore, restricted the sample to matches of quality equal to or higher than three. Out of
the 27 million references retained as valid targets, 13 million (47.1%) satisfied this quality requirement. Our units of analysis are DOCDB patent families which typically include multiple references.
While the precision and recall scores are high, they only refer to what could have been matched
– the content of the Web of Science. Clearly, not all scientific publications that can be referenced in
patents are covered in this database. We assess the extent of this issue and consider the subset of NPL
references which could not be matched to WoS. We attempt a match to an alternative publication
database, Scopus, which has a larger coverage. This exercise generates 113,340 additional SNPL
links to 49,254 Scopus items for publication years 1996-2016. Given that this is less than 2% of the
total, for simplicity, we disregard these links in our analysis.
Our final sample contains 952,932 DOCDB patent families with at least one grant publication
and at least one matched SNPL reference at any of the patent offices considered here.
This compares well with previous datasets, and in general, constitute a larger number of observations than previously identified in existing studies. Ahmadpoor and Jones (2017) use patent data
exclusively at the USPTO between 1976 and 2015 where 759,000 patents were found to be directly
linked to at least one scientific publication in WoS via an NPL reference. Jefferson et al. (2018) starts
with 11.8 million scientific publications published between 1980 and 2015, of which roughly 1.2
million are cited in 690,000 patent families (1.1 million patents). Marx and Fuegi (2019) link US
patents from 1926-2018 to scientific papers from 1800-2018, identifying approximately 15.7 million
citation links between 1.4 million patents to 2.9 million papers. In comparison, our dataset links
952,932 patent families from 1985-2017 to 2,229,658 distinct scientific articles in the time range of
1980-2016.

6

With a quality cutoff at four, the precision increases even further, but recall suffers to a greater extent so that the
quality cutoff at three is preferred when putting equal weight on precision and recall.

15

Table S-T2: Match quality
Office

Precision

Recall

EPO

0.99

0.96

USPTO

0.99

0.92

WIPO

0.99

0.97

Notes: Based on a manual validation exercise of 1000 NPL references per office, as reported in Knaus and Palzenberger
(2018). Precision is the share of NPL reference matches that was correct. Recall is, when considering all NPL references
that could have been matched, the share that were matched correctly.

SNPL self-references
We single out SNPL references to scientific publications where at least one author also figures among
the inventors of the patent and where one affiliation of the SNPL references overlap with the list of
applicants in the patent. We refer to these categories as SNPL inventor self-references and applicant
self-references, respectively. This type of SNPL references reveals links between patents and scientific
publications originating from either the same organization or from the same individuals, or both.
The first analyses rely on the full sample of SNPL references. We present results separately for these
categories and excluding them in a later stage.
We consider SNPL inventor self-references those that refer to scientific publications where at
least one author has the same name of an inventor on the patent. We consider as SNPL applicant
self-references those that refer to scientific publications where at least one affiliation overlaps with
the list of applicants in the patent. To match applicants with affiliations we use a list of manually
disambiguated organizations (academic institutions and firms) derived from the combination of
multiple sources: the Global Research Identifier Database (GRID), the ORBIS database and the
EU Scoreboards database. We merge separately applicants in patents and affiliations in scientific
publications to these lists using a probabilistic matching algorithm based on training data.
We consider an applicant and an affiliation to be the same when they match to the same entity
in the list. Note that the two categories of self-references may overlap.7
Related literature on SNPL references
We briefly summarize the literature that has so far discussed the characteristics of SNPL references
and their relationship with patent value.
Hicks et al. (2000) look at all scientific articles published between 1993 and 1995 in journals
indexed in the Science Citation Index (SCI) with at least one US author. They find that about 6,600
of these publications were cited in 1997 US-invented patents. The probability of a publication being
cited as SNPL depends not only on the publication’s research field, but also on its scientific impact. If
a publication belongs to the top 1% most highly cited publications, it is about nine times more likely
to be cited by a US patent than a randomly chosen US publication. In similar vein, Popp (2017) finds
7

Figure S-F5a presents related descriptive statistics.

16

in green energy technology fields that scientific articles that are cited frequently by other articles are
also more likely to be cited by patents.
Breschi and Catalini (2010) analyze all patent applications to the European Patent Office (EPO)
registered in the period 1990 to 2003 within three technology fields (lasers, semiconductors and
biotechnology) and find about 44,000 patents with altogether 18,000 SNPL references. SNPL references are more frequent in biotech and lasers than in semiconductors, presumably due to the larger
distance between the semiconductor technology field and science.
Harhoff et al. (2003) are among the first to analyze the relationship between the value of such
patents and the scientific impact of the underlying scientific contributions. They document a positive
relationship between patent value and the number of NPL references. The relationship is particularly
strong in the technical area of chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Several other authors have explored
the role of NPL references as potential determinants of patent value. Branstetter (2005) use a random sample of 30,000 US patents from 1983-86, of which about 4,300 include SNPL. Those patents
that cite scientific articles are of significantly higher quality (more claims and forward-citations)
than those that do not. Sorenson and Fleming (2004) link about 17,300 patents from 1990 with
about 16,700 non-patent references. Here, patents that cite non-patent literature receive more citations and are cited more quickly than other patent. They argue this positive relationship between
forward-citations and science intensity of a given patent is due to knowledge diffusion through the
academic publication. Gittelman and Kogut (2003) explicitly ask “Does good science lead to valuable knowledge?" in biotechnology. They suggest that “(. . . ) the evolutionary logics that select
valuable scientific publications and valuable patents are different, and because of this, influential
publications are not more likely to lead to influential patents than other publications." They employ
data on the patent and publication portfolios of 116 biotechnology firms and obtain results that
largely confirm their hypothesis.
Suzuki (2011) argues that patented inventions may be assessed with regard to their monetary
or their technical quality. The presence of references to the scientific publications has a strong
positive effect on the technological value, but a weak negative effect on the commercial value of
the patent. The author also points to considerable heterogeneity across technological fields. Fischer
and Leidinger (2014) use data from Ocean Tomo auctions between 2006 and 2009 to approximate
auction prices as a function of observable value correlates. They find only weak and imprecisely
estimated effects for the number of NPL references. As they point out, patents traded at Ocean Tomo
auctions are not representative and mostly in the IT and IT-related technical fields. Zahringer et al.
(2017) construct a sample of young life science firms and find that higher-quality academic science
is associated with patent citations. This relationship is moderated by the respective firm’s research
activities. Veugelers and Wang (2019) use all Web of Science journal articles published in 2001 and
all patents from PATSTAT (version 2013b). They find that only about 10% of articles become SNPL.
Novel publications are more likely to receive future citations by patents, particularly the 1% highly
novel scientific publications. They further find that publications receiving more scientific citations
also receive more patent citations.

17

Sapsalis et al. (2006) use data on 155 patent families with application dates between 1985 and
1999 at the EPO to model the relationship between citations received by patents and characteristics
of the underlying science. They find that NPL self-references (i.e. the inventors are also authors
on the referenced scientific publication) to the scientific literature are associated with an increase
in forward-citations of a patent. The authors argue that in such cases of highly valuable patents,
“the inventors master (and contribute to) the related science-base (as witnessed by their own publications) and decide to codify their tacit knowledge into technological inventions" (Sapsalis et al.,
2006, p. 1640).
In the perspective followed by Fleming and Sorenson (2004), invention is interpreted as a process of search for new and useful configurations of technological components. Science serves as a
map, pointing inventors to particularly useful configurations of components. Alternatively, science
allows inventors to avoid search over less productive solutions. However, these effects are not pertinent across all technologies. Recourse to science may offer little help when inventors work with
highly independent components, but should generate high returns when the underlying inventive
problem is particularly difficult. Using the population of patents granted by the USPTO in May
and June of 1990 (n=16,822 after exclusion of 442 patents without any references), they find that
only 2,919 of these patents reference scientific publications. In the empirical analysis, the authors
show that references to scientific publications increase forward-citations received by patents with
an elasticity of about 10%.
While the results of the studies discussed here are intriguing, they are typically obtained from
relatively small samples which are particularly well-suited for the respective studies. An exception
is the recent study by Ahmadpoor and Jones (2017), who analyze the network of US patents citing
directly or indirectly SNPL references. They hereby introduce the distance to the science frontier as
a metric for science-technology intensity. Watzinger and Schnitzer (2018) borrow this metric and
provide correlations between the science-technology intensity and the value of patents. Mukherjee
et al. (2017) emphasize the importance of the age structure of references. The authors study (separately) scientific publications in the WoS database and patents, but they do not link NPL references
to WoS entries. Both for publications and for patents they detect a “hot spot" defined by the age
structure (of backward references) that is correlated with an increase in citations received by the
publication or patent.

S-2.2

Measures of Science Quality

Scientific citations
Our main variable of interest is the scientific quality of publications cited in patents. We use measures of science quality based on the count of forward-citations to publications. This is an established
bibliometric indicator of scientific quality. The use of citations is based on the notion that scientists
cite publications they consider influential for their own research. Accordingly, it is possible to assume that highly cited publications have a greater impact on follow-on research and represent a
meaningful measure of their scientific quality.
For a given publication, we count the number of citations in a window of three years from
18

publication. This raises the issue that some of these citations may happen later than the filing
date of the citing patent. In this case, the number of citations received by a publication may be not
independent of the patent itself. In our main specifications, we assume for simplicity that the number
of citations to the publication remains indeed independent to the patent citation. In robustness
analyses, we verified that the core results remain equivalent when excluding patent citations to
publications published in the three years before the filing of the patent.
Journal impact factor
An alternative measure of science quality is the impact factor of the journal in which the respective
publication is published (JIF). In any given year, the impact factor of a journal is the number of
citations, received in that year, of articles published in that journal during the two preceding years,
divided by the total number of articles published in that journal during the two preceding years. We
use JIF indicators available by the inCite Journal Citations Report. A disadvantage of this measure is
that, due to the lack of completeness of the necessary information, the data are available only after
1997. Moreover, the JIF constitutes a retrospective measure of quality of the journal that ignores
the possible high variance of publications quality within one same journal and over time. On the
other hand, the JIF has the advantage of being predetermined at the time a publication is published,
so that it is not subject to concerns about truncation and mechanical correlation with the measure
of patent value.8
Patent level aggregation of SNPL references
In our sample, for patents with SNPL, there are on average 7.4 SNPL references per patent, and a
considerable share of 64.2% has references to more than one distinct scientific publication. In our
main analyses, we define SNPL science quality as the maximum science quality across publications
in SNPL references in a patent. This is based on the notion that the distribution of scientific forwardcitations is highly skewed. Consequently, the scientific impact of the most highly cited publication,
or the journal with the highest JIF, may be more indicative of SNPL overall science quality than
the average across publications. For robustness, we also estimate alternative aggregation operators.
This is further discussed in section S-2.2.9
We apply a coherent criterion to aggregate at the patent level the information regarding the presence of self-references: we consider a patent as having a self-reference if the scientific publication
with the highest scientific quality among the SNPL references is a self-reference.

8

We use the JIF as variable of interest in table S-T6 to show robustness of our results to alternative measures of science
quality.
9
Table S-T7 shows the corresponding results.

19

S-2.3

Measures of Patent Value

Patent citations
Our main dependent variable is patent value. In our main specification, we proxy patent value with
the number of forward-citations received by the patent. The number of citations is an established,
and perhaps the most widely used, measure of patent value, which is highly correlated with other
indicators of technological and economic value of patents (Harhoff et al., 2003; Fischer and Leidinger, 2014; Moser et al., 2018). Patent citations differ substantially from citations in scientific
literature. Scientific citations constitute recognition of scientists of the relevance of previous contributions for their own work. In contrast, patent citations, particularly to other patents, perform the
legal function of documenting the technological relatedness of a patent to existing prior art with the
scope of assessing its novelty and patentability (Michel and Bettels, 2001; Roach and Cohen, 2013).
Due to different legal requirements, citations at the EPO and the USPTO differ substantially.
EPO patents tend to cite patents that are essential to document the novelty (or lack of novelty) and
patentability of the invention; the applicants, in particular, are not required to provide any citation10 .
Applicants at USPTO are expected to report the most extensive list of citations to all possibly relevant
patents and examiner complement this list. For this reason we provide analysis where we count EPO
and USPTO citations separately. In our main specifications we use USPTO citations.
We construct the count of citations to a patent from the USPTO over a period of 5 years from the
first filing date.11 In robustness analyses, we use the count of citations from the EPO within 5 years
from the first filing date. In case of the EPO citation measure, only examiner-supplied citations are
considered.
Patent scope
As alternative proxy for patent value, we adopt a measure of the patent’s scope. The value of a patent
is considered proportional to the scope of its protection on a particular technology. The narrower
the scope of protection, the lower is its value. The text of patent claims tends to be longer for highly
specific and narrow patent protection. In other words, longer descriptions of a claimed invention
are associated with more specific features that are actually object of the patent protection (Kuhn
and Thompson, 2019). Our measure is defined as the logarithm of the number of words in the first
independent claim in patents.12

10
Indeed, EPO patents are often filed with no initial references, and, when present, the introduction of references by
the applicant is arguably more strategic than in other jurisdictions.
11
The choice of the time window for the count of scientific and patent citations is motivated primarily by pragmatic
considerations: we want to ensure a sufficient period so that the number of citations actually reflects the underlying
constructs we are interested in, but we want to limit truncation. The difference between the window considered for
scientific publications and for patents is also motivated by the fact that patent applications are not instantly published
after filing and – as a result – typically receive few citations within the first years, whereas scientific publications are often
cited immediately after publication.
12
Tables S-T5 and S-T6 show the corresponding results. Descriptive statistics are available in the main publication.

20

Measures of monetary value
Patent citations and patent claim length need to be understood as merely indirect measures of a
patent’s economic value. Moreover, the number of citations is at times considered to also capture
the technological and social value of a patent (Trajtenberg, 1990), which may differ from the private
value for the patent owner. Obtaining direct indicators of the monetary private value of patents is
a challenging task. Data on this dimension of patent value have limited coverage. To complement
the array of indicators of patent value in this direction we adopt two sources of data. First, we
use data provided by Kogan et al. (2017) based on estimated stock market returns to the grant of
the patent, as a proxy of the private value of the patent grant. Kogan values are only available
for patent families with US patent members where at least one applicant was a publicly listed US
company. The data cover exclusively a total of 1,029,987 patent families, of which 230,389 come
with SNPL references. Second, we use survey-based assessments of patent value from the research
project PatVal (Giuri et al., 2007). This is a subsample of 11,061 patent families with at least one EP
patent member, of which 2,579 have SNPL references with first filing year mostly in 2003-2005.13
Descriptive statistics are available in the main publication.14

S-3
S-3.1

Regression analyses
Regression models

Selection of scientific publications into SNPL references
In a first set of analyses, we consider the probability and frequency in which scientific publications
appear in SNPL reference, as a function of their scientific quality.
The regressions take the following forms:
yi = βci t citi +

X

βft SFfi ∗ Tfi + εi

(S-3.1)

ft

Dependent variable and predictors of interest:
• yi : The dependent variable is a measure of the probability (or frequency) of a scientific publication appearing among the SNPL references. Respectively, the variable is either a binary or
a count variable. Count variables are log-transformed with offset 1. Given the large dataset
13

Tables S-T5 and S-T6 show the corresponding results.
The Kogan et al. (2017) patent value measures have been in widespread usage since their publication, but in our
setting they come with major drawbacks. Much of the private value of the technology will already be incorporated in
the stock price, as previous patent publications and grants in other patent systems are informative for investors. The
value narrowly captures the additional value of a patent granted in the US patent system. Any information related to the
technological capability of the firm that the patent reveals will not be incorporated in that measure. On the other hand,
the measures from Giuri et al. (2007) are based on a survey, but the exact phrasing measures much more precisely the
concept of private patent value: “Suppose that on the day in which this patent was applied for, the applicant and you had
all the information you have today regarding the value of this and the related patents. In case a potential competitor of
the applicant was interested in buying the whole set of patents (the patent family including all national patents derived
from it), what would have been the minimum price (in Euro) that the applicant should have demanded?”.
14

21

and the large number of FE groups, nonlinear (count) models are not considered. We employ
several variants of these variables.
• citi : The main independent variable is a measure of scientific quality. We measure scientific
quality at the publication level as the number of citations received over a 3 year period starting
from publication (see section S-2.2).
FEs:
• SFfi ∗ Tfi : These are FEs corresponding to the combination of scientific fields and publication
years. These FEs control flexibly for mechanical differences in scientific quality and SNPL
frequency across different scientific fields and over time within each scientific field. In total,
there are 252 scientific field codes supplied by the Web of Science.
Science quality and patent value: residualized variables
Naturally, usage of SNPL references as well as the quality of cited SNPL varies substantially over
technological areas as well as over time. In the regression models below, this is taken into account
explicitly with FE control variables. In all figures relating patents to scientific quality, we apply
residualization which brings the graphical display in line with the regression outputs.
To do so, we regress both the SNPL science quality variables as well as the patent value variables
P
on the full set of technology area × first filing year FEs. The formal model reads yi = ft βft Ffi ∗ Tti +
εi . This is done in the full sample of patents both with and without SNPL references. Afterwards, we
P
calculate the residual variation as ε̂i ≡ yi − ŷi = yi − ft β̂ft Ffi ∗ Tti , where ε̂, ŷ and β̂ are estimated
values. In fact, ε̂i = yi − ȳft , where ȳft is the mean within technology area × first filing year group.
Therefore, E[ε̂i ] = 0, both overall and within each ft group.
The values plotted in the graphs are ε̂i + ȳ, where ȳ is the full-sample mean of y. This returns
the absolute levels back to what is contextually expected and interpretable.
In plain terms, this strategy removes level effects within technology area × first filing year groups
by subtracting the mean y within groups. The overall level is retained by adding the overall y mean.
The y variable is transformed. Before, it is a deviation from the within-group mean. Afterwards, it
is a deviation from the overall mean.

Science quality and patent value: regression models
In the empirical analysis, we study the relationship between the presence and the quality of scientific
publications referenced in patents and the value of patents.
The regressions take the following form:
yi = βhasSNPL hasSNPLi + βsnplQ snplQi
+

X
ft

βft T Ffi ∗ Tti +

X

βa Aai +

a

X
n

Dependent variable and predictors of interest:
22

βn Nni +

X
r

β r Rri +

X
p

β p Ppi + εi

(S-3.2)

• yi : The dependent variable is a measure of patent value. In the main specifications and
figures, we use the count of citations from the USPTO within the first 5 years after filing. In
alternative specifications, we use: the count of citations from the EPO; indicators of monetary
value; patent scope as measured by the length of the first independent claim (see section S2.3). All dependent variables are in log-terms with offset 1. Given the large dataset and the
large number of FE groups, nonlinear (count) models could not be considered.
• hasSNPLi : A dummy equal to 1 if a patent has at least one reference to a scientific publication
• snplQi : A measure of SNPL science quality. We measure scientific quality at the scientific
publication level as the number of citations received over a period of 3 years from publication.
We define SNPL science quality as the maximum scientific quality across SNPL references in a
patent when more than one is present.15
FEs:
• T Ffi ∗ Tti : These are FEs corresponding to the combination of technological classes and first filing year. These FEs control flexibly for mechanical differences in patent value across different
technological fields and over time within each technological field.
• Aai : These are FEs for the applicant of the patent.
• Nni : These are FEs for the distinct number of inventors listed on the patent.
• Rri : These are FEs for the number of patent references. We use individual FEs for each number
of references up to the 95th percentile and assign one dummy for all patents with a higher
number of references.16
• Ppi : These are FEs for the number of patent references to scientific publications. We use an
individual FE for each number of references up to the number corresponding to the 95th
percentile and aggregate in one FEs patents with a higher number of references. Note that
hasSNPLi is collinear and therefore dropped when this set of FEs is used.

S-3.2

Regression results

Selection of scientific publications in SNPL references
We present first regression results for the probability that a scientific publication appears in SNPL
references as a function of its scientific quality. In the first main specification, table S-T3, column 1
and 2, we consider all SNPL references. Second, in column 3 and 4, we consider exclusively SNPL
references within five years from the year of publications. Third, in column 5 and 6, we consider
references within five years and exclusively if they are the SNPL references with the highest scientific
quality. In a fourth variant, column 7 and 8, we consider only SNPL references that are cited for the
15

We test the robustness of the results to alternative aggregation criteria (see table S-T7).
In regressions involving PatVal (EUR) values, the number of available observations is substantially lower. Here, we
include only the log-transformed count of backward patent references when estimating the extended specification.
16

23

first time by an applicant, so that each patent applicant-scientific publication pair is counted at most
once (one per applicant). Finally, in table S-T4, we provide regression results excluding academic
patents as well as self-references of various types. Figures S-F3a and S-F3b also show graphically
that the exclusion of SNPL self-references is irrelevant to the results. Overall, we consistently find
a positive and significant effect of science quality on the selection of scientific articles into SNPL
references.
Main regression results: SNPL science quality and patent value
Table S-T5 presents regression results for our core findings. It shows elasticity estimates for the
main measure of SNPL science quality and each one of the alternative measures of patent value as
dependent variable. We include sets of more demanding controls incrementally. All models include
the variable hasSNPLi as a control for the level effect of having at least one SNPL reference. In
column 1 to 6, we present results for our base-line specification where we control exclusively for
technology field and year pair FEs. In column from 7 to 12, we include all patent level controls as
detailed in the above section S-3.1. In column from 13 to 18, we add applicant FEs. Figure S-F4a
further highlights the striking differences in the overall distribution of patent citations for patents
with and without SNPL references.
Alternative measures of SNPL science quality
As a first variant to these specifications, we test the robustness of the results to alternative measures
of SNPL science quality. In table S-T6 we use a measure based on the journal impact factor instead of
citations. The number of observations is lower because the journal impact factors are only available
to us from 1998 onward. Overall, we find very similar results.17 In table S-T7, we use alternative
measures of SNPL science quality derived from different criteria of aggregation at the patent level
of the scientific quality of multiple scientific publications, when more than one appear in the NPLreferences of a patent. When ci is the citation count of SNPL reference i, in our main models we
P
P
consider the maximum. Alternatively, we also consider the sum ( i ci ), average ( 1n i ci ) and square
qP
2
root of the sum of squares (
i ci ). We find similar results irrespective of the aggregation criterion
used. Figure S-F4b graphically shows the results.
Self-references
Figure S-F5a shows the frequency of occurrence of self-references: between 5 and 10% of all patent
families include a self-reference. Most self-references are inventor self-references (5-10%), whereas
applicant self-references are less frequent with 2-4%. The frequency of self-references tends to
decrease with the SNPL science quality (although non-monotonically); this tendency is most pronounced at the top.

17

The only exception are the results for the USD values, where the results are unstable in the first two specifications
(column 5 and 11) but remain positive and significant in our last and most complete specification.

24

In the paper, we consider the possibility that self-references drive the results. On the one hand,
from a theoretical standpoint, it is interesting to consider whether high-quality science leads to highvalue technologies within or outside the boundaries of the organizations in which it is developed. On
the other hand, we want to ensure that the results are not driven by highly productive organizations
and individuals that perform scientific and technological activities at the same time.
Figure S-F5b replicates the results reported in the paper, separating different categories of selfreferences. The different groups of self-references behave very similarly. Table S-T8 provides regression estimates separately for a sample consisting only of patents with self-references and excluding
all patents with self-references. While the magnitude is larger for the sample with self-references,
the estimated elasticities are positive and significant in all specifications. We can conclude that
self-references do not drive the overall effects.
Technology fields, year of patent filing, and applicant countries
We analyze the heterogeneity of the estimates, first, across technological fields of patents. In table
S-T9, we run separate regressions by technology main area. In line with previous literature (e.g.,
Harhoff et al., 2003), we find that effects are particularly strong in Chemistry. However, SNPL science
quality also matters for Electrical Engineering, Instruments as well as Mechanical Engineering.
Second, we explore the heterogeneity over time based on the first filing year of patents. We
decompose the elasticities calculated in table S-T5 (column 1/2, 7/8) over time. Figure S-F6 depicts
the corresponding point estimates. We find that after marginally increasing between 1985 and 2000,
the extent of the relationship decreased substantially. After 2000, there is a substantial decline
which is especially pronounced for the US system. The understanding of the reasons for this decline
requires further research.
We consider the possibility that the effect is driven by intense science usage of particular countries. To do so, we split the sample by the first applicant country and consider China, Europe (EU-28),
Japan, South Korea and the United States separately. From table S-T10, we find that science quality
is important in all countries, but particularly so in Europe, the US and Japan. Overall, the results
are consistent across different geographic areas.
Interdisciplinarity of SNPL references
We explore the role of interdisciplinarity of science. Previous studies demonstrate the existence of
a close connection between novelty and scientific impact and the ability of scientists to successfully
recombine knowledge from distinct domains (Mukherjee et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017; Veugelers and Wang, 2019). In the context of our analysis we are interested in exploring whether this
dimension explains the correlation between SNPL science quality and patent value. We proxy the
interdisciplinarity of science with the interdisciplinary journals as captured by the classification of
journals in scientific fields in WoS.18
18

Some field codes refer directly to multidisciplinary research. These field codes are ah, vj, wu, bq, po, ev, ui, dy, le,
ro, if and pm. We tested our results by including journals associated with these codes in the sample of interdisciplinary
journals or excluding them. This affects the level estimates of patent value for different values of interdisciplinarity but
leaves untouched the correlation with SNPL science quality.

25

In figure S-F7a we plot the share of patents with SNPL references to interdisciplinary scientific
publications and, in figure S-F7b, the patent value by SNPL science quality of patents with and without SNPL interdisciplinary references. The share of patents with interdisciplinary SNPL references
is highest for intermediary values of SNPL science quality. Indeed, we find that interdisciplinarity
is associated overall with higher patent value, with the exception of patents at the top of the SNPL
science quality distribution. The correlation with SNPL science quality remains in any case highly
positive for both categories. Table S-T11 presents the underlying regression results.
Distance of SNPL references
Finally, we present regression results for the distance and time-distance of SNPL references. The
related results are presented graphically in the paper. Table S-T12 shows results relative to the
interaction between the distance of SNPL references and table S-T13 reports the corresponding
regression results for the time-distance of SNPL references. Here, we split the time-distance into
tertiles. In accordance to what is discussed in the paper, we find that patent families at a short
distance, by either dimension, are of particularly high value and tend to show higher elasticities with
SNPL science quality as well. The elasticities remain in any case strongly positive and significant
also at a relatively high distance.

26

S-4

Supplementary graphs and tables
Figure S-F1: Precision-recall tradeoff in the WoS match
1

6

5

Precision (Cutoff at class x)

4
.99

3

.98

.97

2

.96

1
WIPO
EPO

.95
.2

USPTO
45° line
.4

.6

.8

1

Recall (Cutoff at class x)
The tangent 45° line shows the optimal precision-recall tradeoff when precision and recall
are valued equally.

Notes: Based on manually evaluating 1000 matches for each patent office, as reported in Knaus and Palzenberger (2018).
The 45°-line shows the set of points which is of the same quality if precision and recall are weighted equally. This
corresponds to a F1-score. The point where this line is intersected is the optimal point, here shown for the WIPO validation.
Precision is the share of SNPL reference matched correctly among the matched SNPL references. Recall is the ratio between
correct matches identified and all SNPL references that were or should have been matched.

27

Figure S-F2: Sample descriptives over time
8

.8

6

.6
4
.4
2

.2
0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

# SNPL (dash)

Share of patent families

1

0

Priority year
Patent family
contains US patent
contains EP patent
contains SNPL references

# SNPL
# SNPL (within 5 years)

Notes: Shows the composition of the estimation sample. The estimation sample contains US and EP patents from patent
families with at least one member patent granted at USPTO or EPO.

Figure S-F3: Selection into SNPL by science quality
(a) Probability of patent citation (ext. margin)

(b) Number of patent citations (int. margin)

All SNPL references
Excluding SNPL self-references

Count: Article referenced by patent

Probability: Article referenced by patent

1

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
<50%

20

All SNPL references
Excluding SNPL self-references

15

10

5

0
>50%

>70%

>80%

>90%

>95%

>99%

>99.9% >99.99%

<50%

Science Quality

>50%

>70%

>80%

>90%

>95%

>99%

>99.9% >99.99%

Science Quality

Notes: Probability of being cited as SNPL (left) and the number of SNPL citations (right) by science quality of a scientific
publication. Science quality is the 3-year citation count of the scientific publication. Shaded areas show 95% confidence
intervals around the respective means.

28

20

p10/p90
IQR & Median
Mean

US citations (residualized)
10

Patent Value (Citations)

15

12

8

Patents without SNPL references

4
SNPL Science Quality - Maximum (Default)
SNPL Science Quality - Sum
SNPL Science Quality - √∑(q²)
SNPL Science Quality - Average

5

0

Low Quality

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

0

(b) Patent value by SNPL science quality

No

SNPL

Yes

(a) Patent value by science reference
Notes: Left: Distribution of patent citations for patents with and without SNPL references. Residualized 5-year patent
forward-citations by US patents towards patent families are used, see section S-3.1.
Right: Average patent values by science quality, considering alternative science quality operationalizations. SNPL science
quality is the quality of publications referenced by a patent. When there are multiple patent-paper references, we by
default use the highest-quality reference (orange). In comparison, the average quality also delivers a positive correlation
(gray), but it is more diluted. Other aggregation methods which also focus on the top of the distribution are virtually
identical to the maximum. These are the sum (green) and the square root of the sum of squares (blue). Science quality
is the 3 year citation count of a scientific publications. Patent value is measured as the 5 year count of patent forward
citations by US patents. Patent value and science quality are residualized using technology field × first filing year FEs. The
dashed line indicates the average patent value of patents without SNPL references. Shaded areas show 95% confidence
intervals around the respective means. N = 4,767,844 patents (952,932 with SNPL references).

29

Figure S-F5: Patent value by science quality, with and without SNPL self-references
(a) Share of SNPL (self-)references by
science quality

(b) Patent value by science quality of
SNPL (self-)references

12

Patent Value (Citations)

Share of patents (%)

10

8

6

4

Share any self-references
Share inventor self-references
Share applicant self-references

2

0

Low Quality

8

Patents without SNPL references

4
Patents with any SNPL self-references
Patents with SNPL inventor self-references
Patents with SNPL applicant self-references
Patents without SNPL any self-references

0

High Quality

Low Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

Notes: Left: Share of SNPL self-references by SNPL science quality. Right: Average patent value by SNPL science quality
and categories of SNPL self-references. The lines show values for any self-reference (green), inventor self-references
(orange) and applicant self-references (blue) or patents without SNPL self-references (gray). SNPL science quality is the
maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patent value is
measured as the 5-year count of patent forward-citations by US patents. Patent value and science quality measures are
residualized using technology field-first filing year pair FEs. The gray shaded area shows 95% confidence intervals around
the respective means. For visual purposes, the confidence intervals around the means concerning self-references show
the maximum extent of the 95% confidence intervals of any of the three underlying measures.

Figure S-F6: Patent value-science quality relationship over time
(b) All patent-level controls

.02

.05

.04

.06

.1

.08

(a) Baseline regressions

US Citations

EP Citations

1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
-

1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
-

0

EP Citations

0

US Citations

Notes: The figure plots the interactions coefficients between each first filing year of patents and SNPL science quality, in a
regression with the 5-year patent forward-citations by US patents and EP patents as dependent variables. Science quality
is the maximum 3-year citation count of SNPLs of a patent family. Left: Models include technology field and first filing
year pair FEs. Right: Models additionally include FEs for SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of
inventors. Range indicators show 95% confidence intervals around the respective regression coefficients.

30

Figure S-F7: Patent value by science quality and interdisciplinarity
(a) Share of interdisciplinarity

(b) Patent value and interdisciplinarity
12

50

Patent Value (Citations)

Share of patents / publications (%)

60

40

30

20

Patents without SNPL references

4

Patents with interdisciplinary SNPL
Interdisciplinary publications in WOS
+ interdiscipinary field codes

10

0

8

Low Quality

Patents with single discipline SNPL
Patents with interdisciplinary SNPL
0

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

Low Quality

High Quality

Patents ranked by SNPL Science Quality

Notes: Left: Share of patents with interdisciplinary SNPL by SNPL science quality. Right: Patent value by SNPL science
quality and by interdisciplinarity of SNPL references. Scientific articles are considered interdisciplinary if the journal
where they are published is associated with at least two WoS field codes. SNPL science quality is the maximum 3-year
citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patent value is measured as the
5-year count of patent forward-citations by US patents. Patent value and science quality measures are residualized using
technology field-first filing year pair FEs. Shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals around the respective means.

31

S-5 Regression results
Table S-T3: SNPL and science quality elasticities (intensive and extensive margin, by SNPL definitions)
SNPL definition
DV: SNPL
3y Cit

Field × Year FE
Adj. R-Square
Observations

All
(1)
(1/0)

Within 5y
(2)
Count

(3)
(1/0)

(4)
Count

Within 5y max quality
(5)
(6)
(1/0)
Count

One per applicant
(7)
(8)
(1/0)
Count

0.053

0.068

0.042

0.049

0.013

0.013

0.041

0.043

(1550.99)

(1575.22)

(1405.31)

(1435.04)

(785.91)

(820.06)

(1398.84)

(1470.63)

Yes
0.033
42962463

Yes
0.033
42962463

Yes
0.114
42962463

Yes
0.111
42962463

Yes
0.091
42962463

Yes
0.090
42962463

Yes
0.091
42962463

Yes
0.094
42962463

Notes: Values in “0/1”-columns are semi-elasticities, values in “Count”-columns are elasticities. Includes WoS subject code times publication year FEs. The level of observation is
at the WoS item. Science quality (3y cit) is measured by 3-year forward-citations by other WoS items. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

32
Table S-T4: SNPL and science quality elasticities (probability and frequency, with SNPL restrictions)
SNPL restriction
DV: SNPL
3y Cit

Field × Year FE
Adj. R-Square
Observations

No academic patents
(1)
(2)
(1/0)
Count

No applicant self-ref.
(3)
(4)
(1/0)
Count

No inventor self-ref.
(5)
(6)
(1/0)
Count

No any self-ref.
(7)
(8)
(1/0)
Count

0.036

0.046

0.052

0.067

0.050

0.063

0.050

0.063

(1208.51)

(1214.60)

(1536.94)

(1558.94)

(1502.40)

(1518.22)

(1498.92)

(1514.58)

Yes
0.082
42962463

Yes
0.078
42962463

Yes
0.112
42962463

Yes
0.109
42962463

Yes
0.108
42962463

Yes
0.104
42962463

Yes
0.107
42962463

Yes
0.103
42962463

Notes: Includes WoS subject code times publication year FEs. The level of observation is at the WoS item. Science quality (3y cit is measured by 3-year forward-citations by other
WoS items. The baseline category consists of observations with no 3-year forward-citations, approximately 50% of the dataset. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

Table S-T5: Patent value and science quality

DV (log):

(1)
5y Cit US

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values

3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

0.082
(123.51)

0.042
(86.00)

−0.015
(−27.42)

−0.059
(−39.51)

0.022
(6.83)

Patent-level controls
Patent applicant FE
Adj. R-Square
Observations

Base
No
0.156
4319309

Base
No
0.067
4319309

Base
No
0.157
2464480

Base
No
0.323
1241037

Base
No
0.113
899272

DV (log):

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
5y Cit US 5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values

0.107
(3.47)
Base
No
0.045
10839

3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

0.037
(45.46)

0.030
(47.43)

−0.012
(−17.10)

−0.038
(−18.79)

−0.046
(−11.27)

Patent-level controls
Patent applicant FE
Adj. R-Square
Observations

All
All
No
No
0.262
0.100
4319309 4319309

All
No
0.160
2464480

All
No
0.324
1241037

All
No
0.125
899272

DV (log):

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
5y Cit US 5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values

3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

0.027
(29.68)

0.023
(31.57)

−0.010
(−12.13)

−0.027
(−13.00)

0.003
(1.94)

Patent-level controls
Patent applicant FE
Adj. R-Square
Observations

All
All
Yes
Yes
0.362
0.169
3763831 3763831

All
Yes
0.253
2099196

All
Yes
0.389
1122794

All
Yes
0.887
857176

0.082
(2.69)
All
No
0.065
10839

0.084
(1.52)
All
Yes
0.113
5697

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding to
the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patent-level
controls “Base” include technology fields and first filing year pair FEs. Patent-level controls “All” further include FEs for
SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors. Patent applicant FEs are based on the first
applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

33

Table S-T6: Patent value and science quality (journal impact factor of SNPL reference)

DV (log):

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
5y Cit US 5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values
0.087
(67.56)

−0.035
(−26.79)

−0.142
(−31.82)

−0.007
(−0.71)

0.246
(3.48)

Patent-level controls
Base
Base
Patent applicant FE
No
No
Adj. R-Square
0.149
0.064
Observations
3929139 3929139

Base
No
0.157
2289880

Base
No
0.328
1106701

Base
No
0.112
773969

Base
No
0.045
10261

JIF SNPL ref (max)

DV (log):

0.117
(68.24)

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
5y Cit US 5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values
0.056
(37.17)

−0.039
(−25.76)

−0.102
(−18.34)

−0.056
(−5.08)

0.210
(2.99)

Patent-level controls
All
All
Patent applicant FE
No
No
Adj. R-Square
0.255
0.097
Observations
3929139 3929139

All
No
0.160
2289880

All
No
0.329
1106701

All
No
0.124
773969

All
No
0.065
10261

JIF SNPL ref (max)

DV (log):

0.028
(14.94)

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
5y Cit US 5y Cit EP US Claim Length EP Claim Length USD Values EUR Values
0.044
(24.41)

−0.031
(−15.85)

−0.075
(−12.30)

0.020
(4.18)

Patent-level controls
All
All
Patent applicant FE
Yes
Yes
Adj. R-Square
0.359
0.170
Observations
3385640 3385640

All
Yes
0.260
1931070

All
Yes
0.394
993200

All
Yes
0.891
734425

JIF SNPL ref (max)

0.015
(6.83)

0.203
(1.49)
All
Yes
0.116
5356

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding
to the maximum JIF across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patent-level controls “Base”
include technology fields and first filing year pair FEs. Patent-level controls “All” further include FEs for SNPL reference
counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors. Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the
grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

34

Table S-T7: Patent value and science quality (alternative science quality indicators)

DV (log):

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

0.037

0.027

(45.46)

(29.68)
0.037

0.026

(46.04)

(29.31)
0.042

0.030

(47.04)

(29.82)
0.038

0.027

(46.24)

(29.91)

SNPL science quality indicators:
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

3y Cit SNPL ref (sum)

3y Cit SNPL ref (avg)

3y Cit SNPL ref (sq)
35
Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.262

0.362

0.262

0.362

0.262

0.362

0.262

0.362

Observations

4319309

3763831

4319309

3763831

4319309

3763831

4319309

3763831

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. The table present results for alternative criteria of aggregation at the patent level of the science quality of SNPL references. The dependent
variable is the 5-year count of patent forward-citations by US patents. Patent-level controls “All” include technology fields and first filing year pair FEs, FEs for SNPL reference
counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors. Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in
parentheses.

Table S-T8: Patent value and science quality (self-references)
Self-references

Excluded

Only

(1)

(2)

(3)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

0.033

0.024

0.040

0.028

(36.00)

(23.58)

(24.21)

(14.38)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.255

0.358

0.235

0.339

Observations

4100590

3555570

3684125

3152984

DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

0.025

0.018

0.046

0.037

(35.20)

(22.53)

(34.07)

(23.16)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.090

0.160

0.084

0.151

Observations

4100590

3555570

3684125

3152984

DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding
to the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patentlevel controls “All” further include FEs for SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors.
Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in
parentheses.

36

Table S-T9: Patent value and science quality (by technology area of patent)
Technology area
DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

Constant

Electrical Eng

Instruments

Chemistry

Mechanical Eng

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

0.028

0.030

0.060

0.048

(21.60)

(15.51)

(45.56)

(11.32)

1.645

1.471

1.047

1.080

(1754.24)

(979.79)

(518.65)

(1323.25)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

No

No

No

Adj. R-Square

0.204

0.232

0.235

0.176

Observations

1542153

713973

779607

953557

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

0.026

0.024

0.040

0.032

(17.75)

(10.43)

(26.42)

(6.28)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.316

0.359

0.324

0.309

Observations

1359841

570768

652006

755229

DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding
to the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patentlevel controls “All” further include FEs for SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors.
Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in
parentheses.

37

Table S-T10: Patent value and science quality (by patent applicant country)
Patent applicant country

China

Europe

Japan

South Korea

United States

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

0.020

0.042

0.036

0.014

0.032

(3.14)

(25.00)

(18.40)

(3.14)

(29.20)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

No

No

No

No

Adj. R-Square

0.218

0.287

0.171

0.176

0.268

Observations

54062

948243

869068

149389

2032330

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

0.004

0.033

0.021

0.017

0.033

(0.86)

(23.78)

(13.77)

(4.99)

(38.63)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

No

No

No

No

Adj. R-Square

0.126

0.090

0.073

0.118

0.133

Observations

54062

948243

869068

149389

2032330

DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

DV (log):
3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding
to the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Patentlevel controls “All” further include FEs for SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors.
Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in
parentheses.

38

Table S-T11: Patent value and science quality (interdisciplinarity)
(1)

(2)

(3)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

0.054

0.047

0.040

0.037

(15.47)

(12.41)

(15.35)

(12.73)

0.042

0.031

0.035

0.027

(45.13)

(29.78)

(47.66)

(32.32)

0.032

0.024

0.023

0.017

(30.66)

(20.53)

(27.80)

(18.68)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.262

0.362

0.100

0.169

Observations

4319309

3763831

4319309

3763831

DV (log):
Interdisciplinary

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × Single Discipline

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × Interdisciplinary

(4)

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding to
the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. The interdisciplinarity status is taken from the most cited scientific publication appearing as SNPL reference in a patent. Patent-level
controls “All” further include FEs for SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors. Patent
applicant FEs are derived from the first applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

39

Table S-T12: Patent value and scientific impact (US citations) (by frontier distance)

DV (log):

(1)

(2)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

Distance to frontier:
0

0.818

(416.50)

0.753

(327.87)

1

0.595

(327.21)

0.567

(287.88)

2

0.363

(191.49)

0.403

(188.36)

3

0.232

(101.58)

0.283

(99.75)

4

0.150

(48.38)

0.212

(51.28)

5

0.144

(38.10)

0.215

(39.75)

6

0.157

(43.21)

0.257

(45.98)

7

0.149

(46.75)

0.270

(54.86)

8

0.121

(41.76)

0.249

(56.85)

9

0.080

(27.94)

0.206

(48.36)

10

0.035

(11.37)

0.166

(36.66)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max)

0.056

(194.53)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 0

0.089

(144.39)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 1

0.070

(147.30)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 2

0.037

(62.50)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 3

0.027

(25.62)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 4

0.018

(10.14)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 5

0.018

(8.19)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 6

0.007

(3.50)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 7

−0.002

(−0.90)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 8

−0.002

(−1.62)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 9

0.000

(0.35)

−0.001

(−0.83)

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × 10
Patent-level controls

Base

Base

Patent applicant FE

No

No

Adj. R-Square

0.187

0.189

Observations

4378579

4378579

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. Patent-level controls “Base” include technology fields and first filing year pair
FEs. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding to the maximum 3-year citation count
across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

40

Table S-T13: Patent value and scientific impact (by time-distance)
(1)

(2)

(3)

5y Cit US

5y Cit US

5y Cit EP

5y Cit EP

0.141

0.116

0.089

0.076

(33.37)

(25.58)

(28.11)

(21.56)

0.052

0.040

0.039

0.028

(12.09)

(8.56)

(12.14)

(7.79)

0.039

0.031

0.033

0.027

(36.56)

(26.38)

(38.86)

(28.03)

0.037

0.027

0.027

0.021

(33.39)

(21.97)

(30.41)

(20.90)

0.031

0.019

0.027

0.018

(26.87)

(14.92)

(30.00)

(17.35)

Patent-level controls

All

All

All

All

Patent applicant FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

Adj. R-Square

0.263

0.363

0.101

0.169

Observations

4319309

3763831

4319309

3763831

DV (log):

(4)

SNPL time distance:
Short

Medium

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × Short

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × Medium

3y Cit SNPL ref (max) × Long

Notes: All reported values are elasticities. 3y Cit SNPL ref (max) is a measure of SNPL science quality corresponding to
the maximum 3-year citation count across scientific publications appearing as SNPL references in a patent. Short, Medium
and long time-distance are dummies for the tertiles of time-distance. Patent-level controls “All” further include FEs for
SNPL reference counts, patent reference counts and number of inventors. Patent applicant FEs are derived from the first
applicant on the grant publication. Robust standard errors. T-statistics in parentheses.

41

References
Ahmadpoor, M. and B. F. Jones (2017). The Dual Frontier: Patented Inventions and Prior Scientific
Advance. Science 357(6351), 583–587.
Alcacer, J. and M. Gittelman (2006). Patent Citations as a Measure of Knowledge Flows: The Influence of Examiner Citations. The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4), 774–779.
Allen, T. J. (1977). Managing the Flow of Technology. Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
Branstetter, L. (2005). Exploring the Link between Academic Science and Industrial Innovation.
Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 79/80, 119–142.
Breschi, S. and C. Catalini (2010). Tracing the Links between Science and Technology: An Exploratory Analysis of Scientists’ and Inventors’ Networks. Research Policy 39(1), 14–26.
Brooks, H. (1994). The Relationship Between Science and Technology. Research Policy 23(5), 477–
486.
Bush, V. (1945). Science, the Endless Frontier: A Report to the President. Technical report, United
States Office of Scientific Research and Development.
Callaert, J., B. Van Looy, A. Verbeek, K. Debackere, and B. Thijs (2006). Traces of prior art: An
analysis of non-patent references found in patent documents. Scientometrics 69(1), 3–20.
Fischer, T. and J. Leidinger (2014). Testing Patent Value Indicators on Directly Observed Patent Value
– An Empirical Analysis of Ocean Tomo Patent Auctions. Research Policy 43(3), 519–529.
Fleming, L. and O. Sorenson (2004). Science as a Map in Technological Search. Strategic Management Journal 25(8-9), 909–928.
Gittelman, M. and B. Kogut (2003). Does Good Science Lead to Valuable Knowledge? Biotechnology
Firms and the Evolutionary Logic of Citation Patterns. Management Science 49(4), 366–382.
Giuri, P., M. Mariani, S. Brusoni, G. Crespi, D. Francoz, A. Gambardella, W. Garcia-Fontes, A. Geuna,
R. Gonzales, D. Harhoff, et al. (2007). Inventors and Invention Processes in Europe: Results from
the PatVal-EU Survey. Research Policy 36(8), 1107–1127.
Harhoff, D., F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel (2003). Citations, Family Size, Opposition and the Value of
Patent Rights. Research Policy 32(8), 1343–1363.
Hicks, D., A. Breitzman Sr, K. Hamilton, and F. Narin (2000). Research Excellence and Patented
Innovation. Science and Public Policy 27(5), 310–320.
Jaffe, A. B. (1986). Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’ Patents,
Profits, and Market Value. The American Economic Review 76(5), 984–1001.
Jaffe, A. B. (1989). Real Effects of Academic Research. The American Economic Review, 957–970.
Jefferson, O. A., A. Jaffe, D. Ashton, B. Warren, D. Koellhofer, U. Dulleck, A. Ballagh, J. Moe,
M. DiCuccio, K. Ward, et al. (2018). Mapping the Global Influence of Published Research on
Industry and Innovation. Nature Biotechnology 36(1), 31.
Knaus, J. and M. Palzenberger (2018). PARMA. A Full Text Search Based Method for Matching Non-Patent Literature Citations with Scientific Reference Databases. A Pilot Study. DOI:
10.17617/2.2540157.
42

Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological Innovation, Resource
Allocation, and Growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 665–712.
Kuhn, J. M. and N. C. Thompson (2019, January). How to Measure and Draw Causal Inferences
with Patent Scope. International Journal of the Economics of Business 26(1), 5–38.
Marx, M. and A. Fuegi (2019). Reliance on Science in Patenting. Working paper, Rochester, NY.
Merton, R. K. (1968). The Matthew Effect in Science: The Reward and Communication Systems of
Science are Considered. Science 159(3810), 56–63.
Merton, R. K. (1973). The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. University
of Chicago press.
Michel, J. and B. Bettels (2001). Patent Citation Analysis. A Closer Look at the Basic Input Data
from Patent Search Reports. Scientometrics 51(1), 185–201.
Mokyr, J. E. (2002). The gifts of Athena: the origin of the knowledge economy (1st ed.). Princetorn
University Press.
Moser, P., J. Ohmstedt, and P. W. Rhode (2018). Patent Citations – An Analysis of Quality Differences
and Citing Practices in Hybrid Corn. Management Science 64(4), 1477–1973.
Mukherjee, S., D. M. Romero, B. Jones, and B. Uzzi (2017). The Nearly Universal Link between the
Age of Past Knowledge and Tomorrow’s Breakthroughs in Science and Technology: The Hotspot.
Science Advances 3(4), 1–9.
Murray, F. (2002). Innovation as Co-Evolution of Scientific and Technological Networks: Exploring
Tissue Engineering. Research Policy 31(8-9), 1389–1403.
Popp, D. (2017). From Science to Technology: The Value of Knowledge from Different Energy
Research Institutions. Research Policy 46(9), 1580–1594.
Roach, M. and W. M. Cohen (2013). Lens or Prism? Patent Citations as a Measure of Knowledge
Flows from Public Research. Management Science 59(2), 504–525.
Sapsalis, E., B. v. P. de la Potterie, and R. Navon (2006). Academic Versus Industry Patenting: An
In-Depth Analysis of What Determines Patent Value. Research Policy 35(10), 1631–1645.
Scotchmer, S. (2004). Innovation and Incentives (1st ed.). MIT Press.
Sorenson, O. and L. Fleming (2004). Science and the diffusion of knowledge. Research Policy 33(10),
1615–1634.
Stokes, D. E. (2011). Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation. Brookings
Institution Press.
Suzuki, J. (2011). Structural Modeling of the Value of Patent. Research Policy 40(7), 986–1000.
Thompson, P. and M. Fox-Kean (2005). Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge Spillovers:
A Reassessment. American Economic Review 95(1), 450–460.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Innovations.
The Rand Journal of Economics 21(1), 172–187.
Veugelers, R. and J. Wang (2019). Scientific novelty and technological impact. Research Policy.
43

Wang, J., R. Veugelers, and P. Stephan (2017). Bias against Novelty in Science: A Cautionary Tale
for Users of Bibliometric Indicators. Research Policy 46(8), 1416–1436.
Watzinger, M. and M. Schnitzer (2018). Standing on the Shoulders of Science. mimeo.
Zahringer, K., C. Kolympiris, and N. Kalaitzandonakes (2017). Academic Knowledge Quality Differentials and the Quality of Firm Innovation. Industrial and Corporate Change 26(5), 821–844.

44

