1

Observation of superconducting phase transition in InN

Zhi-Yong Song,1,2 Liyan Shang,1 JunHao Chu,1,2,* Ping-Ping Chen,2 Akio Yamamoto3 and Ting-Ting Kang2,*

1
Key Laboratory of Polar Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
State Key Laboratory of Infrared Physics, Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200083 Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China
3
University of Fukui, Fukui 910-8507, Japan

2

* E-mail: jhchu@mail.sitp.ac.cn (J. C.)
*E-mail: kang@mail.sitp.ac.cn (T. K.)
Abstract: InN superconductivity is very special among III-V semiconductors, because other III-V semiconductor (like GaAs, GaN, InP, InAs
etc.) usually lacks strong covalent bonding and seldom shows superconductivity at low-temperature. In this paper, via current-voltage(I-V)
measurement, we probe the superconducting phase transitions in InN. The possible connection with those chemical-unstable phase separated
inclusions, like metallic indium or In2O3, was removed by HCl acid etching. It finds InN samples can show different phase transition behaviors.
The vortex-glass (VG) to liquid transition, which is typical in type-II superconductors, is observed in the sample with large InN grain size. In
contrast, the small grain-sized sample’s superconducting properties are sensitive to acid etching, shows a transition into a non-zero resistance
state at the limit of temperature approaches zero. Our work suggests that the grain size and inter-grain coupling may be two key factors for
realizing InN superconductivity. InN superconductivity can become robust and chemical stable if the grain size and inter-grain coupling both are
large enough.

I. INTRODUCTION
Group-III nitrides are the typical semiconductors interested
for optoelectronic applications [1-3]. Therefore, it is surprising
that one of its members – InN [4,5] can be superconductor.
However, upon its first report by Inushima et al.[6], InN
superconductivity and its importance had not been understood
by most people, yet. It is known that typical III-V
semiconductor (e.g. GaAs, InAs, GaN etc., except BN, whose
B and N atoms are bound by strong covalent bonds) is usually
not easy to be tuned into superconducting [7,8]. In contrast, IV
semiconductor (Si, diamond, SiC etc.) can become
superconductor by heavy doping [9]. The reason is explained
under the framework of BCS mechanism: (1) IV semiconductor
is with strong directional covalent bonds, but III-V
semiconductor is with weak covalent bonds. (2) III-V
semiconductor is mostly made by heavy element. Therefore,
III-V semiconductor doesn’t have large enough phonon energy
and a strong electron-phonon coupling. Additionally, the
enhanced spin- orbit coupling in III-V tends to break the cooper
pairing under BCS mechanism. In this sense, even III-nitride
can be superconducting, GaN(which is with more covalent
character and made by lighter element) shall be easier to be
superconductor than InN. However, the experimental evidence
on GaN superconductivity is still lack [7]. The traditional IV
semiconductor superconductivity mechanism, which is driven
by phonons strongly coupled to holes at the Γ point and requires
the material to be p-type [10], is not straightforwardly
applicable in InN. Because InN superconductivity is all
observed in n-type InN up to now[11-13].
Although InN superconductivity seems to be “unreasonable”
within the framework of current superconductivity theory for
semiconductors, the major doubt on InN superconductivity is
rooted in a simple speculation: InN can have two phase
separated superconducting inclusions, i.e. indium metal (In)
and indium oxide(In2O3), whose superconductivity may

“contaminate” InN. However, this naive In/In2O3 speculation
faces strong challenges. Concerning In, its upper critical field
Hc2 (~0.03T) is much smaller than that of InN(~1T). Although
the small sized In nanoparticle had been theoretically proposed
to increase Hc2 [14], such proposal is not reliable because small
size effect had been experimentally proved to suppress the
superconductivity in In [15]. Furthermore, another similar
III-nitride – GaN had been tuned into superconducting by
containing a heavy amount of Ga and has a similar Hc as Ga
[7,16]. Then it is less persuasive to assume that metal
nanoparticle superconductivity effect is only present in InN. On
In2O3, the attribution of 33°XRD peak to In2O3 needs further
clarification [17], because metallic indium, amorphous InN,
InN(10-11), cubic InN can also produce similar XRD reflection
[12]. Additionally, achieving In2O3 superconductivity is not
easy and needs low disorder [18]. And it is hard to believe the
unintentionally introduced In2O3 in InN can meet such
requirement.
Besides the importance in superconductivity physics, InN
superconductivity is of technical interests. For example, InN
superconductor can be used to fabricate the superconducting
single photon detector (SSPD)[19,20]. Firstly, compared with
NbN - the most successful material in SSPD, InN shares many
similar and attractive properties, namely, high chemical
stableness, good mechanical performance etc. Secondly, InN
has a suitable transition temperature T c(~3K). While high-Tc
superconducting material is not suitable for SSPD application,
because its large superconducting gap energy will reduce the
sensitivity to photons of a given energy (especially at longer
wavelength) [20]. On the other hand, too low Tc requires a large
cooling ability and is less convenient. Finally, InN’s
application in superconducting industry is favored because it
can be integrated with the III-V technology, allowing an easy
combination of semiconductor and superconductor function
within one material system, i.e. III-nitride.
In this work, we note that, if InN superconductivity is
produced by In/In2O3, such superconductivity will be chemical
1

2

Fig.1. (a) SEM images for the etched sample A(a) and B(b), the scale bar’s length is 5μm. (c,d) X-ray diffraction patterns of the as-grown, etched InN films
of sample A(c) and B(d).

unstable, because In/In2O3 is highly reactive. Therefore, it is
straightforward to remove such inclusions by acid etching and
check InN’s superconductivity. And such experiment is not
available in the literatures, yet. This work is also useful for the
future applications of InN in SSPD, where a chemical
stableness is preferred.
II. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
For comparison, we use two n-type InN films in this work,
which are termed as sample A and B, respectively. Both of
them were grown by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy
(MOVPE) on insulative GaN/sapphire (0001) templates in
University of Fukui. The growth temperature is 520°C(480°C)

for sample A(B). The detailed growth conditions can be found
elsewhere [21]. The thickness of sample A(B) is measured to be
~850 nm (~950 nm) by cross-section SEM. The room
temperature electron mobility and concentration of sample A(B)
is 505cm2/Vs(280cm2/Vs) and 1.21019cm-3(2.21019cm-3).
Fig.1 (c) and (d) are the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results of
sample A and B, respectively. In addition to the InN(0002)
reflection at 31.36°, both two samples have a small peak at
~33.0°. This small peak can be removed by the HCl acid
etching. Therefore, it is attributed to In(101) (2θ=32.95°) [22],
or (110) reflection of a rhombohedral phase In2O3(2θ=32.92°).
Each sample was cut into one small piece (sized
~1mm10mm) and subjected to HCl etching to remove the

Fig.2. (a) R-T transitions and (b) R-B transitions for as-grown and etched sample A. (c) Normalized resistance as a function of temperature under
different magnetic field for as-grown sample A. (d) The upper critical field ( Hc2) as a function of temperature (T) for as-grown and etched sample A. In
(a,b,c), the resistance is measured with a current of 1μA.

2

3
possible In/In2O3 inclusions. Figure 1(a, b) shows the surface
morphologies (SEM images) of the HCl etched samples. As
seen, sample B shows more voids after HCL etching, indicating
more serious phase separation. Transport measurements were
done in Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics using a dilution
refrigerator down to ~30mK temperature and a cryogen-free
low-temperature system with lowest temperature of 1.5K.
Magnetic field was applied vertical to the sample surface, i.e.
along InN c[0001] axis. The Ohmic contacts were made using
metal indium or silver pastes.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
3.1. The existence of stable InN superconductivity against
chemical etching.
In Fig.2(a) and (b), for sample A, the normalized resistance
R/Rn (Rn is the normal state resistance) as a function of
temperature T(R-T) and magnetic field H(R-H) is displayed.
Because superconductivity is both observed in the as-grown
and etched sample A, it proves that the superconductivity in
InN can survive from the acid etching. And the critical
temperature and magnetic field are not changed significantly by
etching. These observation indicate those chemical stable
inclusions, like large sized In/In2O3, is less possible to be
responsible for InN’s superconductivity in sample A.
Fig.2(c) displays the R-T curves of the as-grown sample A
under different magnetic field. On increasing H, the
superconducting transition broadens and shifts to lower
temperature. Using these curves, we can deduce the upper
critical field (Hc2), and Hc2 is defined as the H field where
R/Rn=90%. In Fig.2 (d), we calculated the dirty-limit coherence
length (ξ0,dirty) of sample A by dirty limit(in case of the mean
free path l<ξ0) relation [23]:
dH

Hc2 (0) = 0.69Tc c2 |T=Tc (1a)
dT
ξ0,dirty = [ϕ0 /2πHc2 (0)]1/2 (1b)
where Tc2(H) at different H is determined from R-T scans
where R/Rn=90% is met. Eq.(1) gives the similar ξ0,dirty value
for the as grown(≈23nm) and etched(≈21nm) sample A. The

clean-limit (Pippard) coherence length ξ0,clean of sample A is
estimated by [24,25,26] :

ξ0,clean =

VF ħ
π

=

0.1804VF ħ

(2)

kB TC

where 2=Eg is the superconducting energy gap, VF is the fermi
velocity, Tc=2.4K is the transition temperature where R/Rn=10%
happens. It reaches ξ0,clean≈710nm.
In a conventional superconductor, coherence length ξ(T) will
approach ξ0 in the limit of T→0. While near Tc, ξ(T) diverges as
(Tc-T)-1/2. ξ0 is equal to 0,clean if the sample is "clean" and to
0,dirty if it is "dirty" (i.e., when the mean free path l<0) [26]. By
T>Tc Hall measurements and InN’s effective electron mass
me*/m0=0.07 [5], we reach l≈25nm for sample A. Therefore, the
dirty limit requirement l<0,dirty is not met well and ξ0 will be
close to ξ0,clean. 0 is the low bound for the grain size which
permits the occurrence of superconducting ordering [15,25] and
we will address this topic later.
3.2. The vortex liquid -glass transition.
For the etched sample A, Fig.3(a) is the I-V(current-voltage)
curves under different temperature, with a small magnetic field
μ0H=5mT (for introducing the vortex). Fig.3(c) displays the I-V
curves under different magnetic field H, at a fixed temperature
0.5K(<<Tc). It shows that the I-V curves show a smooth
evolution in the curvature from being convex to linearity with
increasing temperature and magnetic field. These phenomena
agree well with the vortex-glass (VG) theory, where the vortex
comes from self-field due to persistent current and applied
magnetic field is pinned/depinned. In VG theory, with the
decrease of temperature, the mobile vortex (i.e. vortex liquid
state) will finally be pinned by the randomly distributed pinning
centers, reaching the superconducting state (i.e. vortex glass
state).
According to VG theory, the I-V curves at different
temperatures near liquid-glass phase transition temperature (Tg)
can be scaled into two different branches by the scaling law
[27,28,29]:
V
ν(z+2−D)

I(T−Tg )

= f± (

I

|T−Tg |ν(D−1)

)

(3)

Fig.3. For etched sample A, (a) I-V curves at various temperatures from 35mK to 2.5K for μ0H=5mT. (b) VG scaling of the V-I curves in (a). (c) I -V
characteristics measured at 0.5 K for magnetic fields ranging from 0 to 40mT. (d)VG scaling of the V-I curves in (c).

3

4
where v is the exponent of the vortex-glass correlation length ξg
and ξg diverges at Tg as:
ξg~|T-Tg|v
(4)
z is the dynamical critical exponent, D is the dimension number,
and f± are the scaling functions above and below T g. Above Tg,
where in the vortex liquid phase, there is a finite linear
resistance for low current limit I→0 [27]:
ν(z+2−D)

(5)
Rlin = (V/I)I→0 ∝ (T − Tg )
and the I-V curve goes non-linearly for large I. At Tg, the I-V
curve satisfies the relationship:
V(I)|T=Tg ~ I z+1⁄D−1
（6）
Below Tg, where in the vortex-glass regime, the
double-logarithmic I-V curves have downward curvatures
corresponding to vanishing linear resistance. The scaling
results are shown in Fig.3(b). The I-V curves are nicely scaled
into two branches, which touches each other at the T=1K-1.2K
scaling curves. This agrees well with the fitting T g value

are separated into two parts by a particular magnetic field
(μ0Hg). We can modify Eq. (3) by replacing Tg with Hg, based
on VG theory [27]. Then those IV curves can also be scaled into
two branches with μ0Hg=10mT, D=2.
D=2 means the VG transition in Fig.3 is quasi-2D [29,30].
This is further supported by two behaviors in I-V. Firstly, as
shown in Fig.3(a), for temperature in 1.5K-2K (i.e. the vortex
liquid region), the I-V curves exhibit a crossover from 1inear
behavior at small current I to nonlinear behavior at high I. Such
a crossover is anticipated in the quasi-2D VG model: at low I,
the vortex dynamics at length scales larger than ξg (ξg is of the
order of ) is concerned, where the system will look like a
vortex liquid with a linear resistance); at high I, the excitations
involve length scales smaller than ξg and the associated glassy
dynamics yield a nonlinear I-V relation [29]. Secondly, a
Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition [30,31,32],
which is a characteristic phase transition in 2D superconductor,
was found at a specific temperature TBKT=1.5K in Fig.3(a) by

Fig.4. (a) R-T transitions and (b) R-B transitions for as-grown and etched sample B. (c) The linear resistance Rlin at I→0[deduced from the I-V curves in
Fig.4(d)] as a function of temperature for etched sample B. (d) I-V characteristics measured at magnetic field μ0H=0T for etched sample B. (e)Scaling of the
V-I curves in (d).

Tg=1.1K.
Fig.3(a) can be fully explained within the framework of VG
theory. When temperature T<Tg, the sample is in the vortex
glass state. So the resistance falls rapidly with decreasing
current and is zero below the critical current. At T>Tg, the
sample is in the vortex liquid state, the V-I curves exhibit ohmic
behavior and the resistance remains constant even at small
current I. Previous theoretical and experimental studies show
that z=4~7 and ν=1~2 are the reasonable values for VG phase
transition [27]. In order to get a nice scaling performance, we
have D=2, ν=1.9, z=4.2.
Since magnetic field and temperature exhibit analogous
effects in suppressing superconductivity and generating
quasi-particles in conventional superconductors, I-V relations
under different magnetic fields, which are shown in Fig. 3(c),
are qualitatively similar to the I-V curves at different
temperatures in Fig.3(a). The difference is that these V-I curves

the occurrence of VI3 [30]. Below TBKT, the vortex/antivortex
pairs generated by topological excitations will be bound
leading to a zero linear resistivity. At TBKT, it has VI3, which
is a sign of the BKT transition. The observed VG transition
agrees with the previous reports that that InN is a type-II
superconductor [12]. The quasi-2D VG character indicates that
sample A’s thickness ~900nm is comparable or smaller than the
ξ0 and the corresponding ξg.
3.3. The non-zero resistance state at the limit of T→0.
Different from sample A, sample B is sensitive to acid
etching. Fig.4 (a) displays the R-T curves of the etched sample
B. Compared with the as-grown sample B, it finds the
superconducting transition is much broadened after etching.
And the etched sample B’s resistance is not zero even at the
lowest temperature T=30mK. R-H measurements in Fig. 4(b)
shows that etched sample B’s “critical” magnetic field is also
significantly reduced, which may be due to the reduced Tc.
4

5
Fig.4(d) is the I-V curves of etched sample B under different
temperature. With increased temperature, the I-V curves show
an evolution from convex curvature to linear dependence,
which indicates the vortex glass state doesn’t exist. The trend
toward BKT transition with VI3 is observed under reduced
temperature. The resistance goes to a finite value as the current
I approaches zero, i.e. VI at I→0. In Fig.4 (e), we try to scale
the I-V curves in Fig.4(d), even the attempt fails. The fitting
parameters cannot be adjusted to the reasonable range, e.g.
z=1.17 being away from the z=4~7 range.
The failed scaling is mainly due to the appearance of a
non-zero resistance state (NZRS) at the limit of T→0[33]. As
shown in Fig.4(c). The NZRS is not a vortex liquid state with
Tg=0K, because the deuced I→0 linear resistance Rlin in Fig.3(a)
is not linear to log(T), as required by Eq.(5) [30]. This NZRS is
also inconsistent with other mechanism that can suppress the
superconductivity, like phase slip, in which the phase of the
superconducting condensate wave-function jumps irreversibly,
leading to the non-zero resistance. These phase slips represent
activation processes that can be triggered either thermally (i.e.
thermally activated phase slips, TAPS) or through quantum
tunneling (quantum phase slip, QPS) [33]. However, TAPS
requires a temperature dependence of resistance as[33]:
R(T)exp(-U/kBT)
(7)
where U is the activation energy. But NZRS doesn’t follow
such relation at T→0, as shown in Fig.4(c, inset). On the other
hand, QPS explanation requires the sample’s sheet resistance
Rs in normal state is larger than the quantum of resistance

Fig.5. (a) Schematics of the inter-grain superconducting coupling in
InN(0001) granular film. The presence of inter-grain inclusion can enhance the
inter-grain coupling J. If such inclusions are removed, the grain boundary can
only serve as a weak link with small J. (b) Schematic phase diagram of InN
superconductor with the introduction of vortex (under a small magnetic field or
with the persistent current’s self-field), as a function of J and temperature T.

RQ=h/4e2=6.45k[34], while our InN sample’s Rs is too
small(~10).
According to the phase transition theory, the scaling
behavior can be attributed to the existence of a characteristic
length which diverges at the transition temperature [10], like
Eq.(4). Therefore, we propose that there should be a special size
which limits the expansion of vortex-glass correlation length ξg
in the etched sample B even at T→0K. We believe the InN
grain size can be such limit. On the other hand, since NZRS is
not observed in the as-grown sample B, as shown in Fig.4(a),
the In/In2O3 inclusion seems to “suppress” the NZRS.

Fig.5(a) gives our theoretical model regarding NZRS. In this
model, we suggest that several factors are highlighted in InN
superconductivity. Firstly, the grain size L makes difference. If
L is comparable to or smaller than coherence length ξ0 (e.g.
~700nm above), the magnitude fluctuations of superconducting
order parameter will destroy the superconductivity [15].
Consequently, such grain is no longer superconducting. This
situation will not change even if the InN is shaped into a [0001]
orientated thin wire (i.e. in a quasi-one dimensional with the
diameter <ξ0 or ~ξ0) as the growth going on [25]. Secondly, the
inter-grain coupling can recover the superconductivity in InN.
In this case, the diffusion of electron pairs from the
superconductor grain into the normal material (known as the
proximity effect) then into the neighboring grain gives rise to
global superconductivity.
Fig.5(b) gives the schematic phase diagram describing InN
superconductivity with the presence of vortex, as a function of
inter-grain coupling J and temperature T. Since
superconductivity on individual islands is fragile by its small
size L<ξ0 or L~ξ0, non-superconducting T=0 states is present as
the NZRS. The appearence of NZRS signifies the existence of
mesoscopic energy scale on each grain (e.g. an effective
“charging energy” or the electronic level spacing on a grain etc.)
[15,32]. Therefore, a minimum inter-island coupling Jm must be
overcome for superconductivity to be attained [15].
3.4. Discussion on the sample-dependent superconductivity
in InN.
With this phase diagram, we can consistently understand the
various sample-dependent superconductivity results in InN
based on the grain size and inter-grain coupling J. For those
small grain sized InN film (e.g. sample B), since the
superconductivity in each grain is fragile or not present, the
sample’s global superconductivity heavily relies on the
inter-gain coupling which is realized by the inter-grain
inclusion In/In2O3. The previous reports also clearly
demonstrated that indium metal prefers to reside on the (11-20)
planes of InN, which is the inter-grain interface of InN. Acid
etching can then remove such inclusions and reduce the
inter-gain coupling J. Consequently, a broadened transition
does result not only simply from a spread in Tc of the individual
grains, but also from an inhomogeneous distribution of J.
NZRS will also appear due to J<Jm. For large grain sized InN
film (e.g. sample A), its individual grain has robust
superconductivity and its inter-grain coupling is already strong
(because of the large area of inter-grain touching interface).
Therefore, acid etching has no obvious influences. The
morphology observed in Fig.1(c,d) and previous reports [21]
agree with the grain-size attribution above.
On the roles of In/In2O3 in InN superconductivity, we believe
that they can enhance the superconductivity by filling the gaps
between InN grains. However, if In/In2O3 alone want to
establish the global superconductivity, they must: (a)
continuously distribute from the source to the drain and get
exposed there; (b) with a grain size >~30nm for In/In-oxide
composite film [35] or >4nm for pure metal In[15]. However,
item (a) and (b) will make In/In2O3 easy to be etched away by
acid, so removing the superconductivity. Kadir et al. claimed
In2O3 alone contributes to the superconductivity in InN via their
thermal annealing experiment [17]. However, their annealing
5

6
temperature is too higher (530-650°C) than the growth
temperature. The grain size and inter-grain coupling had been
certainly modified there.
V. SUMMARY
We have measured I-V curves in HCl acid etched InN films
at various magnetic fields and temperatures. We proved that
InN superconductivity can be chemical stable against acid
treatment, or sample-dependent. The standard vortex glass,
vortex liquid phase in type II superconductor and a special
non-zero resistance phase (which is typical in a weakly coupled
superconducting islands system) are observed. The competing,
transition among these phases are understood in a framework
considering grain size and inter-grain coupling, which are the
two key factors in InN superconductivity.
Author Contributions. T.K. initiated and supervised this
research. Z.S. performed the measurements. Z.S. and T.K.
analyzed the data. T.K. wrote the manuscript. P.C. provided the
InN samples for the early stage of this research. A.Y. provided
the InN samples used in this research. The requests for
materials should be addressed to T.K..
Acknowledgements. The work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
11204334, 61475178, 61574150, 61376015, 91321311,
Shanghai Science and Technology Foundation 14JC1406600.
T. K. specially thanks the “Hundred Talent program” of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences for the fund to establish the
low-temperature transport lab.

References
[1] Isamu Akasaki, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1119 (2015). Nobel Lecture:
Fascinated journeys into blue light.
[2] Hiroshi Amano, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1133 (2015). Nobel Lecture: Growth
of GaN on sapphire via low-temperature deposited buffer layer and realization
of p-type GaN by Mg doping followed by low-energy electron beam
irradiation.
[3] Shuji Nakamura, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1139 (2015). Nobel Lecture:
Background story of the invention of efficient blue InGaN light emitting
diodes.
[4] Ashraful Ghani Bhuiyan, Akihiro Hashimoto, and Akio Yamamoto,
Citation: J. Appl. Phys. 94, 2779 (2003). Indium nitride (InN): A review on
growth, characterization, and properties.
[5] Junqiao Wu, J. Appl. Phys. 106, 011101 (2009). When group-III nitrides go
infrared: New properties and perspectives.
[6] T. Inushima, V. V. Mamutin, V. A. Vekshin, S. V. Ivanov, T. Sakon, M.
Motokawa, and S. Ohoya, J. Cryst. Growth 227, 481 (2001). Physical
properties of InN with the band gap energy of 1.1 eV.
[7] Konstantin Iakoubovskii, Physica C 469, 675 (2009). Recent advances in
superconductivity of covalent superconductors.
[8] E. Bustarret, Physica C 514, 36 (2015). Superconductivity in doped
semiconductors.
[9] Xavier Blase, Etienne Bustarret, Claude Chapelier, Thierry Klein and
Christophe Marcenat, Nature material 8, 375 (2009). Superconducting
group-IV semiconductors.
[10] E. Bustarret, C. Marcenat, P. Achatz1, J. Kacˇmarcˇik, F. Le´vy, A.
Huxley, L. Orte´ga, E. Bourgeois, X. Blase, D. De´barre and J. Boulmer,
Nature 444, 465 (2006). Superconductivity in doped cubic silicon.
[11] Weimei Xie, Q.Y. Xie, Kang Wang, Ping Tao, Fengming Zhang and X.S.
Wu, Materials Letters 208, 23 (2017). Transport properties for Zn + ion
implanted InN films at low temperature.

[12] Takashi Inushima, Duncan K. Maude, Hai Lu, William J. Schaff, Takuya
Iizuka, Shin-ichi Kimura, Akio Yamamoto, and Kazutoshi Fukui, J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 81, 044704 (2012). Superconducting Properties of InN with Low Carrier
Density near the Mott Transition.
[13] E. Tiras, M. Gunes, N. Balkan, R. Airey, and W. J. Schaff, Citation: Appl.
Phys. Lett. 94, 142108 (2009). Superconductivity in heavily compensated
Mg-doped InN.
[14] T. A. Komissarova, R. V. Parfeniev, and S. V. Ivanov, Appl.Phys. Lett.
95, 086101 (2009). Comment on “Superconductivity in heavily compensated
Mg-doped InN” [Appl. Phys. Lett.94, 142108 (2009)].
[15] H. M. Jaeger, D. B. Haviland, B. G. Orr, and A. M. Goldman, Phys. Rev.
B 40, 182 (1989). Onset of superconductivity in ultrathin granular metal films.
[16] N.E. Alekseevskii, G.V. Samsonov, O.I. Shulishova, Sov. Phys. JETP 17,
950 (1963). Superconductivity of Gallium Nitride.
[17] A. Kadir, S. Mukhopadhyay, T. Ganguli, C. Galande, M. R. Gokhale, B.
M. Arora, P. Raychaudhuri, and A. Bhattacharya, Solid State Commun. 146,
361(2008). Non-intrinsic superconductivity in InN epilayers: Role of Indium
Oxide.
[18] D. Shahar and Z. Ovadyahu, Phys. Rev. B 46, 10917 (1992).
Superconductivity near the mobility edge.
[19] Robert H. Hadfield, Nature Photonics 3, 696 (2009). Single-photon
detectors for optical quantum information applications.
[20] Chandra M. Natarajan, Michael G. Tanner and Robert H. Hadfield,
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 25, 063001(2012). Superconducting nanowire
single-photon detectors: physics and applications.
[21] A. Yamamoto, K. Kodama, N. Shigekawa, T. Matsuoka, and M.
Kuzuhara, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55, 05FD04 (2016). Low-temperature (≥400 °C)
growth of InN by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy using an NH3
decomposition catalyst.
[22] Ting-Ting Kang, Xianglin Liu, Ri Q. Zhang, Wei G. Hu, Guangwei
Cong, Feng-Ai Zhao, and Qinsheng Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 071113 (2006).
InN nanoflowers grown by metal organic chemical vapor deposition.
[23] S. P. Chockalingam, Madhavi Chand, John Jesudasan, Vikram Tripathi,
and Pratap Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214503 (2008). Superconducting
properties and Hall effect of epitaxial NbN thin films.
[24] Charles P. Poole, Jr., Horacio A. Farach, Richard J. Creswick and Ruslan
Prozorov, Superconductivity (Academic Press, 2007), 2nd ed. P149.
[25] A. Bezryadin, Superconductivity in Nanowires: Fabrication and
Quantum Transport (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2013), 2nd ed.
[26] M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity (McGraw-Hill,
NewYork, 1996), 2nd ed.
[27] Yi Sun, Jian Wang, Weiwei Zhao, Mingliang Tian, Meenakshi Singh &
Moses H. W. Chan, Sci. Rep. 3, 2307; DOI:10.1038/srep02307 (2013).
Voltage-current properties of superconducting amorphous tungsten nanostrips.
[28] David A. Huse, Matthew P. A. Fisher & Daniel S. Fisher, Nature, 358,
553–559 (1992). Are superconductors really superconducting?
[29] C. Dekker, P. J. M. Wöltgens, R. H. Koch, B. W. Hussey, and A. Gupta,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2717 (1992). Absence of a finite-temperature vortex-glass
phase transition in two-dimensional YBa2Cu3O7−δ films.
[30] Huan Yang, Ying Jia, Lei Shan, Yingzi Zhang, Hai-Hu Wen, Chenggang
Zhuang, Zikui Liu, Qi Li, Yi Cui, and Xiaoxing Xi, Phys. Rev. B 76, 134513
(2007). I−V characteristics of the vortex state in MgB 2 thin films.
[31] D. J. Resnick, J. C. Garland, J. T. Boyd, S. Shoemaker, and R. S.
Newrock, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1542(1981). Kosterlitz-Thouless Transition in
Proximity-Coupled Superconducting Arrays.
[32] Serena Eley, Sarang Gopalakrishnan, Paul M. Goldbart, and Nadya
Mason, Nature Phys 8 59 (2012). Approaching zero-temperature metallic states
in mesoscopic superconductor–normal–superconductor arrays.
[33] Xavier D.A. Baumans, Dorin Cerbu, Obaı¨d-Allah Adami, Vyacheslav S.
Zharinov, Niels Verellen, Gianpaolo Papari, Jeroen E. Scheerder, Gufei Zhang,
Victor V. Moshchalkov, Alejandro V. Silhanek and Joris Van de Vondel, Nat.
Commun. 7:10560 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10560 (2016). Thermal and quantum
depletion of superconductivity in narrow junctions created by controlled
electromigration.
[34] Matthew P. A. Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 885 (1986). Quantum Phase
Slips and Superconductivity in Granular Films.
[35] A. T. Fiory, A. F. Hebard, and W. I. Glaberson, Phys. Rev. B 28,
5075(1983). Superconducting phase transitions in indium/indium-oxide
thin-film composites.

6

