arXiv:1903.08172v2 [hep-th] 24 Jul 2019

Prepared for submission to JHEP

Index-Like Theorems from Line Defect Vevs

T. Daniel Brennana Gregory W. Moorea
a

NHETC and Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University
126 Frelinghuysen Rd., Piscataway NJ 08855, USA

E-mail: tdanielbrennan@physics.rutgers.edu, gwmoore@physics.rutgers.edu
Abstract: In this paper we investigate the relation between complexified Fenchel-Nielsen
coordinates and spectral network coordinates on Seiberg-Witten moduli space. The main
technique is the comparison of exact expressions for the expectation value of ’t Hooft defects
in certain 4D SU (2) N = 2 gauge theories. We derive an index-like theorem for a class of
Dirac operators on singular monopole moduli spaces. Our expression determines the indices
of Dirac operators on singular monopole moduli spaces in terms of characteristic numbers for
vector bundles over certain Kronheimer-Nakajima quiver varieties.

Contents
1 Introduction and Technical Summary
1.1 Technical Summary

1
3

2 ’t Hooft Defects in 4D N = 2 SU (2) Gauge Theories on R3 × S 1
2.1 Monopole Bubbling

5
6

3 Localization
3.1 Expectation Value of Line Defects
3.2 Zmono in terms of Characteristic Numbers

8
8
10

4 Spectral Networks
4.1 Theories of Class S
4.1.1 Labeling Line Defects In Class S
4.1.2 Complexified Fenchel-Nielsen Coordinates
4.2 Spectral Networks in Theories of Class S
4.3 Wall Crossing in Spectral Networks
4.4 Fenchel-Nielsen Networks

11
11
12
14
15
18
22

5 Semiclassical Formulation of BPS States
5.1 Moduli Space Approximation
5.2 Fenchel-Nielsen Spectral Networks and The Semiclassical Region

23
24
26

6 Index Theorem and Characteristic Numbers
6.1 General Theory
6.2 Example: SU (2) Nf = 0 Theory
6.2.1 Index Theorem
6.2.2 Characteristic Numbers
6.2.3 Explicit Example: ⟨L2,0 ⟩ in SU (2) SYM
6.3 Comments on the N = 2∗ Theory

29
29
31
35
36
38
40

1

Introduction and Technical Summary

Exact results in quantum field theories with four-dimensional N = 2 supersymmetry can lead
to nontrivial and interesting mathematical predictions. In this paper we consider exact results
for line defect expectation values in theories which are of class S but also possess a Lagrangian
formulation.

–1–

In general, class S theories are closely related to Hitchin systems and in these theories the
Hitchin moduli space M is interpreted as a space of vacua when the 4D theory is compactified
on a circle. If a line defect L preserves four supersymmetries and is wrapped on this circle then
the associated vev ⟨L⟩ is a holomorphic function on M in a complex structure determined
by the supersymmetry preserved by L. The preserved supersymmetry may be characterized
by a phase ζ, which may be viewed as an element of the twistor sphere: ζ also determines a
complex structure on M. We will denote the space M with complex structure determined
by ζ as Mζ . In the theories under consideration the holomorphic function ⟨L(ζ)⟩ on Mζ
can be computed, exactly, in three different ways. This paper explores some consequences of
comparing the resulting exact expressions.
For theories of class S one of the exact methods expresses ⟨L(ζ)⟩ in terms of “spectral
network coordinates” on Mζ [17–19]. These coordinates are generalizations of well-known
cluster, shear, and Fock-Goncharov coordinates. They are functions on the twistor space and,
restricted to a fiber Mζ , are holmorphic Darboux coordinates in complex structure ζ. See
Section 4 below for a description of “spectral network coordinates.” We refer to the exact
result for ⟨L(ζ)⟩ in these coordinates as the “Darboux expansion.” See equation (1.3) below
for the detailed formula.
On the other hand, thanks to the AGT correspondence, ⟨L(ζ)⟩ can also be expressed in
terms of complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates [1, 10]. These are also holomorphic Darboux coordinates on Mζ . See Section 4.1.2 for a description of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates.
Thus, by comparing answers for a finite set of line defects one can express one coordinate
system in terms of the other. The transformation turns out to be rather nontrivial.
In theories of class S that also have a Lagrangian description one can also evaluate ⟨L(ζ)⟩
exactly using localization techniques. These localization techniques are only understood fully
for certain line defects known as pure ’t Hooft operators, and are only valid in weak-coupling
regimes in the Coulomb branch. 1 The function ⟨L(ζ)⟩ for an ’t Hooft line defect, when
evaluated using localization, turns out, again, to be expressed naturally in terms of complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates and moreover involves interesting equivariant characteristic
numbers of Kronheimer-Nakajima varieties.
At the same time, in the weak coupling region of a class S theory the coefficients of the
Darboux expansion have an interpretation in terms of indices of certain Dirac-like operators
defined on moduli spaces of (singular) magnetic monopoles. Thus, by first comparing line
defect vev’s to determine the change of variables from spectral network to Fenchel-Nielsen
coordinates and then using the above facts, we find unusual expressions for the L2 -index of
certain Dirac operators in terms of characteristic numbers of Kronheimer-Nakajima varieties.
This comparison yields our “index-like” theorem.
We should stress how unusual our “index-like” theorem is. In standard index theorems
the index of a Dirac operator on one manifold is expressed in terms of a characteristic number
of the relevant bundle on the same manifold. In the present case the (L2 -) index of a Dirac
1

Mathematically by weak-coupling regions we refer to certain asymptotic regimes of Mζ .

–2–

operator is expressed in terms of sums of characteristic numbers on a different (but related)
manifold. (Alternatively, an equivariant characteristic number is expressed as a sum of indices
of Dirac operators.) Hence the qualifier “index-like theorem.” The physical idea here is
essentially trivial, but the mathematical statement seems to be fairly nontrivial and would
seem to be challenging to prove from first principles.
The remainder of this paper implements the above idea in the special case of 4D G =
SU (2) N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theories with adjoint or fundamental matter. In the
remainder of this introduction we explain the idea in a bit more detail.
1.1

Technical Summary

In the case of 4D G = SU (2) N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theories, there are two complexifiedFenchel-Nielsen coordinates which we will denote a, b. From general principles, the expectation value of the ’t Hooft defects can be expressed in Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates as a Fourier
expansion in b. More precisely, this can be written as [22, 25]
⟨Lp,0 (ζ)⟩ =

∑

cosh(v, b)(F (a))v Zmono (a, m, ǫ; P, v) ,

(1.1)

v∈Z+ ∶ v≤p

where v = diag(v, −v) and P = diag(p, −p) where v, p ∈ Z. On the right hand side the ζdependence is captured by the use of complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates on Mζ . 2
Here the expectation value above is expressed as a sum over monopole bubbling configurations where cosh(v, b)F (a)v encodes the contribution of bulk fields and Zmono (a, m, ǫ; P, v)
describes the contribution from the SQM that arises on the ’t Hooft defect from bubbling [4].
See [4–6] for more background and explanation of notation.
In the localization computation of ⟨Lp,0 ⟩, Zmono (P, v) is given by a characteristic number
of a certain resolved Kronheimer Nakajima space 3
Zmono (a, m, ǫ; P, v) = lim ∫
ξ→0

̃ξ (P,v)
M
KN

̂T (T M
̃ξ ) ⋅ CT ×T (V(R)) .
eω+µT A
F
KN

(1.2)

̃ξ (P, v) is a certain resolved Kronheimer-Nakajima space determined by the line
Here M
KN
defect charge (P ) and core magnetic charge (v), eω+µT induces the T -equivariant volume form
̃ξ (P, v), A
̂T (T M
̃ξ ) is the T -equivariant A-genus
̂
on M
that describes the contribution
KN
KN
from the N = 2 vectormultiplet and CT ×TF (V(R)) is a characteristic class related to the
matter hypermultiplets where T is the Cartan torus of the conserved global symmetry group
of flavor, R-, and global gauge transformations. The equivariant integral can then be evaluated
2

Usually complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates are introduced as holomorphic coordinates, depending
on a cutting system, of the character variety X = Hom(π1 (C), GC )/conj. for some complex gauge group GC .
In our case, Mζ is isomorphic to X for all ζ ≠ 0, ∞ as a complex manifold, but not canonically. Our FenchelNielsen coordinates will therefore also be functions on the twistor space of M (with the fibers above ζ = 0, ∞
removed). When restricted to a fiber Mζ , they are holomorphic Darboux coordinates. It is in this way that
they become comparable to spectral network coordinates.
3
There is an additional subtlety with 4D N = 2 SU (N ) theories with Nf = 2N . See footnote 10 for more
details.

–3–

as a contour integral in an algebraic torus whose poles are enumerated by Young tableaux
[38, 39, 43]. 4
On the other hand, using the class S technology, the expectation value of a supersymmetric line defect can be computed by the trace of the holonomy of a flat SL(N ; C) connection
along a corresponding curve γ in an associated Riemann surface C. Spectral networks express
the expectation value of such 4D line defects as
⟨Lp,0 ⟩u∈B = ∑ Ω(γ, Lp,0 ; u)Yγ ,

(1.3)

γ∈Γ

where Ω(γ, Lp,0 ; u) are framed BPS indices, Yγ are Darboux functions on the moduli space
of flat SL(N ; C) connections on C associated to the physical charge γ ∈ Γ , and Γ is a torsor
of the IR charge lattice [17].
In the semiclassical limit of the theories we are considering, the framed BPS indices of ’t
Hooft defects can be identified with the index of a twisted Dirac operator on singular monopole
moduli space [3, 20, 21, 36, 37, 40, 41, 47]. Locally on moduli space we can decompose γ
non-canonically into magnetic, electric, and flavor charge γ = γm ⊕ γe ⊕ γf . Then we have:
/Y] e
Ω(γ, Lp,0 ; u) = IndL2 [D
E

γ ⊕γf
matter ⊗SM(P,γm ,u)

.

(1.4)

/Y, a
Here the superscript γe ⊕ γf denotes the associated eigenspace of the L2 index of D
Dirac operator modified by adding Clifford multiplication by a hyperholomophic vector field
defined by Y ∈ tC . The Dirac operator acts on sections of Ematter ⊗ SM(P, γm , u) where
SM(P, γm , u) is the spinor bundle on the singular monopole moduli space M(P, γm , u) and
Ematter → M(P, γm , u) is a vector bundle over it related to hypermultiplet zero-modes. 5
Thus, by comparing the expectation value of ’t Hooft defects computed via localization
and spectral network techniques in a weak coupling limit, we can derive a relation between
characteristic numbers of Kronheimer-Nakajima spaces and indices of Dirac operators on
singular monopole moduli space:
(v,b)
(F (a)) lim ∫ ξ
∑ Ω(γ, Lp,0 ; u)Yγ = ∑ e
̃
∣v∣

γ∈Γ

∣v∣≤∣P ∣

ξ→0

MKN (P,v)

̂T (T M
̃ξ ) ⋅ CT ×T (V(R)) .
eω+µT A
F
KN
(1.5)

Since the formula is valid for an infinite number of line defects, we can use it both to express
Yγ in terms of a, b (or vice versa) and to determine relations between Dirac indices and
characteristic numbers on certain Kronheimer-Nakajima spaces.
The outline of the paper will be as follows. We will begin by reviewing ’t Hooft defects in
4D N = 2 G = SU (2) asymptotically free gauge theories with adjoint and fundamental matter
. Then we will discuss the localization results for their expectation value and the connection to
characteristic numbers of Kronheimer-Nakajima spaces. Then we will go on to discuss spectral
4
5

See Section 3.2 for exact definitions and more details.
See Section 5 for exact definitions.

–4–

networks and the relation to the index of a twisted Dirac operator on singular monopole
moduli space in the semiclassical limit. Then we will discuss the comparison of localization
and spectral networks and provide an index formula for Dirac operators on singular monopole
moduli space and a formula for the characteristic numbers of Kronheimer-Nakajima spaces.
We will illustrate the derivation of these formulas fully in the example of the SU (2) Nf = 0
theory.
We expect that this technique can be extended to more general 4D N = 2 theories of
class S. In the more general setting, the calculations analogous to the ones presented in this
paper could be used to compute more general indices of the twisted Dirac operator on singular
monopole moduli space with higher rank gauge group and coupled to more complicated vector
bundles with hyperholomorphic connection.
Additionally, this paper is related to the work of [26, 44] in which the authors investigate
the generating function for certain holomorphic Darboux coordinates (what we are calling
complexified Fenchel-Nielson coordinates) on the moduli space of SL(2; C) flat connections
on a punctured Riemann surface. There, the authors relate the generating function for these
coordinates to the effective twisted superpotential of the corresponding 4D N = 2 theory of
class S in the presence of a 12 Ω-deformation and discuss its relevance to quantum Hitchin
systems.

’t Hooft Defects in 4D N = 2 SU(2) Gauge Theories on R3 × S 1

2

Our setting will be 4D G = SU (2) N = 2 gauge theory on R3 × S 1 with adjoint or fundamental
matter. We will be considering the expectation value of reducible ’t Hooft defects which are
studied in [4, 6, 25].
A reducible ’t Hooft defect is defined in terms of irreducible defects which are 21 -BPS
operators specified by the data (⃗
xn , Pn , ζ). Here x
⃗n ∈ R3 specifies the insertion position,
Pn ∈ Λmw specifies the ’t Hooft charge,6 and ζ ∈ U (1) specifies the conserved supersymmetries.
Given this data, the associated ’t Hooft defect is defined by imposing the local boundary
conditions
⃗ = Pn r̂n + O(r −3/2 ) ,
B
n
2rn2

X =−

Pn
+ O(rn−1/2 ) ,
2rn

(2.1)

⃗ is the magnetic field, and X is a real, adjoint valued Higgs field
at x
⃗n where r⃗n = x
⃗−x
⃗n , B
which is related to the complex Higgs field of the N = 2 vectormultiplet Φ as
Im[ζ −1 Φ] = X .

(2.2)

We will denote an irreducible ’t Hooft defect as L[Pn ,0] (⃗
xn ). We will often suppress the
dependence on x
⃗n in addition to the phase ζ.
6

The magnetic weight lattice is defined as Λmw = {h ∈ Λcochar ∣ ⟨µmatter , h⟩ ∈ Z , ∀µmatter } where µmatter
are highest weights specifying the representations of the hypermultiplets in the theory and the cocharacter
lattice is defined as Λcochar = {h ∈ t ∣ exp{2πh} = 1G }.

–5–

A reducible ’t Hooft defect is then defined as the product of irreducible ’t Hooft defects:
Lp,0 = (L[h1 ,0] ) ,
p

(2.3)

where h1 is a simple magnetic weight. As an operator in a quantum theory, the expectation
value of a reducible ’t Hooft defect inserted at the origin is defined as the limit
⟨Lp,0 ⟩ = lim ⟨L1,0 (⃗
x1 )...L1,0 (⃗
xp )⟩ .
x
⃗i →0

(2.4)

Note that Lp,0 should not to confused with L[ph1 ,0] .
2.1

Monopole Bubbling

In order to compute the expectation value of an ’t Hooft defect, it is necessary to understand
the BPS field configurations. These are generically described by a collection of dyonic states
in the presence of an ’t Hooft defect. An important feature of the interaction between magnetically charged states and ’t Hooft defects is the phenomenon called monopole bubbling
[27].
Monopole bubbling is the process in which a smooth monopole is absorbed by an ’t
Hooft defect, thus screening the magnetic charge of the defect. Additionally, it gives rise to
an effective SQM living on the world volume of the screened ’t Hooft defect which we will refer
to as the bubbling SQM. This can be understood via the following string theory construction
[4, 5].
Consider embedding the 4D N = 2 SU (2) gauge theory on the world volume theory
of a pair of parallel D3-branes which are localized at x5,6,7,8,9 = 0 and x4 = ± 21 v. This
embedding can be achieved by adding a sufficiently large mass deformation to the adjoint
hypermultiplet associated with the excitations along the x6,7,8,9 -directions.7 This seperation
in the x4 -direction introduces a Higgs vev X∞ = vH1 , where H1 is a simple coroot.
Here, smooth monopoles are described by D1-branes running between the D3-branes in
the x4 -direction [8]. Additionally, a reducible ’t Hooft defect at x
⃗n is described by a collection
of NS5-branes that are localized at x1,2,3 = x
⃗n and spread out in the x4 -direction between
the D3-branes. If we combine these two elements so that there are m D1-branes running
between the D3-branes and 2p NS5-branes localized at x
⃗n , then we have an asymptotic,
relative magnetic charge and ’t Hooft charge
γ̃m = γm − [Pn ]− = m H1

,

Pn = 2p ĥ1 ,

(2.5)

where ĥ1 is a simple cocharacter (not magnetic weight), and [Pn ]− is the image of the ’t Hooft
charge in the totally negative Weyl chamber. See Figure 1.
Here, monopole bubbling can be understood by moving D1-branes to be coincident with
the collection of NS5-branes in the x1,2,3 -directions. We can then understand the bubbling
7

For example by introducing an Ω-deformation in the x6,7,8,9 -directions.

–6–

D31

D32

D31

m D1

D32
m D1

p NS5

x1,2,3
x4

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. In this figure we show the brane configuration describing singular monpole configurations
on a stack of D3-branes (a). In (b) we show the singular limit in which we have a reducible monopole
given by many spatially coincident NS5-branes in the x1,2,3 -directions.

SQM living on the world volume of the ’t Hooft defect by performing a sequence of HananyWitten transformations so that the bubbled D1-branes only end on NS5-branes [4, 14, 23].8
In the case where (p − k) D1-branes have bubbled, the theory living on the ’t Hooft defect is
described by a N = (0, 4) quiver SQM with quiver:
1

2

k−1

k

k

k

1

k

k−1

2

1

1

where the node k is repeated 2p − 2k + 1 times9 and
P = 2p ĥ1

,

P − v = kH1 ,

(2.6)

where v is the effective ’t Hooft charge. We will refer to this quiver as Γ (P, v).
In the case of a 4D theory with adjoint matter, the bubbling SQM is enhanced to a
N = (4, 4) quiver SQM, and in the case of Nf fundamental hypermultiplets, it is modified by
coupling to Nf short fundamental Fermi multiplets to the central gauge node:
8

Here Hanany-Witten transformations are represented by pulling NS5-branes through D3-branes to create
a D1-brane stretched between them. See [4] for details.
9
In the case where p = k, there is a single U (k) node with 2 fundamental hypermultiplets adjoined to it.

–7–

Nf

1

2

k−1

k

k

k

k

1

3

k

k−1

2

1

1

Localization

We can compute the expectation value of an ’t Hooft defect on R3 ×S 1 using localization. Due
to the fact that we are on a non-compact space, we must introduce an IR-regulator which is
accomplished via a 21 Ω-deformation with corresponding fugacity ǫ+ . The expectation value
of Lp,0 can be defined as a supersymmetric index
⟨Lp,0 ⟩ = TrHLp,0 (−1)F e−βH+ǫ+ J+ +iQ⋅Θ+mf ⋅F ,

(3.1)

where HLp,0 is the Hilbert space of the quantum field theory with an insertion of Lp,0 , β is
the radius of the thermal circle, H is the Hamiltonian, J+ and F are the generators of the
1
2 Ω-deformation and flavor symmetries with fugacities ǫ+ and mf respectively, Q = (γe , γm )
is the vector of electric and magnetic charges, and Θ = (θe , θm ) is the vector of electric and
magnetic theta angles.
Here we will be fixing the electric and magnetic theta angles θe , θm . The electric theta
angle can be defined in terms of local field configurations by the holonomy of the gauge
connection along the thermal circle at infinity
∮

1
S∞

At dt = θe .

(3.2)

The magnetic theta angle, is similarly naturally defined as the holonomy of the dual magnetic
gauge field. However, in order to fix both θe and θm , we must define the magnetic theta angle
as the Fourier dual of path integral with fixed magnetic charge ⟨Lp⃗,0 ⟩γm
⟨Lp,0 ⟩θm = ∑⟨Lp,0 ⟩γm e−2πiγm θm .

(3.3)

γm

Implementing localization leads to an expectation value which is of the form of (3.5). The
details of the localization computation are contained in [4, 22, 25].
3.1

Expectation Value of Line Defects

In the case of G = SU (2), as we consider here, the expectation value of an ’t Hooft defect that
is computed by localization is naturally written in terms of two complexified Fenchel-Nielsen

–8–

coordinates: a, b. These form a maximal set of holomorphic coordinates on the Hitchin moduli
space Mζ . Associated to a weak coupling description, these coordinates have a semiclassical
expansion
a =iθe − 2πβY∞ + ... ,
b =iθm +

(3.4)

8π 2 β
X∞ − ϑβY∞ + ... ,
g2

where θm and θe are the magnetic and electric theta angles, ζ −1 Φ∞ = Y∞ + iX∞ are the real
and imaginary parts of the phase rotated vev of the adjoint-valued Higgs field Φ of the N = 2
vectormultiplet, and ϑ is the real part of the complex gauge coupling τ . Note that we will
generally take Φ∞ to be fixed so that a, b have ζ-dependence via X∞ , Y∞ . Additionally, here β
is the radius of the thermal circle and (...) correspond to non-perturbative corrections, which
we will discuss later in Section 5.2. More exact expressions for them are given in Section
4.1.2.
In these coordinates, the expectation value of an ’t Hooft defect is written [22, 25]
⟨Lp,0 ⟩ =

∑

v∈Z+ ∶ v≤p

cosh(v, b)(F (a))v Zmono (a, m, ǫ; P, v) ,

P = diag(p, −p) ,

(3.5)

Here the sum is over monopole bubbling configurations labeled by the effective ’t Hooft charge
v = diag(v, −v). In each summand, the contribution cosh(v, b)(F (a))v can be attributed to
the contribution of the bulk fields whereas Zmono (P, v) can be attributed to the bubbling
SQM living on the world volume of the ’t Hooft defect in the given bubbling configuration.
As in [4, 6], we will focus on the contribution coming from Zmono (P, v). This contribution
can be understood as the Witten index IW of the bubbling SQM as described in Section 2.1.10
These theories naturally have an action which is Q-exact:
S =Q⋅V ,

(3.7)

Q2 = H + aQa + ǫ+ J+ + mf ⋅ F ,

(3.8)

where Q is a real supercharge that satisfies:

where Qa , J+ , and F are charges for the flavor symmetry corresponding to global gauge
transformations, the R-symmetry corresponding to the 21 Ω-deformation, and other flavor
10

There is an additional subtlety in the case of the SU (2) Nf = 4 theory (and indeed in any SU (N )
Nf = 2N theory). Here the Zmono (P, v) has the interpretation as the ground state index IH0 = limβ→∞ IW (β).
Additionally, there are some issues that arise with applying localization to the related bubbling SQM which
requires adding an additional contribution
(Loc)

Zmono ∶= IH0 = IH0

+ Iasymp ,

(3.6)

where Iasymp counts ground states on non-compact directions of field space with finite potential energy. See
[2, 6] for more details.

–9–

symmetries. These generate a group of conserved symmetries of the bubbling SQMs which
we will denote T = TG × U (1)ǫ+ × Tf where TG , Tf are the maximal tori of the gauge and flavor
group respectively.
Because the bubbling SQM is described by a N = (0, 4) quiver SQM, the path integral
naturally localizes to a T -equivariant integral over the vacuum moduli space. In order to
use localization, we must introduce an FI-parameter in the SQM. This lifts the Coulomb and
mixed branches and causes the path integral to localize to a finite dimensional (T -equivariant)
integral over the Higgs branch which is isomorphic to the Kronheimer-Nakajima space/quiver
moduli space corresponding to the quiver defining the bubbling SQM: Γ (P, v).
It will be more convenient in the following discussion however to identify the quiver
⃗ w)
Γ (P, v) by its gauge and hypermultiplet nodes. That is to say we will define Γ (k,
⃗ ∶= Γ (P, v)
⃗
where k = (k1 , ..., kn ) encode the gauge nodes and w
⃗ = (w1 , ..., wn ) encode the fundamental
hypermultiplet nodes. In this notation, we can identify the Higgs branch of the bubbling
⃗ w)
⃗ w).
SQMs with the Kronheimer-Nakajima space MKN (k,
⃗ associated to the quiver Γ (k,
⃗
⃗
MKN (k, w)
⃗ is defined as the hyperkähler quotient with respect to the moment maps
µC = ∑ ∑ Bj,j+1 Bj+1,j + Ii Ji ,
i j=i−1,i

†
†
, Bi,i+1 ] − [Bi−1,i
, Bi−1,i ] + Ii Ii† − Ji† Ji ,
µR = ∑[Bi,i+1

(3.9)

i

where Vi ≅ Cki and Wi ≅ Cwi with
Bj,j+1 ∶ Vj → Vj+1

,

Bj+1,j ∶ Vj+1 → Vj

I i ∶ Vi → W i

,

,

and the gauge group G = ∏i U (ki ) acts as
Bi,i+1 ↦ gi−1 Bi,i+1 gi+1

Ii ↦ Igi

,

,

Ji ↦ gi−1 Ji

,

Ji ∶ Wi → Vi ,

(3.10)

gi ∈ U (ki ) .

(3.11)

Physically, the Bi,i±1 can be interpreted as the bosonic fields of the bifundamental hypermultiplets and the Ii , Ji can be interpreted as the bosonic fields of the fundamental hypermultiplets.
3.2

Zmono in terms of Characteristic Numbers

Thus far we have not taken into account the varying matter content of the 4D theories.
Coupling the 4D theory to matter hypermultiplets gives rise to a vector bundle, which we
⃗ w).
will call the matter bundle, over the same moduli space MKN (k,
⃗ This modifies the T equivariant integral so that we can identify Zmono (P, v) with the T -equivariant integral over
⃗ w)
M(k,
⃗ of some characteristic class
Zmono (P, v) ∼ ∫

⃗ w)
MKN (k,
⃗

eω+µT charT (T MKN ) ,

(3.12)

where ω is the real symplectic (1,1)-form in some choice of complex structure (which we
will define shortly), µT is the moment map for the action of T , and charT (T MKN ) is a
T -equivariant characteristic class on T MKN depending on the matter content of the theory.

– 10 –

⃗ w)
This equation is not strictly well defined since MKN (k,
⃗ is a singular space. However,
the singularities can be resolved by introducing an FI-parameter ξ [29]. We will denote the
⃗ w).
̃ξ (k,
resolved space M
⃗
KN
In 4D, the parameter ξ comes with a choice of direction of on R3 (and consequently on
̃ξ ) which corresponds to deforming the product
the resolved space M
KN
⟨Lp,0 (0)⟩ Ð→ ⟨L1,0 (⃗
x1 ) L1,0 (⃗
x2 ) ... L1,0 (⃗
xp )⟩

,

x
⃗i − x
⃗i+1 = ξ ẑ ,

(3.13)

in that direction (we have chosen the ẑ-direction). The choice of direction defines a complex
⃗ w)
̃ξ (k,
structure on M
⃗ and it is in this complex structure that ω is the (1,1) symplectic form.
KN
Note that by comparing to the definition of the reducible ’t Hooft defect (2.4), computing
the expectation value ⟨Lp,0 ⟩ requires taking the limit ξ → 0. See [4] for more details.
Now we can use the result of [4, 25] for the characteristic class for the 4D asymptotically
free SU (2) theories with fundamental and adjoint matter to write the monopole bubbling
contribution
⎧
̃KN )
⎪
N = 2∗ theory
̂T (T M
⎪χ
eω+µT ⎨ y
⃗ w)
⎪
̂T
̃
(k,
⃗
⎪
KN
⎩A (T MKN ) ⋅ CT ×TF (VNf ) Nf theory

Zmono (P, v) = lim ∫ ξ
̃
ξ→0‘ M

(3.14)

̃KN is a vector bundle
where χ
̂Ty the T -equivariant χ
̂y -genus with y = e−m+ǫ+ , and VNf → M
with
(3.15)
CT ×TF (VNf ) = ∏ (exi − e−xi ) .
ch(VNf ) = ∑ exi ,
i

i

See [5, 25, 35, 38, 39, 43, 45] for details on computing these integrals.

4

Spectral Networks

In this section we will review the technology of spectral networks [18, 19]. Spectral networks
are a method for computing the the holonomy of flat connections on a Riemann surface,
which, as discussed previously, can be identified with the expectation value of a line defect L
in the class S construction. It provides a set of “Darboux coordinates” Yγ on Mf lat (C; GC ),
the moduli space of flat GC connections on C associated to γ ∈ H1 (Σ; Z). Spectral networks
naturally computes the expectation value of the ’t Hooft defect as a Laurent series in these
coordinates
⟨L⟩ =
Ω(γ; LP )Yγ ,
(4.1)
∑
γ∈H1 (Σ;Z)

whose coefficients are framed BPS indices.
4.1

Theories of Class S

Theories of class S are those which are constructed by taking the six-dimesional N = (2, 0)
theory and compactifying it along an oriented Riemann surface C with a topological twist
[13, 16, 28, 48]. For the type SU (N ) theories of class S, this can be described as the low energy

– 11 –

effective theory of a stack of N M5-branes wrapped on C ×M4 with the same topological twist
where M4 is 4D spacetime. When M4 = R × S 1 where S 1 has radius R the space of quantum
vacua can be identified with the moduli space of solutions to the Hitchin equations on C
FC + R2 [ϕ, ϕ̄] = 0 ,

∂¯AC ϕ = 0 ,

(4.2)

with gauge group G = SU (N ) where AC is the G-connection. Given a solution of these
equations, we can identify the Seiberg-Witten curve and differential as
Σ = { det(xdz − ϕ) = 0} ⊂ T ∗ C

,

λSW = xdz ,

(4.3)

where (x, z) ↦ xdz are coordinates on T ∗ C. Intuitively, the Coulomb branch vacuum is
described by separating multiple M5-branes wrapped on C along a transverse direction to
produce a single M 5 brane wrapped on Riemann surface Σ which is an N -branched cover
Σ → C.
4.1.1

Labeling Line Defects In Class S

As described in Section 7 of [17] a natural class of line defects in class S theories is obtained
by considering a semi-infinite M2-brane that ends on a one-dimensional submanifold P ⊂ C
times a line in M4 . The line defect is labeled by a representation Rα of SU (N ) associated to
each connected component Pα of P and a phase ζ, where ζ determines the unbroken supersymmetry. (Geometrically ζ describes how the M2-brane extends in the extra dimensions.)
We can denote the resulting line defect by L(R, P, ζ). We now consider the case where the
line defect wraps the circle of radius R in M4 at a fixed point in R3 . In this case the vacuum is
described by a solution to Hitchin’s equation to which we can associate a flat GC connection
A = Rζ −1 ϕ + AC + Rζ ϕ̄ .

(4.4)

Because these theories are partially topologically twisted, the expectation value of such a line
defect can be expressed in terms of the holonomy of this flat gauge field [16, 17]:
⟨LP ⟩ = ∏ TrRα HolPα A .

(4.5)

α

In this paper we will be focusing on the case of theories of class S with gauge group SU (2).
We will take all the representations Rα to be the fundamental representation. Therefore, the
line defects can be labeled by L(P, ζ) where P is a smooth one-dimensional submanifold of C.
Isotopy classes of such submanifolds can be conveniently labeled, given a pants decomposition
of C in terms of Dehn-Thurston parameters: 11
11

The importance of being careful about connected components in the Dehn-Thurston theorem was first
made clear to us in joint work with Anindya Dey while checking predictions of S-duality in class S theories
with gauge group G = SU (2).

– 12 –

Theorem (Dehn-Thurston): [7, 46] Let C be an oriented Riemann surface with
3g−3+n
negative Euler characteristic that has genus g and n punctures. Let {γi }i=1
be a maximal
3g−3+2n
set of non-intersecting curves defining a pants decomposition of C and let {γi }i=3g−3+n+1
be
a collection of simple closed curves near the punctures. There is a mapping
3g−3+2n
× Z3g−3+2n ,
D ∶ I(C) → Z≥0

γ ↦ (⟨γ, γi ⟩, q⃗)

(4.6)

where I(C) is the set of isotopy classes of closed one dimensional submanifolds, qi is the
twisting number with respect to γi , and ⟨ , ⟩ is the intersection number. Elements in the
image of D are denoted (⃗
p, q⃗) and are called Dehn-Thurston parameters.
The choice of {γi }3g−3+n
above correspond to a weak coupling decomposition of the
i=1
UV curve C, and specifies a Lagrangian duality frame with gauge algebra su(2)⊕h with
h = 3g − 3 + n. Each curve corresponds to a weakly coupled SU (2) gauge group in the 4D
theory.
Now consider the line defect associated to a generic 1D submanifold γp⃗,⃗q with DehnThurston (DT) parameters (⃗
p, q⃗) = (p1 , ..., ph , q1 , ..., qh ). This submanifold will have a set
(α)
of connected components γp⃗,⃗q = ⊕kα=1 γp⃗,⃗q labeled by α, each of which has its own Dehn(α)

(α)

(α)

(α)

Thurston parameters: (⃗
p(α) , q⃗(α) ) = (p1 , ..., ph , q1 , ..., qh ). The line defect L(γp⃗,⃗q , ζ)
then decomposes as a product of line defects
k

Lγp,⃗ q⃗ = ∏ Lγ (α) ,

(4.7)

p,
⃗ q⃗

α=1

In [11] it is conjectured that the line defects L(P, ζ) are the same as the ’t Hooft-Wilson
line defects of the Lagrangian theory with gauge algebra su(2)⊕h . Moreover, it is proposed
that the Dehn-Thurston parameters should be identified with the ’t Hooft-Wilson parameters
characterizing the magnetic and electric charges. This cannot be true in general, but it seems
highly plausible for those Dehn-Thurston parameters that correspond to one-dimensional
submanifolds γp⃗,⃗q with only one connected component. In this case the proposal of DrukkerMorrison-Okuda is that L(P, ζ) corresponds to the 4D line operator L[P (i) ,Q(i) ] which has ’t
Hooft-Wilson charges
h

P = ⊕ pj hI(j)
j=1

h

,

Q = ⊕ qj λI(j) ,

(4.8)

j=1

where hI(j) is the simple magnetic weight, λI(j) is the simple weight of the j th factor of the
gauge group, and h = 3g − 3 + n. It should be stressed that some more work is needed to make
use of this conjecture: In mathematics it is not known what conditions one should put on the
Dehn-Thurston parameters (⃗
p, q⃗) in order for γp⃗,⃗q to have a single connected component! The
only case where this is known is the once-punctured torus (corresponding to the G = SU (2)
N = 2∗ theory) and the four-punctured sphere (corresponding to the G = SU (2) Nf = 4

– 13 –

theory) [12]. In that case there are only a pair of DT parameters (p, q) and γ(p,q) has g
connected components, where g is the gcd of p and q.
More generally, in the case where the four-dimensional gauge group is G = SU (2) we have
only a pair of DT parameters (p, q). Here the minimally charged ’t Hooft defect corresponds
to the line with DT parameters (1, 0)
Lγ(1,0) = L[h1 ,0] ,

(4.9)

which can be identified with the highest weight representation Rh1 of SU (2)∨ . Following the
decomposition above, a line defect corresponding to DT parameters (p, 0) is the pth power of
the simple ’t Hooft defect
p
Lγ(p,0) = (L[h1 ,0] ) .
(4.10)
Thus, we see that the ‘t Hooft defect corresponding to Lγ(p,0) is reducible. By equation (4.5)
the vev is the trace of the holonomy in the representation Rh⊗p1 . This is the origin of our
notation from (2.3)
Lp,0 ∶= Lγ(p,0) .
(4.11)
By contrast L[ph1 ,0] corresponds to a trace in the representation Rph1 . If the vev of Lp,0 is
sin ((p+1)θ )
= Up (cos θ) where Up is a
expressed as (2 cos θ)p then the vev of L[ph1 ,0] has vev
sin θ
Tchebyshev polynomial.
4.1.2

Complexified Fenchel-Nielsen Coordinates

Because the expectation values of line defects in theories of class S are given by the trace of
the holonomy of a flat connection, they are holomorphic functions on Seiberg-Witten moduli
space. This allows them to be expressed via the AGT correspondence in terms of a particular
set of holomorphic coordinates called complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates. These can be
defined as follows.
Choose a weak coupling region of the Coulomb branch. This defines a complex structure
and comes with a maximal set of non-intersecting curves {γi }3g−3+n
that are not isotopic to
i=1
punctures on the UV curve C which correspond to weakly coupled gauge groups indexed by
i. 12 Associated to each γi , we can define the holomorphic coordinates {ai } ∈ tC defined by
⟨Lγi ⟩ = TrN eai .

(4.12)

The {ai } are Poisson commuting with respect to the standard, symplectic (2, 0)-form ΩJ on
Seiberg-Witten moduli space [9, 27]
ΩJ (

∂
∂
,
)=0 ,
∂ai ∂aj

and form a maximal set of Poisson commuting holomorphic functions.
12

Here we are restricting to the case of Lagrangian theories of class S with SU (2) gauge group.

– 14 –

(4.13)

Now we can define a set of symplectically dual coordinates {bi } ∈ tC with respect to ΩJ
such that
1
(4.14)
ΩJ = ̵ ∑ TrN (dai ∧ dbi ) .
h i

We can then fix the redundancy bi → bi + fi (a) where ∂ai fj = ∂aj fi by specifying the semiclassical limit as in (3.4).
In the case of a single SU (2) gauge group, as we consider here, the above discussion
reduces to a single pair of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates a, b. These define the Fenchel-Nielsen
coordinates a, b used for localization in Section 3.
4.2

Spectral Networks in Theories of Class S

For this paper, we are only considering the case of spectral networks in theories of class
S of type G = SU (2), GC = SL(2; C). However, the following discussion generalizes to all
ADE-type gauge groups [17–19, 33, 34].
A spectral network W subordinate to the covering Σ → C is a collection of oriented,
open paths w on C called walls that begin at branch points and flow to punctures of C
or other branch points. We will be interested in a special class of spectral networks which
arise naturally in theories of class S called WKB spectral networks. These are defined by a
meromorphic, quadratic differential ϕ2 on the closure C of C and a choice of ϑ ∈ R/2πZ. 13
Locally, the quadratic differential can be written
ϕ2 = u(z)(dz)2 .

(4.15)

This can be used to define a foliation of C by curves γ which satisfy
e−2iϑ u(γ(t)) (

dγ 2
) ∈ R+ ,
dt

(4.16)

where where t is an affine parameter for γ. The corresponding spectral network W(ϕ2 , ϑ)
is then defined by the critical graph of the foliation defined by ϕ2 and ϑ — i.e. the set of
limiting curves that divide the foliation into distinct sectors.
The spectral network technology developed by [18, 19] provides a trivialization of the
SL(2; C) vector bundle over the complement C/W and gives gluing conditions across the
walls. This trivialization is subordinate to the covering Σ → C such that we can locally
equate the space of flat SL(2; C) connections on C to the space of flat GL(1, C) connections
on Σ
Mf lat (Σ, GL(1; C)) ≅ Mf lat (C, SL(2; C)) ,
(4.17)
which allows us to compute holonomies of the non-abelian vector bundle E → C in terms of
holonomies of the connection of a flat line bundle on L → Σ.
The moduli space Mf lat (Σ, GL(1; C)) has a natural set of coordinates:
̂∗
Yγ = Holγ ∇ab ∈ C

13

,

∀[γ] ∈ H1 (Σ; Z) ,

For our case we will want to pick eiϑ = ζ where ζ is the phase of the line defect.

– 15 –

(4.18)

where ∇ab is the connection on L. These coordinates follow the multiplication rule
Yγ Yγ ′ = (−1)⟨γ,γ ⟩ Yγ+γ ′ ,
′

(4.19)

where ⟨ , ⟩ is the oriented intersection pairing. Further, the Yγ satisfy
Yγb = −1 ,

Yγ+ω∗ γ = 1 ,

(4.20)

where γb is a small loop around a branch point b and ω ∶ Σ → Σ is the map that exchanges
sheets of the covering Σ → C. Let us define Σ ′ = Σ/{ramification points}. For generic W, we
can fix a basis of {γi } ∈ H1 (Σ ′ ; Z)/⟨γ + ω ∗ γ⟩ to form our coordinate system on M(Σ, GL(1)).
These Yγi are the Darboux coordinates related to the spectral network W.
The holonomy of the flat non-abelian gauge connection along a 1-cycle P can now be
given in terms of Yγ associated to the decomposition of P with respect to a basis of open
paths on C/W. These open paths must then be joined across the walls of the spectral network
by transition functions such that the complete expression for the holonomy is given by the
product of the holonomies along these open paths connected by transition matrices between
the different regions of C/W.
The holonomy of an open path in a single connected region of C/W can be written as
DP = (

YP 0
)
0 YP−1

D̃P = (

or

0 YP
) ,
−YP−1 0

(4.21)

where DP corresponds to the path across a simple open region and D̃P corresponds to a path
that crosses a branch cut. Additionally, by making a convenient choice of trivialization, we
can write the holonomy across a generic wall [17–19]
⎧
⎪
⎛ 1 Sw ⎞
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎝ 0 1 ⎠
Sw = ⎨
⎪⎛ 1 0 ⎞
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎠
⎝
⎪
⎩ Sw 1

for w of type 21,
,

(4.22)

for w of type 12,

where Sw is some function of Yγi .
The case where a path crosses a double wall is a bit more subtle. To compute the parallel
transport across a double wall, one must infinitesimally displace the phase ζ (requires picking
a resolution convention) so that the double wall is replaced by a pair of generic walls; then
one can compute the holonomy across the “double wall” by using the rules above. This
prescription allows one to compute the holonomy of a complexified flat gauge connection
along any path in terms of Darboux coordinates defined by the spectral network (spectral
coordinates).
In addition to these rules, there are also several consistency conditions that restrict the
number of free spectral coordinates. These come from abelian gauge symmetry on open path
segments and from imposing monodromy conditions around branch points and punctures.

– 16 –

This gauge symmetry acts by rescaling the spectral coordinate Yγij by a function corresponding to the end points of the curve γij
Yγij → gi Yγij gj−1 ,

(4.23)

where the beginning and end points of γij are labeled by i and j respectively. Note that the
trace of the holonomy around closed paths are invariant under such gauge transformations.
The consistency conditions we impose for monodromy around a branch point b and puncture p is that
Yγ 0
−1 0
Holγb ∇ = (
(4.24)
) ,
Holγp ∇ = ( p −1 ) ,
0 Yγp
0 −1
which come from the condition in (4.20) and the trivialization of the vector bundle at the
punctures given in the data specifying the spectral network. Here ∇ is the connection on
E → C which locally can be related to the connection on L as explained in [18, 19].
In the class S construction, there is a natural choice of quadratic differential, given by
the square of the Seiberg-Witten differential
ϕ2 = λ2SW .

(4.25)

In this setting, we have that the charge lattice of the 4D theory is given by Γ ≅ H1 (Σ ′ ; Z).
Here there is a natural central charge function

given by

Z ∶Γ →C ,

(4.26)

Z ∶ γ ↦ ∫ λSW .

(4.27)

γ

This allows us to express the corresponding Darboux coordinate as a function of γ as [15]
log Yγ =

πR
non-perturbative
Zγ + πR ζ Z γ + iΘ ⋅ Qγ + {
} ,
in g
ζ

(4.28)

where Θ ⋅ Qγ is the Cartesian product of the vector of electric and magnetic theta angles
with the vector of electromagnetic charges associated to γ. It is important to note that
these coordinates generically have non-perturbative corrections to the semiclassical expression
which, while complicated, are known and given in explicit formulas in [15].14
14

The leading terms were first worked out in unpublished work by B. Pioline and A. Neitzke and in unpublished work by F. Denef and G. Moore. The main point of [15] was to give the full non-perturbative
answer.

– 17 –

E2

E'2

E

E'

E3

E'3

E1

E'1

γE

γE'

E4

E'4

Figure 2. This figure shows the flip of an edge in a triangulation (left flips to right) giving rise to a
Fock Goncharov (shear) coordinate inside a quadrilateral with edges E1 , E2 , E3 , E4 . This figure also
demonstrates the projection of the paths in Σ → C corresponding to the Darboux coordinates YE and
YE ′ .

4.3

Wall Crossing in Spectral Networks

An important feature of spectral networks is that they give us an excellent tool for understanding wall crossing. In this setting, wall crossing is realized by changes of topology of the
spectral network W(ϕ2 , ϑ) as we scan the phase ζ = eiϑ which can be lifted to ζ̂ ∈ C∗ .
The locations of the critical phases ζ = ζc where the spectral network undergoes topology
changes lift to a co-dimension-1 “walls” in C∗ called and are called K-walls [18]. Physically,
each K-wall corresponds to a co-dimension loci where ζ is aligned or anti-aligned with the
phase of Zγk . Here, the change in topology of the spectral network causes the Darboux
coordinates to undergo a cluster-like transformation/mutation [17]
Kγk ∶ Yγi ↦ (1 − σ(γ)Yγk )−⟨γk ,γi ⟩Ω(γk ) Yγi
where

σ(γ) = (−1)⟨γe ,γm ⟩ ,

,

γk ∈ Γ ,

(4.29)

(4.30)

is a particular choice of quadratic refinement with respect to a choice of splitting of the charge
lattice and γ = γe ⊕ γm [17].15
However, since the expectation value of a line defect LP is defined by a path P ⊂ C which
is independent of the topology of the spectral network, the expectation value
⟨LP ⟩ = ∑ Ω(γ, LP )Yγ ,

(4.31)

γ∈Γ

15

We will be working in the semiclassical limit so that there is always an almost canonical choice of charge
lattice splitting.

– 18 –

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3. This figure shows how a wall running to a puncture (a) twists around the puncture in
a sequence of flips (b,c) and approaches the juggle in which the wall runs completely around the
puncture (d).

is wall crossing invariant. This means that the Yγ undergo coordinate transformations which
exactly cancel the wall crossing of the framed BPS indices. Thus, by studying the wall crossing
properties of the Yγ , one can infer the wall crossing of framed BPS states.
A nice feature of generic WKB spectral networks is that the walls provide an ideal triangulation of C. In these networks, the associated Darboux coordinates have a natural
identification with the edges of the triangulation. These coordinates are given by the holonomy along the lift under the projection π ∶ Σ → C of a path running between the branch
points of different triangles through a given edge of the triangulation. See Figure 2. We will
use the notation where the Darboux coordinate associated to the edge E is denoted YE .
In such spectral networks, the fundamental topology shift that occurs in wall crossing is
a flip of the triangulation . See Figure 2. Explicitly, in a generic WKB spectral network and
consider a quadrilateral with edges E1 , E2 , E3 , E4 with diagonal edge E, a flip on the edge
E ↦ E ′ acts on the corresponding Darboux coordinates by:
YE ↦ YE−1′

YE2 ↦ YE2′ = YE2 (1 + YE−1 )−1
YE4 ↦ YE4′ =

YE1 ↦ YE1′ = YE1 (1 + YE ) ,

,
YE4 (1 + YE−1 )−1

,

YE3 ↦ YE3′ = YE3 (1 + YE ) ,

(4.32)

,

where the signed intersection pairing of the edges is ⟨E, Ei ⟩ = (−1)i .
In the case of theories with vectormultiplets, spectral networks can also undergo a topol-

– 19 –

-

V0

1

2

P-1

P0

P1

P2

V

P

Figure 4. This figure shows how to lift a spectral network on an annulus surrounding a puncture on
C to the simply connected cover. The puncture P , and exterior vertex V lift an an infinite number of
seperated points, denoted {Pi } and {Vi } respectively, connected by interior edges giving a triangulation
of the strip.

ogy change called a juggle.16 This can be understood as an infinite sequence of flips involving
a puncture that has the effect of twisting a wall that runs to a puncture until it completely
encircles it [16]. See Figure 3.
The juggle can be understood as follows [16]. Consider an annulus surrounding a puncture, P (which we replace by a disk with a marked point), with a single vertex V of the
triangulation on the outer boundary. Now consider lifting the configuration to the simply
connected cover which is a triangulated infinite strip as in Figure 4. In this covering there
are an infinite number of images of the interior marked point (P → {Pi }), exterior vertex
(V → {Vi }), and edges indexed by i ∈ Z. We can define Darboux coordinates on the annulus
as the Darboux coordinates on the triangulated strip corresponding to the different edges in
the same preimage under the projection to the annulus.
If we choose an ordering of the lifted images of the vertices, we can define a winding
number of an interior edge by the difference of the image number of the end points. Further,
we can iteratively increase (decrease) the winding numbers of the interior edges by performing
a sequence of simultaneous flips on all of the preimages of the the interior edge with the lowest
16

There is another transformation called a “pop” which has to do with changing the decoration of a given
puncture, but this will not be important for our story. See [16] for more details.

– 20 –

V-1

V0

V1

V2

V-1

V0

V1

V2

P-1

P0

P1

P2

(b)

(a)

P-1

P0

P1

P2

V-1

V0

V1

V2

P-1

P0

P1

P2

(c)

Figure 5. This figure demonstrates how flips in the spectral network on the annulus corresponds to
increasing winding number by considering the flips of all of the preimages in the triangulated strip.
Here the processes of going from (a) → (b) and (b) → (c) requires a sequence of 2 flips where the red
edges undergo the flip.

Figure 6. This shows the two possible types of Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks on a single pair of
pants where the dotted orange lines are a branch cut. These spectral networks are called ”molecules”
in [24].

(highest) winding number. See Figure 5.
After n such flips, the interior edges run between the 0th exterior vertex preimage to the
th
n and (n − 1)th interior preimage. We can now make sense of the corresponding Darboux
coordinates in the limit as n → ∞. First note that as n → ∞ the interior edges approach a
parallel line to the interior and exterior edges. This corresponds to a spectral network where
there is a single, double wall circling the puncture of C under consideration. If we define Y+
and Y− to be the edges with higher and lower winding number respectively after n flips, then
in the n → ∞ limit we can construct the well defined coordinates:
(+)

YA = lim Y+ Y−
n→∞

,

(+)

YB = lim (Y+ )−n (Y− )1−n .

– 21 –

n→∞

(4.33)

(−)

(−)

Similarly, there exists an analogous coordinate system {YA , YB } for the limit of sending
the winding to −∞ which is related by
(−)

(+)

YA = (YA )−1
4.4

,

(−)

(+)

(+)

(+)

YB = ((YA )1/2 − (YA )−1/2 )−4 (YB )−1 .

(4.34)

Fenchel-Nielsen Networks

Now we will discuss a special class of spectral networks called Fenchel-Nielsen networks [24].
These spectral networks have only double walls corresponding to a set of minimal cuts necessary to decompose the Riemann surface C into a disjoint product of punctured discs and
annuli. This is a WKB spectral network where ϕ2 is a Jenkins-Strebel differential — ϕ2 gives
a foliation of C by closed paths. Another way of saying this is that a Fenchel-Nielsen spectral
network is given by a pants decomposition of C in which on each pair of pants, the spectral
network is one of the two networks in Figure 6.
These spectral networks are referred to as Fenchel-Nielsen-type because the a-type FenchelNielsen coordinate has a straightforward interpretation in terms of the associated spectral
network coordinates. associated to these networks have a straightforward interpretation as
complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates.
Let us take a maximal set of non-intersecting curves {γi }3g−3+n
that define a pants dei=1
composition of C. On each pair of pants, there are classes of curves which are homotopic to
a subset of the {γi }. The holonomy around a curve that is homotopic to such a γi is given in
terms of the spectral network coordinates 17
⟨Lγi ⟩ = Tr2 (

Yγi 0
) = Yγi + Yγ−1
.
i
0 Yγ−1
i

(4.35)

However, we see from before, that this is simply the definition of the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinate a:
Yγi + Yγ−1
= Tr2 ea
(4.36)
i
Wilson line vevs for a fundamental representation of a factor in the (four-dimensional) gauge
algebra are usually expressed as three-term expressions in the functions Yγ . (See e.g. (10.33)
from [17].) The relation to the above two-term expansion is clarified in equation (6.22) above.
In a large class of theories, such as the ones we study here, Fenchel-Nielsen spectral
networks can be obtained from a generic WKB spectral network by performing a juggle.
This requires changing ζ such that we cross an infinite number of K-walls. In the theories
we consider, there are infinite number of such walls which accumulate along co-dimension
1 “accumulation points” in the ζ-plane. See Figure 7. In our setting, sending ζ to an
accumulation point is equivalent to undergoing the infinite number of flips that occur in a
juggle, leading to a Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network. See Section 5.2 for further discussion.
17

Note that Yγ are defined for γ ∈ H1 (Σ; Z) while Lγ is defined for γ ⊂ C. Here we use the loose notation
where Yγ for γ ⊂ C is defined as Yπ−1 (γ)∣i the lift under the projection π ∶ Σ → C onto one of the sheets. Due
to (4.20), the two choices of lifting are related by inverses and thus are merely a choice of convention.

– 22 –

ζ

Figure 7. This figure shows the structure of the K-walls in the ζ-plane. There are accumulation points
(red) on the imaginary axis where the associated WKB spectral network becomes a Fenchel-Nielsen
spectral network.

Remark Recall from the discussion of Section 4, that the spectral network coordinates
Yγ is given in (4.28) and has a semiclassical expansion with an infinite number of nonperturbative corrections. Since, as we showed above, we can identify the complexified FenchelNielsen coordinates with spectral network coordinates, the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates a, b
must similarly have an infinite number of non-perturbative corrections to their semiclassical
value. We will demonstrate this in the example of the SU (2) Nf = 0 theory in Section 6.2 by
computing the leading non-perturbative corrections.

5

Semiclassical Formulation of BPS States

Because the expectation value of a line defect in a theory of class S can be expanded as a series
of Darboux coordinates with coefficients that are framed BPS indices (4.1), the expectation
value of the line defect is entirely encoded in the spectrum of framed BPS states. In the
semiclassical limit of Lagrangian 4D N = 2 theories, the spectrum of framed BPS states can
be described by the index of a Dirac operator on singular monopole moduli space [3, 40, 41].
The identification of BPS states with the kernel of a Dirac operator arises from the effective description of the dynamics of BPS states in the adiabatic limit via collective coordinates.
The resulting theory is a SQM on (bundles over) singular monopole moduli space with potential [3, 20, 21, 36, 40, 41, 47]. Solving for the BPS spectrum is reduced to solving the Dirac
equation on singular monopole moduli space coupled to certain bundles over MBP S .

– 23 –

5.1

Moduli Space Approximation

Consider the semiclassical limit of a four-dimensional N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theory
with hypermulitiplet matter and ’t Hooft line defect insertions where ∣X∞ ∣ >> ∣Y∞ ∣. The BPS
equations for this theory are given by
Di X = Bi

,

Di Y = Ei

,

D i Ei = 0 ,

(5.1)

where ζ −1 Φ = Y + iX is the decomposition of the N = 2 vectormultiplet scalar into real and
imaginary parts and ζ is specified by the ’t Hooft defect. In the background defined by the
asymptotic boundary conditions
X = X∞ −

γm
+ ...
,
2r
g2 ∗
γ + ... ,
Y = Y∞ −
8πr e

γm
r̂i + ...
2r 2
g2 γe∗
Ei =
r̂i + ... ,
8πr 2

Bi =

(5.2)

in the limit as r → ∞ with an ’t Hooft defect insertion, the space of solutions of the equations
(5.1) is singular monopole moduli space: M(P, γm ; X∞ ).18
We can consistently describe the dynamics of BPS states up to order O(g2 ) as dynamics
on the moduli space, M(P, γm ; X∞ ). Let us now introduce coordinates {z m } on M. These
coordinates will be elevated to time dependent fields
z m ∶ Rt → M ,

(5.3)

whose variation will describe the dynamics of the BPS states.
Since we are considering the dynamics of BPS states which are 12 -SUSY, there are still
preserved supercharges. This indicates that the z m (t) have super-partners χm (t) coming
from non-trivial fermionic zero modes.
Similarly, there are also fermionic zero-modes ψ s (t) coming from the hypermultiplet
fermions that couple the theory to the spin-bundle associated with a vector bundle Ematter →
M of rank [3]
⎫
⎧
⎪
⎪
1
⎪
⎪
rnkR [Ematter ] =
∑ nρ (µ) ⎨⟨µ, γm ⟩ sign(⟨µ, X∞ ⟩ + mx ) + ∑ ∣⟨µ, Pj ⟩∣⎬ ,
⎪
⎪
2 µ∈∆R
⎪
⎪
j
⎭
⎩

(5.4)

where mx = Im[ζ −1 mf ]. Thus, the dynamics of the full effective SQM couples to the bundle
Spin(Ematter ) ⊗ SM Ð→ M ,

(5.5)

which is given in terms of the collective coordinates {z m (t), χm (t), ψ a (t)}.
The corresponding supercharges are explicitly of the form
Q̂a = χm (J̃a )mn (żn − G(Y∞ )n ) ,

(5.6)

̂a = (Ai , X) ∈ M and specifying boundary conditions (5.2), there is a unique
Upon choosing a solution A
solution of the second equation (5.1) for Y, Ei .
18

– 24 –

where

Ja = (J r , 1) ,

J̃a = (−J r , 1) .

(5.7)

and {J r } are the complex structures on T M and G(Y∞ )m is a triholomorphic vector field
that generates a global gauge transformation 19 along Y∞ ∈ t where
Y∞ = Re[ζ −1 aD ] =

4π
ϑ
Y∞ +
X∞ ,
2
g
2π

(5.9)

where ζ is defined by the line defect.
In the Hamiltonian formulation, the supercharge operator becomes a twisted Dirac operator:
(5.10)
Q̂a = iγ m (J̃a )mn (Dn − iG(Y∞ )n ) ,
where Dn is the spin coviariant derivative on Spin(Ematter ) ⊗ SM → M. Thus, BPS states
are those that are in the kernel of the supercharge Dirac operators.
Now from the supersymmetry algebra
{Q̂a , Q̂b } = 2δab (Ĥ + Re[ζ −1 Z]) ,

(5.11)

we see that if a BPS state is in the kernel of any of the supercharges, then it is in the kernel
of all of the supercharges. Therefore, the spectrum of BPS bound states can be determined
by considering the kernel of the 4th supercharge
Y

/ .
Q̂4 = iγ m (Dm − iG(Y∞ )m ) ≡ iD

(5.12)

Additionally, since the electric charge and flavor charge operators commute with the Hamiltonian, and hence the supercharge operator, we can simultaneously diagonal the two. This
leads to a decomposition of the Hilbert space of BPS states into γ = γm ⊕ γe ⊕ γf -isotypical
BP S
BP S
HL
= ⊕ HL
.
p,0
p,0 ,γ

(5.13)

γ∈Γ

Therefore, we can identify
BP S
/Y]
] = IndL2 [D
dim[HL
p,0 ,γ

γe⊕γf

M

= Ω (γ; u)

,

γ = γm ⊕ γe ⊕ γf ,

(5.14)

where here we mean the γe ⊕ γf -isotypical component of the L2 index of the Dirac operator
/ Y on M(P, γm ; X∞ ).
D
19

More generally, the vector fields G(HI )m , which generate global gauge transformations along HI ∈ t, are
defined by
D̂2 ǫHI = 0

,

lim ǫHI = HI

∣⃗
x∣→∞

,

̂a ,
D̂a ǫHI = −G(HI )m δm A

(5.8)

̂a ∈ M(P, γm ; X∞ ) and the {δm A
̂a } form a basis of the
where D̂a is the covariant derivative with connection A
tangent space T[Âa ] M(P, γm ; X∞ ).

– 25 –

5.2

Fenchel-Nielsen Spectral Networks and The Semiclassical Region

Now we can connect the formalism of semiclassical BPS states and spectral networks. Recall
that the the expectation value of line defects is determined by the framed BPS index as in
(4.1). Therefore, the index of the Dirac operator from the previous section can be used to
determine the expectation value of an ’t Hooft defect in the semiclassical limit.
Since we want to compare to the localization computation, which is naturally expressed in
terms of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates, one would hope to use Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks
and the associated Dirac operators. In order to implement this we need to know: 1.) if there
exists Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks in the semiclassical limit and 2.) where in parameter
space these spectral networks exist so that we can compare to indices of Dirac operators. In
this section we will show that such spectral networks exist in the semiclassical limit, but that
they only exist in parameter space where the moduli space approximation breaks down.
The question of whether or not a Fenchel-Nielsen network exists is equivalent to the
question of whether or not there exists a Jenkins-Strebel differential on C that encodes the
data of the theory in some semiclassical limit. The data of the differential is (u, ζ, m) ∈
B × U (1) × tF .
The existence of Jenkins-Strebel differentials on a Riemann surface C with punctures are
studied by Liu [30, 31]. There, Liu shows that given a decomposition of C into a collection
of punctured disks {Dm } and annuli {Rk }, there exists a uniquely determined real JenkinsStrebel differential with closed trajectory ϕ2 with fixed monodromy mi ∈ R around each
puncture and height hk ∈ R around each annuli where the height is defined as
hk = Inf γk ∮

γk

√
∣Im ϕ2 ∣ ,

(5.15)

where the infimum is taken over all paths that run between the boundaries of Rk . Note that
the Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network is exactly given by the union of the boundaries of these
component disks and annuli.
Now consider as an example the case of the 4D SU (2) N = 2∗ theory. This theory is
constructed as a theory of class S by taking C to be a torus with a single puncture. This
theory comes with a complex 2-dimensional parameter space defined by u ∈ B ≅ C and the
complex mass parameter of the hypermultiplet. C can be decomposed as an annulus Ra
and a punctured disk Dm . See Figure 8 for the example of the 4D SU (2) N = 2∗ theory
where C = T 2 /{0}.20 Thus, there is a 3 dimensional family (specifying m, γ, and ζ) of
Jenkins-Strebel differentials which forms a real co-dimension 1 subspace of parameter space.
This suggests that there could exist a Jenkins-Strebel differential in the semiclassical limit
(∣u∣ → ∞ ) and therefore that there could exist a Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks in the
semiclassical limit. This has been confirmed by numerical computations.21
20

We would especially like to thank Pietro Longhi for providing these figures.
We would like to thank Pietro Longhi for sharing his numerical computation for the SU (2) N = 2∗ theory
and for making the authors aware of Liu’s work on Jenkins-Strebel differentials.
21

– 26 –

Figure 8. This figure shows the explicit decomposition of the UV curve C = T 2 /{0} into disks
and annuli for the 4D SU (2) N = 2∗ theory in two different ways. Note that the boundary of
these components give rise to the Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks corresponding to both types of
fundamental molecules. Which type of Fenchel-Nielsen molecules appear in the spectral network is
dependent on the relative holonomies of the cuts. See [24] for details.

Now recall that for a WKB Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network, the real Jenkins-Strebel
differential is related to the Seiberg-Witten differential as
ϕ2 = ζ −2 λ2SW .

(5.16)

Asking that ϕ2 as defined by this equation is a Jenkins-Strebel differential defines the FenchelNielsen locus in B ∗ × C∗ .
As usual in Seiberg-Witten theory, the periods of λSW give the vev’s of the Higgs field
and mass parameters. In our case the UV curve is given by C = T 2 /{0}. This means that if
we pick a basis of H1 (Σ̄; Z) = spanZ {A, B},
∮ λSW = a
A

,

∮ λSW = aD
B

,

∮

Dp

λSW = mf ,

(5.17)

where Dp is a loop circling the puncture and mf is the mass of the adjoint hypermultiplet.
In this notation, the condition that ϕ2 is a Jenkins-Strebel differential (and hence gives rise
to a Fenchel-Nielsen-type WKB spectral network) is that
−1
∮ ζ λSW ∈ R ,
A

∮

Dmi

ζ −1 λSW ∈ R ,

(5.18)

which can be rewritten as
Im[ζ −1 a] = X∞ = 0 ,

Im[ζ −1 mf ] = mx = 0 .

(5.19)

This locus in parameter space, which we will call the Fenchel-Nielsen locus, is an accumulation
point of K-walls in the ζ-plane and we will denote the associate phase in U (1) as ζF N .
– 27 –

Unfortunately, the Fenchel-Nielsen locus is exactly where the moduli space approximation, which gives the identification between the framed BPS index and the index of a Dirac
operator on singular monopole moduli space, breaks down. In the limit X∞ → 0, the space
M(Pn , γm ; X∞ ) (and M(γm ; X∞ )) are not defined. The reason is that the semiclassical
expression for the central charge is given by
ζ −1 Zγ = − [

4π
4π
(γm , X∞ ) − ⟨γe , Y∞ ⟩] + i [ 2 (γm , Y∞ ) + ⟨γe , X∞ ⟩] .
g2
g

(5.20)

Thus the BPS mass MBP S = Re[ζ −1 Zγ ] for a monopole goes to zero as we scan ζ such that
X∞ → 0. However, we know that monopoles do not become massless in the semiclassical
limit. Thus, we can deduce that the non-perturbative quantum effects must become large
and therefore the effective SQM description above must break down.
However, by taking ∣X∞ ∣, ∣Y∞ ∣ → ∞ as ∣X∞ ∣/∣Y∞ ∣ → 0, we can still identify framed BPS
indices with the index of a Dirac operator for phases which are arbitrarily close to the FenchelNielsen locus. This will allow us to give an index theorem for the supercharge Dirac operators
almost everywhere on the ζ-plane. See Figure 1 of [41] or Figure 4 of [40] for more details.
The above analysis makes it clear that there always exists SU (2) Fenchel-Nielsen networks (and in fact all SU (N )-type Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks) in the semiclassical
limit. These exist on the locus where all of the masses and ai = ∮Ai λSW have the same
phase. Such a spectral network can be constructed by gluing together pairs of pants with
semiclassical Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks on them by the procedure of [24]. The only
condition here is that the Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks all have the associated phase.
Remark Recall that a Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network corresponds to a WKB spectral
network with a Jenkins-Strebel differential. This is defined by decomposing the Riemann
surface C into a collection of annuli and punctured disks. On each component, the flow lines
of ϕ give a foliation of curves that are homotopic to the boundary components. If we consider
infinitesimally deforming the phase ζ associated to the quadratic differential, we find that
the flow lines on each component are no longer homotopic to the boundary components, but
rather spiral into them with a very large winding number. Thus, as we send ζ → ζF N the
flow lines of ϕ2 twist around the boundary components infinitely many times until they form
closed paths, producing a Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network. This infinite spiraling indicates
that Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks can be achieved by performing a juggle on a WKB
spectral network where all physical parameters have aligned phases. Using the procedure from
Section 8.4 of [24], one can identify the limiting coordinates (4.33) with the Fenchel-Nielsen
(+)
(+)
coordinates YA = ea , while YB defines a choice of eb . 22
Thus, the Darboux coordinates associated to Fenchel-Nielsen spectral networks in the
cases we are studying can be obtained by acting on a generic set of spectral network coor22

Note that we could also approach the Fenchel-Nielsen locus in the opposite direction. The procedure from
[24] in conjunction with the relation between the two limiting coordinates (4.34), correspond to two different
±
choices of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates. Equation (7.52) of [16] shows that a is well-defined and YB
define two
choices of b that are related by (4.34).

– 28 –

dinates by an infinite number of cluster coordinate transformations. The resulting spectral
network coordinates are those that result from the flip (4.33). This gives a recursion formula
for the Darboux coordinates that can be “integrated” to give a relation between the Darboux
coordinates of a spectral network in any chamber and the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates which
are used in localization computations. This will be the primary computational tool that we
will use to construct an index theorem and give a formula for the characteristic numbers in
the next section.

6

Index Theorem and Characteristic Numbers

In this section we will compare the different methods of computing the expectation value of
’t Hooft defects in 4D N = 2 G = SU (2) asymptotically free theories with fundamental and
hypermultiplet matter. We will outline how this comparison can be used to give an index
theorem for Dirac operators on singular monopole moduli spaces and give the characteristic
numbers of certain Kronheimer-Nakajima spaces23 . We will explicitly show these for the
SU (2) Nf = 0 theory.
6.1

General Theory

Consider an N = 2 SU (2) Lagrangian theory of class S with mass parameters of identical
phase. Now pick a point in the semiclassical limit of the Coulomb branch away from the
Fenchel-Nielsen locus. We are interested in computing the expectation values of a ’t Hooft
defect which is specified by an integer p and a phase ζ.
Now consider comparing the localization and spectral network result for the expectation
value of ’t Hooft defects. Localization requires introducing an IR regulating 12 Ω-deformation
and expresses the expectation value in terms of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates. This coordinate
expansion is well defined almost everywhere in a simply connected region on the Coulomb
branch and is independent of the phase of ζ there due to trivial monodromy. The spectral
networks computation however, is not independent of the phase ζ. Rather, it is different
in each chamber cn ⊂ Cζ of the ζ-plane.24 The reason is that the spectral network undergoes topology change at each K-wall and hence has a different set of associated Darboux
coordinates in each chamber cn ⊂ Cζ .
Away from the Fenchel-Nielsen locus, the spectral network coordinates are not FenchelNielsen coordinates, but rather are Darboux coordinates which are related to the localization
Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates by an infinite sequence of Kontsevich-Soibelman transformations.
Due to the “simple” transformation properties of the spectral network coordinates, these
coordinate transformations can be integrated to determine the mapping between FenchelNielsen coordinates and the Darboux coordinates in every chamber. This can be achieved as
follows. First, solve for the expectation value of the minimal Wilson and ’t Hooft defects in a
23

These are the transversal slice to the stratum of the bubbling locus of singlar monopole moduli spaces.
See [4, 42] for details.
24
Here ζ changes the decomposition of u into X∞ , Y∞ .

– 29 –

generic WKB spectral network of choice. We will assign the chamber in the ζ-plane in which
we have computed these as the c0 chamber. Now by tuning the phase of ζ, we will cross walls
of marginal stability which takes us from the cn chamber to the cn±1 chamber depending on
the direction we tune ζ.
Now we can solve for the expectation values in all chambers by solving the recursive
K-wall crossing formulas [17]:
⟨L1,0 ⟩ζ∈cn (Yγi ) = ⟨L1,0 ⟩ζ∈cn−1 (Kγn ⋅ Yγi ) ,

⟨L0,1 ⟩ζ∈cn (Yγi ) = ⟨L0,1 ⟩ζ∈cn−1 (Kγn ⋅ Yγi ) , (6.1)

where ⟨L⟩ζ∈cn is the expectation value of L computed using the WKB spectral network aĉ(γn ).
ssociated to ζ ∈ cn and the K-wall between the cn and cn−1 chamber is W
1
After we set the 2 Ω deformation parameter ǫ+ → 0, we can then compare the localization
expression of the expectation value of the Wilson and ‘t Hooft defects to their expression in
terms of the spectral network coordinates in a generic chamber chamber ci . Inverting these
formulas allows us to solve for (a, b) in terms of the Yγ in some fixed chamber ci .
Then, by combining this with the solution with the KS-wall crossing formulas, we then
have an expression for the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates (a, b) in terms of the Yγ in all chambers
cn . Inverting the formulas, one obtains an (admittedly complicated) expression for the a, b
in terms of the Yγ .
We can then take these expressions and substitute the expression for a, b in terms of
the Yγ into the localization expression above. By identifying the coefficients of the Laurent
expansion with that of the spectral network computation we arrive at an expression for the
framed BPS indices in every chamber. Then by using the relation of the index of the Dirac
operator to the framed BPS indices in the semiclassical limit away from the Fenchel-Nielsen
locus
Y γe ⊕γf

/ ]
∑ Ind[D

γ∈Γ

M(P,γm ;X∞ )

Yγ = ∑ Ω (γ; L[P,0] , cn ) Yγ
γ∈Γ

⎧
⎫
(6.2)
⎪
⎪
⎪
∣v∣
̃KN ) ⋅ CT ×T (V(R))]⎪
̂T (T M
,
= ⎨ ∑ e(v,b) (F (a)) [lim ∫ ξ
⎬
eω+µT A
F
̃
a
⎪
⎪
ξ→0 M
(P,v)
⎪
⎪
KN
⎩∣v∣≤∣P ∣
⎭eb =fa (Yγ )
e =fb (Yγ )

we get an index formula for the associated Dirac operator in all chambers arbitrarily close to
the Fenchel-Nielsen locus.
Similarly, we can substitute the expression for the Darboux coordinates Yγ in the cn
chamber in terms of the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates a, b into the spectral network computation. Then, identifying the coefficients of the Laurent expansion in terms of the exponentiated
Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates on both sides
∣v∣

b
∑ e (F (a)) Zmono (a, m; P, v) = ∑ Ω(γ; L[P,0] , cn )Yγ (a, b) ,

∣v∣≤P

γ∈Γ

Zmono (a, m; P, v) = lim ∫
ξ→0

̃ξ (P,v)
M
KN

̂T (T M
̃KN ) ⋅ CT ×T (V(R)) ,
eω+µT A
F

– 30 –

(6.3)

allows us to express the characteristic numbers that determine Zmono (a, m; P, v) as a rational
function of exponentiated Fenchel-Nielsen a-coordinates, masses, and framed BPS indices.

Remark Note that there is an additional subtlety in the case of the N = 2 SU (2) Nf = 4
theory. The reason is that Zmono (a, m; P, v) is not entirely given by a characteristic number
but rather has an additional contribution from states on the Coulomb branch of an associated
SQM [6].
Example: SU (2) Nf = 0 Theory

6.2

Now we will apply the above, discussion to determine the framed BPS indices for the SU (2)
Nf = 0 theory. This will produce an index-like formula for a Dirac operator coupled to a
hyperholomorphic vector field Gn (Y∞ ) on singular monopole moduli space.
The expectation value of the ’t Hooft defect in the Nf = 0 theory is given in terms of
Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates as
⟨Lp,0 ⟩Loc = ∑ cosh(v, b)(F (a)) Zmono (a; P, v) ,
v

(6.4)

0≤v≤p

where

P = diag(p, −p)

v = diag(v, −v) .

,

(6.5)

In the case where ǫ+ = 0, which is necessary for comparing with the Fenchel-Nielsen and Dirac
operator expressions, these have the simple form
⟨L0,1 ⟩Loc = ea + e−a

eb + e−b
.
2 sinh(a)

⟨L1,0 ⟩Loc =

,

(6.6)

As shown in [17, 40], the expectation value of the ’t Hooft defect of minimal charge in
terms of Darboux coordinates in the chamber cn is given by 25

where

⟨L1,0 ⟩ζ∈cn =

1
1
(Un (fn ) −
Un−1 (fn ))
n
Xm Xe
Xe
fn =

and

,

⟨L0,1 ⟩ζ∈cn = 2fn ,

1
1
2 2n+2
(Xe +
(1 + Xm
Xe
)) ,
2
Xe

X m = Y 1 Hα

,

2

Xe = Y 1 α .
2

(6.7)

(6.8)

(6.9)

Here we take n ∈ Z+ to denote the chamber cn in the ζ-plane and the notation Un to denote
the Tchebyshev polynomial of the second kind:

25

Un−1 (cos(x)) =

sin(nx)
.
sin(x)

Recall that L1,0 is the minimal ’t Hooft defect and L0,1 is the minimal Wilson defect.

– 31 –

(6.10)

In this theory, the Fenchel-Nielsen locus is given by ⟨α, X∞ ⟩ = 0. 26 Let us pick a u ∈ B such
that Φ∞ = ±iX∞ when ζ ∈ R and Φ∞ = ±Y∞ when ζ ∈ iR. We can now identify the imaginary
axis as the Fenchel-Nielsen locus.
The spectrum of the vanilla BPS states in the semiclassical region are given by
γ = ±α

,

γn± = ±Hα ⊕ n α

, n∈Z ,

(6.11)

with BPS indices

⎧
⎪
−2 γ = ±α
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
(6.12)
Ω(γ; u) = ⎨1
γ = γn±
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
else
⎩0
Thus, the phase of the central charge corresponding to a state with charge γ = γm ⊕ γe is
given by
phase(Zγ ) = − arctan [

(γm , Y∞ ) g2 ⟨γe , X∞ ⟩ (γm , Y∞ )⟨γe , Y∞ ⟩
+
(
+
)] + O(g4 ) ,
(γm , X∞ ) 4π (γm , X∞ )
(γm , X∞ )2

g 2 ⟨γe , Y∞ ⟩
⟨γe , X∞ ⟩
(γm , Y∞ )
[1 +
(
+
)]} + O(g4 ) .
= − arctan {
(γm , X∞ )
4π (γm , X∞ ) (γm , Y∞ )

(6.13)

Without loss of generality, we can restrict to the case ζ in the positive real half-plane (the
other cases follow analogously). We are now only concerned with the phase of BPS states
whose K-walls are in the positive real half-ζ plane. These BPS states have charges γn− with
K-walls along the phases
phase(Zγn− ) = − arctan {

(Hα , Y∞ )
n g2 (Hα , Y∞ ) (Hα , X∞ )
[1 −
(
+
)]} ,
(Hα , X∞ )
4π (Hα , X∞ ) (Hα , Y∞ )

(6.14)

to order O(g4 ). Note that the phases of the chentral charges are ordered

(6.15)

̂ ∗ as
in the positive real half-plane. We can now define the chambers cn ⊂ C

(6.16)

− ) ,
phase(Zγn− ) > phase(Zγn−1

̂ ∗ ∣ phase(Zγn ) > phase(ζ) > phase(Zγ )} .
cn ∶= {ζ ∈ C
n−1

̂(γn− ), the Xi,n−1 mutate as:
At the K-wall defined by W
n
Kγn− X1,n−1 = (1+X1,n−1 X2,n−1
)−2n X1,n−1

,

n
Kγn− X2,n−1 = (1+X1,n−1 X2,n−1
)2 X2,n−1 . (6.17)

By comparing with the computation of ⟨L1,0 ⟩ and ⟨L0,1 ⟩ using localization, we can determine the coordinate transformation relating the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates to the spectral
network coordinates in the cn chamber:
Xm = −
26

b(a2 − 1)(1 + a2n+2 b2 )n
a(1 + a2n b2 )n+1

,

Xe =

a(1 + a2n b2 )
,
(1 + a2n+2 b2 )

(6.18)

Note, that here we have defined X∞ ∈ t to lie in the positive chamber. We will thus assume that ⟨α, X∞ ⟩ ≥ 0.

– 32 –

where
a = ea

b = eb .

,

We can now invert the expressions (6.18) to get
√
a = fn − fn2 − 1

(6.19)

√
a − Xe

,
b= √
a2n+1 (aXe − 1)

,

1
1
2 2n+1
fn = (Xe +
) .
Xe
+ Xm
2
Xe

(6.20)

Note that both of these pairs of expressions requires matching the semiclassical expressions
for X1,0 , X2,0 , ea , eb .
This can be used to show explicitly that the spectral network coordinates approach the
Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates as we approach the Fenchel-Nielsen locus. Sending the phase
ζ → ζF N can then be achieved by sending n → ∞ or n → −∞. Going to the Fenchel-Nielsen
locus rotates the phase of Φ∞ = ζ(Y∞ + iX∞ ) so that, in the limit n → ±∞, ±⟨α, Y∞ ⟩ > 0.
Then from the expression for Yγ (4.28), we see that limn→±∞ Yγn is exponentially suppressed
lim Yγn ∼ lim e−(∣n∣+1)πR∣⟨α,Y∞ ⟩∣ × O(e−4π

n→±∞

2 R/g 2

n→∞

)=0 .

(6.21)

Thus, sending ζ → ζF N reduces the standard three-term expansion of the value of the Wilson
line to
lim ⟨L1,0 ⟩n = Y 1 α + Y− 1 α .
(6.22)
n→±∞
±a 27

2

2

This allows us to identify Y 1 α = e .
2
The coordinate identification above can also be seen from taking limits of the coordinate
transformation expressions (6.18). As ζ → ζF N , we pass through chambers with n → ±∞.
From the semiclassical expression for a in (3.4), we see that in this region
lim ∣e±⟨α,a⟩ ∣

n→±∞

Therefore:

ζ∈cn

<1 .

(6.23)

lim Xe = lim Y 1 α = e±a ∣ζ=ζ

n→±∞

n→±∞

FN

2

Similarly we can apply this method to Xm = Y 1 Hα to find

.

(6.24)

.

(6.25)

2

lim Y 1 Hα = − sinh(a)e±b ∣ζ=ζ

n→±∞

FN

2

Using the identification of the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates with spectral network coordinates in cn (6.20), it is possible to compute explicitly the non-perturbative corrections to a, b.
From the results of [15], we know that the corrections to the semiclassical contribution of Yγ
are given by solving the recursive formula
log Yγ (u, θ, ζ) = log Yγsf (u, θ, ζ)
+ ∑ Ω(γ ′ ; u)
γ′

27

⟨γ ′ , γ⟩
dζ ′ ζ ′ + ζ
log(1 − Yγ ′ (u, θ, ζ ′ )) ,
∫
′
′
4πi
ℓγ ′ ζ ζ − ζ

As we will see below, the signs are correlated with the different limits n → ±∞.

– 33 –

(6.26)

where Yγsf is the semi-flat term which is the semiclassical expression in (4.28) and ℓγ ′ is the
ray in the ζ-plane along the K-wall Kγ ′ .
To compute the first order non-perturbative corrections to a, b, we need to use the fact

sf
that the semi-flat expressions for Xe , Xm are of order Xesf ∼ O(1) while Xm
∼ O (e

− 4π2

this, we can expand the expressions for a, b as a Laurent series in Xm :
ea = Xe [1 +

Xe2n+1
4
)] ,
X 2 + O(Xm
Xe − 1/Xe m

g

). Using

2
Xe2n+1 Xm
Xm
4
[1
−
e =−
)] ,
fn (Xe ) + O(Xm
Xe − Xe−1
(Xe − 1/Xe )3
b

where

fn (Xe ) = Xe + n(Xe − 1/Xe ) .

(6.27)

(6.28)

Then by taking into account the non-perturbative corrections to Xe , Xm and comparing or− 4π

ders in e g2 , we can compute the first order non-perturbative corrections to the leading
(semiclassical) expression for a, b as
a(1)
n.p.

=

log[Xen.p.(1) ] + log [1 +

n.p.(1)
]+(
b(1)
n.p. = log[Xm

(1)

Xesf − 1/Xesf

Xesf + 1/Xesf

] ,

) log[Xen.p.(1) ]
sf
− 1/Xe
sf 2n+1
sf 2
(Xe )
(Xm
)
f (Xesf )]
sf
sf 2 n
4(Xe − 1/Xe )

(6.29)

Xesf

+ log [1 −

(1)

sf 2
(Xesf )2n+1 (Xm
)

,

Here an.p. , bn.p. are the first of an infinite series of non-perturbative corrections to the semiclassical values of a, b
a = as.c. + ∑ a(i)
n.p.
i=1

b = bs.c. + ∑ b(i)
n.p. ,
∞

∞

,

(6.30)

i=1

are the leading order non-perturbative corrections to the semi-flat ex, Xm
and Xe
pressions for Xm , Xe which are given by [15]:
n.p.(1)

n.p.(1)

Xen.p.(1) (u, Θ, ζ) = ∑ Ω(γ ′ ; u)
±
γ ′ =γn

n.p.(1)
Xm
(u, Θ, ζ) =

∑

± ,±α
γ ′ =γn

⟪γ ′ , 21 α⟫ iΘ⋅γ ′
dζ ′ ζ ′ + ζe−iαγ′ −2πR∣Zγ′ ∣(ζ ′ +1/ζ ′ )
e
,
e
∫R ζ ′ ′
4πi
ζ − ζe−iαγ′
+

Ω(γ ′ ; u)

⟪γ ′ , 12 Hα ⟫ iΘ⋅γ ′
dζ ′ ζ ′ + ζe−iαγ′ −2πR∣Zγ′ ∣(ζ ′ +1/ζ ′ )
,
e
e
∫
4πi
R+ ζ ′ ζ ′ − ζe−iαγ ′

(6.31)

– 34 –

Using the BPS indices (6.12), these integrals simplify to
Xen.p.(1) =

dζ ′ sin(θm + nθe )(ζ ′2 + ζ 2 ) + 2ζ ′ ζ cos(θm + nθe ) sin(αγn+ ) −2πR∣Zγ′ ∣(ζ ′ +1/ζ ′ )
i
,
e
∑∫
π n∈Z R+ ζ ′
ζ ′2 + ζ 2 − 2ζ cos(αγn+ )

dζ ′ sin(θm + nθe )(ζ ′2 + ζ 2 ) + 2ζ ′ ζ cos(θm + nθe ) sin(αγn+ ) −2πR∣Zγ′ ∣(ζ ′ +1/ζ ′ )
n
e
∫
′
ζ ′2 + ζ 2 − 2ζ cos(αγn+ )
n∈Z 2πi R+ ζ

n.p.(1)
=∑
Xm

+

2i
dζ ′ sin(θe )(ζ ′2 + ζ 2 ) + 2ζ ′ ζ cos(θe ) sin(αα ) −2πR∣Zγ′ ∣(ζ ′ +1/ζ ′ )
e
.
∫
π R+ ζ ′
ζ ′2 + ζ 2 − 2ζ cos(αα )

(6.32)

where above we have used the notation where the integral over ζ ′ has been mapped to the
integral over the positive reals by the phase rotation eiαγ′ = phase(Zγ ′ ) and ⟪γ, γ ′ ⟫ is the
DSZ pairing of charges.
Note that the Yγ are functions of u, θe , θm , ζ on the Hitchin moduli space. Because of
the relation between the a, b and the Xe , Xm in (6.18) and (6.20), we clearly see that the a, b
must also be functions of u, θe , θm , ζ. The explicit dependence of a, b on ζ can be seen first
fixing a point in Hitchin moduli space with fixed coordinates (u, θe , θm ), and then studying
the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates as functions of the complex structure ζ.
6.2.1

Index Theorem

We can now use these coordinate transformations to determine an index formula as follows:
1. Calculate the localization computation for the expectation value of the given line operator:
e(v,b)
̂ M)
̃ ,
⋅ lim ∫
eω+µT A(T
(6.33)
⟨Lp,0 ⟩Loc = ∑
∣v∣
ξ (P,v)
̃
ξ→0
M
∣v∣<∣P ∣ sinh (a)
⃗ w)
̃ξ (P, v) = M
̃ξ (k,
where M
⃗ is the corresponding Kronheimer-Nakajima quiver
KN
KN
variety as described in Section 2.1. In this example it evaluates to
⟨Lp,0 ⟩Loc

2. Perform the change of coordinates:
a ↦ log(fn −

√

fn2

− 1)

eb + e−b
) .
=(
2 sinh(a)
p

,

√
⎞
⎛
a − Xe
,
b ↦ log √
⎝ a2n+1 (aXe − 1) ⎠

(6.34)

(6.35)

in the localization result, where fn is given in equation (6.8) and a = ea as a function of
Xm , Xe .

3. Expand the ⟨Lp,0 ⟩Loc as a Laurent series in Xm , Xe :

nm
, Xene .
⟨Lp,0 ⟩Loc = ∑ Cnm ,ne Xm
n1 ,n2

– 35 –

(6.36)

nm ne
Xe term, Cnm ,ne , with the index:
4. Identify the coefficient of the Xm
Y γe

/ ]
Ind[D

M,cn

where
ζ ∈ cn

M = M(P, γm ) ,

,

γ=

= Cnm ,ne ,

(6.37)

ne
α ⊕ nm Hα
2

,

P = pHα .

(6.38)

After performing the Laurent expansion for ⟨Lp,0 ⟩ given in (6.34) in terms of the Darboux
coordinates in the cn chamber, we have an expression for the graded index of the twisted Dirac
/ Y on singular monopole moduli space:
operator D
ne
Y γe = 2 α

/ ]
Ind[D

M(P,γm ;X∞ )

∞

p

j+m+q+i
2p ∞ ∞ k +(2n+1)(p−k) ⌊d1 /2⌋ ∞

= ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑∑∑

m=0 j=0 k=0 ℓ=0 i=0 q=0

∑ ∑(

∑

d1 =0

d2 =0 d3

p+m−1
2p
)( )
m
k

p+ℓ−1
k+i−1
p
k
j + m + q + i + (2n + 1)(p − k)
⌊d1 /2⌋
2d3
)(
)( )( )(
)(
)(
)
ℓ
i
j
q
d1
d2
d2
⎧
⎪
⎛ 2ℓ − 2d2 − 2d3 ⎞
⎪
⎪
⎪
(−1)i1 ∆ne ,nm
ℓ − d2 − d3 > 0
⎪
∑i1 +i2 =2ℓ−2d2 −2d3
⎪
⎪
−2p
⎠
⎝
⎪
i
,
i
2
⎪
1 2
j+q+d2
× (−1)
×⎨
(1 − 2d3 ) ⎪
⎪ ∞
⎛ i1 + 2d2 + 2d3 − 2ℓ − 1 ⎞ ⎛ i1 ⎞
⎪
i
⎪
⎪
(−1)i1 ∆ne ,nm ℓ − d2 − d3 < 0
∑i1 =0 ∑i12 =0
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎠
⎠
⎝
⎝
i
i
⎪
2
1
⎩
(6.39)
×(

where ∆ne ,nm is a delta function that restricts the sum over the {m, j, k, ℓ, i, q, di , ii } such that
⎧
⎪
ℓ − d2 − d3 > 0
⎪i2
,
nm = ⎨
⎪
⎪
2(ℓ
−
d
−
d
)
−
i
ℓ
−
d
−
d
<
0
2
3
1
2
3
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪2i1 + (2n + 2)i2 + 2(d2 + d3 − ℓ) + i + j + k − m − p
ne = ⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩−(2n + 2)i1 + 2i2 − 2(2n + 1)(d2 + d3 − ℓ) + i + j + m − p

ℓ − d2 − d3 > 0

ℓ − d2 − d3 < 0

(6.40)
,

are fixed. Additionally,

P = diag(p, −p)

,

ζ ∈ cn

,

γm = nm Hα .

(6.41)

This index formula for the case of SU (2) SYM theory is also found in [40].
6.2.2

Characteristic Numbers

Now by expressing Yγ in terms of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates, we can perform a Laurent
expansion with respect to the exponential Fenchel-Nielsen coordinate eb . This will allow us

– 36 –

to isolate the characteristic number. By using the equations for the Darboux coordinates in
terms of Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates (6.18), we get the expansion
⎧
⎪
⎪
(n ,n )
̂ M
̃KN ) =
⎨Ω(nm , ne ; cn )Q1 m e (a; cn )
eω+µT A(T
lim ∫ ξ
∑
̃
⎪
ξ→0 M
(P,v)
0≤nm ,ne ≤p ⎪
KN
⎩
(nm ,ne )
(n ,n )
(6.42)
(a; cn ) + Ω(−nm , −ne ; cn )Q3 m e (a; cn )
+ Ω(−nm , ne ; cn )Q2
⎫
⎪
⎪
(nm ,ne )
+ Ω(nm , −ne ; cn )Q4
(a; cn )⎬ .
⎪
⎪
⎭
where
P = diag(p, −p) ,

(nm ,ne )

and the Qi

(nm ,ne )

Q1

Ω(nm , ne ; cn ) = Ω(γ; cn ) ,

(nm ,ne )

ne

(a, v; cn ) = ∑

[

2nm +v
−i1 ]
2
2nnm

∑

j1 =0

ne

(a, v; cn ) = ∑

[

×(

′

∑

i2 +j2 =
v−nm
−i1 −j1
2

(

ne
i2 + ne − 1
2nm n
)(
)(
)
i1
i2
j1

∑

′

∑

(

ne
i2 − ne − 1
2nm (n + 1)
)(
)(
)
i1
i2
j1

i2 +j2 =
nm +v
−i1 −j1
2

(

ne
i2 − ne − 1
2nm (n + 1)
)(
)(
)
i1
i2
j1

(

i2 + ne − 1
2nm n
ne
)(
)(
)
i1
i2
j1

j2 + 2nm n − 1
) (−1)i2 +j2 +2nm a2n(i1 +j1 )+(2n+2)(i2 +j2 )+ne +2nm −2v (1 − a2 )2(v−nm ) ,
j2

(nm ,ne )

Q3

ne

(a, v; cn ) = ∑

[

2nm +v
−i1
2
]
2nm (n+1)

∑

j1 =0

i1 =0

×(

2nm +v
−i1
2
]
2nm (n+1)

j1 =0

i1 =0

′

∑

i2 +j2 =
nm +v
−i1 −j1
2

j2 + 2nm n − 1
) (−1)i2 +2nm +j2 a2n(i1 +j1 )+(2n+2)(i1 +j2 )+2nm −ne −2v (1 − a2 )2(v−nm ) ,
j2

(nm ,ne )

ne

(a, v; cn ) = ∑

i1 =0

×(

(6.43)

j2 + 2nm (n + 1) − 1
) (−1)2nm +i2 +j2 a2n(i1 +j2 )+(2n+2)(i2 +j1 )+ne −2(nm −v) (1 − a2 )2(nm +v) ,
j2

Q2

Q4

1
γ = nm HI ⊕ ne α ,
2

(a, v; cn ) are different rational functions of a, defined as
i1 =0

×(

v = diag(v, −v) ,

[

2nm +v
−i1 ]
2
2nnm

∑

j1 =0

′

∑

i2 +j2 =
v−nm
−i1 −j1
2

j2 + 2nm (n + 1) − 1
) (−1)i2 +j2 +2nm a2n(i2 +j2 )+(2n+2)(i1 +j1 )−2nm −ne −2v (1 − a2 )2(nm +v) .
j2
(6.44)

– 37 –

Here we use the notation

[m
n]

min[m,n]

i=0

i=0

∑=

∑

,

(

−1
)=1 ,
0

⎧
⎪
⎪
∑i2 +j2 =...
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
′
⎪∑j2 =...
⎪
∑ = ⎨ i2 =0
⎪∑i =...
i2 +j2 =... ⎪
⎪
2
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪ j2 =0
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩∑i2 ,j2 =0

ne , nm ≠ 0
ne = 0 , nm ≠ 0
nm = 0 , ne ≠ 0

(6.45)

ne = nm = 0 .

and the sums are restricted such that ∑bn=a is identically zero for b < a.
/ Y and the characteristic numbers
Note that in both the formulas for the index of D
on MKN , there is a clear mixing of framed BPS states of magnetic charge γm among many
characteristic numbers for different. This suggests that there is a very non-trivial relationship
between framed BPS states and the geometry of singular monopole moduli space since the
MKN are transversal slices to singular strata in M(P, γm ; X∞ ). It is an interesting challenge
to differential geometers to try to prove such relations.
6.2.3

Explicit Example: ⟨L2,0 ⟩ in SU (2) SYM

/ Y and the characteristic numbers on
We can illustrate the above formulas for the index of D
MKN (P, v) with the non-trivial example of the next-to-minimal ’t Hooft defect: L2,0 .
/ Y . In our
Let us first demonstrate the index theorem by calculating the index of D
example, the expectation value from localization can be written

where

⟨L2,0 ⟩Loc =

2 cosh(2b)
+ Zmono (a; 2, 0) ,
sinh2 (a)

Zmono (a; 2, 0) = lim ∫
ξ→0

̃ξ (2,0)
M

̂ M
̃) ,
eω+µT A(T

(6.46)

(6.47)

is the characteristic number on the Kronheimer-Nakajima space defined by the quiver
1

2
as described in Section 2.
For this example, the characteristic number evaluates to [4]
Zmono (a; 2, 0) =

2
.
4 sinh2 (a)

– 38 –

(6.48)

Let us compute the index theorem for the chamber c1 . In this chamber, the coordinate
transformation is of the form
√
1
X 2 X 2n+1
1
+ m e
,
a = ea = f1 − f12 − 1 , f1 = Xe +
2
2Xe
2
¿
√
(6.49)
Á
f1 − f12 − 1 − Xe
b Á
À
b=e =Á
√
√
.
(f1 − f12 − 1)4 Xe − (f1 − f12 − 1)3
Plugging this into the full expectation value
⟨L2,0 ⟩Loc =

yields the Darboux expansion

1
2 cosh(2b)
+
,
2
sinh (a)
2 sinh2 (a)

⟨L2,0 ⟩Loc ∣

a,b↦Xm ,Xe

=

1
2
+ 2Xe2 ,
+ Xe4 Xm
2
Xm

(6.50)

(6.51)

in terms of the spectral network coordinates in the c1 chamber. Note that this matches the
direct computation from spectral networks (6.7) [40].
From this expansion we can read off the indices of the Dirac operator:
⎧
⎪
1
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
ne
⎪
γe = 2 α
⎪
⎪1
/Y]
=⎨
Ind[D
M(P,γm ;X∞ ) ⎪
⎪
2
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩0

γ = Hα ⊕ 2α

γ = −Hα
γ=α

(6.52)

else

where P = 12 diag(2, −2) and ζ ∈ c1 .
Now let us perform the inverse coordinate substitution to derive the characteristic number
from the spectral network computation. Let us start with the expectation value of L2,0 from
the spectral network associated with ζ ∈ c1 :
⟨L2,0 ⟩ζ∈c1 =

1
2
+ 2Xe2 .
+ Xe4 Xm
2
Xm

(6.53)

The coordiante transformation (6.18) now takes the form
Xm = −

b(a2 − 1)(1 + a4 b2 )
a(1 + a2 b2 )2

,

Plugging this into (6.53) we find

⟨L2,0 ⟩ζ∈c1 ∣

Xm ,Xe ↦a,b

=

– 39 –

Xe =

a(1 + a2 b2 )
.
(1 + a4 b2 )

(b + 1/b)2
,
(a − 1/a)2

(6.54)

(6.55)

which indeed matches with the localization computation. Expanding this in powers of b = eb ,
we see that the 0th order term (Zmono (a; 2, 0)) is given by
Zmono (a; 2, 0) =

2
2
.
=
2
(a − 1/a)
4 sinh2 (a)

(6.56)

We can also derive this result from the full formula for the characteristc number. Using
the data
Ω(−1, 0; c1 ) = Ω(1, 4; c1 ) = 1 , Ω(0, 2; c1 ) = 2 ,
(6.57)
the characteristic number formula (6.42) reduces to
lim ∫

̃ξ (2,0)
M
KN

ξ→0

̂ M
̃KN ) =
eω+µT A(T

(1,4)
(0,2)
(1,0)
Ω(1, 4; c1 )Q1 (a; c1 ) + Ω(0, 2; c1 )Q1 (a; c1 ) + Ω(−1, 0; c1 )Q2 (a; c1 )

(6.58)
.

Evaluating the polynomials, we find
(1,4)

Q1

(0,2)

Q1

(a; c1 ) = 0 ,
2

(a; c1 ) = ∑ ∑ ∑ (
−i1

i1 =0 j1 =0 i2 =0

(1,0)

Q2

1

(a; c1 ) = ∑

∑ (

j1 =0 j2 =1−j1

2
i2 + 1
)(
) (−1)i2 +j2 a2(i1 +j2 )+(4(i2 +j1 )+2 = a2 ,
i1
i2

(6.59)

4
j2 + 1
a2j1 +4j2 +2 −2a6 + 4a4
)(
) (−1)j2
=
.
j1
j2
(1 − a2 )2
(1 − a2 )2

Combining these results with the framed BPS indices (6.57), the full formula for the characteristic number evaluates to
lim ∫

ξ→0

6
4
2
ω+µT ̂
̃KN ) = 2a2 + −2a + 4a =
,
e
A(T
M
ξ
2
2
̃
(1 − a )
(a − 1/a)2
M
(2,0)
KN

(6.60)

matching the result from direct computation.
6.3

Comments on the N = 2∗ Theory

Here we would like to make some clarifying comments on the SU (2) N = 2∗ theory and
the Fenchel-Nielsen locus in this theory. In the case of the N = 2∗ theory the UV curve C
is given by the once punctured torus. The algebra of line operators of this theory can be
generated by the three simple line operators Lγ(1,0) , Lγ(0,1) , and Lγ(1,1) . Note that there are
three generating operators because the homology lattice is generated by a cycles that wrap
the A-cycle, B-cycle, and the puncture.
A generic spectral network associated to the SU (2) N = 2∗ theory is given by an ideal
triangulation of C as in Figure 9. In each chamber of the ζ-plane c, the charge lattice is
spanned by three simple elements γi [c] for i = 1, 2, 3 such that
⟨γi [c], γi+1 [c]⟩ = 2

,

γ1 [c] + γ2 [c] + γ3 [c] = γf .

– 40 –

(6.61)

E3
E2

E1

Figure 9. This figure shows a generic WKB spectral network (blue) on the punctured torus. This
corresponds to the triangulation given by the (black) edges E1,2,3 where the rectangle is periodically
identified and the puncture is located at the identified corners.

Given a particular choice of chamber c0 we can identify
γ1 [c0 ] = −α ⊕ γf

,

γ2 [c0 ] = −Hα

,

γ3 [c0 ] = Hα ⊕ α .

(6.62)

In such a chamber, the expectation values of the line operators can be expanded in terms as
¿
√
Á Yγ3
1
À
+Á
,
⟨Lγ(1,0) ⟩ = Yγ2 Yγ3 + √
Yγ2
Yγ2 Yγ3
¿
√
Á Yγ1
1
À
(6.63)
+Á
,
⟨Lγ(0,1) ⟩ = Yγ3 Yγ1 + √
Yγ3
Yγ3 Yγ1
¿
√
Á Yγ2
1
À
⟨Lγ(1,1) ⟩ = Yγ2 Yγ1 + √
.
+Á
Yγ1
Yγ2 Yγ1
Here Yγi is the spectral network coordinate corresponding to the edge Ei .
In the SU (2) N = 2∗ theory, the Fenchel-Nielsen locus is defined by
m̄ ∫ λSW ∈ R
A

,

−1
∫ ζ λSW ∈ R ,
A

(6.64)

where ζ is the phase defining the line operator (and corresponding WKB spectral network).
As it turns out, this coincides with the exceptional locus
E = ⋃ Ei
i

,

Ei = {u ∈ B ∣ Z(γi ; u)/m > 0 , Arg[Z(γi+1 ; u)] < Arg[Z(γi−1 ; u)]} ,

– 41 –

(6.65)

Figure 10. This figure shows a generic WKB spectral network on the punctured torus. The punctured
torus is presented as a trinion with two boundary circles identified. These are the two lower circles
in the above figure. We choose the A-cycle to be defined by the boundary of these circles. Here the
lines are the walls of the corresponding WKB spectral network. While it is not drawn here due to
computational limitations, the walls corresponding to the open paths run to the (upper) puncture.

from [32]. Here mathematical simplifications arise that allow for the exact computation of
the spectrum generator which encodes the entire spectrum of BPS states.
As we approach to the Fenchel-Nielsen locus, we cross an infinite number of K-walls in
passing through the chambers cn with increasing n. Mathematically, crossing the K-wall
going from chamber cn → cn+1 corresponds to mutating along one of basis elements of the
charge lattice in cn , γi [cn ]. As discussed in [17], this transformation keeps the three-term
expansion of the ⟨Lγ ⟩ that have explicit Yγi dependence but increases the complexity of the
⟨Lγ ⟩ that are independent of Yγi . This leads to a fairly simple change of variables between
the complexified Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates and the Yγi given by [9]
√
i β̃ − β̃ −1
Yγ1 =
ℓ β̃λ − (β̃λ)−1

λ = ea

,

ℓ = em

,

√
β̃λ − (β̃λ)−1
Y γ2 = i
λ − λ−1
√
ea+m − e−a−m
β̃ = eb
.
ea−m − e−a+m
,

,

√
λ − λ−1
Y γ3 = −i
,
β̃ − β̃ −1

(6.66)

Sending ζ → ζF N acts on the corresponding spectral network as in Figure 11. This makes
it obvious that the Wilson line ⟨Lγ(1,0) ⟩, which is the holonomy around one of the resolved
punctures, keeps a three term expansion. And further, from the properties of a FenchelNielsen spectral network, we see that the expression for ⟨Lγ(1,0) ⟩ becomes a two term expansion
in the limit ζ → ζF N . We believe mirrors the same behavior of the expectation value of the
Wilson line in the SU (2) Nf = 0 theory as discussed in the previous section.

– 42 –

Figure 11. This figure shows the behavior of the generic WKB spectral network on the punctured
torus from Figure 10 as it approaches the Fenchel-Nielsen spectral network (left in Figure 6). Again,
while it is not drawn here due to computational limitations, the walls corresponding to the open paths
run to the (upper) puncture.

Acknowledgements
TDB and GWM would like to thank Anindya Dey and Andy Neitzke for fruitful collaborations on related material and Tudor Dimofte, Davide Gaiotto, and Feng Luo for enlightening
discussions. TDB and GWM would like to extend a special thanks to Pietro Longhi for
extensive comments on the draft, enlightening discussion, and assistance with figures. TDB
and GWM are supported by DOE grant DOE-SC0010008.

References
[1] L. F. Alday, D. Gaiotto, S. Gukov, Y. Tachikawa and H. Verlinde, “Loop and surface operators
in N=2 gauge theory and Liouville modular geometry,” JHEP 1001, 113 (2010)
doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2010)113 [arXiv:0909.0945 [hep-th]].
[2] B. Assel and A. Sciarappa, “On Monopole Bubbling Contributions to ’t Hooft Loops,”
arXiv:1903.00376 [hep-th].
[3] T. D. Brennan and G. W. Moore, “A note on the semiclassical formulation of BPS states in
four-dimensional N = 2 theories,” PTEP 2016, no. 12, 12C110 (2016) doi:10.1093/ptep/ptw159
[arXiv:1610.00697 [hep-th]].
[4] T. D. Brennan, A. Dey and G. W. Moore, “On ’t Hooft Defects, Monopole Bubbling and
Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics,” arXiv:1801.01986 [hep-th].

– 43 –

[5] T. D. Brennan, “Monopole Bubbling via String Theory,” arXiv:1806.00024 [hep-th].
[6] T. D. Brennan, A. Dey and G. W. Moore, “’t Hooft Defects and Wall Crossing in SQM,”
arXiv:1810.07191 [hep-th].
[7] M. Dehn, “Lecture Notes from Breslau,” 1992. The Archives of the University of Texas at
Austin.
[8] D. E. Diaconescu, “D-branes, monopoles and Nahm equations,” Nucl. Phys. B 503, 220 (1997)
doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(97)00438-0 [hep-th/9608163].
[9] T. Dimofte and S. Gukov, “Chern-Simons Theory and S-duality,” JHEP 1305, 109 (2013)
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2013)109 [arXiv:1106.4550 [hep-th]].
[10] N. Drukker, J. Gomis, T. Okuda and J. Teschner, “Gauge Theory Loop Operators and Liouville
Theory,” JHEP 1002, 057 (2010) doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2010)057 [arXiv:0909.1105 [hep-th]].
[11] N. Drukker, D. R. Morrison and T. Okuda, “Loop operators and S-duality from curves on
Riemann surfaces,” JHEP 0909, 031 (2009) doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/09/031
[arXiv:0907.2593 [hep-th]].
[12] F. Luo, private communication.
[13] D. Gaiotto, “N=2 dualities,” JHEP 1208, 034 (2012) doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2012)034
[arXiv:0904.2715 [hep-th]].
[14] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Supersymmetric Boundary Conditions in N=4 Super Yang-Mills
Theory,” J. Statist. Phys. 135, 789 (2009) doi:10.1007/s10955-009-9687-3 [arXiv:0804.2902
[hep-th]].
[15] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Four-dimensional wall-crossing via
three-dimensional field theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 299, 163 (2010)
doi:10.1007/s00220-010-1071-2 [arXiv:0807.4723 [hep-th]].
[16] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Wall-crossing, Hitchin Systems, and the WKB
Approximation,” arXiv:0907.3987 [hep-th].
[17] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Framed BPS States,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 17,
no. 2, 241 (2013) doi:10.4310/ATMP.2013.v17.n2.a1 [arXiv:1006.0146 [hep-th]].
[18] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Spectral networks,” Annales Henri Poincare 14,
1643 (2013) doi:10.1007/s00023-013-0239-7 [arXiv:1204.4824 [hep-th]].
[19] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Spectral Networks and Snakes,” Annales Henri
Poincare 15, 61 (2014) doi:10.1007/s00023-013-0238-8 [arXiv:1209.0866 [hep-th]].
[20] J. P. Gauntlett, N. Kim, J. Park and P. Yi, “Monopole dynamics and BPS dyons N=2
superYang-Mills theories,” Phys. Rev. D 61, 125012 (2000) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.61.125012
[hep-th/9912082].
[21] J. P. Gauntlett, C. j. Kim, K. M. Lee and P. Yi, “General low-energy dynamics of
supersymmetric monopoles,” Phys. Rev. D 63, 065020 (2001) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.63.065020
[hep-th/0008031].
[22] J. Gomis, T. Okuda and V. Pestun, “Exact Results for ’t Hooft Loops in Gauge Theories on
S 4 ,” JHEP 1205, 141 (2012) doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2012)141 [arXiv:1105.2568 [hep-th]].

– 44 –

[23] A. Hanany and E. Witten, “Type IIB superstrings, BPS monopoles, and three-dimensional
gauge dynamics,” Nucl. Phys. B 492, 152 (1997) doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(97)00157-0,
10.1016/S0550-3213(97)80030-2 [hep-th/9611230].
[24] L. Hollands and A. Neitzke, “Spectral Networks and FenchelNielsen Coordinates,” Lett. Math.
Phys. 106, no. 6, 811 (2016) doi:10.1007/s11005-016-0842-x [arXiv:1312.2979 [math.GT]].
[25] Y. Ito, T. Okuda and M. Taki, “Line operators on S 1 × R3 and quantization of the Hitchin
moduli space,” JHEP 1204, 010 (2012) Erratum: [JHEP 1603, 085 (2016)]
doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2016)085, 10.1007/JHEP04(2012)010 [arXiv:1111.4221 [hep-th]].
[26] S. Jeong and N. Nekrasov, “Opers, surface defects, and Yang-Yang functional,”
arXiv:1806.08270 [hep-th].
[27] A. Kapustin and E. Witten, “Electric-Magnetic Duality And The Geometric Langlands
Program,” Commun. Num. Theor. Phys. 1, 1 (2007) doi:10.4310/CNTP.2007.v1.n1.a1
[hep-th/0604151].
[28] A. Klemm, W. Lerche, P. Mayr, C. Vafa and N. P. Warner, “Selfdual strings and N=2
supersymmetric field theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 477, 746 (1996) doi:10.1016/0550-3213(96)00353-7
[hep-th/9604034].
[29] P. B. Kronheimer and H. Nakajima, ”Yang-Mills Instantons on ALE Gravitional Instantons,”
Math. Ann. (1990) 288: 263.
[30] J. Liu, “On the Existence of Jenkins-Strebel Differentials,” Bull. of Lond. Math. Soc. 36, 03
(2004).
[31] J. Liu, “Jenkins-Strebel Differentials with Poles,” Comment. Math. Helv. 83, 01 (2008).
[32] P. Longhi, “The Structure of BPS Spectra,” Ph.D. Thesis, Rutgers University Library (2015).
[33] P. Longhi and C. Y. Park, “ADE Spectral Networks,” JHEP 1608, 087 (2016)
doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2016)087 [arXiv:1601.02633 [hep-th]].
[34] P. Longhi and C. Y. Park, “ADE Spectral Networks and Decoupling Limits of Surface Defects,”
JHEP 1702, 011 (2017) doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2017)011 [arXiv:1611.09409 [hep-th]].
[35] J. Martens, “Equivariant volumes of non-compact quotients and instanton counting,” Commun.
Math. Phys. 281, 827 (2008) doi:10.1007/s00220-008-0501-x [math/0609841 [math-sg]].
[36] N. S. Manton, “A Remark on the Scattering of BPS Monopoles,” Phys. Lett. 110B, 54 (1982).
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(82)90950-9
[37] N. S. Manton and B. J. Schroers, “Bundles over moduli spaces and the quantization of BPS
monopoles,” Annals Phys. 225, 290 (1993). doi:10.1006/aphy.1993.1060
[38] G. W. Moore, N. Nekrasov and S. Shatashvili, “Integrating over Higgs branches,” Commun.
Math. Phys. 209, 97 (2000) doi:10.1007/PL00005525 [hep-th/9712241].
[39] G. W. Moore, N. Nekrasov and S. Shatashvili, “D particle bound states and generalized
instantons,” Commun. Math. Phys. 209, 77 (2000) doi:10.1007/s002200050016
[hep-th/9803265].
[40] G. W. Moore, A. B. Royston and D. Van den Bleeken, “Semiclassical framed BPS states,”
JHEP 1607, 071 (2016) doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2016)071 [arXiv:1512.08924 [hep-th]].

– 45 –

[41] G. W. Moore, A. B. Royston and D. Van den Bleeken, “L2 -Kernels Of Dirac-Type Operators
On Monopole Moduli Spaces,” arXiv:1512.08923 [hep-th].
[42] H. Nakajima and Y. Takayama, “Cherkis bow varieties and Coulomb branches of quiver gauge
theories of affine type A,” arXiv:1606.02002 [math.RT].
[43] N. A. Nekrasov, “Seiberg-Witten prepotential from instanton counting,” Adv. Theor. Math.
Phys. 7, no. 5, 831 (2003) doi:10.4310/ATMP.2003.v7.n5.a4 [hep-th/0206161].
[44] N. Nekrasov, A. Rosly and S. Shatashvili, “Darboux coordinates, Yang-Yang functional, and
gauge theory,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 216, 69 (2011) doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysbps.2011.04.150
[arXiv:1103.3919 [hep-th]].
[45] E. Prato and S. Wu, “Duistermaat-Heckman measures in a non-compact setting,”
arXiv:alg-geom/9307005.
[46] W.P. Thurston, “On the geometry and dynamics of diffeomorphisms of surfaces,” Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. (N.S.) 19 (1988), no. 2, 417-431.
[47] D. Tong and K. Wong, “Monopoles and Wilson Lines,” JHEP 1406, 048 (2014)
doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2014)048 [arXiv:1401.6167 [hep-th]].
[48] E. Witten, “Solutions of four-dimensional field theories via M theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 500, 3
(1997) doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(97)00416-1 [hep-th/9703166].

– 46 –

