Draft version April 9, 2019
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX62

Stellar Surface Magneto-Convection as a Source of Astrophysical Noise
III. Sun-as-a-star Simulations and Optimal Noise Diagnostics
H. M. Cegla,1, 2, ∗ C. A. Watson,2 S. Shelyag,3 M. Mathioudakis,2 and S. Moutari4
1 Observatoire

de Genève, Université de Genève, Versoix 1290, Switzerland
Research Centre, School of Mathematics & Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK
3 School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia
4 Mathematical Science Research Centre, School of Mathematics & Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK

arXiv:1903.08446v2 [astro-ph.EP] 5 Apr 2019

2 Astrophysics

(Received ?, 2018; Revised ?, 2018; Accepted ?, 2018)

Submitted to ApJ
ABSTRACT
Stellar surface magnetoconvection (granulation) creates asymmetries in the observed stellar absorption lines that can subsequently manifest themselves as spurious radial velocities shifts. In turn, this
can then mask the Doppler-reflex motion induced by orbiting planets on their host stars, and represents a particular challenge for determining the masses of low-mass, long-period planets. Herein, we
study this impact by creating Sun-as-a-star observations that encapsulate the granulation variability
expected from 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulations. These Sun-as-a-star model observations are in
good agreement with empirical observations of the Sun, but may underestimate the total variability
relative to the quiet Sun due to the increased magnetic field strength in our models. We find numerous line profile characteristics linearly correlate with the disc-integrated convection-induced velocities.
Removing the various correlations with the line bisector, equivalent width, and the Vasy indicator may
reduce ∼50-60% of the granulation noise in the measured velocities. We also find that simultaneous
photometry may be a key diagnostic, as our proxy for photometric brightness also allowed us to remove ∼50% of the granulation-induced radial velocity noise. These correlations and granulation-noise
mitigations breakdown in the presence of low instrumental resolution and/or increased stellar rotation,
as both act to smooth the observed line profile asymmetries.
Keywords: Line: profiles – Planets and satellites: detection – Sun: granulation – Stars: activity –
Stars: low-mass – Techniques: radial velocities
1. INTRODUCTION

In this series of papers, we aim to disentangle the
impact of stellar surface magneto-convection on the radial velocity (RV) confirmation of low-mass, long-period
planets. Sun-like stars have an outer convective envelope, wherein hot bubbles of plasma, known as granules, rise to the surface, cool, and eventually sink back
down into the surrounding regions known as intergranular lanes. Naturally, these up- and down-flows induce
blue- and redshifts accordingly. Since the granules are
Corresponding author: H. M. Cegla
h.cegla@unige.ch
∗

CHEOPS Fellow, SNSF NCCR-PlanetS

brighter and cover more surface area than the intergranular lanes, there is a net convective blueshift and the
observed line profiles have an asymmetric shape; for the
Sun, this asymmetry produces a ‘C-shaped’ line bisector
(Gray 2005). Individual plasma flows on the Sun move
with 1-4 km s−1 velocities, but much of the up- and
down-flows cancel out over the ∼106 visible granules on
the solar disc, such that the net root-mean-square (rms)
is several 10s of cm s−1 . This is particularly troublesome
for exoplanet hunters as these stellar-induced velocity
variations can mask the minute Doppler reflex motion
of the host star produced by low-mass, long-period planetary companions. For example, the Earth only induces
a mere 9 cm s−1 Doppler wobble on the Sun; hence
granulation variability has the potential to completely
mask an Earth-analogue signal. In the past, the de-

2

Cegla et al.

tection of such small amplitude planetary signals was
precluded foremost by instrumental precision; however,
this is no longer the case thanks to the next generation of
spectrographs, e.g. ESPRESSO and EXPRES. Consequently, photospheric magneto-convection/granulation
is a source of astrophysical ‘noise’ that must be overcome if we are to push the planet confirmation barriers
to the level of habitable worlds around Sun-like stars.
The aim of this series is to identify the spectral fingerprints of stellar surface magnetoconvection and to
use them to diagnose and disentangle the granulationinduced velocity variations in exoplanet confirmation
and characterisation. Note, this distinction makes this
work fundamentally different from past attempts to
characterise the level of stellar variability using a socalled ‘jitter’ term (e.g. Santos et al. 2000; Saar et al.
2003; Wright 2005), which not only combined various stellar phenomena into a single, unphysical term,
but also treated them as ‘independent, identically distributed Gaussian noise process[es]’ (Aigrain et al.
2012). Such a formalism may be useful for a firstorder prediction of the stellar-induced RV variability;
however, as Aigrain et al. (2012) point out, stellar variability manifests itself as red and/or pink noise and
therefore the impact on RV measurements will often be
significantly larger than that predicted by a random jitter term with the same mean amplitude. Accordingly,
our aim is not to predict the bulk amplitude of the
granulation-induced variations, but rather to identify
key signatures that allow us to mitigate its impact on
RV measurements. For such predictions, we refer the
readers to Cegla et al. (2014) and Bastien et al. (2014),
which show how photometry may be used to predict
the amplitude of RV variability for magnetically quiet
stars, and Oshagh et al. (2017), who show how this
may potentially be extended to more active stars. For
predictions of the stellar oscillation-induced RV amplitudes (excited by convection), see Yu et al. (2018). For
techniques to mitigate the impact of stellar oscillations
on precision RV measurements, see Medina et al. (2018)
and Chaplin et al. (2019).
The present methods to mitigate the impact of granulation in exoplanet observations revolve around optimising observing strategies to bin down this noise source
(Dumusque et al. 2011; Meunier et al. 2015). However,
such approaches are time and cost intensive, and may
reach a fundamental noise floor. Moreover, even though
the lifetimes of individual granules are only ∼5-10 minutes, because the granulation signal is correlated it can
take more than an entire night to bin to the 10 cm s−1
level (Meunier et al. 2015). Instead, we propose to use
the information available in the stellar spectra to dis-

entangle the granulation impact. The premise for this
work is that because the RV shifts originate from changing stellar line profile asymmetries (from the granulation
evolution), we can use our knowledge of these asymmetries to predict and mitigate the convection-induced RV
variability. To understand how granulation impacts stellar absorption lines, we turn to three-dimensional (3D)
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) solar simulations, coupled with one-dimensional radiative transport. Our aim
is to use the realistic line profiles output by such simulations to tile a stellar grid and mimic Sun-as-a-star
observations, which ultimately can be used to search for
correlations between the line profile asymmetries and
the measured RVs. Since the MHD and corresponding
line synthesis are very computationally heavy, it is not
feasible to populate a stellar grid wherein each tile is independent. To overcome this aspect, we parameterised
the absorption line profiles at disc centre in Cegla et al.
(2013, hereafter Paper I) and extended this across the
stellar limb in Cegla et al. (2018, hereafter Paper II).
In this paper, we use this granulation parameterisation
to create the aforementioned Sun-as-a-star observations
and investigate the usefulness of a variety of stellar line
characteristics as granulation noise mitigation tools.
In Section 2, we detail how the Sun-as-a-star model
observations are constructed and compare the outputs
to solar observations. We use these model observations
to search for correlations between convectively-induced
line profile asymmetries and RVs in Section 3, and investigate the impact of stellar rotation and instrumental
resolution in Section 4. Each potential granulation noise
diagnostic is evaluated in Section 5, and we conclude in
Section 6.
2. CREATING SUN-AS-A-STAR OBSERVATIONS

In Papers I and II, we demonstrated how we can parameterise solar surface granulation across the stellar
disc by breaking it down into four components, split
by magnetic field and photospheric continuum intensity:
(bright, non-magnetic) granules, (dark) non-magnetic
intergranular lanes, (dark) magnetic intergranular lanes,
and magnetic bright points (MBPs). The accuracy of
this parameterisation was validated against its ability
to recreate the Fe I 6302 Å line profile (synthesised using NICOLE; Socas-Navarro 2015; Socas-Navarro et al.
2015)1 from a time-series of 3D MHD solar simulation
snapshots, at limb angles 0-80o (in 2o steps), generated
1 1D radiative transport is performed, which neglects spatial
coupling; however, the impact on the disc-integrated line profile
asymmetries is likely small and full 3D radiative transport calculations would require significantly more computational power.

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
with the MURaM code (Vögler et al. 2005) for a net
magnetic field of 200 G and corresponding to a physical
size of 12×12 Mm2 . As noted in Paper I, this magnetic
strength was chosen to ensure we were able to capture
the magnetic components of granulation that are present
even in the quiet Sun (which is likely closer to ∼130 G;
Trujillo Bueno et al. 2004), and the Fe I 6302 Å line was
chosen as it is widely used in both solar observations
and simulations as a diagnostic tool for magnetic field
and temperature.
Filling factors for each component were determined for
each snapshot using the same magnetic field and continuum intensity cuts used to create the parameterisation.
These filling factors were used to add the average four
component line profiles together in the correct proportions to reconstruct a line profile representative of the
granulation pattern for each particular snapshot. Doing so allowed us to confirm our parameterisation could
produce line profiles with the same net shifts and shapes
as the more computationally heavy radiative, 3D MHD
simulations. We refer the readers to Papers I and II for
further details.
Herein, we use probability distributions derived from
this time-series of 3D MHD snapshots to select new filling factors and use them in conjunction with the four average (limb-dependent) component line profiles to generate new line profiles for 12×12 Mm2 patches with the
same fundamental convection characteristics. This then
allows us to generate enough independent line profiles
to tile an entire stellar grid and create numerous Sunas-a-star model observations of photospheric magnetoconvection.
2.1. Granulation Component Probability Distributions
To characterise the probability distributions for the
four component filling factors we use a non-parametric
approach, as several of these distributions failed normality tests (e.g. Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Lilliefors goodnessof-fit, and the Jarque-Bera goodness-of-fit). In line with
this, and to avoid a method sensitive to the data’s bin
size, we use the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
to examine the nature of the probability distributions.
Naturally, our parameterisation is not perfect, so there
is some level of noise in the CDFs, likely due to some
small misclassifications. We also note that the MHD
time-series corresponds to ∼100 minutes of physical time
with a cadence of ∼30 seconds, which samples well ∼1520 granulation turnovers; as such, there is a small chance
some filling factors could be under-sampled.
To overcome any component misclassification, and to
compensate for any potential under-sampling of the filling factors, we fit a generalised logistic function to each

3

CDF; this function is defined as
F (t) = A +

K −A
,
(1 + Qe−B(t−M ) )1/v

(1)

where A and K are the upper and lower asymptotes,
respectively, B is the growth rate, v is a parameter associated with the asymptote near which the maximum
growth occurs (when > 0), Q is related to the inflection
point in F (t), and M determines the inflection point on
the x-axis. The logistic function is well suited to model
the S-shaped population of the CDFs, and the generalised version allows us to fine-tune the fit closely to the
CDFs. As such, the logistic function allows us to ‘fill
in’ any gaps and obtain a smooth probability function
from which we can randomly and realistically select the
filling factors. We perform the fit to this function with a
Levenberg-Marquardt least-squares (Markwardt 2009),
at each limb angle from the MHD simulation (0-80o , in
2o steps – see Paper II for details on the step choice).
As the hot, uprising granular plasma eventually cools
and sinks down into the intergranular lanes, we expect
there to be some anti-correlation between the granule
and intergranular lane component filling factors. Indeed,
there is a strong anti-correlation between the granule
and non-magnetic intergranular lane filling factors (illustrated in Figure 1). The magnetic components are only
weakly correlated with the granule and non-magnetic intergranular lane components, and it is not clear if that
weak correlation is physical or a byproduct of creating
four components.
To create new line profiles, we first generate the granule filling factor. This is because the granule component
is the most well characterised and dominates the overall
line profile. Then we can use the aforementioned correlation to select the non-magnetic intergranular lane
filling factor. To obtain the remaining filling factors
for the MBP and magnetic intergranular lane components, we fit a probability distribution to one of these
magnetic components; the final component is then determined from the difference between the other three
components and unity, since filling factors must naturally total to one. We test both scenarios, i.e. either
drawing the third component from the MBP distribution or drawing it from the magnetic intergranular lane
distribution – note this in contrast to Paper I, where
we did not fully explore the impact of the generating
the magnetic components. An example of the granule
and magnetic component CDFs and their fits is shown
in Figure 1, alongside the anti-correlation between the
granule and non-magnetic intergranular lane filling factors; Figure 1 shows the results for 60o , i.e. µ = 0.5, see
Appendix A for other limb angles. Note the correlation

4

Cegla et al.
Granule (θ = 60o)

(θ = 60o)
Non−magnetic Lane Filling Factor

1.0

CDF

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.68

0.26
0.25
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.21
0.20

0.69

0.70
0.71
0.72
Filling Factor

0.73

0.74

0.68

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.032

0.034

0.036

0.038
0.040
Filling Factor

0.70
0.71
0.72
Granule Filling Factor

0.73

0.74

Magnetic Lane (θ = 60o)

CDF

CDF

MBP (θ = 60o)

0.69

0.042

0.044

0.016

0.018

0.020
0.022
Filling Factor

0.024

0.026

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8
K-S Probability

Wilcoxon Probability

Figure 1. Cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) over the MHD time-series for the granule (top left), MBP (bottom left),
and magnetic intergranular lane (bottom right) components are shown in black; fits using the generalised logistic function from
Eq. 1 are shown in red. Also displayed is the linear relationship between the filling factors for the granule and non-magnetic
intergranular lane components (top right); the shaded area represents a uniform region of width 1.5σ, where σ was determined
by a robust bisquares linear regression (fit shown in black). All plots are for a limb angle of 60o (µ = 0.5).

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.0
0

40
60
Center-to-limb Angle (o)

0.4

0.2

Granule
Non-magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

0.6

80

0.0
0

20

40
60
Center-to-limb Angle (o)

80

Figure 2. The Wilcoxon Rank-Sum (left) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (right) probabilities for 100,000 artificially generated filling
factors as compared to the 201 original filling factors from the MHD simulation for all four granulation components. Probabilities
< 0.05 (dashed lines) are typically considered statistically significant results and require the null hypothesis to be rejected.

between the granule and non-magnetic lane components

has some non-Gaussian noise, which may originate from

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
the stochastic nature of granulation and/or some small
misclassifications. To incorporate this aspect, we add
uniform noise to the linear fit between the granule and
non-magnetic intergranular lane filling factors.
To ensure we produce a combination of filling factors that represent the true underlying distributions, we
compare newly generated distributions with the original
sets from the MHD simulation. For this, we use both
a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) and Wilcoxon Rank-Sum
test, and compare 100,000 new, artificial filling factors
against those from the original 201 MHD snapshots. For
the K-S test, the null hypothesis states that the two populations are drawn from the same distribution, while the
null hypothesis for the Wilcoxon test states that the two
sample populations have the same mean of distribution.
For all four components, at all limb angles, and regardless of drawing from the MBP or magnetic lane distribution, the null hypothesis for the Wilcoxon test could
not be rejected – indicating both populations likely have
the same mean. For the KS-test, the null hypothesis was never rejected for any of the granule and nonmagnetic lane distributions. However, the KS probability for the magnetic component distributions was sensitive to which magnetic component was drawn from the
CDF fit, as well as to the amount of uniform noise added
in the granule versus non-magnetic lane linear fit; the results for these various tests are summarised in Table 1.
Figure 2 displays the the KS and Wilcoxon results when
the MBP was drawn, and the granule-non-magnetic lane
linear fit had 1.5σ noise; see Appendix A for the remaining results.
Only by drawing from the MBP distribution first can
we obtain realistic distributions for both magnetic components. Moreover, since the MBP is brighter and the
filling factors are slightly larger, it is more important
to correctly attribute this component. In addition, as
there appears to be real variability in the granule to
non-magnetic intergranular lane relationship we want
to include as much of this as possible, whilst maintaining sensible distributions for the magnetic components.
Hence, we argue the most realistic way to generate new
line profiles is by:
• Randomly selecting a granule filling factor from a
fit to the CDF derived from the MHD simulation
• Drawing a corresponding non-magnetic lane component from the linear relationship in the MHD
simulation between the granule and non-magnetic
lane components, with 1.5σ of uniform noise
• Randomly selecting the MBP filling factor from a
fit to the CDF derived from the MHD simulation

5

Table 1. Summary of the null hypothesis rejection for the
magnetic component KS tests.
Magnetic Intergranular Lane Generation
Component Non-Mag. Noisea Rejected?b
Mag. Lanec
1.0-2.0σ
Never
MBP
1.0σ
0-36o
MBP
1.5-2.0σ
Always
Magnetic Bright Point Generation
Component Non-Mag. Noisea Rejected?b
MBP
1.0-2.0σ
Never
Mag. Lanec
1.0σ
80o
c
Mag. Lane
1.5σ
20-80o
c
Mag. Lane
2.0σ
Always
a The amount of uniform noise injected into the linear fit used
to generate the non-magnetic lane component (e.g. shaded
region in Figure 1).
b Probabilities < 0.05 and/or 0.01 are typically considered
statistically significant results requiring the null hypothesis
to be rejected.
c Magnetic intergranular lane component.

• Determining the magnetic lane filling factor such
that all four components add to unity.
Note, towards the limb, there were some instances where
the randomly generated MBP component meant the total filling factors were greater than one, without the
addition of the magnetic intergranular lane component.
In these instances, a new MBP was generated; if more
than 100 iterations were made without resolving this issue, then the magnetic lane component was set to zero,
and the MBP component was set to one minus the nonmagnetic components. As the magnetic components
make up less than ∼10% of the total line profile, this
small effect will be negligible when integrating across
the stellar disc. It is also important to note, as only the
granule and MBP components are drawn from probability distributions (since the non-magnetic lane largely
depends on the granule filling factor and all components
must add to unity), there are essentially only two free
parameters used in the generation of new line profiles;
see Paper I for further justifications on the four physical
components used herein.
2.2. Tiling the Stellar Grid
Now that we can generate new line profiles that represent realistic granulation patterns, we can place these
onto a stellar surface grid and construct synthetic ‘Sunas-a-star’ observations. The granulation line profiles are
based on 3D MHD simulations with a physical size of

6

Cegla et al.

Êz = cos i,

Figure 3. The model star grid, shown at a slight inclination,
with larger tiles for illustration only.

12×12 Mm2 at disc centre; as such this sets the tile
size for the stellar grid. To appropriately consider the
geometrical effects, we construct and populate a 3D stellar grid. The synthetic stellar surface is modelled as a
sphere and split into a number of latitudinal slices, which
are further sub-divided into smaller surface elements or
‘tiles’. The number of latitude slices was determined by
taking half the circumference of the sphere and dividing
by the tile size. The subsequent number of tiles, tn , in
each latitude slice is dependent on latitude and defined:
2πR? cos φ
,
(2)
Rt
where R? is the stellar radius (in our case we set this
to approximate the solar value at 695,500 km), Rt is
the tile width (12 Mm), and φ is the latitude; note, this
value is rounded to the nearest integer. The very top
and bottom annuli of the sphere are approximated by
triangles rather than square tiles to help minimise gaps.
Although the simulation snapshots are square, the effect
of approximating these annuli with triangles is negligible
as at these extrema the tiles are heavily limb darkened
and have very small projected areas.
Tiles located on the back of the model star are hidden to ensure that they do not contribute to the disc
integrated observation. The line-of-sight (LOS) to an
individual tile is determined by calculating the angle
between the Earth vector (the vector pointing towards
the observer) and the normal vector to the tile. For a
coordinate system x, y, z, with origin at the centre of
the star, z pointing along the rotation axis, y pointing
towards the observer, and x orthogonal to both z and y
(using a left-hand rule), the Earth vector, Ê is defined:
tn =

Êx = cos θ sin i

(3)

Êy = − sin θ sin i

(4)

(5)

where i is the stellar inclination and θ it the rotation
angle (i.e. 180o = 0.5 phase). If the angle between a
tile’s normal vector and Earth vector is greater than
π/2 then the tile will be hidden from view; this angle
is calculated for each corner of the tile. If a tile falls
only partially on the stellar disc, then it is sub-divided
to calculate the fractional area on the disc; each such
tile is sub-divided into 40 latitude slices and equivalent
longitude slices such that the sub-tiles are as close to
square as possible. The centre of each sub-tile is used
to calculate the angle between the normal and Earth
vector, and the visible sub-tiles are used to scale the
line profile assigned to the full tile accordingly, in terms
of both projected area and limb darkening.
Points (x, y, z) on this 3D model star can then be projected onto the plane for the sky as a 2D surface with
coordinates X and Y via,
X = x sin θ + y cos θ

(6)

Y = cos i (−x cos θ + y sin θ) + z sin i.

(7)

An illustration of this grid, with an exaggerated tile size
for viewing ease, is shown in Figure 3.
Each of the tiles on the model stellar surface can then
be assigned an appropriate absorption line profile. Each
physical tile corresponds to approximately 1o on the stellar disc. The 3D MHD simulation was parameterised in
even 2o steps from disc centre to 80o ; hence, tiles with
a (rounded) even limb-angle in this range are assigned
a randomly generated profile corresponding to the same
limb-angle. For tiles with odd limb-angles, we randomly
assign a line profile corresponding to a limb angle either 1o lower or higher (such that half are higher and
half are lower). All tiles beyond 80o are assigned a line
profile corresponding to the 80o parameterisation. This
region is heavily limb-darkened, with a small projected
area, which contributes less than 5% to the total integrated flux; hence, this small approximation should
be negligible. The MHD simulation naturally includes
limb-darkening; we interpolate between the 2o steps, and
those beyond 80o , to correct the limb darkening in the
line profiles assigned to these tiles. This is done by fitting the non-linear Claret limb darkening law to the intensities output by the simulation. The line profiles in
each tile must be multiplied by the projected area of
the tile to measure the total intensity; this is because
the profiles output by the simulations are generated in
terms of flux per unit area. To include a solar-like rotation, we shift the line profiles in each tile correspond-

7

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise

2.3. Comparison to Solar Observations
In Paper II, we compared the simulated line profiles
extensively to empirical solar observations at discrete
limb angles across the stellar disc. Now that we can create Sun-as-a-star observations, we can further validate
our parameterisation, and new line profile generation,
by comparing the model observations to disc-integrated
solar observations. For this, we compare against three
different solar atlases, constructed at very high resolution, from: the Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS)
on the McMath-Pierce Solar Telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory (Kurucz et al. 1984), the FTS at the
Institut für Astrophysik, Göttingen (IAG) (Reiners et al.
2016), and the PEPSI spectrograph on the SDI telescope located at the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT)
(Strassmeier et al. 2018). The FTS instruments provide
the highest resolution, at ∼500,000 and 670,000 for the
McMath and IAG, respectively, while the PEPSI echelle
spectrograph still has a very high resolution of 270,000.
On the other hand, it is the two most recent instruments,
from the IAG and PEPSI, that provide the highest absolute RV precision, of ∼10 m s−1 ; the McMath FTS can
have RV deviations as large as ∼100 m s−1 (Molaro &
Monai 2012; Reiners et al. 2016; Strassmeier et al. 2018,
and references therein).
Figure 4 compares the line bisector of our Sun-as-astar simulations against those from the solar atlases for
the Fe I 6302 Å line. For the model star, we averaged
together all 1,000 simulations before constructing the bisector. The models and observations were all normalised
to their respective continuum intensities in the region of
-14 to -15 km s−1 , which corresponds to the continuum
of the bluest region in the simulations; however, it is
important to note that each solar atlas was already continuum normalised prior to this, so it is possible there
may still be small deviations from this normalisation.
The lefthand side of Figure 4 shows the line bisectors at
2 A solar-like differential rotation, as opposed to solid-body, will
introduce slight differences in the line profiles asymmetries (Beeck
et al. 2013), but this effect is minimal, compared to photospheric
magnetoconvection effects, for slow rotators like the Sun – see
Appendix C for further details.

1.0

1.0
Shifted

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8
Normalised Flux

Normalised Flux

ing to a projected, solid-body2 rotational velocity of
2 km s−1 . Finally, to generate the artificial observations,
the contributions from all the visible tiles are summed
together to create disc-integrated Sun-as-a-star observations. For this study, this process was repeated to create
1,000 independent, model observations. As such, these
represent instantaneous observations (i.e. zero exposure
duration), separated by more than one granulation lifetime.

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
-0.6

0.7

0.6

0.5
Simulated
IAG
PEPSI
MCMATH

-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2
Velocity (km s-1)

0.4
-0.1

-0.6

Simulated
IAG
PEPSI
MCMATH

-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2
Velocity (km s-1)

-0.1

Figure 4. Left: average line bisector from the discintegrated model observations (shown in red), alongside
those from empirical data taken with the McMath (blue),
IAG (purple), and PEPSI (green) instruments. Right: same,
but model observations are convolved with instrumental profiles, and shifted for shape comparison; red-blue, red-purple
and red-green lines correspond to the McMath, IAG, and
PEPSI instruments, respectively. The McMath data is also
shifted (dashed blue).

their absolute velocities (after correction for the gravitational redshift in the empirical data). The righthand
side of Figure 4 shows the model observation after convolutions with the appropriate instrumental profiles (IPs),
with line shifts for viewing ease; dashed red-blue, redpurple, and red-green lines indicate the simulation was
convolved with the McMath, IAG, and PEPSI IPs, respectively. For the IP, we assume a Gaussian with a fullwidth half-maximum (FWHM) based off the instrument
resolution, centred on zero, and with a area normalised
to one.
As shown in Figure 4, the line bisector shape from
the simulation agrees extremely well with the empirical
data, and provides further evidence that the granulation
parameterisation and model star generation is realistic.
The slight increase in the downward trend of the bisector
from the IAG likely originates from better resolving the
partial blend with a neighbouring oxygen line in the empirical spectrum. It is important to note that the model
star line profile was slightly deeper and wider than the
observed lines, regardless of convolution with the IPs.
These mismatches could come from small differences in
the: continuum normalisation, stellar activity level, differences in the average magnetic field (as these will impact average flow velocities, contrasts between granules
and intergranular lanes, and also the level of Zeeman
splitting), and/or if the nominal resolution for this particular region was lower than the average for the atlas.
Regardless, the good match between the line bisectors
shows we capture the same shape/curvature character-

8

Cegla et al.

istics, and can thus use these aspects with confidence
when searching for granulation noise diagnostics.
Similar to what we found in Paper II at discrete limb
angles, the absolute velocity of the simulated bisector
is more redshifted than the IAG and PEPSI data (as
shown in Figure 4), which we again attribute to the increased magnetic field strength in the simulated data
(200 G) compared to the quiet Sun (∼100 G; Trujillo
Bueno et al. 2004) – see Paper II for more details.
The simulated bisector is considerably more redshifted
than the McMath data; however, we attribute this to
the lower absolute RV precision of McMath dataset
as it deviates from the other empirical solar data by
∼300 m s−1 . We note that placing the bisectors on an
absolute scale is very difficult due to uncertainties in the
tellurics and line blends, as well as uncertainties in the
laboratory wavelengths (Dravins 2008); even a small difference of 0.005 Å leads to an offset >200 m s−1 . Moreover, as we are interested in the application to exoplanet
data, our main concern is the relative RV precision.
To measure the RV variability, we cross-correlate each
disc-integrated model observation with one template
profile; for the template we use one randomly, selected
disc-integrated profile. The RVs are then determined by
fitting a polynomial to the peak of the cross-correlation
function. The peak to peak RV variation of the 1,000
Sun-as-a-star model observations is ∼63 cm s−1 and the
root-mean-square (rms) is ∼10 cm s−1 . To compare
with empirical observations, we turn to measurements of
the solar background in helioseismology. Harvey (1984,
1985) proposed that this ‘background noise’ can be modelled as a superposition of the temporal evolution from
magnetic active regions, supergranulation, mesogranulation, and granulation. The assumption is that the time
evolution of each phenomena can be approximated by an
exponential decay with various characteristic timescales.
Note today, that this often described by a linear combination of Lorentzian and super-Lorentzian functions (as
done in Paper II); at least two components are necessary
to adequately fit the background signal from the granulation phenomena in empirical power spectra, though we
highlight that the physical origin for a component on the
mesoscale (not discussed here) remains an open question
(e.g. see Matloch et al. 2010; Kallinger et al. 2014; Corsaro et al. 2017; Rincon & Rieutord 2018; Kessar et al.
2019, and references therein). Such an approach provides a characteristic timescale, τ , and a corresponding
disc-integrated rms for each phenomenon, σ.
Harvey (1984) found that the contribution from granulation was σ ≈ 70 cm s−1 . However, Elsworth et al.
(1994) later examined the same potassium line, at
770 nm, and report that, with their increased instru-

mental precision, they find the solar background power
is almost five times lower and the σ from granulation
was only 31.9 ± 9 cm s−1 . Pallé et al. (1999) also
measured the solar background, but using the sodium
doublet at 589 nm, and found the granulation rms to
be 46.1 ± 10 cm s−1 ; this measurement was determined
over a period of 804 days, where it varied by ∼10%
according to the periodic variation in the depth of the
operating point along the year (Pallé et al. 1999). In
addition to the helioseismology analyses, recent observations from the HARPS-N solar telescope indicate a
daily correlated ‘noise’ term that is also near 40 cm s−1 ,
and is believed to be due to granulation (Cameron et al.
2019).
The exact granulation rms will depend on both the
observed line choice, and the average magnetic field.
Nonetheless, from the results above it appears our Sunas-a-star observations underestimate the total RV rms
by 3-4 times compared to the quiet Sun. This is not altogether unexpected given the increased magnetic field
strength in our simulations, relative to the quiet Sun.
For instance, in Paper II we found that the increase
in magnetic field strength relative to the quiet Sun reduced the net convective blueshift at disc centre by approximately a factor of 3. The convective blueshift is
reduced in our simulations because the magnetic flux inhibits the convective flows; hence, it is natural to expect
a similar decrease in the overall RV rms of our model
observations. Going forward, we operate under the hypothesis that our granulation parameterisation is capturing the fundamental convection physics, and as such,
that our model observations represent a scaled version
of the quiet Sun. In future work, we will test this hypothesis by fully exploring the temporal variability of
lower magnetic field strength simulations.
3. CORRELATIONS

In this section we analyse the influence of magnetoconvection on the disc-integrated Sun-as-a-star observations of the Fe I 6302 Å line profile (with an average
magnetic field of 200 G). In particular, we examine a
number of different line profile characteristics and their
relation to the convective-induced RV shifts, where the
RV is determined in the same manner as Section 2.3.
See Sections 4 and 5 for the impact of instrumental resolution and stellar rotation.
3.1. Line Depth and Width
To begin, we examine the behaviour the line depth
and width. The absolute line depth would only be available from space, as ground-based data will need to be
continuum normalised to remove fluctuations due to the

9

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
4.5914×1014
5.9226×10-1

Normalised Line Depth

4.5912×1014

Line Depth

4.5910×1014

4.5908×1014

5.9224×10-1

5.9222×10-1

4.5906×1014

4.5904×1014

4.5902×1014
-40

5.9220×10-1

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 5. Absolute (left) line depth and continuum normalised line depth (right) versus the convection-induced RVs; absolute
flux is measured in units of erg s−1 cm−2 sr−1 Å−1 .

Earth’s atmosphere; nonetheless, it is interesting to examine the normalised case in order to inform ourselves
of potential degeneracies. Ultimately, the shape of the
disc-integrated line profile depends on the underlying
granulation pattern across the star. Since line profiles
originating from the granules are deeper than those from
the components in the intergranular lanes, we expect
that a higher granule filling factor will induce both a
greater blueshift and a deeper disc-integrated profile.
Nonetheless, if there are instances when different combinations of filling factors can produce the same ratio from
continuum to line core, then the normalised line depth
may not correlate with the induced RV as strongly as
the absolute depth.
If the line depth changes, this may be accompanied
by a change in line width. To explore this, we examine the full width half maximum (FWHM), as it has
been shown to be a strong indicator of large amplitude stellar activity signals, such as that from starspots
(e.g. see Queloz et al. 2009; Hatzes et al. 2010; Boisse
et al. 2011). However, it is also important to note that
the granule and non-magnetic intergranular lane (which
dominate the profiles with a combined filling factor near
∼0.9), actually have quite similar half-maximum brightness measurements and similar FWHM measurements.
Hence, variations in the ratio between these two components may change the RVs with very little change
in FWHM. On the other hand, the intergranular lane
components are redshifted relative to the granular component and thus could potentially contribute to width
variations when the components are summed to create
the average line profiles.
As shown in Figure 5 find there is a strong linear correlation, with a Pearson’s R coefficient of -0.84 between
the absolute line depth and the RVs, which decreases to 0.66 for the normalised line depth – indicating that there

may be some degeneracies introduced by the continuum
normalisation. However, in both cases the change in line
depth is incredibly small (<<1%), and unlikely to be
discernible in the presence of photon noise. That said,
we expect that the RV rms may be underestimated in
our models, compared to the quiet Sun, and as such
we may expect a larger, more discernible, variation in
reality – future work with lower magnetic field simulations will be used to test this hypothesis. On the other
hand, we find the FWHM does not correlate with the
RV, wtih a Pearson’s R coefficient of only 0.07 (figure
shown in Appendix B). Hence, the FWHM is unlikely to
provide a good diagnostic for the short-term convection
behaviour. However, if the magnetic field changes then
the flow velocities and contrasts between the granular
and intergranular lane components are likely to change
and this may lead to FWHM changes. As such, in future
work we intend to re-examine the impact of FWHM as
a plage indicator.
3.2. Bisector Analysis
The line depth and FWHM only explore two particular regions of the line profiles. To go a step further,
we can analyse the shape of the line profile through its
bisector (defined as the midpoints of horizontal slices in
the profile). There are a number of ways to characterise
the bisector shape; herein, we utilise the bisector inverse
slope3 (BIS), curvature (C and Calt ), bisector velocity
displacement (Vb ), and bisector amplitude (Ab ) – see
Figure 6 and Queloz et al. (2001); Povich et al. (2001);
Dall et al. (2006) for definitions. All correlation plots
for the bisector analysis can be found in Appendix B.
Both the BIS and C look at the difference between average regions in the bisector and were designed to probe
3

Also refereed to as bisector velocity span in the literature.

10

Cegla et al.
1.0
0.9

Vt

V1

Normalised Flux

0.8

0.6

V2

Calt

0.7

Vb
V3

0.5

0.4
-0.010

BIS = Vt - Vb
-0.005

Ab

C = (V3 - V2) - (V2 - V1)
Vb = (V1 + V2 + V3)/3 - Vcore

0.000
Wavelength (Angstroms)

0.005

0.010

Figure 6. Schematic to illustrate the various bisector diagnostics, with an example bisector (from Kurucz et al. 1984)
shown in black. BIS is defined as the difference between
an average region near the top and bottom of the bisector
(shown in blue). C is the difference between three average
regions (shown in red), and the Vb is average of those relative to the line core (defined in orange). Ab is the difference
between the line core and the most blue-shifted region of
the bisector (shown in purple), and Calt is the perpendicular
distance between the bisector and the midpoint of a line connecting the top and bottom of the bisector (shown in green).

the impact of starspots, that effectively take a bite out
of the line profile as the spot rotates in and out of view.
If using these diagnostics as a granulation probe, then
it may be better to fine-tune the regions to the C-shape
of the observed line bisector. To test this, we used both
the standard regions (Vt , Vb , V1 , V2 , V3 ) and also iteratively varied them to maximise the correlation with the
net convective RV shift; regions from 5 – 95% of the
line depth, in steps of 5% were explored (with regions
defined with a width at least 5% of the depth).
When using the standard BIS regions (10-40% and
55-90% the line depth), we find a Pearson’s R correlation coefficient of 0.57. Maximising this correlation, we
find the strength increases dramatically to a Pearson’s R
of 0.93 if we probe the difference between 40-45% and 8095% of the line depth. Hence, we find the strongest correlation when Vb is bounded by a small region just above
the line core and Vt covers a similar region at the C-bend
in the bisector (i.e. when the bisector has changed from
increasing blueshift to decreasing in blueshift). Since the
Vt region is tied tightly to the ‘C’-bend in the bisector, it
is entirely possible that the strength of this correlation
will change based on which stellar lines are observed.
The correlation strength will also likely be impacted by
the stellar rotation and instrumental resolution, as these
will change the bisector shape.

For the bisector curvature, C, we find the standard
regions (20 – 30%, 40 – 55%, and 75 – 95% of the
line depth) result in a moderate-to-weak anti-correlation
with the RVs, with a Pearson’s R of -0.6. After finetuning, we find an optimal correlation when the upper,
middle, and lower regions are defined as 15 – 25%, 25 –
30%, and 90 – 95%, respectively; with these we probe
the bisector just above the C-bend and also near the
line core, and the correlation increases substantially to
a Pearson’s R of -0.93. Similar to the BIS, the strength
of this correlation will depend on the actual shape of the
bisector, and will be subject to stellar rotation, instrumental resolution, and the innate line properties.
Povich et al. (2001) argue that because the bisector
curvature is essentially a second derivative of the line
profile, it can require a high signal-to-noise ratio to measure accurately. While the signal-to-noise ratio is not a
problem for our model observations, it could prove a limiting factor for the bisector analysis in real observations.
This is our motivation for exploring the bisector velocity
displacement, Vb , which averages the three regions from
C and measures their position relative to the line core.
Here, the line core was determined by fitting a parabola
to the bottom three points of the profile. Note, we differ
from Povich et al. (2001), in that our bisector curvature
values are created by averaging over select regions rather
than individual points.
Since the velocity displacement averages the bisector curvature values together, we investigate both standard and optimised curvature regions previously mentioned. We find a much stronger correlation between Vb
and RV than the original C-RV correlation (i.e. with
the standard values), with a Pearson’s R of 0.89. As
such, the additional dimension of measuring the bisector
shape relative to the line core seems to strengthen the
correlation with convection-induced RV. On the other
hand, when using the regions designed to optimise the
curvature-RV relationship, we find the Vb -RV correlation
is still very strong, but slightly weaker than the corresponding C-RV relation, with a Pearson’s R of 0.90.
We also examine an alternate measurement of the bisector curvature, Calt , defined as the perpendicular distance between the bisector and the midpoint of a line
that connects the bluest and reddest points of the bisector Povich et al. (2001). As such, this provides a measure
of how much the C-shape bends towards the blue-end of
the spectrum. In this search, we limit the bisector to 10
– 95% of the line depth to avoid the very bottom and
top of the line; we also average over individual points
corresponding ± 2% of the flux value. We find Calt curvature measure has a much weaker correlation with the
induced RV than that from C above, with a Pearson’s

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
R of only -0.39. Moreover, because this definition of the
curvature is based on very small regions, the signal-tonoise ratio necessary to construct such measurements is
higher.
The last bisector measurement analysed was the bisector amplitude, Ab , exploring the difference between the
line core and the bluest part of the bisector (determined
from an average over a small region covering ± 2% of
the flux). As such, this is a measure of the C-bend in
the bisector, and since the C-shape is a direct result
of granulation, Ab should correlate with the convectioninduced RV shifts. Indeed, we find a strong correlation,
with a Pearson’s R coefficient of -0.89. Comparing this
strength to the Calt -RV relation indicates that the bend
in the C-shape, where the profile is most blueshifted,
happens at a slightly different region than that probed
by Calt .
While the centre of the line can be measured to very
high precision observationally with the cross-correlation
technique, this is not necessarily the case for the most
blueshifted point of the bisector. As a result, even
if spectrographs reach cm s−1 precision, we may need
to average over a slightly larger region of the most
blueshifted point to beat down the photon noise. Regardless, the strength of this correlation clearly indicates that the bisector amplitude is a very simple, fast
and potentially powerful granulation noise diagnostic.
3.3. Full Profile Analysis
With a view toward combating photon noise in future
empirical observations, and maximising the information
content from the available spectrum, we also want to investigate diagnostics that utilise the entire line profile.
We start this investigation by looking at the two stellar
activity indicators introduced by Figueira et al. (2013).
The first is termed bi-Gaussian fitting; it was originally
developed by Nardetto et al. (2006 – and references
therein) to analyse the line centres and asymmetries in
the line profiles of pulsating stars. Bi-Gaussian fitting
involves simultaneously fitting the left and right side of
the line profile (or CCF) with a Gaussian that contains
an additional asymmetry parameter (A); for this we use
a Levenberg-Marquardt least-squares fitting. The difference between RV centroids from the bi-Gaussian and
the pure Gaussian fits, ∆V , then acts as a proxy for
the RV induced from the line/CCF asymmetry(see Appendix B and Figueira et al. 2013, for more details). We
find a moderately strong anti-correlation between the
convection-induced RV shifts and ∆V , with a Pearson’s
R coefficient of -0.71.
Since ∆V originates from the line asymmetry, we also
examined the relationship between RV and the asym-

11

metry fraction of the FWHM, A. As one might expect,
the strength of the correlation is the same as that for
∆V (with a Pearson’s R of 0.70). The interesting thing
to note about the A-RV relation is the variation in A
seen for the disc-integrated model profiles. In Figueira
et al. (2013), the authors used bi-Gaussian fitting to explore the impact of starspots, where their simulations
indicated changes in A of ∼2%. Since convection is a
smaller amplitude effect, compared to spots, we expect
a lower variation in A; however, we find A only changes
by ∼0.01%, which means this correlation may be very
difficult to see in the presence of photon noise.
The second activity indicator introduced in Figueira
et al. (2013) is the velocity asymmetry, Vasy . The goal
of the Vasy indicator is to compare the RV spectral information on the blue wing to that on the red wing for
the entirety of the line profile and/or CCF. It allows us
to evaluate the gradient in the spectral line for both the
blue and red wings separately at equal flux values, and
condenses these gradients into one (weighted) average
measurement per observation. We follow the updated
definition from Lanza et al. (2018) – see Appendix B for
more details. For our models, there is a strong correlation with RV, with a Pearson’s R of -0.92. Given the
strength of this correlation, the Vasy(mod) diagnostic has
potential to help disentangle convection and should be
further pursued in attempts to remove activity-related
noise in stellar observations. However, further investigation from solar observations and simulations of varying
magnetic field will help quantify how much we expect
Vasy(mod) to vary and whether this can be discernible
with future instrumentation.
Another way to probe the behaviour of an entire line
profile is to measure its equivalent width (EW). Since
the EW essentially measures the area of a spectral line
profile, it could be affected by convective-induced variability. In fact, it is well known that the net convective
blueshift of spectral lines correlates with their EWs (Allende Prieto & Garcia Lopez 1998; Ramı́rez et al. 2008;
Reiners et al. 2016), and that both quantities are altered by magnetic fields (Meunier et al. 2010; Fabbian
et al. 2010). The EW has also long-been used as a diagnostic of pressure-mode oscillations, excited by surface
convection, and evidence for granulation can be seen in
the power spectra derived from EW variations (Kjeldsen
et al. 1995, 1999). Power spectra from RVs indicate a
similar behaviour, which suggests convection may cause
the two quantities to manifest in a similar frequency
structure; yet, it remains to be seen if the EWs and RVs
correlate with one another contemporaneously.
In particular, we know a granule line profile has a
larger EW than those originating from the intergranular

12

Cegla et al.

3.4. Photometric Brightness
Although we lose the absolute continuum information
in ground-based spectra, we can retrieve it from photometry. This could potentially be useful as a granulation
noise diagnostic, as one would naively expect a star with
a greater granule filling factor to be both brighter and
more blueshifted. However, in reality this may not be
the case if the stochastic nature of granulation washes
out such a correlation. In line with this latter point,
Meunier et al. (2015) failed to see such a correlation in
their granulation models, which were based off a combination of empirical solar relations and velocities derived from a hydrodynamical simulation. Meunier et al.
(2015) argued that the relationship between observed
granule size, velocity, and brightness was noisy and lost
its coherence when integrating across the entire stellar
disc. Our approach differs from Meunier et al. (2015)
in two key ways: our model backbone is purely MHDbased (and therefore not limited by instrumental precision) and the velocities are derived from the line profile
shapes (rather than the raw x, y, z velocities from the
HD/MHD simulation).
To emulate photometric measurements, we integrate
the area under the disc-integrated model line profiles
and use this as a proxy for the photometric brightness.
It is important to note that we are ‘simulating’ photometric variability over a very small wavelength range,
and operating under the assumption the changes seen
here will also be present across the observed wavelength
region. To have a feel for the magnitude of the changes
in this brightness proxy, we normalise by the maximum
area, subtract off the mean, and convert to parts per million (ppm). This normalised brightness proxy is shown
in Figure 7, where we see the predicted correlation,
with the largest brightness corresponding to the largest
blueshifts. In fact, this is one of the strongest correlations with convective-induced RV, with a Pearson’s R
of -0.90. The peak-to-peak variation is ∼110 ppm, with

60

40
Normalised Brightness Proxy (ppm)

lanes, partially because these profiles are formed higher
in the atmosphere and have larger line depths. Hence,
instances when more granules are present, could lead to
profiles with larger EWs and greater blueshifts. This is
indeed what we find, where there is a strong correlation
between the EW and RV and a Pearson’s R coefficient of
-0.91. The EW is a particularly powerful diagnostic for
ground-based data since it is independent of both the
continuum intensity and the stellar rotation. However,
RV precision is not independent of rotation as it is more
difficult to determine precise RVs at higher stellar rotation rates; hence, the strength of this correlation could
still be slightly impacted by stellar rotation.

20

0

-20

-40

-60
-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 7. A brightness proxy versus RV, where the proxy
is determined by the integrated area underneath the discintegrated model line profiles. This area has been normalised
by its maximum value, mean-subtracted, and converted to
parts per million (ppm).

an rms of 20 ppm, which would be measurable with current space-based photometric technology. For instance,
the Kepler satellite was designed to detect Earth-analog
planets, with a dip in brightness corresponding to 84
ppm for an Earth-size planet around a Sun-sized star,
and has demonstrated 10 ppm precision. The limiting
factor to discern this correlation comes down to the RV
precision, which should be attainable with ESPRESSO,
and potentially EXPRES, for bright targets – such as
those that will be targeted with TESS and PLATO.
It is not entirely clear why we see such a strong
brightness-RV correlation with our models, while Meunier et al. (2015) do not see it in their model stars. It
could potentially stem from the instrumental noise inherent in the empirical relationships governing the granular evolution in Meunier et al. (2015), which are circumvented here. However, it could also be due to a flaw
in our granulation parameterisation, that could be missing some physics. For example, the nature of the fourcomponent parameterisation assumes fixed flow velocities and continuum contrasts for each component; this
was based off little variation/impact of these parameters
in our MHD time-series, but may not be reflective of a
global pattern across the stellar disc or for other line
profiles. This parameterisation is also tied to the physical size of the MHD snapshots, which is incorporated
in the stellar grid, while Meunier et al. (2015) populate
their star with individual granules; hence, there could
be some over-averaging in our approach, but as each tile
is independent and their the physical area is quite small
(∼0.005% of visible stellar disc) this seems unlikely. Re-

13

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise

4. ADDITIONAL FACTORS

In addition to the inherent stellar line properties
(e.g. formation height, excitation potential, Landé factor etc.), there are a number of additional factors that
can impact the line profile shape and our ability to discern that shape. Here we will explore the impact of instrumental resolution and the inherent stellar rotation.
4.1. Impact of Instrumental Resolution
The instrumental resolution of a spectrograph determines how well we are able to measure the shape of
any given stellar line. A low instrumental resolution
will smear out line asymmetries due to a broader pointspread function; this can make it difficult to measure
small asymmetries, including those induced by granulation. To explore this we assume ESPRESSO-like hypothetical instrumental profiles (IPs). The ESPRESSO
spectrograph is highly stabilised and its IP can be approximated by a Gaussian. The width of each Gaussian

Realistic Sampling

Oversampling
1.0

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8
Normalised FLux

Normalised FLux

gardless, these aspects will be explored in future work,
and we will seek to empirically validate this relationship.
It is also interesting to note that the rms of the brightness fluctuations seen here are of similar magnitude to
those observed on the Sun. For example, Kallinger et al.
(2014) report that the rms intensity fluctuations from
solar granulation fall just shy of 30 ppm, as measured
by the VIRGO instrument aboard the SOHO satellite.
On top of this, the Sun’s photometric variability extends
from ∼100 – 1800 ppm over the course of a solar cycle
with an average variability near ∼400 ppm, as seen from
the SOHO data presented in Bastien et al. (2013 – and
references therein). Our model star observations have
an average magnetic field of 200 G, which is more active
than the quiet Sun, but does not produce the sunspots
found in the more active parts of the solar cycle. In addition, we have evidence that the magnetic field in our simulations is large enough to restrict flow velocities (e.g.
redshifts relative to the quiet Sun), hence it may actually act to inhibit the overall photometric variability.
Consequently, the brightness fluctuations of ∼110 ppm
peak-to-peak and 20 ppm rms seen in our model stars is
credible, given the magnetic field, and acts as further evidence that the granulation parameterisation and noise
diagnostics are representative of the physics taking place
in photospheric magnetoconvection.
If this brightness-RV relationship is confirmed, its
strength here implies that photometry may be among
the best ways to identify granulation-induced RVs shifts.
Accordingly, high precision simultaneous photometry
from space-based transit missions could potentially be
a key to disentangling the granulation noise within the
spectroscopic observations.

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.7

0.6

True
MR
HR
UHR

0.4
-350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50
Velocity (m s-1)

0.5

0.4
-100 -50

0
50 100 150 200
Velocity (m s-1)

Figure 8. Line bisector of the average model line profile before (in black) and after it was convolved with
an ESPRESSO-like IP corresponding to its three modes:
Medium Resolution (70,000), High Resolution (140,000), and
Ultra-High Resolution (190,000). Left: bisectors when the
profile sampling has not changed; right: when the sampling
changes corresponding to the resolution mode.

corresponds to ESPRESSO’s three modes: Medium Resolution (MR), High Resolution (HR), and Ultra-High
Resolution (UHR), with a resolving power of 70,000,
140,000, and 190,000, respectively. We convolve each of
these IPs with an average line profile from the 1,000 Sunas-a-star model observations. If we sample the line profile at the same rate as the true, simulated line profile,
then we can isolate the impact of the line profile shapes.
The corresponding line bisectors for this case are shown
in the lefthand side of Figure 8. We can clearly see that
the lower resolution smears out the asymmetries, as the
bisector from the MR case is nearly straight. Fortunately, we see both the HR and UHR modes can capture
most of the line asymmetries, with only small deviations
from the original C-shape. However, we note that this
may not necessarily be the case for line profiles with different shapes. For example, hotter stars will have the
C-bend occur much lower down in the line profile, which
will be more heavily impacted by the resolving power.
Naturally, the measured line profile shapes are also
impacted by how finely we can sample line profiles
(which depends on the Echelle grating and the number of pixels on the CCD). For the HR and UHR modes
of ESPRESSO, the true sampling rate is 0.5 km s−1 .
The MR mode is binned by a factor of two, so the true
sampling is 1 km s−1 . Taking both of these sampling
rates into account by interpolating onto grids with the
respective samplings, we re-do the convolutions and plot
their resultant bisectors in the righthand side of Figure 8. From this, it is clear that the sampling rate of

14

Cegla et al.
vsini = 4 km s-1

vsini = 6 km s-1

vsini = 8 km s-1
1.0

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

Normalised FLux

1.0

Normalised FLux

1.0

Normalised FLux

Normalised FLux

vsini = 2 km s-1
1.0

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5
Best Values at 2 km s-1
Standard Values

0.4
-350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50
Velocity (m s-1)

0.4
-350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50
Velocity (m s-1)

0.4
-350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50
Velocity (m s-1)

0.4
-350 -300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50
Velocity (m s-1)

Figure 9. Average line bisectors from model observations with stellar rotation rates corresponding to v sin i = 2, 4, 6, and
8 km s−1 (left to right, respectively). The Vt and Vb regions of the BIS are over-plotted in red and blue, respectively; dashed
lines show the standard regions from the literature and solid lines show the regions fine-tuned to the solar rotation (2 km s−1 ).

the lower resolution mode adds significant noise to the
bisector calculation. Hence, it will be very important to
have high to ultra-high resolution if we want to measure
the minute asymmetry variations induced by convection.
This aspect will be further discussed in Section 5.
4.2. Impact of Stellar Rotation
If the local photospheric line profile is symmetric,
then an increase in stellar rotation will result in a
broader, shallower disc-integrated profile, with symmetric changes on both line wings and zero change to the
line core. An asymmetric local line profile complicates this picture significantly. Ultimately, the discintegrated profile will still be shallower and broader, but
the changes in the line wings will not be symmetric and
the line core will also be impacted. The exact nature
of the stellar rotation impact will be dependent on the
underlying line profile shape, which is dependent on the
particular stellar line and the magnetic field of the photosphere. Even if the line profile is not magnetically sensitive, the magnetic field can alter the thermodynamic
structure of the convection, which will impact the line
shape (Beeck et al. 2015). To explore how this impacts
our simulated Fe I 6302Å line profile (with 200 G average field strength), we re-ran all 1,000 model star observations for various solid body stellar rotation rates
corresponding to a v sin i of : 4, 6, 8, and 10 km s−1 .
The average bisector from these model observations are
shown in Figure 9 for v sin i of 4 – 8 km s−1 , alongside the original 2 km s−1 . For slow-rotators like the
Sun, differential rotation has a minimal influence on the
line profiles and does not significantly modify our final
results – see Appendix C for more details.

With increasing stellar rotation, the line core first increases in blueshift and then increases in redshift, while
the line wings continue to blueshift; this is in agreement
with the behaviour seen by Beeck et al. (2015) for their
100 G MHD simulations of the Fe I 6165 and 6173 Å
lines. Even a small change in v sin i from 2 to 4 km s−1
makes a remarkable change in the line profile, with far
less asymmetry seen in the bisector when increasing the
v sin i to 4 km s−1 . At higher rotations we begin to see
more asymmetry in the line bisector, but its behaviour
is quite different from the solar rotation case. To further highlight these differences, we over-plotted the bisector regions probed by the two different BIS definitions in Section 3.2 (from the standard literature values
and when fine-tuned to the solar rotation case). From
Figure 9, it is clear that granulation-noise diagnostics
probing the line shape and corresponding bisector will
perform very differently depending on the stellar rotation (further discussed in Section 5).
5. NOISE REDUCTION

In this section, we analyse the effectiveness of each
line profile characteristic as a granulation-noise mitigation tool. From Section 3, it is clear that many of
the line characteristics are linearly correlated with the
granulation-induced RV shifts. Hence, we can heavily
mitigate this noise by subtracting off a linear fit between
each diagnostic and the RVs. To determine the noise
mitigation success, we compare the correlation-corrected
RV rms to the original, uncorrected rms. Even though
the total RV variability may be underestimated in our
model observations as compared to the quiet Sun (see
Section 2.3), the fractional reduction in the rms should
still scale with the true value if the fundamental physics

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
is correct. Hence, in Table 2, we present the fractional
reduction in the RV rms; negative fractions represent
cases where an attempt to remove the correlation actually increased the RV scatter, as is the case when the
correlation was weak or non-existent.
We find that very strong correlations are needed to reduce the RV variability. For example, diagnostics that
produced correlations with a Pearson’s R of ∼ |0.7| resulted in effectively no change in the RV rms (e.g. those
from the bi-Gaussian fitting, ∆V and A). This is likely
because the RVs were not uniformly distributed, but
instead heavily clustered around 0 shift, and subtracting off a linear fit between the diagnostic and RV will
most heavily impact the extremes. Nonetheless, there
are many diagnostics that show a very strong correlation and significant noise mitigation. For example,
the fine-tuned BIS and bisector curvature, (both) velocity displacement(s), bisector amplitude, Vasy , equivalent width, and brightness all remove around 50% of
the granulation noise; this could mean up to four times
less observing time is required to reach desired RV precisions.
It is also interesting to note that the increase in scatter in the RV correlation when changing from absolute
to continuum normalised line depth is sufficient to kill
any noise reduction in the model observations; this may
not be the case if the RV variability were greater, but
should be carefully considered for ground-based observations. We also want to draw attention to the significant
increase in noise reduction ability when fine-tuning the
BIS and bisector curvature regions, as compared to using
the standard ranges in the literature; in both instances,
the diagnostic goes from zero noise reduction to a reduction >60%. This highlights the importance of examining the particular stellar line characteristics rather than
applying a blanket approach to all lines. However, we
do see that the velocity displacement, which utilises the
same regions as the curvature, performs well when using
both the standard and fine-tuned regions. As such, in
the future we will explore this behaviour in additional
stellar lines to confirm if the additional information from
the line core is sufficient to make these diagnostic more
independent of the particular line shape than the bisector curvature. Additionally, observations of starspots
have taught us that we often need to use many diagnostics to determine the stellar activity behaviour, and we
recommend the same for granulation; this may be especially important as the total variation in each diagnostic
is small and may be difficult to discern empirically.
In Section 4, we also explored the impact of various
ESPRESSO-like instrumental resolutions, as well as the
effect of varying the stellar rotation from solar-like up

15

to a v sin i of 10 km s−1 . The noise mitigation results
at each instrumental resolution are also shown in Table 2, alongside the results for models with v sin i of 4
and 6 km s−1 (see Appendix C for the v sin i = 8 and
10 km s−1 results). We note that when exploring the
impact of the resolving power, we use only the cases
where we also altered the sampling of the line profile
accordingly.
As expected, we see that a decrease in resolution results in a decrease in noise reduction. This is because
the convolution with the instrumental profile smooths
out the asymmetries in the observed line profile. On
top of this, these asymmetries are even more difficult
to measure when the profile is sampled more coarsely.
The medium resolution (R = 70,000) reduced the noise
reduction for many diagnostics by more than half, while
the high and ultra-high resolutions (R = 140,000 or
190,000) only saw a marginal decrease. There are a few
exceptions to this behaviour. For example, moving to
the medium resolution led to an increase in correlation
strength for the standard bisector curvature definition,
but the correlation strength in the high and ultra-high
resolution modes behaves as expected. A similar effect is
seen for the Vasy(mod) , where in this instance the correlation is weaker in the medium resolution mode, but the
medium mode still has a stronger correlation than the
high and ultra-high resolutions. As such, for both it is
unlikely the increased correlation strengths at medium
resolution will hold up in the presence of photon noise
and/or slightly different line sampling. We also see a
very slight increase in the correlation/noise reduction
for the standard velocity displacement and bisector amplitude when moving to the high and ultra-high resolutions (as compared to the original case with no convolution). However, these improvements are very small
and both measurements consider small regions of the
line profile (e.g. the line core), which are hard to discern when the line sampling is reduced. We also find the
line depth, equivalent width, and brightness proxy to be
almost independent of the resolution. This is not surprising as a convolution with a Gaussian instrumental
profile should conserve the equivalent width and therefore also the area/brightness. Additionally, a convolution will change the absolute value of the line depth, but
should preserve the behaviour relative to the RV because
it is less impacted by the convolution-altered asymmetries than the line wings. Consequently, the equivalent
width and simultaneous photometry may provide some
of the best diagnostics to disentangle granulation noise.
Given the future wealth of photometric data from missions like TESS, CHEOPS, and PLATO, and the ease
of calculating the EW from the necessary ground-based

16

Cegla et al.
Table 2. Granulation noise reduction for various diagnostics, alongside their Pearson’s R correlation coefficient.
v sin i = 2 km s−1
Diagnostic
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
v sin i = 4 km s−1
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
v sin i = 6 km s−1
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness

Resolution = 70,000
Reduction (%)
R
35.65
-0.84
-20.02
-0.64
-586.67
0.14
-81.40
0.48
11.16
0.75
39.12
-0.85
36.46
-0.84
-0.77
0.70
-58.94
0.53
-694.33
0.12
3.93
-0.72
-66.31
-0.52
-66.35
0.52
49.40
-0.89
52.83
-0.90
54.30
-0.91

Resolution = 140,000
Reduction (%)
R
32.42
-0.83
-28.97
-0.61
-831.93
0.11
-48.05
0.56
52.37
0.90
-51.39
-0.55
45.50
-0.88
56.72
0.92
36.78
0.85
-234.10
-0.29
54.01
-0.91
-25.83
-0.62
-25.81
0.62
36.71
-0.85
52.74
-0.90
53.02
-0.91

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
32.66
-0.83
-28.04
-0.62
-4468.55
-0.02
-44.98
0.57
57.41
0.92
-6.30
-0.69
50.80
-0.90
59.24
0.93
43.54
0.87
-170.33
-0.35
60.68
-0.93
-15.42
-0.65
-15.44
0.65
36.54
-0.84
52.66
-0.90
52.76
-0.90

Reduction (%)
36.37
-13.38
-1387.91
-42.31
61.20
-34.29
61.63
49.58
52.32
-135.77
48.10
-0.53
-0.63
57.85
53.91
52.70

R
-0.84
-0.66
0.07
0.57
0.93
-0.60
-0.93
0.89
0.90
-0.39
-0.89
-0.71
0.70
-0.92
-0.91
-0.90

-51.21
-258.48
-932.73
-212.15
-300.44
-235.87
-316.02
-428.24
-251.70
-167.97
-1962.35
-196.16
-196.81
-275.98
25.66
19.88

-0.55
-0.27
-0.10
-0.31
-0.24
-0.29
0.23
-0.19
-0.27
-0.35
-0.05
0.32
-0.32
0.26
-0.80
-0.78

-42.63
-305.51
-270.23
-235.44
-260.68
-2655.09
-414.35
-307.87
-272.93
-404.79
-1641.84
-223.28
-223.97
-27.84
28.86
23.50

-0.57
-0.24
-0.26
-0.29
-0.27
-0.04
0.19
-0.24
-0.26
-0.19
-0.06
0.30
-0.29
0.62
-0.81
-0.79

-66.16
-466.26
-377.25
-201.93
-235.40
-213.01
-454.37
-192.87
-178.59
-189.73
-741.17
-199.24
-199.92
-307.18
26.40
20.67

-0.52
-0.17
-0.21
-0.31
-0.29
-0.30
0.18
-0.32
-0.34
-0.33
0.12
0.32
-0.32
0.24
-0.81
-0.78

-70.06
-493.11
-521.71
-201.09
-257.31
-213.20
-241.24
-212.02
-182.96
-182.47
-648.14
-196.04
-196.72
-203.44
25.94
20.17

-0.51
-0.17
-0.16
-0.32
-0.27
-0.30
0.28
-0.31
-0.33
-0.33
0.13
0.32
-0.32
0.31
-0.80
-0.78

-210.79
-3529.02
-375.79
-40.16
-38.26
-82.91
-37.59
-47.48
-46.71
-521.42
-170.79
-33.02
-33.47
-40.52
-6.59
-14.76

-0.31
-0.03
-0.21
-0.58
-0.59
0.48
0.59
-0.56
-0.56
-0.16
0.35
0.60
-0.60
0.58
-0.68
-0.66

-180.38
-202717.06
-193.26
-42.70
-41.13
-38.43
-41.10
-43.14
-44.04
-4466.65
-42.86
-40.75
-41.10
-44.78
-4.23
-11.20

-0.34
0.00
-0.32
-0.57
-0.58
0.59
0.58
-0.57
-0.57
0.02
0.57
0.58
-0.58
0.57
-0.69
-0.67

-262.05
-1835.29
-244.97
-38.33
-36.81
-65.99
-39.79
-30.48
-31.45
-932.33
-43.48
-33.90
-34.32
-40.70
-6.26
-14.37

-0.27
0.05
-0.28
-0.59
-0.59
0.52
0.58
-0.61
-0.61
-0.10
0.57
0.60
-0.60
0.58
-0.69
-0.66

-280.50
-1589.69
-60.50
-39.24
-37.04
-70.29
-39.92
-32.53
-33.04
-729.72
-75.93
-32.86
-33.29
-33.70
-6.71
-14.90

-0.25
0.06
-0.53
-0.58
-0.59
0.51
0.58
-0.60
-0.60
-0.12
0.49
0.60
-0.60
0.60
-0.68
-0.66

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
spectroscopic follow-up, there is strong potential to disentangle the granulation effects from the Doppler wobble
of low-mass, long-period planets.
From Figure 9, we see that even a small change in the
stellar rotation can have a significant impact on the line
profile shape. Moving from a v sin i of 2 to 4 km s−1
significantly reduced the asymmetry seen in the line bisector, and as a result we expect drastic reductions in
our noise mitigation attempts. However, as the equivalent width/area should be conserved when the rotation is increased, we expect the this diagnostic, and the
brightness, to be relatively unaffected by the v sin i. Regardless of the diagnostic, we also expect a decrease in
the correlation with RV as rotation increases because
the RV becomes more difficult to precisely determine.
This is indeed what we find, as shown in Table 2. At a
v sin i of 4 km s−1 , only the equivalent width and brightness maintain a strong enough correlation to provide any
granulation noise reduction, and at v sin i = 6 km s−1
even these diagnostics fail. We compare the equivalent
width and area measurements between each stellar rotation case and confirm that they are conserved; it is the
increase in scatter amongst the RV measurements that
decreases their correlation strength. Ultimately, these
results will depend on the inherent shape of the particular stellar lines observed, and the overall variability.
Nonetheless, the Fe I 6302 Å line simulated here is fairly
representative of most lines observed in a given solar-like
star, so we may expect the corresponding CCFs to behave similarly. Consequently, the slowest rotating stars
should provide the most ideal cases for granulation noise
mitigation – both because of the increased RV precision
available, and because we can measure the asymmetries
to diagnose the underlying granulation behaviour.
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

Stellar surface magnetoconvection has the potential to
induce spurious RV shifts that can completely mask the
Doppler-reflex signal induced by low-mass, long-period
planets. Throughout this work we have shown that it
may be possible to disentangle and therefore correct the
convective-induced RV shifts. Herein, we use a realistic granulation parameterisation, with a 3D MHD backbone, from Cegla et al. (2013) and Cegla et al. (2018),
to generate new stellar absorption line profiles that contain the same fundamental convection characteristics
as those from the computationally heavy radiative 3D
MHD simulations. Independent granulation profiles are
then tiled across a model star and disc-integrated to create 1000 realistic Sun-as-a-star model observations that
contain magnetoconvection with an average magnetic
field strength of 200 G for the Fe I 6302 Å line. The

17

shapes of the disc-integrated line profiles match very
well those from empirical solar observations from the
McMath, IAG, and PEPSI spectrographs. The net convective blueshift in our simulation is approximately a
third of that from the quiet Sun, but this is in agreement with what we expect due to the inhibition of convection from the increased magnetic field strength in our
MHD simulation (Cegla et al. 2018). Along with this,
the RV rms from the granulation in our model observations is only ∼10 cm s−1 , which is a factor of 3-4 lower
than what we expect in the quiet Sun (Elsworth et al.
1994; Pallé et al. 1999). We attribute the reduced rms
to the increased inhibition of the convective flows from
the higher magnetic field strength, and operate under
the hypothesis that our models represent a scaled version of the quiet Sun behaviour; this hypothesis will be
further tested in future work where we explore the temporal variability of lower magnetic field strength MHD
simulations.
Using these Sun-as-a-star model observations, we
search for correlations between line shape characteristics and the convection-induced RV shifts. We find
many line profile characteristics show a strong linear
correlation with the induced RVs, and that by subtracting off this correlation we can significantly reduce the
RV variability. We find that the line depth is well correlated with the RV, but that this correlation is only
strong enough to be useful as a noise mitigation tool
if the line profiles are not continuum normalised, with
a ∼35% of reduction in the RV rms. Unfortunately,
ground-based data must be normalised so this may not
be the most ideal diagnostic; on top of this, the total variation in the line depth is very small and likely
undetectable. However, other stellar lines may have a
larger variation in depth due to the granulation evolution, so it could potentially be a useful diagnostic for
other lines. Nonetheless, we find the BIS, bisector curvature (C), bisector velocity displacement (Vb ), bisector
amplitude (Ab ), Vasy(mod) , and equivalent width may
all be capable of removing up to ∼50-60% of the RV
noise, which could mean approximately four times less
observing time is required. Each of these diagnostics
had peak-to-peak variations of ∼10-30 cm s−1 , which
may be detectable with instruments like ESPRESSO
and EXPRES, especially if the variability is a factor
of 3-4 times larger in the quiet photosphere. We also
integrated the area underneath the disc-integrated line
profiles to act as a proxy for photometric brightness,
which we found to correlate very strongly with RV and
may also offer a ∼50% reduction in the granulation RV
noise. It is important to keep in mind that we were approximating the brightness over a very small wavelength

18

Cegla et al.

region, but if confirmed, this could mean simultaneous
photometry from current and future missions like TESS,
CHEOPS, and PLATO may play a key role in disentangling granulation-induced RV noise. It is also important
to note that we are not simply advocating for a ‘one-off,
flicker-style’ photometric rms measurement to predict
the level of stellar RV noise; we are advocating for
simultaneous photometric and spectroscopic measurements, as this could allow us to actually mitigate the
granulation-induced RV variability and push our detection limits to lower-mass, longer-period planets. While
these space-missions will provide thousands of potential
targets, it is clear that the future long-term monitoring
by PLATO will make such simultaneous ground-based
RV follow-up far more amenable.
We also explore the impact of instrumental resolution
and stellar rotation. Even at a resolution of 70,000, the
instrumental profile will act to smooth out the asymmetries in the observed line profiles; this decreases the
amplitude of the variability in each line diagnostic, making it more difficult to discern and increasing the scatter
in the correlation with the RV, thereby decreasing the
noise mitigation success. Fortunately, a high resolution
of 140,000 or 190,000 is sufficient to capture most line
asymmetries with only minimal impact on the noise mitigation. However, this result is contingent on the shape
of the line bisector; a bisector with a ‘C-bend’ closer to
the line core (as expected for hotter stars) will be more
severely impacted. The equivalent width and brightness
are mostly independent of the instrumental resolution.
The stellar rotation also strongly impacts the line profile
shape, and even a small increase from a v sin i of 2 to
4 km s−1 causes the line bisector to be significantly less
asymmetric. This means that our bisector diagnostics
fine-tuned to the solar rotation are no longer useful noise
mitigation tools. The exception to this is the equivalent
width and the brightness; however, even these diagnos-

tics perform more poorly due to the decreased RV precision from the increase in the stellar rotation.
Similar to procedures that correct for starspot/plage
contamination, we advocate that all diagnostics found
here to produce any noise reduction should be explored
in conjunction with one another when analysing empirical data. Additionally, we anticipate that diagnostics
that utilise the entire line profile should be most robust against photon noise (e.g. Vasy(mod) and equivalent
width). In future work we will explore the impact of
photon noise, finite exposures, and the possibility to use
a linear combination of diagnostics to further increase
the noise reduction. This will also be extended across
a variety of magnetic field strengths and stellar lines,
and eventually various spectral types and astrophysical noise sources (e.g. supergranulation and/or plage
regions etc.). Nonetheless, the strong noise mitigation
we find here promises great potential for disentangling
granulation, which will be critical to reach the RV precision necessary for the future confirmation of true Earthanalogs. Moreover, it is clear that high precision, high
resolution observations of slowly rotating stars hold the
most promise for such granulation noise mitigation.
H.M.C. acknowledges the financial support of the
National Centre for Competence in Research PlanetS
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation
(SNSF); S.S., H.M.C and C.A.W acknowledge support
from the Leverhulme Trust. C.A.W. acknowledges support from the UK Science and Technology Facilities
Council (STFC), including grants ST/I001123/1 and
ST/P000312/1. This research has made use of NASA’s
Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services.

Software: MURaM (Vögler et al. 2005; Shelyag &
Przybylski 2014; Shelyag 2015); OPAL (Rogers et al. 1996;
Rogers & Nayfonov 2002); NICOLE (Socas-Navarro 2015;
Socas-Navarro et al. 2015)

REFERENCES
Aigrain, S., Pont, F., & Zucker, S. 2012, MNRAS, 419,
3147, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19960.x
Allende Prieto, C., & Garcia Lopez, R. J. 1998, A&AS,
129, 41, doi: 10.1051/aas:1998173
Bastien, F. A., Stassun, K. G., B., G., & J., P. 2013,
Nature, 500, 427
Bastien, F. A., Stassun, K. G., Pepper, J., et al. 2014, AJ,
147, 29, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/147/2/29
Beeck, B., Cameron, R. H., Reiners, A., & Schüssler, M.
2013, A&A, 558, A49, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321345

Beeck, B., Schüssler, M., Cameron, R. H., & Reiners, A.
2015, A&A, 581, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201525874
Boisse, I., Bouchy, F., Hébrard, G., et al. 2011, A&A, 528,
A4+, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014354
Bouchy, F., Pepe, F., & Queloz, D. 2001, A&A, 374, 733,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20010730
Cameron, A. C., Mortier, A., Phillips, D. F., et al. 2019,
submitted to MNRAS
Cegla, H. M., Shelyag, S., Watson, C. A., & Mathioudakis,
M. 2013, ApJ, 763, 95, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/763/2/95

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
Cegla, H. M., Stassun, K. G., Watson, C. A., Bastien,
F. A., & Pepper, J. 2014, ApJ, 780, 104,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/780/1/104
Cegla, H. M., Watson, C. A., Shelyag, S., et al. 2018, ApJ,
866, 55, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaddfc
Chaplin, W. J., Cegla, H. M., Watson, C. A., & Davies,
G. R. 2019, accepted to AJ.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.00657
Corsaro, E., Mathur, S., Garcı́a, R. A., et al. 2017, A&A,
605, A3, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731094
Dall, T. H., Santos, N. C., Arentoft, T., Bedding, T. R., &
Kjeldsen, H. 2006, A&A, 454, 341,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20065021
Dravins, D. 2008, A&A, 492, 199,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810481
Dumusque, X., Udry, S., Lovis, C., Santos, N. C., &
Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G. 2011, A&A, 525, A140+,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014097
Elsworth, Y., Howe, R., Isaak, G. R., et al. 1994, MNRAS,
269, 529, doi: 10.1093/mnras/269.3.529
Fabbian, D., Khomenko, E., Moreno-Insertis, F., &
Nordlund, Å. 2010, ApJ, 724, 1536,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/724/2/1536
Figueira, P., Santos, N. C., Pepe, F., Lovis, C., & Nardetto,
N. 2013, A&A, 557, A93,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220779
—. 2015, A&A, 582, C2,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220779e
Gray, D. F. 2005, The Observation and Analysis of Stellar
Photospheres
Harvey, J. 1985, in ESA Special Publication, Vol. 235,
Future Missions in Solar, Heliospheric & Space Plasma
Physics, ed. E. Rolfe & B. Battrick
Harvey, J. W. 1984 (Pasadena: NASA JPL), 327
Hatzes, A. P., Dvorak, R., Wuchterl, G., et al. 2010, A&A,
520, A93+, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014795
Kallinger, T., De Ridder, J., Hekker, S., et al. 2014, A&A,
570, A41, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424313
Kessar, M., Hughes, D. W., Kersalé, E., Mizerski, K. A., &
Tobias, S. M. 2019, ApJ, 874, 103,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab07bf
Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., Frandsen, S., & dall, T. H.
1999, MNRAS, 303, 579,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.1999.02254.x
Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., Viskum, M., & Frandsen, S.
1995, AJ, 109, 1313, doi: 10.1086/117363
Kurucz, R. L., Furenlid, I., Brault, J., & Testerman, L.
1984, Solar flux atlas from 296 to 1300 nm
Lanza, A. F., Malavolta, L., Benatti, S., et al. 2018, A&A,
616, A155, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731010

19

Markwardt, C. B. 2009, in Astronomical Society of the
Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 411, Astronomical Data
Analysis Software and Systems XVIII, ed. D. A.
Bohlender, D. Durand, & P. Dowler, 251
Matloch, L., Cameron, R., Shelyag, S., Schmitt, D., &
Schüssler, M. 2010, A&A, 519, A52,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014478
Medina, A. A., Johnson, J. A., Eastman, J. D., & Cargile,
P. A. 2018, ApJ, 867, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aadf82
Meunier, N., Desort, M., & Lagrange, A.-M. 2010, A&A,
512, A39, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913551
Meunier, N., Lagrange, A.-M., Borgniet, S., & Rieutord, M.
2015, A&A, 583, A118,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201525721
Molaro, P., & Monai, S. 2012, A&A, 544, A125,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118675
Nardetto, N., Mourard, D., Kervella, P., et al. 2006, A&A,
453, 309, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20054333
Oshagh, M., Santos, N. C., Figueira, P., et al. 2017, A&A,
606, A107, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731139
Pallé, P. L., Roca Cortés, T., Jiménez, A., GOLF Team, &
Virgo Team. 1999, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Conference Series, Vol. 173, Stellar Structure: Theory
and Test of Connective Energy Transport, ed.
A. Gimenez, E. F. Guinan, & B. Montesinos, 297
Povich, M. S., Giampapa, M. S., Valenti, J. A., et al. 2001,
AJ, 121, 1136, doi: 10.1086/318745
Queloz, D., Bouchy, F., Moutou, C., et al. 2009, A&A, 506,
303, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913096
Queloz, D., Henry, G. W., Sivan, J. P., et al. 2001, A&A,
379, 279, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011308
Ramı́rez, I., Allende Prieto, C., & Lambert, D. L. 2008,
A&A, 492, 841, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810901
Reiners, A., Mrotzek, N., Lemke, U., Hinrichs, J., &
Reinsch, K. 2016, A&A, 587, A65,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201527530
Rincon, F., & Rieutord, M. 2018, Living Reviews in Solar
Physics, 15, 6, doi: 10.1007/s41116-018-0013-5
Rogers, F. J., & Nayfonov, A. 2002, ApJ, 576, 1064,
doi: 10.1086/341894
Rogers, F. J., Swenson, F. J., & Iglesias, C. A. 1996, ApJ,
456, 902, doi: 10.1086/176705
Saar, S. H., Hatzes, A., Cochran, W., & Paulson, D. 2003,
in The Future of Cool-Star Astrophysics: 12th Cambridge
Workshop on Cool Stars, Stellar Systems, and the Sun,
ed. A. Brown, G. M. Harper, & T. R. Ayres, Vol. 12,
694–698
Santos, N. C., Mayor, M., Naef, D., et al. 2000, A&A, 361,
265

20
Shelyag, S. 2015, ApJ, 801, 46,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/801/1/46
Shelyag, S., & Przybylski, D. 2014, PASJ, 66, S9,
doi: 10.1093/pasj/psu085
Socas-Navarro, H. 2015, NICOLE: NLTE Stokes
Synthesis/Inversion Code, Astrophysics Source Code
Library. http://ascl.net/1508.002
Socas-Navarro, H., de la Cruz Rodrı́guez, J., Asensio
Ramos, A., Trujillo Bueno, J., & Ruiz Cobo, B. 2015,
A&A, 577, A7, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424860

Cegla et al.
Strassmeier, K. G., Ilyin, I., & Steffen, M. 2018, A&A, 612,
A44, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731631
Trujillo Bueno, J., Shchukina, N., & Asensio Ramos, A.
2004, Nature, 430, 326, doi: 10.1038/nature02669
Vögler, A., Shelyag, S., Schüssler, M., et al. 2005, A&A,
429, 335, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20041507
Wright, J. T. 2005, PASP, 117, 657, doi: 10.1086/430369
Yu, J., Huber, D., Bedding, T. R., & Stello, D. 2018,
MNRAS, 480, L48, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/sly123

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise

21

APPENDIX
A. PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS FOR ADDITIONAL LIMB ANGLES

In this section we display additional granulation component filling factor probability distributions and relationships
that were used in Section 2, to create new line profiles that contain convective-induced asymmetries and radial velocity
shifts. Figures 10, 11, 12, and 13 show these results for the limb angles: 0, 20, 40, and 70o (µ = 1, 0.94, 0.77, 0.34),
respectively. In each of these figures we plot the filling factor cumulative distribution functions for the granule, MBP,
and magnetic intergranular lane components. In addition, these figures also include the linear relationship between
the granule and non-magnetic components. We remind the reader these filling factors are from 201 snapshots of a
solar MHD simulation, corresponding to approximately 100 minutes of physical time. See Section 2 for more details,
including Figure 1 for the equivalent results at 60o (µ = 0.5).
Granule (θ = 0o)

(θ = 0o)
Non−magnetic Lane Filling Factor

1.0

CDF

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.30

0.29

0.28

0.27

0.26

0.64

0.65

0.66
Filling Factor

0.67

0.64

Magnetic Lane (θ = 0o)

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

CDF

CDF

MBP (θ = 0o)

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0.032

0.034

0.036 0.038 0.040
Filling Factor

0.65
0.66
0.67
Granule Filling Factor

0.042

0.044

0.014 0.016 0.018 0.020 0.022 0.024 0.026 0.028
Filling Factor

Figure 10. Cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) over the MHD time-series for the granule (top left), MBP (bottom left),
and magnetic intergranular lane (bottom right) components are shown in black; fits using the generalised logistic function from
Eq. 1 are shown in red. Also displayed is the linear relationship between the filling factors for the granule and non-magnetic
intergranular lane components (top right); the shaded area represents a uniform region of width 1.5σ, where σ was determined
by a robust bisquares linear regression (fit shown in black). All plots are for a limb angle of 0o (µ = 1.0).

In Section 2, we also tested how well we could reproduce the original granulation component filling factor distributions
based on the KS and Wilcoxon Rank-Sum tests. In each instance, a granule filling factor is selected based on a
probability distribution determined from its CDF, and then a non-magnetic intergranular lane filling factor is selected
based on the anti-correlation between these components in the MHD simulation. In addition, some uniform noise

22

Cegla et al.
Granule (θ = 20o)

(θ = 20o)
Non−magnetic Lane Filling Factor

1.0

CDF

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.30

0.29

0.28

0.27

0.26
0.64

0.65

0.66
Filling Factor

0.67

0.68

0.64

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0.036

0.038

0.040 0.042
Filling Factor

0.68

Magnetic Lane (θ = 20o)

CDF

CDF

MBP (θ = 20o)

0.65
0.66
0.67
Granule Filling Factor

0.044

0.046

0.012

0.014

0.016 0.018 0.020
Filling Factor

0.022

0.024

Figure 11. Cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) over the MHD time-series for the granule (top left), MBP (bottom left),
and magnetic intergranular lane (bottom right) components are shown in black; fits using the generalised logistic function from
Eq. 1 are shown in red. Also displayed is the linear relationship between the filling factors for the granule and non-magnetic
intergranular lane components (top right); the shaded area represents a uniform region of width 1.5σ, where σ was determined
by a robust bisquares linear regression (fit shown in black). All plots are for a limb angle of 20o (µ ≈ 0.94).

is added to non-magnetic intergranular lane filling factor; the noise level is based on the observed scatter between
these components in the MHD simulation, as determined from a robust bisquares linear regression. Then one of the
magnetic components is selected from a probability distribution determined from its CDF, and the final magnetic
component is selected such that all components add to unity (see Section 2 for more details). Figure 14 shows these
results when the MBP is generated from its probability distribution, both when 1 and 2σ of uniform noise is added to
the granule – non-magnetic lane relationship (see Figure 2, for the results if selecting 1.5σ uniform noise). On the other
hand, Figure 15 displays these results, alongside the case for 1.5σ uniform noise, when the magnetic intergranular is
generated instead. See Section 2 for more discussion of these results.
B. ADDITIONAL GRANULATION CORRELATIONS PLOTS

In Section 3, we show how a variety of stellar absorption line profile diagnostics correlate with the corresponding
convective-induced RVs from our Sun-as-a-star model observations. The corresponding correlation plots for these
diagnostics are shown in Figures 16-24. In addition, we provide here the definitions for the bi-Gaussian fitting and the
Vasy indicator presented in Section 3.3. The bi-Gaussian fit, following Figueira et al. (2013) is defined as


4 ln 2(RV − RVcen. )2
+ Cont.
bG(RV ) = −D exp −
(F W HM × (1 + A))2
(B1)
if RV > RVcen.

23

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
Granule (θ = 40o)

(θ = 40o)

0.8

CDF

0.29

Non−magnetic Lane Filling Factor

1.0

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.65

0.66

0.67
0.68
Filling Factor

0.28

0.27

0.26

0.25

0.69

0.65

0.66

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0.038

0.040

0.042 0.044
Filling Factor

0.69

Magnetic Lane (θ = 40o)

CDF

CDF

MBP (θ = 40o)

0.67
0.68
Granule Filling Factor

0.046

0.048

0.012

0.014
0.016
Filling Factor

0.018

0.020

Figure 12. Cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) over the MHD time-series for the granule (top left), MBP (bottom left),
and magnetic intergranular lane (bottom right) components are shown in black; fits using the generalised logistic function from
Eq. 1 are shown in red. Also displayed is the linear relationship between the filling factors for the granule and non-magnetic
intergranular lane components (top right); the shaded area represents a uniform region of width 1.5σ, where σ was determined
by a robust bisquares linear regression (fit shown in black). All plots are for a limb angle of 40o (µ ≈ 0.77).

4 ln 2(RV − RVcen. )2
bG(RV ) = −D exp −
(F W HM × (1 − A))2



+ Cont.

(B2)

if RV < RVcen.
with four free parameters: the line depth, D, the centre of the bi-Gaussian fit, RVcen. , the full width half max
(F W HM ), and the asymmetry, A, given as a fraction of the F W HM . The RV here is the RV of each point in the
line profile and Cont. is the continuum level. Then, from this we can examine the difference in RV as measured from
a Bi-Gaussian fit and a pure Gaussian fit (where A = 0):
∆V = RVcen. − RVG,cen.

(B3)

The Vasy indicator is defined as:
P
Vasy(mod) =

f lux (Wi (red)

P

− Wi (blue)) × Wi

f lux

Wi

2

.

(B4)

The weights, Wi , were developed by Bouchy et al. (2001 – and references therein) when calculating the fundamental
photon noise limit in RV measurements in exoplanet searches. We follow the updates from Figueira et al. (2015) and

24

Cegla et al.
Granule (θ = 70o)

(θ = 70o)
Non−magnetic Lane Filling Factor

1.0

CDF

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.72

0.74

0.76
Filling Factor

0.22

0.20

0.18

0.16

0.78

0.72

0.78

Magnetic Lane (θ = 70o)

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

CDF

CDF

MBP (θ = 70o)

0.74
0.76
Granule Filling Factor

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0.028 0.030 0.032 0.034 0.036 0.038 0.040
Filling Factor

0.022 0.024 0.026 0.028 0.030 0.032 0.034
Filling Factor

Figure 13. Cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) over the MHD time-series for the granule (top left), MBP (bottom left),
and magnetic intergranular lane (bottom right) components are shown in black; fits using the generalised logistic function from
Eq. 1 are shown in red. Also displayed is the linear relationship between the filling factors for the granule and non-magnetic
intergranular lane components (top right); the shaded area represents a uniform region of width 1.5σ, where σ was determined
by a robust bisquares linear regression (fit shown in black). All plots are for a limb angle of 70o (µ ≈ 0.34).

Lanza et al. (2018):
1
Wi =
F0 (i)



∂F0 (i)
∂RV (i)

2
,

(B5)

where F (i) is flux at each point i in the line profile, and ∂F0 (i)/∂RV (i) is the slope of the line at each ith point; the
slope is measured between one flux position, F (i), and the position directly next to it, F (i + 1).
C. ADDITIONAL NOISE REDUCTIONS

In Section 4 we discuss the impact on the disc-integrated absorption line profiles from the Sun-as-a-star model
observations if the v sin i is increased from 2 to 10 km s−1 . Moreover, how these changes impact the resultant line
profile diagnostics and their noise mitigation ability is discussed in Section 5. Table 2 displays the noise mitigation
results for a large variety of line profile diagnostics, at different instrumental resolutions, for model stars with a v sin i
of 2, 4, and 6 km s−1 . Here we show these results for model stars with a v sin i of 8 and 10 km s−1 in Table 3. See
Sections 4 and 5 for more discussion on these results.
The stellar rotation tests performed in Section 4 assume solid body rotation. However, we know from empirical
observations of the Sun and Sun-like stars that stellar surface differential rotation is common. Herein we briefly
explore the impact of differential rotation as a function of equatorial velocity. For this, we use the empirical law
derived from the Sun: Ω = Ωeq (1 − α sin2 θ), where Ω is the angular rotational velocity, Ωeq is the value corresponding

25

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
With 1σ uniform noise (MBP generated)
1.0

0.8

0.8
K−S Probability

Wilcoxon Probability

With 1σ uniform noise (MBP generated)
1.0

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.0
0

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

0.4

0.2

Granule
Non−magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

0.6

0.0
0

80

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.0
0

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

80

0.6

0.4

0.2

Granule
Non−magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

With 2σ uniform noise (MBP generated)

1.0

K−S Probability

Wilcoxon Probability

With 2σ uniform noise (MBP generated)

20

80

0.0
0

20

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

80

Figure 14. The Wilcoxon Rank-Sum (left) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (right) probabilities for 100,000 artificially generated
filling factors as compared to the 201 original filling factors from the MHD simulation for all four granulation components.
Probabilities < 0.05 (dashed lines) are typically considered statistically significant results and require the null hypothesis to be
rejected.

to the equator, θ is the stellar latitude, and α is the relative differential rotation rate. In particular, α is the difference
between the equatorial and polar velocities, relative to the equatorial velocity, i.e. α = (Ωeq − Ωpole )/Ωeq ; on the Sun
this is approximately 0.2 (negative α values are considered anti-solar). Naturally, a full investigation of differential
rotation would require testing a large range of both solar and anti-solar α values, as well as a full range of stellar
inclinations. Such a complete exploration is beyond the scope of the paper. However, to get a feel for the potential
impact we created model stars with α = 0.2 and 0.6 – to match the Sun and to explore a more extreme rotational
sheer. We also hold the stellar inclination fixed at 90o and model stars with equatorial velocities of 2, 4 and 6 km s−1 .
The final noise reduction diagnostics from each of these differentially rotating model stars are shown in Tables 4, 5,
and 6. By comparing these results to those from the model stars with solid body rotation (also shown in Tables 4 –
6.), it is clear that the differential rotation has minimal impact for this range of systems. We expect a larger impact
for faster rotating stars, but as rapidly rotating stars are typically younger and more magnetically active, granulation
is unlikely to be the dominant noise source for these systems. There may also be larger differences for systems where
the stellar rotational axis is highly inclined from the line-of-sight; e.g. a near pole-on system could potentially have a
stellar rotational sheer on par with the amplitude of the v sin i? , in which case it would be necessary to account for
the differential rotation if trying to disentangle the convection-induced bisector/line profile changes.
We note that there were visible differences in the bisector shapes for the model with veq = 6 km s−1 and α = 0.6 as
compared to the equivalent solid body case. As such, if the granulation noise diagnostics for this rotation rate were
able to provide tangible noise reduction we may have seen an impact when including this level of differential rotation.

26

Cegla et al.
With 1σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)
1.0

0.8

0.8
K−S Probability

Wilcoxon Probability

With 1σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)
1.0

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.0
0

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

0.0
0

80

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.0
0

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

0.4

0.0
0

80

With 2σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)

0.8
K−S Probability

0.8

0.6

0.4

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

80

0.6

0.4

0.2

Granule
Non−magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

20

With 2σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)
1.0

0.0
0

80

0.6

1.0

0.2

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

0.2

Granule
Non−magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

20

With 1.5σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)

1.0

K−S Probability

Wilcoxon Probability

With 1.5σ uniform noise (Mag. Lane generated)

Wilcoxon Probability

0.4

0.2

Granule
Non−magnetic Lane
Magnetic Lane
MBP

20

0.6

80

0.0
0

20

40
60
Center−to−limb Angle (o)

80

Figure 15. The Wilcoxon Rank-Sum (left) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (right) probabilities for 100,000 artificially generated
filling factors as compared to the 201 original filling factors from the MHD simulation for all four granulation components.
Probabilities < 0.05 (dashed lines) are typically considered statistically significant results and require the null hypothesis to be
rejected.

Yet, there were also small bisector shape differences for the veq = 4 km s−1 scenario, and the two diagnostics capable
of noise reduction experienced negligible changes when including differential rotation. Consequently, stellar surface
differential rotation appears to have a minimal impact on our ability to mitigate granulation-induced RV variability.

27

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
6.5569

6.5568

FWHM (km s-1)

6.5567

6.5566

6.5565

6.5564

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

10

10

5

5

BIS (cm s-1)

BIS (cm s-1)

Figure 16. Full-width half-maximum (FWHM) versus RV.

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

15

15

10

10

5

5
Curvature (cm s-1)

Curvature (cm s-1)

Figure 17. The bisector inverse span (BIS) versus RV for the case when the top and bottom regions are defined by the standard
values in the literature (left) and also when they are fine-tuned to the disc-integrated model line bisector shape (right). The
mean values of the BIS was subtracted for each, to more easily see their net variation (-15.26 and -81.25 m s−1 , respectively).

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15
-40

-15
-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 18. Bisector curvature, C, versus RV, where the three curvature regions were either defined using standard values in
the literature (left) or fine-tuned to the disc-integrated model line bisector shape (right). The mean values for the curvature
were subtracted for each, to more easily see their net variation (89.8 and 104.57 m s−1 , respectively).

28
15

15

10

10

5

5
Vb (cm s-1)

Vb (cm s-1)

Cegla et al.

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15
-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

-15
-40

40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 19. The velocity displacement of the bisector, Vb versus RV, where the bisector regions were defined both using the
standard values (left) and the values fine-tuned to the disc-integrated model line bisector (right). The mean values for the Vb
were subtracted for each, to more easily see their net variation (-93.47 and -76.58 m s−1 , respectively).

15

10

Calt (cm s-1)

5

0

-5

-10

-15
-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 20. An alternative bisector curvature measurement versus RV. The mean curvature, 96.05 m s−1 , was subtracted off
to more easily see the net variation.

20

Ab (cm s-1)

10

0

-10

-40

-20

40

Figure 21. The amplitude of the bisector versus RV; the mean amplitude of 125.60 m s−1 was subtracted off to more easily
see the net variation.

29

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise
−1.002

10
−1.004

−1.006
A (%)

∆V (cm s−1)

5

0

−1.008
−5

−1.010
−10

−40

−20

0
Velocity (cm s−1)

20

40

−40

−20

0
Velocity (cm s−1)

20

40

Figure 22. Left: the difference in between the RV centroid as determined from bi-Gaussian and (pure) Gaussian fitting, ∆V ,
versus RV (as determined by cross-correlation); the mean ∆V , 31.45 m s−1 , is subtracted to more easily see the net variation.
Right: the asymmetry (expressed as a percentage) of the bi-Gaussian fit versus RV.

14.14

Vasy(mod) × 100

14.13

14.12

14.11

14.10
−40

−20

0
Velocity (cm s−1)

20

40

Figure 23. The velocity asymmetry, Vasy(mod) , versus RV, where the Vasy(mod) has been multiplied by a factor of 100.

4.31040

4.31035

EW (km s-1)

4.31030

4.31025

4.31020

4.31015

4.31010

-40

-20

0
Velocity (cm s-1)

20

40

Figure 24. The equivalent width (EW) versus RV.

30

Cegla et al.
Table 3. Granulation noise reduction for various diagnostics, alongside their Pearson’s R correlation coefficient.
v sin i = 8 km s−1
Diagnostic
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
v sin i = 10 km s−1
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness

Reduct. (%)
-523.34
-1070.42
-288.11
-14.45
-37.94
-80.03
-41.18
-68.31
-61.55
-168.60
-101.51
-20.38
-20.55
-22.58
-32.87
-42.59

R
-0.16
0.09
-0.25
-0.66
-0.59
0.49
0.58
-0.51
-0.53
-0.35
0.44
0.64
-0.64
0.63
-0.60
-0.57

Resolution =
Reduct. (%)
-414.24
-873.19
-201.05
-16.28
-29.39
-66.62
-28.64
-34.62
-29.37
-190.84
-707.95
-5605.90
-17.12
-22.05
-35.70
-41.85

70,000
R
-0.19
0.10
-0.32
-0.65
-0.61
0.51
0.61
-0.60
-0.61
-0.33
0.12
0.02
-0.65
0.63
-0.59
-0.58

-975.82
-795.23
-269.66
-7.94
-51.47
-99.54
-63.39
-139.24
-124.32
-136.23
-172.03
-26.26
-26.20
-12.01
-60.74
-66.34

-0.09
0.11
-0.26
-0.68
-0.55
0.45
0.52
-0.39
-0.41
-0.39
0.35
0.62
-0.62
0.67
-0.53
-0.52

-809.11
-614.56
-223.69
-8.05
-36.75
-80.10
-42.48
-68.06
-56.08
-158.13
-98.47
-1915.68
-16.49
-18.59
-71.08
-67.73

-0.11
0.14
-0.30
-0.68
-0.59
0.49
0.57
-0.51
-0.54
0.36
0.45
-0.05
-0.65
0.64
-0.50
-0.51

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-620.55
-0.14
-670.77
0.13
-233.99
-0.29
-13.97
-0.66
-33.46
-0.60
-73.48
0.50
-36.18
0.59
-49.10
-0.56
-41.69
-0.58
-175.27
-0.34
-74.01
0.50
38.76
0.85
-18.32
-0.65
-22.28
0.63
-33.81
-0.60
-43.21
-0.57
-1234.62
-576.67
-234.38
-6.38
-47.68
-95.58
-55.35
-109.81
-93.63
-137.90
-139.02
-1609.51
-23.15
-15.00
-61.31
-67.28

-0.07
0.15
-0.29
-0.68
-0.56
0.46
0.54
-0.43
-0.46
0.39
0.39
0.06
-0.63
0.66
-0.53
-0.51

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-672.25
-0.13
-649.47
0.13
-237.97
-0.28
-13.66
-0.66
-33.91
-0.60
-73.78
0.50
-35.64
0.59
-54.29
-0.54
-46.89
-0.56
-168.07
-0.35
-83.54
0.48
-202.95
0.31
-18.75
-0.64
-20.81
0.64
-33.73
-0.60
-43.38
-0.57
-1348.82
-573.34
-237.20
-7.28
-49.27
-95.70
-57.98
-120.27
-104.04
-150.84
-150.26
-411.69
-24.38
-11.70
-60.60
-67.16

-0.07
0.15
-0.28
-0.68
-0.56
0.46
0.53
-0.41
-0.44
0.37
0.37
0.19
-0.63
0.67
-0.53
-0.51

31

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise

Table 4. Granulation noise reduction for various diagnostics from model observations with veq = 2 km s−1 and i? = 90o , at
various levels of differential rotation, alongside their Pearson’s R correlation coefficient.
α = 0.0
Diagnostic
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.2
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.6
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness

Reduct. (%)
36.37
-13.38
-1387.91
-42.31
61.20
-34.29
61.63
49.58
52.32
-135.77
48.10
-0.53
-0.63
57.85
53.91
52.70

R
-0.84
-0.66
0.07
0.57
0.93
-0.60
-0.93
0.89
0.90
-0.39
-0.89
-0.71
0.70
-0.92
-0.91
-0.90

Resolution =
Reduct. (%)
35.65
-20.02
-586.67
-81.40
11.16
39.12
36.46
-0.77
-58.94
-694.33
3.93
-66.31
-66.35
49.40
52.83
54.30

70,000
R
-0.84
-0.64
0.14
0.48
0.75
-0.85
-0.84
0.70
0.53
0.12
-0.72
-0.52
0.52
-0.89
-0.90
-0.91

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
32.42
-0.83
-28.97
-0.61
-831.93
0.11
-48.05
0.56
52.37
0.90
-51.39
-0.55
45.50
-0.88
56.72
0.92
36.78
0.85
-234.10
-0.29
54.01
-0.91
-25.83
-0.62
-25.81
0.62
36.71
-0.85
52.74
-0.90
53.02
-0.91

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
32.66
-0.83
-28.04
-0.62
-4468.55
-0.02
-44.98
0.57
57.41
0.92
-6.30
-0.69
50.80
-0.90
59.24
0.93
43.54
0.87
-170.33
-0.35
60.68
-0.93
-15.42
-0.65
-15.44
0.65
36.54
-0.84
52.66
-0.90
52.76
-0.90

36.36
-13.32
-1347.94
-43.77
61.22
-32.33
61.78
48.90
51.37
-131.93
27.90
-4.16
-4.26
57.69
57.23
53.17

-0.84
-0.66
0.07
0.57
0.93
-0.60
-0.93
0.89
0.90
-0.40
-0.81
-0.69
0.69
-0.92
-0.92
-0.91

37.01
-16.24
-946.72
-80.00
11.72
-49.50
28.90
2.57
-76.40
-983.63
6.98
-70.42
-70.47
-20.05
59.08
54.97

-0.85
-0.65
0.10
0.49
0.75
-0.56
-0.81
0.72
0.49
0.09
-0.73
-0.51
0.51
-0.64
-0.93
-0.91

32.63
-28.77
-774.74
-55.03
51.19
-47.13
44.13
56.01
35.16
-225.07
55.58
-29.19
-29.18
37.86
57.77
53.68

-0.83
-0.61
0.11
0.54
0.90
-0.56
-0.87
0.92
0.84
-0.29
-0.91
-0.61
0.61
-0.85
-0.92
-0.91

32.86
-27.82
-7488.75
-40.95
56.57
-53.50
56.67
60.81
45.56
-139.65
60.12
-18.63
-18.64
60.67
57.50
53.42

-0.83
-0.62
-0.01
0.58
0.92
-0.55
-0.92
0.93
0.88
-0.39
-0.93
-0.64
0.64
-0.93
-0.92
-0.91

35.22
-15.44
-1230.14
-52.48
59.34
-33.28
58.33
45.95
48.81
-139.65
46.13
-9.40
-9.47
55.81
56.83
52.57

-0.84
-0.65
0.07
0.55
0.93
-0.60
-0.92
0.88
0.89
-0.39
-0.88
-0.67
0.67
-0.91
-0.92
-0.90

36.29
-17.31
-928.12
-99.81
5.41
-9.19
25.07
-1.83
-93.99
-1140.95
89.19
-82.72
-82.78
-43.56
58.73
54.41

-0.84
-0.65
0.10
0.45
0.73
-0.68
-0.80
0.70
0.46
0.08
-0.99
-0.48
0.48
-0.57
-0.92
-0.91

31.73
-30.26
-758.77
-69.45
48.19
-47.42
40.25
53.86
31.72
-258.50
59.17
-36.47
-36.43
35.01
57.37
53.09

-0.83
-0.61
0.12
0.51
0.89
-0.56
-0.86
0.91
0.83
-0.27
-0.93
-0.59
0.59
-0.84
-0.92
-0.91

31.87
-29.54
-16053.98
-55.09
56.45
-42.72
53.62
58.74
42.68
-130.25
58.58
-25.06
-25.06
59.13
57.11
52.82

-0.83
-0.61
-0.01
0.54
0.92
-0.57
-0.91
0.92
0.87
-0.40
-0.92
-0.62
0.62
-0.93
-0.92
-0.90

32

Cegla et al.

Table 5. Granulation noise reduction for various diagnostics from model observations with veq = 4 km s−1 and i? = 90o , at
various levels of differential rotation, alongside their Pearson’s R correlation coefficient.
α = 0.0
Diagnostic
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.2
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.6
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness

Reduct. (%)
-51.21
-258.48
-932.73
-212.15
-300.44
-235.87
-316.02
-428.24
-251.70
-167.97
-1962.35
-196.16
-196.81
-275.98
25.66
19.88

R
-0.55
-0.27
-0.10
-0.31
-0.24
-0.29
0.23
-0.19
-0.27
-0.35
-0.05
0.32
-0.32
0.26
-0.80
-0.78

Resolution =
Reduct. (%)
-42.63
-305.51
-270.23
-235.44
-260.68
-2655.09
-414.35
-307.87
-272.93
-404.79
-1641.84
-223.28
-223.97
-27.84
28.86
23.50

70,000
R
-0.57
-0.24
-0.26
-0.29
-0.27
-0.04
0.19
-0.24
-0.26
-0.19
-0.06
0.30
-0.29
0.62
-0.81
-0.79

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-66.16
-0.52
-466.26
-0.17
-377.25
-0.21
-201.93
-0.31
-235.40
-0.29
-213.01
-0.30
-454.37
0.18
-192.87
-0.32
-178.59
-0.34
-189.73
-0.33
-741.17
0.12
-199.24
0.32
-199.92
-0.32
-307.18
0.24
26.40
-0.81
20.67
-0.78

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-70.06
-0.51
-493.11
-0.17
-521.71
-0.16
-201.09
-0.32
-257.31
-0.27
-213.20
-0.30
-241.24
0.28
-212.02
-0.31
-182.96
-0.33
-182.47
-0.33
-648.14
0.13
-196.04
0.32
-196.72
-0.32
-203.44
0.31
25.94
-0.80
20.17
-0.78

-51.07
-255.78
-974.28
-205.75
-296.03
-225.41
-307.13
-450.62
-255.22
-157.96
-1571.27
-192.54
-193.16
-280.52
25.42
19.50

-0.55
-0.27
-0.09
-0.31
-0.24
-0.29
0.24
-0.18
-0.27
-0.36
-0.06
0.32
-0.32
0.25
-0.80
-0.78

-42.69
-302.89
-274.93
-235.95
-249.74
-2266.21
-313.09
-311.89
-280.18
-363.45
-1527.41
-217.76
-218.42
-25.22
28.65
23.16

-0.57
-0.24
-0.26
-0.29
-0.27
0.04
0.24
-0.24
-0.25
-0.21
-0.06
0.30
-0.30
0.62
-0.81
-0.79

-66.09
-460.14
-384.94
-204.92
-230.51
-193.92
-413.69
-194.96
-179.13
-219.74
-897.35
-195.21
-195.85
-290.94
26.16
20.30

-0.52
-0.18
-0.20
-0.31
-0.29
-0.32
0.19
-0.32
-0.34
-0.30
0.10
0.32
-0.32
0.25
-0.80
-0.78

-69.96
-485.95
-534.27
-202.53
-252.44
-243.34
-282.53
-236.63
-187.96
-168.66
-751.70
-192.34
-192.98
-249.93
25.69
19.79

-0.51
-0.17
-0.16
-0.31
-0.27
-0.28
0.25
-0.28
-0.33
-0.35
0.12
0.32
-0.32
0.27
-0.80
-0.78

-50.20
-244.38
-1356.79
-194.96
-357.93
-153.60
-394.53
-707.28
-323.07
-123.07
-938.69
-193.38
-193.90
-340.38
24.16
17.87

-0.55
-0.28
-0.07
-0.32
-0.21
-0.37
0.20
-0.12
-0.23
-0.41
-0.10
0.32
-0.32
0.22
-0.80
-0.77

-42.64
-290.47
-306.02
-207.54
-348.25
-164.62
-297.52
-315.99
-251.64
-210.62
-775.01
-209.50
-210.08
-56.37
27.50
21.68

-0.57
-0.25
-0.24
-0.31
-0.22
-0.35
0.24
-0.23
-0.27
-0.31
-0.11
0.31
-0.31
0.54
-0.81
-0.79

-65.23
-430.79
-443.25
-189.30
-314.65
-109.31
-363.70
-271.05
-200.84
-152.35
-12050.25
-192.36
-192.91
-359.23
24.93
18.70

-0.52
-0.19
-0.18
-0.33
-0.23
-0.43
0.21
-0.26
-0.32
-0.37
-0.01
0.32
-0.32
0.21
-0.80
-0.78

-68.91
-453.05
-457.30
-192.36
-394.98
-100.13
-376.98
-299.71
-204.58
-120.58
-3584.83
-190.93
-191.47
-263.39
24.45
18.17

-0.51
-0.18
-0.18
-0.32
-0.20
-0.45
0.21
-0.24
-0.31
-0.41
0.03
0.33
-0.32
0.27
-0.80
-0.77

33

Stellar surface magneto-convection as a source of astrophysical noise

Table 6. Granulation noise reduction for various diagnostics from model observations with veq = 6 km s−1 and i? = 90o , at
various levels of differential rotation, alongside their Pearson’s R correlation coefficient.
α = 0.0
Diagnostic
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.2
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness
α = 0.6
Abs. Depth
Norm. Depth
FWHM
BISstd
BISbest
Cstd
Cbest
Vb,std
Vb,best
Calt
Ab
∆V
A
Vasy
EW
Brightness

Reduct. (%)
-210.79
-3529.02
-375.79
-40.16
-38.26
-82.91
-37.59
-47.48
-46.71
-521.42
-170.79
-33.02
-33.47
-40.52
-6.59
-14.76

R
-0.31
-0.03
-0.21
-0.58
-0.59
0.48
0.59
-0.56
-0.56
-0.16
0.35
0.60
-0.60
0.58
-0.68
-0.66

Resolution =
Reduct. (%)
-180.38
-202717.06
-193.26
-42.70
-41.13
-38.43
-41.10
-43.14
-44.04
-4466.65
-42.86
-40.75
-41.10
-44.78
-4.23
-11.20

70,000
R
-0.34
0.00
-0.32
-0.57
-0.58
0.59
0.58
-0.57
-0.57
0.02
0.57
0.58
-0.58
0.57
-0.69
-0.67

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-262.05
-0.27
-1835.29
0.05
-244.97
-0.28
-38.33
-0.59
-36.81
-0.59
-65.99
0.52
-39.79
0.58
-30.48
-0.61
-31.45
-0.61
-932.33
-0.10
-43.48
0.57
-33.90
0.60
-34.32
-0.60
-40.70
0.58
-6.26
-0.69
-14.37
-0.66

Resolution = 140,000
Reduct. (%)
R
-280.50
-0.25
-1589.69
0.06
-60.50
-0.53
-39.24
-0.58
-37.04
-0.59
-70.29
0.51
-39.92
0.58
-32.53
-0.60
-33.04
-0.60
-729.72
-0.12
-75.93
0.49
-32.86
0.60
-33.29
-0.60
-33.70
0.60
-6.71
-0.68
-14.90
-0.66

-205.91
-2830.64
-393.62
-39.05
-39.12
-92.98
-38.99
-48.73
-46.99
-669.80
-180.08
-32.69
-33.13
-39.92
-7.02
-15.42

-0.31
-0.03
-0.20
-0.58
-0.58
0.46
0.58
-0.56
-0.56
-0.13
0.34
0.60
-0.60
0.58
-0.68
-0.65

-178.74
-30521.94
-197.81
-42.57
-41.68
-45.54
-41.79
-43.32
-43.47
-1260.67
-53.40
-40.16
-40.51
-44.80
-4.59
-11.77

-0.34
-0.00
-0.32
-0.57
-0.58
0.57
0.58
-0.57
-0.57
0.07
0.55
0.58
-0.58
0.57
-0.69
-0.67

-257.60
-2033.33
-252.31
-38.17
-36.93
-73.75
-41.41
-31.79
-31.68
-912.82
-53.65
-33.48
-33.89
-37.48
-6.66
-15.01

-0.27
0.05
-0.27
-0.59
-0.59
0.50
0.58
-0.60
-0.60
-0.10
0.55
0.60
-0.60
0.59
-0.68
-0.66

-274.97
-1752.31
-280.84
-38.45
-38.59
-81.98
-41.79
-33.63
-33.30
-836.00
-79.29
-32.48
-32.89
-37.73
-7.12
-15.55

-0.26
0.05
-0.25
-0.59
-0.59
0.48
0.58
-0.60
-0.60
-0.11
0.49
0.60
-0.60
0.59
-0.68
-0.65

-187.99
-1589.35
-508.82
-42.22
-58.77
-244.47
-62.28
-78.15
-66.57
-791.74
-235.63
-39.68
-40.04
-53.94
-9.30
-18.41

-0.33
-0.06
-0.16
-0.58
-0.53
0.28
0.52
-0.49
-0.51
-0.11
0.29
0.58
-0.58
0.54
-0.68
-0.65

-165.10
-3101.43
-236.85
-46.58
-61.59
-186.22
-53.00
-57.04
-54.67
-185.36
-78.11
-45.78
-46.09
-65.89
-6.46
-14.17

-0.35
-0.03
-0.28
-0.56
-0.53
0.33
0.55
-0.54
-0.54
0.33
0.49
0.57
-0.56
0.52
-0.68
-0.66

-227.51
-7536.76
-319.57
-40.05
-51.37
-185.68
-56.09
-54.58
-48.05
-476.29
-104.27
-605.13
-40.15
-57.07
-8.83
-17.85

-0.29
0.01
-0.23
-0.58
-0.55
0.33
0.54
-0.54
-0.56
-0.17
0.44
-0.14
-0.58
0.54
-0.68
-0.65

-239.84
-5267.82
-370.55
-41.78
-53.16
-215.08
-59.59
-57.60
-51.12
-713.14
-144.54
-38.96
-39.31
-54.91
-9.36
-18.48

-0.28
0.02
-0.21
-0.58
-0.55
0.30
0.53
-0.54
-0.55
-0.12
0.38
0.58
-0.58
0.54
-0.67
-0.65

