Effects of the grain size and shape on the flow stress: a
dislocation dynamics study
M. Jianga,b, B. Devincrea, G. Monnetb
a

LEM, CNRS-ONERA, 29 Avenue de la Division Leclerc, BP 72, 92322 Chatillon, France

b

EDF-R&D, MMC, Avenue des Renardières, 77818 Moret-sur-Loing, France

Abstract
Dislocation dynamics simulation is used to investigate the effect of grain size and grain shape
on the flow stress in model copper grains. We consider grains of 1.25 – 10 µm size, three
orientations (<135>, <100> and <111>) and three shapes (cube, plate and needles). Two types
of periodic aggregates with one or four grains are simulated to investigate different
dislocation flux at grain boundaries. It is shown that in all cases the flow stress varies linearly
with the inverse of the square root of the grain size, with a proportionality factor varying
strongly with the grain orientation and shape. Simulation results are discussed in the light of
other simulation results and experimental observations. Finally, a simple model is proposed to
account for the grain shape influence on the grain size effect.

Keyword: dislocation dynamics, Hall-Petch, grain size, grain shape, plastic deformation
1. Introduction
Intensive research has been dedicated to the effect of grain size on the mechanical properties
of metals and alloys (Armstrong, 2014; Cordero et al., 2016; Lasalmonie and Strudel, 1986;
Li et al., 2016). At the beginning of 1950, Hall (Hall, 1951) used the dislocation pileup model
proposed by Cottrell (Cottrell, 1953) to explain the relation observed experimentally between
the lower yield stress of mild steels and the grain size, d. This relation is recognized today as
the Hall-Petch (HP) law:
σ" = σ$ + 𝐾𝑑 ()/+ ,
(1)
where 𝜎$ is a reference stress generally called friction stress and K the HP constant. In the
following, the quantity K𝑑 ()/+ is called the HP term. Some years later, Petch (Petch, 1953)
has shown that the cleavage stress of mild steels also varies consistently with the HP law and
Armstrong et al. (Armstrong et al., 1962) provided evidence that the HP law applies to the
whole stress-strain curve and remains valid for most polycrystalline metals and alloys. It was
also shown by Conrad and Schoeck (Conrad and Schoeck, 1960) and Petch (Petch, 1958) that
the HP law applies to BCC metals at low temperature, with a temperature quasi-independent
HP constant. In some experiments, K is found to be constant or to slightly decrease with
deformation in BCC (P. Pechkovskii et al., 1989; Tsuchida et al., 2008), FCC (Feaugas and
Haddou, 2003; Meyers et al., 1995) and HCP (Chia et al., 2005) metals and alloys. However,
1

Cordero et al. (Cordero et al., 2016) have shown that some pure metals show an opposite
behavior with increasing K with deformation. On the other hand, Li et al. (Li et al., 2016)
have shown that statistical analysis of the ensemble of experimental data on the Hall-Petch
effect does not allow discriminating between the dependencies on 1/Öd, 1/d, ln(d)/d, etc. This
has been attributed by Li et al. to the dispersion of results and the experimental errors in
determining the grain size.
While the grain size effect applies to many mechanical properties of crystalline materials
(including microhardness (Hughes et al., 1986)), several phenomenological rationalizations
are possible (Hirth, 1972). Among the different interpretations, one can cite dislocation pileup
models (ex. (Navarro and de los Rios, 1988; Smith and Worthington, 1964)), which refer to
the original mechanism proposed by Hall and assume a stress concentration at the head of the
dislocation pileup leading to the deformation propagation to the neighbouring grain by either
activating dislocation sources in the next grain or enabling the transmission of dislocation
across the grain boundaries (GBs). The incompatibility-type model relies on the original work
of Ashby (Ashby, 1970) who introduced the concept of Geometrically Necessary Dislocations
(GNDs) versus Statistically Stored Dislocations (SSDs). Such models interpret the HP effect
as a result of the GND accumulation, necessary to accommodate strain incompatibility
between grains. In this approach, the HP constant K is proportional to the square root of the
plastic strain. However, Cordero et al. (Cordero et al., 2016) have shown that even in the
cases where K increases with deformation, the increasing rate is not found to follow a square
root. Also, Li et al. (Li et al., 2016) has pointed out another serious concern about this type of
models: as K goes to zero in the absence of plastic deformation, the grain size effect must
vanish at the threshold of plastic strain. Such behavior is not supported by experimental
observations. A third type of models assumes a composite behavior of polycrystals where the
grain interior and a layer bounding GBs have different strength (Kocks, 1970). Plastic flow is
initiated in the GBs region owing to the incompatibility in elastic deformation of adjacent
grains (Benson et al., 2001; Meyers and Ashworth, 1982). In another approach, Li (Li, 1963)
(see also (Bata and Pereloma, 2004)) suggested that grain size effects are induced by
dislocation emission from GB ledges. More recently, Sinclair et al. (Sinclair et al., 2006)
proposed a new model accounting for dislocation storage at GBs and for their interaction with
dislocations on the opposite side of the grain. The resulting elastic screening decreases the
back stress, which in turn predicts a decrease of K with deformation.
A strong limitation of all existing models is that they do not provide a detailed description of
dislocation arrangement and interactions in the vicinity of GBs. Numerical simulations are
then needed to develop more physically justified models. Molecular dynamics are frequently
used to analyze the GB response to one or few impinging dislocations (e.g. (Dewald and
Curtin, 2007; Wang et al., 2014)). But the collective dislocation properties responsible for the
HP effect can only be investigated with larger scale simulations such as discrete Dislocation
Dynamics (DD). Based on 2D-DD simulations, Biner and Morris (Morris, 2002) studied the
evolution of the flow stress in polycrystals with one slip system per grain and grain size
ranging from 2–16 µm. Lefebvre et al. (Lefebvre et al., 2007) made simulations with grains in
the range 0.5–2 µm size and two slip systems per grain. In both studies, the yield stress was
found to vary as dn, with an exponent n rather different from -½. 3D-DD simulations appear
to be the only approach for quantitative investigations. Very few 3D-DD simulations of
2

polycrystalline aggregate have been reported. Ohashi et al. (Ohashi et al., 2007) studied the
effect of grain size on the stress necessary to activate Frank-Read sources. Their results
suggest that sources with lengths close to one third of the grain size are the first to be
activated. This effect was accounted for by introducing an addition hardening term
proportional to the inverse of the grain size. On the other hand, the accumulation of GNDs at
GBs was reproduced by Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2014) and connected to strain gradient in
crystal plasticity. Only, De Sansal et al. (de Sansal et al., 2009) investigated the plasticity of a
periodic polycrystalline aggregate made with regular polyhedral grains. The calculated yield
stress in these simulations was found to vary with a HP exponent n between -½ and -1. In
addition, this study underlined the absence of dislocation pileups and intensive cross-slip
activity in the simulations with grain sizes lower than 1 µm. On the other hand, using 3d-DD
simulations, El-Awady (El-Awady, 2015) has shown that, depending on the initial dislocation
density, size effects may result from dislocation starvation, single-source strengthening or
exhaustion hardening.
Remarkably, most published studies are concerned with the HP effects in polycrystals made
of homogeneous equiaxed grains. Nevertheless, many materials of technological importance
are composed of heterogeneous and non-equiaxed grains, such as bainitic and martensitic
steels. Using the self-consistent scheme, Berbenni et al (Berbenni et al 2007) have shown that,
not only the average grain size, but the type of the grain size distribution function and its
standard deviation strongly affect the flow stress as well. The heterogeneity in grain size
basically reduces the sensitivity to grain size. On the other hand, although grain shape is
suspected to have strong effect on the flow stress (Van Houtte, 1982), little is known about
the influence of grain shape on the HP Law (Delannay and Barnett, 2012; Hansen et al., 2010).
Using DD simulations, only Yellakara and Wang (Yellakara and Wang, 2014) investigated
the response of polycrystalline thin films and reported a variation of the HP exponent with the
simulated volume shape. In the latter study, only cubic and hexagonal shapes were
investigated, with close aspect ratios.
Giving the above underlined difficulties in measuring, interpreting, simulating and predicting
the grain size effects in polycrystals, it is necessary to split the problem into different issues:
(i) the effect of grain size and shape on the flow stress of individual grains and small
aggregates with impenetrable boundaries as a function of the loading direction, (ii) the effect
of dislocation – GB interactions such as absorption, repulsion, transmission, etc. (ex. (Lee et
al., 1990; Shen et al., 1988)) and (iii) the elasto-plastic interactions between adjacent grains
(ex. (Raabe et al., 2003; Sachtleber et al., 2002)). Clearly, the Hall-Petch effect cannot be
correctly addressed without accounting for these three issues together. However, these
features cannot be investigated by any individual simulation technique because they pertain to
different scales. Feature (ii) involves the GB atomic structure and disorientation, while feature
(iii) requires simulations at the macroscopic scale of a representative volume element. In
contrast, feature (i) is related to the collective dislocation behavior inside one grain, which is
the scope of mesoscopic simulations such as dislocation dynamics. The complete
investigation of the Hall-Petch effect is thus still beyond the reach of one numerical
simulation method. Many simulations at the three relevant scales are still necessary to provide
a comprehensive picture of grain size effect.
3

In this paper, we report on 3D-DD simulations at the mesoscopic scale, pertaining to feature
(i). It must be noted that the assumption of impenetrable GBs used in the present study does
not give a fully description of the dislocation-GB interactions. Such proposition is made for
reason of simplicity and because the development of more realistic constitutive rules
accounting for all the phenomena observed at GBs in experiments or in atomistic simulations
does not exist today. The development of such rules goes far beyond the goal of the present
study. Still, 2D and 3D-DD simulations, accounting for dislocation transmission at GBs, have
been proposed with some success (Zhou and Lesar, 2012; Quek et al., 2014; Fan et al., 2015;
Burbery et al., 2017) to model plastic strain hardening in ultrafine-grains polycrystalline
aggregates. These studies are considering grain size smaller than 1.5µm and therefore
dislocation dynamics at very high stress. Contrarily, the present investigation considers grain
sizes from 1.25 to 10µm and small plastic strain up to 0.2%. Hence, the stress on the
dislocation arrested at GBs is always relatively low. This is why, the assumption of
impenetrable GBs is expected to be an appropriate solution to investigate the Hall-Petch
effect. The objective is to shed light on the evolution of the flow stress of one grain and small
periodic clusters of grains as a function of the grain/cluster size, shape and orientation. In
particular the collective dislocation properties are explored and a simple method is proposed
to account for the grain shape effect. The paper is organized as follows: simulation technique
and conditions are given in Section 2; then DD calculations on the grain size effect (Section 3)
and on the grain shape effects (Section 4) are presented. The obtained results are discussed in
Section 5 and general conclusions are summarized in section 6.
2. Simulation technique and conditions
The 3D-DD simulation code used in this study is microMegas. The basic features of this code
are presented in reference (Devincre et al., 2011). In the following, only features important for
the present simulations are specified. Pure copper is the model FCC material considered in the
study. As illustrated in Figure 1a, initial dislocation microstructures are built up from random
distributions of dipolar loops with square shape inside the simulated volumes. Every loop is
composed of two pairs of edge segments belonging to a given slip system s and two edge
segments belonging to the collinear system of s, i.e. sharing the same Burgers vector in a
different glide plane. Dipolar loop distribution is preferred here to a distribution of FrankRead sources, because it avoids infinitely strong dislocation pinning points that come with the
use of sources (Mohles, 2001) and favors the emergence of a realistic 3D dislocation
networks. At the beginning of simulations, the initial dislocation configuration is relaxed to
generate an energy-minimized microstructure where dislocation segments are free to form
junctions or annihilate. This relaxed 3D interconnected microstructure is thus closer to the
“real” microstructure of un-deformed crystals and avoid using a distribution of Frank-Read
sources with arbitrary length. The faces bounding the simulated volume are perpendicular to
the <100> axes of the FCC lattice. Tensile tests are usually simulated by imposing a constant
uniaxial strain rate in three specific crystalline directions ([100], [111] and [135] directions) in
order to investigate different slip dynamics in single and multi-slip conditions. Unless
specified, all values of the yield stress 𝜎- are taken at 0.1% of plastic strain. The copper
4

elastic constants, the Burgers vector and the Schmid factors calculated for the 3 tensile
directions are listed in Table 1.
Shear
modulus
G (GPa)

Poisson
ratio n

Burgers
vector b (A°)

Lattice
friction
𝝉𝒇 (MPa)

42

0.431

2.5525

2.5

Schmid
factor
𝒎𝟎𝟎𝟏

Schmid
factor
𝒎𝟏𝟏𝟏

Schmid
factor
𝒎𝟏𝟑𝟓

0.408

0.272

0.49

Table 1: Main 3D-DD simulation parameters used to model Cu plastic strain

To make sure that simulations are close to quasi-static conditions, all computations are made
at relatively low strain rate amplitude. It must be noted here that the strain rate used in
simulations must be decreased when increasing the grain size since a fixed dislocation
displacement produces less plastic deformation. The strain rate solutions used with each grain
size are given in Table 2. Tests have been made systematically to control that the simulation
results are not modified when the simulated strain rate is decreased by a factor 2.
Screw dislocation segments are allowed to cross-slip following a framework described in
(Raabe et al., 2003). As previously discussed in (Dewald and Curtin, 2007), cross-slip is a key
mechanism in the simulation of polycrystals with grains in the micrometer range. This
mechanism is needed to avoid rapid exhaustion of dislocation sources when artificial pinning
points are not considered in the initial dislocation microstructure.
2.1 Boundary conditions
Periodic conditions (PC) are applied to the simulated volume in all calculations and two types
of boundaries are used. With the transparent boundary (TB) condition, dislocations are free
to cross the simulated volume borders and they automatically reinter the simulated volume
from the opposite face due to the PC. Alternatively, the impenetrable boundary (IB) condition
confines dislocation motion inside the grain. Dislocations inside these grains are then
immobilized when they reach an IB. Hence, TB condition is used to investigate the properties
of an infinite single crystal (or bulk crystal) and the IB condition is employed to simulate
plastic slip in grains with non-penetrable boundaries.
In this study two sets of calculations that make use of IB condition are performed. The first
geometry is made with one grain occupying the total simulated volume. This simulation
condition reproduces a polycrystal made of one periodic grain, which is named as the “onegrain polycrystal” simulation. Comparison between the one-grain polycrystal simulations and
single crystal simulations that make use of TBs is illustrated in Figure 1. In the one-grain
simulations, by virtue of the PCs, dislocations accumulating against the IBs experience elastic
interactions with dislocations accumulated on the other side of the IB. Obviously, this feature
is a strong limitation of the one-grain simulations since in real polycrystals, dislocations on
one side of a GB experience interactions with dislocation belonging to an adjacent grain with
different orientation and therefore different slip activity.

5

Figure 1(a): example of an initial dislocation configuration with a random distribution of dipolar loops; each
color corresponds to a specific slip system. (b) and (c) are the dislocation microstructures obtained after
deformation using transparent boundaries (TBs) and impenetrable boundaries (IBs), respectively.

In order to check the pertinence of the one-grain simulations, a second type of geometry with
larger simulation volumes made of four grains is also considered (see Figure 2). In these
“four-grain simulations”, adjacent grains are loaded along different axes and contain initially
different distributions of dislocation loops. This results in different slip activity on both sides
of the IBs.
2.2 Grain size and initial dislocation density
To ideally simulate the HP effect, the influence of grain size on the flow stress should be
computed, keeping all other microstructure features (such as dislocation density) unchanged.
It turns out that this requirement is hard to fulfill for the following reason. The initial
dislocation density is given by 𝜌 = (𝑛 × 4𝑙)⁄𝑑 < , where n is the number of dislocation loops
with a squared shape randomly inserted in a grain; l the dislocation loop size and d the grain
size (see Fig. 1a). As the grain size is increased by a factor of 10 in the simulations,
considering initial loops size independent of the grain size imposes a variation up to a factor
of 1000 in the dislocation number between simulations to keep the dislocation density
unchanged. Hence, working at constant dislocation density leads to strong computational time
issues as well as geometrical difficulties to set up a realistic 3D dislocation network whatever
the grains size. Rather, it is simpler to fix an initial loops size proportional with the grain size
and to keep their number n and distribution unchanged. This simpler solution, similar to the
one previously used in micro-pillars simulations (see for instance El-Awady, 2015), allows
for simulations at different grain size with a dislocation density variation smaller than a factor
100 in good agreement with experimental observations. This is why the dislocation density
we used in the DD simulations varies with the grain size as reported in Table 2. In addition, as
discussed by many authors (see for instance El-Awady, 2015), many experimental evidences
show that it is unrealistic to expect that the dislocation density in the different grain sizes
would be the same.
Since the interaction coefficient of the Taylor equation (see Section 3.1) varies with the initial
dislocation density, the corresponding coefficient (usually called forest interaction strength or
Taylor coefficient) is calculated from the simulations. The corresponding values are given in
Table 2.

6

Cubic grain size dimension d (µm)
Dislocation loop size l (µm)
Dislocation density rini (1012 m-2)
Strain rate amplitude (s-1)
Average dislocation strength a

1.25
0.375
30
250
0.33

2.5
0.75
7.7
200
0.38

5
1.5
2
50
0.42

10
3
0.48
15
0.45

Table 2: Simulation conditions and initial dislocation microstructure definition as function of grain size. The
Taylor coefficient is calculated from the simulated stress-strain curves at yield.

2.3 Simulated grain shapes
One of the main goals of this work is to quantitatively evaluate the impact of grain shape on
the HP law. Hence, three different grain shapes are considered (see Figure 2). We consider
cube, plate and needle grain shapes, to simulate the shapes frequently found in polycrystals.
These shapes are close to those observed in recrystallized polycrystals with equiaxed grains,
or lathes and needles observed during allotropic transformations (bainite, perlite and
martensite, etc (Bhadeshia and Honeycombe, 2006)) and thin film (Yoshinaga et al., 2008).

Figure 2: (a, b, c) the three grain shapes investigated with the simulations. One {111} FCC slip plane at the
center of each grain is drawn to illustrate the variation of the slip plane area; (d, e, f) the three different types of
four-grained simulated aggregates. Grains of the same color are mechanically loaded identically but contain
different dislocation distributions.

The ratios between the linear dimensions of the three grain shapes are as follows: three almost
equal dimensions (5;5;5) for the cube grain, two large dimensions (8;8;2) in the plate grain
and one large dimension (31;2;2) in the needle grain. By convention, the grain size in all cases
@
is defined as 𝑑 = √𝑉 .

3. The grain size effects
Given the limitation of DD calculations, it is clear that DD cannot entirely address the grain
size effect observed in polycrystals. However, a formulation similar to that in Eq. 1 represents
7

a useful framework for the analysis and interpretation of our results. In this context, the
friction stress so in the HP law accounts for the intragranular yield stress, as suggested by
Cordero et al. (Cordero et al., 2016). so is material dependent and this quantity must be
defined to calculate the HP term. We suppose in the simulations that so is equal to the yield
stress of an ideal Taylor polycrystal, i.e. a polycrystal of random texture and very large grains.
For such polycrystals, so is directly related to the Critical Resolved Shear Stress tc measured
in a single crystal made with the same material. In addition, in the one-grain polycrystal
simulations, so reduces to the yield stress of an infinitely large grain and the HP law becomes:
A
σ" = CB + KdF
(2)
with m is the highest Schmid factor of slip systems calculated in the simulated grain. Here, it
must be noted that this is the main advantage of the one-grain simulations. Such simulations
give the possibility to study the grain size effect at the slip system level and to reduce the HP
law on the active slip systems to:
τ" = τH + kdF
(3)
where ty = msy, tc = mso and k = mK the reduced HP constant.
To test the validity of Eq. 2 or Eq. 3, the plastic behavior of a single crystal is first determined
to calculate the value of tc in all simulations. In single crystals, tc is controlled by forest
interactions and is expected to follow the Taylor equation:
τH = τJ + αGbNρ
(4)
where 𝜏Q is a lattice friction (solid solution) accounting for dislocation interaction with
impurities. In the present study, 𝜏Q is fixed to the value of 2.5 MPa in the simulation to mimic
common copper polycrystals with a low purity.
In the Taylor equation, the coefficient a is the forest strength coefficient, which was directly
calculated by DD simulations (Madec et al., 2002). In the following, a simple procedure
proposed by Devincre et al. (2006) is used to account for the variation of a with the
dislocation density ρ:

α=

(

)α
ρ )

ln 1/ α ref b ρ

(

ln 1/ α ref b

ref

(5)

ref

where αref is evaluated to 0.4 at ρref= 1012m-2 in the case of a uniform distribution of slip
systems.
Since the initial dislocation density increases with decreasing grain size (see Table 2), the
friction stress so in the HP law is following Eq.4 expected to increase with decreasing grain
size. This variation in so cannot be neglected when calculating the HP term (Kdn). This is why
so must be assessed. In order to do so, simulations of copper single crystals with increasing
initial dislocation density are reported in the next section.
3.1 Assessment of the single crystal behavior
For each tested initial dislocation density (see Table 2), three different tensile axes were
considered: [001], [111] and [135]. As explained in section 2, single crystal simulations are
8

made replacing in the one-grain simulations the impenetrable boundary (IB) condition by the
transparent boundary (TB) condition.
As illustrated in Figure 3a, the resolved shear stress t computed in the single crystal
simulations does not evolve rapidly with the strain. Hence, strain hardening is low. To
complete this general remark, it can be seen that the [111] orientation as a higher strain
hardening rate than the [001] orientation while both are under multiple-slip condition. On the
other hand, the orientation [135], leading to single slip condition, has non-visible strain
hardening. The computed strain hardening rates are: θ001≈170MPa, θ111≈320MPa and θ135≈0.
Such behavior is in good agreement with experiments where strain hardening is in the order
of G/200 in multislip and G/3000 in single slip conditions (Devincre et al. 2008). In these
conditions, it is possible to evaluate without ambiguity tc in each simulation. The computed
values are plotted as a function of the initial dislocation density in Figure 3b. As expected, all
the simulation results are in good agreement with the predictions of the Taylor equation (eq.
5), when the drift of the forest strength coefficient α associated to the variation of the
dislocation line tension with the dislocation density ρ is considered.

Figure 3: (a) Stress-strain curves of 3 single crystal simulations with 3 different crystal orientations.
Computations are made using transparent boundaries of simulation volume of 5µm size. (b) Evolution of the
CRSS as a function of the initial dislocation density (see Table 2). The full line is the prediction of the Taylor
equation (Eq. 4).

Two additional observations can be made from Figure 3b: (i) tc is only slightly affected by
the orientation of the tensile axis. Hence, the nature and number of active slip systems have
little influence on the yield stress of single crystal. (ii) Predictions of Eq. 4 constitute a lower
bound for the values of tc obtained in DD simulations. This is the signature of the effective
stress needed to impose plastic strain by imposing a finite velocity of mobile dislocations,
which necessarily causes a shift from the quasi-static critical stress prediction made with the
Taylor equation. Nevertheless, the difference between the computed values and the model
predictions never exceeds a few percent.
3.2 Impenetrable boundaries and plastic strain hardening
In a second step, comparison is made between the results of the single crystal and the onegrain polycrystal using the same simulation volumes and the same initial dislocation
configurations. Going from one simulation to the other implies only to switch from TB to IB
condition. In Figure 4 we show an example of the evolution of the applied stress (a) and the
9

dislocation density (b) as a function of the plastic strain in a cubic volume of 5 µm loaded in
the [001] orientation. One can easily see that the flow stress and the dislocation density
increase with strain much faster in the one-grain simulation than in the single crystal
simulations. This is a direct outcome of IB condition and a signature of the size effect. The
large dislocation storage rate observed in the one-grain simulation is a consequence of
dislocation accumulation at the GBs.

Figure 4. Comparison between simulations using transparent boundaries (TBs) and impenetrable boundaries (IBs)
in a 5 µm cubic simulation volume loaded in the [001] tensile axis: (a) stress-strain curves and (b) dislocation
density as a function of plastic strain. Dashed lines in (a) correspond to the prediction of Eq. 4 with the
dislocation density recorded in (b).

Strain hardening calculated in the one-grain simulation is almost constant and amounts to
approximately 13 GPa in Figure 4, which corresponds to approximately G/3. This hardening
rate is 100 times larger than that found in the single crystal simulation. It is computed up to a
plastic strain of 0.2%, i.e. the conventional elastic limit considered for the determination of
yield stress in most experiments. As revealed in Figure 4a, the huge hardening rate we found
in the one-grain simulation takes place from the very beginning of the plastic deformation and
cannot be justified by an increase of forest hardening induced by the increase of the
dislocation storage rate (see § Discussion).
3.3 Hall-Petch effects in the one-grain simulations
Now, we investigate the effect of the grain size on the yield stress using the one-grain
simulations. Variations of the grain size are tested from 1.25 𝜇𝑚 to 10 𝜇𝑚 (see Table 2). In
this section, the grains are cubic and tensile tests are made in different orientations: [001],
[111] and [135]. Examples of stress-strain curves computed for the one-grain simulations
deformed in the [135] direction are shown in Figure 5a. Results of these simulations are
compared with the single crystal behavior obtained with the same dislocation configuration,
i.e. an initial dislocation density of 2.1012 m-2. One sees that the flow stress increases
substantially with decreasing grain size. Again, it must be emphasized that this strengthening
cannot be explained by the modification of initial dislocation density with the grain size.
Moreover, when comparing the different curves in Figure 5a, it appears that strain hardening
is weakly sensitive to grain size in those simulations.
10

Figure 5 (a) Example of stress-strain curves obtained with the one-grain simulations for tensile tests along the
[135] axis and for different grain sizes. The stress-strain curve simulated with TBs is added for comparison; (b)
evolution of the HP term calculated at plastic strain equal to 0.1% and with the grain size of different
orientations (full diamonds correspond to solutions obtained with 0.2% offset of plastic strain).

In order to investigate the grain size effect using Eq. 3, the critical stress tc computed from the
single crystal simulation is subtracted from the resolved yield stress 𝜏- recorded in the onegrain simulations. Results of those calculations are plotted as a function of grain size d in
Figure 5b for the twelve simulations we performed. Simulation results systematically exhibit
linear dependency on the inverse of the square root of the grain size. In addition, in the case of
the one-grain simulations oriented for single slip deformation, the grain size effect is tested at
two plastic strain amplitude (0.1% and 0.2%). From this last set of simulation results, it is
clear that the slope of the linear fit increases with the selected plastic strain offset.
Hence, the HP constant K given by the slope of the linear fit (see dashed lines in Figure 5b)
varies with the loading axis and selected offset of the yield stress. Such variation is not a
discrepancy of the simulations, but the consequence of the one-grain simulation condition.
We will see in the discussions section that a realistic value of K can be defined as an average
of those obtained from the one-grain simulations with different plastic strain amplitudes and
different grain orientations.
4. Results on the grain shape effects
4.1 The one-grain simulation
The same set of simulations described in the previous section was repeated with grains of
plate and needle shapes. The increase in the critical stress as a function of the grain size for
the three tensile directions is depicted in Figure 6. For the sake of clarity, simulation results
are split into three figures depending on the loading axis.

11

Figure 6. Variation of the HP term as function of the grain size for the three simulated grain shapes and loading
axis.

As can be seen, the HP term, i.e. the term (ty - tc), is always approximately proportional to
1/√d. The HP law seems to be still valid in the case of non-equiaxed grains. However, the
slope of the curves, i.e. the HP constant K, depends strongly on the grain shape. For the three
investigated shapes, K has the largest value in the case of needles and weakest for cubic
grains. On the other hand, the HP constant is higher in the single slip condition ([135]
orientation), while it remains substantially the same in multislip conditions ([001] and [111]
axes).
4.2 Four-grain simulations
In the previously reported simulations, the HP effect is investigated with particular aggregates
made of one grain surrounded by its periodic images. We can suspect this configuration to
induce artifacts due to the equal slip activity on both sides of the GBs. To investigate the
effect of plastic strain incompatibility at GBs, the behavior of four-grain aggregates
(described in Sec. 2) is now investigated. For the sake of simplicity, these simulations are
performed at imposed stress rate (stress-controlled mode). As the previous simulations have
been made at constant strain rate (strain controlled mode), we first check the consistency
between the two controlling modes in the simulation. In Figure 7a, the results of one-grain
simulations with a 2.5µm cubic grain deformed along the [001] and the [111] axis are shown
as a function of loading modes. From such tests, we see that the two controlling modes give
basically the same mechanical response and both controlling modes can be used
indiscriminately in the aggregate simulations.

12

Figure 7. (a) Comparison between stress-controlled (full lines) and strain-controlled (dotted lines) modes for the
one-grain simulations. The cubic grain is 2.5µm size and two loading axes ([100] and [111]) are considered. For
comparison, two stress-strain curves calculated with the four-grain simulations using the same grain shape, same
size and two loading orientations are reproduced in red curves. The two reported four-grain simulations only
differ in the initial dislocation distributions. The black dashed line is the average of the one-grain simulations; (b)
evolution of the HP term calculated with the four-grain simulations (open symbols) and calculated as an average
of the one-grain simulations made with the [100] and [111] loading axis (full symbols).

In addition, in Figure 7a two stress-strain curves taken from simulations of four-grain
aggregate with grains alternatively oriented in [001] and [111] and different in their random
initial dislocation distribution are presented. Again, it can be seen that both stress-strain
curves are very close to each other. This ensures that the initial dislocation microstructure has
little influence on the simulation results.
Furthermore, it can be noted in Figure 7a that the four-grain aggregate stress-strain curves are
close to the average of the stress-strain curves (black dashed line) of the one-grain
simulations of the [111] and [001] orientations.
Results relative to the evolution of the HP term calculated with the four-grain simulations as a
function of grain size and for different grain shapes (cube, plate and needle) are reported in
Figure 7b. In this figure, we see that the linear dependency of the HP term on the inverse of
the square root of the grain size applies in all cases. Also, the values of the HP constant K
(slope of the straight lines in Figure 7b) vary substantially with the grain shapes. The largest
value of K is obtained with the needle shapes and the lowest for the cubic grains.
4.3 The Bauschinger effect
Since most of the dislocation content in the grains are accumulated at grain boundaries, it is
interesting to investigate a possible Bauschinger effect in our simulation conditions. To do so,
a specific simulation is performed on the 5 µm grain using the impenetrable boundary
condition. The tensile axis is [135] and the loading is reversed at 0.3% of plastic slip. The
corresponding stress-strain curve is given in Erreur ! Source du renvoi introuvable..

13

Figure 8: Stress strain curve associated to the Bauschinger test made for the 5 µm grain size simulation and the
loading axis [135].

As can be noticed on the curve, the strain reversion leads first to a vertical drop of the stress
with respect to the plastic strain axis. This elastic unload step is followed by approximately
0.1% of plastic strain reversal. This plastic strain relaxation reveals that one third of the
dislocation microstructure accumulated at the grain boundary is pushed back when unloading.
In addition, plastic strain in the compression direction is observed at stress amplitude smaller
than -5MPa. The Bauschinger effect we calculate is thus very strong and indicates the
presence of a strong back-stress with an amplitude close to the flow stress. This test clearly
shows that kinematic hardening is predominant with respect to the isotropic hardening in our
simulations.
5. Discussion
According to the usual interpretation of the HP effects (Armstrong et al., 1962; Cordero et al.,
2016), the yield stress of polycrystals is composed of two linearly superposed contributions:
the intragranular one, represented by the friction stress so and the intergranular component
represented by the HP term (Kdn). The main objective of this work is to investigate the
evolution of the HP term as a function of the grain size and shape when assuming that GBs
are impenetrable barriers to dislocation motion (i.e. in the relatively low stress and low strain
conditions). To do so, the HP term must be isolated from the friction stress so in the simulated
flow stress. In the periodic aggregates models we investigated (one-grain and four-grain
simulations), so is by definition the flow stress of the same aggregates, but with very large
grain size. Because of DD simulation limitations, it is not possible to compute directly so.
This is why the friction stress of each simulation condition must be evaluated. In the case of
the one-grain simulations, so becomes the yield stress of a large single crystal oriented in the
same direction as the grain in the simulation. The results reported in Figure 4 prove that so
can be precisely evaluated by the Taylor equation (Eq. 4) provided that the variation of the
forest strength a with the initial dislocation density is taken into account. In the four-grain
simulations, the results reported in Figure 7 show that so can be considered as the average of
14

the Taylor equation predictions of the critical stress of all grain orientations present in the
aggregate.
5.1 Size effects in equiaxed grains
In all simulations performed in this work, we calculated the HP term and examined the
dependency on d, as given in Eq. 2. Our results show good alignment with dn when -0.7 < n <
0.3. This is in partial agreement with the statistical analysis made by (Dunstan and Bushby,
2014) which shows that there is no conclusive experimental evidence of the linearity with
n = -0.5 dependency. However, when we impose that the fitting lines pass by the origin, only
values of -0.5 < n < -0.4 provide good fit to our results. This is why, we consider in this
discussion the exponent to be equal to -0.5. The good alignment with 1/Öd is evidenced, in
Figure 5 and Figure 6 for the one-grain simulations and in Figure 7 for the four-grain
simulations. This choice is consistent with the initial HP relation (Hall, 1951) and many
experimental investigations (Armstrong et al., 1962; Cordero et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016).
Since dislocation storage strongly increases when grain size decreases, it is interesting to
check whether the obtained size effects can be explained by an isotropic hardening resulting
from the increase in dislocation density. To this end, we first calculate the forest strengthening
as a function of the recorded dislocation density. Dislocation density increases basically only
on active slip systems. Therefore, the use of the Taylor equation with an average forest
strength α is not justified at finite strain. Instead, the tensor form of the Taylor equation
accounting for dislocation density on each slip system proposed by Franciosi et al. (Franciosi
et al., 1980) is preferable:
Z^ ^
τZ = τJ + µbN∑)+
^_) a ρ .

(6)

In Eq. 6, 𝑎 ab is the interaction matrix known from previous DD simulations investigations
(Hansen et al., 2010), accounting for the interaction strength between slip system i and s.
Since dislocation density evolution on every slip system is recorded in the simulations, Eq. 6
gives a precise evaluation of the flow stress all along the stress strain curves. This is done in
Figure 4a, where predictions of Eq. 6 are plotted in dashed lines for a single crystal simulation
(transparent boundaries) and for the equivalent one-grain simulations (impenetrable
boundaries). It can be seen that Eq. 6 correctly predict the flow stress of the single crystal
simulation but not that of the aggregate simulation, where the predicted shear stress is far
below the recorded flow stress. Indeed, in the presence of IBs a large number of dislocations
(with the same Burgers vector and direction) is accumulated close to the boundaries. This
phenomenon of polarized dislocation structure at GBs leads to a strong intergranular
strengthening that cannot be predicted by the Taylor equation, used to calculate forest
strengthening.
Another feature of interest is the effect of grain size on the evolution of the dislocation density
storage. It is interesting to compare the dislocation storage computed within the DD
simulations with a simple geometrical analysis. Neglecting forest interactions, every
dislocation loop accommodates in cubic grains a shear increment dg » bd2/V, and contributes
to an increase in dislocation density dr » 4d/V. The rate of dislocation storage is thus dr/dg »
4/(bd).
15

Figure 9: Rate of dislocation storage as a function of grain size. The dashed line represents the geometrical
prediction proposed in this work.

This prediction is compared with simulation results in Figure 9, gathering the results of all the
one-grain simulations with grains of cubic shape and different sizes and orientations. It can be
seen that the storage rate recorded in DD simulations is inversely proportional to the grain
size. Furthermore, the above geometrical prediction is in good agreement with DD results,
which confirm that almost all stored dislocations are accumulating at the IBs. In other terms,
we checked that, in the present simulation conditions, dislocation storage in the bulk of the
grains is almost negligible with respect to that at GBs. The forest dislocation storage term
(𝛼N𝜌/𝑏) frequently used in the literature when modeling the HP effect is not justified. These
results are in full agreement with the classical Kocks-Mecking formulation of crystal
plasticity simulations of polycrystal behavior by Haouala et al (Haouala et al., 2018).
5.2 Estimation of the HP constant K
As discussed before, the HP exponent n is found close to -0.5 in all simulations. Therefore,
the square root dependency is adopted in the following discussion. By subtracting the flow
stress of large single crystal (so) estimated with Eq. 6, it is possible to calculate the HP
constant K as a function of grain size and shape. For the one-grain simulations of cubic shape,
the computed values of K (in MPa√𝑚) is found to vary with respect to the tensile axis: 0.1 for
the [135] axis, 0.06 for the [111] axis and 0.07 for the [001] axis. This variation is expected
because the arrangement of dislocations accumulated at the IBs depends on the number of
active slip systems.
As discussed in the introduction, the evolution of the flow stress of one grain or small grain
clusters as a function of the grain size and shape is only one feature of the grain size effects in
real polycrystals. Therefore, it is useful to compare the value of K calculated in the
simulations with experimental observations. To do so, one must bear in mind that the
experimental values are usually obtained on polycrystals with many grain orientations, while
we have only one grain orientation in the one-grain periodic simulation. Using the Taylor
hypothesis, which has been confirmed in copper (Kocks et al., 2000), the macroscopic stress
becomes the average of the loading stress of the different constituent grains. Considering that
the three simulated orientations are representative of common polycrystal texture, the HP
16

constant measured in experiment can be compared with the average of the K values obtained
in the simulations. The simple average of our results is K = 0.092 MPa m-0.5, which is below
the values reported in the literature (in MPa√𝑚): 0.14 (Thompson et al., 1973), 0.19 (Meyers
et al., 1995), 0.11 (Feltham and Meakin, 1957), 0.15 (Thompson and Backofen, 1971), 0.16
(Hansen and Ralph, 1982). The latter values yield an average experimental value K = 0.15
MPa√𝑚, which is 39% larger than that estimated with the simulations.
Additional thinking suggests that the difference observed between simulations and
experiments may be due to the selection of the 0.1% strain offset for the definition of yield in
the simulations, while it is 0.2% strain in the experimental investigations. The 0.1% offset
was considered in order to reduce the significant computation times. Examining the stressstrain curves of the one-grain simulations (see for example Figure 5a), it is clear that the flow
stress increases strongly and monotonously with the strain. The value of K must thus increase
when fixing the offset of yield strain at 0.2% in the simulation. Only four simulations with
grains oriented parallel to the [135] tensile axis was conducted to 0.2% of plastic strain. The
HP terms calculated for these simulations are reported in Figure 5b (full diamond marks). The
corresponding HP constant K is 0.16 MPa√𝑚, which better matches with the experimental
values. It is worth noting that the presence of solute element in the grain boundary layer
increases the stability of grains, which is known to raise the value of K in industrial Cu alloys
compared to pure Cu (see for ex. Thompson et al. 1973). This finding has recently been
confirmed in atomistic simulations of the Cu-Al systems by Borovikov et al. (Borovikov et al.
2017).
5.3 Effect of grain shape
As revealed in Figure 6, for all grain orientations the HP constant K increases strongly when
the grain shape considered in simulation is not cubic. The largest value of K is found with the
needle shape, with a value two times larger than that obtained for cubic grains. This indicates
that the HP effect increases when the aspect ratio of the grain is different from 1. We propose
the following model to account for this property.
Let us consider grains in the form of parallelepipeds with three independent dimensions. As
the accumulation of polarized dislocations close to IBs and its associated back stress is at the
heart of the interpretations of the HP effect, we consider a dislocation loop expanding on a
slip plane from the center of the grain. Its final length C is equal to the circumference of the
surface of the slip plan bounded by the grain faces. During expansion, the accommodated
plastic deformation is proportional to the area S of this surface. If the back stress is mainly
associated with the polarized dislocation accumulated against IBs, it must be proportional to
C. On the other hand, during deformation, the back stress increase with deformation is likely
to be inversely proportional to S. Consequently, we expect K to be proportional to C/S. This
factor has dimensionality [m-1] and has to be normalized by the corresponding factor of a
cubic grain shape to recover a factor of unity in the case of equiaxed grains. One can thus
define a shape factor as:
ψ=

17

f gBhij
g fBhij

(7)

When considering FCC slip system symmetry and parallelepipedic grains with boundaries
perpendicular to <100> directions, this shape factor takes the value ψ = 1 (cube), ψ = 1.51
(plate) and ψ = 2.52 (needle). The HP terms deduced from Figure 6 are plotted in Figure 10 as
a function of 1/√𝑑 weighted by the shape factor. It can be seen that all data now collapse on
the same straight line going through zero at very large grains. This confirms that the effect of
grain shape revealed in the simulations is well taken into account using the shape factor
defined in Eq. 7.

Figure 10. Evolution of the HP term with the grain size multiplied by the shape factor 𝜓 for the three tested grain
orientations and three grain shapes.

In other words, our simulations suggest that in order to apply the HP relation in the case of
non-isotropic grain shapes of a volume V, one should define an effective grain size deff
accounting for the shape factor given in Eq. 7. The present model is based on the calculation
of the average dislocation loop length C and the average area swept by dislocations S,
suggesting the following generalized Hall-Petch relation:
σ" = σ$ +

l
Nmjnn

with

qg +

)

doJJ = p f r × @

√s

(8)

Eq. 8 involves three independent parameters because it is developed for parallelepipedic
grains of three independent dimensions. Of course, for the geometries used in our simulations
(needles and plates), Eq. 8 reduces to only two independent parameters.
5.4

Plastic strain incompatibility in the four-grain simulations

As shown in Figure 7, the stress-strain curve of four-grain simulations including [001] and
[111] grains is close to the average of the stress-strain curves calculated with the one-grain
simulations for the [001] and [111] grain orientations. This result is surprising, since every
grain is surrounded by grains of different slip activity in the four-grain simulations, while slip
activity is identical on both sides of the boundaries in the one-grain simulations. The long
range stress field associated with the polarized dislocation density accumulated at IBs is then
expected to be different. Thus, in the case of periodic cluster simulations, it seems that the
flow stress is little sensitive to the details of the grain neighborhood; the overall behavior is a
simple average of the individual responses of its grains. This result supports the assumption
made in homogenization methods (Roters et al., 2010) and XRD observations made on grain
18

rotations in polycrystals deformation (Poulsen et al., 2003; Winther et al., 2004), at least, at
the beginning of plastic deformation.
Consequently, it is relevant to check if the shape factor defined in the previous section still
applies to the four-grain simulations with non-cubic grains (see results in Figure 7b). The
corresponding HP analysis as a function of the effective grain size deff is plotted in Figure 11a
in which deff was normalized by the norm of the Burgers vector b.

Figure 11. HP term vs different functions of the effective grain size deff and the smallest edge length of grain dmin,
including simulations results on cubic (circles), plate (triangles) and needle (diamonds) shapes on one-grain (full
symbols) and four-grain clusters with [001] and [111] orientations (open symbols).

It can be seen that results of the four-grain simulations with different grain shapes (cube, plate
and needles) are again aligned on the same line passing roughly by the origin. The
corresponding HP constant K is equal to 0.087 MPa√𝑚, which is quite close to the average of
the values obtained for the [001] and [111] one-grain simulations (given in full symbols in
Figure 11). In addition, this value is lower than that obtained from averaging the K values we
obtained in section 5.2 when accounting for all the one-grain simulations. This discrepancy
comes from the absence of grains oriented for single slip condition (e.g. <135> orientation) in
the four-grain simulations. Indeed, we show in Figure 6 that these grains induce the largest
HP effect. Hence, our simulations show that polycrystal aggregates with texture endorsing
single slip deformation in the grains are expected to provide enhanced HP effect at the yield
strain.
19

Following the analyses made by Li et al. (Li et al., 2016), where it has been shown that
experimental results fit well on different functions : 1/Ö deff, 1/deff and ln deff /deff, it is
important to check if this feature applies also on our results. In Figure 11c and d, we plot the
values of the HP term given in Figure 11a as a function of 1/deff and ln deff /deff, respectively.
Also, as sometime proposed in the literature, we plot in Figure 11b calculated values of the
HP term as a function of dmin, the smallest edge length of grains. It can be noticed that any of
these tests gives data aligned on a straight line passing by the origin. The trends observed in
Figure 11c and d cut the y-axis at a significantly high value (» 30 MPa). This feature cannot
be easily rationalized using physical arguments. Consequently, the best rationalization of our
results seems to be given using the inverse of the square root of the effective grain size.

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated the flow stress of periodic grains and 4-grain clusters of
different sizes and shapes with impenetrable boundaries. The following conclusions can be
drawn from the DD simulations reported in this paper:
- The critical resolved shear stress of single crystals is correctly predicted by the forest
model given by the Taylor equation providing that the logarithmic dependency on the
dislocations density of the forest strength (a) is appropriately accounted for.
- Strengthening induced by dislocations accumulated at GBs cannot by predicted using
the Taylor equation. An alternative constitutive equation will be proposed in a
forthcoming paper.
- The yield stress at 0.1% and 0.2% offset of plastic strain in grains of orientations
<100>, <111> and <135> and shapes cube, plate and needle, is found to vary almost
linearly with the inverse of the square root of the grain size.
- The grain size effect on the flow stress varies strongly with the grain orientation. The
average of the HP constant values (K) calculated at 0.2% offset of plastic strain is
close to the values reported in experiments on copper polycrystals. This suggests that
the strong assumption we made when considering GBs as impenetrable captures the
basic mechanical features that take place at low plastic strain and low stress.
- The HP constant varies strongly with the grain shape. A shape factor is proposed to
account for this sensitivity and an effective grain size is defined in order to keep using
the HP relation in the case of non-equiaxed grains.
- The mechanical response of periodic four-grain aggregates is well approximated by
the average of responses of its constituent periodic grains.
Modeling the grain boundary interactions with moving dislocations (absorption, repulsion,
emission) requires specific physically based constitutive rules for the boundary response.
Such rules can only be addressed in atomistic simulations, where the atomic structures and
thermodynamics of the boundaries are fully accounted for. On the other side, only DD
simulation gives the possibility to reproduce the kinematic conditions associated to realistic
dislocation patterns accumulated in the vicinity of grain boundaries. This information is
essential to investigate the long-range internal stresses and stress concentrations affecting
20

plastic deformation of polycrystals. Multiscale modeling of the inter- and intragranular
features of plastic deformation of polycrystals is an exciting perspective that remains to be
explored.

Acknowledgment
This work is partially funded from the Euratom research and training program 2014-2018
under grant agreement No 661913 (SOTERIA). This work also contributes to the Joint
Program on Nuclear Materials (JPNM) of the European Energy Research Alliance (EERA).
7. References
Armstrong, R., 2014. The plastic deformation of polycrystalline aggregates. Acta Mech. 225,
1013.
Armstrong, R.W., Codd, I., Douthwaite, R.M., Petch, N.J., 1962. The plastic deformation of
polycrystalline aggregates. Philos. Mag. 7, 45.
Armstrong, R.W., 2014. Engineering science aspects of the Hall–Petch relation. Acta Mech.
225, 1013–1028.
Ashby, M.F., 1970. The deformation of plastically non-homogeneous materials. Philos. Mag.
21, 399–424.
Bata, V., Pereloma, E., 2004. An alternative physical explanation of the Hall–Petch relation,
Acta Mater. 52, 657–665.
Benson, D., Fu, H.-H., Meyers, M., 2001. On the effect of grain size on yield stress:
Extension into nanocrystalline domain, Materials Science and Engineering A. 319, 854–
861.
Berbenni, S., Favier, V., Berveiller, M., 2007. Impact of the grain size distribution on the
yield stress of heterogeneous materials, Int. J. Plast. 23, 114–142.
Bhadeshia, H., Honeycombe, R., 2006. Steels: Microstructure and Properties. ButterworthHeinemann.
Borovikov, V. , Mendelev, M.I. , King, A.H., 2017. Effects of solutes on dislocation
nucleation from grain boundaries, Int. J. Plast. 90, 146–155.
Burbery N. B., Po G., Das R., Ghoniem N., and Ferguson W. G., 2017. Dislocation dynamics
in polycrystals with atomistic-informed mechanisms of dislocation - grain boundary
interactions, Journal of Micromechanics and Molecular Physics, 02(01):1750003.
Chia, K.-H., Jung, K., Conrad, H., 2005. Dislocation density model for the effect of grain size
on the flow stress of a Ti–15.2 at.% Mo β-alloy at 4.2–650 K, Materials Science and
Engineering A. 409, 32–38.
21

Conrad, H., Schoeck, G., 1960. Cottrell locking and the flow stress in iron. Acta Met. 8, 791.
Cordero, Z.C., Knight, B.E., Schuh, C.A., 2016. Six decades of the Hall–Petch effect – a
survey of grain-size strengthening studies on pure metals. Int. Mater. Rev. 61, 495–512.
Cottrell, A.H., 1953. Theory of dislocations. Prog. Met. Phys. 4, 205–264.
De Sansal, C., Devincre, B., Kubin, L., 2009. Grain Size Strengthening in Microcrystalline
Copper: A Three-Dimensional Dislocation Dynamics Simulation, Key Engineering
Materials. 423, 25–32.
Delannay, L., Barnett, M.R., 2012. Modelling the combined effect of grain size and grain
shape on plastic anisotropy of metals. Int. J. Plast. 32–33, 70–84.
Devincre, B., Madec, R., Monnet, G., Queyreau, S., Gatti, R., Kubin, L., 2011. Modeling
crystal plasticity with dislocation dynamcis simulations : the «MICROMEGAS» code,
in: S. Forest, A.P. (Ed.), Mechanics of Nano-Objects. Presses des Mines, pp. 81–100.
Devincre, B., Hoc, T., Kubin, L., 2008. Dislocation mean free paths and strain hardening of
crystals. Science, 320, 1745–1748.
Devincre, B., Kubin, L., Hoc, T., 2006. Physical analyses of crystal plasticity by DD
simulations. Scr. Mater. 54, 741–746.
Dunstan, D.J., Bushby, A.J., 2014. Grain size dependence of the strength of metals: The Hall–
Petch effect does not scale as the inverse square root of grain size, Int. J. Plast., 53, 56–
65. doi:10.1016/j.ijplas.2013.07.004.
El-Awady, J.A., 2015. Unravelling the physics of size-dependent dislocation-mediated
plasticity. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–9.
Fan, H., Aubry, S., Arsenlis, A., El-Awady, J.A., 2015. Orientation influence on grain size
effects in ultrafine-grained magnesium. Scr. Mater. 97, 25–28.
Feaugas, X., Haddou, H., 2003. Grain-size effects on tensile behavior of nickel and AISI
316L stainless steel. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 34, 2329–2340.
Feltham, P., Meakin, J.D., 1957. On the mechanism of work hardening in face-centred cubic
metals, with special reference to polycrystalline copper. Philos. Mag. A J. Theor. Exp.
Appl. Phys. 2, 105–112.
Franciosi, P., Berveiller, M., Zaoui, A., 1980. Latent hardening in copper and aluminium
single crystals. Acta Metall. 28, 273–283.
Hall, E.O., 1951. The Deformation and Ageing of Mild Steel: III Discussion of Results. Proc.
Phys. Soc., Sect. B 64, 747.
Hansen, B.L., Bronkhorst, C.A., Ortiz, M., 2010. Dislocation subgrain structures and
modeling the plastic hardening of metallic single crystals. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci.
Eng. 18, 55001.
22

Hansen, N., Ralph, B., 1982. The strain and grain size dependence of the flow stress of
copper. Acta Metall. 30, 411–417.
Haouala, S., Segurado, J., LLorca, J., 2018. An analysis of the influence of grain size on the
strength of FCC polycrystals by means of computational homogenization. Acta Mater.
148, 72–85.
Hirth, J.P., 1972. The influence of grain boundaries on mechanical properties. Metall. Trans.
3, 3047–3067.
Hughes, G.D., Smith, S.D., Pande, C.S., Johnson, H.R., Armstrong, R.W., 1986. Hall-petch
strengthening for the microhardness of twelve nanometer grain diameter electrodeposited
nickel. Scr. Metall. 20, 93–97.
Kocks, U.F., 1970. The relation between polycrystal deformation and single-crystal
deformation. Met. Mater. Trans. 1, 1121.
Kocks, U.F., Tomé, C.N., Wenk, H.R., 2000. Texture and Anisotropy: Preferred Orientations
in Polycrystals and Their Effect on Materials Properties. Cambridge University Press.
Lasalmonie, a, Strudel, J., 1986. Influence of grain size on the mechanical behaviour of some
high strength materials. J. Mater. Sci. 21, 1837–1852.
Lee, T.C., Robertson, I.M., Birnbaum, H.K., 1990. TEM in situ deformation study of the
interaction of lattice dislocations with grain boundaries in metals. Philos. Mag. A 62,
131–153.
Lefebvre, S., Devincre, B., Hoc, T., 2007. Yield stress strengthening in ultrafine-grained
metals : A two-dimensional simulation of dislocation dynamics. J. Mech. Phys. Solids
55, 788–802.
Li, J.C.M., 1963. Petch relation and grain boundary sources. Trans. Am. Inst. Met. Eng. 227–
239.
Li, Y., Bushby, A.J., Dunstan, D.J., 2016. The Hall–Petch effect as a manifestation of the
general size effect. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 472.
Madec, R., Devincre, B., Kubin, L.P., 2002. From dislocation junctions to forest hardening.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 255508.
Meyers, M.A., Ashworth, E., 1982. A model for the effect of grain size on the yield stress of
metals. Philos. Mag. A 46, 737–759.
Meyers, M.A., Andrade, U.R., Chokshi, A.H., 1995. The effect of grain size on the highstrain, high-strain-rate behavior of copper. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 26, 2881–2893.
Mohles, V., 2001. Simulations of dislocation glide in overaged precipitation-hardened
crystals. Philos. Mag. A 81, 971–990.

23

Morris, S.B.B. and J.R., 2002. A two-dimensional discrete dislocation simulation of the effect
of grain size on strengthening behaviour. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 10, 617.
Navarro, A., de los Rios, E.R., 1988. An alternative model of the blocking of dislocations at
grain boundaries. Philos. Mag. A 57, 37–42.
Ohashi, T., Kawamukai, M., Zbib, H., 2007. A multiscale approach for modeling scaledependent yield stress in polycrystalline metals. Int. J. Plast. 23, 897–914.
Pechkovskii, É.P., Moiseev, V.F., Ban’kovskii, O.I., Rafalovskii, V.A., 1989. Plastic
deformation of polycrystals. Report II. Limit of elasticity and strain hardening of
molybdenum, niobium, and iron, Strength Mater. 21, 338–344.
Petch, N.J., 1953. The Cleavage Strength of Polycrystals. J. Iron Steel Inst. 174, 25.
Petch, N.J., 1958. The ductile-brittle transition in the fracture of α-iron: I. Philos. Mag. 3,
1089.
Poulsen, H.F., Margulies, L., Schmidt, S., Winther, G., 2003. Lattice rotations of individual
bulk grains: Part I: 3D X-ray characterization. Acta Mater. 51, 3821–3830.
Quek, S.S., Wu, Z., Zhang, Y.W., Srolovitz, D.J., 2014. Polycrystal deformation in a discrete
dislocation dynamics framework. Acta Mater. 75, 92–105.
Raabe, D., Sachtleber, M., Weiland, H., Scheele, G., Zhao, Z., 2003. Grain-scale
micromechanics of polycrystal surfaces during plastic straining. Acta Mater. 51, 1539–
1560.
Roters, F., Eisenlohr, P., Hantcherli, L., Tjahjanto, D.D., Bieler, T.R., Raabe, D., 2010.
Overview of constitutive laws, kinematics, homogenization and multiscale methods in
crystal plasticity finite-element modeling: Theory, experiments, applications. Acta
Mater. 58, 1152–1211.
Sachtleber, M., Zhao, Z., Raabe, D., 2002. Experimental investigation of plastic grain
interaction. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 336, 81–87.
Shen, Z., Wagoner, R.H., Clark, W.A.T., 1988. Dislocation and grain boundary interactions in
metals. Acta Metall. 36, 3231–3242.
Sinclair, C.W., Poole, W.J., Bréchet, Y., 2006. A model for the grain size dependent work
hardening of copper. Scr. Mater. 55, 739–742.
Smith, E., Worthington, P.J., 1964. The effect of orientation on the grain size dependence of
the yield strength of metals. Philos. Mag. A J. Theor. Exp. Appl. Phys. 9, 211–216.
Thompson, A.W., Backofen, W.A., 1971. Production and mechanical behavior of very finegrained copper. Met. Trans. 2, 2004–2005.
Thompson, A.W., Baskes, M.I., Flanagan, W.F., 1973. The dependence of polycrystal work
hardening on grain size. Acta Metall. 21, 1017–1028.
24

Tsuchida, N., Masuda, H., Harada, Y., Fukaura, K., Tomota, Y., Nagai, K., 2008. Effect of
ferrite grain size on tensile deformation behavior of a ferrite-cementite low carbon steel.
Mater. Sci. Eng. A 488, 446–452.
Van Houtte, P., 1982. On the equivalence of the relaxed Taylor theory and the Bishop-Hill
theory for partially constrained plastic deformation of crystals. Mater. Sci. Eng. 55, 69–
77.
Wang, J., Beyerlein, I.J., Tomé, C.N., 2014. Reactions of lattice dislocations with grain
boundaries in Mg: Implications on the micro scale from atomic-scale calculations. Int. J.
Plast. 56, 156–172.
Winther, G., Margulies, L., Schmidt, S., Poulsen, H.F., 2004. Lattice rotations of individual
bulk grains Part II: correlation with initial orientation and model comparison. Acta
Mater. 52, 2863–2872.
Yellakara, R.N., Wang, Z., 2014. A three-dimensional dislocation dynamics study of the
effects of grain size and shape on strengthening behavior of fcc Cu. Comput. Mater. Sci.
87, 253–259.
Yoshinaga, N., Sugiura, N., Hiwatashi, S., Ushioda, K., Kada, O., 2008. Deep Drawability of
Electro-deposited Pure Iron Having an Extremely Sharp <111>//ND Texture. ISIJ Int.
48, 667–670.
Zhang, X., Aifantis, K.E., Senger, J., Weygand, D., Zaiser, M., 2014. Internal length scale and
grain boundary yield strength in gradient models of polycrystal plasticity: How do they
relate to the dislocation microstructure? J. Mater. Res. 29, 2116–2128.
Zhou, C., Lesar, R., 2012. Dislocation dynamics simulations of plasticity in polycrystalline
thin films. Int. J. Plast. 30–31, 185–201.

25

