MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Preprint 29 March 2019

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in Atmospheres of
hot Jupiters
Siddharth Gandhi,1? Nikku Madhusudhan,1 †
1 Institute

of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK

arXiv:1903.11603v1 [astro-ph.EP] 27 Mar 2019

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

Thermal emission spectra of hot Jupiters have led to key constraints on thermal inversions (or ‘stratospheres’) in their atmospheres with important implications for their
atmospheric processes. Canonically, thermal inversions in hot Jupiters have been suggested to be caused by species such as TiO and VO which have strong visible opacity
to absorb incident starlight. We explore two new avenues for thermal inversions in
hot Jupiters, exploring both the visible and infrared opacities in their atmospheres.
Firstly, by exploring a range of metal-rich species we find that four species (AlO, CaO,
NaH and MgH) provide visible opacities comparable to TiO/VO and can cause strong
inversions with reasonable abundances. Secondly, we show that a low infrared opacity
caused by a low H2 O abundance, e.g. through a C/O∼ 1, can also lead to strong thermal inversions even with low abundances of the visible absorbers mentioned above.
We find that increasing the C/O ratio towards unity requires almost 2 orders of magnitude lower abundances for the visible absorbers in order for an inversion to form.
Finally, we explore the thermal inversion in WASP-121b and find that it can be explained by all the visible absorbers listed above for different C/O ratios. Our study
demonstrates the importance of both the refractory and volatile species in governing
the physicochemical processes in hot Jupiter atmospheres. Spectroscopic observations
in the visible have the potential to detect the newly proposed refractory species that
can cause thermal inversions in addition to TiO and VO.
Key words: opacity – radiative transfer – methods: numerical – planets and satellites:
atmospheres – planets and satellites: composition

1

INTRODUCTION

Atmospheric characterisation of exoplanets has entered a
new era, with high precision and high resolution spectral
data available for a growing number of planets (Madhusudhan et al. 2016). Transiting exoplanets have been characterised using both emission and transmission spectroscopy
for atmospheric studies thanks to instruments such as the
Hubble WFC3 spectrograph (Deming et al. 2013; Madhusudhan et al. 2014b; Kreidberg et al. 2014; Sing et al.
2016). In recent years there has also been significant development in ground-based observations, from high precision
spectra in the visible (Sedaghati et al. 2017) to very high
resolution spectroscopy in the near infrared (Snellen et al.
2010; Birkby et al. 2013). We have also been able to find
molecules and investigate the temperature profiles through
direct imaging of exoplanets (e.g. Konopacky et al. 2013;
Macintosh et al. 2015). With this we now have a wealth

?

E-mail: sng29@ast.cam.ac.uk
† E-mail: nmadhu@ast.cam.ac.uk
c 2018 The Authors

of observations for a range of exoplanets that encompass
both strongly irradiated and non-irradiated planets over a
wide range of temperatures. We have been able to detect
and characterise the atmospheric temperature profiles and
chemistry of exoplanets like never before and with future
instruments (e.g JWST) we will be able to explore in even
more detail the processes that occur on such planets.
Emission spectroscopy in particular is able to probe the
temperature structure of the dayside atmosphere in detail
due to its sensitivity to the thermal gradients. One of the
major areas in this direction has been the study of thermal
inversions in highly irradiated exoplanets, particularly hot
Jupiters. Thermal inversions are regions of the atmosphere
where the temperature increases with altitude, similar to
the stratosphere on Earth. This is caused by entrapment of
the incident stellar irradiation due to the presence of strong
UV/visible absorption, such as O3 for Earth’s stratosphere.
In hot Jupiters, molecules such as TiO and VO have been
suggested to play a similar role (Hubeny et al. 2003; Fortney
et al. 2008). The larger and hotter extrasolar giant planets
have been thus far the most studied thanks to their strong

2

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

Table 1. Summary of developments in the theory of thermal inversions in strongly irradiated giant planets.
Study

Investigation into Thermal Inversions on hot Jupiters

Hubeny et al. (2003)
Fortney et al. (2008)
Spiegel et al. (2009)
Zahnle et al. (2009)
Knutson et al. (2010)
Madhusudhan et al. (2011)
Mollière et al. (2015)
Beatty et al. (2017a)
Lothringer et al. (2018)
This work

Proposed TiO and VO as a candidate for thermal inversions in hot Jupiters.
Introduced a two-class system for classifying hot Jupiters dependant on the atmospheric temperature.
Investigated depletion of TiO and VO in hot Jupiter atmospheres due to gravitational settling.
Proposed HS and S2 as candidates for thermal inversions at intermediate temperatures (∼1000-2000K).
Investigated effect of stellar activity and concluded inversions are more likely with lower UV flux.
Investigated dependence of TiO and VO on C/O ratio.
Suggested atomic Na and K are capable of leading to thermal inversions for a C/O ratio near 1.
Proposed that higher log(g) suppresses inversions due to cold-trap processes.
Proposed Fe, Mg, SiO and metal hydrides as candidates for inversions on planets with Teq >2500 K.
Propose four species, AlO, CaO, NaH and MgH for causing thermal inversions. Investigated the effect of
the infrared opacity on thermal inversions.

spectral signatures. Initial observational inferences of stratospheres, or thermal inversions, were based mostly on photometric data (Burrows et al. 2007, 2008; Knutson et al. 2008,
2009; Madhusudhan & Seager 2010), several of which have
since been revised (Diamond-Lowe et al. 2014). More recently, inferences of thermal inversions have been possible
with HST WFC3 observations (Haynes et al. 2015; Evans
et al. 2017; Sheppard et al. 2017). These planets are of great
interest as only a handful of species have been suggested
to be capable of leading to a thermal inversion in such atmospheres. Their strong effect on the temperature profile
results in significant observable consequences in the thermal
emission spectra of exoplanets. A review on thermal inversions can be seen in Madhusudhan et al. (2014a).
The first theoretical work on thermal inversions on hot
Jupiter atmospheres was by Hubeny et al. (2003). Here they
proposed two molecules, TiO and VO, which both had sufficiently strong absorption in the visible that they should be
capable of causing thermal inversions at or near their expected solar abundances on hot Jupiters. These species are
only expected to exist in the atmospheres of planets with a
temperature exceeding 2000K, but a significant number of
irradiated giant planets so far discovered exceed this temperature on their dayside (e.g WASP-33b, WASP-12b, WASP18b). This work was built upon by Fortney et al. (2008),
who also modelled atmospheres with TiO and VO to calculate radiative-convective equilibrium P-T profiles of the
atmospheres of several known hot Jupiters. They propose a
two-class hot Jupiter classification, dependant on the equilibrium temperature being above or below ∼1500K. Below
∼1500K, planets were expected to be too cool to host TiO or
VO in their gaseous state. Therefore only planets above this
temperature are expected to have the TiO/VO in sufficient
abundances to lead to thermal inversions.
Subsequent studies investigated other factors that influence the possibility of thermal inversions on hot Jupiters.
A detailed investigation of the effect of TiO across a number of hot Jupiters was carried out by Spiegel et al. (2009).
In this study, the vertical upwelling in the atmosphere and
the day-night redistribution were also considered. They proposed that when the gravitational settling was considered,
an atmospheric temperature higher than ∼1800K was required for TiO to be abundant enough in the observable atmosphere to cause thermal inversions. Therefore, they proposed only the hottest exoplanets were capable of thermal
inversions. They also determined that VO is less likely to

play a significant role in thermal inversions on hot Jupiters
due to its weaker cross section and lower equilibrium solar
abundance compared to TiO.
Zahnle et al. (2009) proposed that sulphur species, such
as HS and S2 , may be responsible for thermal inversions
in the stratospheres for planets with intermediate temperatures, ranging from ∼1000-2000K. Both of these species
possess significant UV absorption (in particular HS) and
thus can lead to radiative heating rates that are significant
enough to lead to thermal inversions. Knutson et al. (2010)
investigated the effect of the star’s UV flux, and whether
spectrally active species would remain stable on such exoplanets. The most active stars with the strongest UV fluxes
were the least likely to harbour thermal inversions, given
that such visible absorbers would most likely be dissociated
by the incident UV irradiation. Therefore they predicted
that thermal inversions would be more likely on hot Jupiters
if the incident UV flux was low enough for inversion-causing
species to exist. Inversions have also been suggested to be
caused by thermal instabilities in the presence of ohmic dissipation in highly irradiated atmospheres from general circulation models (Menou 2012).
Madhusudhan et al. (2011) investigated the equilibrium
abundances of TiO and VO as the C/O ratio varied. They
found that a C/O ratio of 1 reduced the abundance of these
species by a factor of ∼100, thereby reducing the visible
opacity of the atmosphere. Madhusudhan (2012) proposed
a 2D classification scheme, depending on the atmospheric
temperature and the C/O ratio for hot Jupiters. When the
C/O ratio exceeds unity, the available oxygen preferentially
binds to carbon to form carbon monoxide. The atmosphere
is thus depleted of oxygen to form species such as H2 O, TiO
and VO. Mollière et al. (2015) on the other hand found that
a C/O ratio near 1 also resulted in thermal inversions from
the gaseous atomic species Na and K. They discovered that
with an atmospheric temperature over 2000K, thermal inversions were seen in the model atmospheres with F5, G5 and
K5 stars at pressures of ∼0.1-0.01 bar. This results from the
atomic line wings, which result in significant absorption of
the visible flux and therefore emulate the role of TiO or VO
to lead to a thermal inversion. More recently, Beatty et al.
(2017b) analysed the spectrum of an irradiated brown dwarf
and hypothesised that the lack of a thermal inversion seen
was due to the high surface gravity. The higher log(g) would
likely enhance cold-trap processes which prevent TiO/VO
from circulating up into the photosphere and therefore reaMNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters
soned that this may prevent thermal inversions from forming
on more massive exoplanets.
More recent work suggesting the thermal dissociation of
H2 O in ultra hot Jupiters (T&2500 K) has shown that thermal inversions may also form more readily on such planets
(Parmentier et al. 2018; Lothringer et al. 2018; Arcangeli
et al. 2018). The inversions are driven by the lack of H2 O,
which causes the photospheric cooling to be more inefficient
(Mollière et al. 2015). Thus thermal inversions can form due
to species such as TiO and VO in the atmosphere. The dayside emission spectra from such dissociated atmospheres are
expected to have weak HST WFC3 spectral features due to
the weaker H2 O absorption but have strong CO features in
the Spitzer 4.5µm bandpass as this does not readily dissociate. This mechanism of thermal dissociation has thus been
proposed to explain the lack of significant WFC3 spectral
features seen in several ultra hot Jupiters with an equilibrium temperature in excess of 2000K (e.g. Kreidberg et al.
2018; Parmentier et al. 2018). Lothringer et al. (2018) have
also explored equilibrium models of hot Jupiters such as
KELT-9b, with Teq ∼ 4500 K, when species such as TiO/VO
begin to thermally dissociate and proposed several candidate
species for inversions in the atmospheres of such extremely
hot planets (see table 1). These species, such as Fe, Mg and
SiO, remain thermally stable over a much wider range of
temperatures. On the other hand, several ultra hot Jupiters
do show strong H2 O absorption which remains a conundrum
(Parmentier et al. 2018).
At the same time as equilibrium models, retrievals of
hot Jupiter emission spectra has enabled atmospheric characterisation and abundance analyses from observations. Focus of research has recently moved into investigating the candidate species for thermal inversions. It has only been very
recently that we have been able to obtain spectra of sufficient quality so as to infer such species in exoplanets. Haynes
et al. (2015) reported signs of a thermal inversion from an
emission spectrum of WASP-33b. Retrievals of WASP-33b
revealed that this stratosphere was likely the effect of TiO in
the atmosphere. Nugroho et al. (2017) also detected TiO in
WASP-33b using high resolution spectroscopy. Evans et al.
(2016) obtained transmission spectra of WASP-121b with
visible and near-infrared WFC3 observations and hypothesised that the spectrum was best fit with TiO or VO present
in the atmosphere. This is plausible given that the equilibrium temperature for this planet is ∼2400K and further supported by the presence of a thermal inversion on the dayside (Evans et al. 2017) found in their subsequent study.
Sheppard et al. (2017) have also studied the dayside atmosphere of WASP-18b and found a thermal inversion in
the infrared emission spectrum, also confirmed by Arcangeli
et al. (2018). Thus there is a growing number of exoplanets which possess thermal inversions and we are now beginning to place constraints on TiO and VO through such
observations. More recently, Sedaghati et al. (2017) reported
a detection of TiO through the ground based transmission
spectrum of the planet WASP-19b using VLT. A subsequent
attempt to detect the same using GMT proved unsuccessful
(Espinoza et al. 2019). With new advances in instrumentation, it is likely that detections of such species becomes
commonplace in exoplanets. Therefore a theoretical understanding of how thermal inversions occur in exoplanets and
due to which chemical species is of paramount importance.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

3

In this work we report three key aspects of thermal inversions on hot Jupiters. Firstly, using semi-analytic models,
we explore the required atmospheric abundance for species
with strong visible cross sections in order for a thermal inversion to occur in the atmosphere. These analytic models
form the basis for predictions we will use and provide a good
insight into the relevant radiative processes occurring in the
atmosphere. We also test how well the semi-analytic prediction holds for a real atmosphere by testing against full
radiative-convective equilibrium models of the atmosphere
using line-by-line radiative transfer.
Secondly, we explore species beyond TiO and VO which
possess a strong visible cross section and thus are capable of
leading to thermal inversions. Here, we find 4 species, AlO,
CaO, NaH and MgH which if present at sufficient abundance
are capable of forming thermal inversions in hot Jupiters.
This is done through our self-consistent radiative-convective
equilibrium code GENESIS (Gandhi & Madhusudhan 2017).
Key to this new find has been the molecular cross sections
generated from the latest and most accurate line lists available (Hill et al. 2013; McKemmish et al. 2016; Patrascu et al.
2015; Yurchenko et al. 2016; Rivlin et al. 2015; Yadin et al.
2012).
Thirdly, we explore the effect of the infrared opacity
on thermal inversions. It is well known that it is the ratio
of the visible to infrared opacity that governs the formation of thermal inversions (Hubeny et al. 2003; Hansen 2008;
Guillot 2010). Thus far, only variation of the visible opacity
has been considered through species such as TiO and VO.
However, we show that the infrared opacity is just as significant for causing inversions. We vary the infrared opacity
through the C/O ratio of the atmosphere. The abundance
of the volatile species (e.g H2 O, CH4 , NH3 , CO, HCN, CO2 ,
C2 H2 ) is closely tied to the C/O ratio and altering this can
change the abundance of these species by several orders of
magnitude (Moses et al. 2013). This can thus alter the overall infrared opacity of the atmosphere and therefore the required visible opacity for an inversion. We demonstrate that
with a C/O ratio near unity species such as TiO can be at
sub-solar abundance and still lead to thermal inversions. We
follow on to model WASP-121b, a hot Jupiter known to possess a thermal inversion (Evans et al. 2017). We explore the
required abundance of each of the metallic species to cause
a thermal inversion in its atmosphere for both C/O=0.5 (solar) and C/O=1 for the planet.
In what follows, section 2 introduces the theory and the
conditions required for a thermal inversion in an atmosphere.
Section 3 describes the effect of the visible opacity and the
new species which can lead to stratospheres in these atmospheres. Section 4 discusses the importance of the infrared
opacity in determining the conditions for a thermal inversion
through the effect of the C/O ratio. We explore the thermal
inversion in a known system, WASP-121b, in section 5 with
comparisons between models with various inversion-causing
species against the observations. Finally, the conclusion and
implications of the work are discussed in section 6.

2

THEORY OF THERMAL INVERSIONS

Thermal inversions or ‘stratospheres’ on exoplanets require
specific atmospheric conditions, but leave strong signatures

2.1

High − T Emission

λ

Thermal Inversion P − T profile

Signatures of Thermal Inversions in Emission
Spectra

Despite the relatively modest spectral coverage, recent observations have been able to reveal stratospheres in a number of hot Jupiters (Haynes et al. 2015; Evans et al. 2017;
Sheppard et al. 2017). These dayside emission spectra are
well suited to characterise the pressure-temperature (P-T)
profile, and in particular determine whether the atmosphere
possesses a thermal inversion as the spectra are very strongly
dependant on the thermal gradient in the photosphere.
The strong influence on the observed spectrum means that
through instruments such as the HST WFC3 spectrograph,
tight constraints have been obtained for the temperature
gradient in the photosphere.
Thermal inversions leave a strong signature on the observed emission spectrum of the dayside of an exoplanet
(Fortney et al. 2008; Burrows et al. 2008; Madhusudhan
& Seager 2010). Consider a planet who’s temperature is
an isotherm. In this case, regardless of the location in the
atmosphere from which the emission occurs, the observed
spectrum will be that of a black body at the isothermal
temperature. However, if a temperature gradient is present
such that the temperature increases going outwards in the
atmosphere, emission features are formed in the emergent
spectrum. Some wavelengths will have greater opacity than
others, given that the molecular cross-sections of the constituent chemical species can vary by many orders of magnitude over the spectral range. Hence emission occurs from
different points in the atmosphere. Wavelengths with low
opacity will have flux emanating from lower down in the
atmosphere, where the temperature is cooler. On the contrary, wavelengths with greater opacity will only have emission occurring from the uppermost layers of the atmosphere.
There is a greater flux emitted in the regions of higher opacity, given that the temperature is higher here (see fig. 1).
Therefore the observed spectrum will have distinct emis-

Emission Features

Low − T Emission

on the emergent spectra. The spectral signatures allow us to
study stratospheres from observations of exoplanet spectra
and explore the chemical species which may be responsible.
In this section we will explore the theory of thermal inversions, from prominent species which can cause inversions
to the influence of volatile species such as H2 O. On Earth,
the thermal inversion is achieved through ozone, which absorbs the strong UV radiation incident from the Sun, thus
heating the upper layers of the atmosphere. Hot Jupiters
can exhibit thermal inversions with quite different chemistry
thanks to their high temperature and extreme irradiation.
In both cases however, the method through which thermal
inversions are achieved is the same, strong absorption of
the incident flux at shorter wavelengths of light, typically
UV/visible (∼0.4-1µm). The flux from the star is greatest in the visible part of the spectrum, and any absorber
with a strong visible cross section that is present in significant quantities will heat the upper atmosphere. This thermal inversion effects the thermal emission spectrum received
from the dayside atmosphere. Outlined below is the effect of
these stratospheres on the observed spectra. We then explore semi-analytic and full line-by-line radiative-convective
equilibrium models and their importance in predicting and
modelling inversions on exoplanet atmospheres.

Flux Ratio

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

log(P)

4

T
Figure 1. Schematic showing the effect of a thermal inversion
on the observed planet/star flux ratio. Lower regions in the atmosphere, where the temperature is cooler, are probed in opacity
windows, i.e. wavelengths with low opacity. At wavelengths where
molecular absorption is stronger, emission features occur due to
the flux being emitted from higher up in the atmosphere where
temperature is higher in the case of a thermal inversion (see section 2.1).

sion features resulting from the higher opacity wavelengths.
Thus emission features result from the presence of a thermal inversion. The strength of these features depend on the
abundance of the spectrally active species that causes them
in the emergent spectrum, and thus we can also constrain
the molecular mixing ratio of such spectrally active species.
Molecular features in the emergent spectra are often broad
and can cover a significant wavelength range (see fig. 3),
therefore can be constrained even with relatively low resolution observations (Kreidberg et al. 2014; Line et al. 2016).

2.2

Analytic Semi-Grey Model

Semi-analytic models of atmospheres can provide important
insights into the atmospheric processes that occur. In particular they can help understand the underlying principles of
thermal inversions in what are often complex atmospheres,
with a number of chemical species each with its own frequency dependant spectral features. To begin, we will consider the semi-grey analytic model by Guillot (2010). This
allows us to extract the dominant physics that determines
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters

10 -5

thermal inversions on exoplanets. From then, we can consider self-consistent equilibrium models to complete the picture and compare to the simple analytic model.
The semi-grey temperature profile at an optical depth
τ , for a planet with internal temperature Tint and irradiation
temperature Tirr is given by (Guillot 2010),

10 -4
10 -3

P/bar

3
2
3
2
µ
γ
µ
T = Tint 4 ( + τ ) + Tirr 4 µ( + + (
− )e−γτ /µ ),
4
3
4
3
γ
3µ
γ
(1)
4

Kvis =

1
2
1
2

Z

Ivis,µ dµ,

(2)

µ2 Ivis,µ dµ.

(3)

−1

For strongly irradiated planets, we can assume that the internal temperature is negligible compared to the irradiation
temperature, Tint  Tirr . For there to be an inversion in the
atmosphere, the temperature at small optical depth must
exceed that at high optical depth,
4

f≡

T (τ = 0)
≈
T (τ  1)4

γ
2
+ 3µ
3
2
+ µγ
3

> 1.

(4)

The denominator is determined at a high optical depth
(τ >> 1) but also below the penetration depth (τ < τpen ),
where the internal heat flux of the planet dominates over
the incident radiation flux. This typically occurs at Ppen &
100 − 103 bar (Gandhi & Madhusudhan 2017). Rearranging gives us a quadratic in γ. Hence the condition on the
atmospheric opacity ratio γ is
γ2
2
− (f − 1)γ − µ = 0,
3µ
3
p
γ = κvis /κir = µ(f − 1) + µ (f − 1)2 + 3.

(5)
(6)

Thus √
for a thermal inversion to take place (i.e f > 1),
γ > µ 3. Under the assumption of√isotropic incoming and
outgoing radiation, where µ ≈ 1/ 3 (Hubeny & Mihalas
2014), this becomes
γ = κvis /κir & 1.

(7)

Hence the visible opacity must exceed the infrared opacity
in order for a thermal inversion to occur in the atmosphere.
Higher infrared opacity thus requires a greater visible opacity in order to cause an inversion. The assumptions that have
gone into this analytic model should be emphasised here,
namely that the incident stellar flux is negligible in the infrared and that the planet’s own emission occurs primarily in
the infrared. The semi-grey model also assumes an outgoing
and an incident beam of radiation, the two-stream approximation, and that the opacity is not a function of wavelength
in the visible and the infrared. However, these results do
match well with full radiative-convective equilibrium models with layer-by-layer opacity calculations as discussed in
section 2.3 below.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

10 -1
10 1
10 2 1800

1

−1
Z 1

10 -2
10 0

where γ = κvis /κir denotes the ratio of visible to infrared
opacity. Here, τ refers to the monochromatic optical depth
of the atmosphere. µ2 = Kvis /Jvis is defined by the ratio of
moments of the specific intensity in the visible Ivis,µ ,

Jvis =

5

2000

2200

T/K

log(TiO) = − 8. 5
log(TiO) = − 8. 0
log(TiO) = − 7. 5
log(TiO) = − 7. 0
log(TiO) = − 6. 5

2400

2600

Figure 2. Effect of varying the TiO abundance on the equilibrium
P-T profile of a hot Jupiter. The P-T profiles are generated with
the GENESIS model of a hot Jupiter with equilibrium temperature of 2000 K and solar equilibrium abundances for the volatile
species. In this model we assume TiO is the sole source of the
visible opacity.

2.3

Self-Consistent Models

The semi-analytic grey model will now be compared against
our self-consistent atmospheric model GENESIS (Gandhi
& Madhusudhan 2017). This model includes full line-byline frequency dependent radiative transfer with radiativeconvective equilibrium. We will test how well the condition
for a thermal inversion from the semi-grey model holds given
a more complex atmosphere. The algorithm used to run
the equilibrium models uses the Feautrier radiative transfer
method with Rybicki’s linearisation scheme for temperature
correction, the full details of which can be found in Gandhi
& Madhusudhan (2017) and Hubeny (2017). This model
calculates the radiative-convective equilibrium atmospheric
profile which we can compare against the semi-grey model
to determine how much the frequency dependant molecular
opacity affects the P-T profile. For this work we have assumed the bottom boundary condition to be the diffusion
approximation. We investigated pressures of 100, 103 and
104 bar for the bottom of the atmosphere, but found no significant differences in the resultant equilibrium P-T profile
and emergent spectrum. This is because these pressures are
significantly below the photosphere and the internal heat
flux from the planet is significantly weaker than ambient
flux due to irradiation.
For illustration, we consider a hot Jupiter around a Sunlike star, with an equilibrium temperature of 2000K and a
cloud-free atmosphere. We assume the infrared opacity to be
contributed by the seven prominent volatile species, H2 O,
CH4 , NH3 , CO, CO2 , HCN and C2 H2 which are considered
to be in chemical equilibrium (Madhusudhan 2012; Heng
& Tsai 2016; Gandhi & Madhusudhan 2017). The visible
opacity is assumed to arise from TiO only. The choice of
this is two-fold: TiO has been observed in the visible under
transmission spectroscopy (Sedaghati et al. 2017) and has
been suggested as a candidate for thermal inversion in the
atmosphere of hot Jupiters because of its very strong visi-

6

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

ble cross-section (Hubeny et al. 2003; Fortney et al. 2008).
The TiO is assumed to be uniformly mixed throughout the
atmosphere and the atmospheric volume mixing fraction is
varied to alter the visible opacity as needed.
For the semi-grey model, we first need to obtain an estimate of the infrared and visible opacity of the atmosphere,
κir and κvis . This is done by summing the molecular crosssections of each of the chemical species, weighted by their
mixing fractions, and then integrating over frequency following Hubeny et al. (2003). The opacity from a species i is
given by
κν,i =

P
σi (ν),
kb T

(8)

where σi (ν) is the molecular cross section as a function of
frequency ν and kb is the Boltzmann constant. The molecular cross sections are computed over a broad spectral range
between 0.4-50µm. A representative temperature and pressure (Tp = 2000 K and P = 0.1 bar) were chosen to match
the conditions of the photosphere. The overall opacity in
the infrared is estimated through the Planck mean opacity
which for a species i is given by
R∞
κν,i Bν (Tp )dν
κIR,i = 0R ∞
.
(9)
Bν (Tp )dν
0
Here, the Planck function effectively weights the opacity κν,i
according to the emergent radiation to determine the overall infrared opacity. To determine the visible opacity for a
species j we use the absorption mean opacity for a solar type
star (Ts = 5700 K),
R∞
κν,j Bν (Ts )dν
.
(10)
κvis,j = 0R ∞
Bν (Ts )dν
0
The absorption mean weights the opacity with the stellar
Planck function to determine the effective absorption from
species with strong visible cross-sections which absorb the
incident star light which peaks in the visible. A further discussion of the absorption mean and Planck mean opacities
can be found in Hubeny et al. (2003). By equating κir to
κvis , we find the minimum required mixing fraction of TiO
for which an inversion occurs as
P
i κIR,i Xi
.
(11)
XTiO =
κvis,TiO
We calculate the mixing fractions Xi for each of the 7
volatile species at 2000K and 0.1 bar pressure in chemical
equilibrium assuming solar abundances. The κvis,TiO term
denotes the absorption mean opacity of TiO weighted with
a black body at Ts = 5700 K. We then find log(XTiO ) ≈
−7.0 for our model atmosphere. For a general species j with
strong absorption in the visible, the abundance required for
a certain P-T profile with a fixed γ ≡ κvis /κir is given by
P
κIR,i Xi
Xvis,j = γ i
.
(12)
κvis,j
Figure 2 shows the effect on the P-T profile of varying TiO throughout the atmosphere in the self-consistent
equilibrium model. The abundance is increased from
log(XTiO ) = −8.5 to −6.5, keeping the chemical composition of the volatile species fixed at solar composition. The
figure shows the P-T profile inverting as expected for a TiO
abundance remarkably close to log(XTiO ) = −7.0. This confirms that the semi-grey model gives a good estimate of the

opacity required for an inversion. We have also tested this
against the required abundance for a thermal inversion from
the semi-analytic model for a number of species and have
also found good agreement with GENESIS. Hence, we use
the semi-grey model to provide a good guide to estimate the
required abundance of species in order for thermal inversions
to occur (see table 2).
Figure 2 shows that the temperature at pressures .
0.1 bar increases as the abundance of TiO increases from
log(XTiO ) = −8.5 to −6.5. This is due to increased absorption of the incident radiation in the upper atmosphere. Consequently, a smaller fraction of the stellar flux penetrates
down into the deeper layers of the atmosphere, hence why
the atmosphere at P& 1 bar is cooler as the TiO abundance
is increased. Eventually at a TiO abundance of -6.5, the PT profile is dominated by the strong visible opacity, and
≈ 700K inversion is seen between the top and bottom of the
atmosphere. Throughout all of the variation of TiO abundance however, the region of the atmosphere near P∼ 0.1 bar
remains at a similar temperature. This is the photosphere
where we much of the emission occurs. Therefore, the temperature gradient in the photosphere is strongly affected by
the abundance of the TiO, even though the temperature here
may not vary too significantly at 0.1 bar.
The solar abundance of Ti is log(Tisolar ) ≈ −7.1, similar to that required for TiO to result in a thermal inversion. If we assume that most of the Ti will be in the form
of its oxide, then the atmospheric abundance is sufficient
at solar abundance to result in an inversion. However, we
observe a spread in hot Jupiters with thermal inversions,
which may be due to the differences in the chemical compositions of these planets. Other factors such as cold-trap
process (Beatty et al. 2017a) may also prevent thermal inversions occurring. Rain-out of TiO at temperatures below
∼ 2000K is also another important consideration (Spiegel
et al. 2009). TiO will only be in its gaseous form on the very
hottest of exoplanets, and may be a contributing factor as
to why some of the cooler hot Jupiters such as WASP-43b
(Kreidberg et al. 2014) and HD209458b (Line et al. 2016)
show non-inverted atmospheric temperature profiles.

3

EFFECT OF VISIBLE OPACITY ON
INVERSIONS

We will now investigate species other than the commonly
hypothesised TiO and VO which may lead to stratospheres.
Fig. 3 shows the molecular cross sections at 2000K and 0.1
bar for a number of metallic species generated with the
method of Gandhi & Madhusudhan (2017). These cross sections were computed using the line lists obtained from EXOMOL (Tennyson et al. 2016) with the pressure broadening
coefficients derived using the method in Sharp & Burrows
(2007). Fig. 3 shows the species which have strong visible
cross sections and are therefore able to affect the equilibrium
P-T profile of the atmosphere even at trace mixing ratios.
As we have already seen in the previous sections, TiO at
solar abundance is sufficient for a thermal inversion, even
lower than this amount is sufficient in some cases (see section 4). Therefore these species with strong visible opacity
are important in determining the P-T profile and hence the
emergent emission spectrum from the dayside atmosphere.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters

Molecular Cross Section /cm 2

3.1

10 -14

TiO
VO

10 -15

AlO
CaO

10 -16
10 -17
10 -18
10 -19
10 -20
10 -21
10 -220.4 0.5

0.7

NaH
MgH

1.0 1.2 1.5
λ/µm

2.0

Figure 3. Molecular cross sections of chemical species with strong
absorption cross sections in the visible. The cross sections were
calculated at representative conditions of 0.1 bar pressure and
2000K.

Table 2. Table showing the solar atomic log mixing ratio and
the required molecular log mixing ratios of each metallic species in
order to form a thermal inversion for various C/O ratios. The solar
atomic abundances were obtained from Asplund et al. (2009).
The required volume mixing ratios were determined from eqn. 12
and thermochemical equilibrium of the volatile infrared species at
2000K and 0.1 bar. In each model the species with strong visible
opacity was included by itself with no other visible absorbers
present.
Required log(Vol. Mixing Ratio)
Species
TiO
VO
AlO
CaO
NaH
MgH

Solar

C/O = 0.5

C/O = 1

C/O = 1.5

-7.1
-8.0
-5.6
-5.7
-5.8
-4.5

-7.0
-6.5
-5.9
-6.5
-6.2
-6.6

-9.2
-8.7
-8.2
-8.8
-8.5
-8.9

-7.5
-7.1
-6.5
-7.1
-6.9
-7.2

VO is another candidate often considered for a thermal inversion (Fortney et al. 2008; Spiegel et al. 2009). Like
TiO, VO is predicted to only be gaseous in hot Juptier atmospheres at temperatures exceeding ∼1800K. Table 2 shows
the required abundances for VO to result in a thermal inversion and the solar abundance of V (Asplund et al. 2009).
Only slightly super-solar abundance of VO is sufficient to
satisfy equation 7 and thus result in stratosphere. However,
any species with strong visible absorption is capable of causing thermal inversions on hot Jupiters if their abundance is
significant enough. By carefully studying the species from
their molecular line lists and cross sections, we are able to explore several new candidates for thermal inversions. In what
follows, we determine the abundances required for each of
these species to lead to an inversion for a range of model
atmospheres below.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

7

Other Sources of Visible Opacity

Strong molecular opacity can arise from a number of different species. As well as the well explored TiO and VO, AlO,
CaO, NaH and MgH all possess strong molecular spectral
features in the visible region of the spectrum as shown in fig.
3. These cross sections have been derived from the latest line
lists of each of these species (Patrascu et al. 2015; Yurchenko
et al. 2016; Rivlin et al. 2015; Yadin et al. 2012). They all
have distinct cross sections, but over the visible spectrum
they provide similar strong opacity. AlO has a peak cross
section near ∼0.5µm, and CaO has a peak nearer 1µm. Hydride species such as NaH and MgH also have strong enough
molecular cross sections to satisfy equation 7 at nearly solar abundance (see e.g Lothringer et al. 2018). We will now
model the effect of each of these new species on the model
atmosphere. As previously we will assume a planet with an
equilibrium temperature of 2000K and equilibrium volatile
chemistry.

3.2

Effects on Equilibrium Profile

We determined the required abundance for each of the
prominent species capable of causing thermal inversions.
This was done by first calculating the absorption mean opacities for the known metallic species with strong visible crosssections to determine κvis . We calculated the infrared opacity assuming equilibrium chemistry for the 7 volatile species.
We then equated the infrared and visible opacity to determine the required mixing fraction for an inversion, analogously with TiO in eqn. 11. Table 2 shows the required
abundances of each species to satisfy γ = 1 from the semianalytic model as well as their solar atomic abundances.
If we assume that all of the atomic species are present in
the form of their relevant molecule ( i.e., that the atom is
bound only to the relevant molecule), all four of the new
species, AlO, CaO, NaH and MgH are at or near the abundance required for an inversion at solar abundance. This is
because despite the overall lower mean molecular cross sections compared to TiO and VO, all of their respective atomic
abundances are higher than Ti or V.
Fig. 4 shows the effect of the metallic species on the
equilibrium P-T profile of the atmosphere. The models were
run with our GENESIS self-consistent radiative-convective
equilibrium model, assuming equilibrium chemical compositions for the volatile species at a C/O ratio of 0.5 (solar
value). As seen in the previous section, TiO results in an
inversion at 0.1 bar of ∼500K between the top and bottom
of the atmosphere at solar composition (left panel fig. 4). At
solar abundance, VO is not present in sufficient quantities
to lead to a thermal inversion, as per the prediction from
the semi-grey models (see table 2).
Of the new species at solar composition, AlO is at just
the abundance required for an inversion and thus we can see
the onset of the temperature inversion at pressures lower
than 10mbar on the left panel in figure 4. CaO shows a similar trend to TiO, with a similar P-T profile for the atmosphere and an inversion of ∼400K. The similar P-T profiles
for these two species is likely due to the similar molecular
cross sections, which show broad coverage over all of the visible spectrum (see fig. 3). NaH only shows very weak signs of
a thermal inversion at 1 bar, and the temperature profile is

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

P/bar

8

10

5

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

100
101

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

7.1
8.0
5.6
5.7
5.8
4.5

Solar Metallicity
C/O=0.5

vis/ ir = 10

C/O=0.5

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

6.0
5.5
4.9
5.5
5.2
5.6

2
101600
2000 2400 2800 3200 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400

T/K

T/K

Figure 4. Radiative equilibrium P-T profiles of model atmospheres with varying abundances of metallic species. The model assumes
a hot Jupiter with an equilibrium temperature of 2000K and a solar C/O ratio of 0.5. The left panel shows the effect of solar mixing
fractions for the inversion-causing refractory species. In the right panel, the abundances of the inversion-causing species are such that
the ratio of visible to infrared opacity was 10. The volatile species were assumed to be in chemical equilibrium with solar abundances,
and in each model the species was included in the atmosphere by itself with no other visible absorbers.

monotonically decreasing with height. The molecular abundance at solar composition is not quite sufficient to produce
a significant inversion as it is very near the critical abundance required. MgH on the other hand does show a strong
molecular cross section only up to 0.8µm in fig. 3 and therefore displays a significantly different P-T profile to TiO, VO
or CaO. MgH thus allow some of the stellar flux to penetrate
down to the deeper layers due to its lack of strong opacity
over all of the peak stellar flux range.
The right panel of fig. 4 shows the effect of altering the
mixing fraction of each of the metallic species through equation 12. The abundance of each of the species was adjusted
accordingly to maintain γ ≡ κvis /κir = 10 and therefore
result in a thermal inversion of similar extent for all of the
species. We now see similar equilibrium P-T profiles from all
of the species, however, the non-grey nature of the opacity
results in some differences. AlO and MgH show the inversion
occurring higher in the atmosphere (P ∼ 10−2 bar) and the
deepest layers being hotter than with the other species. This

can be traced to the molecular cross sections of these species
in fig. 3. Both MgH and AlO display strong cross sections
in the wavelength region near 0.5µm which drop away significantly nearer to the infrared. AlO displays a lower cross
section near 0.6µm and the cross section of MgH becomes
almost completely negligible above 0.8µm. This means that
unlike the other metallic species, there are opacity windows
in which the stellar irradiation is able to penetrate down to
the higher pressures. This in turn causes the deeper layers
of the atmosphere to heat up, hence why the temperature of
the deep atmosphere is the highest with these two species.
This also shifts the thermal inversion to higher in the atmosphere. The other metallic species (TiO, VO, CaO and
NaH) display strong cross sections throughout the visible region (<1µm) due to which the deepest layers of these model
atmosphere are left relatively cool.
Some equilibrium P-T profiles in fig. 4 also show small
non-inverted profiles near ∼ 1 bar before the inversion at
P. 0.1 bar in the atmosphere, particularly for species such
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters
as AlO. This dip in the P-T profile is contributed by the
variation in the value of γ ≡ κvis /κir as a function of pressure. We found that the overall value of γ decreases for pressures greater than 1 bar. This is primarily dominated by
the broadening of the molecular features, which result in a
change in the overall opacity. The broadening of the lighter
volatile species with pressure is greater than those of the
much more massive metallic species such as TiO and VO.
Thus at P∼ 1 bar the κir is often dominant over the visible opacity. At lower pressures, however, the metallic species
dominates the opacity, and thus γ > 1 at higher altitudes,
resulting in an inversion at pressures below 0.1 bar. In addition, species such as MgH and AlO have significant opacity windows (see fig. 3) where radiation flux can penetrate
deeper in the atmosphere (as discussed above) to heat these
layers just below the photosphere.
All of these species are capable of causing thermal inversions in hot Jupiters. At solar elemental abundance most
of the species are at or near the abundances required to form
inversions. It is quite likely that multiple such species may
contribute to the visible opacity and thus require lower abundances of each for an inversion. How much we expect of such
species in the atmospheres of hot Jupiters is an unknown,
given that as well as the chemical equilibrium, disequilibrium effects may act to enhance/diminish the abundance.
Another assumption here is that all of the nuclei of the relevant metal are bonded to the given molecule, which may
not be the case depending on the temperature and pressure
dependant chemical equilibrium of the atmosphere. For instance, the Mg may partially form Magnesium silicate clouds
in the atmosphere instead of MgH, thus reducing the overall
atmospheric abundance. Mixing from the night side and/or
upwelling from deeper in the atmosphere may also alter the
abundance. However, what we have been able to demonstrate here is that as well as TiO and VO, other species
are also capable of forming thermal inversions on the very
hottest extrasolar giant planets. We have also demonstrated
the effect of the individual species on the equilibrium P-T
profile, and how there is variation with the molecular cross
section of each species compared to the simple semi-grey
model seen in section 2.2. Our whole focus so far has been
on the visible opacity, κvis , but in section 4 we will explore
how the infrared opacity from the 7 volatile species can also
alter the P-T profile.
3.3

Inversions on Very Hot Planets

The temperature on hot Jupiters for these newer species to
exist in the gaseous phase is however very high, ∼2500K
(Sharp & Burrows 2007; Burrows 2009), and only the most
strongly irradiated exoplanets are going to have conditions
sufficient for them to remain in their gaseous form. Temperatures such as this have been observed for several systems, e.g WASP-33b and WASP-18b. We do observe thermal inversions in both of these systems (Haynes et al. 2015;
Sheppard et al. 2017). Recent observations of thermal emission from other very hot Jupiters equilibrium temperatures
greater than 2000K) has revealed some surprising insights
into the atmospheric temperature profile. Many of these extremely hot planets studied with WFC3 data show very few
spectral features. This indicates that the temperature may
be close to isothermal in these atmospheres. If this is the
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

9

case it would mean that the infrared opacity does equal the
visible opacity. This would be an important observation for
hot Jupiter atmospheres as it shows the visible opacity is significant for these exoplanets. Photodissociation of H2 O has
also been proposed at these high temperatures (Parmentier
et al. 2018). This would reduce the strength of spectral features in the infrared due to the loss of H2 O. In addition,
the formation of H- in the atmosphere may result in strong
visible opacity due to its cross section. This would act to
increase the strength and possibility of an inversion as it
would increase the overall visible to infrared opacity ratio
(Lothringer et al. 2018; Parmentier et al. 2018). Lothringer
et al. (2018) has proposed various candidate species (e.g. Fe,
Mg and SiO) which may provide sufficient visible opacity in
order to form thermal inversions in atmospheres of planets
such as KELT-9b, with an equilibrium temperature exceeding 4000K.
3.4

Inversions on Cooler Planets

Cooler hot Jupiters with equilibrium temperatures between
1000-2000K are less likely to have a thermal inversion from
the metallic species considered above. None of the species
considered here remain gaseous at these comparatively low
temperatures and therefore κvis remains lower than κir , preventing an inversion from occurring. However, other species
have been proposed which exist in the gaseous phase at temperatures below 2000K and which may have strong visible
cross sections. Zahnle et al. (2009) showed that at these
intermediate temperatures absorption from species such as
HS or S2 is sufficient to produce thermal inversions thanks
to their strong UV absorption. These species may however
photo-dissociate under strong irradiation (Knutson et al.
2010). Further exploration of the disequilibrium chemistry
may suggest the feasibility of thermal inversions by these
sulphur bearing species. Other proposed species capable of
thermal inversions at these intermediate temperatures include atomic Na and K (Mollière et al. 2015).

4

EFFECT OF INFRARED OPACITY

Variation of the infrared opacity, κir , can also alter γ such
that we can satisfy the inequality in equation 7. This is an
area that has not been explored in great detail, but the infrared opacity is just as significant in determining the conditions for thermal inversions as the visible. If κir is reduced
whilst holding κvis fixed, the visible opacity will eventually
exceed the infrared opacity. This will lead to thermal inversions in the photosphere without the need for high abundances for species with strong visible cross sections. We will
vary the infrared opacity in the atmosphere through the atmospheric C/O ratio. The motivation for this was two-fold.
Firstly, we may explore the variation in the infrared opacity using a single parameter and whilst maintaining chemical equilibrium for the volatile molecular species (see fig.
5). This allows us to explore the more complex parameter
space of these species and their chemical reactions without
having to use unphysical atmospheric parameters. Secondly,
the variation of the C/O ratio results in a very large variation
in the overall infrared opacity of the atmosphere, especially
due to the low H2 O abundance at C/O>1. Up to 3 orders

Volume Mixing Fraction

10

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
10 -8
10 -9
10 -100.1

0.3 0.50.7 1 1.5
C/O

3

5

H2 O
CH4
NH3
CO
HCN
CO2
C2 H2

10

Required Mixing Fraction

Figure 5. Equilibrium mixing ratios for the 7 volatile species
which have significant absorption in the infrared as a function of
the C/O ratio. This was calculated at a temperature of 2000K
and 0.1 bar pressure.

10

6

10

7

10

8

10

9

0.1

TiO
VO
AlO
CaO
NaH
MgH

4.2

0.3 0.5

1 1.5

C/O

3

5

10

Figure 6. Required molecular abundance for a thermal inversion for each of the metallic species as a function of the C/O
ratio. These were calculated assuming the semi-grey model such
that the visible opacity equals the infrared opacity. The model
atmosphere was assumed to have an equilibrium temperature of
2000K.

of magnitude difference can be achieved by varying the C/O
ratio by only a factor of ∼2 due to the very sharp change
in equilibrium chemistry near C/O∼1 (see fig. 5). Therefore we are able to significantly alter γ and thereby lead to
inversions with only relatively small changes in the atomic
abundances.

4.1

ratio at a temperature of 2000K and 0.1 bar pressure following Madhusudhan (2012). Low C/O ratios such as solar
values (∼0.54) are dominated by water vapour and CO. The
remaining species are only present in very small quantities,
with the exception being N2 , not shown in fig. 5 as it has
no significant spectroscopic signature. Increasing the C/O
ratio towards 1 increases the CO abundance linearly until
C/O>1, where it levels off given that its abundance is now
limited by the available oxygen. As there is now a dearth of
O, oxygen bearing species such as H2 O and CO2 are greatly
depleted in the atmosphere. On the other hand, carbon rich
species such as CH4 and C2 H2 are now enhanced in the atmosphere, as well as HCN. This change in the abundance by
several orders of magnitude results in a significant change to
the opacity.
The infrared opacity is most strongly influenced by
H2 O. The cross section for H2 O is stronger than the other
species and therefore the atmospheric H2 O abundance effects the κir the most strongly. Therefore, as the C/O ratio
is increased towards 1, the H2 O and thus the total infrared
opacity decreases as shown in fig. 5. This has previously been
explored in the work by Mollière et al. (2015). At a C/O ratio of 1, the most abundant species is CO. This therefore
greatly reduces the κvis required for a thermal inversion in
the atmosphere, i.e to satisfy equation 7. With C/O>1, the
volume mixing ratio of the carbon rich species now increases
and therefore κir increases accordingly. We explore the required abundances of the metallic species with a strong visible opacity to cause thermal inversions in the atmosphere
as a function of the C/O ratio.

Chemical Equilibrium of Volatile Species

The equilibrium chemical abundance of the volatile species
can vary by many orders of magnitude as the C/O ratio is altered. Fig. 5 shows the equilibrium abundance of H2 O, CH4 ,
NH3 , CO, CO2 , HCN and C2 H2 as a function of the C/O

Thermal Inversions with Super-Solar C/O
Ratio

As the C/O ratio is increased towards 1, the required visible
opacity in order to produce a thermal inversion decreases. As
a result, the required abundance for the species with strong
visible cross sections for thermally inverted photospheres is
reduced as shown in fig. 6. The lower infrared opacity means
a lower visible opacity is needed to satisfy equation 7. As
expected, TiO possesses the strongest opacity and therefore
the required abundance for an inversion is the least compared to the other species we consider in our study. The 4
new species, AlO, CaO, NaH and MgH all require ∼1.5-2
orders of magnitude higher abundance than the TiO due to
their weaker opacity.
What is uncertain however is the abundances of the
metallic species as the C/O ratio increases. As oxygen is
most likely in the CO, it unclear whether the oxygen bearing species such as TiO, VO, AlO and CaO would be present
in sufficient quantities. Equilibrium calculations have shown
that with a C/O ratio of 1, the abundances of TiO and VO
reduce by a factor of ∼100-1000 (Madhusudhan et al. 2011).
However, these species would not need to be at solar abundances to lead to inversions when the C/O ratio is 1. Fig.
6 and table 2 show the required molecular mixing fraction
of each species in order to invert the P-T profile as a function of the C/O ratio. To match the infrared opacity, these
species can be sub-solar and still lead to a thermal inversion.
Therefore regardless of the lower abundance TiO and VO
may still be capable of leading to thermal inversion on carbon rich planets. With a C/O ratio of 1 even atomic species
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters
such as Na/K are capable of producing thermal inversions
in the photosphere of hot Jupiters around some stars. A discussion of the Na/K opacity and its effect at C/O= 1 can
be found in Mollière et al. (2015). The required mixing fraction of all of the metallic species has dropped by a similar
quantity thanks to the lower infrared opacity.
Fig. 7 shows the effect of solar abundances and
κvis /κir = 10 on the P-T profile when the C/O ratio equals
1. The volatile molecular species are taken to be in chemical
equilibrium in each layer of the atmosphere. Now, in contrast
to fig. 4, all of the metallic species are abundant enough at
solar composition to lead to strong thermal inversions in the
photosphere (left side if fig. 7). This can be seen from both
fig. 6 and table 2. The visible opacity in the left panel is the
same as fig. 4, but the infrared opacity has now decreased
for a C/O ratio of unity. The overall κir has dropped as
the H2 O, which is the dominant source of opacity in the infrared, is now at a lower mixing fraction. With such little
infrared opacity, solar composition of species such as TiO
can lead to an inversion with ∆T of over 1000K. Therefore,
should it be the case that high C/O atmospheres still have
some visible opacity sources, we may expect that thermal
inversions are more likely at C/O∼1, even when the abundances of visible opacity sources are significantly sub-solar.
The condition κvis /κir = 10 requires ∼ 1 dex lower mixing
fraction for all of the metallic species than solar, such is the
weakness of κir when C/O=1. The profiles agree well with
each other here, with the temperature in the deeper atmosphere (> 0.1bar) very similar for all of the metallic species.
Once again though the AlO leads to an inversion at a higher
point in the atmosphere than the other species, most likely
caused by its lower visible cross section.
As the C/O ratio is increased to 1.5 the infrared opacity
remains relatively low. Table 2 and figure 6 show that the required abundance for a thermal inversion has increased but
is still well below that for a solar C/O ratio. The dominant
source of the infrared opacity is now species such as CH4
and C2 H2 which can be highly abundant in such carbonrich atmospheres (Madhusudhan et al. 2011), as shown in
fig. 5. All of the species at solar abundance are still capable
of leading to thermal inversions in the left hand panel of fig.
8. All of the species are within 1 dex of the mixing fraction
required to satisfy κvis /κir = 10, therefore both sides of fig.
8 shows similar P-T profiles. It is interesting to note that
despite varying the C/O ratios which leads to κir varying by
many orders of magnitude, thermal inversions always form
in the photosphere near P= 0.1 bar. It should also be noted
that when the C/O ratio exceeds 1, other larger hydrocarbon
molecules not included here may also form in the atmosphere
with significant opacity both in the infrared and possibly the
visible and thus affect the inversions. With these detailed atmospheric models we will now model a planet with a known
thermal inversion, WASP-121b (Evans et al. 2017).

5

CASE STUDY: HOT JUPITER WASP-121B

WASP-121b is a hot Jupiter with a radius of ∼1.7RJ orbiting an F6 star with an equilibrium temperature of ∼2300K.
Emission spectroscopy of this planet has shown the presence of a thermal inversion from HST WFC3 observations
(Evans et al. 2017). Transmission and emission spectra have
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

11

also shown evidence for TiO/VO in the atmosphere of this
planet (Evans et al. 2016, 2017). This makes the exoplanet a
good candidate to study thermal inversions and investigate
the species responsible. We model WASP-121b for a C/O ratio of 0.5 and 1 with all of the 6 species we have considered
thus far that are capable of leading to a thermal inversion.
The abundances are set such that the thermal emission spectra most closely resemble the observations.
Fig. 9 shows the equilibrium P-T profiles for a range
of metallic species for each C/O ratio for WASP-121b. The
presence of the inversion affects the corresponding spectra in
fig. 10 as evident in the emission features. These are clearly
visible with all of the species considered, as discussed in
section 2.1. The required abundances to match the observed
spectrum are within .1 dex of solar for all of the species
for the C/O=0.5 case (see left panel of fig. 9 and fig. 10). A
C/O ratio of 0.5 also requires a higher abundance of metallic
species thanks to the greater infrared opacity due to the
H2 O content of the atmosphere. As was the case previously,
a C/O ratio of 1 reduces the abundances needed for each
of the metallic species and therefore sub-solar abundances
are sufficient to produce the observed thermal inversion. The
required mixing fraction in order to cause an inversion has
dropped by ∼1.5 dex below that required for a solar C/O
ratio. With the C/O ratio of 1, the lack of water vapour or
any other strongly IR active species means a lower κir and
therefore a lower κvis is required for a thermal inversion.
The features of H2 O are more prominent on the left
panel of fig. 10 and thus provide a stronger spectral feature
in the HST WFC3 range compared to the right panel with
C/O=1. The spectra follow the observations closer with a
C/O ratio of 0.5 than the C/O=1 case, as the H2 O emission
features are clearly seen in the WFC3 observations. Nevertheless, regardless of the C/O ratio of the atmosphere, we
are still able to produce an inversion over both the C/O
ratios considered here that matches the observed emission
spectrum.
We are able to model the thermal inversion on WASP121b with 4 new species, AlO, CaO, NaH and MgH along
with the well studied TiO and VO. From the GENESIS
model we have been able to reproduce the observed emission spectrum for all of the species in radiative-convective
equilibrium (fig. 10). As we have no observations beyond
the near infrared, we are unable to further constrain the
refractory species responsible for this inversion. Transmission spectroscopy in the optical can further investigate which
metallic species are likely to be present in the atmosphere
given that they all have strong and unique spectral features
below 1µm.

6

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The goal of this work is to characterise the nature of thermal
inversions in hot Jupiters and the molecular species which allow thermal inversions to occur. We explored semi-analytic
and line-by-line radiative equilibrium models with a number of species thus far not explored and determined 4 new
species which are capable of leading to thermal inversions in
hot Jupiter atmospheres. We also explored the effect of varying the infrared opacity through the C/O ratio and found
that a C/O ratio of 1 results in inversions with the lowest re-

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

P/bar

12

10

5

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

100
101

Solar Metallicity
C/O=1
log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

7.1
8.0
5.6
5.7
5.8
4.5

vis/ ir = 10

C/O=1

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

8.2
7.7
7.2
7.8
7.5
7.9

2
101600
1900 2200 2500 2800 3100 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400

T/K

T/K

Figure 7. Radiative equilibrium P-T profiles of model atmospheres with varying abundances of metallic species for C/O = 1. The
model assumes a hot Jupiter with an equilibrium temperature of 2000K. The left panel shows the effect of solar mixing fractions of the
metallic species, and the right panel shows the abundances such that the ratio of visible to infrared opacity was 10. The volatile species
were assumed to be in chemical equilibrium at C/O = 1, and in each model the species was included in the atmosphere by itself with no
other visible absorbers.

quired abundance of metallic species. With this exploration
of the parameter space for thermal inversions we compared
our findings with WASP-121b, a planet known to have a
thermal inversion and which shows evidence for TiO and/or
VO (Evans et al. 2016, 2017).
As well as the well established TiO and VO (Fortney
et al. 2008; Spiegel et al. 2009), we found that AlO, CaO,
NaH and MgH may also be present in significant enough
quantities in order to cause thermal inversions in extrasolar giant planets. Each of these species is capable of causing
thermal inversions at or near their solar atomic abundance.
We explored the effects of varying their abundance from solar composition (Asplund et al. 2009) to κvis /κir = 10 for
a number of different C/O ratios. For each of the metallic
species we also obtain the required mixing fraction in order to produce a thermal inversion on a hot Jupiter with
an equilibrium temperature of 2000K. These new molecules
open up a new avenue to explain thermal inversions in hot
Jupiter atmospheres.

Whilst many of these species are capable of causing
thermal inversions, there are some caveats and simplifications in our models which we should emphasise. Given their
refractory nature, these new species AlO, CaO, NaH and
MgH require very high temperatures (>2000K) to be present
in the gas phase (Sharp & Burrows 2007; Woitke et al.
2018). Therefore, very strongly irradiated atmospheres are
required for these species to be present in significant quantities to cause thermal inversions. Such temperatures have
been seen for a handful of exoplanets (Haynes et al. 2015;
Cartier et al. 2017; Evans et al. 2017; Sheppard et al. 2017;
Beatty et al. 2017a), but many hot Jupiters may be too cool
for these species (Kreidberg et al. 2014; Crouzet et al. 2014;
Line et al. 2016). This is also consistent with the fact that
thermal inversions have been inferred in only the hottest of
hot Jupiters (Haynes et al. 2015; Evans et al. 2017; Sheppard et al. 2017). Photodissociation of species such as H2 O
(Parmentier et al. 2018) has not been included here, and
this may play an important role in determining the overall

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

P/bar

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters

10

5

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

100
101

Solar Metallicity
C/O=1.5
log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

7.1
8.0
5.6
5.7
5.8
4.5

13

vis/ ir = 10

C/O=1.5

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

6.5
6.1
5.5
6.1
5.9
6.2

2
101600
2000 2400 2800 3200 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400

T/K

T/K

Figure 8. Radiative equilibrium P-T profiles of model atmospheres with varying abundances of metallic species for C/O = 1.5. The
model assumes a hot Jupiter with an equilibrium temperature of 2000K. The left panel shows the effect of solar mixing fractions of the
metallic species, and the right panel shows the abundances such that the ratio of visible to infrared opacity was 10. The volatile species
were assumed to be in chemical equilibrium at C/O = 1.5, and in each model the species was included in the atmosphere by itself with
no other visible absorbers.

κir on such high temperature planets. Another important
consideration is that we have not explored how equilibrium
chemistry affects these metallic species. We assume that the
atomic abundance of each of these metallic species is equal
to the molecular abundance (i.e. that all of the atoms are
bound to the relevant species) but this can be significantly
lower for some molecules. Species such as Na have already
been observed in hot Jupiters, and thus NaH may not be
present at or near its solar atomic abundance in the atmosphere. However, observations of these systems may be able
to constrain some of the species to determine how well each
is able to cause an inversion.
Optical transmission spectra of such hot Jupiters may
provide key insights into the possible metallic species which
result in thermal inversions and their atmospheric abundances. Each of these metallic species has a strong opacity at
visible wavelengths, with a unique molecular cross section,
as shown in fig. 3. As such these species are observable with
optical transmission spectra. We now have high precision
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

and resolution transmission spectra for a number of planets
(Nikolov et al. 2014; Wyttenbach et al. 2015; Chen et al.
2018), with some even showing evidence for TiO (Sedaghati
et al. 2017). With future instruments such as JWST we will
be able to obtain even higher precision data down to a wavelength of 0.6µm, where all of these species possess a strong
cross section.
We have also explored variation in the infrared opacity,
κir , through the C/O ratio. This has been largely ignored
until now, but the influence of the infrared active species
on thermal inversions is a key step towards understanding
the physical processes and emergent spectra. The change in
the C/O ratio can result in significant changes in the atmospheric abundance of the volatile species (e.g. Madhusudhan
2012; Moses et al. 2013) and thus κir . We found that the
required mixing fraction for a thermal inversion for all of
the relevant metallic species decreased as we increased the
C/O ratio. The lowest infrared opacity and thus the lowest required mixing fraction of a metal species for a thermal

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

P/bar

14

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

100

WASP 121b
C/O=0.5

WASP 121b
C/O=1

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =

101
2
102400

2800

T/K

8.0
7.5
5.0
5.8
6.6
5.5

3200

2800

3200

T/K

9.5
9.0
7.8
7.3
8.0
7.0

3600

Figure 9. Radiative-convective equilibrium P-T profiles for the planet WASP-121b for a C/O ratio of 0.5 (left) and 1 (right) that most
closely match the observed spectrum. In each model the species was included in the atmosphere by itself with no other visible absorbers.

inversion was when the C/O ratio was close to unity. At
these C/O ratios, the infrared opacity is dominated at such
high temperatures by CO, which has only a small molecular cross section. The H2 O abundance is low when C/O=1
(log(H2 O) < 10−5 ), and thus there is no significant opacity
from water vapour, which possesses the dominant molecular cross section of all of the infrared volatile species. This
means that in order to satisfy κvis > κir we require a lower
visible opacity compared to the C/O = 0.5 case.
The C/O ratio is likely to strongly affect the abundance
of the metallic species, and we should expect the atmosphere
to be greatly depleted particularly of oxygen rich species
such as TiO, VO, AlO and CaO. For instance, TiO and
VO have their abundance reduced by between 2-3 orders of
magnitude when the C/O ratio is 1 compared to their solar
abundance (Madhusudhan et al. 2011). However, the H2 O
abundance and thus the overall infrared opacity falls by a
similar amount. Therefore the required molecular abundance
for an inversion-causing metallic species also drops by over 2
orders of magnitude from its solar abundance. A log mixing
fraction as low as -10 for species such as TiO is sufficient to
satisfy equation 7 and as shown in fig. 6. This means that

atmospheres which have a C/O≈ 1 may be just as likely to
have a thermal inversion even if the visible absorbers are
present in significantly sub-solar quantities. This also means
that weaker visible absorbers such as Na and K can also
affect the inversion (Mollière et al. 2015).
We modelled the thermal inversions on WASP-121b
(Evans et al. 2017), a hot Jupiter observed to have a thermal inversion in the retrieved emission spectrum. We modelled all of the metallic species that are capable of leading
to thermal inversions and found the abundances that are required to produce a thermal inversion for both C/O=0.5 and
C/O=1. We found that we are able to match the observed
emission spectrum with every species over both C/O ratios,
as shown in figs. 9 and 10.
Inversions on planetary systems throughout the solar
system are common despite the compositional range of the
planets that are present, and strongly irradiated hot Jupiters
are ideal laboratories to study such inversions. They have
strong spectral signatures, and even with current facilities
we can obtain high resolution and high precision spectra
from their dayside. Studying how and why these planets
possess thermal inversions can not only tell us about the
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

New Avenues for Thermal Inversions in hot Jupiters

6 ×10 3

Flux Ratio

5
4
3

log(TiO) =
log(VO) =
log(AlO) =
log(CaO) =
log(NaH) =
log(MgH) =
Data

8.0
7.5
5.0
5.8
6.6
5.5

log(TiO) = 9.5
log(VO) = 9.0
log(AlO) = 7.8
log(CaO) = 7.3
log(NaH) = 8.0
log(MgH) = 7.0
Data

WASP 121b
C/O=0.5

2

15

WASP 121b
C/O=1

1
1

1.5

2

3

/m

4

5

6 7 8

1

1.5

2

3

/m

4

5

6 7 8

10

Figure 10. Planet/star flux ratios for the radiative-convective equilibrium models of WASP-121b for a C/O ratio of 0.5 (left) and 1
(right). The green points indicate the Hubble WFC3 and Spitzer photometric observations. The corresponding P-T profiles are shown
in fig. 9.

landscape of the hot Jupiter systems and their chemistry,
but also provide key insights into the formation mechanisms
of such planets. This is particularly so given the strong effect the C/O ratio has on the overall infrared opacity and
thus the likelihood for an inversion. With current and future instrumentation such as the VLT and JWST we can
probe in even more detail the chemical structure and temperature profile of such atmospheres and learn more about
the processes that occur on such systems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
SG and NM acknowledge financial support from the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC), UK. We
thank Ivan Hubeny for the very valuable comments on the
manuscript.

REFERENCES
Arcangeli J., et al., 2018, ApJ, 855, L30
Asplund M., Grevesse N., Sauval A. J., Scott P., 2009, ARA&A,
47, 481
Beatty T. G., Madhusudhan N., Tsiaras A., Zhao M., Gilliland
R. L., Knutson H. A., Shporer A., Wright J. T., 2017a, AJ,
154, 158
Beatty T. G., Madhusudhan N., Pogge R., Chung S. M., Bierlya
A., Gaudi B. S., Latham D. W., 2017b, AJ, 154, 242
Birkby J. L., de Kok R. J., Brogi M., de Mooij E. J. W., Schwarz
H., Albrecht S., Snellen I. A. G., 2013, MNRAS, 436, L35
Burrows A., 2009, in Henning T., Grün E., Steinacker J., eds,
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series Vol. 414,
Cosmic Dust - Near and Far. p. 115 (arXiv:0902.1777)
Burrows A., Hubeny I., Budaj J., Knutson H. A., Charbonneau
D., 2007, ApJ, 668, L171
Burrows A., Budaj J., Hubeny I., 2008, ApJ, 678, 1436
Cartier K. M. S., et al., 2017, AJ, 153, 34
Chen G., et al., 2018, A&A, 616, A145
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Crouzet N., McCullough P. R., Deming D., Madhusudhan N.,
2014, ApJ, 795, 166
Deming D., et al., 2013, ApJ, 774, 95
Diamond-Lowe H., Stevenson K. B., Bean J. L., Line M. R., Fortney J. J., 2014, ApJ, 796, 66
Espinoza N., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 482, 2065
Evans T. M., et al., 2016, ApJ, 822, L4
Evans T. M., et al., 2017, Nature, 548, 58
Fortney J. J., Lodders K., Marley M. S., Freedman R. S., 2008,
APJ, 678, 1419
Gandhi S., Madhusudhan N., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 2334
Guillot T., 2010, A&A, 520, A27
Hansen B. M. S., 2008, ApJS, 179, 484
Haynes K., Mandell A. M., Madhusudhan N., Deming D., Knutson H., 2015, ApJ, 806, 146
Heng K., Tsai S.-M., 2016, ApJ, 829, 104
Hill C., Yurchenko S. N., Tennyson J., 2013, Icarus, 226, 1673
Hubeny I., 2017, MNRAS, 469, 841
Hubeny I., Mihalas D., 2014, Theory of Stellar Atmospheres
Hubeny I., Burrows A., Sudarsky D., 2003, ApJ, 594, 1011
Knutson H. A., Charbonneau D., Allen L. E., Burrows A.,
Megeath S. T., 2008, ApJ, 673, 526
Knutson H. A., Charbonneau D., Burrows A., O’Donovan F. T.,
Mandushev G., 2009, ApJ, 691, 866
Knutson H. A., Howard A. W., Isaacson H., 2010, ApJ, 720, 1569
Konopacky Q. M., Barman T. S., Macintosh B. A., Marois C.,
2013, Science, 339, 1398
Kreidberg L., et al., 2014, ApJ, 793, L27
Kreidberg L., et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 17
Line M. R., et al., 2016, AJ, 152, 203
Lothringer J. D., Barman T., Koskinen T., 2018, ApJ, 866, 27
Macintosh B., et al., 2015, Science, 350, 64
Madhusudhan N., 2012, ApJ, 758, 36
Madhusudhan N., Seager S., 2010, ApJ, 725, 261
Madhusudhan N., Mousis O., Johnson T. V., Lunine J. I., 2011,
ApJ, 743, 191
Madhusudhan N., Knutson H., Fortney J. J., Barman T., 2014a,
Protostars and Planets VI, pp 739–762
Madhusudhan N., Crouzet N., McCullough P. R., Deming D.,
Hedges C., 2014b, ApJ, 791, L9

16

Gandhi & Madhusudhan

Madhusudhan N., Agúndez M., Moses J. I., Hu Y., 2016, Space
Sci. Rev., 205, 285
McKemmish L. K., Yurchenko S. N., Tennyson J., 2016, MNRAS,
463, 771
Menou K., 2012, ApJ, 754, L9
Mollière P., van Boekel R., Dullemond C., Henning T., Mordasini
C., 2015, ApJ, 813, 47
Moses J. I., Madhusudhan N., Visscher C., Freedman R. S., 2013,
ApJ, 763, 25
Nikolov N., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 437, 46
Nugroho S. K., Kawahara H., Masuda K., Hirano T., Kotani T.,
Tajitsu A., 2017, AJ, 154, 221
Parmentier V., et al., 2018, A&A, 617, A110
Patrascu A. T., Yurchenko S. N., Tennyson J., 2015, MNRAS,
449, 3613
Rivlin T., Lodi L., Yurchenko S. N., Tennyson J., Le Roy R. J.,
2015, MNRAS, 451, 634
Sedaghati E., et al., 2017, Nature, 549, 238
Sharp C. M., Burrows A., 2007, ApJS, 168, 140
Sheppard K. B., Mandell A. M., Tamburo P., Gandhi S., Pinhas
A., Madhusudhan N., Deming D., 2017, ApJ, 850, L32
Sing D. K., et al., 2016, Nature, 529, 59
Snellen I. A. G., de Kok R. J., de Mooij E. J. W., Albrecht S.,
2010, Nature, 465, 1049
Spiegel D. S., Silverio K., Burrows A., 2009, ApJ, 699, 1487
Tennyson J., et al., 2016, Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy, 327,
73
Woitke P., Helling, Ch. Hunter, G. H. Millard, J. D. Turner, G.
E. Worters, M. Blecic, J. Stock, J. W. 2018, A&A, 614, A1
Wyttenbach A., Ehrenreich D., Lovis C., Udry S., Pepe F., 2015,
A&A, 577, A62
Yadin B., Veness T., Conti P., Hill C., Yurchenko S. N., Tennyson
J., 2012, MNRAS, 425, 34
Yurchenko S. N., Blissett A., Asari U., Vasilios M., Hill C., Tennyson J., 2016, MNRAS, 456, 4524
Zahnle K., Marley M. S., Freedman R. S., Lodders K., Fortney
J. J., 2009, ApJ, 701, L20
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

