Generated using the official AMS LATEX template—two-column layout. FOR AUTHOR USE ONLY, NOT FOR SUBMISSION!
JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

Surface expression of a wall fountain: application to subglacial discharge plumes

arXiv:1903.10624v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 2 Mar 2020

C RAIG D. M C C ONNOCHIE∗
Department of Civil and Natural Resources Engineering, The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand

C LAUDIA C ENEDESE
Physical Oceanography Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA, USA
J IM N. M C E LWAINE
Department of Earth Sciences, University of Durham, Durham, UK
Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA
ABSTRACT
We use laboratory experiments and theoretical modeling to investigate the surface expression of a subglacial
discharge plume, as occurs at many fjords around Greenland. The experiments consider a fountain that is
released vertically into a homogeneous fluid, adjacent either to a vertical or a sloping wall, that then spreads
horizontally at the free surface before sinking back to the bottom. We present a model that separates the
fountain into two separate regions: a vertical fountain and a horizontal, negatively buoyant jet. The model
is compared to laboratory experiments that are conducted over a range of volume fluxes, density differences,
and ambient fluid depths. It is shown that the non-dimensionalised length, width, and aspect ratio of the
surface expression are dependent on the Froude number, calculated at the start of the negatively buoyant jet.
The model is applied to observations of the surface expression from a Greenland subglacial discharge plume.
In the case where the discharge plume reaches the surface with negative buoyancy the model can be used to
estimate the discharge properties at the base of the glacier.

1. Introduction

ranging from relatively confined point sources to extended
line sources (Jackson et al., 2017). The fresh (≈ 0 g/kg)
and cold (≈ 0o C) meltwater is lighter than the surrounding fluid and forms a turbulent plume that rises up the ice
face entraining relatively warm and salty water from the
fjord. The entrained fjord water rapidly mixes throughout
the plume, enhances the transport of heat and salt to the
ice boundary and drives rapid melting, as demonstrated in
laboratory experiments by McConnochie and Kerr (2017)
and Cenedese and Gatto (2016). Here we focus on glaciers
that have vertical or near-vertical termini as opposed to
glaciers with a near-horizontal floating ice shelf or ice
tongue. With this focus, it is typically assumed that the
ice face near subglacial plumes is vertical although recent
observations have suggested that the ice face can be undercut (Fried et al., 2015).
Greenland fjords typically have an approximately twolayer stratification (Straneo et al., 2011, 2012). Due to
this density stratification, subglacial plumes often rise to a
level where they are denser than the ambient fluid. At this
point, the flow is best described as a fountain that rises
due to its momentum but decelerates due to its buoyancy.
The flow continues to entrain relatively warm and salty
water from the fjord but instead of accelerating it begins

The mass loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets is an increasingly significant component of global
sea level rise (e.g. Chambers et al., 2017). Interactions between the polar oceans and the ice sheets are an important
control on the rate of glacier melting, but are not fully understood (Straneo and Cenedese, 2015). An area of recent
focus has been the subglacial discharge plumes that are
released at the base of Greenland glaciers and that have
been linked to elevated melt-rates (e.g. Slater et al., 2016;
Carroll et al., 2015; Straneo and Cenedese, 2015).
These subglacial discharge plumes originate from surface melting of the ice sheet. The meltwater then flows to
the base of the ice sheet where it travels underneath the ice
through a complex network of channels. Eventually, the
meltwater is released into the fjord at the grounding line —
the location where the ice sheet becomes afloat. There is
currently a high degree of uncertainty regarding the geometry of the subglacial discharge sources with possibilities

∗ Corresponding author address: Craig Mcconnochie, Department
of Civil and Natural Resources Engineering, The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
E-mail: craig.mcconnochie@canterbury.ac.nz

Generated using v4.3.2 of the AMS LATEX template

1

2

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

to decelerate. Throughout this paper we typically use the
term plume to describe the general flow resulting from the
subglacial discharge of meltwater and the term fountain to
describe the specific part of the flow containing upward
vertical momentum and downward buoyancy. After rising
vertically, the meltwater plume can either intrude horizontally into the ambient stratification at mid-depth if its density is higher than the upper layer, propagate away from
the ice at the free surface if its density is lower than the upper layer, or reach the free surface due to excessive vertical
momentum before sinking back down to a level of neutral
buoyancy (Beaird et al., 2015; Cenedese and Gatto, 2016;
Mankoff et al., 2016; Sciascia et al., 2013).
In this study we focus on the third scenario where the
meltwater rises through the upper layer as a fountain and
then sinks. In contrast to canonical fountains in semiinfinite environments where the flow rises until it has zero
vertical momentum and then falls back around the rising
fluid to a level of neutral buoyancy (Hunt and Burridge,
2015), we focus here on flows that reach the free surface
with significant vertical momentum. This causes the fluid
to spread horizontally at the surface for some distance before sinking to a level of neutral buoyancy. Since the subglacial discharge is typically highly turbid, it is often visible as a pool of sediment-laden fluid at the free surface
(e.g. How et al., 2017; Mankoff et al., 2016). Although
the suspended sediment could have important dynamical
effects on the plume and the surface pool, throughout this
study we will assume that it is carried as a passive tracer.
Mankoff et al. (2016) photographed a well defined region of turbid fluid in front of Saqqarliup Sermia, Greenland, that was interpreted as a subglacial discharge pool.
The pool was triangular in shape, approximately 300 m
wide at the glacier face and stretched 300 m away from the
glacier. Considering that subglacial discharge plumes are
typically assumed to be semi-circular (Slater et al., 2016;
Mankoff et al., 2016), the triangular shape is somewhat
surprising and as yet, has not been explained.
There are several possible explanations for the triangular shaped surface expression such as a sloping glacier
face, a secondary circulation induced by the narrow fjord,
and increased melting induced by the plume itself leading
to an incised glacier face that redirects the surface outflow. In this paper we use a set of laboratory experiments
to investigate several controlling mechanisms on the surface expression of subglacial discharge plumes which we
model as a fountain, next to a wall, that reaches the free
surface. We consider a fountain rather than a plume as
we are interested in a flow that will reach the free surface,
spread for some distance and then sink. By considering a
fountain we effectively limit the investigation to the region
where the flow is above its level of neutral buoyancy.
Although both the vertical plume (e.g. Slater et al.,
2016) and horizontal intrusion (e.g. Jackson et al., 2017)
have been extensively studied, much less attention has

been given to how the flow transitions from vertical to
horizontal. This transition is important not just for determining the size of the surface expression, but also for
understanding how to force the boundary of fjord-scale
models (e.g. Cowton et al., 2015; Carroll et al., 2015). As
such, although this study is primarily focused on the size
of the surface expression, it will also offer insight into how
the subglacial discharge flow transitions from vertical to
horizontal which has broader implications for Greenland
fjords.
Turbulent fountains have been extensively studied in the
past (see Hunt and Burridge, 2015). Many of the previous
studies have examined the entrainment of ambient fluid
into an axisymmetric fountain (e.g. Burridge and Hunt,
2016; Bloomfield and Kerr, 1998). Although turbulent
fountains and turbulent plumes are governed by approximately the same force balance, entrainment into fountains is significantly more complex due to the potential reentrainment of sinking fluid into the rising fountain. The
problem of a fountain adjacent to a wall has also been of
interest to many authors given its applicability to building
fires and enclosed convection (e.g. Goldman and Jaluria,
1986; Kapoor and Jaluria, 1989; Kaye and Hunt, 2007).
Despite the previous work on turbulent fountains, there
are features of subglacial discharge fountains that have
not been fully studied. First, much of the previous work
on wall fountains has focused on two-dimensional flows
whereas we are interested in wall fountains generated from
a point source. In addition, subglacial discharge fountains
reach the free surface with a significant vertical momentum that causes them to spread horizontally before sinking. As such the upward and downward flows can be spatially separated, causing the horizontal flow field at the
free surface to be important to the overall dynamics. As
well as the applicability to subglacial discharge surface
expressions, understanding this surface flow could be important in a variety of similar problems as it will control
where the source fluid will come to rest and how much
entrainment of ambient fluid will occur.
From the definition of a fountain given in Hunt and
Burridge (2015), the fact that the sinking fluid is not reentrained into the rising flow would suggest that the considered situation is not in fact a fountain but is a vertical, negatively buoyant jet. However, we retain the term
fountain for simplicity and to clarify that the rising flow
is denser than the surrounding fluid, unlike what would be
expected for a plume.
The purpose of this paper is to investigate some of the
physical processes that could control the dimensions and
shape of the surface expression of a subglacial discharge
plume. Our hypothesis is that if the processes controlling
the surface expression are well understood, then the subglacial discharge properties could be inferred from visual
observations of the fjord surface.

3

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

In §2 we present a theoretical model of the fountain that
results from a subglacial discharge plume and of its surface expression. In §3 we describe the experimental apparatus. §4 and §5 give the experimental results and comparisons with predictions from the theoretical model. Finally
in §6 we apply the model to the observations of a surface
pool described in Mankoff et al. (2016) and attempt to infer the sub-surface properties of the plume.
2. Theory
We consider a scenario similar to that occurring at the
Greenland glacier fronts where floating ice shelves are not
present: the steady and vertical release of freshwater, from
a single point source located next to a wall, into a relatively
deep (many source radii) two-layer stratification. The release of freshwater will produce buoyant fluid that is often modelled as a semi-circular plume (Slater et al., 2016;
Mankoff et al., 2016). Although the source of the freshwater discharge is likely to have some horizontal momentum
in the geophysical case, it is common to model the discharge as a purely vertical flow as the length scale whereby
the discharge attaches to the wall is typically much smaller
than the total water depth (e.g. Cowton et al., 2015; Xu
et al., 2013).
To produce a surface expression of the plume that is
denser than the upper layer, we set the ambient density
profile and subglacial discharge characteristics such that
the plume is initially positively buoyant but, due to entrainment of the lower layer fluid, it becomes more dense
than the upper layer. However, the vertical momentum
at the interface between the lower and upper layers is
assumed to be sufficient that the plume will rise to the
free surface and spread horizontally for some distance before sinking back to the interface depth. This is shown
schematically in figure 1.
The flow can be considered in two separate regions:
first, a vertical flow next to the wall and second, a horizontal negatively buoyant jet that is generated at the free
surface. These regions are shown on figure 1 and shall be
referred to as “region 1” and “region 2”. As the flow transitions from the first to the second region we assume that
all vertical momentum is converted to horizontal momentum. In the appendix we show how the vertical momentum
is converted into horizontal momentum in the transition region. Details of the two separate regions and the transition
are described below.
To simplify the experiments (§3), we will ignore the
positively buoyant plume in the lower layer and consider a
dynamically equivalent system only comprising the lighter
upper layer. The initial discharge in the simplified system
is equivalent to the plume at the density interface in the full
geophysical system. The experimental system is shown as
the unhatched region in figure 1. In the following section
we consider only the simplified system but note that the

F IG . 1. Schematic showing the flow being considered. Relatively
fresh fluid is released into a two-layer stratification with upper layer
density ρu and lower layer density ρl . Labels 1, 2, and T show the two
regions of the flow and the transition from vertical to horizontal flow.
The experiments only consider the upper (unhatched) layer. Therefore
the interface between the two density layers on this figure is the base of
the experimental tank. sy shows the length of the surface expression in
the y (wall-perpendicular) direction as measured in our experiments and
δ is the thickness of the horizontal negatively buoyant jet.

same equations that are used for the fountain in the upper
layer can be applied to the buoyant plume that forms in the
lower layer.
a. Wall fountain
The canonical equations for a buoyant plume from Morton et al. (1956) are used for both the positively buoyant flow (the plume) in the lower layer and the negatively
buoyant flow (the fountain) in the upper layer of region 1.
Following Slater et al. (2016) and Ezhova et al. (2018) we
have assumed that the wall causes the plume to be semicircular and adjusted the plume model accordingly. The
fountain volume flux Q, momentum flux M, and buoyancy
flux B are calculated from
dQ
dz
dM
dz

=

παbw,

(1)

=

πb2 g0
− 2Cd bw2 ,
2

(2)

and
dB
dz

=

d
dz



πb2 wg0
2


=0

(3)

where z is the height above the source, b is the top-hat
fountain radius, w is the top-hat fountain velocity, g0 is
the top-hat reduced gravity between the fountain and the
surrounding ambient fluid, Cd is the drag coefficient assumed to be 0.0025 (Cowton et al., 2015) and α = we /w
is the entrainment coefficient with we being the velocity
with which ambient fluid is entrained into the fountain.
We note that M is actually the specific momentum flux
(i.e. the momentum flux divided by the density) but will
be referred to as the momentum flux throughout the paper

4

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

for simplicity. The value for α is determined to be 0.10
by the experiments described in §4. It is assumed that the
drag against the wall is negligible compared to the buoyancy forces. Using a drag coefficient of 0.0025, the drag
force is estimated to be approximately 5% of the buoyancy
force in the laboratory experiments and typically < 3% of
the buoyancy force for a geophysical scenario.
Equations (1)–(3) are initialised at z = 0 (the base of the
unhatched layer on figure 1) using the values of the volume, momentum and buoyancy fluxes and the discharge
area at the source. As demonstrated by Kaye and Hunt
(2006), for (1)–(3) to be valid the fountain must have a
source Froude number (Fr0 = w0 (g00 b0 )−1/2 ) greater than
approximately 3, where subscript 0 refers to source properties. The width of the plume must also be much less than
the thickness of the top layer. In the context of a subglacial
discharge, these conditions will generally be met in cases
where the flow reaches the surface. Equations (1)–(3) are
used to determine the vertical fluxes at the free surface.
Following Ezhova et al. (2018), we expect the timeaveraged density and velocity profiles in the wall-parallel
direction to be roughly Gaussian. Perpendicular to the
wall, the velocity and density profiles outside of the viscous sublayer can also be adequately modelled by a Gaussian curve, although the rate of spread is significantly
lower in the wall-perpendicular than the wall-parallel direction. The more rapid spreading in the wall-parallel direction is explained by Launder and Rodi (1983) in the
context of wall jets by the interaction with the wall leading
to non-isotropic turbulent fluctuations — eddies normal to
the wall cannot be as large as eddies parallel to the wall.
At the level of the free surface, we expect the fountain to have a density maximum located at the wall but
a velocity maximum that is offset some distance due to
the no-slip boundary condition imposed by the wall. The
distance of this offset, yo , is taken from direct numerical
simulations of a wall plume (Ezhova et al., 2018) and we
approximate the velocity profile between the wall and the
maximum velocity location as linear in the y direction and
Gaussian in the x direction. The velocity and density profiles at the height of the undisturbed free surface can then
be described as

h

i
(y−yo )2
1 x2

, y > yo

 w exp − 2 m2 + n2
ws (x, y) =
 
h
i


 y w exp − x22 ,
y < yo
yo
2m
(4)
and



1 x2
y2
0
0
gs = g exp −
+
,
(5)
2 m2 n2
where w and g0 are the maximum values of the fountain
velocity and reduced gravity, x and y are the distances in
the wall-parallel and wall-perpendicular direction, and m

and n define the size of the fountain in the x and y directions, respectively. The values of w and g0 are taken from
the free surface values of equations (1)–(3) and depend
on the source conditions and ambient fluid properties (i.e.
depth and density structure). The values of m and n are
taken from experiments that measured the width and the
length of the fountain before it reached the surface (§4).
Finally, x and y are defined such that (x, y) = (0, 0) gives
the centre of the fountain in the x direction and the position of the wall in the y direction. The exact form of the
velocity profile for the region y < yo is relatively unimportant to the spreading of the surface expression. The
fluid between yo and the wall spreads parallel to the wall
rather than away from the wall, so it has almost no effect on the length of the surface expression (the size in
the wall-perpendicular direction). The velocity profile has
only a small effect on the width of the surface expression
(the size in the wall-parallel direction) due to the small
fluxes in this region. As the Reynolds number increases
the region between y = 0 and y = yo will contain a smaller
proportion of the total fluxes so in a geophysical setting,
with a very large Reynolds number, this region is most
likely completely insignificant.
b. Transition from vertical to horizontal fluxes
We assume that the fountain’s momentum causes the
free surface to rise a small amount so that the flow can be
treated as equivalent to the solution for the flow around a
90◦ corner. This assumption is justified in the appendix.
The pressure at the free surface ps leads to the free surface
rising according to
Z(x, y) =

ps (x) w2s − us (x)2 /2
=
,
g
g

(6)

where g corresponds to the acceleration due to gravity and
not the reduced gravity. us (x) is the horizontal velocity
at the surface and the second part of this equation follows
from Bernoulli’s principle.
Figure 2 shows the modelled free surface deviation Z,
normalised by the maximum value. A threshold free surface deviation of Z = 0.01Zmax is used to define the outside edge of the fountain (blue line on figure 2). Following
Zgheib et al. (2015), we separate the fountain into independent sectors. The sectors are defined such that the arc
angle that the sector boundaries make with the centre of
the fountain is constant and that the sector edges follow
the maximum gradient in the free surface (black dashed
lines on figure 2). As such, all sectors start from the centre of the fountain, follow the steepest gradient of the free
surface and finish at the fountain boundary at uniformly
spaced angles. Due to the asymmetric Gaussian velocity
profiles, this results in sector boundaries that are slightly
curved rather than being straight lines as in Zgheib et al.
(2015). All of the fluid between yo and the wall will travel

5

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

in the wall-parallel direction so this region is treated as two
sectors: one in the positive x direction and the other in the
negative x direction.
The vertical volume, momentum and buoyancy fluxes
entering each sector are calculated from the velocity and
reduced gravity profiles given in (4) and (5) as

but are adapted for the different geometry and orientation:
dQ
ds
dMx,y
ds
dMz
ds

I

=

Q̂

w dA,

(7)

=

M̂

2

w dA,

(8)

wg0 dA,

(9)

S

I

=

B̂

S

where ˆ· refers to the vertical flux in a sector and

H

dA is

S

the surface integral over the area of a sector. The fluxes
are combined with the sector width W (see figure 2) to
calculate the top-hat velocity u, reduced gravity g0 , and
thickness δ of the negatively buoyant jets that leave the
sector horizontally:
u

=

g0

=

δ

=

αuW,

(13)

=

0,

(14)

= W δ g0 ,

(15)

and

S

I

=

M̂
,
Q̂
B̂
,
Q̂
Q̂2
.
M̂W

(10)
(11)
(12)

The horizontal velocity u leaving a given sector is assumed
to be in the direction of maximum free-surface gradient at
the centre of the sector as shown by the arrow on figure 2
and consistent with the definition of the sector boundaries.
c. Horizontal negatively buoyant jet
The second region is composed of a series of negatively
buoyant jets, directed horizontally, and emanating from
the outside boundary of the sectors shown in figure 2. The
velocity u, reduced gravity g0 , thickness δ , width W , and
direction β of the jet are all obtained from §2b. It is envisaged that a separate jet is leaving from each sector. The
jets have a cross-sectional area given by the thickness δ
and the sector width W and are bounded on the top by the
free surface, on either side by the neighbouring jets (or
the wall), and ambient fluid on the base. As such, once
the surface expression has reached a quasi-steady size, the
jets only entrain ambient fluid through the base. Once the
surface expression begins to sink, the jets will be able to
entrain ambient fluid from above as well but this is outside the focus of our model. The equations that govern the
propagation of each jet are similar to those given in (1)–(3)

dB
ds

=

0,

(16)

where s is the distance along the path length of each jet,
and Mx,y and Mz are the momentum fluxes in the horizontal
and vertical directions, respectively. An entrainment coefficient of α = 0.1 is used in this region, which is a value
between that of a pure jet and a pure plume (Carazzo et al.,
2006).
The jet centreline position, s = (sx , sy , sz ), is also tracked
for each sector over time as:



Mz
dsx
= cos β cos tan−1
,
(17)
ds
Mx,y



dsy
Mz
,
(18)
= sin β cos tan−1
ds
Mx,y



dsz
Mz
= − sin tan−1
,
(19)
ds
Mx,y
where β is the horizontal angle of jet propagation taken
from §2b and measured from a plane that is parallel
to the wall, as shown on figure 2. The value γ =
tan−1 (Mz /Mx,y ) gives the angle of jet propagation in the
vertical plane, measured from the horizontal and increasing downwards (i.e. γ is initially zero and increases as
the horizontal jet becomes a vertical plume). Finally, sz is
constrained such that the distance between the jet centreline and the free surface is at least half the jet thickness.
Equations (13)–(19) are evolved in s from the edge of the
fountain (blue line on figure 2) until the upper surface of
the jet is deeper than a predetermined threshold based on
the experimental setup, at which point sx and sy define the
outside edge of the fountain surface expression for each
sector.
Different sectors have different momentum and buoyancy fluxes due to both the fountain asymmetry and the
offset between the Gaussian velocity and density profiles.
The fountain asymmetry results in the edge of the fountain (blue line on figure 2) having a larger radius of curvature in the centre (x ≈ 0) than near the wall (y → yo ).
This causes the jet to decelerate more rapidly in the wallparallel direction than in the wall-perpendicular direction.
The offset in the velocity and density profiles results in
the sectors in the centre of the fountain having a lower reduced gravity and higher velocity than the sectors near the

6

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

F IG . 2. The modelled free surface deviation caused by the fountain impacting the free surface. The blue line shows the defined edge of the
fountain and the black dashed lines show the sector boundaries. β is the angle normal to the fountain edge that the jet will propagate in. W is the
width of the sector. In this case, the value of yo is 0.71 cm.

wall. Both of these factors will cause the surface expression to spread further in the wall-perpendicular direction
than in the wall-parallel direction, as will be shown when
we compare the model predictions with the experimental
observations (figure 5).
3. Experiments
Experiments were conducted in a glass tank that was
61.5 cm wide in the horizontal directions and 40 cm high.
A section of Perspex, almost as wide as the tank, was attached to the base of the tank, approximately 1 cm from
one wall, via a hinge. The Perspex could be rotated to
represent a vertical or sloping ice face.
A point source was installed at the centre of the hinged
wall and 10 cm above the base of the tank. The source
had a radius of 0.27 cm and was designed such that the
discharge was turbulent from the point of release, as described in Kaye and Linden (2004). The source rotated
with the hinged wall such that the discharge was always
parallel to the wall and upwards. The fountain typically
became attached to the wall after a few centimetres.
The tank was initially filled with a mixture of oceanic
salt water and fresh water to provide a predetermined density. The density was measured using an Anton Parr densimeter to an accuracy of 10−6 g cm−3 . The temperature
of the ambient fluid was thermally equilibrated at room
temperature by resting the fluid in a storage drum for at
least 12 hours prior to filling the tank. Residual motions
caused by filling the experimental tank were left to decay
for at least 30 minutes before the experiment was started.

Negatively buoyant seawater, with a small amount of
rhodamine dye added for visualisation, was discharged
from the source with a flow rate that was controlled by
a pump. The flow rate was sufficiently high to impart
enough vertical momentum for the negatively buoyant
fluid to reach the surface. Similarly to the ambient fluid,
the density was measured prior to an experiment with an
Anton Parr densimeter and the fluid was allowed at least
12 hours to thermally equilibrate. The pump could provide
flow rates from 2.5–7.5 cm3 s−1 . Lower flow rates would
have been possible but were avoided to ensure that the discharge was turbulent.
For most of the experiments (§5), the flow was illuminated with a horizontal light sheet located near the free
surface of the tank. Adjacent to the tank, green LEDs produced light that was passed through a cylindrical lens to
form a horizontal sheet of green light with a thickness of
approximately 0.5–1 cm in the region of interest. Despite
the lens, the light sheet spread slightly in the vertical direction causing its thickness to slightly increase away from
the wall and its intensity to slightly decrease within the upper 0.5–1 cm. We expect the negatively buoyant jet to be
visible near the free surface until its upper surface falls
below the base of the light sheet (i.e. 0.5–1 cm below the
free surface). For experiments that were designed to measure the horizontal spreading rate of the fountain (§4) the
light sheet was placed horizontally at varying depths in the
water column. For these experiments the light sheet had a
thickness of approximately 0.5 cm in the region occupied
by the fountain.

7

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

The fountain surface expression was recorded with a
Nikon camera placed directly above the tank. The camera
recorded a video of the entire experiment that was later
processed using ‘Streams’ (Nokes, 2014). Approximately
30 s of video was time averaged to remove the turbulent
fluctuations in the surface expression. Letting the experiment continue for longer times resulted in the sinking
surface expression fluid entraining back into the fountain.
Such a situation would not be expected in a geophysical
context primarily because the surface expression is considerably larger than the fountain, but also due to further
mixing and advection within the fjord that was not present
in the laboratory experiments. A reference image from
before the fountain was started was subtracted from the
averaged experimental image to remove any effects from
inconsistent lighting. Finally the intensity of red light was
calculated for each pixel of the averaged and subtracted
image and a threshold was applied to the resulting intensity field to determine the edge of the dyed fluid (e.g. figure 3).
We note that the dye intensity shouldn’t be interpreted as a quantitative measure of the dye concentration
throughout the surface expression. Firstly, the dye concentration is uncalibrated and there is no reason to expect a
linear relationship between concentration and the intensity
of reflected light observed by the camera. Secondly, across
the length of the surface expression we would expect the
light sheet to be significantly attenuated. Having said this,
the results do suggest that the observed light intensity primarily decreases due to the advection of dyed fluid below
the light sheet. Several experiments were conducted with
the entire tank lit by ambient lighting which allowed the
sinking of dye from the free surface to the base of the tank
to be qualitatively observed. Furthermore, as discussed
later in §5, the measured surface expression dimensions
were relatively insensitive to the chosen intensity threshold. This insensitivity is consistent with advective sinking
of dye but would not be expected if attenuation of light or
mixing of the dyed fluid was causing the observed reduction in intensity.
4. Fountain spreading rate
A small set of experiments was conducted to measure
the rate at which the rising fountain spreads horizontally
due to entrainment of ambient fluid (i.e. the spreading in
region 1 of the theoretical model). From Ezhova et al.
(2018) we expect the flow to spread more rapidly in the
wall-parallel direction than the wall-perpendicular direction. As such, these experiments had two purposes. First,
to measure the relative length of the fountain in the wallparallel and the wall-perpendicular directions and second,
to measure a bulk entrainment coefficient for use in the
fountain model described in §2a.

F IG . 3. Normalised light intensity showing the horizontal subsurface
spreading of the fountain. The top image shows the fountain 4.8 cm
above the source while the bottom image shows the fountain 10.5 cm
above the source. The black line shows the 52% contour level used to
determine the top-hat fountain width.

We assume that the wall fountain is a semi-ellipse and
calculate the top-hat radius of an equivalent semi-circular
fountain with the same cross-sectional area as
b=

√
r1 r2 ,

(20)

where r1 and r2 are the measured half-widths of the rising
fountain in the wall-parallel and wall-perpendicular directions, respectively.
Figure 3 shows two images from the spreading rate experiments. The images have been processed as described
in §3 to show the normalised light intensity. The top image
shows the fountain shape at a height of 4.8 cm above the
source while the second image shows the fountain 10.5 cm
above the source. It is clear that the fluid has spread much
more rapidly in the wall-parallel direction than in the wallperpendicular direction, leading to an increasing asymmetry with height. The black lines on figure 3 show the
fountain edge based on a threshold intensity of 52% of
the maximum value. A threshold value of 52% is used as
representative of a top-hat profile where the concentration
field spreads slightly more rapidly than the velocity field
(Turner, 1973).
Figure 4 shows all measurements of the top-hat fountain
half-widths in the wall-parallel and wall-perpendicular directions as a function of height above the source. Also
shown is the equivalent radius of a semi-circular fountain
from equation (20). A linear regression has been used to
calculate the spreading rate of the fountain which is used
to calculate an entrainment coefficient based on the canonical self-similar plume model (Morton et al., 1956):
α=

5 db
.
6 dz

(21)

8

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

We note that far away from the source it is expected
that the aspect ratio would reach a constant value given by
the ratio of the spreading rate in the wall-parallel direction to that in the wall-perpendicular direction. Thus, although the aspect ratio is seen to increase with height for
the experimental fluid depths used in the present study, we
would expect it to be constant at the greater fluid depths
relevant to geophysical situations. We estimate this constant aspect ratio from the upper panel of figure 4 as



dr1
dr2
≈ 4.
(24)
dz
dz
We note that the ratio of spreading rates is very similar to
that from numerical simulations of a buoyant plume next
to a vertical wall (Ezhova et al., 2018).
5. Surface expression

F IG . 4. Experimental measurements of horizontal fountain spreading as a function of height above the source. The top panel shows the
measured half widths in the wall-parallel and wall-perpendicular directions, the middle panel shows the top-hat radius of an equivalent semicircular fountain and the bottom panel shows the ratio of half widths in
the wall-parallel (r1 ) to the wall-perpendicular (r2 ) direction.

For the range of heights that were tested, the semicircular fountain radius is given by
b = 0.12z + 0.57

(22)

where b and z are measured in cm and z is measured from
the source. Thus, the bulk entrainment coefficient that we
used in §2a is α = 0.10, consistent with the range of values typically found for turbulent jets and plumes (Carazzo
et al., 2006). The ratio of half-widths in the wall-parallel
and wall-perpendicular directions is given by
r1
= 0.11z + 0.71.
r2

(23)

This ratio, as well as the calculated fountain radius from
(1)–(3), is used to calculate m and n in (4) and (5). Since
our source is circular we would expect the initial ratio of
half-widths to be 1. The lower value of 0.71 is likely
due to the fountain being drawn towards the wall by the
Coandă effect (Wille and Fernholz, 1965) whereby entraining flows create a low pressure region near boundaries
and hence are attracted to the boundary.

The majority of the experiments were designed to examine the surface expression of the fountain. The initial
volume flux and reduced gravity of the fountain, as well
as the ambient fluid depth, were all varied over the experiments. These changes are equivalent to changing the
properties of the plume penetrating into the upper layer of
the fjord and changing the depth of the upper layer.
Burridge and Hunt (2017) considered a twodimensional dense jet released horizontally at the free
surface and found that the non-dimensionalised distance
that the jet stays at the surface increases linearly with
the source Froude number defined as Fr = u(g0 δ )−1/2 .
Although the flow that we are considering is significantly
different from a two-dimensional surface jet, we expect
that the length and width of the surface expression in our
experiments will have a similar dependence on Fr.
Values of the experimental parameters and calculated
values of δ and Fr are provided for each of the experiments in table 1. The values of δ , u, and g0 (and hence
Fr) are calculated at the transition to the horizontal negatively buoyant jet region based on the model presented in
§2. Since the values of δ and Fr are different for each sector in the model we have shown the two extreme values:
the wall-parallel direction x, and the wall-perpendicular
direction y.
a. Dimensions of the surface expression
Figure 5 shows processed images of the surface expression for three experiments. The edge of the surface expression, defined by the normalised 10% light intensity
contour, is shown in black and the model prediction of
the surface expression given by (sx , sy ) from (17)–(19) is
superimposed in blue. A 10% threshold was used, different from the 52% threshold used to determine the tophat fountain width (figure 4), because we are interested
in the actual size of the surface expression rather than a

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Q0
(ml s−1 )
2.71
5.89
4.30
5.89
3.42
5.89
4.30
4.71
5.09
5.89
5.89
5.89
7.48
6.39
6.68
6.72

g00
(cm s−2 )

H
(cm)

δx
(cm)

δy
(cm)

Frx
(-)

Fry
(-)

3.54
12.10
7.00
10.61
3.32
9.18
3.73
2.80
4.06
4.57
4.44
3.32
4.56
3.61
2.92
3.68

10.0
11.2
10.0
11.0
10.0
11.0
10.0
13.1
10.0
11.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
9.0
10.0
8.5

1.23
1.24
1.08
1.10
0.98
1.05
0.96
1.14
0.89
0.93
0.88
0.86
0.85
0.78
0.85
0.67

1.52
1.50
1.33
1.38
1.22
1.31
1.19
1.32
1.10
1.16
1.08
1.06
1.06
0.99
1.05
0.95

1.17
1.43
1.69
1.82
2.11
2.13
2.59
3.05
3.83
3.87
4.36
5.28
5.85
6.23
6.60
7.28

1.44
1.81
2.08
2.25
2.86
2.66
3.09
4.08
4.72
4.82
5.42
6.52
7.13
7.44
8.13
8.18

9

TABLE 1. Source volume flux Q0 , source reduced gravity g00 , free
surface height above the source H, and calculated values of δ and Fr for
all of the surface expression experiments with a vertical wall. Q0 , g00 ,
and H are external parameters that are measured based on the source
and ambient properties while δ and Fr are calculated at the transition to
the negatively buoyant jet based on the model presented in §2.

top-hat scale. As such, we selected the minimum threshold possible while remaining above the noise levels of the
experimental observations. The model prediction shows
reasonable agreement with the experiments but for large
values of Fr tends to predict a more semi-circular surface
expression than is observed in the experiments.
The reduction in observed light intensity is caused by
a variety of processes and is not correlated directly with
the concentration of dye within the surface expression.
The relatively low sensitivity of the observed surface expression dimensions to changes in the intensity threshold defining the edge of the surface expression (described
later) suggests that the primary process reducing the observed light intensity is the advective sinking of dyed fluid
below the light sheet. However, there are a number of
secondary processes that could also cause the observed
reduction of the light intensity. The most important of
these are the attenuation of the light sheet as it passes
through the dyed fluid, averaging the temporal variability when producing the light intensity figures, and dilution
of the surface expression dyed fluid due to mixing. Dilution of the surface expression is increasingly important
for experiments with larger Froude numbers. Since the
experiments were not designed to measure dye concentration (which would have required a camera with a larger
dynamic range and careful calibration) we are unable to
quantify the effects of dilution in the experiments. However, based on our model of the surface expression flow,
we expect the dye to dilute to 85% and 43% of its maximum value across the surface expression for the top and

F IG . 5. Normalised light intensity as measured from typical experiments focused on the surface expression. The particular experiments are
those with Fry = 1.44 (top), 4.82 (middle), and 8.18 (bottom) as given in
table 1. The black line shows the normalised 10% light intensity threshold which was used to determine the edge of the surface expression and
the blue line shows the predicted shape of the surface expression based
on the model presented in §2.

bottom panel of figure 5, respectively. At high Fr numbers
both the dilution and the attenuation of light are significant
which could help to explain why the observed surface expression is smaller than the model predictions for large Fr.
Figure 6 shows the experimental and predicted
length and half-width of the surface expression, nondimensionalised by δ , for each experiment given in table 1. The error bars for the model predictions are calculated by using a depth threshold for the negatively buoyant jet of 0.5 cm and 1 cm to reflect the uncertain position
of the bottom of the light sheet during the experiments.
The error bars for the experimental results are estimated to
be 1 cm for all experiments. This is based on processing
the experimental data with intensity thresholds of 5% and
20% when defining the edge of the surface expression for
a selection of experiments. The relatively low sensitivity
of the measured surface expression dimensions to the chosen intensity threshold suggests that the light intensity is
decreasing due to the dyed surface expression fluid sinking

10

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

F IG . 7. Experimental and predicted values of the surface expression
aspect ratio as a function of Fr. The value of Fr used is an average
of Frx and Fry . Experimental results are shown in blue while model
predictions are shown in red. Experiments with a fluid depth of 10 cm
are shown by crosses, a fluid depth of 11–11.2 cm by circles, and a fluid
depth of 8.5–9 cm by squares.

F IG . 6. Experimental measurements of the fountain surface expression half-width (sx , top panel) and length (sy , lower panel) plotted as a
function of Frx and Fry , respectively. The length and half-width of the
surface expression are non-dimensionalised by the jet thickness δ in the
corresponding direction. Also shown are the model predictions for each
experiment with a linear fit to the model predictions.

below the light sheet rather than due to mixing or attenuation of the light sheet. Once the surface expression fluid
starts sinking, the light intensity will quickly decrease as
the dyed fluid sinks below the thin light sheet. In contrast,
both mixing and light attenuation will reduce the observed
light intensity continually with a initially rapid decrease
followed by a slower decay.
A linear fit is plotted through the model predictions
shown in figure 6. The linear fit is applied to the model
predictions rather than the experimental values to test the
similarity of our negatively buoyant jet model to that of
Burridge and Hunt (2017). The applicability of the model
presented by Burridge and Hunt (2017) is not obvious
a priori. Burridge and Hunt (2017) give the applicability of their model to flows where the Froude number is
greater than 12 whereas the Froude numbers in the present
study vary between 1 and 9. Additionally, the flows being considered are significantly different. Burridge and
Hunt (2017) considered a two-dimensional jet that only
spreads vertically due to entrainment from the base, while
we consider a jet that also spreads azimuthally as it propagates. However, figure 6 shows that the model presented
in §2 also results in the non-dimensionalised surface expression being linearly dependent on Fr (with a different
constant of proportionality compared to the results of Bur-

ridge and Hunt (2017)). The dimensions of the surface expression are accurately predicted by the model presented
in §2 across most of the parameter space with a root mean
square error of 2.95 and 1.30 for sx /δx and sy /δy , respectively (approximately 15% in each case).
b. Aspect ratio of the surface expression
We define an aspect ratio of the surface expression as
the width parallel to the wall (sx ) divided by the length
perpendicular to the wall (sy ). Therefore, if the surface
expression was semi-circular it would have an aspect ratio
of 2. Figure 7 shows the experimental and predicted aspect
ratio of the surface expression for the experiments given
in table 1. The different symbols indicate different fluid
depths. The predicted values are shown in red while the
experimental values are shown in blue. The aspect ratio is
plotted against Fr which is the average of Frx and Fry .
Figure 7 shows that the aspect ratio decreases as Fr increases. For low values of Fr the surface expression is
predominantly defined by the shape of the fountain below
the surface (figure 3, bottom panel) and the aspect ratio is
larger than 2. As Fr increases, the negatively buoyant jet
travels further away from the wall before sinking below
the light sheet and the initial asymmetry in fountain shape
becomes less important. Instead, the lower radius of curvature at the middle of the fountain and the offset velocity
and density profiles lead to the jet travelling further away
from the wall than along the wall (§2c) and the aspect ratio
decreases.
c. The effect of a sloping wall
A supplementary set of experiments was undertaken
to investigate the effect of a sloping wall on the surface

11

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

expression. Experiments similar to those described in
§4 showed that the entrainment coefficient and fountain
asymmetry were not significantly affected by a sloping
wall. Due to refraction of light from the Perspex wall, visualising the fountain beneath the surface was much more
challenging for a sloping wall than for a vertical wall. As
such, the results were not used to determine the entrainment coefficient, only to confirm that the value is not significantly different from the vertical case. Furthermore,
we assume that the distance that the maximum velocity is
offset from the wall is unaffected by the slope.
The model that was presented in §2 is slightly adapted to
account for a sloping wall. In the vertical wall case, all of
the fountain momentum that entered into a sector was converted to horizontal momentum with a direction normal to
the sector boundary. For a sloping wall, the same process is undertaken for the vertical component of the fountain momentum, but the horizontal momentum is retained
in the wall-perpendicular direction. This adjustment results in the length of the surface expression (sy ) being increased and the width of the surface expression (sx ) being
decreased. The effect on the length is small as the sector
boundary in the centre of the surface expression is approximately parallel to the wall. As such, both the vertical and
horizontal components of the fountain momentum leave
the sector in the wall-perpendicular direction (β = 90◦ on
figure 2). In contrast, for the sector next to the wall, the
vertical component of the fountain momentum will be directed along the wall while the horizontal component will
be directed in the wall-perpendicular direction. More significant changes to the length would require transfer of
momentum between sectors and it is not clear how this
should be done.
The experimental parameters for the sloping experiments are given in table 2. Figure 8 shows the normalized
light intensity field for two experiments with similar discharge characteristics but a vertical and a sloping wall. It
can be seen that in the case of a sloping wall, the fountain
fluid travels less distance in the wall-parallel direction and
a greater proportion of the fluid ends up far away from the
wall.
Figure 9 gives the experimental and model results for
experiments conducted with a sloping wall and shows that
the model predictions do not deviate significantly from the
linear dependence on Fr that was determined for a vertical wall (solid lines on figure 9). We note that although
the model results shown on figure 9 suggest that the dependence of the surface expression size on Fr is not significantly affected by the presence of a sloping wall, the
modifications to the theoretical model described at the beginning of this section can have a large impact on the value
of Fr. As an example, the experiment shown in table 1 for
a vertical wall with Q0 = 5.89 ml s−1 and g00 = 4.57 cm s−2
has Froude number values of Frx = 3.87 and Fry = 4.82.
In contrast, a similar experiment with a 55◦ slope angle

θ
(◦ )

Q0
(ml s−1 )

g00
(cm s−2 )

H
(cm)

δx
(cm)

δy
(cm)

Frx
(-)

Fry
(-)

55
55
55
55
55
55
55
70
70
70
70
70

3.63
4.30
5.13
5.89
5.89
5.89
7.48
3.54
4.30
5.13
5.89
7.48

4.25
4.32
3.52
4.25
3.52
4.98
4.32
4.25
3.52
3.52
4.57
4.25

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

1.52
1.38
1.27
1.26
1.24
1.23
1.22
1.27
1.12
1.07
1.07
1.03

1.34
1.22
1.11
1.11
1.09
1.08
1.07
1.24
1.09
1.05
1.04
1.01

1.14
1.62
2.55
2.71
3.07
3.26
3.65
1.43
2.46
3.21
3.24
4.61

2.03
3.26
5.20
5.47
6.23
6.64
7.41
2.50
4.32
5.60
5.69
8.03

TABLE 2. Experimental slope angle θ , source volume flux Q0 ,
source reduced gravity g00 , free surface height above the source H, and
calculated values of δ and Fr for all of the surface expression experiments with a sloping wall. The angle θ is measured from the horizontal.

F IG . 8. Normalised light intensity as measured from two typical
experiments. The upper panel shows an experiment with a vertical wall
and Q0 = 5.89 ml s−1 , g00 = 3.32 cm s−2 while the lower panel shows an
experiment with θ = 55◦ and Q0 = 5.89 ml s−1 , g00 = 3.52 cm s−2 . The
low light intensity around y = 5 cm on the lower panel is an artefact of
the top of the Perspex wall and is not physically meaningful. The blue
line is showing the model prediction and the black line is showing the
normalised 10% intensity threshold from the experiments.

(Q0 = 5.89 ml s−1 and g00 = 4.98 cm s−2 on table 2) has
Froude number values of Frx = 3.26 and Fry = 6.64. However, even with the modified treatment of the fountain momentum through the transition region, the model under-

12

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

predicts the length of the surface expression for both 55◦
and 70◦ angles.
Figure 10 shows the measured and predicted values of
the surface expression aspect ratio for the sloping wall experiments. Similarly to figure 7, the value of Fr that is
shown is the mean value of Frx and Fry . Since the model
systematically under predicts the length of the surface expression, the predicted aspect ratio is always too large.
The discrepancy between the predicted and measured aspect ratio is larger for the 55◦ experiments than for the 70◦
experiments as the underestimation of the surface expression length is larger. The discrepancy is reduced for larger
values of Fr as the surface expression becomes larger and
the effect of an approximately constant error in the wallperpendicular direction is reduced.
6. Application to observations
In this section we apply the model presented in §2 to
observations of a subglacial discharge plume from Saqqarliup Fjord, Greenland (Mankoff et al., 2016). Photographs
of the fjord surface show a triangular surface expression
that extends approximately 300 m along the front of the
glacier and 300 m into the fjord (see figure 3a of Mankoff
et al., 2016). Accompanying these aerial photographs of
the surface expression are observations of the water properties within the fjord — both some distance downfjord
and through the surface expression. The oceanographic
observations show a significantly different density profile
downstream than through the surface expression.
Downstream in the fjord, the 150 m water column has
an approximately two-layer density profile with warmer
and fresher water overlying cooler and saltier water (see
figure 7 of Mankoff et al., 2016). We characterise the
overlying layer as S = 29.5 g kg−1 , T = 2.0◦ C, ρ =
1023.4 kg m−3 and the underlying layer as S = 33 g kg−1 ,
T = 1.0◦ C, ρ = 1026.3 kg m−3 , where S and T are representative values of the salinity and temperature for each
layer taken from figure 7 of Mankoff et al. (2016) and
ρ is the density at those conditions calculated based on
the thermodynamic equation of seawater (IOC, SCOR and
IAPSO, 2010). Throughout the remainder of this section
we will refer to these two layers as the upper and lower
layers, respectively.
Salinity profiles through the surface expression show
that the density profile is significantly altered with a weak
and more uniform stratification (see figure 5 of Mankoff
et al., 2016). It is expected that during periods when
the subglacial discharge is not present, as is generally assumed throughout winter, the two-layer stratification will
exist throughout the entire fjord but that the strong subglacial discharge displaces the upper layer down the fjord.
In addition to the photographic observation of the surface expression and temperature-salinity profiles, Mankoff
et al. (2016) attempted to infer the subglacial discharge

flux based on observed water mass properties. They estimated the subglacial discharge flux at the base of the
glacier to be 105 − 140 m3 s−1 , which compares favorably
with estimated runoff for the 5 days prior to observation
from the RACMO model of 101 m3 s−1 . In their attempts
at modelling the flow, Mankoff et al. (2016) assumed that
the radius of the subglacial discharge source was 5 − 15 m.
We will apply the model presented in §2 to the observations in two distinct ways. The first of these is most
analogous to the laboratory experiments and corresponds
to the expected conditions when the plume first develops
at the start of the melt season. As mentioned above, without a strong subglacial discharge, we expect the two-layer
stratification observed away from the surface expression in
Mankoff et al. (2016) to exist across the entire fjord. The
fluid immediately below the surface expression is taken
to have properties equal to the upper layer. As such, the
plume rises through this two-layer stratification until it hits
the free surface and then sinks into the underlying fluid
that is less dense than the surface expression.
The second way that we apply the model uses the observations in Mankoff et al. (2016) more directly. Based
on the the density profiles through the surface expression
(figure 5 of Mankoff et al., 2016), two adjustments to the
previously described conceptual framework are required.
First, the plume will not entrain fluid from the two-layer
stratification which is positioned far downstream but from
the fluid that directly surrounds the plume. The fluid surrounding the plume is best approximated by the salinity and the temperature profiles through the surface expression (dark lines on figure 5 of Mankoff et al., 2016)
— recall that the surface expression is roughly 10 times
as large as the expected plume diameter (approximately
20 m, figure 12a of Mankoff et al., 2016), so the profiles
through the surface expression are still outside the rising
plume. Using either the downstream density profile or that
through the surface expression for entrainment into the
vertical plume has a minimal impact on either the vertical plume or the density of the surface expression, but our
choice is more consistent with the observations than using
the downstream density profile. The more significant conceptual adaptation that needs to be made arises from the
observation that the water column through the surface expression is stably stratified in the vertical direction (again,
refer to the dark lines on figure 5 of Mankoff et al., 2016).
As a result, the surface expression fluid is unable to sink
vertically beneath a less dense underlying fluid layer and
an alternate mechanism for limiting the surface expression
size needs to be considered.
We propose that instead of sinking into a less dense underlying layer, the surface expression fluid is subducted
below the less dense upper layer that is positioned further down the fjord. A subduction mechanism is reminiscent of an atmospheric cold front where two layers of
air with different densities flow into one another and the

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

13

F IG . 9. Experimental measurements and model predictions for the fountain surface expression for experiments with a sloping wall. The top row
shows the wall-parallel (sx ) direction and the bottom row shows the wall-perpendicular (sy ) direction. The left column shows experiments with a
slope angle of 70◦ and the right column shows experiments with a slope angle of 55◦ . The solid lines are the same linear fit shown in figure 6 for a
vertical wall.

F IG . 10. Experimental and predicted values of the surface expression
aspect ratio as a function of Fr for the experiments with a sloping wall.
The value of Fr used is the average of Frx and Fry .

less dense layer is displaced upwards. However in this
case, instead of less dense air being pushed upwards, the
denser fluid layer (the surface expression) is pushed downwards. The subduction mechanism is consistent with observational data (figure 7 of Mankoff et al., 2016) which
shows strongly sloping isopycnals near the edge of the surface expression but no evidence of dense fluid on top of
less dense fluid, as is required by the sinking mechanism
explored in the experiments and is shown on the schematic
in figure 1.
Under the subduction mechanism, the size of the surface expression is determined by the position of the density front — i.e. how far down the fjord the upper layer

is displaced. To estimate the displacement we consider
that, in the absence of a subglacial discharge, the upper
layer would occupy the full extent of the fjord. The relaxation back to this steady state would be forced by the
buoyancy difference between the upper layer and the surface expression fluid.
q The velocity scale of such a flow
is given by u f ∼ g0f δ f , where g0f is the reduced gravity
based on the upper layer and surface expression densities
and δ f is the thickness of the surface expression or the upper layer, which have approximately the same values as in
Mankoff et al. (2016). We take δ f = 15 m based on figure
7 of Mankoff et al. (2016). Values for g0f depend on the
source volume flux and radius of the plume as they will
impact the density of the surface expression. However, as
a representative case, using a radius of 10 m and a source
volume flux of 120 m3 s−1 , gives g0f = 5.8 × 10−3 m s−2
and u f = 0.30 m s−1 . The velocity u f can be thought of as
the velocity that the upper layer would propagate towards
the ice face with, if the subglacial discharge were to be
suddenly stopped. However, the presence of the surface
expression resists the flow of the upper layer towards the
ice face and, at a steady state, the front between the upper layer and the surface expression will be stationary. It
follows that the position of this front will be the location
where the surface expression velocity is equal to u f . If the
surface expression velocity was greater than u f at the front
then the upper layer would be pushed back downfjord. Alternatively, if the surface expression velocity was less than

14

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

F IG . 11. Calculation of the length of the subglacial discharge plume
surface expression for a variety of source discharge volume fluxes and
source radii. The top panel shows results using a two-layer stratification throughout the entire fjord and the sinking mechanism. The bottom
panel shows results using the stratification observed in Mankoff et al.
(2016) through the surface expression and the subduction mechanism.
Note the significantly different scales in both the x and the y axes for
the two panels. Solid black lines show the observed length of the surface expression and dashed black lines show the estimated range of the
subglacial discharge flux from Mankoff et al. (2016).

u f at the front then the upper layer would be able to propagate towards the ice face until a balance is obtained.
The model presented in §2 provides the velocity in the
surface expression as a function of position. As such we
can use it to find where the surface expression velocity is
equal to u f and use this location as an estimate of the surface expression size. Figure 11 shows estimates of the surface expression length as a function of discharge volume
flux and discharge radius using both the sinking mechanism (top) and the subducting mechanism (bottom). We
note that although the sinking mechanism is not consistent
with figures 5 and 7 of Mankoff et al. (2016), it is expected
to be representative of the dynamics occurring when the
subglacial discharge starts at the onset of the melting season.
Figure 11 shows that the subduction mechanism predicts the size of the surface expression with more accuracy than the sinking mechanism. When considering the
sinking mechanism (top panel of figure 11), the surface
expression is typically much shorter than that which was
observed by Mankoff et al. (2016). For the predicted surface expression size to be comparable to that which was
observed, the density of the surface expression needs to be

very similar to that of the upper layer, which leads to unrealistic sensitivity of the surface expression size to small
changes in the discharge flow rate. In contrast, the subduction mechanism predicts a surface expression size that
is comparable to the observations, particularly for larger
radii and lower source volume fluxes. The lower end of
the source volume flux range is also more consistent with
the estimate based on RACMO data of 101 m3 s−1 .
Combined with the observational evidence that vertical
density profiles are stably stratified at all locations in the
fjord (figures 5 and 7 of Mankoff et al., 2016), figure 11
provides strong support for a subduction mechanism determining the surface expression length rather than a direct sinking mechanism. We stress that subduction of the
surface expression still relies on the presence of fluid that
is less dense than the surface expression. The difference
is that for the surface expression to “sink” the less dense
fluid must be directly underneath the surface expression
whereas if the less dense fluid is horizontally adjacent, the
surface expression will be “subducted”.
It is worth considering why the difference between the
laboratory experiments and observations exists. The observational evidence suggests that the entire upper layer
is displaced downfjord by the surface expression which
is then subducted beneath the upper layer. In contrast, the
experiments clearly demonstrate sinking of the surface expression into a less dense underlying layer of fluid. The
key difference between the two situations is that in the
fjord observations, the thickness of the surface expression
is comparable to that of the upper layer, whereas in the laboratory experiments the upper layer is approximately ten
times as thick as the surface expression. When the surface
expression and upper layer are of comparable thickness,
the entire upper layer must be displaced downfjord and
the interface below the surface expression remains stably
stratified. However, when the upper layer is significantly
thicker than the surface expression, some portion of the
upper layer remains below the surface expression and the
interface becomes vertically unstable.
7. Conclusion
We have considered the surface expression of a subglacial discharge plume in a stratified fjord. Several processes that could control the surface expression size and
shape have been considered to attempt to understand the
triangular surface expression observed at Saqqarliup Fjord
(Mankoff et al., 2016). Our hypothesis is that if these
processes can be better understood, subsurface properties
of these plumes could be inferred from observations of
the surface expression which are considerably simpler to
make.
To this end, we have presented a model and experiments
that examine the surface expression of a fountain released
adjacent to a wall that is either vertical or sloping. The

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

model separates the flow into vertical and horizontal regions. A transition region where all of the vertical momentum is converted to horizontal momentum through a
free-surface pressure gradient connects the two regions.
The model predicts that the dimensions of the surface
expression of the fountain, non-dimensionalised by the
thickness of the horizontal jet, will be linearly dependent
on Fr, which is consistent with previous studies of twodimensional negatively buoyant surface jets (Burridge and
Hunt, 2017).
Experiments are first used to examine the shape and
spreading rate of the subsurface fountain. Similar to
Ezhova et al. (2018), we find that the fountain spreads
more rapidly in the wall-parallel direction than in the wallperpendicular direction. Neither the rate of spreading nor
the asymmetry are significantly affected by a sloping wall.
Experimental measurements of the dimensions of the
surface expression generally agree with the model for a
vertical wall. For a sloping wall, the model slightly under
predicts the length of the surface expression. At least for
a vertical wall, the experiments appear to confirm that the
transition from vertical to horizontal flow was treated appropriately in the model. This provides some insight into
how subglacial plumes transition to horizontal intrusions,
which could help constrain the forcing in models of fjordscale circulation. However, a more complicated treatment
of the transition is probably required if the ice face is significantly overcut.
The surface expression shape tends to become less
semi-circular and more triangular as the size increases,
consistent with the observed triangular surface expression
at Saqqarliup Fjord (Mankoff et al., 2016). However, the
predicted surface expression shape based on our model remains semi-elliptical rather becoming triangular (see, for
example, figure 5). This inconsistency highlights that, although the model can predict the shape and aspect ratio of
the surface expression, it is not able to predict the shape
of the surface expression at high values of Fr and requires
further development.
Finally, the model is applied to observations of a subglacial discharge plume in front of Saqqarliup Sermia
(Mankoff et al., 2016). We apply the model in two separate ways exploring possible mechanisms by which the
surface expression fluid could move away from the surface. The first of these mechanisms involves sinking into
a less dense fluid body that underlies the surface expression. The second mechanism involves the surface expression fluid being subducted below a less dense fluid body
that is horizontally adjacent. Consistent with the oceanographic observations presented in Mankoff et al. (2016),
predictions of the surface expression size are more accurate if the subduction mechanism is considered rather than
the sinking mechanism. The similarity between the model
predictions and observations of the surface expression size

15

suggests that it may be possible to infer the subglacial discharge properties at the source from observations of the
downfjord density profile and observations of the surface
expression size. However, the experiments presented in
this study were focused on the sinking mechanism and
further experiments examining the subduction mechanism
(i.e. with an upper layer of comparable depth to the surface expression) would help to demonstrate the applicability of the subduction mechanism. In addition, comparison
with observations from other fjords is needed to assess the
generality of these results. In particular, in a fjord where
the surface expression is significantly less deep than the
upper layer, the dynamics are expected to be different and,
in this scenario, the sinking mechanism may be more appropriate.

Acknowledgments. We gratefully acknowledge technical assistance from Anders Jensen and thank anonymous
reviewers for improving the clarity of the manuscript. CM
thanks the Weston Howard Jr. Scholarship for funding.
Support to CC was given by NSF project OCE-1434041
and OCE-1658079.
APPENDIX
Conversion of vertical momentum flux to horizontal
momentum flux
This appendix justifies the assumption made in §2b that
the transition from vertical to horizontal flow can be
treated as the flow around a 90◦ corner with no loss of
momentum or mass fluxes. The following calculation assumes incompressible and two-dimensional flow. Within
the vertical plane through the centreline, and in the vicinity
of the corner, these assumptions are expected to be valid.
We note that within this appendix x, y, z, and w are
used differently to the rest of the paper. Instead we use the
standard nomenclature of complex variables used in Lamb
(1916). The nomenclature within the appendix should be
considered to be self-contained and independent from the
remainder of the manuscript.
The inner boundary of the fountain is in contact with
the stationary ambient fluid and, after subtracting the hydrostatic pressure, at high Reynolds number it can be regarded as a free surface (i.e. the pressure is zero). There
is a general method using complex variables due to Lamb
(1916)(§73) which can be used for solving these problems
in the inviscid, irrotational case. That is it conserves momentum and mass which should be a good approximation
near the surface.
In our geometry there is a single right angle bend corresponding to a power of 1/2, therefore following Lamb
(1916) we must have
dz √
= coth w,
dw

(A1)

16

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY

h
√ i
If we define R = π + log(3 + 2 2) /2 we can write this
solution to the same order fully implicitly as


√
1
R
2
2
2
√ − 1 (x−y)4 +· · · .
R = (x+y) +(x−y) / 2+
8
18
(A7)
We can also look far from the corner where we have
π
+ exp(π/2 − 2y).
4
(A8)
Thus the solution corresponds to a jet of thickness π/4 and
uniform incoming and outgoing speed 1. The solution can
trivially be scaled to any velocity and size.
Figure A1 shows a time-averaged normalised light intensity image of the fountain viewed from the side of the
tank with the solution for flow around a corner superimposed. The edge of the fountain is identified as the location where the normalised light intensity falls to less than
20% of the maximum value at each height. The edge of
the fountain is only used for comparison with the solution
for flow around a corner and as such the exact threshold is
not significant.
It can be seen that the solution given by (A7) agrees
well with the contour of light intensity near the free surface where the solution is expected to be valid, justifying
the assumption of inviscid, irrotational flow in vicinity of
the corner.
y=

F IG . A1. Time-averaged normalised light intensity of a side view of
the fountain (i.e. y and z are the Cartesian coordinates). The blue solid
line shows where the light intensity falls to 20% of the maximum intensity at that height which we use as a measure of the inner boundary of
the fountain. The black dashed line shows the solution for flow around a
corner from (A7) using Lamb’s method. Dotted lines show the enlarged
section on the right panel.

where z = x + iy is the complex coordinate, w = φ + iψ,
φ is the velocity potential and ψ is the stream function.
ψ = 0 is the streamline along the wall and the horizontal
free surface and ψ = π/4 is the streamline along the inner
boundary of the fountain. Integrating (A1) gives
√
√
z = cot−1 coth w + coth−1 coth w,
(A2)
an implicit equation for the stream function ψ. Applying
Bernoulli’s theorem the pressure is given by
p =C−

u2 + v2
1 dw
=C−
2
2 dz

2

=

1 1
− | tanh w|, (A3)
2 2

where we have chosen the pressure to be zero at the inner
boundary of the fountain. The pressure along the vertical
wall and the horizontal free surface is given by taking w =
s, where s is real and w = 0 is the corner:
1
pw =
.
1 + e|2s|

(A4)

The connection between s and world coordinates comes
from (A2).
The equation for the inner boundary of the fountain is
given implicitly by substituting w = π/4 + s into (A2). In
the vicinity of the bend we can write a parametric power
series solution
x

=

√
π+log(3+2 2)
4


5 4
17 5
+ √12 +s + 12 s2 − 16 s3 − 24
s + 120
s ,
y

=

√
π+log(3+2 2)
4

+ √12

−s +

1 2
1 3
5 4
17 5
2 s + 6 s − 24 s − 120 s



.

π
+ exp(π/2 − 2x),
4

or

x=

References
Beaird, N., F. Straneo, and W. Jenkins, 2015: Spreading of Greenland
meltwaters in the ocean revealed by noble gases. Geophys. Res. Lett.,
42, 7705–7713.
Bloomfield, L. J., and R. C. Kerr, 1998: Turbulent fountains in a stratifed fluid. J. Fluid Mech., 358, 335–356.
Burridge, H. C., and G. R. Hunt, 2016: Entrainment by turbulent fountains. J. Fluid Mech., 790, 407–418.
Burridge, H. C., and G. R. Hunt, 2017: From free jets to clinging wall
jets: the influece of a horizotal boundary on a horizontally forced
buoyant jet. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2 (023501).
Carazzo, G., E. Kaminski, and S. Tait, 2006: The route to self-similarity
in turbulent jets and plumes. J. Fluid Mech., 547, 137–148.
Carroll, D., D. A. Sutherland, E. L. Shroyer, J. D. Nash, G. A. Catania,
and L. A. Stearns, 2015: Modeling turbulent subglacial meltwater
plumes: Implications for fjord-scale buoyancy-driven circulation. J.
Phys. Oceanogr., 45, 2169–2185.

(A5)

Cenedese, C., and V. M. Gatto, 2016: Impact of a localized source of
subglacial discharge on the heat flux and submarine melting of a
tidewater glacier: a laboratory study. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 46, 3155–
3163.

(A6)

Chambers, D. P., A. Cazenave, N. Champollion, H. Dieng, W. Llovel,
and R. Forsberg, 2017: Evaluation of the global mean sea level budget between 1993 and 2014. Surveys in Geophys., 38, 309–327.

JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Cowton, T., D. Slater, A. Sole, D. Goldberg, and P. Nienow, 2015: Modeling the impact of glacial runoff on fjord circulation and submarine melt rate using a new subgrid-scale parameterization for glacial
plumes. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans, 120, 796–812.
Ezhova, E., C. Cenedese, and L. Brandt, 2018: Dynamics of threedimensional turbulent wall plumes and implications for estimates of
submarine glacier melting. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 48, 1941–1950.

17

Slater, D. A., D. N. Goldberg, P. W. Nienow, and T. R. Cowton, 2016:
Scalings for submarine melting at tidewater glaciers from buoyant
plume theory. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 46, 1839–1855.
Straneo, F., and C. Cenedese, 2015: The dynamics of Greenland’s
glacial fjords and their role in climate. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci., 7, 89–
112.

Fried, M. J., and Coauthors, 2015: Distributed subglacial discharge
drives significant submarine melt at a Greenland tidewater glacier.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 42, 9328–9336.

Straneo, F., R. G. Curry, D. A. Sutherland, G. S. Hamilton, C. Cenedese,
K. Vage, and L. A. Stearns, 2011: Impact of fjord dynamics and
glacial runoff on the circulation near Helheim Glacier. Nat. Geosci.,
4, 322–327.

Goldman, D., and Y. Jaluria, 1986: Effect of opposing buoyancy on the
flow in free and wall jets. J. Fluid Mech., 166, 41–56.

Straneo, F., and Coauthors, 2012: Characteristics of ocean waters reaching Greenland’s glaciers. Annals of Glaciol., 53, 202–210.

How, P., and Coauthors, 2017: Rapidly-changing subglacial hydrology
pathways at a tidewater glacier revealed through simultaneous observations of water pressure, supraglacial lakes, meltwater plumes and
surface velocities. The Cryosphere, 11, 2691–2710.

Turner, J. S., 1973: Buoyancy effects in fluids. Cambridge University
Press.

Hunt, G. R., and H. C. Burridge, 2015: Fountains in industry and nature.
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 47, 195–220.
IOC, SCOR and IAPSO, 2010: The international thermodynamic equation of seawater - 2010: Calculation and use of thermodynamic
properties. UNESCO.
Jackson, R. H., and Coauthors, 2017: Near-glacier surveying of a subglacial discharge plume: implications for plume parameterizations.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 44, 6886–6894.
Kapoor, K., and Y. Jaluria, 1989: Heat transfer from a negatively buoyant wall jet. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 32, 697–709.
Kaye, N. B., and G. R. Hunt, 2006: Weak fountains. J. Fluid Mech.,
558, 319–328.
Kaye, N. B., and G. R. Hunt, 2007: Overturning in a filling box. J. Fluid
Mech., 576, 297–323.
Kaye, N. B., and P. F. Linden, 2004: Coalescing axisymmetric turbulent
plumes. J. Fluid Mech., 502, 41–63.
Lamb, H., 1916: Hydrodynamics. 4th ed., Cambridge University Press.
Launder, B. E., and W. Rodi, 1983: The turbulent wall jet - measurements and modeling. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 15, 419–459.
Mankoff, K. D., F. Straneo, C. Cenedese, S. B. Das, C. G. Richards, and
H. Singh, 2016: Structure and dynamics of a subglacial discharge
plume in a Greenlandic fjord. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans, 121, 8670–
8688.
McConnochie, C. D., and R. C. Kerr, 2017: Enhanced ablation of a
vertical ice face due to an external freshwater plume. J. Fluid Mech.,
810, 429–447.
Morton, B. R., G. I. Taylor, and J. S. Turner, 1956: Turbulent gravitational convection from maintained and instantaneous sources. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 234, 1–23.
Nokes, R., 2014: Streams, version 2.03: system theory and design. Department of Civil and Natural Resources Engineering, University of
Canterbury, New Zealand.
Sciascia, R., F. Straneo, C. Cenedese, and P. Heimbach, 2013: Seasonal
variability of submarine melt rate and circulation in an East Greenland fjord. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans, 118, 2492–2506.

Wille, R., and H. Fernholz, 1965: Report on the first European Mechanics Colloquium, on the Coanda effect. J. Fluid Mech., 23, 801–819.
Xu, Y., E. Rignot, I. Fenty, and D. Menemenlis, 2013: Subaqueous
melting of Store Glacier, West Greenland from three-dimensional,
high-resolution numerical modeling and ocean observations. Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 4648–4653.
Zgheib, N., T. Bonometti, and S. Balachandar, 2015: Dynamics of noncircular finite-release gravity currents. J. Fluid Mech., 783, 344–378.

