Power narrowing: Counteracting Doppler broadening in two-color transitions
Ran Finkelstein,∗ Ohr Lahad,∗ Ohad Michel, Omri Davidson, Eilon Poem, and Ofer Firstenberg

arXiv:1904.08529v2 [physics.atom-ph] 21 Nov 2019

Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 760001, Israel
Doppler broadening in thermal ensembles degrades the absorption cross-section and the coherence time of
collective excitations. In two photon transitions, it is common to assume that this problem becomes worse
with larger wavelength mismatch. Here we identify an opposite mechanism, where such wavelength mismatch
leads to cancellation of Doppler broadening via the counteracting effects of velocity-dependent light-shifts and
Doppler shifts. We show that this effect is general, common to both absorption and transparency resonances,
and favorably scales with wavelength mismatch. We experimentally confirm the enhancement of transitions for
different low-lying orbitals in rubidium atoms and use calculations to extrapolate to high-lying Rydberg orbitals.
These calculations predict a dramatic enhancement of up to 20-fold increase in absorption, even in the presence
of large homogeneous broadening. More general configurations, where an auxiliary dressing field is used to
counteract Doppler broadening, are also discussed and experimentally demonstrated. The mechanism we study
can be applied as well for rephasing of spin waves and increasing the coherence time of quantum memories.

Doppler broadening is ubiquitous in atomic and
molecular spectroscopy. Atoms and molecules with different thermal velocities experience different Doppler
shifts, which broaden the absorption lines and reduce
their contrast [1]. Increasing the light intensity typically causes further broadening due to saturation or
other power-broadening mechanisms, such as inhomogeneous light-shifts. These broadening or dephasing
mechanisms are major limiting factors, particularly in
the field of quantum optics with atomic ensembles [2–
6]. For instance, the coherence time of collective excitations in atomic gasses is often limited by Doppler
dephasing, hindering the performance of single-photon
sources and memories [7–9]. As Doppler broadening is
an inhomogeneous dephasing mechanism, one can potentially counteract it by introducing additional velocitydependent shifts [10–14]. Here we study the counteraction of Doppler broadening by velocity dependent lightshifts and identify an important class of systems where
such counteraction occurs naturally, without a need for
additional auxiliary fields.
Coherent two-photon processes, such as Raman transitions, two-photon absorption, and electromagnetically
induced transparency (EIT), are at the heart of many
quantum-optics protocols, ranging from quantum light
sources and memories [15–18] to sensing and quantum
non-linear optics [19]. The canonical example of a threelevel system employed for these processes is the Λ configuration, where two long-lived ground states are coupled via an intermediate excited state. In these systems, two-photon transitions are usually characterized by
negligible residual Doppler broadening, as the nearlydegenerate transition wavelengths experience opposite
Doppler shifts [20]. Particularly in a degenerate Λ sys-

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work

tem under EIT conditions, atoms at all velocities contribute to slowing down light and storing it [21]. Moreover, the coherence formed between the two lower states
is usually long-lived, which further contributes to narrow
linewidths. This class of systems can thus operate coherently at room temperature, making it a viable quantum
technology platform [22].
Another practical, though less studied, three-level system is the ladder configuration [23], where the intermediate state is coupled to an even higher excited state
[Fig. 1 (b)]. Ladder-type systems were recently shown to
be advantageous for broadband, noise-free, photon storage [7, 8], and they form the basis for quantum nonlinear optics with Rydberg atoms [19]. Nevertheless, a major caveat in ladder-type systems is the residual Doppler
broadening due to wavelength mismatch of the two optical transitions, which leads to significant dephasing and
broadening of the two-photon resonance [24].
Here, we demonstrate and study power narrowing of
two-color two-photon excitations in ladder systems, i.e.
the cancellation of residual Doppler broadening by lightshifts. We find the conditions under which the spectra
of these systems present resonances with no motional
broadening and high contrast. Power narrowing and the
resulting line enhancement are observed for both twophoton absorption and EIT resonances. We provide a
model which reproduces the observations and explains
them in terms of velocity-dependent light-shifts, generated by the excitation light.
In order to place power narrowing in a broader context,
we explore several extensions of the above study. First,
we identify the universal condition for optimal power
narrowing and derive its scaling with the system parameters. Second, we provide a prediction for two-color excitations of high-lying Rydberg states, which are typically characterized by a large wavelength mismatch. We
show that power narrowing becomes even more signifi-

In a thermal ensemble, the one-photon resonances are
broadened due to the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution
2
2 −1/2 −v 2 /(2vT
)
f (v) = (2πvT
)
e
of atomic velocities v.
We consider the typical regime for hot atoms, where the
resulting Doppler broadening dominates the linewidth
kc vT , kvT  Γ. For describing the three-level system,
we first examine the far-detuned limit ∆  Γ, where
resonant two-photon absorption occurs. We consider
the vast majority of the atoms with velocities v satisfying |∆ − kv|  Γ for which the absorption spectrum is
given by [21]

(a)
PBS

To detector

(b)

(c)

𝛿

control

𝛀

Ω γ

Δ
probe

α(δ, v) = α0 Γ

Ω2
(∆−kv)2 γc

γc2 + (δ + qkv −

Ω2
2
∆−kv )

,

(1)

2

Ω
where γc = γ + Γ (∆+kv)
2 is the power-broadened width
and α0 is the resonant absorption coefficient for stationary atoms. The two terms in the denominator that
shift the two-photon resonance are the residual Doppler
shift, associated with the two-photon momentum transfer
qk, and the velocity-dependent light-shift induced by the
Rcontrol field. When integrating over all velocities α(δ) =
dvf (v)α(δ, v), these shifts typically result in broadening and attenuation of the absorption line,
p such that
the peak absorption is limited by α0 Γ/(kvT 2/π)[14].
One finds however that these two shifts have opposite
signs when q > 0 in a counter-propagating configuration. The net two-photon shift has a minimum, around
which different velocities contribute to the absorption at
the same frequency. Notably, for a large enough detuning ∆  kv, the light-shift is linear in velocity
Ω2 /(∆ − kv) ≈ Ω2 /∆ + (Ω2 /∆2 )kv, and a complete
cancellation of Doppler broadening is achieved when

Fig. 1. Spectroscopy of two-color transitions. (a) probe
and control beams with different wave-numbers k 6= kc
counter-propagate inside a vapor cell. Both beams are
circularly-polarized (using quarter-wave plates, QWP; polarizations shown by green arrows), and a polarizing beam-splitter
(PBS) picks out the transmitted probe. (b) The ladder configuration, where wavelength mismatch introduces two-photon
Doppler shifts δ(v) that depend on the atomic velocity v. The
control field couples the intermediate state to a higher excited
state with Rabi frequency Ω and detuning ∆. (c) Measured
two-photon absorption spectra (∆ = 650 MHz) exhibiting
power narrowing. As the power is increased, the linewidth decreases and the absorption increases, up to an optimal power
(black spectrum), after which the line broadens.

cant in this case, and the resulting two-photon absorption
is greatly enhanced. Third, we establish power narrowing as a general effect of far-detuned dressing fields by
demonstrating and analyzing power narrowing by means
of an auxiliary dressing field.
System and model.— We study the absorption spectrum of a weak probe beam, counter-propagating a strong
control beam with Rabi frequency Ω in a thermal vapor
cell, as depicted in Fig. 1(a,b). The wave-numbers of
the probe and control are k and kc , respectively. We define the unitless parameter q = kc /k − 1, which quantifies the wavelength mismatch and thus the magnitude
of the residual Doppler broadening qkvT , where vT is
the atomic thermal velocity. The homogeneous decoherence rates of the intermediate and excited states are
Γ and γ, respectively. A two-photon resonance appears
when the two-photon detuning δ is close to zero. It has
the form of a transmission line due to EIT when the
one-photon detuning ∆ from the intermediate level is
close to zero and an absorption line due to two-photon
absorption when ∆ is large. The control power can
be varied, and, for each power, the probe frequency is
scanned to obtain an absorption spectrum [see Fig. 1(c)].

Ω2 /∆2 = q.

(2)

Experiment.— In our experiment, we use 87 Rb with
the ground level 5S1/2 , intermediate level 5P3/2 , and
higher-excited levels 5D5/2 or 7S1/2 . The experiment is
performed in a magnetically-shielded 10-mm long 87 Rb
cell at a temperature of 70 ◦ C. The atoms are optically
pumped to the maximally polarized ground state, such
that the level structure becomes close to that of a pure
three-level system. We measure the linewidth of the twophoton resonances as a function of control power for
both two-photon absorption (Fig. 2) and EIT (Fig. 3).
These measurements are done for the 5S1/2 → 5D5/2
two-photon transition, for which k = 2π/(780 nm) and
kc = 2π/(776 nm), and for the 5S1/2 → 7S1/2 , for
which k = 2π/(780 nm) and kc = 2π/(741 nm). The
different transitions are thus characterized by a wavelength mismatch q = 5 · 10−3 and q = 5 · 10−2 , respectively. For the two-photon absorption measurements,
2

Absorption

(a)
2

1

0

FWHM [MHz]

(b)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

Fig. 3. Enhancement and sub-homogeneous width of EIT
resonances. (a) Measured EIT contrast at different control
powers for q = 5·10−3 (red, measured on the 5S1/2 → 5D5/2
transition), q = 5 · 10−2 (blue, measured on the 5S1/2 →
7S1/2 transition), and q = 0 (black, calculated). Solid lines
are the result of a numerical calculation. (b) Full width at half
maximum (FWHM) for the same configurations. The EIT lines
are much narrower than the residual Doppler broadening, and,
for low control powers, they are also narrower than the homogeneous width (red shading for q = 5 · 10−3 and blue shading
for q = 5 · 10−2 ).

Fig. 2. Power narrowing and enhancement of two-photon
absorption. (a) Measured peak probe absorption (normalized
by one-photon resonant absorption in the absence of the control
field) at different control powers with q = 5 · 10−3 (red, measured on the 87 Rb 5S1/2 → 5D5/2 transition), q = 5 · 10−2
(blue, measured on the 5S1/2 → 7S1/2 transition), and q = 0
(black, calculated). Solid lines are the result of a numerical calculation. (b) Full width at half maximum (FWHM) for the same
configurations. Both transitions are significantly narrower than
the expected residual Doppler width, shown by dashed lines for
q = 5 · 10−3 (red) and q = 5 · 10−2 (blue). Optimal narrowing is achieved when Ω2 /∆2 = q, marked by arrows for both
configurations.

in Figs. (2) and (3)].
For the two-photon absorption resonance (Fig. 2), we
find that increasing the control power does not lead to
power broadening but rather narrows the measured absorption line. The linewidth indeed reaches its minimal value around Ω2 /∆2 = q for both transitions, in
excellent agreement with Eq. (2). As the Rabi frequency is increased from 0 up to this value, the resonance linewidth decreases, manifesting power narrowing. Consequently, the peak absorption increases, surpasses that calculated for q = 0 [black curve in Fig. 2(a)],
and, in the q = 5 · 10−2 case,peven surpasses the onephoton absorption α0 Γ/(kvT 2/π). The fact that this
limit is surpassed shows that power narrowing is not a
velocity-selective process, but rather engages many velocity groups in the absorption at the same detuning, thus
serving as a resource for strong light-matter interaction.
For a larger wavelength mismatch q, the mutual cancellation of the velocity-dependent light-shift and the residual
Doppler shift occurs at larger Rabi frequencies, closer to
the saturation of the two-photon transition, resulting in
an even more striking spectral narrowing and enhancement of absorption. Thus, counter-intuitively, the wave-

we set the one-photon detuning to ∆ = 1180 MHz for
q = 5 · 10−3 and to ∆ = 650 MHz for q = 5 · 10−2 .
In the absence of power broadening, the main decoherence mechanisms in these atomic systems are residual Doppler broadening (qkvT ; inhomogeneous), as well
as radiative lifetime, laser noise, and transit-time broadening which add up to the homogeneous decoherence
rate γ. In our experiment, qkvT = 1.28 MHz and
2γ = 2.48 MHz for q = 5 · 10−3 ; qkvT = 12.45 MHz
and 2γ = 3.93 MHz for q = 5 · 10−2 . The one-photon
homogeneous decoherence rate is 2Γ = 6 MHz. Typically the two broadening terms combine to form socalled Voigt line-shapes, whose calculated widths are
marked by dashed lines in Fig. 2(b). Nevertheless, as
Figs. (2) and (3) show, we find over a broad range of
control powers that the measured linewidths of the twophoton resonances are narrower than the expected Voigt
widths. These measurements agree well with full numerical calculations of the three-level susceptibility, integrated over all atomic velocities [shown as solid lines

3

(a)

𝚫>𝟎
Absorption (𝑞 = 0) Absorption (𝑞 > 0)

(b)

𝚫=𝟎
Absorption (𝑞 = 0) Absorption (𝑞 > 0)

Fig. 4. Contribution of different velocity groups to the absorption spectrum α(δ, v)
v). (a) Calculation of the two-photon absorption per atomic velocity group (normalized by maximal absorption) when ∆ > 0 (here ∆ = 1.1 GHz). The left panels show the
degenerate case q = 0 [kc = k = 2π/(780 nm)], and the right panels show the two-color case q > 0 [kc = 2π/(741 nm)]. For
q > 0, a significant fraction of the atomic velocities contribute to the absorption at the same frequency. The velocity-integrated absorption spectra (bottom, solid blue) are compared against those naively expected due to homogeneous decoherence alone (dashed
green for q = 0) and due to residual Doppler broadening (dashed red for q > 0). (b) The same calculations are repeated for the
EIT resonance when ∆ = 0. Here for q > 0, the edges of the transparency window exhibit pronounced absorption peaks, which
correspond to ‘turning points’ of the maximal absorption in the velocity-detuning space.

length mismatch q is in fact a resource in this class of
systems, since a larger Doppler shift can counteract the
inhomogeneous light-shift at larger control powers.
For the EIT resonance (Fig. 3), we find at low control powers that the transparency window for the twocolor case (q > 0) is narrower and deeper than that expected for the degenerate case (q = 0). In fact, in the
colored areas marked in Fig. 3(b), the linewidth is even
narrower than the homogeneous linewidth 2γ. This subhomogeneous feature is associated with the emergence
of enhanced absorption features around the transparency
line, as described by the model presented below and reproduced by a full numerical calculation.
Numerical calculations.— In Fig. 4(a), we compare by
numerical calculations the two-photon absorption spectra of a Doppler-free system (q = 0) with that of a
two-color system (q > 0). Naively, one may expect the
former to exhibit the narrow homogeneous line (dashed
green in the bottom panel), and the latter to have a
broader line with width on the order of kqvT (red dashed
line). In practice however, in the q > 0 case, many velocity groups contribute to the absorption at the same
frequency around the condition specified by Eq. (2),
whereas in the q = 0 case, inhomogeneous light-shift
broadens and attenuates the absorption line.
In the EIT regime ∆ = 0, the two-photon resonances
appear as transparency lines rather than absorption lines,
as shown in Fig. 4(b). The spectrum is comprised of
many Autler-Townes doublets with different splittings
and detunings, and a transparency window is formed at

the narrow region where none of the velocity groups absorb light. For most velocity groups, the Doppler shift
satisfies kv  Γ, and thus Eq. (1) holds with ∆ = 0,
α(δ, v) = α0 Γ

Ω2
(kv)2 γc

γc2 + (δ + qkv +

Ω2 2
kv )

.

(3)

The counteracting effects of light-shift and Doppler shift
result in enhanced absorption features around the central
transparency window [Fig. 4(b) bottom]. Furthermore,
many velocities which would otherwise contribute to resonant absorption now contribute to transparency, thus enhancing the EIT contrast.
Generalization and extensions.— In general terms, the
power narrowing mechanism we study can be understood
as the counteraction of the inhomogeneous shifts of two
coupled transitions. The far-detuned control field admixes each transition into the other, such that the transition to be narrowed inherits from the other transition a
small fraction Ω2 /∆2 of its inhomogeneous shift. Power
narrowing is achieved when the bare shifts of the two
transitions are of opposite sign, and it is optimal when
their ratio equals −Ω2 /∆2 . This condition sets the optimal control power for a fixed ∆, and it reduces to Eq. (2)
for Doppler-broadened two-color transitions. We shall
now study the sensitivity of this mechanism to the key
parameters of the system and project its performance to
a broader class of systems.
We start by numerically verifying the optimum condition [Eq. (2)] for a wide range of detuning ∆ and

4

(b)

0.5

15
10

0.3

5
0.1
0

2

6

10

14

2

6

Fig. 5, we compare this configuration (q = 0.6) to those
experimentally confirmed in this work (q  1). As
the wavelength mismatch increases, the counteraction of
the two inhomogeneous shifts occurs at larger control
powers, resulting in more significant narrowing. This is
accompanied by enhanced absorption, approaching that
of stationary atoms, which is attributed to the saturation of the two-photon transition at high powers, where
ΓΩ2 /∆2  γ for all atoms.
The general picture presented above provides us with
additional tools to cancel inhomogeneous broadening
even when such cancellation does not occur naturally,
i.e, when Eq. (2) does not hold. We experimentally
demonstrate how this is achieved by adding an auxiliary dressing field, as presented in Fig. 6. We use the
three-level system 5S1/2 → 5P3/2 → 5D5/2 with wavelength mismatch q = 5 · 10−3 under weak driving,
such that its two-photon linewidth is dominated by residual Doppler broadening. We add a dressing field with
kd = 2π/(1270 nm) detuned by ∆d = 400 MHz from
the transition 5D5/2 → 31F7/2 , counter-propagating the
control field and with Rabi frequency Ωd . Since the
Doppler width of the latter transition is much larger than
the residual Doppler width of the 5S1/2 → 5D5/2 transition, the dressing field can be weak, Ωd  ∆d , ensuring negligible population transfer to the fourth level. As
shown by Fig. 6(b), the two-photon line exhibits power
narrowing with respect to the dressing power Ω2d /∆2d ,
with the optimum obtained around Ω2d /∆2d = qk/kd ,
similarly to Eq. (2).
Finally, various non-idealities may limit the magnitude of the effect presented in this work. First, for a given
detuning ∆ and wavelength mismatch q, the magnitude
of power narrowing and the absorption enhancement are
bounded by the ratio of inhomogeneous to homogeneous
broadening. In the experimental results presented here,
terms such as laser linewidth and transit-time broadening constitute a significant fraction of the homogeneous
width, on top of the natural lifetime. Improving these
factors would further increase the achievable power narrowing. Second, in the absence of optical pumping, the
manifold nature of the atomic levels might reduce the
overall effectiveness of the narrowing effect, as the optimal condition of Eq. (2) cannot be simultaneously met
for several transitions with different coupling strengths.
Nevertheless, for the entire manifold, the Doppler shift
and the light-shift are of opposite signs and counteract
each other over a broad range of laser powers. Thus,
while its magnitude is reduced, power narrowing still occurs for degenerate multi-level systems, even in the presence of non-idealities such as non-optimal optical pumping.
Conclusion.— We have identified a class of systems

Absorption

(a)

0
14

10

(c)

20
15

0.3

10

0.2

5

0.1
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Absorption

0.4

0

Fig. 5. Dependence of power narrowing on system parameters at optimal power Ω2 = q∆2 : (a) Relative narrowing
(linewidth normalized by residual Doppler width) versus detuning, calculated for wavelength mismatch of q = 5 · 10−3 , q =
5 · 10−2 , and q = 0.6; The latter matches transitions to
high-lying Rydberg states. The working points corresponding to the experiments of Fig. 2 are marked by arrows. (b)
Gain in absorption (peak absorption normalized by one-photon
absorption) versus detuning. (c) Dependence of power narrowing on the wavelength mismatch for fixed large detuning
∆ = 20kvT . The magnitude of the effect scales favorably with
wavelength mismatch, as the counteraction of the two inhomogeneous shifts occurs at larger control powers. The points mark
representative transitions in Rb.

wavelength mismatch q. We find that indeed the narrowest line is achieved around Ω2 = q∆2 , as long as
∆ > kvT  Γ. We then fix Ω2 = q∆2 and scan ∆
and q. Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show that the line narrowing and the enhancement of absorption increase with detuning. In our experiment, the detunings were 3-5 times
larger than kvT ; these points are indicated by arrows in
Figs. 5 (a) and 5(b). Larger detuning would provide for
more narrowing, as long as the laser power is increased
accordingly. This is explained by a larger capture range
of velocities, for which the weak dressing approximation
is valid.
Figure 5(c) shows that power narrowing scales favorably with the wavelength mismatch in two-color systems.
It can therefore play an important role in systems that
suffer from residual Doppler broadening that is comparable to the optical Doppler broadening. An important
example for such configuration is the two-photon transition to high-lying Rydberg states in Rubidium, with
k = 2π/(780 nm) and kc = 2π/(480 nm) [19]. In

5

where velocity-dependent light-shift and Doppler shift
can counteract each other. For low driving powers, the
two-photon absorption-line becomes narrower with increasing power, up to the point of complete cancellation
of Doppler broadening, after which the line broadens as
typically occurs with power broadening. An important
distinction between the power narrowing mechanism and
other spectral-narrowing phenomena is that power narrowing engages many velocity groups in the resonant

process and is, in principle, not velocity selective. While
power narrowing of the two-photon absorption resonance
results in an enhanced absorption (thus enabling stronger
light-matter interaction), a similar mechanism in the EIT
resonance results in enhanced transparency contrast and
narrow linewidth. These features would lead to a smaller
group-velocity of light pulses propagating through such
media. We have found that optimal power narrowing in
two-photon absorption is always achieved when the ratio
between the inhomogeneous widths of the two-photon
and one-photon transitions equals Ω2 /∆2 . The latter can
be understood in a dressed state picture as a mutual cancellation of the inhomogeneous broadenings of the constituent bare levels. We have demonstrated how this picture is applied in other configurations, by using an auxiliary dressing field to cancel the inhomogeneous broadening of a system where such cancellation does not occur
naturally. In all configurations, we found the qualitative
effect to be robust to the employed dressing powers and
detunings.
While we have studied here the cancellation of
Doppler broadening in continuous wave spectroscopy,
akin to Rabi spectroscopy, the same rephasing mechanism should also apply to pulsed schemes, akin to
Ramsey spectroscopy. Importantly, one could eliminate
Doppler dephasing of collective excitations in pulsed
light-storage schemes by applying a rephasing powernarrowing field during storage.
These results establish power narrowing as an important tool for quantum technologies based on strong and
coherent light-matter interaction at ambient conditions,
where inhomogeneous broadening is often the limiting
factor.
Acknowledgements— We acknowledge financial support by the Israel Science Foundation and ICORE, the
European Research Council starting investigator grant QPHOTONICS 678674, the Pazy Foundation, the Minerva
Foundation with funding from the Federal German Ministry for Education and Research, and the Laboratory in
Memory of Leon and Blacky Broder.

[1] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Atom-photon interactions : basic
processes and applications (New York : Wiley, 1998).
[2] K. Hammerer, A. S. Sørensen, and E. S. Polzik, Reviews
of Modern Physics 82, 1041 (2010).
[3] B. Huber, T. Baluktsian, M. Schlagmüller, A. Kölle,
H. Kübler, R. Löw, and T. Pfau, Physical Review Letters
107, 243001 (2011).
[4] F. Ripka, H. Kübler, R. Löw, and T. Pfau, Science 362,
446 (2018).
[5] S. L. Bromley, B. Zhu, M. Bishof, X. Zhang, T. Bothwell,
J. Schachenmayer, T. L. Nicholson, R. Kaiser, S. F. Yelin,

M. D. Lukin, A. M. Rey, and J. Ye, Nature Communications 7, 11039 (2016).
[6] M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov, A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg,
G. R. Welch, M. D. Lukin, Y. Rostovtsev, E. S. Fry, and
M. O. Scully, Physical Review Letters 82, 5229 (1999).
[7] R. Finkelstein, E. Poem, O. Michel, O. Lahad, and
O. Firstenberg, Science advances 4, eaap8598 (2018).
[8] K. T. Kaczmarek, P. M. Ledingham, B. Brecht, S. E.
Thomas, G. S. Thekkadath, O. Lazo-Arjona, J. H. D.
Munns, E. Poem, A. Feizpour, D. J. Saunders, J. Nunn,
and I. A. Walmsley, Phys. Rev. A 97, 042316 (2018).

(a)

(b)

Δd

dressing

Ωd

𝛿

control

Ω

γ

Δ

probe

Fig. 6. Power narrowing by an auxiliary dressing field. (a)
Three-color level scheme, where a dressing field with Rabi frequency Ωd is detuned by ∆d from resonance. Here Ω2 /∆2
is kept small, such that the two-photon transition is dominated
by (residual) Doppler broadening. (b) Measured width of the
two-photon absorption line versus dressing power (circles) and
corresponding numerical calculations (solid line). The width is
significantly narrower than the expected residual Doppler width
(dashed line) and, for optimal dressing power, reaches a value
close to the homogeneous width of the two-photon transition
(shaded area).

6

[9] Y.-S. Lee, S. M. Lee, H. Kim, and H. S. Moon, Opt. Express 24, 28083 (2016), arXiv:1609.02378.
[10] G. Grynberg, Journal de Physique 40 (1979).
[11] S. Reynaud, M. Himbert, J. Dupont-Roc, H. H. Stroke,
and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 756 (1979).
[12] A. K. Popov and A. S. Bayev, Phys. Rev. A 62, 25801
(2000).
[13] D. D. Yavuz, N. R. Brewer, J. A. Miles, and Z. J. Simmons, Physical Review A 88, 063836 (2013).
[14] O. Lahad, R. Finkelstein, O. Davidson, O. Michel,
E. Poem, and O. Firstenberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123,
173203 (2019).
[15] L.-M. Duan, M. D. Lukin, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, Nature
414, 413 (2001).
[16] M. D. Eisaman, A. André, F. Massou, M. Fleischhauer,
A. S. Zibrov, and M. D. Lukin, Nature 438, 837 (2005).
[17] K. F. Reim, P. Michelberger, K. C. Lee, J. Nunn, N. K.

[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

7

Langford, and I. A. Walmsley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,
053603 (2011).
O. Katz and O. Firstenberg, Nature Communications 9,
2074 (2018).
O. Firstenberg, C. S. Adams, and S. Hofferberth, J. Phys.
B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 49, 152003 (2016).
O. Firstenberg, M. Shuker, A. Ron, and N. Davidson,
Reviews of Modern Physics 85, 941 (2013).
M. Fleischhauer, A. Imamoglu, and J. P. Marangos, Reviews of modern physics 77, 633 (2005).
S. Knappe, P. Schwindt, V. Shah, L. Hollberg, J. Kitching,
L. Liew, and J. Moreland, Opt. Express 13, 1249 (2005).
T. T. Grove, V. Sanchez-Villicana, B. C. Duncan,
S. Maleki, and P. L. Gould, Phys. Scr. 52, 271 (1995).
A. Urvoy, C. Carr, R. Ritter, C. S. Adams, K. J. Weatherill,
and R. Löw, J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 46, 245001
(2013).

