Dynamical diversity of pulsating solitons in a fiber laser
Hong-Jie Chen1, Yan-Jie Tan1, Jin-gan Long1, Wei-Cheng Chen2, Wei-Yi Hong1, Hu Cui1, Ai-Ping
Luo1,*, Zhi-Chao Luo1,*, and Wen-Cheng Xu1,*
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanophotonic Functional Materials and Devices &

Guangzhou Key Laboratory for Special Fiber Photonic Devices and Applications, South China
Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, China
2

School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan 528000, China

*

Corresponding authors: luoaiping@scnu.edu.cn; zcluo@scnu.edu.cn; xuwch@scnu.edu.cn

Abstract: Pulsating behavior is a universal phenomenon in versatile fields. In nonlinear
dissipative systems, the solitons could also pulsate under proper conditions and show many
interesting dynamics. However, the pulsation dynamics is generally concerned with single
soliton case. Herein, by utilizing real-time spectroscopy technique, namely, dispersive
Fourier-transform (DFT), we reveal the versatile categories of pulsating solitons in a fiber
laser. In particular, the weak to strong explosive behaviors of pulsating soliton, as well as the
rogue wave generation during explosions were observed. Moreover, the concept of soliton
pulsation was extended to the multi-soliton case. It is found that the simultaneous pulsation of
energy, separation and relative phase difference could be observed for solitons inside the
molecule, while the pulsations of each individual in multi-soliton bunch could be regular or
irregular. These findings would further enrich the ultrafast dynamics of dissipative solitons in
nonlinear optical systems.

1. Introduction
Compared with the Hamiltonian system, the dissipative system is more complicated in the
sense that the dissipative system has the dissipative properties of continuous exchange of
energy with the environment. In such a dissipative system, gain and loss play an essential role
in the formation of dissipative solitons. Owing to its characteristic of energy exchange, the
fiber laser can be regarded as a dissipative system and the pulses formed in such a system can
be treated as dissipative solitons [1]. In addition to its excellent ability of generating
ultra-short pulses which has a wide range of applications in fields from fundamental physics
to industrial purposes, the mode-locked fiber laser is also known as an ideal test bed for
investigating complex nonlinear dynamics. So far, various striking nonlinear phenomena have
been observed in fiber lasers, such as multi-soliton patterns [2-5], vector soliton [6-9] and
dissipative soliton resonance [10-13]. However, due to the lack of advanced measurement

technologies, these results were not based on a real-time measurement method, which means
that some important information may be ignored since the ultrafast nonlinear phenomena
cannot be captured by the conventional measurement instruments.
Till recent years, owing to the development of real-time measurement techniques,
dispersive Fourier-transform (DFT) has been regarded as one of the standard real-time
measurement techniques for resolving ultrafast dynamics of solitons in laser systems [14].
Through the DFT, the spectrum of the soliton could be mapped into a temporal waveform by
using dispersive element with enough group-velocity dispersion. Thus, the ultrafast spectral
signals can be captured by a real-time oscilloscope with a high-speed photodetector. The DFT
technique opens up the way of experimentally investigating the transient dynamics of solitons
in lasers. Indeed, it has been employed to observe complex ultrafast nonlinear phenomena,
including soliton explosion [15-19], build-up and transient dynamics of solitons [20-25],
pulsating solitons [26-28], as well as internal dynamics and build-up of soliton molecules
[29-35].
Particularly, pulsating soliton as a distinctive localized structure in dissipative systems has
attracted extensive attention [36-43]. Unlike equal amplitude of pulse train generated from the
laser, it is found that the amplitude of the pulsating soliton could evolve periodically or in a
more complex way along with the cavity roundtrips and the pulsating soliton exists regardless
of the sign of the dispersion. In the early years, the properties of the pulsating solitons could
merely be observed by the oscilloscope due to the limitation of the measuring apparatus. That
is to say, only the temporal intensity information of the pulsating solitons was obtained [38].
With the development of real-time spectroscopy techniques, i.e., DFT, it is possible to unveil
the real-time spectral dynamics of pulsating solitons [26-28]. Generally, the soliton pulsating
behavior in fiber laser systems was investigated in the single pulse regime. In fact,
theoretically the dissipative optical systems could also support the cases of multi-soliton
pulsations. However, the reported dynamical behaviors of the pulsating soliton, in particular
the multi-soliton pulsation, are still limited, the underlying dynamics have not been fully
revealed. Therefore, it is of great interest to investigate the versatile behaviors of pulsating
solitons in a fiber laser.
In this work, we firstly observed, to the best of our knowledge, the dynamical diversity of
pulsating solitons in a fiber laser by using the DFT. We revealed the real-time spectral
evolution from single-soliton pulsation to multi-soliton pulsation. The explosive behavior
during the single-soliton pulsation was observed, where the degree of soliton explosions is
from weak to strong, and the rogue wave was generated. Then the pulsating behaviors of the
multi-soliton patterns were also investigated. Particularly, the solitons inside the molecule

show the synchronous pulsations in energy, separation and relative phase difference, while the
energy pulsation of each individual in multi-soliton bunch could be either regular or irregular.
The experimental results would enrich the transient dynamics of the pulses in laser
community and contribute to further understanding the complex features of pulsating solitons
in dissipative optical systems.

2. Experimental setup

Figure 1. Schematic of the experimental setup.

The dynamical diversity of pulsating solitons was observed in a passively mode-locked fiber
laser (See Figure S1 in Supplementary Materials). The schematic of the whole experimental
setup is presented in Figure 1. At the laser output, we measure the average optical spectrum
and the radio-frequency (RF) spectrum by using an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA,
Yokogawa, AQ6375B) and a RF spectrum analyzer (Advantest, R3131A), respectively. The
autocorrelation trace of soliton is measured by an autocorrelator (Femtochrome, FR-103WS).
Apart from the conventional measurements above, directly observing the spatial-temporal
intensity evolution is fulfilled by a real-time oscilloscope (Tektronix, DSA71604B, 16 GHz)
with a photodetector (Newport, 818-BB-35F, 12.5 GHz). On the other hand, to measure the
spatial-spectral evolution of solitons, the DFT technique is adopted. In order to stretch the
temporal solitons and map them into the shot-to-shot spectrum, here for pulsating
non-bound-state solitons (the pulsating single-soliton, explosive pulsating soliton and

pulsating soliton bunch), a ~16 km long SMF is used, while for the soliton molecule, a piece
of dispersion compensation fiber (DCF) with dispersion amount of 2300 ps/nm is adopted.
Consequently, combining the photodetector and oscilloscope, the shot-to-shot spectrum can
be measured in real-time with resolution of Δλ=0.29 nm and Δλ = 0.035 nm, respectively, for
our DFT configuration. It is worth noting that, for the soliton molecules, owing to their
separation is quite large, around 106 ps in our experiment comparing to that of soliton pairs in
the anomalous dispersion regime, a large total dispersion to stretch the pulsating soliton
molecules is therefore in need, which enables two individual corresponding shot-to-shot
soliton spectra to overlap completely. In this case, the two superposition spectra can be
regarded as a unit, ensuring the accuracy to resolve the shot-to-shot spectral dynamics of
pulsating soliton molecules in the spectral domain.

3. Experimental results
3.1 Pulsating single-soliton and explosive long-period pulsating soliton
3.1.1 Pulsating single-soliton
In our experiment, by adjusting the PC, the dissipative soliton with typical rectangular
spectrum can be firstly observed at the pump power of 6.34 mW. But here we do not focus on
this type of dissipative soliton which is commonly seen, since the properties of the common
dissipative single-soliton operation in fiber lasers, to large degree, have been fully
investigated. However, for the solitons with pulsating properties, they have not yet been
completely experimentally studied. It is always inspired to explore different patterns of
pulsating solitons. Therefore, we are more interested to further reveal the dynamics of
pulsating single-soliton, which is also expected to be bunched together as pulsating solitons
bunch without soliton interactions or bounded together forming pulsating soliton molecule
under the soliton interactions in fiber lasers.
By further finely tuning the PC and adjusting the pump power to 8.43 mW, we were able to
observe the pulsating single-soliton. Notably, the average spectrum presented on the OSA has
gradient edges instead of conventional rectangular ones, as shown in Figure 2(a). Moreover,
the RF spectrum has several satellite peaks around the main peak with separation of 33.8 kHz
as depicted in Figure 2(b), indicating the soliton was operating in pulsating regime. Then we
performed the real-time measurement techniques to analyze the characteristics of the soliton
in both spectral and temporal domains. The 1500 continuous roundtrips evolution of

shot-to-shot spectrum reconstructed through DFT is presented in Figure 2(c). One can see that
the spectrum breathes periodically. Correspondingly, the soliton energy also varies with the
cavity roundtrips with a pulsating period of ~274 roundtrips, corresponding to a modulation
frequency of 33.8 kHz in RF spectrum presented in Figure 2(b). Figure 2(d) shows the
corresponding temporal evolution of the soliton. It is evident that the width and intensity of
the soliton vary periodically with the cavity roundtrips, emerging pulsating properties.

Figure 2. The characteristics of the single-soliton pulsation. (a) The spectrum obtained from the
OSA. (b) The RF spectrum. (c) The shot-to-shot spectra and corresponding energy evolution. (d)
Pulse train.

Furthermore, we fixed the pump power and subtly adjusted the orientation of the PC to
better display the characteristics of pulsating solitons. We find that the spectrum displayed on
the OSA varies correspondingly, namely, the spectrum can vary from the relative flat top to
the gradient one (See Figure S2 in Supplementary Materials). Moreover, the special spectrum
is related to the degree of soliton pulsation parameters (strong or weak pulsation). That is to
say, the larger the gradient extent of the spectral edges, the stronger the modulation of
pulsating soliton energy and amplitude is. Particularly, when the gradient extent of spectral
edges is slight enough, the energy modulation is also very slight, showing a tendency toward
a stable mode-locked state. The variation of the spectral gradient extent could be attributed to
the change of the pulsating states in the laser cavity. In the experiment, the adjustment of the
PC would change the cavity loss, namely, the transmission of the cavity varies, leading to the
variation of the pulsating states. Consequently, the characteristics of the mode-locked
spectrum would change correspondingly.

3.1.2 Explosive long-period pulsating soliton

Figure 3. The explosive long-period pulsating soliton operation. (a) The spectrum obtained from
the OSA. (b) The RF spectrum. (c) The shot-to-shot spectra and corresponding energy evolution.
(d) The enlarged explosive pulsating soliton region.

In the process of exploring the pulsating single-soliton, especially, we also observed that the
pulsating single-soliton collapsed intermittently and returned back to the original pulsating
state after roundtrips of dozens to around one hundred during the evolution. This soliton
nonlinear phenomenon, in fact, is similar to the soliton explosion [15-19]. When adjusting the
orientation of the PC, in addition to achieving the regularly pulsating single-soliton at the
pump power of 8.98 mW, we noticed a unique average spectrum from the OSA showing a
high instability: spikes and dips stochastically occur on the spectrum. One typical spectrum is
presented in Figure 3(a). And Figure 3(b) shows the corresponding RF spectrum, which has
many irregular peaks. To acquire the possible diverse characteristics of the pulse, we recorded
15000 roundtrips real-time spectra with DFT, as shown in Figure 3(c). Obviously, during the
evolution of the pulsating soliton, we can see the explosive pulsating soliton spectrum with
extreme intensity peak around the 8000th roundtrip and the corresponding pulse energy
suddenly raises. To clearly show the detailed explosive process of pulsating soliton, we take
out 1200 roundtrips single-shot spectra from the 15000 roundtrips evolution process, as
shown in Figure 3(d). From the 7200th roundtrip to the 8400th roundtrip, three explosive
events of the pulsating soliton corresponding to three pulsating periods can be observed, and
the explosive degree strengthens gradually. Note that, comparing to the explosions of

pulsating soliton around the 7550th and the 7800th roundtrips, the pulsating soliton explosion
around the 8000th roundtrip is much more highly chaotic and sustains longer roundtrips
(about 100 roundtrips).
For these three different explosion events, the spectrum collapse sustains certain roundtrips
and recovers to the regular pulsating soliton. As for the strongest explosive pulsating soliton
event, the spectrum broadens dramatically. To illustrate more details, one typical single-shot
spectrum is drawn during the explosion at the 7982th roundtrip, as presented in the inset of
Figure 3(c). Here, the spectrum collapse can be found clearly, and the explosive spectrum has
intensive peaks. Besides, we note that the RF spectrum in Figure 3(b) has quite many satellite
peaks, which also shows a slight chaotic feature. Given that the pulsating soliton behavior is
along with the explosive events and long-period pulsation (~242 roundtrips) at the same time
in our experiment, we regard this unique pulsating soliton pattern as the “explosive
long-period pulsating soliton”. Moreover, we investigated the extreme waves in the spectral
domain by recording the maximum intensity of the single-shot spectrum. It is found that
spectral rouge waves generated in such an explosive long-period pulsating soliton regime,
which is shown in the Supplementary Materials (See Figure S3).

3.2 Pulsating dual-soliton bunches
3.2.1 Irregular pulsating dual-soliton bunch
In the following, before seeking for the pulsating soliton molecules which are expected to be
formed in a laser system, we tried to explore the pulsating solitons bunch to see the possible
dynamics difference between the single-soliton pulsation and multi-soliton bunch pulsation.
More importantly, since the soliton molecule can be treated as a unique pattern of
multi-soliton bunch when the separation between the individuals is small enough, it might be
instructive to further find the pulsating soliton molecules.

Figure 4. Irregular pulsating dual-soliton bunch operation. (a) The spectrum obtained from the
OSA. (b) The RF spectrum. (c) The pulse train. (d) The total energy evolution of the dual-soliton
bunch. (e) and (g) The shot-to-shot spectra of the two solitons. (f) and (h) The energy evolution of
the two solitons.

As a rule, multi-soliton bunch is expected to be generated under the stronger pump power
in the laser system. Therefore, by increasing the pump power to 12.06 mW，the stable
mode-locked dual-soliton bunch could firstly be achieved. Likewise, the corresponding
spectrum with steep edges was observed. Then, we finely tuned the PC to look for the average
optical spectrum with gradient edges on the OSA, as shown in Figure 4 (a). Here, note that
the gradient range of the spectral edges is smaller comparing with that in the pulsating
single-soliton regime. The corresponding RF spectrum is shown in Figure 4(b), which also
has several satellite peaks around the main peak with separation of 31.5 kHz, meaning that the
dual-soliton bunch presents pulsating behavior. To further verify the existence of pulsating
solitons bunch, temporal evolution of the laser output was measured directly by the real-time
oscilloscope and shown in Figure 4(c). It is evident that the pulsating dual-soliton bunch has
been observed. To further get insight into the shot-to-shot spectral evolution of the pulsating
solitons bunch, via the DFT, the two pulsating solitons were stretched into corresponding
real-time spectra. Instead of relatively strong periodic pulsation of spectrum in pulsating
single-soliton, both two periodic spectra show a slight pulsation as illustrated in Figures 4(e)
and (g). Figures 4(d), (f) and (h) display the corresponding energy evolution of solitons bunch
and each individual. Particularly, it can be seen that, during the periodic evolution of soliton
energy in dependence of roundtrips, irregular fluctuation happens to the periodic energy

pulsation of soliton 1, while the energy of soliton 2 keeps relatively regular pulsation. For this
energy pulsation difference, we suppose that one of the solitons experiences a small
perturbation, leading to the variation of peak power for this soliton. Thus, the pulsating
behavior changes correspondingly. In this case, the different pulsation of the two solitons
could be observed. Although irregular energy pulsation takes place to the pulsating
dual-soliton bunch, the pulsation frequency of the whole dual-soliton bunch with 31.5 kHz
(corresponding to ~294 roundtrips) still can be measured by the RF spectrum analyzer, as
shown in Figure 4(b).

3.2.2 Dual-soliton bunch with regular pulsation

Figure 5. Regular pulsating dual-soliton bunch operation. (a) The spectrum obtained from the
OSA. (b) The RF spectrum. (c) The pulse train. (d) The total energy evolution of the dual-soliton
bunch. (e) and (g) The shot-to-shot spectra of the two solitons. (f) and (h) The energy evolution of
the two solitons.

Then we increased the pump power to 12.63 mW and carefully tuned the PC, dual-soliton
bunch with regular pulsation was achieved. The spectrum from the OSA is shown in Figure 5
(a). The periodic evolutions of temporal and spectral intensity are represented in Figures 5(c),
(e) and (g), which are further confirmed by a RF spectrum analyzer. Similarly, the RF
spectrum in Figure 5(b) displays multiple peaks with frequency difference of ~35.1 kHz,
which well agrees with ~264 roundtrips pulsating period of the dual-soliton bunch in Figures

5(c), (e) and (g). From Figures 5(c), (e) and (g), we can clearly see that the pulsations of the
dual-soliton bunch are regular and much stronger in both temporal and spectral domains
comparing to those of the dual-soliton bunch with irregular pulsation in Figure 4. In addition,
due to the increase of pump power, the pulsation period (~264 roundtrips) is also shorter than
~294 roundtrips pulsating period of the dual-soliton bunch with irregular pulsation. In terms
of the shot-to-shot spectra, the real-time spectral characteristics are similar to those of the
pulsating single-soliton (See Figure S4 in the Supplement Materials). The corresponding
energy evolutions of solitons bunch, soliton 1 and soliton 2 are depicted in Figures 5(d), (f)
and (h), respectively. Obviously, all three energy pulsating processes are regular and have
same period, which means in this case the pulsating dual-soliton complex is fairly stable.

3.3 Pulsating soliton molecules
In the following, we aimed for verifying the possible existence of pulsating soliton molecules
in the fiber laser which have few reports so far. Actually, soliton molecules can be regarded as
a unit when the individual solitons bound together under their interactions. Two particular
characteristics of soliton molecules: the spectrum with modulation and the autocorrelation
trace with multiple peaks, are useful to identify whether the fiber laser operates in the bound
state regime.
Here, based on the characteristics of pulsating solitons we observed above, especially the
gradient edges of optical spectrum directly displayed on the OSA, as well as the features of
soliton molecules spectrum with interference fringes, we sought for the pulsating soliton
molecules. When fixing the pump power at 13.67 mW, we obtained pulsating soliton
molecule by controlling the PC, and the results are summarized in Figure 6. Figure 6(a) shows
the spatial-spectral dynamical evolution. One can clearly see that the spectra with modulation
breathe periodically, namely the spectra experience periodic broadening and compression. For
better displaying the interference fringes of the soliton molecule spectrum, we also show the
spectra with a small range in Figure 6(d). Correspondingly, the energy of the soliton molecule
varies periodically, as presented in the inset of Figure 6(a), showing pulsating property with a
period of ~355 roundtrips, which is well consistent with the frequency difference of 26.5 kHz
in RF spectrum in Figure 6(c). Here, it should be noted that because the output power is too
low to be transmitted in the DCF, the real-time spectral dynamics via DFT was recorded after
an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA). The corresponding temporal evolution of the soliton
molecule is further demonstrated in Figure 6(b). From Figure 6(b), one can see that two
pulsating solitons bound as a unit and evolves stably. Based on both spectral and temporal

characteristics, it demonstrates that pulsating dual-soliton molecule has been observed in our
fiber laser. Then we further investigated the temporal separation and relative phase difference
between the two solitons inside the molecule from the DFT spectra of the soliton molecule. It
is found that the separation and phase difference between the two solitons simultaneously
vibrate with the roundtrips, as shown in Figure 6(e). The soliton separation oscillates with
amplitude of 1.7 ps and a period of ~355 roundtrips. Meanwhile, the phase difference
oscillates with amplitude of 0.34π and a period of ~355 roundtrips. Figure 6(f) shows the
evolution trajectory of the two interacting solitons in the phase plane, indicating that the
oscillations possess stably periodic behavior. Thus, we observed the soliton molecule
pulsation, which pulsates not only in energy, but also in soliton separation and phase
difference.

Figure 6. Characteristics of periodic pulsating soliton molecule. (a) The real-time spectra
evolution measured with DFT, inset: the energy evolution. (b) The temporal evolution. (c) The RF
spectrum. (d) The enlarged spectra. (e) The soliton separation and relative phase difference as a
function of the roundtrips. (f) The corresponding interaction planes.

When the PC was further adjusted slightly, the soliton molecule pulsated as a unit could be
still observed. That is, the two solitons consisting of the molecule possess synchronous
pulsations. However, in this case the soliton molecule did not pulsate in a periodic way.
Figure 7(a) shows the real-time spectral dynamics of pulsating soliton molecule with
aperiodic behaviors. The details of real-time spectral evolution with shorter spectral range are
also given in Figure 7(d). As can be seen here, the interference fringes of mode-locked
spectrum present the irregular (or non-perfect periodic) patterns, indicating that the separation
and phase difference between the two solitons inside the molecule irregularly evolve with
roundtrip time. The whole energy evolution of the pulsating soliton molecule further

demonstrated that the pulsating behavior is irregular, as depicted in the inset of Figure 7(a).
Correspondingly, the pulse train of the soliton molecule is also shown in Figure 7(b). Here, it
can be clearly seen that the two solitons pulsate as a unit, but not in a periodic manner.
Moreover, because of the aperiodic pulsation of soliton molecule, the side peaks of RF
spectrum with broader bandwidth could be observed under this state, as presented in Figure
7(c). As mentioned above, the interference fringes indicate that the soliton molecule evolves
when propagating in the laser cavity. Likewise, to gain insight into the dynamical
characteristics of the pulsating soliton molecule from the soliton separation as well as phase
difference point of view, we provide the evolution of the soliton separation and phase
difference extracted from the DFT spectra in Figure 7(e), where the aperiodic evolving (even
random) trend could be observed. Moreover, the corresponding interaction plane between the
two solitons is plotted in Figure 7(f). It further proves that the pulsating behavior of the
soliton molecule is not stable.

Figure 7. Characteristics of aperiodic pulsating soliton molecule. (a) The real-time spectra
evolution measured with DFT, inset: the energy evolution. (b) The temporal evolution. (c) The RF
spectrum. (d) The enlarged spectra. (e) The soliton separation and phase difference as a function
of the roundtrips. (f) The corresponding interaction planes.

4. Discussions
Pulsating soliton is a distinct nonlinear local structure in dissipative systems. The
investigations on both its temporal and spectral characteristics in real-time contribute to
reveal the underlying abundant dynamics of pulsating solitons, which would also help to
better design and optimize the laser for generating robust ultra-short pulse. In recent years,
thanks to the development of the DFT technique, more and more transient dynamics of the
pulses in fiber lasers have been unveiled [15-35]. They directly deepen our understanding of

the process by which the pulses generated or evolved. In this work, we observed various
dynamics of pulsating solitons by using DFT from explosive pulsating soliton to pulsating
dual-soliton bunches and pulsating soliton molecules in a same fiber laser under engineering
the pump power and the polarization state of the pulses. The explosive pulsating soliton
events evolve from weak to strong, accompanying by the great broadening of the spectrum at
the strongest explosive event. It may come from the fluctuation of pulse peak power. When
the laser operates at pulsating regime, the gain and loss are not complete balance. Pulsating is
an intermediate state between stationary stability and chaos. At certain time, the imperfect
pulsating behavior leads to the perturbation of the pulse peak power. When the peak power of
the mode-locked pulse exceeds the cavity tolerant nonlinear effect (overdriven nonlinear
effect), the soliton will split into small pulses with random phase difference in this case and
show the explosive behavior. After some roundtrips, some small pulses dissipate and the
residual pulses reshape into one. Then the next perturbation of the pulse peak power will
make the pulse split and the spectrum collapse again. The degree of the explosive events
depends on the peak power of the split small pulses. The higher the peak power, the broader
the spectrum generates due to the self-phase modulation and cross-phase modulation effects.
And it is more likely to appear rogue waves as the statistical analysis.
When we increased the pump power and manipulated the orientation of the PC, the
pulsating dual-soliton bunch with irregular or regular pulsating period were observed. Note
that the separation between the two solitons in a bunch is more than 20 ns, they do not have
direct interactions. Therefore, the pulsation for each individual could be irregular or regular,
synchronous or asynchronous. In the case of the relatively stronger pulsation, the
characteristics of their real-time spectra are similar with those of the pulsating single-soliton.
However, for the pulsating soliton molecules, the separation between the two solitons inside
the molecue is around 106 ps, with the soliton width of about 23 ps (See Figure S5 in
Supplementary Materials). The two solitons are bounded together under their direct
interactions due to the change of the pump power or/and the PC. Consequently, the spectrum
presents periodical modulation in soliton molecules state. Generally, the two solitons inside
the pulsating soliton molecules act as a unit. It is interesting to know why the pulsations of
soliton molecules show different behaviors in the experiment. By comparing the two states of
the soliton molecules, the periodic evolution of pulse separation and phase difference could be
observed for the regularly periodic pulsation of soliton molecule. However, the irregularly
periodic pulsation of soliton molecule shows the aperiodic evolution of pulse separation and
phase difference. As we know, the soliton pulsation is related to the gain and loss in the laser
cavity. In this case, the soliton molecule will possess the same state including soliton

separation and phase difference when it propagates through the EDF every roundtrip for the
periodically evolving phase difference and pulse separation. Thus, the gain for this type of
soliton molecule will be equilibrated, resulting in the appearance of regular pulsation.
However, the aperiodic evolution of soliton molecule will experience different states when
passing through the EDF every roundtrip, leading to irregular gain dynamics of soliton
molecule. Therefore, it is indicated that the pulsating behavior of soliton molecule is
influenced greatly by the evolution of pulse separation and phase difference. That is to say,
the locked or periodic evolution of pulse separation and phase difference is essential for
achieving regular pulsation of soliton molecule. In fact, the soliton molecules with oscillating
phase difference and separation have been experimentally observed [29, 30, 33-35], but there
are rare reports on the simultaneous pulsation in energy. Furthermore, we also observed the
pulsating triple-soliton molecule (See Supplementary Materials), indicating that the pulsating
behavior of soliton molecule could be an intrinsic feature in ultrafast lasers. Although we have
experimentally observed these diverse pulsating soliton patterns in a same fiber laser, it is
anticipated to find more distinct pulsating solitons and reveal the detailed temporal
information through using time-lens measurement technique [23,44,45].

5. Conclusion
To conclude, in this work, we have experimentally investigated the diversity dynamics of
pulsating solitons from single-soliton to multi-soliton in a fiber laser by using DFT. The weak
to strong explosive behaviors of pulsating soliton, as well as the rogue wave generation
during explosions were observed. Moreover, we find that the pulsations of each individual in
multi-soliton bunch could be regular or irregular. On the other hand, for the pulsating soliton
molecule, the two solitons inside the molecule act as a unit, the simultaneous pulsations in
energy, separation and relative phase difference were observed. These findings would further
enrich the ultrafast dynamics of dissipative solitons in nonlinear optical systems.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
61875058, 11874018, 61875242, 61378036), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou
(Grant No. 201607010245).

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interests.

References
1. P. Grelu1 and N. Akhmediev, Dissipative solitons for mode-locked lasers, Nat. Photon. 6,
84–92 (2012).
2. D. Y. Tang, B. Zhao, L. M. Zhao, and H. Y. Tam, Soliton interaction in a fiber ring laser,
Phys. Rev. E 72, 016616 (2005).
3. A. Haboucha, H. Leblond, M. Salhi, A. Komarov, and F. Sanchez, Analysis of soliton
pattern formation in passively mode-locked fiber lasers, Phys. Rev. A 78(4), 043806 (2008).
4. S. Chouli and P. Grelu, Soliton rains in a fiber laser: an experimental study, Phys. Rev. A
81(6), 063829 (2010).
5. F. Amrani, M. Salhi, P. Grelu, H. Leblond, and F. Sanchez, Universal soliton pattern
formations in passively mode-locked fiber lasers, Opt. Lett. 36(9), 1545–1547 (2011).
6. S. T. Cundiff, B. C. Collings, N. N. Akhmediev, J. M. Soto-Crespo, K. Bergman, and W. H.
Knox, Observation of polarization-locked vector solitons in an optical fiber, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82(20), 3988–3991 (1999).
7. D. Y. Tang, H. Zhang, L. M. Zhao, and X. Wu, Observation of high-order
polarization-locked vector solitons in a fiber laser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101(15), 153904 (2008).
8. L. M. Zhao, D. Y. Tang, X. Wu, H. Zhang, and H. Y. Tam, Coexistence of
polarization-locked and polarization-rotating vector solitons in a fiber laser with SESAM, Opt.
Lett. 34(20), 3059–3061 (2009).
9. L. M. Zhao, D. Y. Tang, H. Zhang, X. Wu, and N. Xiang, Soliton trapping in fiber lasers,
Opt. Express 16(13), 9528–9533 (2008).
10. W. Chang, A. Ankiewicz, J. M. Soto-Crespo, and N. Akhmediev, Dissipative soliton
resonances, Phys. Rev. A 78(2), 023830 (2008).
11. X. Wu, D. Y. Tang, H. Zhang, and L. M. Zhao, Dissipative soliton resonance in an
all-normal-dispersion erbium-doped fiber laser, Opt. Express 17(7), 5580–5584 (2009).
12. Z.-C. Luo, W.-J. Cao, Z.-B. Lin, Z.-R. Cai, A.-P. Luo, and W.-C. Xu, Pulse dynamics of
dissipative soliton resonance with large duration-tuning range in a fiber ring laser, Opt. Lett.
37(22), 4777-4779 (2012).
13. K. Krzempek, Dissipative soliton resonances in all-fiber Er-Yb double clad figure-8 laser,
Opt. Express 23(24), 30651–30656 (2015).
14. K. Goda and B. Jalali, Dispersive Fourier transformation for fast continuous single-shot

measurements, Nat. Photon. 7(2), 102–112 (2013).
15. A. F. J. Runge, N. G. R. Broderick, and M. Erkintalo, Observation of soliton explosions in
a passively mode-locked fiber laser, Optica 2(1), 36-39 (2015).
16. A. F. J. Runge, N. G. R. Broderick, and M. Erkinatalo, Dynamics of soliton explosions in
passively mode-locked fiber lasers, J. Opt. Soc. of Am. B, 33(1), 46-53 (2016).
17. M. Liu, A. P. Luo, Y. R. Yan, S. Hu, Y. C. Liu, H. Cui, Z. C. Luo, and W. C. Xu,
Successive soliton explosions in an ultrafast fiber laser, Opt. Lett. 41(6), 1181–1184 (2016).
18. P. Wang, X. Xiao, H. Zhao, and C. Yang, Observation of duration-tunable soliton
explosion in passively mode-locked fiber laser, IEEE Photon. J. 9(6), 1507008 (2017).
19. Y. Yu, Z.-C. Luo, J. Kang, and K. K. Y Wong, Mutually ignited soliton explosions in a
fiber laser, Opt. Lett. 43(17), 4132-4135 (2018).
20. G. Herink, B. Jalali, C. Ropers, and D. Solli, Resolving the build-up of femtosecond
mode-locking with single-shot spectroscopy at 90 MHz frame rate, Nat. Photon. 10(5), 321–
326 (2016).
21. X. Wei, B. Li, Y. Yu, C. Zhang, K. K. Tsia, and K. K. Y. Wong, Unveiling multi-scale laser
dynamics through time-stretch and time-lens spectroscopies, Opt. Express 25(30), 29098–
29120 (2017).
22. K. Krupa, K. Nithyanandan and P. Grelu, Vector dynamics of incoherent dissipative
optical solitons, Optica 4(10), 1239-1244 (2017).
23. P. Ryczkowski1, M. Närhi, C. Billet, J.-M. Merolla, G. Genty, and J. M. Dudley,
Real-time full-field characterization of transient dissipative soliton dynamics in a
mode-locked laser, Nat. Photon. 12, 221–227 (2018).
24. H.-J. Chen, M. Liu, J. Yao, S. Hu, J.-B. He, A.-P. Luo, W.-C. Xu, and Z.-C. Luo, Buildup
dynamics of dissipative soliton in an ultrafast fiber laser with net-normal dispersion, Opt.
Express 26(3), 2972-2982 (2018).
25. H.-J. Chen, M. Liu, J. Yao, S. Hu, J.-B. He, A.-P. Luo, Z.-C. Luo, and W.-C. Xu, Soliton
booting dynamics in an ultrafast anomalous dispersion fiber laser, IEEE Photon. J. 10(2),
1501809 (2018).
26. Z. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, R. He, J. Zhao, G. Wang, and G. Yang, Self-organized
compound pattern and pulsation of dissipative solitons in a passively mode-locked fiber laser,
Opt. Lett. 43(3), 478-481(2018).
27. Y. Du, Z. Xu, and X. Shu, Spatio-spectral dynamics of the pulsating dissipative solitons
in a normal-dispersion fiber laser, Opt. Lett. 43(15), 3602-3605 (2018).
28. Z.-W. Wei, M. Liu, S.-X. Ming, A.-P. Luo, W.-C. Xu, and Z.-C. Luo, Pulsating soliton
with chaotic behavior in a fiber laser, Opt. Lett. 43, 5965-5968 (2018).

29. G. Herink, F. Kurtz, B. Jalali, D. R. Solli, and C. Ropers, Real-time spectral
interferometry probes the internal dynamics of femtosecond soliton molecules, Science
356(6333), 50–54 (2017).
30. K. Krupa, K. Nithyanandan, U. Andral, P. Tchofo-Dinda, and P. Grelu, Real-time
observation of internal motion within ultrafast dissipative optical soliton molecules, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 118(24), 243901 (2017).
31. X. Liu, X. Yao, and Y. Cui, Real-time observation of the buildup of soliton molecules,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121(2), 023905 (2018).
32. J. Peng and H. Zeng, Build-up of dissipative optical soliton molecules via diverse soliton
interactions, Laser Photon. Rev., 1800009 (2018).
33. S. Hamdi, A. Coillet, and P. Grelu, Real-time characterization of optical soliton molecule
dynamics in an ultrafast thulium fiber laser, Opt. Lett. 43(20), 4965-4968 (2018).
34. M. Liu, H. Li, A.-P. Luo, H. Cui, W.-C. Xu, and Z.-C. Luo, Real-time visualization of
soliton molecules with evolving behavior in an ultrafast fiber laser, J. Opt. 20, 034010 (2018).
35. Z. Q. Wang, K. Nithyanandan, A. Coillet, P. Tchofo-Dinda, and P. Grelu, Optical soliton
molecular complexes in a passively mode-locked fibre laser, Nat. Commun.10, 830 (2019).
36. J. M. Soto-Crespo, N. Akhmediev, and A. Ankiewicz, Pulsating, creeping, and erupting
solitons in dissipative systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(14), 2937-2940 (2000).
37. N. Akhmediev, J. M. Soto-Crespo, and G. Town, Pulsating solitons, chaotic solitons,
period doubling, and pulse coexistence in mode-locked lasers: complex Ginzburg-Landau
equation approach, Phys. Rev. E 63(5), 056602 (2001).
38. J. M. Soto-Crespo, M. Grapinet, P. Grelu, and N. Akhmediev, Bifurcations and
multiple-period soliton pulsations in a passively mode-locked fiber laser, Phys. Rev. E 70(6),
066612 (2004).
39. N. Akhmediev and A. Ankiewicz, Dissipative solitons in the complex Ginzburg-Landau
and Swift-Hohenberg equations, Lect. Notes Phys. 661, 1–17 (2005).
40. W. Chang, A. Ankiewicz, N. Akhmediev, and J. M. Soto-Crespo, Creeping solitons in
dissipative systems and their bifurcations, Phys. Rev. E 76(1), 016607 (2007).
41. W. Chang, J. M. Soto-Crespo, P. Vouzas, and N. Akhmediev, Extreme soliton pulsations
in dissipative systems, Phys. Rev. E 92(2), 022926 (2015).
42. J. M. Soto-Crespo, N. Devine, and N. Akhmediev, Dissipative solitons with extreme
spikes: bifurcation diagrams in the anomalous dispersion regime, J. Opt. Soc. of Am. B 34(7),
1542-1549 (2017).
43. A. E. Akosman and M. Y. Sander, Route towards extreme optical pulsation in linear cavity
ultrafast fibre lasers, Sci. Rep. 8, 13385 (2018).

44. M. Närhi, B. Wetzel, C. Billet, S. Toenger, T. Sylvestre, J.-M. Merolla, R. Morandotti, F.
Dias, G. Genty, and J. M. Dudley, Real-time measurements of spontaneous breathers and
rogue wave events in optical fibre modulation instability, Nat. Commun. 7, 13675 (2016).
45. A. Klein, G. Masri, H. Duadi, K. Sulimany, O. Lib, H. Steinberg, S. A. Kolpakov, and M.
Fridman, Ultrafast rogue wave patterns in fiber lasers, Optica 5(7), 774-778 (2018).

Supporting Information
1. The laser setup
The schematic of the laser setup is shown in Figure S1. The fiber laser cavity includes a 10 m
long erbium-doped fiber (EDF) with dispersion parameter of −44.5 ps/nm/km pumped by a
980

nm

laser

diode

through

a

wavelength-division-multiplexer

(WDM),

a

polarization-dependent isolator (PD-ISO), a polarization controller (PC), a carbon nanotube
saturable absorber (CNT-SA) and an output coupler (OC). The other fibers in the cavity are
single-mode fibers (SMF-28) with 12 m long. Therefore, in this laser, the effect of saturable
absorption is realized by both nonlinear polarization rotation (NPR) technique and CNT-SA.
Furthermore, the output coupler with coupling ratio of 10:90 is used to extract 10% of the
laser output for measurements.

Figure S1. Schematic of the fiber laser.

2. Spectral variation of the pulsating single-soliton with the PC adjustment
Here, to better display the characteristics of time-average optical spectrum displayed on the
OSA when adjusting the orientation of the PC, we provide several optical spectra

corresponding to different PC orientations at the same pump power, as shown in Figures S2(a),
(b) and (c). From these figures, one can see that by tuning the PC orientation, the shape of the
optical spectrum varies in a certain range, from flat top to remarkable gradient edges in our
experiment. Moreover, this kind of spectrum is connected with the pulsation parameters. To
put it differently, the larger the gradient extent of the spectral edges, the stronger the
modulation of pulsating soliton energy and amplitude is. The single-shot spectra
corresponding to the maximum pulsating soliton energy for these three PC orientations
through DFT are recorded in Figures S2(d), (e) and (f). As seen from Figures S2(d), (e) and
(f), the single-shot spectra exhibit the structured profiles, where two sharp spectral peaks with
oscillation structures around them locate at both edges of the spectrum. And the larger
gradient degree of the average spectrum, the stronger the spectral fringe at the edges of the
single-shot spectrum is. This structured profile of the single-shot spectrum is the characteristic
of the dissipative soliton shaping in net-normal dispersion fiber laser [24]. As for the
difference of the spectral fringe at the edges of the spectrum in these three cases, it comes
from the increase of the soliton energy during pulsating. Therefore, the spectrum shows
stronger oscillation structure at the edges.
Additionally, it should be noted that these three average spectra with diverse gradient
extent edges correspond to the different pulsating solitons with different energy modulations,
respectively. In other words, in our experiment, we find that the pulsating soliton energy
modulation varies according to the gradient extent of average spectrum. When the energy
modulation becomes larger, the structured spectrum corresponding to the maximum pulsating
soliton energy varies, from peaks appearing at the single-shot spectral edges without
remarkable fringes to sharp peaks with deep fringes.

Figure S2. Optical spectra at different PC orientations. (a)-(c) Average spectra obtained from OSA.
(d)-(f) Shot-to-shot spectra corresponding to the maximum pulsating soliton energy.

3. Rogue wave generation in explosive long-period pulsating soliton regime

Figure S3. Statistical distribution histogram of the amplitude fluctuations
in explosive long-period pulsating soliton regime.

Rogue wave (RW) has been observed in different operation regimes in fiber lasers, like in
noise-like pulse and chaotic multi-pulse cases [R1-R3]. It seems that all these complex
nonlinear phenomena to some extent share a common characteristic: solitons with chaotic
behaviors. Since the explosive long-period pulsating soliton in our experiment has remarkable
chaotic feature and the extreme spectral events appear, we perform statistical measurements to
analyze the link between the highly chaotic pulsating soliton and generation of rogue wave.
Note that, instead of studying the temporal solitons which are expected to generate the RW,
due to our temporal resolution (80 ps) is not enough to resolve the timing between the
splitting pulses from a soliton when explosion of pulsating solitons takes place, we investigate
the extreme waves in the spectral domain by recording the maximum intensity of the
single-shot spectrum. To display the histogram of the statistical distribution of the maximum
spectrum intensity in the explosive pulsating soliton regime, 100000 trace samples are
recorded by the oscilloscope. The results are shown in Figure S3. From Figure S3, we can see
that the significant wave height (SWH) is 0.0171V. In these pulse amplitude events, the vast
majority of them are concentrated in a lower intensity. The largest intensity of extreme
spectral wave is more than 6 times of the SWH. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3(c), the
chaotic spectral fringes happen around the maximum pulsating soliton energy. Therefore, we
believe that RWs generated in such an explosive long-period pulsating soliton regime.

R1. C. Lecaplain, Ph. Grelu, J. M. Soto-Crespo, and N. Akhmediev, Dissipative rogue waves
generated by chaotic pulse bunching in a mode-locked laser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 233901 (2012).
R2. J. Peng, N. Tarasov, S. Sugavanam, and D. Churkin, Rogue waves generation via nonlinear
soliton collision in multiple-soliton state of a mode-locked fiber laser, Opt. Express 24(19),
24256-24263 (2016).

R3. Z.-R. Cai, M. Liu, S. Hu, J. Yao, A.-P. Luo, Z.-C. Luo, and W.-C. Xu, Graphene-decorated
microfiber photonic device for generation of rogue waves in a fiber laser, IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Quantum Electron. 23(1), 20–25 (2017).

4. Typical single-shot spectrum of dual-soliton bunch with regular pulsation
To better show the characteristics of the single-shot spectrum of dual-soliton bunch with
regular pulsation, three typical real-time spectra are taken within one pulsation period, as
shown in Figure S4. One can observe that at the positions of the 335th and 365th roundtrips,
the sharp peaks appear at the edges of the spectrum and gradually become stronger. However,
at the 454th roundtrip, the spectrum has parabola-like top. These spectral characteristics are
quite similar to those of pulsating single-soliton in the inset of Figure 2(c).

Figure S4. Single-shot spectra of dual-soliton bunch with regular pulsation.

5. The spectrum displayed on the OSA and the autocorrelation trace of the
periodic pulsating soliton molecule
Figure S5 shows the spectrum presented on the OSA and the corresponding autocorrelation
trace of the periodic pulsating soliton molecule. As can be seen from Figure S5(a), the
spectrum shows evident fringes, which is the typical characteristic of a soliton molecule. The
corresponding autocorrelation trace depicted in Figure S5(b) further confirms that the soliton
molecule consists of 2 identical solitons. Moreover, the temporal separation of 106.5 ps
coincides with the 0.08 nm modulation spacing on the spectrum.

Figure S5. (a) The spectrum displayed on the OSA and (b) the autocorrelation trace of the periodic
pulsating soliton molecule.

6. Characteristics of pulsating triple-soliton molecule

Figure S6. Characteristics of pulsating triple-soliton molecule. (a) The real-time spectra evolution
measured with DFT, inset: the energy evolution. (b) The temporal evolution. (c) The RF spectrum.
(d) The enlarged spectra. (e)The soliton separation and relative phase difference as a function of
the roundtrips. (f) The corresponding interaction planes.

When increasing the pump power to 15.68 mW, we obtained pulsating triple-soliton molecule
by carefully manipulating the PC. Figure S6 summarizes its characteristics. Figure S6(a)
shows the spatial-spectral evolution. Obviously, the spectra with modulation pulsate
periodically, like that of the dual-soliton molecule in Figure 6. For better clarity, we show the
enlarged spectra in Figure S6(d). The energy evolution of the triple-soliton molecule is
presented in the inset of Figure S6(a), which also varies periodically with a period of ~276
roundtrips, well consistent with the frequency difference of 34.1 kHz in RF spectrum in
Figure S6(c). Furthermore, the corresponding temporal evolution of the triple-soliton
molecule is demonstrated in Figure S6(b). It is clear that three pulsating solitons bound as a

unit and evolves stably. In addition, we analyze the temporal separation and relative phase
difference of the triple-soliton molecule, as shown in Figure S6(e). Note that the separation
and phase difference between the solitons inside the molecule synchronously oscillate with
the roundtrips, which are similar with those of the dual-soliton molecule in Figure 6(e).
Figure S6(f) further shows the evolution trajectory of the interacting solitons in the phase
plane, indicating that the oscillations possess relatively stable periodic behavior. So far, we
observed the pulsating triple-soliton molecule, similar to the pulsating dual-soliton molecule,
which pulsates not only in energy, but also in soliton separation and phase difference.

