U(1) gauge symmetry free of redundancy and a generalized Byers-Yang theorem
Kicheon Kang∗

arXiv:1905.12183v1 [quant-ph] 29 May 2019

Department of Physics, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea
We present a reformulation of the U (1) gauge theory by eliminating the redundancy inherent in
the conventional approach. Our reformulation is constructed on the basis of local field interaction
approach to electrodynamics. The gauge symmetry in our framework is associated with a physical
transformation, which represents the invariance of the equation of motion of a charged scalar field
under the change in the distribution of electromagnetic field at a distance. We demonstrate that all
physical properties of the U (1) gauge theory are preserved with the removal of redundancy in the
gauge field. In addition, our reformulation provides a generalization of the Byers-Yang theorem to
open systems.

Introduction-. Gauge theory is one of the greatest pillars in modern physics. It provides a universal framework to understand a wide range of phenomena ranging
from the field theories of electromagnetism to the standard model of elementary particles and forces. Despite
its great success, gauge theory consists of a disturbing
feature; it is constructed based on redundancy of description rather than the physical symmetry (see e.g., p.189
of Ref. 1). The simplest example is classical electrodynamics. A point charge e with four-velocity ṙµ under the
four-potential Aµ is described by the Lagrangian:
e
(1)
L = L0 + ṙµ Aµ ,
c
where L0 is the kinetic part of the particle. Gauge symmetry in this Lagrangian implies the invariance of the
equation of motion for the particle under transformation
µ

′µ

A →A

µ

µ

=A −∂ Λ

(2)

with any scalar function Λ(x). Notably, this transformation is not associated with the symmetry of two physical
states that have the same properties. Instead, it indicates
that Aµ and A′µ represent the same physical state. In
other words, it is impossible, even in principle, to make
a gauge transformation of the system in a laboratory,
unlike other physical transformations, e.g., translation,
rotation, and the Lorentz transformation.
This property of gauge theory is closely related to
the “nonlocality” of electromagnetic interaction because
the local interaction of the particle with the gauge field
(Eq. (1)) includes a certain degree of arbitrariness (see
Eq. (2)). Recently, it was found that this arbitrariness
of the interaction can be removed by adopting the local field interaction (LFI) approach [2–5]. The LFI theory successfully reproduces the classical electrodynamics and topological Aharonov-Bohm (AB) effect [2, 3].
This implies that we can describe quantum theory involving electromagnetic interaction that does not rely on
the potential, in contrast to the conventional viewpoint.
However, one may inquire whether the approach without
redundancy of Aµ removes the ubiquity of gauge theory.
We need to clarify the manifestation of “gauge symmetry” in this redundancy-free description. In this Letter,

we resolve this question and reveal the gauge symmetry
intrinsic in the LFI approach. The gauge symmetry in
this framework is associated with a physical transformation without mathematical redundancy, while preserving other properties of U (1) gauge theory. We discuss
the gauge symmetry in this framework for both a point
charge and charged scalar field. In addition, applying
this gauge symmetry to a system without a closed loop,
we derive a generalized Byers-Yang theorem [6, 7] and
show that it can be experimentally verified in a superconducting point contact.
Gauge invariance as a physical symmetry in classical
electrodynamics-. A particle with charge e and mass m
under external electric (E) and magnetic (B) fields can
be described by the Lagrangian:
L = L0 + Lin ,

(3)

where
L0 = −mc

p
c2 − ṙ · ṙ

(4)

is the kinetic part, and
Lin = ṙµ Πµ

(5a)

represents the interaction of a particle with the external
fields given in terms of the Lorentz-covariant LFI [2, 3].
In this description, redundancy of the potential Aµ in
Eq. (1) is eliminated and the particle’s motion is coupled
with the “field-momentum four vector”, Πµ = (Π0 , Π),
defined as
Z
1
Π0 =
Ee · E d3 x,
(5b)
4πc
Z
1
Π=
Ee × B d3 x,
(5c)
4πc
where Ee is the electric field generated by charge e.
Mathematically, Πµ in Eq. (5) plays the same role as Aµ
in the potential-based Lagrangian in Eq. (1). This Lagrangian successfully reproduces the classical equation of
motion and the topological quantum phase. In addition,
it demonstrates the locality of the interaction which can

2
be tested in real experiments. For its details, see Refs. 2–
5.
We aim to demonstrate the appearance of gauge symmetry in the absence of redundancy in the gauge field.
For a given system configuration, the Lagrangian of
Eq. (3) is unique; if Πµ is different in Lin , it represents
a different configuration of the external E and B. The
Lagrangian possesses a symmetry under this condition.
For the transformation
Πµ → Π′µ = Πµ − ∂ µ Λ

(6)

the Lagrangian is transformed as
L → L′ = L −

It should be noted that we may work on the Dirac field
for the electron, but it gives the same result for the U (1)
gauge symmetry. The Klein-Gordon equation (Eq. (10))
for φ is generated by the Lagrangian:
1
(~∂µ φ − iΠµ φ)(~∂ µ φ∗ + iΠµ φ∗ ) − mc2 φ∗ φ
m
1
−
Fµν F µν .
(11)
16π

L = −
dΛ
.
dt

(7)

This indicates that the equation of motion for the particle is invariant under the “gauge transformation” of
Eq. (6) because a total time derivative dΛ/dt does not
affect the Lagrange equation of motion (see e.g., Section
2 of Ref. 8). From the Lagrangians (3), (4), and (5), we
obtain the gauge-invariant equation of motion:
drν
dpµ
= Gµν
,
dt
dt

(8a)

where pµ is the momentum 4-vector of the particle and
e
Gµν ≡ ∂ µ Πν − ∂ ν Πµ = F µν ,
c

(8b)

is proportional to the electromagnetic field tensor F µν .
Eq. (8) is equivalent to the one obtained from the standard potential-based approach (see e.g., Ref. 9) and can
be rewritten as
dE
= eṙ · E,
dt

Applying the canonical transformation of the Lagrangian
(Eqs. (3)-(5)) with the introduction of φ, we obtain the
Klein-Gordon equation:


i
m2 c2
i
(10)
−(∂µ − Πµ )(∂ µ − Πµ ) + 2 φ = 0.
~
~
~

dp
e
= eE + ṙ × B ,
dt
c

(9)

where E, p, and ṙ are the energy, momentum, and velocity of the particle, respectively.
The invariance of the equation of motion under the
gauge transformation of Πµ (Eq. (6)) is not associated
with the redundancy of description because Πµ is a physical quantity without arbitrariness. The change in Πµ in
Eq. (6) is caused by the variations in E and B. A constraint in this transformation is that the local value of
field tensor F µν remains unchanged. In other words, the
“gauge transformation” of Πµ represents a change in distribution in the external E and B, while their local values
remain unchanged at the position of the particle. Therefore, the gauge symmetry in the Lagrangian for a point
charge (Eqs. (3)-(5)) implies that its equation of motion
is invariant under any change in the external field distribution at a distance. This invariance is evident because
the equation of motion is local, although the conventional
gauge theory with Aµ does not consider the problem in
this way.
U (1) gauge invariance as a physical symmetry-. Let
us consider electrodynamics with charged scalar field φ.

The mathematical structure of this Lagrangian is
equivalent to that given by the standard approach where
Πµ is replaced by eAµ /c. Therefore, exploring the U (1)
gauge symmetry is straightforward and it produces the
following results. First, Lagrange equations for the fields
φ and Πµ lead to Klein-Gordon (10) and Maxwell equations, respectively. Second, and most importantly, the
gauge symmetry is manifested in the invariance of L under the transformation
φ → φ′ = φe−iΛ/~ , Πµ → Π′µ = Πµ − ∂µ Λ,

(12)

with an arbitrary scalar function Λ. Similar to the case
of the point particle discussed above, this transformation
does not include any redundancy of description. It is a
physical symmetry associated with different Πµ , or equivalently, with different distributions of external E and B.
The gauge symmetry in L indicates that the equation of
motion for φ (Eq. (10)) is invariant under the change of
the external electromagnetic field at a distance. Finally,
the charge conservation is derived from the symmetry via
the Nöther’s theorem. In our framework, it is expressed
in terms of continuity equation:
∂µ j µ = 0 ,

(13)

for the four-charge current,
j µ = −i

~ ∗ µ
(φ D φ − φDµ φ∗ ) ,
m

(14)

where the covariant derivative is given by
Dµ φ = (∂ µ −

i µ
Π )φ .
~

(15)

Generalized Byers-Yang theorem-. An intriguing consequence of the U (1) gauge symmetry is the Byers-Yang
theorem [6]. It states that all physical properties of a
doubly connected system (an annulus) enclosing a magnetic flux Φ (see Fig. 1(a)) are periodic in Φ with period
Φ0 = hc/e. Here, we show that the theorem can be

3
extended to an open system (Fig. 1(b)) with our formulation. We also propose an experimental arrangement to
confirm the generalized theorem using the superconducting point contact. In our framework of the LFI approach,
the eigenfunction φ of a charged particle in both systems
(Fig. 1(a,b)) satisfies the wave equation
1
(−i~∇ − Π)2 φ + cΠ0 φ = ǫφ ,
2m

(16)

in the limit v/c ≪ 1 of Eq. (10). For many particles, the
energy eigenfunction ψ satisfies
1 X
(−i~∇j − Π(rj ))2 ψ + V ψ = Eψ .
2m j

(17)

that the Byers-Yang theorem can be extended to an open
system.
Before discussing a realistic example that demonstrates
the Byers-Yang theorem for an open system, let us point
out some important facts. First, there are no observable
effects of the external flux in a normal conductor in the
configuration of Fig. 1(b), because the boundary condition does not alter the physics of the open system. However, the situation is different for a superconductor with
macroscopic quantum coherence. This is analyzed below in detail. Second, the standard approach with vector
potential A fails to describe the periodicity in the open
system. In the potential-based approach, the boundary
condition of Eq. (22) is replaced by
′
R∞
ψL
= αei(e/~c) −∞ A·dr ,
′
ψR

The magnetic field vanishes in the region of nonzero ψ,
B = (c/e)∇ × Π = 0. Therefore we can write Π = ∇Λ,
and Π can be gauged away. Under the transformation
ψ → ψ ′ = ψe−(i/~)

P

j

Λ(rj )

,

Π → Π′ = Π − ∇Λ = 0 ,

(18)

the wave equation (17) reduces to
1 X
(−i~∇j )2 ψ ′ + V ψ ′ = Eψ ′ ,
2m j

(19)

implying that Π is removed from the wave equation with
a modified boundary condition in ψ ′ .
Consider the boundary condition of a doubly connected system. For any specific coordinates of a particle,
say ri , that circulates around the loop once while keeping
the other coordinates fixed, ψ ′ acquires a phase factor by
the transformation (18) as
ψ ′ → ψ ′ e−i

H

Π·dr/~

= ψ ′ e−i(eΦ/~c) .

(20)

Because the wave equation (19) is independent of Π, the
Π-dependence of E is determined by the boundary condition (20), which constitutes the original Byers-Yang theorem: all physical properties of the loop are periodic in
Φ with its period Φ0 = hc/e.
Our analysis on the periodicity can also be applied to
an open system (Fig. 1(b)). For a specific coordinate of
′
′
a particle, ri , let ψL
(ψR
) be the asymptotic value of the
wave function at the left (right) infinity of ri such that
′
ψL

′

≡ ψ (ri → −∞),

′
ψR

′

≡ ψ (ri → ∞).

′
R∞
ψL
= αei −∞ Π·dr/~ ,
′
ψR

and
R ∞ its phase factor remains ambiguous as the integral
A·dr is not a well-defined quantity for an open path.
−∞
Andreev bound states and gauge symmetry-. Now we
discuss the manifestation of the Byers-Yang theorem for
an open system with the boundary condition of Eq. (22)
in a realistic system. The system under consideration
is a Josephson weak link that connects the two regions
of a superconductor with an external magnetic flux at a
distance of the superconductor (see Fig. 2). The type of
the junction is insignificant here. It can be described by
the Bogoliubov-deGennes equation [10]:


(22)

where the constant α is independent of Π. Because the
eigenvalue E is determined by the wave equation (19) and
the boundary
R ∞condition (22), all physical properties are
periodic in −∞ Π · dr/~ with period 2π. This indicates

He ∆(x)
∆∗ (x) −He∗



u(x)
v(x)



=E



u(x)
v(x)



,

(24a)

where the components of the Hamiltonian in our framework is given by
1
(−i~∇ − Π)2 + U (x),
2m
1
(i~∇ − Π)2 + U (x).
=
2m

He =
He∗

(24b)

Π can be gauged away by the following transformation
to the ‘primed’ functions:
Π′ = Π − ∇Λ = 0
u′ = ue−iΛ/~ , v ′ = veiΛ/~ ,
∆′ = ∆e−2iΛ/~ ,

(21)

From the gauge transformation (Eq. (18)), we obtain

(23)

and thus, we obtain

 ′

 ′

He′
∆′ (x)
u (x)
u (x)
=
E
,
∆′∗ (x) −He′
v ′ (x)
v ′ (x)

(25)

(26a)

where
He′ = −

~2 2
∇ + U (x) .
2m

(26b)

4
This transformation reveals the periodicity of the physical properties of the system. The eigenvalue E is determined by Eq. (26) and the boundary condition of ∆′
(represented in its phase shift)
ϕ ≡ arg (∆′L /∆′R ) = ϕ0 + ϕB ,

to an open system, which can be confirmed in an experiment for the Andreev bound states of a superconducting
point contact.

(27a)

where ∆′L ≡ ∆′ (x → −∞) and ∆′R ≡ ∆′ (x → ∞) are
the boundary values of ∆′ (x) at each lead. ϕ0 = ϕL − ϕR
is the intrinsic phase difference between the two sides of
the superconductor, and ϕB is the flux dependence of the
phase given by
Z
2 ∞
2eθ
ϕB =
Φ,
(27b)
Π · dr =
~ −∞
hc
where θ is the angle formed in the geometry of the system
(see Fig. 2). Therefore, the eigenvalues are periodic functions of Φ with period 2πhc/(2eθ) and all physical properties display the same periodicity. Notably, for θ = 2π,
ϕB reduces to the Aharonov-Bohm phase 2eΦ/(~c) associated with the Cooper pair charge 2e.
As an example, we consider a delta-function potential
U (x) = U0 δ(x) and a constant gap function ∆(x) = ∆0 .
The latter condition gives ϕ0 = 0 in Eq. (27a). A solution inside the gap (−∆0 < E < ∆0 ), known as the
Andreev bound state, can be determined by solving the
Bogoliubov-deGennes equation (26) with the boundary
condition of ∆′ (x) (Eq. (27)) [11, 12]. We obtain
q
(28)
E = ±∆0 1 − T sin2 (ϕB /2),
where T = 1/(1 + Z 2 ) is the transmission probability across the point contact with the parameter Z ≡
mU0 /(~2 kF ) (kF being the Fermi wave vector). Considering that the Andreev bound states and their phase
dependence have been well confirmed in experiments with
superconducting hybrid junctions, the flux dependence of
the bound-state energy (Eq. (28)) can also be observed
in real experiments. The bound-state energy may be directly probed by spectroscopic measurements (see e.g.,
Ref. 13, 14) with variations in the magnetic flux. To
confirm the generalization of the Byers-Yang theorem,
the superconductor should not form a closed loop that
circulates around the flux to avoid observation of the ordinary AB phase 2eΦ/~c.
Conclusion-. In conclusion, we have presented a reformulated U (1) gauge theory on the basis of physical
symmetry. The symmetry transformation corresponds to
a change in the electromagnetic field in the inaccessible
region of the charged scalar field (φ) along with a change
in the phase factor of φ. This reformulation preserves
all properties of the U (1) gauge theory but eliminates
the redundancy inherent in the conventional approach.
This also implies that quantum electrodynamics can be
defined without relying on Aµ . In addition, our formulation provides a generalization of the Byers-Yang theorem

∗
Electronic address: kicheon.kang@gmail.com
[1] A. Zee, Quantum field theory in a nutshell (Princeton
university press, 2010).
[2] K. Kang, arXiv:1308.2093 (2013).
[3] K. Kang, Phys. Rev. A 91, 052116 (2015).
[4] K. Kang, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 71, 565 (2017).
[5] Y.-W. Kim and K. Kang, New Journal of Physics 20,
103046 (2018).
[6] N. Byers and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 46 (1961).
[7] Y. Imry, Introduction to mesoscopic physics (Oxford University Press on Demand, 2002).
[8] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Classical mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1960).
[9] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics (Wiley, 1999).
[10] P. De Gennes, Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys
(Benjamin, New York, 1966).
[11] I. Kulik, Soviet Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Physics 30, 944 (1969).
[12] A. Furusaki, Superlattices and microstructures 25, 809
(1999).
[13] J. Pillet, C. Quay, P. Morfin, C. Bena, A. L. Yeyati, and
P. Joyez, Nature Physics 6, 965 (2010).
[14] B.-K. Kim, Y.-H. Ahn, J.-J. Kim, M.-S. Choi, M.-H. Bae,
K. Kang, J. S. Lim, R. López, and N. Kim, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 076803 (2013).

5

(a)

(b)


FIG. 1: (a) Doubly connected system of conductor (gray region) with external magnetic flux Φ pierced inside closed loop.
(b) Similar, but open, conductor with external Φ. In both systems, gauge symmetry provides periodicity of energy eigenvalues as a function of Φ.

φL

Φ

φR

θ
FIG. 2: Superconducting point contact with external magnetic flux Φ. Andreev bound state energies depend on the
phase difference ϕL − ϕR between two superconductors, Φ,
and angle θ formed in the geometry of the system.

