Quantitative understanding of negative thermal expansion in scandium trifluoride from
neutron total scattering measurements
Martin T Dove,1, 2, 3, ∗ Juan Du,3 Zhongsheng Wei,3 David A Keen,4 Matthew G Tucker,5 and Anthony E Phillips3

arXiv:1905.09250v4 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 24 Jul 2020

1 Schools

of Computer Science and Physical Science & Technology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, People’s Republic of China
2 Department of Physics, School of Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology,
205 Luoshi Road, Hongshan district, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, People’s Republic of China
3 School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
4 ISIS Facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Harwell Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0QX, UK
5 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Neutron Scattering Division, 1 Bethel Valley Road, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Negative thermal expansion (NTE)—the phenomenon where some materials shrink rather than
expand when heated—is both intriguing and useful, but remains poorly understood. Current understanding hinges on the role of specific vibrational modes, but in fact thermal expansion is a weighted
sum of contributions from every possible mode. Here we overcome this difficulty by deriving a realspace model of atomic motion in the prototypical NTE material scandium trifluoride, ScF3 , from total
neutron scattering data. We show that NTE in this material depends not only on rigid unit modes—the
vibrations in which the scandium coordination octahedra remain undistorted—but also on modes that
distort these octahedra. Furthermore, in contrast with previous predictions, we show that the quasiharmonic approximation coupled with renormalisation through anharmonic interactions describes this
behaviour well. Our results point the way towards a new understanding of how NTE is manifested in
real materials.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Almost all materials expand when heated, but some
shrink instead. This phenomenon of negative thermal expansion (NTE) [1–4] is of fundamental interest from a
structural and thermodynamic point of view, and also
commercially important [5–7], for instance in preparing
substrates resistant to thermal shock. It is among the
most widely studied of the anomalous negative thermodynamic properties, others including auxetics with
negative Poisson’s ratio [8], and materials which soften
under pressure (negative derivative of the bulk modulus
with pressure) [9–11].
At the present time we only have a qualitative understanding of the general principles underlying the origin
of NTE arising from vibrational rather than magnetic
or electronic reasons, based on an idea called the ‘tension effect’ [1, 6, 12]. We illustrate this idea in Figure 1
for a linear arrangement of octahedral groups of atoms.
Rotations of neighbouring polyhedra will give rise to a
transverse displacement of the shared vertex atom. If the
bonds between the central and vertex atoms are strong,
the transverse displacement of this atom, u, will pull its
neighbours inwards rather than stretching the bond. If
these transverse motions arise from phonons of angular frequency ω, classical harmonic phonon theory gives
hu2 i = kB T/mω 2 , where T is the temperature. By geometry, if the bonds do not change their length, the thermal
motion reduces the lattice parameter a from a value a0
at low temperature to a ' a0 (1 − hu2 i/a20 ) = a0 (1 + αT ),

giving a negative value of the coefficient of linear thermal
expansion, α = a−1 ∂a/∂T = −kB /ma20 ω 2 [1].
This simple picture is far from a good explanation. For
one thing, we have to add to this the effects of all other
phonons, many of which (including the bond-stretching
vibration) will contribute towards positive thermal expansion. The tension effect therefore requires that the
associated phonons must represent a sufficiently significant number of the total number of phonons. Furthermore, the fragment of a structure shown in isolation in
Figure 1 is part of a three-dimensional crystal structure
with the same type of connections in the other two directions. The connections to the rest of the structure give
constraints that can significantly reduce the flexibility
of the fragment and hence reduce the contribution of
the tension effect to thermal expansion. For example, the
modulation shown in Figure 1 will require distortions of
polyhedra linked in other directions, and in fact in the
plane of the diagram there is only one modulation—the
one in which neighbouring polyhedra rotate in opposite
senses of equal magnitude—that involves no distortions.
The energy cost of polyhedral distortions may reduce the
effect of such tension-effect vibrations. In view of this

FIG. 1: Representation of a linear arrangement of
corner-linked structural octahedra showing rotations.
For clarity the upper atoms are not shown.
∗

martin.dove@icloud.com

2
discussion, there is currently no physical understanding
of why our subject material, ScF3 , shows NTE, whereas
almost every cubic perovskite material has positive thermal expansion, even though they all have the same basic
network structure [13].
We present here an experimentally-based atomic-scale
analysis of NTE in the prototypical material ScF3 [14–16],
obtained from neutron total scattering measurements
analysed using the Reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) method.
This approach is used to refine configurations of atoms
so that both their long-range and their local structure
are consistent with experimental data. Whilst there have
been a few reports of total scattering measurements of
NTE materials [15, 17–26]—including ScF3 itself [15, 26–
29]—in only one previous case, namely that of ZrW2 O7
[19, 21], has the method been used to generate an atomic
model of the fluctuations associated with NTE to provide
a consistent examination of the tension effect. From our
analysis of the atomic configurations across a wide range
of temperatures generated in this study we show that
the fluctuations associated with the tension effect are a
mix of whole-body rotations and bond-bending distortions of ScF6 octahedra. We have determined the relative
balance of these in ScF3 across the range of temperatures in our experiment, and evaluated how this balance
leads to NTE in ScF3 , whereas similar materials such as
SrTiO3 show positive expansivity [30]. The picture that
emerges here is consistent across the whole range of temperatures, and supported by simulations using a model
system. We also analyse the effects of anharmonicity in
ScF3 through the variation of the distribution of atomic
displacements with temperature, given some recent calculations of single-model anharmonicity in ScF3 [16], and
our growing understanding that anharmonicity has the
effect of reducing NTE at high temperatures [31, 32]. Total
scattering data analysed using the Reverse Monte Carlo
method is the only way to obtain information about these
issues from experiment.
II.

BACKGROUND: RECIPROCAL-SPACE MODEL OF
NEGATIVE THERMAL EXPANSION IN ScF3

Scandium trifluoride, ScF3 , has the rhenium trioxide
structure, equivalent to the perovskite structure with a
vacant A site (Figure 2). It displays isotropic negative
thermal expansion over the range 0 K to 1100 K—our
data are shown in Figure 3—with a linear coefficient of
thermal expansion of α = −10 MK−1 at 200 K [14].
Accurate calculations of the phonon dispersion curves
of ScF3 using the Density Functional Theory (DFT)
method [16, 32, 33] show two important points. The first
is that there is a line in reciprocal space (together with
the symmetrically related lines) containing the lowestenergy phonons, namely for the wave vectors ( 21 , 12 , ξ )
for − 12 ≤ ξ ≤ 12 ; the two special points ξ = 0 and ξ = 12
have labels M and R respectively. The eigenvectors of
these modes correspond to transverse motions of the F

FIG. 2: Crystal structure of ScF3 at a temperature of 1200
K obtained by Rietveld refinement of neutron powder
diffraction data reported in this paper. It has a primitive
cubic structure (Strukturbericht symbol D09 , space
group Pm3m) with one formula unit per unit cell). The
ellipsoids (Sc pink, F green) represent the thermal
motion along different directions, with the volume
enclosing 50% of the total distribution of atom positions.

atoms with whole-body rotations of the ScF6 octahedra.
Measurements of inelastic x-ray scattering [33] and diffuse x-ray scattering [34] from single crystals support this
picture exactly. The second point is that the frequencies of
phonons away from the M–R line increase rapidly with
frequency, and these modes have low frequency only for
wave vectors near this line in reciprocal space. Again,
this point is consistent with the inelastic and diffuse scattering measurements [33, 34].
The low-frequency modes with wave vectors along the
M–R line and with eigenvectors corresponding to octahedral rotations are what are called Rigid Unit Modes
(RUMs) [1, 35–38]. Their low energy is a consequence of
the fact that the force constants associated with bending
the octahedral F–Sc–F angles are much larger than those
associated with bending the linear Sc–F–Sc angles; our estimate discussed in the Supplemental Material is that the
two force constants differ by a factor of around 50. Such
a large factor accounts for the fact that the value of the
frequency of the transverse acoustic mode at wave vector
( 12 , 0, 0) is much larger than that of the RUM frequency,
seen in both the DFT calculations [16, 32, 33] and inelastic
x-ray scattering experiments [33]. The same situation is
seen in the experimental phonon dispersion curves of
the cubic perovskite phase of SrTiO3 [39]. The existence
of RUMs provides a natural mechanism for the tension
effect in NTE materials since the rotations give rise to a
shrinkage of the crystal structure and these modes have
the necessary low energy [1, 37, 38]. Indeed, the DFT calculations show that the RUMs have a considerably larger
contribution to NTE than all other individual phonons,
by two orders of magnitude.[40]
As we have noted, pure RUMs exist along lines of
wave vectors. A line of wave vectors of RUMs in ScF3

3
occupies only a tiny—effectively infinitesimal—fraction
of reciprocal space, and virtually all phonons must necessarily involve distortions of the ScF6 octahedra. In particular, even though the pure RUM motions have the
highest contribution to NTE of any phonon, their tiny
weighting in reciprocal space means that any tension
effect model must involve such distortions. The finite,
as opposed to infinite, stiffness associated with distortions of the polyhedra are in fact an important part of the
RUM model [38]; we return to this point in §VIII. And
in fact, the DFT phonon calculations [16, 32, 33] show
that in reciprocal space the tension effect will ‘bleed into’
the phonons whose wave vectors are close to, but not
exactly on, the line M–R. These modes have a large component of rotation but an increasing component of polyhedral distortion on moving away from the M–R line in
reciprocal space. They are, in effect, what we would call
quasi-RUMs [36]. The extent to which the spectrum of
quasi-RUMs can give rise to an overall NTE will depend
on the extent to which the polyhedra can easily be distorted, a question that is analysed in detail in this paper.
This will give us a new perspective of the role of RUMs
in the tension effect that will be applicable to many NTE
materials, and will enable us to understand, for the first
time, why NTE can exist in some materials but not in
other materials with close structural similarity.
At this point we note that the authors of reference 26
have proposed a radically different model. Their central
idea is that the ScF6 octahedra have no internal rigidity in terms of bending of the bonds, and that the Sc–F
bonds can rotate in an uncorrelated way as independent
Einstein oscillators. In part this idea is based on a misleading interpretation of the first three peaks in the pair
distribution function because of the use of inappropriate integration limits coupled with the effects of noise
associated with the Fourier transforms. The idea of the
Sc–F bonds being able to rotate in an uncorrelated motion implies the absence of a force constant associated
with bending of the octahedral F–Sc–F bond, which is
directly the opposite of the RUM model. This type of
model would surely give rise to a significant tension effect. However, it would lead to an excitation spectrum
with 6 low-frequency modes for all wave vectors, and
an additional two low-frequency shear acoustic modes
along the (ξ, 0, 0) direction and one along the (ξ, ξ, 0) direction. Whist this model of uncorrelated Sc–F motion
is appealing as an intuitive interpretation of the tension
effect, it is completely inconsistent with our knowledge
of the phonon dispersion curves by both ab initio calculation [16, 32, 33] and inelastic x-ray scattering measurements [33]. A recent paper based on new x-ray total
scattering measurements [29] supports the interpretation
presented here, based on an earlier pre-print of this article, over the model of uncorrelated F-atom motions
proposed in reference 26.
The RUM model with infinite stiffness and the uncorrelated model of reference 26 represent two opposite
ends of a spectrum. We would argue that the calculated

[16, 32, 33] and measured [33] phonon dispersion curves
actually mean that the balance is more towards a RUM
model with more polyhedral flexibility than found in
corresponding oxides. Where ScF3 actually sits in this
balance is explored in detail in this paper.

III.

METHODS

Neutron total scattering and diffraction experiments
were performed on the Polaris diffractometer at the UK
ISIS spallation neutron facility. The sample was obtained
commercially, and x-ray and neutron powder diffraction
measurements showed that the sample is of single phase
within the limits of detection. The sample was packed
into a cylindrical vanadium can of radius 8 mm. Measurements for 750 µA.h were obtained over the temperature
range 10–1200 K, with shorter runs at intermediate temperatures performed for crystal structure analysis. The
POLARIS instrument can measure down to a wavelength
of 0.1 Å [41], which gives a maximum energy transfer
far in excess of the upper limit of 85 meV required from
the DFT phonon calculations on ScF3 [16] and therefore
the experiments and subsequent analysis capture the full
range of phonon excitations.
Rietveld refinement was carried out using the GSAS
software [42] with the EXPGUI interface [43]. Data were
prepared for Rietveld analysis using the MANTID software [44].
The RMC simulations were performed using the RMCprofile code [45]. The data sets used were the total scattering function after correction and subtraction of the
self term, i ( Q), the pair distribution function (PDF) D (r )
obtained as Fourier transform of the function Qi ( Q) (the
corrections to form i ( Q) and conversion to the PDF D (r )
were performed using the GUDRUN package [46]), and
the Bragg scattering profile. Key equations and data are
given in the Supplemental Material, showing the high
quality of the fitting we were able to achieve.
Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the DL POLY code [47], using a model developed by
fitting the calculated dispersion curves to the DFT results
of reference 16 using the GULP lattice simulation code
[48, 49]. The model is described in more detail in Section VI, in the Supplemental Material, and in the parallel
reference 11.

IV.

REAL-SPACE ANALYSIS OF NEGATIVE THERMAL
EXPANSION

We collected total neutron scattering data from a powder sample of scandium trifluoride, measuring both the
Bragg scattering—sensitive to the long-range order—and
the diffuse scattering. Although several previous pair
distribution function studies of ScF3 have used X-rays
[15, 27–29], for our analysis neutron radiation was a more
appropriate choice, for three reasons. First, the accessible

4
2.06
Sc-F
F-F
Sc-Sc
a (long runs)
a (short runs)

2.05

Distance (Å)

range of scattering vector Q, and hence the resolution of
the pair distribution function derived from it, is much
greater: we were able to measure up to a maximum value
of Qmax = 50 Å−1 , while with X-rays the maximum
achievable value of Q with a short-wavelength silver anode is 22.5 A−1 , and is usually practically up to around 30
Å−1 with synchrotron radiation measurements. Second,
the X-ray atomic form factor decays rapidly with scattering vector Q, which further limits the Q range in which
useful data can be collected: even if we were somehow
able to measure X-ray scattering at 50 Å−1 , the scattering
factor of Sc would be only 0.7% of its value at low Q. Finally, because this Q-dependence differs between atoms,
calculating a scattering-weighted pair distribution function from a trial configuration of atoms is necessarily
approximate.
Thus our neutron data enabled us to calculate highresolution, bias-free pair distribution functions D (r ) (see
III), which are effectively histograms of instantaneous
interatomic distances. We then used the Reverse Monte
Carlo (RMC) method [45, 50–52] to obtain a set of atomic
configurations consistent with these data, each of which
can be regarded as a plausible snapshot of the instantaneous atomic positions in this material.
The experimental lattice parameter is shown in Figure 3, plotted as a/2, showing the NTE over the temperature range 0–1100 K and positive expansion at higher
temperatures consistent with previous data [14]. In this
figure we also compare the mean nearest-neighbour Sc–F
and F–F distances, and half the mean Sc···Sc distance, all
three obtained from analysis of the RMC configurations.
The Sc–F and F–F distances are fully consistent with the
positions of the peaks in the PDF data, but in the case of
the Sc···Sc distance, the peak in the PDF overlaps with
that from the second-neighbour F···F distribution and
thus we cannot extract this directly from the raw data.
The prediction from the tension effect is that the distance
between mean positions of two bonded atoms should be
shorter than the actual mean bond length, and indeed as
expected the Sc–F bond and F–F distances show normal
positive thermal expansion (Sc–F expansion coefficient
α = +15 MK−1 ), whereas a/2 decreases on heating defining the negative thermal expansion. This result for the
Sc–F bond is consistent with two recent measurements
of the PDF [15, 26]. [53]
Figure 3 also shows the temperature dependence of
the mean distance between neighbouring Sc atoms. One
might expect, given the locations of the Sc atoms, for
this distance to reflect exactly the lattice parameter. However, although slight, we see a difference between these
two quantities that grows on heating, with the Sc···Sc
distance showing a slightly weaker dependence on temperature than for the linear dimensions of the crystal, and
a change to positive expansivity at a lower temperature.
A similar effect was seen in Zn(CN)2 , where the (negative) expansivity of the Zn···Zn distance is less negative
than the linear expansivity of the crystal [20]. In that case
the difference is due to the fact that the primary mech-

2.04
2.03
2.02
2.01
2.00
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Temperature (K)

FIG. 3: Comparison of the temperature dependence of
half the lattice parameter, a/2 (black squares, filled
squares representing data from longer measurements
and open squares representing data from shorter
measurements), half of the average instantaneous
nearest-neighbour Sc···Sc distance obtained from
analysis of the RMC configurations (gray filled circles),
the average instantaneous nearest-neighbour F–F
distance obtained from
√analysis of the RMC
configurations scaled by 1/ 2 (open black circles), and
the average instantaneous nearest-neighbour Sc–F
distance also obtained from analysis of the RMC
configurations (black filled circles. In each plot statistical
error bars are smaller than the sizes of the data symbols.
The scaling means that each data set should converge to
a value of a/2 at low temperature. The lines are guides
to the eye; the guides for the F–F and Sc–F distances
were obtained by fitting functions of the form
d = d0 + α coth(θ/T ), and the guides for the lattice
parameter and Sc–Sc distances were obtained by fitting
functions of the form d = d0 − γT + α coth(θ/T ), where
the parameters d0 , α, γ and θ were variables in the fitting
process.

anism for NTE is from the acoustic modes [54]. This is
of course different to ScF3 , where the main NTE modes
are rotational modes of optic character that lie along the
edges of the Brillouin zone. However, by symmetry these
modes transform into transverse acoustic modes as the
wave vectors changes from the M–R line to zero, as seen
in the dispersion curves reported in references 16 and 55.
We propose that the behaviour of the Sc····Sc distance
may be associated with the growing acoustic mode character of the NTE phonons moving away from the M–R
line; indeed, the bending of the F–Sc–F right angle can be
associated with the transverse acoustic (shear) mode.

5
V.

LOCAL STRUCTURAL DISTORTIONS FROM
REVERSE MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS

We now consider the local atomic motions that are associated with NTE. The fact that the Sc–F bond shows
positive thermal expansion implies that the tension effect will provide the mechanism. Thus we need to consider effects associated with transverse motions of the
F atom, and the extent to which this is correlated with
the ScF6 octahedra moving as nearly-rigid objects or distorting. Figure 4a shows the behaviour of three angles
with temperature: first the variance of Sc–F–Sc angles as
they distort from the value of 180◦ , second the variance
of the F–Sc–F angles as they distort from the ideal octahedral angle of 90◦ , and third the mean-square rotations of
the ScF6 octahedra (calculated using the GASP tool; see
below). The largest fluctuation, by a significant margin,
is for the Sc–F–Sc angle, which is primarily associated
with the transverse motions of the F anion and is consistent with both the thermal ellipsoids seen in Figure 2
and the role of the tension effect. The other two angles,
namely of the ScF6 octahedral rotations and the bending
of the F–Sc–F bond, are actually very similar to each other.
Thus the transverse motions of the F atoms as reflected
in the Sc–F–Sc angles are achieved by both rotations and
bond-bending deformations of the ScF6 octahedra.
In Figure 4b we show the details of an analysis performed using the GASP method, based on using geometric algebra to represent the rotations of polyhedral groups
of atoms [56–58]. Given a set of bond vectors for an octahedron, ri , where i runs over all the centroid-vertex
bonds, we can compare the vectors in one configuration
with those in another (here, the ideal average structure),
which we denote as r0 . The difference, which we call
the mismatch, is ei = ri − ri0 . GASP uses a least-squares
algorithm to find the rotation of each octahedron that
minimises M = ∑i |ei |2 , where we sum over all bonds in
the polyhedron. The residual value of M per polyhedron
is then decomposed into contributions from bending of
bond angles and stretching of bonds, thereby accounting for the total motion involving non-uniform displacements of the F atoms. The results in Figure 4b compare
the extent to which the sum of the atomic motions of
the F atoms in each ScF6 octahedron can be separated
into whole-body rotations of the octahedron, flexing of
the F–Sc–F 90◦ bond angle, and stretching/shrinking of
the Sc–F bonds. [59] This partition, which barely changes
with temperature, is compared in summary form with
corresponding results from a similar study of the TiO6 octahedra in the perovskite SrTiO3 [60] in Table I, together
with results from a molecular-dynamics simulation on a
model system (described in the Supplemental Material)
in which the energy penalty for bending the X – M – X angle tends to zero. Our results show that ScF3 is quite close
to that limiting case [61]. The analysis suggests, therefore,
that the ScF6 octahedra in ScF3 are significantly more
flexible with regard to bending the anion–cation–anion
angles than are the TiO6 octahedra in SrTiO3 ; we will

TABLE I: The percentage mismatch between different
atomic configurations of a network of MX6 octahedra
and the ideal structure, decomposed by GASP into
X – M – X bending, M – X stretching, and MX6 rotation
components. We compare three systems: the RMC
configurations of ScF3 , a hypothetical perovskite
structure in the limit where the octahedra have flexible
bond angles, and SrTiO3 as also analysed by RMC and
taken from reference 60. The hypothetical structure is an
important comparison because, even if there are no
rigidity constraints applied to the bond angles within
the ScF3 octahedra, some fraction of their random
distortion will always be mathematically attributable to
a rigid-body rotation.
Material

Bend Stretch Rotation

ScF3
70%
Flexible model 75%
SrTiO3
44%

10%
5%
19%

20%
20%
37%

argue below that this is the key difference that gives rise
to NTE in ScF3 but not in the cubic oxide perovskites.
[62]
Comparing absolute values of the fluctuations for ScF3
and SrTiO3 at a single temperature, say 300 K, we find
that in SrTiO3 the linear Ti–O–Ti angle fluctuates by an
average of around 5◦ and the TiO6 octahedra orientation
fluctuates by around 2◦ [60], while the corresponding
sizes of the fluctuations in ScF3 are around 14◦ and 7◦
respectively (Figure 4a). On the other hand, the coefficient of thermal expansion of the Ti–O bond, 10 MK−1
is comparable to that of the Sc–F bond cited above, with
similar Sc–F and Ti–O bond lengths.
We can also compare this analysis with the phonon dispersion curves for ScF3 calculated using ab initio methods [16] and calculated for SrTiO3 using a shell model
fitted to inelastic neutron scattering and infrared spectroscopy [39]. We see that the octahedral cation–anion
stretching frequencies are very similar (20 THz in ScF3
and 22 THz in SrTiO3 ), suggesting (given the similar
masses of O and F) that the bonds in ScF3 and SrTiO3 are
of similar stiffness. In both ScF3 and SrTiO3 the octahedral rigid-body rotational phonons between the R and M
wave vectors are of very low frequency compared to the
stretching mode in both materials, namely between 0.6 to
1.2 THz in ScF3 and between 1.3 to 2.5 THz in SrTiO3 at
a temperature of 200 K. However, the bending frequencies are different. If we take, for example, the transverse
acoustic mode frequency at X, ( 12 , 0, 0), which is a shear
mode that reflects bending distortions of the octahedra,
we find that it is lower in frequency by around a factor
of 2 in ScF3 than in SrTiO3 , meaning the corresponding
force constants are 4 times smaller. This is consistent with
our finding that the ScF6 octahedra are rather more flexible than the TiO6 octahedra. But care is needed not to
go to the extreme viewpoint and imagine that there is

6
100
Sc-F-Sc linear angle
F-Sc-F right angle
ScF6 rotation

500

Percentage of motion

Angular fluctuations (Deg 2)

600

400
300
200
100
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Temperature (K)
(a)

Rotation

Stretch

60
40
20
0

0

Bend

80

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Temperature (K)
(b)

FIG. 4: (a) Comparison of the variances of three angles associated with local motions taken from the RMC
configurations. The black points show the departure of the Sc–F–Sc angle from its nominal value of 180◦ , the green
points show the variance of the F–Sc–F angle as it fluctuates from its nominal value of 90◦ , and the red points show
the mean-square angle of rotation of the ScF6 octahedra as a whole body. (b) Breakdown of the total motion
(excluding overall polyhedral displacements) of the atoms in the ScF3 crystal from the GASP analysis of the RMC
configurations, where the red, green and blue points and guides to the eye represent the fraction of the motion that is
associated with whole-body rotations of the ScF6 octahedra, deformations of the F–Sc–F right angles, and stretching
of the Sc–F bonds respectively. In both plots statistical error bars are smaller than the sizes of the data symbols, and
the lines/curves are given as guides to the eye.

no force constant associated with the bending of the F–
Sc–F right angle. There is, and it directly gives rise to a
non-zero shear elastic constant [63].

VI.

MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS WITH A
SIMPLIFIED MODEL

Simulation methods can often give insights into the relationship between the properties of materials and their
atomic structure. For ScF3 there have been a number of
simulation studies using the molecular dynamics (MD)
method with with classical force fields or ab initio methods [64–66]. What is less useful about such methods is
that it is not easy to change parameters that directly affect one type of structure flexibility alone. Any change
in some aspect of the model will affect everything. To
address the question of the relative roles of the forces associated with the bending of the octahedral F–Sc–F bond
angle or linear Sc–F–Sc bond angle we need to work with
a simpler idealised model, and we explore this now.
The model introduced briefly in the previous section,
and in our parallel paper on pressure-induced softening in ScF3 [11], is described in more detail in the Supplemental Material. The model has been designed and
analysed to see the effect of various independent parameters on the NTE. There are two parameters that are of
interest (a third parameter controls the bond stretching,
which is tuned to a high stiffness by comparison with the

DFT phonon calculations). The first, with symbol A, controls flexing of the linear Sc–F–Sc bond and determines
the frequency of the RUM along the M–R wave vectors.
The value of this parameter was tuned directly by comparison of the calculated RUM frequencies with those
given by the DFT phonon calculations. The second, with
symbol k, controls flexing of the F–Sc–F right-angle, and
its value was tuned to reflect the variation of the shear
acoustic modes from the DFT dispersion curves. Increasing both of these parameters will reduce the flexibility of
the structure in their respective ways, and hence change
the thermal expansion. We explicitly do not include ionic
charges in the model because Coulomb interactions will
affect the flexibilities of both the linear Sc–F–Sc bond
and right-angle F–Sc–F bond. Nevertheless, the simple
three-parameter model does a surprisingly good job of
reproducing the phonon dispersion curves, comparing
Figure S11 with the results, say, of reference 16.
Figure 5 shows the results of varying both force constants starting from the model that best reproduces the
DFT phonon dispersion curves. The first result from the
data shown in Figure 5 is that increasing both force constants will reduce the negative thermal expansion, and
eventually drive it positive. Increasing the F–Sc–F force
constant k will increase the frequencies of the modes
close to the RUM M–R line, which will reduce the number of phonons contributing significantly to the overall
NTE and hence leading to a reduction and eventual elimination of NTE. This is consistent with the narrative de-

67

67

66

66

Unit cell volume (Å 3 )

Unit cell volume (Å 3 )

7

65
64

A = 4.0
A = 3.0
A = 2.0
A = 1.0
A = 0.5
A = 0.3
A = 0.1
A = 0.025 eV

63
62

65
64

k = 7.0
k = 6.0
k = 5.0
k = 4.0
k = 3.0
k = 2.0
k = 1.6
k = 1.2 eV

63
62

61

61
0

200

400

600

800

1000

0

200

Temperature (K)

400

600

800

1000

Temperature (K)

(a)

(b)

20

10
0

(MK -1)

-10

v

-20

v

(MK -1)

0

-20
-30
-40

-40

-50
-60

-60
0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

A (eV)

4

5

6

7

k (eV)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 5: (a) and (b) show the variation of volume of one unit cell of ScF3 with the inter-octahedral Sc–F–Sc and
intra-octahedral F–Sc–F angle force constants respectively, A and k (see Supplemental Material for the equations). (c)
and (d) show the corresponding coefficients of volumetric thermal expansivity for the cases k = 1.2 eV and A = 0.025
eV respectively, corresponding to the values that give best match to the DFT dispersion curves [16] as discussed in the
Supplemental Material.

veloped based on the RMC results presented above. On
the other hand, the force constant associated with the
linear Sc–F–Sc bond, A, plays a role in increasing the
frequencies of the RUMs but less of a role in shaping
the dispersion curves, so will have a gradual effect in
changing the NTE as the mode frequencies increase. The
increased frequency of the RUMs will lead to a reduced
transverse amplitude of the F atoms. In some ways, this
is similar to the effects of the forces imparted in the analogous perovskites with an atom in the A site (such as Sr
in SrTiO3 ). There is, however, one significant difference
with regard to changing the two force constants. In the
case of the F–Sc–F right angle, NTE vanishes by increasing the force constant value by a factor of 3.3, whereas in
the case of the Sc–F–Sc angle, NTE vanishes by increasing
the force constant value by around a factor of 40. Looking

at dispersion curves in perovskites, for example in SrTiO3
[39], suggests that in perovskites the size of this factor
is not reached. On the other hand, the factor of 3.3 increase in the bending force constant is exactly consistent
with the difference between ScF3 and SrTiO3 discussed
in the previous section. Thus the difference strongly suggests that key effect in determining NTE is indeed the
bond-bending flexibility of the ScF3 octahedra.

VII.

ANHARMONICITY

There is a lot of current interest in the role of anharmonic phonon interactions in NTE. Typically the most
important ones are those involving fourth-order interac-

8
30

60
40

700K
800K
950K
1000K
1100K
1200K

25
20
15

0.2
0.15

Width 2 (Å2)

10K
100K
200K
290K
400K
500K
600K

Number per distance interval

Number per distance interval

80

10

20
0
-1

-0.5

0

Displacement x (Å)

0.5

1

0.05

5
0
-1

0.1

-0.5

0

Displacement x (Å)

(a)

(b)

0.5

1

0

0

200

400

600

800

Temperature (K)

1000

1200

(c)

FIG. 6: (a) and (b) show histograms of the lateral displacements of the F atoms at the different temperatures (circles).
At all temperatures the distributions are well described by Gaussian functions (thin lines). (c) shows the variance of
the Gaussian fits as a function of temperature. The data follow a linear dependence on temperature throughout the
range studied, as indicated by the fitted straight line, demonstrating that a renormalised phonon model is sufficient to
describe the anharmonic effects in ScF3 .

tions, which have the effect of changing phonon frequencies. Several recent papers have studied anharmonicity
in ScF3 in various ways [16, 32, 33, 67].
In renormalised phonon theory [68] the temperaturedependence of a phonon angular frequency ω (k, j) (j
labels the mode for any k) in the high-T limit varies as
[32, 69]
ω 2 (k, j) = ω02 (k, j) + 12 kB T

∑
0 0

k ,j

α4 (k, k0 , j, j0 )
ω02 (k0 , j0 )

where ω02 is the square of the harmonic angular frequency,
and the interactions characterised by the fourth-order anharmonic parameters α4 couple the phonon (±k, j) to
all other phonons (±k0 , j0 ). This summation includes the
case (k, j) = (−k0 , j0 ) ; when this case is taken alone, it
represents the independent-mode approximation. It is this
approximation only that is probed in a frozen-phonon
calculation [16], and it will give just a small part of the
overall picture. That is, the contributions from the modes
(k, j) 6= (k0 , j0 ) are normally much more important than
only the modes (k, j) = (−k0 , j0 ) in determining how
phonon frequencies change with temperature. The DFT
calculations of Li et al [16] suggested that for the Rpoint mode the independent-mode anharmonic potential
is quite large compared to the harmonic potential, but
the summation over all modes may still mean that the
primary anharmonic effects come instead from interactions across the Brillouin zone. Van Roekeghem et al
[67] recently studied the anharmonicity using both xray inelastic scattering and through calculations of the
phonon frequencies via a renormalised phonon method.
They showed, consistent with most perovskites, that the
low frequency branch along the line M–R and the three
lowest-frequency optic modes at zero wave vector soften
on cooling, consistent with renormalised phonon theory,
whereas the higher-frequency modes harden on cooling.

Similar results were obtained by Oba et al [32]. The softening on cooling arises from direct anharmonic interactions via renormalised phonon theory as described here,
whereas the hardening of the high-frequency modes
arises primarily from thermal expansion of the Sc–F bond.
In this model, the renormalised phonons continue to
look like phonons with well-defined frequencies, with
lifetimes substantially larger than the phonon frequency
(See Figure 3 of reference 67). Separately, in reference
31 we showed from simple considerations that anharmonic renormalisation of phonon frequencies will cause
NTE to shift towards positive expansivity at higher temperatures; the same result is obtained by more detailed
renormalised phonon theory calculations [32, 67].
We have analysed our RMC configurations to look for
any effects of anharmonicity in the distributions of transverse displacements of fluorine atoms. This particular
atomic displacement was chosen since it is active in the
R-point RUM previously identified as having a dominant fourth-order term. Figure 6 shows the distribution
of these displacements of F atoms away from the Sc···Sc
line as a function of temperature. Two features of these
data are noteworthy. First, the distributions are well fitted
by Gaussian functions at all temperatures. In particular,
we find no evidence for a toroidal distribution of fluorine atoms, as conjectured in a recent PDF study [26].
[70] Second, the fitted variance of these Gaussian distributions increases linearly with temperature, exactly as
one would expect for a harmonic oscillator. We conclude
that, to the extent to which anharmonicity is important in
this material, it is completely described within the renormalised phonon approximation taken to fourth order. In
other words, although fourth-order interactions seen by
individual phonon modes may limit their amplitude at
high temperature, there is an insufficient number of such
modes with near-zero harmonic terms to make an appreciable difference to the distribution of atomic positions.

9
Thus overall the most important anharmonic interactions involve couplings between different phonons, as
described by the renormalised phonon approximation
taken to fourth order rather than the independent mode
approximation. Furthermore, our results also rule out the
significant of higher-order terms because they too would
lead to a different temperature dependence.
It is worth making a general comment here. It is very
tempting to assume that because high temperatures lead
to large-amplitude motions, they also lead to significant
and unusual anharmonic effects. Actually this need not
be so, given that large amplitudes are perfectly possible within the harmonic approximation. Our analysis
here shows that high temperature does not necessarily
produce unusual behaviour, such as envisaged in reference 26 for example. Instead, at high temperature ScF3
behaves as a typical harmonic crystal, or at least as one
whose behaviour is only weakly perturbed by anharmonic effects. A similar conclusion was obtained from an
RMC study of BiFeO3 based on neutron total scattering
data; in spite of very large atomic motions at high temperature, the average structure remains robustly constant
across a wide range of temperatures and there are no
unusual changes in atom distributions [71].

VIII.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Our two key conclusions from the analysis of the RMC
configurations discussed above are that that the NTE
arises from a set of phonons with wave vectors around
the lines of RUMs in reciprocal space and which are
sufficiently extensive because of the relatively lower force
constants associated with bending the bonds within the
ScF6 coordination octahedra than in related systems, and
that the transverse displacement of the F atoms, although
associated with a quartic mode, can be well described by
a Gaussian distribution whose width varies linearly with
temperature, consistent with a renormalised harmonic
phonon model. These results are closely related, since
the RUMs are exactly the modes that will have small
quadratic terms and in which the quartic terms are thus
expected to be dominant. What they show is that the
quasi-RUM vibrations make dominant contributions to
the thermal expansion, and in particular to the NTE, of
ScF3 . A similar conclusion was reached by the authors of
reference [29] by a different type of analysis.
We need to state clearly that the deformations of the
ScF6 octahedra allowed within the quasi-RUMs do not
in any way repudiate the importance of RUMs. It is a
common misconception that the RUM model requires
the octahedra to be very rigid (a mistake propagated
in reference 26), but in fact quite the opposite is true,
as has been discussed in detail recently in reference 38.
The basic RUM model has always considered the structural polyhedra to have finite, rather than infinite, rigidity,
which in the original application of the RUM model to
displacive phase transitions is directly associated with

the phase transition temperature [72–76]. In the same
vein, the RUM model itself does not presuppose that any
rigidity of the polyhedra arises only from covalent bonding. Polyhedral rigidity certainly can arise from Coulomb
interactions or steric hindrance effects between anions
within the structural polyhedra. In this sense our work
here is also consistent with the viewpoint of reference
[77], which discusses RUMs and quasi-RUMs in the context of a model with ionic forces.

The point is this: the fact that the RUMs are restricted to
wave vectors lying on lines in reciprocal space means that
they are a vanishingly small fraction of the total number
of phonon modes and therefore alone they cannot give
overall NTE. Instead, to get overall NTE it is necessary
that there is a sufficiently-large number of low-frequency
RUM-like phonon modes—quasi-RUMs—close to the
wave vectors of the RUMs. This is possible if the polyhedra (in this case the ScF6 octahedra) have some flexibility.
Thus we propose firstly that the existence of the RUMs
gives a set of phonons with the necessary low frequencies and appropriate mode eigenvectors for the tension
effect to give NTE, and secondly that the flexibility of the
polyhedra allows the contribution from the quasi-RUMs
to spread across a sufficiently large volume in reciprocal space to have enough thermodynamic weighting to
give an overall NTE. This explains concisely why there
is NTE in ScF3 but only positive thermal expansion in
other perovskites such as SrTiO3 ; both materials have
stiff cation–anion (Sc–F or Ti–O) bonds, but the TiO6 octahedra are more resistant to bond-bending distortion than
the ScF6 octahedra. This interpretation provides a plausible and reasonable explanation of the origin of NTE in
ScF3 : one that is predictive, that is based on standard concepts in condensed matter physics, and that is consistent
with previous experimental data and simulations.

In conclusion, our real-space analysis of ScF3 , based
on using the Reverse Monte Carlo method with neutron
total scattering data to generate configurations of atoms
over a wide range of temperatures, has allowed us to establish a quantitative view of the structural fluctuations
associated with NTE. Comparison with a similar study of
SrTiO3 , together with comparisons of published phonon
dispersion curves, shows the importance of RUMs in giving rise to NTE, but that is also necessary to have some
degree of polyhedral distortion to spread the contributions to NTE across a wider range of wave vectors than
those associated with the pure RUMs. Fluorinated octahedra have bonds that are as stiff as in their oxygenated
counterparts, but have more bond-bending flexibility. On
this basis we suggest that in the search for materials with
large negative coefficients of thermal expansion, fluorinated analogues of other oxides with NTE—one example
being ZnF2 as an analogue of the rutile phase of TiO2
[78]—might prove to be particularly fertile [79].

10
DATA AVAILABILITY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Original data sets are available directly from ISIS with
Digital Object Identifier 10.5286/ISIS.E.RB1510519 [80].
Corrected data and atomic configurations are available
on request from the corresponding author.

We are grateful to ISIS for provision of neutron beam
time, supported under proposal number RB1510519.
We also appreciate help from Helen Playford (ISIS)
in preparation for the experimental beam time. J.D.
is grateful to the China Scholarship Council and
Queen Mary University of London for financial support. This research utilised the following computing resources: a) Queen Mary’s Apocrita HPC facility (DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.438045), supported by QMUL ResearchIT and funded by EPSRC grants EP/K000128/1 and
EP/K000233/1 (M.T.D.); b) Midlands Plus Tier-2 HPC
facility, funded by EPSRC grant EP/P020232/1 (M.T.D.).

[1] Martin T Dove and Hong Fang, “Negative thermal expansion and associated anomalous physical properties: review
of the lattice dynamics theoretical foundation,” Reports on
Progress in Physics 79, 066503 (2016).
[2] Jun Chen, Lei Hu, Jinxia Deng, and Xianran Xing, “Negative thermal expansion in functional materials: controllable
thermal expansion by chemical modifications.” Chemical
Society Reviews 44, 3522–3567 (2015).
[3] Cora Lind, “Two Decades of Negative Thermal Expansion
Research: Where Do We Stand?” Materials 5, 1125–1154
(2012).
[4] C P Romao, K J Miller, C A Whitman, M A White, and B A
Marinkovic, “Negative thermal expansion (thermomiotic)
materials.” in Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry II: From
elements to applications (Elsevier, 2013) pp. 127–151.
[5] Koshi Takenaka, “Negative thermal expansion materials:
technological key for control of thermal expansion.” Science and Technology of Advanced Materials 13, 013001
(2012).
[6] G D Barrera, JAO Bruno, THK Barron, and N L Allan,
“Negative thermal expansion,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 17, R217–R252 (2005).
[7] Er-Jun Liang, “Negative thermal expansion materials and
their applications: A survey of recent patents.” Recent
Patents on Materials Science 3, 106–128 (2010).
[8] Xin Ren, Raj Das, Phuong Tran, Tuan Duc Ngo, and Yi Min
Xie, “Auxetic metamaterials and structures: a review,”
Smart Materials and Structures 27, 023001–39 (2018).
[9] Hong Fang and Martin T Dove, “Pressure-induced softening as a common feature of framework structures with negative thermal expansion.” Physical Review B 87, 214109
(2013).
[10] Hong Fang, Anthony E Phillips, Martin T Dove,
Matthew G Tucker,
and Andrew L Goodwin,
“Temperature-dependent pressure-induced softening in
Zn(CN)2 .” Physical Review B 88, 144103 (2013).
[11] Zhongsheng Wei, Lei Tan, Guanqun Cai, Anthony E
Phillips, Ivan da Silva, Mark G Kibble, and Martin T
Dove, “Colossal pressure-induced softening in scandium
fluoride,” Physical Review Letters 124, 255502 (2020).
[12] R Mittal, M K Gupta, and S L Chaplot, “Phonons and
anomalous thermal expansion behaviour in crystalline
solids,” Progress in Materials Science 92, 360–445 (2018).

[13] It may be argued that since, in comparison with the perovskite structure, ScF3 has no A-site cation, it should have
more flexibility for rotational motions and hence for the
tension effect to operate. However, this is a real-space intuition that doesn’t necessarily correspond directly with
what is really found. Since vibrations are correctly resolved
into a summation of normal modes with wave vectors in
reciprocal space, any effects of the A-site cation should
be interpreted in terms of their effect on the frequencies
of the relevant phonon modes. And here we see that the
effect is not to block the motion at all. First, comparing for
ScF3 [16, 32, 33] and SrTiO3 [39] the values of the lowestfrequency modes along the M–R directions in reciprocal
space, as defined later, we find very similar frequency values and hence the capacity for similar RUM amplitudes.
Furthermore, in many cubic perovskites there is a softening of the RUM phonon frequencies on cooling towards a
displacive phase transition, which will increase the RUM
amplitude.
[14] Benjamin K Greve, Kenneth L Martin, Peter L Lee, Peter J
Chupas, Karena W Chapman, and Angus P Wilkinson,
“Pronounced negative thermal expansion from a simple
structure: Cubic ScF3 .” Journal of the American Chemical
Society 132, 15496–15498 (2010).
[15] Lei Hu, Jun Chen, Andrea Sanson, Hui Wu, Clara
Guglieri Rodriguez, Luca Olivi, Yang Ren, Longlong Fan,
Jinxia Deng, and Xianran Xing, “New Insights into the
Negative Thermal Expansion: Direct Experimental Evidence for the “Guitar-String” Effect in Cubic ScF3 .” Journal
of the American Chemical Society 138, 8320–8323 (2016).
[16] Chen W Li, Xiaoli Tang, J A Muñoz, J B Keith, S J Tracy, D L
Abernathy, and B Fultz, “Structural relationship between
negative thermal expansion and quartic anharmonicity of
cubic ScF3 .” Physical Review Letters 107, 195504 (2011).
[17] Simon J Hibble, Simon M Cheyne, Alex C Hannon, and
Sharon G Eversfield, “Beyond Bragg scattering: the structure of AgCN determined from total neutron diffraction.”
Inorganic Chemistry 41, 1042–1044 (2002).
[18] Simon J Hibble, Simon M Cheyne, Alex C Hannon, and
Sharon G Eversfield, “CuCN: a polymorphic material.
Structure of one form determined from total neutron
diffraction.” Inorganic Chemistry 41, 4990–4992 (2002).
[19] Matthew G Tucker, Andrew L Goodwin, Martin T Dove,
David A Keen, Stephen A Wells, and John S O Evans,

11
“Negative thermal expansion in ZrW2 O8 : mechanisms,
rigid unit modes, and neutron total scattering.” Physical
Review Letters 95, 255501 (2005).
[20] Karena W Chapman, Peter J Chupas, and Cameron J
Kepert, “Direct observation of a transverse vibrational mechanism for negative thermal expansion in
Zn(CN)2 : an atomic pair distribution function analysis.”
Journal of the American Chemical Society 127, 15630–
15636 (2005).
[21] Matthew G Tucker, David A Keen, John S O Evans, and
Martin T Dove, “Local structure in ZrW2 O8 from neutron
total scattering.” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 19,
335215 (2007).
[22] Monica Dapiaggi, HyunJeong Kim, Emil S Božin, Simon
J L Billinge, and Gilberto Artioli, “Study of the negative
thermal expansion of cuprite-type structures by means of
temperature-dependent pair distribution function analysis:
Preliminary results.” Journal of Physics and Chemistry of
Solids 69, 2182–2186 (2008).
[23] Karena W Chapman and Peter J Chupas, “Anomalous
thermal expansion of cuprites: A combined high resolution pair distribution function and geometric analysis.”
Chemistry of Materials 21, 425–431 (2009).
[24] Simon J Hibble, Ann M Chippindale, Elena Marelli, Scott
Kroeker, Vladimir K Michaelis, Brandon J Greer, Pedro M
Aguiar, Edward J Bilbé, Emma R Barney, and Alex C Hannon, “Local and average structure in zinc cyanide: toward
an understanding of the atomistic origin of negative thermal expansion.” Journal of the American Chemical Society
135, 16478–16489 (2013).
[25] F Bridges, T Keiber, P Juhas, S J L Billinge, L Sutton, J Wilde,
and Glen R Kowach, “Local vibrations and negative thermal expansion in ZrW2 O8 .” Physical Review Letters 112,
045505 (2014).
[26] David Wendt, Emil Bozin, Joerg Neuefeind, Katharine
Page, Wei Ku, Limin Wang, Brent Fultz, Alexei V
Tkachenko, and Igor A Zaliznyak, “Entropic elasticity
and negative thermal expansion in a simple cubic crystal,”
Science Advances 5, eaay2748–8 (2019).
[27] C Yang, P Tong, J C Lin, X G Guo, K Zhang, M Wang,
Y Wu, S Lin, P C Huang, W Xu, W H Song, and Y P Sun,
“Size effects on negative thermal expansion in cubic ScF3 ,”
Applied Physics Letters 109, 023110 (2016).
[28] Lei Hu, Feiyu Qin, Andrea Sanson, Liang-Feng Huang,
Zhaoo Pan, Quang Li, Qiang Sun, Lu Wang, Fangmin Guo,
Umut Aydemir, Yang Ren, Chengjun Sun, Jinxia Deng,
Guiliana Aquianti, James M Rondinelli, Jun Chen, and
Xianran Xing, “Localized symmetry breaking for tuning
thermal expansion in ScF3 nanoscale frameworks,” Journal
of the Americna Chemical Society 140, 4477–4480 (2018).
[29] T A Bird, J Woodland-Scott, L Hu, M T Wharmby, J Chen,
A L Goodwin, and M S Senn, “Anharmonicity and scissoring modes in the negative thermal expansion materials
ScF3 and CaZrF6 ,” Physical Review B 101, 064306 (2020).
[30] The authors of reference 16 give a slightly misleading qualitative opinion on the fexibility of the ScF6 octahedra on
the basis of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, because they constructed their atomic configuration with an
odd number of unit cells along each direction. This choice
automatically excludes all Rigid Unit Modes, and thus
their simulation is unrealistic and their conclusions, albeit
qualitative, are affected by this choice.
[31] Hong Fang, Martin T Dove, and Anthony E Phillips,
“Common origin of negative thermal expansion and other

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

exotic properties in ceramic and hybrid materials.” Physical Review B 89, 214103 (2014).
Yusuke Oba, Terumasa Tadano, Ryosuke Akashi, and
Shinji Tsuneyuki, “First-principles study of phonon anharmonicity and negative thermal expansion in ScF3 ,” Physical Review Materials 3, 033601 (2019).
Sahan U Handunkanda, Erin B Curry, Vladimir Voronov,
Ayman H Said, Gian G Guzmán-Verri, Richard T Brierley,
Peter B Littlewood, and Jason N Hancock, “Large isotropic
negative thermal expansion above a structural quantum
phase transition.” Physical Review B 92, 134101–6 (2015).
Sahan U Handunkanda, Connor A Occhialini, Ayman H
Said, and Jason N Hancock, “Two-dimensional nanoscale
correlations in the strong negative thermal expansion material ScF3 ,” Physical Review B 94, 214102–6 (2016).
A P Giddy, M T Dove, G S Pawley, and V Heine, “The
determination of rigid-unit modes as potential soft modes
for displacive phase transitions in framework crystal structures.” Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations of
Crystallography 49, 697–703 (1993).
Kenton D Hammonds, Martin T Dove, Andrew P Giddy,
Volker Heine, and Bjoern Winkler, “Rigid-unit phonon
modes and structural phase transitions in framework silicates,” American Mineralogist 81, 1057–1079 (1996).
Volker Heine, Patrick R L Welche, and Martin T Dove, “Geometrical Origin and Theory of Negative Thermal Expansion in Framework Structures,” Journal of the American
Ceramic Society 82, 1793–1802 (1999).
Martin T Dove, “Flexibility of network materials and the
Rigid Unit Mode model: a personal perspective,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 377, 20180222–18
(2019).
W G Stirling, “Neutron inelastic scattering study of the
lattice dynamics of strontium titanate: harmonic models.”
Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics , 2711–2730 (1972).
It is worth remarking about the origin of the stiffness in
the structural polyhedra in general and more specifically
in the case of the ScF6 octahedra in ScF3 . Much of the
original literature on RUMs concerned silica and silicates,
which are conventionally considered to have strong covalent bonds defining the shape and stiffness of the structural
SiO4 tetrahedra. However, it is important to understand
that the rigidity of structural polyhedra do not rely on covalent bonding, because tension within the polyhedra in a
system where the bonding is more ionic in nature can arise
from mutual repulsions between the vertex ions because
of size effects and Coulomb interactions. This is pertinent
for ScF3 . The Sc–F bond is relatively strong, as evidenced
by the large value of the Sc–F stretching frequency in the
phonon dispersion curves [16, 32, 33], indicating some degree of covalent bonding, but it is more likely that the ionic
size and electrostatic interactions will be most important
in the F–Sc–F bond-bending forces.
“Polaris technical information, STFC ISIS Neutron and
Muon Source, https://www.isis.stfc.ac.uk/pages/polaristechnical-information.aspx,” (2019).
A C Larson and R B Von Dreele, General Structure Analysis System (GSAS), Tech. Rep. LAUR 86-748 (Los Alamos
National Laboratory, 2004).
Brian H Toby, “EXPGUI, a graphical user interface for
GSAS,” Journal of Applied Crystallography 34, 210–213
(2001).

12
[44] O Arnold, J C Bilheux, J M Borreguero, A Buts, S I Campbell, L Chapon, M Doucet, N Draper, R Ferraz Leal, M A
Gigg, V E Lynch, A Markvardsen, D J Mikkelson, R L
Mikkelson, R Miller, K Palmen, P Parker, G Passos, T G
Perring, P F Peterson, S Ren, M A Reuter, A T Savici, J W
Taylor, R J Taylor, R Tolchenov, W Zhou, and J Zikovsky,
“Mantid—Data analysis and visualization package for neutron scattering and µ SR experiments,” Nuclear Inst. and
Methods in Physics Research, A 764, 156–166 (2014).
[45] Matthew G Tucker, David A Keen, Martin T Dove, Andrew L Goodwin, and Qun Hui, “RMCProfile: reverse
Monte Carlo for polycrystalline materials.” Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 19, 335218–16 (2007).
[46] Alan K Soper, GudrunN and GudrunX, Tech. Rep. RAL-TR
13 (Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, 2012).
[47] Ilian T Todorov, William Smith, Kostya Trachenko, and
Martin T Dove, “DL POLY 3: new dimensions in molecular dynamics simulations via massive parallelism,” Journal
of Materials Chemistry 16, 1911–8 (2006).
[48] Julian D Gale, “GULP: A computer program for the
symmetry-adapted simulation of solids,” Journal of the
Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 93, 629–637 (1997).
[49] Julian D Gale and Andrew L Rohl, “The General Utility
Lattice Program (GULP).” Molecular Simulation 29, 291–
341 (2003).
[50] Matthew G Tucker, Martin T Dove, and David A Keen,
“Application of the reverse Monte Carlo method to crystalline materials,” Journal of Applied Crystallography 34,
630–638 (2001).
[51] Martin T Dove, Matthew G Tucker, and David A Keen,
“Neutron total scattering method: simultaneous determination of long-range and short-range order in disordered
materials.” European Journal of Mineralogy 14, 331–348
(2002).
[52] D A Keen, M G Tucker, and M T Dove, “Reverse
Monte Carlo modelling of crystalline disorder,” Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 17, S15–S22 (2005).
[53] The recent study of Wendt et al [26] reports two anomalous findings, first that the mean F–F distance shrinks with
increasing temperature, and second that the integrated
area of the second F–F peak in the PDF decreases with temperature. In both cases these are contrary to what we have
found. These two anomalous results may reflect the limitations of analysis of the PDF alone, without the support
of a model. As the F–F peak broadens with temperature,
the data become increasingly noisy, and the pair density
within any fixed r range will necessarily decrease. Furthermore, the analysis may also be affected by artefacts
associated with untreated truncation effects at the maximum observable value of Q. Such problems highlight
the value of making use of modelling approaches such as
RMC, where the atomic model imposes reasonable physical constraints on the data analysis. The atomistic configuration RMC provides means that there is no ambiguity in
assigning pair density where peaks are very broad or overlap, such as the 4 Å peak here, which encompasses both
Sc–Sc and F· · · F pairs. Figures S7–S9 in the Supplementary
Information show the RMC-derived decomposition of the
PDF into contributions from individual atomic pairs.
[54] Hong Fang, Martin T Dove, Leila H N Rimmer, and Alston J Misquitta, “Simulation study of pressure and temperature dependence of the negative thermal expansion in
Zn(CN)2 .” Physical Review B 88, 104306 (2013).

[55] K S Aleksandrov, V N Voronov, A N Vtyurin, S V
Goryainov, N G Zamkova, V I Zinenko, and A S Krylov,
“Lattice dynamics and hydrostatic-pressure-induced phase
transitions in ScF3 .” Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 94, 977–984 (2002).
[56] Stephen A Wells, Martin T Dove, and Matthew G Tucker,
“Finding best-fit polyhedral rotations with geometric algebra,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 14, 4567–4584
(2002).
[57] Stephen A Wells, Martin T Dove, Matthew G Tucker, and
Kostya Trachenko, “Real-space rigid-unit-mode analysis
of dynamic disorder in quartz, cristobalite and amorphous
silica.” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 14, 4645–
4657 (2002).
[58] Stephen A Wells, Martin T Dove, and Matthew G Tucker,
“Reverse Monte Carlo with geometric analysis – RMC+GA,”
Journal of Applied Crystallography 37, 536–544 (2004).
[59] In Figure 4a the sizes of the fluctuations of the ScF6 orientations and F–Sc–F angles are similar, but in Figure 4b
the GASP analysis suggest that the motions of the F atoms
associated with bond bending are rather larger than from
rotations of the octahedra. These results are actually consistent with each other: the contribution to M from the
octahedral rotation will come from three axes, but there
are 12 bending angles associated with deformation of the
octahedra.
[60] Qun Hui, Matthew G Tucker, Martin T Dove, Stephen A
Wells, and David A Keen, “Total scattering and reverse
Monte Carlo study of the 105 K displacive phase transition in strontium titanate,” Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 17, S111–S124 (2005).
[61] But it would be wrong to say that it is the limiting case,
because the model, being a simplified model, is not an exact representation of the actual material. In particular, the
division between the three types of motion is not exactly
the same. What we are demonstrating is that even in the
limit of fairly flexible octahedra the GASP method will still
identify whole-body rotations.
[62] There are two important points to highlight in the two diagrams in Figure 4. The first is that the angular fluctuations
in (a) increase linearly with temperature, in line with expectations from classical quasi-harmonic lattice dynamics.
Second is that the distribution of atomic motion over the
three components in (b) is more-or-less constant with temperature, reflecting phonon eigenvectors and again being
fully consistent with classical quasi-harmonic lattice dynamics. In particular, although thermal motion is large at
the higher temperature, it does not lead to any breakdown
of the classical picture, contrary to the opinion expressed
in reference 26.
[63] We consider models in which the Sc–F bond is the sole
rigid entity, with complete flexibility of the ScF6 octahedra, as for example in reference 26, to be over-flexible and
unable to provide useful insights, not least because such
models will predict the wrong signs of the Grüneisen parameters for many phonon modes. A similar situation was
discussed with regard to NTE in Cu2 O in reference 81,
where the true rigid entity is the linear O–Cu–O trimer,
and models that consider only the O–Cu bonds as the rigid
entities are too flexible.
[64] Petr Lazar, Tomáš Bučko, and Jürgen Hafner, “Negative thermal expansion of ScF3 : Insights from densityfunctional molecular dynamics in the isothermal-isobaric
ensemble.” Physical Review B 92, 224302–6 (2015).

13
[65] Dmitry Bocharov, Yuri Rafalskij, Matthias Krack, Mara Putnina, and Alexei Kuzmin, “Negative thermal expansion
of ScF3 : first principles vs empirical molecular dynamics,”
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering
503, 012001–5 (2019).
[66] D Bocharov, M Krack, Yu Rafalskij, A Kuzmin, and J Purans, “Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations of negative thermal expansion in ScF3 : The effect of the supercell
size,” Computational Materials Science 171, 109198 (2020).
[67] Ambroise van Roekeghem, Jesús Carrete, and Natalio
Mingo, “Anomalous thermal conductivity and suppression of negative thermal expansion in ScF3 .” Physical Review B 94, 020303–5 (2016).
[68] In common usage, the term quasiharmonic model considers
the effect of changes in volume on the phonon frequencies through the consequent changes in harmonic force
constants, giving new harmonic phonon frequencies as
modified by the anharmonic coupling of force constants
to volume. The term renormalised phonon model considers
how a renormalised harmonic Hamiltonian can result from
a mean-field treatment of the anharmonic interactions between phonons, typically focussing on the fourth-order
interactions.
[69] Martin T Dove, Introduction to Lattice Dynamics (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2009).
[70] Importantly, the reverse Monte Carlo method is indeed
capable of generating such distributions in cases where
they genuinely exist; one clear example is that of the cubic
phase of cristobalite [82].
[71] Juan Du, Anthony E Phillips, Donna C Arnold, David A
Keen, Matthew G Tucker, and Martin T Dove, “Structural
study of bismuth ferrite BiFeO3 by neutron total scattering
and the reverse Monte Carlo method,” Physical Review B
100, 104111 (2019).
[72] Martin T Dove, A P Giddy, and V Heine, “On the application of mean-field and landau theory to displacive phase
transitions,” Ferroelectrics 136, 33–49 (1992).
[73] Martin T Dove, Volker Heine, and Kenton D Hammonds,
“Rigid unit modes in framework silicates,” Mineralogical
Magazine 59, 629–639 (1995).
[74] Martin T Dove, Manoj Gambhir, Kenton D Hammonds,
Volker Heine, and Alexandra K A Pryde, “Distortions
of framework structures.” Phase Transitions 58, 121–143
(1996).
[75] Manoj Gambhir, Volker Heine, and Martin T Dove, “A oneparameter model of a rigid-unit structure,” Phase Transitions 61, 125–139 (1997).
[76] Martin T Dove, Manoj Gambhir, and Volker Heine,
“Anatomy of a structural phase transition: theoretical analysis of the displacive phase transition in quartz and other
silicates.” Physics and Chemistry of Minerals 26, 344–353
(1999).
[77] Alexey V Tkachenko and Igor A Zaliznyak, “Criticality,
entropic elasticity, and negative thermal expansion of a

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

coulomb floppy network: ScF3 -inspired theory for a class
of ionic solids,” (2019), arXiV:1908.11643.
Lei Wang, Cong Wang, Ying Sun, Kewen Shi, Sihao Deng,
Huiqing Lu, Pengwei Hu, and Xiaoyun Zhang, “Metal
fluorides, a new family of negative thermal expansion
materials,” Journal of Materiomics 1, 106–112 (2015).
The research group of Angus Wilkinson has explored several fluorides with crystal structures analogous to ScF3 ,
including materials with various levels of doping [83–87].
Many examples display phase transitions involving rotations of octahedra and which appear to be continuous
(second-order). These phase transitions will be accompanied by the softening of the RUM phonons on cooling towards the transition temperature, through the types of anharmonic interactions discussed in this paper as described
by equation 1. We have shown that such a variation of
the renormalised phonon frequency with temperature will
lead to a reduction, or even elimination, of NTE [31], as
also demonstrated in recent calculations [32, 67].
M T Dove, M G Tucker, T Zhang, A E Phillips, and
J Du, “Structural origin of negative thermal expansion
in ScF3 ,” (2015), STFC ISIS Neutron and Muon Source,
DOI: 10.5286/ISIS.E.RB1510519.
Leila H N Rimmer, Martin T Dove, Björn Winkler, Dan J
Wilson, Keith Refson, and Andrew L Goodwin, “Framework flexibility and the negative thermal expansion mechanism of copper(I) oxide Cu2 O.” Physical Review B 89,
214115 (2014).
Matthew G Tucker, Matthew P Squires, Martin T Dove,
and David A Keen, “Dynamic structural disorder in cristobalite: neutron total scattering measurement and reverse
Monte Carlo modelling.” Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 13, 403–423 (2000).
Cody R Morelock, Benjamin K Greve, Leighanne C Gallington, Karena W Chapman, and Angus P Wilkinson, “Negative thermal expansion and compressibility of Sc1− x Yx F3
(x ≤ 0.25).” Journal of Applied Physics 114, 213501 (2013).
Cody R Morelock, Justin C Hancock, and Angus P Wilkinson, “Thermal expansion and phase transitions of α-AlF3 ,”
Journal of Solid State Chemistry 219, 143–147 (2014).
Justin C Hancock, Karena W Chapman, Gregory J Halder,
Cody R Morelock, Benjamin S Kaplan, Leighanne C
Gallington, Angelo Bongiorno, Chu Han, Si Zhou, and Angus P Wilkinson, “Large negative thermal expansion and
anomalous behavior on compression in cubic ReO3 -type
AII BIV F6 : CaZrF6 and CaHfF6 .” Chemistry of Materials 27,
3912–3918 (2015).
Cody R Morelock, Leighanne C Gallington, and Angus P
Wilkinson, “Solid solubility, phase transitions, thermal expansion, and compressibility in Sc1− x Alx F3 .” Journal of
Solid State Chemistry 222, 96–102 (2015).
Brett R Hester and Angus P Wilkinson, “Negative Thermal
Expansion, Response to Pressure and Phase Transitions in
CaTiF6 ,” Inorganic Chemistry 57, 11275–11281 (2018).

