Self-Similarity and Criticality in the Boson (pions)
field produced according to dynamic cascade
models.
Yiannis Contoyiannis(1) and Myron Kampitakis(2)
(1) Department of Electric-Electronics Engineering, West Attica University, 250
Thivon and P. Ralli, Aigaleo, Athens GR-12244, Greece (email: yiaconto@uniwa.gr)
(2) Hellenic Electricity Distribution Network Operator SA, Network Major
Installations Department, 72 Athinon Ave., N.Faliro GR-18547, Greece (email:
m.kampitakis@deddie.gr)

Abstract: In this work we reveal that the inside-outside dynamic
model for the production of fermion-antifermion pair (or quarkantiquark in QCD), is an out of equilibrium process. Properties of a
complex system as the self-similarity and the critical point of a
continuous phase transition in equilibrium appear. In this work we
show that this is accomplished imposing a type of mapping process
through a self-composition operator on a  bosons (or pions)
field.
Key words: Inside-outside cascade, bosons (pions) production, selfsimilarity, criticality.

1. Introduction
A great open issue in High Energy physics is the problem of confinementdeconfinement transition between the matter of Quarks-Gluons plasma and the
Hadrons matter. This transition has cosmological significance since it refers to the
production of the material of the Hadrons (baryons-mesons) at the early time of the
universe. Today the problem is faced by two basic research currents. The first one
supports that this transition was an out of equilibrium transition with clear dynamic
characteristics while the second one suggests this transition has the characteristics
of phase transition in equilibrium, as described by Statistical Physics of critical
phenomena. The main argument for the out of equilibrium process is that the very
small times in Hadronic interactions 10 s) did not permit the phase transitions
mechanism and the main argument of the other side is that in critical state there is

space-time invariance and therefore time scaling has no meaning. A possible
scenario in the framework of the out of equilibrium process which has been
developed in the past by Bjorken [1] in order to explain the mesons (quarksantiquarks pair) production is the Inside-Outside cascade model. In the framework of
the cascade models a scenario was introduced by Schwinger [2] which faces the
particle production with QCD nonperturbative models. It is a two-dimensional
quantum electrodynanics (QED ) model in which the property of quark confinement
is a natural consequence of dynamical process. On the other hand, various models
have been developed in the framework of Statistical phase transitions mainly in
numerical experiments on Lattice non-perturbative QCD [4]. In the level of
symmetries, the SU(2) gauge group describes the two color (or flavors) degrees of
freedom of QCD and has the same center with the Z(2) spin model as the Ising
models. We have shown [3] that at critical point the fluctuations of the order
parameter obey to a dynamic in time behavior which is an intermittent map. The
motivation of this work is the idea that the dynamic mechanisms of bosons (pions)
production like QED can be simulated by an iterative map through a selfcomposition operator which produces the critical intermittent dynamics. Then selfsimilar structures in the space of bosons (pions) field as well as critical fluctuations in
terms of a continuous phase transition emerge.

2.  model

Generally, according to this model, it has been found that QED involving massless
fermions with electromagnetic interaction is equivalent to a free boson field φ with a
mass  



√

, where e is the coupling constant. This is analogous to the system of

quarks and antiquarks in QCD in which the physical quanta are mesons, which are
bound states consisting a quark and an antiquark. The physical boson in QED can be
considered as the analogue of the pion of QCD. Starting from Klein-Gordon equation
one can obtain [4] the produced boson field :
  ,  




√




sin$%  & $   ' √()* '  & * & + (1)

where  the spatial direction where the boson as bound state (fermionantifermion) moves. The quantities $% and $ are the components of momentum
$, , -  0,1. According to this picture, the produced boson field  starts to
emerge at the point of the separation of the fermion-antifermion pair and spreads
from the inside (small  ) region to the outside ( large  ) region, as time proceeds.
In the inside-outside cascade picture it can be shown [1] that the produced boson
field  is a function of the relativistic invariant quantity  . &   , / being
the proper time. One can obtain the explicit proper-time dependence by considering
 at the space-time point   0, . Thus we have from (1) :

 / 

&1

1$
0 % sin$% / ' √()*/ & *&/+
√( $
 &√(2% / ' √( (2)

where 2% / is the Bessel function of order 0. From equation (2) we conclude that

the produced field  oscillates about √(. In the following we let m=1. The Bessel
function is expressed through its series expansion:
/
&14  
2
2% /  3
6!
8

49%

4

/
&14  
2
 1'3
6!
8

49

in eq.(2) obtaining that the bosons (or pions) Field :/ ;
:/ 

4

C

B  DB
D
& ∑8
49
4!D

<=>? @
√

is given as :

(3)

Fig.1 illustrates the boson field :/ as a function of /.

Fig.1 The produced boson field :/ as a function of the proper time E. The points where
the red line intersects the curve are the time locations where pair the fermion-antifermion
(quark-antiquark for QCD) is created. The occurring non convergence for large values of E
is due to finite calculation capacity of the machine.

3. A mapping process creates Self-Similarity on
boson field :/

According to the inside-outside cascade process the FFG pair after its production, it
is separated . According to the mechanism described in [5] the interaction between
a quark and an antiquark can be represented phenomenologically by a linear
potential proportional to the separation between the two particles which is an
essential feature for quark confinement. When the separation exceeds a threshold
value, a new pair FFG can be produced at a next instant in such a flux tube. This
process continues producing pairs FFG at successive time instants. We propose that
the above iterative process could be mathematically expressed by the action of a
self- composition operator. The composition function is an operation that takes two
functions f and g and produces a function h such that h(x) = g(f(x)). If H ; I then we
can write I   II. For any natural number n ≥ 2, the nth functional power
can be defined as f(f(f(….(f(x)…)) = f n(x). The repeated composition of such a function
with itself is called a self-composition function. Essentially, this process is a mapping
of boson field :/ on to itself. In figure 2 the boson field : K / vs / is presented.

Fig2. The 4th iteration field LM E vs E is shown. The self-similarity between the parts of
the boson field LM E is obvious.

The existence of self-similar structures due to the action of the self-composition
operator is apparent. The self-similar structures are characterized by scale

invariance, such that if a part of a system is magnified until it is as large as the
original system (figs 2(b),(c),(d)), one would not be able to tell the difference
between the magnified part and the original system [6]. It is essential that the selfsimilarity here is not coming from any scale factor in the case of doubling operator
Tf(x)=af(f(x/a)) which is met in renormalization group processes in maps [7].The
generation of self-similar structures is the result of the action of self-composition
operator only. One could say that this mapping shifts the limits of convergence of
boson field towards greater times. Indeed, comparing fig 1 and fig2 it is clear that
the radius of convergence has shifted from / N 22 to / N 26,4 where the fourth
structure appears. As N increases, new self-similar structures could be added
which belong to boson (pions) field : Q / . Scaling relations can be deduced
between the self-similar structures corresponding to various values of number
iterations. Such a scaling relation can be found for the envelope describing the decay
of boson field. The curve function for the part1 of boson field for N=2,3,4,… is given
by power-law
R/~/ T ; 1Q 

TVD

W

(4)

Scaling law (4) can be applied to other parameters too.

4. Criticality in the Boson Field
4a. The method of critical fluctuations
The existence of self-similarity in the limit of convergence leads us to investigate if a
critical state according to the Ginzburg –Landau Theory exists in this area because
the self-similarity is a basic characteristic of critical state. It is very important in an
out of equilibrium process of boson ( or pions for QCD) production as the insideoutside model is connected with a continuous phase transition in equilibrium
following the theory of critical phenomena. A way to find the existence of the
critical state is the analysis of order parameter fluctuations  by the Method of
Critical Fluctuations (MCF) . Details for this method are presented in [8]. Importantly,
the exact dynamics at the critical point can be determined analytically for a large
class of critical systems introducing the so-called critical map [3]. This map can be
approximated as a intermittent map:
XY  X ' ZX ' [X

(5)

The shift parameter [X introduces a non-universal stochastic noise which is
necessary for the creation of ergodicity [9]. Each physical system has its
characteristic "noise", which is expressed through the shift parameter [X . Notice, for
thermal systems the exponent z is connected with the isothermal critical exponent
δ as z = δ + 1 . The crucial observation in this approach is the fact that the

distribution P (l ) of the suitable defined laminar lengths l (waiting times in laminar

region) [7] of the above mentioned intermittent map of Eq. (11) in the limit [X \ 0 is
given by the power law [7]

P(l ) ~ l − pl

(6)

z
. Therefore
z −1
1
the exponent pl is connected with the isothermal exponent δ by: pl = 1 + . The

where the exponent pl is connected with the exponent z by pl =

δ

distribution of the laminar lengths of fluctuations is fitted by the function:

P(l ) ~ l − p2 e − p3l

(7)

We focus on the exponents p2 and p3 . If the exponent p3 is zero, then, the
z
suggests that the
z −1
exponent pl (or p2 ) should be greater than 1. On the other hand according to the

exponent p2 is equal to the exponent pl . The relation pl =

theory of critical phenomena [6] the isothermal exponent δ is greater than 1.
1
Therefore, as a result from pl = 1 + we take 1 < pl ( p2 ) < 2 . In conclusion, the
δ
critical profile of the temporal fluctuations is restored in the restrictions: p2 > 1 and

p3 ≈ 0 . As the system removes from the critical state, the exponent p2 decreases
while simultaneously the exponent p3 increases reinforcing, in this way, the
exponential character of the laminar lengths distribution.

4b. Results from MCF analysis
The MCF is a method which requires the existence of the fluctuations. It is known
that if a dynamic process has critical dynamics then the addition of properly quantity
of noise for ergodicity purposes helps this criticality to reveal[10]. Recently we
introduced a method where the above idea is applied [11]. According to this method
for a given signal where the short-time range fluctuations are absent we normalize
this signal in the interval [0,1] and then we add uniform noise according to the [10] .
In this way, we create a new time-series in which fluctuations appear and finally we
apply the MCF on this modified signal. In figure 3 we present the results from MCF
analysis from the part2 of the boson field F K τ ( fig2b).

Fig3. (a) The normalized structure of LM E in the interval [0.1] with noise addition. The
noise is uniform in the interval [-0.035, 0.035]. The results do not change significantly for a
broader region of noise between _`. `b & _`. `M. (b) The histogram of LM E values .
The fixed point (f.p) lies in the distribution edge with greater statistical weights because
the f.p “attracts the trajectories” . Here it has been set to 0.1. The ends of laminar regions
lie in the area between 0.65-0.85 (c) The values of the exponents c ,cb in the area of
laminar regions vs the end of each laminar region are shown. It is characteristic that all
the c values are greater than 1 and simultaneously the cb is very close to 0. These are
the critical conditions and so we can claim that critical fluctuations are present. The most
representing c values are these which correspond to cb exactly at the zero value
because then the power-laws distributions appear. As we have seen the criticality is
extended for c d e, . There are 5 such values fluctuating between 1.8 up to 1.87
which is close to the upper limits of criticality . (d) A representing laminar distribution
fitted by the eq. (7) ( red line) for the laminar region `. fg h LM h 0.1 . The fitting gives
c  e. ij, cb  ` and k  `. ggj.

The results of the above MCF analysis demonstrate clearly the existence of criticality
in bosons (pions) field. Such a result appears in the critical point of 3D-Ising model
[11] which as is known undergoes a continued phase transition in equilibrium.

6. Conclusions-discussion
Imposing the self-composition operator on the bosons( pions) produced field
according to the cascade models mechanism, the self-similarity and criticality
emerge in the bosons(pions) system in terms of Physics of critical phenomena. The
existence of random noise is necessary to see the equivalence between the dynamic
process and the criticality in stationary conditions. The decisive role for the
emergence of criticality is the action of the self-composition operator. The crucial
question is if every critical state in nature is a result of the action of self-composition
operator on the field who plays the role of order parameter of a critical system. This
is an issue for further investigation. In our case this happened since the cascade
mechanism is essentially a feedback mechanism where the creation of a pair
fermion-antifermion ( or quark-antiquark) acts as input in order to emerge the next
pair . This is an iterative process which could mathematically be expressed by the
self-composition operator as it is shown in this work .

7. References
1. J. D. Bjorken, Lectures presented in the 1973 Proceedings of the Summer
Institute on Particle Physics, edited by Zipt, SLAC-167 (1973).
2. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev.128,2425 (1962); J. Schwinger, in Theoretical Physics,
Lecture Presented at Seminar on Theoretical Physics , Trieste, 1962, published by
IAEA, Vienna, 1963, p.89.
3. “Criticality and Intermittency in the order parameter space”, Y.Contoyiannis and
F. Diakonos. Phys.Lett. A 268(2000) 286-292
4. Cheuk-Yin Wong, “Introduction to high-Energy Heavy-Ion Collisions”, World
Scientific Publishing , 1994.
5. A. Casher, H. Neuberger, and S. Nussinov, Phys. Rev. D20, 179 (1979);H.
Neuberger, Phys.Rev. D20,2936 (1979); C. B. Chiu and S. Nussinov, ibid. 20,945
(1979).
6. K. Huang Statistical Mechanics 2nd New York: Wiley 1987.
7. H. G. Schuster, “Deterministic Chaos” VCH, Weinheim, 1998.
8. Y. Contoyiannis, F. Diakonos and A. Malakis . “Intermittent dynamics of critical
fluctuations” Phys.Rev. Lett. 89, 35701(2002) ; “Monitoring of a preseismic
phase from its electromagnetic precursors”. Y. Contoyiannis, P. Kapiris and K.
Eftaxias. Phys. Rev. E 71, 1(2005) ; Recent seismic activity at Cephalonia island
(Greece): a study through candidate electromagnetic precursors in terms of
nonlinear dynamics SM Potirakis, Y Contoyiannis, NS Melis, J Kopanas, G
Antonopoulos, Nonlin. Processes Geophys. Discuss 2, 1587-1629,2015

9. Y.F. Contoyiannis and F.K. Diakonos “Unimodal maps and order parameter
fluctuations in the critical region” . Phys. Rev. E 76,031138 (2007).
10. “Intermittent criticality revealed in ULF magnetic fields prior to the 11 March
2011 Tohoku earthquake” Y. Contoyiannis, S.M Potirakis, K. Eftaxias, M.
Hayakawa, A. Schekotov. Physica A 452(2016)19-28. ; “Intermittency-induced
criticality in the lower ionosphere prior to the 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes as
embedded in the VLF propagation data observed to multiple stations’. Stelios M.
Potirakis, Yiannis Contoyiannis, Tomokazu Asano, Masashi Hayakawa.
Tectonophysics 722 (2018) 422–431 ; “Observation of intermittency-induced
critical dynamics in geomagnetic field time series prior to the intense magnetic
storms of March, June and December 2015” G. Balasis, I. A. Daglis, Y.
Contoyiannis, S. M. Potirakis, C. Papadimitriou, N. S. Melis, O. Giannakis, A.
Papaioannou, A. Anastasiadis, C. Kontoes, Journal of Geophysical Research:
Space Physics, 123. (2018), 1-20, doi: 10.1002/2017JA025131.
11. “Intermittent dynamics of critical fluctuations” Y. Contoyiannis, F. Diakonos and
A. Malakis . Phys.Rev. Lett. 89, 35701(2002).

