J
our
nal
Name

arXiv:1905.08980v1 [cond-mat.soft] 22 May 2019

Propagating Density Spikes in Light-Powered MotilityRatchets
Celia Lozano a,∗ , Benno Liebchen b,c,†,∗ , Borge ten Hagen b,d,∗ , Clemens Bechinger a and Hartmut
Löwenb

Combining experiments and computer simulations, we use a spatially periodic and flashing lightfield to direct the motion of phototactic active colloids. Here, the colloids self-organize into a
density spike pattern, which resembles a shock wave and propagates over long distances, almost
without dispersing. The underlying mechanism involves a synchronization of the colloids with the
light-field, so that particles see the same intensity gradient each time the light-pattern is switched
on, but no gradient in between (for example). This creates a pulsating transport whose strength
and direction can be controlled via the flashing protocol and the self-propulsion speed of the
colloids. Our results might be useful for drug delivery applications and can be used to segregate
active colloids by their speed.

1

Introduction

Active colloids are autonomously navigating microparticles that
consume energy while moving. They comprise living microorganisms like bacteria, algae and sperm 1–3 , but also man-made synthetic swimmers, which can be produced with desired properties.
Such synthetic microswimmers are often based on anisotropic colloidal Janus particles that are self-propelled by phoretic mechanisms either directly induced by catalytic surfaces evoking chemical reactions 4,5 , or initiated by light 6–12 or other external fields,
such as ultrasonic 13 , magnetic 14–17 or electric 18,19 ones.
While free active colloids show a diffusive random motion on
large scales 20,21 , equivalent to the motion of passive colloids at
high temperature, applications to use them e.g. for targeted drug
delivery 22,23 or nanorobotics 24 require to direct and steer their
motion on demand.
One way to direct the motion of active particles is to expose
them to a periodic but asymmetric potential landscape (ratchet),
leading to directed transport 25–28 , in a way similar as for passive colloids driven out of equilibrium through additional timedependent fields 29–31 . Characteristically, such potential ratchets

a

Fachbereich Physik, Universität Konstanz, Konstanz 78457, Germany.
Institut für Theoretische Physik II: Weiche Materie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
c
Institut für Festkörperphysik, Technische Universität Darmstadt, 64289 Darmstadt,
Germany.
d
Physics of Fluids Group and Max Planck Center Twente, Department of Science and
Technology, MESA+ Institute, and J. M. Burgers Centre for Fluid Dynamics, University
of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands.
†
corresponding author: liebchen@fkp.tu-darmstadt.de
∗
These authors contributed equally.
b

involve forces acting on the center of mass coordinate of the particles, yielding a spatial variation of their potential energy. A versatile alternative to create directed transport in active colloids,
are so-called motility-ratchets, which specifically exploit the active nature of the particles and have no direct counterpart for
passive colloids. These ratchets hinge on the spatial modulation of the self-propulsion speed (or direction) through an external field 27,32,33 , not affecting the potential energy of the particles. Here, the required modulation of the self-propulsion speed
can be achieved e.g. for light-sensitive Janus colloids in a suitable standing light-wave 32 which has been previously discussed
in the context of dynamical trapping of active particles in the
dark spots of the light field 34,35 . An interesting extension of such
static motility-ratchets, providing an additional handle to control
the active particle dynamics, is to use a time-dependent motility
field, as recently considered theoretically 36–38 , and also experimentally 39 for light-sensitive bacteria 40–42 .
In the present work, we combine simulations and experiments
to establish a flashing motility-ratchet for synthetic phototactic
colloids, based on a sawtooth-shaped light pattern with intensity I(x,t) which we periodically switch on and off (flashing).
The gradients of I create an effective torque affecting the colloids’ self-propulsion direction which can systematically bias their
motion 32,43 , yielding a directed transport. Here, the emergence
of transport hinges on a phototactic torque biasing the active
particles’ direction of motion, as opposed to classical flashing
potential ratchets 30,44 , usually depending on the interplay of
time-dependent forces and diffusion. This novelty in the working mechanism of the flashing motility-ratchet manifests in a set
of remarkable features. In particular, we find that the individJ
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
, 1–8 | 1

a uniform field in each off-phase, provoking a persistent unidirectional motion. This dynamics is based on a limit cycle attractor in
the underlying phase space, which represents a late-time dynamics where particles move by exactly one spatial period per flashing
cycle, in suitable parameter regimes. Since all particles which are
attracted by the same limit cycle show one and the same periodic dynamics at late times they move coherently with a speed
dictated by the limit-cycle, leading to an almost dispersion-free
transport - a key feature of the present work.

2

Fig. 1 Schematic: Active colloids polarize and self-organize into density spikes propagating resonantly through the flashing light field. Here,
the colloids synchronize with the flashing light-field and a macroscopic
fraction of them essentially follows the same periodic trajectory, as dictated by a limit cycle of the system, so that particles within each density
spike move coherently. This creates a pulsating particle transport with
low dispersion. The shown sawtooth-shaped profile represents the particle’s self-propulsion velocity, which varies between vmin and vmax when
the light-pattern is on (“on-phase”), where a, b determine the steepness
of the gradient, and which everywhere equals voff , when the light-field is
uniform (middle panel, “off-phase”).

ual active particles synchronize with the flashing light-field and
self-organize into density-spikes resembling a coherently moving
shock-wave. As their most striking feature, these spikes hardly
disperse, opposing the usual situation in potential ratchets, where
the interplay of time-dependent forces and diffusion leads to
strong dispersion of any localized particle ensemble. Thus, the
present setup opens a route to use laser-light to create a pulsating transport allowing to ’bombard’ a distant target with short and
intense pulses of active particles, as might be interesting, in particular, for drug-delivery applications. Here, the transport velocity
can be systematically controlled via the flashing times, but interestingly, it also depends sensitively on the particle speed in the
off-phase. In particular, we find that the transport direction even
reverts when changing the self-propulsion speed of the particles
in the off-phase. This transport reversal can be used, in principle,
to segregate ensembles of fast and slow particles and might serve
as a useful tool for the preparation of clean ensembles of active
particle with near identical self-propulsion speed.
Before detailing these findings, let us sketch the physical mechanism underlying the flashing motility-ratchet: If the torque acting on the active colloids scales linearly with the gradient of
the laser field (unsaturated regime) no transport can occur in
static light patterns. (This contrasts 32 operating in the saturated
regime.) Intuitively, if noise is negligible, this is because the phototactic torque acting on particles crossing a whole spatial period,
first turns them into a certain direction and then back to the original orientation, so that a localized and unbiased initial ensemble
remains unbiased for all times. Flashing in turn allows the particles to synchronize with the light field, in a way that they repeatedly see the same gradient when the light pattern is on and
2|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–8

Model

For conceptual clarity, we first introduce an idealized flashing
motility ratchet, based on an effective phototactic torque which
scales linearly with the light gradient (ω ∝ |∇I|). In this case, the
emerging transport is flashing-induced and vanishes in static light
patterns. To see this, consider self-propelled Janus particles, actively moving in 2D with a self-propulsion speed v(x,t), varying
both in space and time, as controlled by the imposed light-field
(see Fig. 1). For simplicity, we specifically consider a quasi 1D
modulation of the light field, and hence of v. The self-propulsion
direction û = (cos φ , sin φ ) changes in response to an effective phototactic torque, and also due to rotational diffusion, yielding:
ṙ

√
= v(x,t)û + 2Dt ζr (t),

(1)

φ̇

√
= ω(x, φ ,t) + 2Dr ζφ (t).

(2)

Here r = (x, y) and Dt , Dr are translational and rotational diffusion coefficients; ζr (t) and ζφ (t) represent Gaussian white noise
of zero mean and unit variance. The key-quantity controlling the
particle dynamics in the light-field is the phototactic alignment
rate ω, which reads
ω(x, φ ,t) = Av(x,t)v0 (x,t) sin φ

(3)

where v0 (x,t) = ∂ v(x,t)/∂ x. Eq. (3) represents a linear relationship between alignment rate and intensity gradient, ω ∝ |∇I|,
which is realistic for shallow light patterns 32 , but will later be
generalized towards saturation effects. Here, the coefficient A
follows from experiments 32 . For the velocity profile v(x,t), we
choose a sawtooth-shape in the on-phase, as sketched in Fig. 1,
with segment lengths a, b and minimal and maximal velocities of
vmin and vmax respectively. In the off-phase the velocity is uniform
v(x,t) = voff .
Note that in general, besides creating an effective torque aligning
the particles, light gradients also induce effective forces creating
particle translations, represented by a term ∝ ∇I on the r.h.s of
Eq. (1). In accordance with 32 , we here neglect such a term for
simplicity, but emphasize its existence for future reference.

3

Flashing-induced Coherent Transport

Let us now explore the dynamics of a representatative particle
ensemble in the flashing light-field (Fig. 1). We choose random
initial positions and orientations uniformly distributed within one
unit cell of the sawtooth-shaped light pattern (x ∈ [0, L) and
φ ∈ [0, 2π)) and define the average transport velocity as hvi =
lim [x(t) − x(0)]/t, where tend is some time, large enough that hvi

t→tend

is basically stationary. Now performing Brownian dynamics simulations (see ∗ for details) until t = tend for various ton but fixed
flashing period T = ton + toff , we generically find a directed transport for all values of ton (Fig. 2, inset). In contrast, however, for
the static cases ton = 0 and toff = T (uniform light field) and ton = T
and toff = 0 (static sawtooth-shaped light pattern) the transport
vanishes. That is the directed transport is flashing-induced.
Before exploring the origin and properties of the flashinginduced transport, let us first understand its absence in uniform
light fields. To see this, note that particles crossing a whole spatial period of a static light pattern (ton = 10s), do not experience
any net alignment, which can be seen as follows for the noisefree case: from Eqs. (1,2,3) and φ̇ = ẋ(∂ φ /∂ x), it follows that for
vanishing noise we have ∂ φ /∂ x = Av0 (x) tan φ (x), which yields, after integration over a spatial period φ (x + L) = φ (x). Thus, in the
absence of noise, if all particles are initialized with uniformely distributed orientations in an intensity-maximum of the light field,
exactly half of them permanently move to the left and to the right
respectively, i.e. there is no transport. (For spatially distributed
initial ensembles, we provide a slightly more general argument
for the absence of transport in footnote 45 .) Our argument for
the absence of transport breaks down in the presence of flashing.
Intuitively, flashing allows the particles to synchronize with the
light field in a way that they “see” the same gradient each time
the light-field is switched on and no gradient when the light-field
is off. This repeatedly aligns their self-propulsion in the same direction, as we further detail in section 4.
The synchronization of the particle motion with the light-field
has a number of remarkable consequencies. One of them is shown
in Fig.
p 2 (inset), where we can see that the standard deviation
σ = hv2 i − hvi2  hvi, for most values of ton . That is, the transported particle ensemble hardly disperses, but moves rather coherently through the flashing light field. In particular, σ has a
minimum at ton ≈ 2.6s where the transport velocity is maximal. To
further illuminate the particle dynamics in the flashing motilityratchet, let us consider the spatial particle distribution in the lightpattern after, a snapshot of which after 20 driving cycles is shown
in Fig. 2. As we can see in this figure, for ton = 10s, where we have
no transport, most particles are localized around their initial positions; they collectively move back and forth in the light-pattern.
Conversely, for ton = 2s the particle distribution is strongly asymmetric and shows a train of pronounced peaks resembling a shock
wave. This train persistently moves to the right, with a speed of
precisely one spatial periode per flashign cycle (v = L/T ).
Apart from exploring the dependence of the transport velocity
on parameters of the environment, such as the flashing duration
ton , it is instructive to also explore the dependence of the transport velocity on particle properties: In Fig. 3, we show the transport velocity as a function of voff (self-propulsion speed in the off
state), finding a remarkable structure, comprising distinct peaks

∗ Brownian dynamics simulations have been performed using a standard forward Euler algorithm with a time step of dt = 0.001T . Each point in curves showing averages
is based on Np = 100 trajectories (initial conditions), integrated for 30T and distributions are based on Np = 50.000 initial conditions. The system size is infinite, i.e.
the simulations do not require any boundary conditions.

Fig. 2 Propagating density spikes: Spatial particle distribution after t =
200s for N p = 50.000 and different ton shown in p
the key. Inset: Mean transport velocity hvi and standard deviation σ = h(v − hvi)2 i as a function
of ton , calculated for N p = 100 and tend = 30T per data point. The dashed
line shows the zero line to guide the eye. Parameters: ton + toff = 10s;
a = 27.38µm; b = 6.02µm; vmin = 3µm/s; vmax = 13µm/s and voff = 3µm/s;
A ≈ 0.65 (A = C1C2 /R for particles with radius R = 1.365µm and C1 = 0.44,
C2 = 2.01s being experimentally determined parameters, see 32 ).

in the transport velocity, and in particular a transport-reversal for
10µm/s . voff . 20µm/s. (Note here, that the structure of the
peaks is statistically well converged, as indicated by the fact that
the standard deviation σ is much smaller than hvi for most data
points.) Following the observed transport reversal, when considering a mixture of particles with different velocities, say 5µm/s
and 15µm/s, the flashing light-field will transport them in opposite directions and segregate the mixture. This could be used in
principle as a tool to prepare clean ensembles of active particles
with a uniform self-propulsion speed. Notice that the presence
of a current reversal alone, which is naturally present in many
potential ratchets 29 , is not sufficient to achieve a clean and nearcomplete segregation of two initially distributed particle species.
Instead, such a segregation requires |hvi| & σ for each species,
a condition which is naturally fulfilled for the flashing motilityratchet (Fig. 3). This shows once more that the intrinsically low
dispersion of the emerging transport might be useful for practical
applications. Notice however, that σ increases roughly linearly
with voff (Fig. 3) i.e. with the distance particles travel within each
off-phase. That is, the particle distribution gets broader as voff increases allowing for a clean segregation ’only’ for particles which
are not too fast.

4

Mechanism

To understand the mechanism leading to a coherently travelling
density spike pattern in detail, it is instructive to first explore typical trajectories in the noise-free case (Dr = Dt = 0), as visualized
in Fig. 4a for the case ton = 2s. Here, within one or several driving
cycles, the orientation of the particles, which align antiparallel to
the light-gradient, converges to a steady value of either φ = 0 (or
φ = 2πn, n being integer) or to φ = (2n + 1)π (particles typically
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
, 1–8 | 3

Fig.
p 3 Transport reversal: Mean velocity hvi and standard deviation σ =
h(v − hvi)2 i for ton = 2s as a function of voff . Other parameters as in
Fig. 2.

need about 2 − 4s to fully turn 32 ) corresponding to perfect alignment with the axis along which the light-pattern is modulated
(upper panel). Once they are aligned, particles no longer experience a torque from the light-field (p × ∇I(x,t) = 0 for all x,t)
and persistently self-propel in one and the same direction. Conversely to their constant orientation, the speed of the particles
still evolves rather irregularly at this stage: it simply reads v = voff
in each off-phase, but in the on-phase v ∈ (vmin , vmax ) it depends
on the particle’s position at the instance the light-field is switched
on. At late times, the dynamics converges to a limit cycle attractor, whose existence is expected from the Poincaré-Bendixon
theorem, resulting in a regular, periodic dynamics (Fig. 4a, middle and lower panel). That is particles fully synchronize with the
flashing light-field with a temporally periodic speed, whose average is exactly v = L/T (middle panel), i.e. particles propagate
by exactly one spatial period L per T = 10s. As illustrated by the
blue and the orange curve in Fig. 4a (middle panel), depending
on the initial conditions, particles follow a corresponding orbit either to the left or to the right. In this minimal case where only
two limit cycles are relevant, each particle propagates the same
one-flashing-cycle-averaged velocity of v = L/T either to the left
or to the right (Fig. 4a, middle and lower panel). The resulting
late-time transport velocity is then fully determined by the ratio
of initial conditions reaching the limit cycle corresponding to motion to the left and to the right, respectively, i.e. to the ’basins of
attraction’ of the two limit cycles. Specifically for the considered
case of ton = 2s, most of the particles reach an attractor pointing to the right, which generates the transport. (In general, depending on ton besides limit cycles representing a 1:1 resonance,
also limit cycles allowing particles to traverse n spatial periods
within m driving cycles are allowed, leading to a particle speed of
v = nL/(mT ).)
In the presence of noise, φ does of course not fully converge to
π or 2π but fluctuates even at late times (upper panel in Fig. 4b).
However, most of the time (for ton = 2s), particles still follow a
near-resonant dynamics and move with v ≈ L/T (middle panel in
Fig. 4b), temporarily resembling trajectories of the underlying de-

4|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–8

terministic system. Such a dynamics can prolong for many driving
cycles. From time to time, however, noise relocates a particle from
one limit cycle of the underlying deterministic system to another
one, leading, at least temporarily to a different dynamics. The
dynamics shown in Fig. 4b (middle panel) illustrates this: In the
time interval between t ∼ 510s and t ∼ 550s, the orange trajectory
crosses from the “φ = 0-attractor” of the underlying noise-free system over to the “φ ≈ −2π attractor”, yielding the same dynamics,
but in between, it follows the “φ = −π-attractor” for a few flashing cycles and moves into the opposite direction. In the presence
of noise, the resulting transport velocity is therefore mainly determined by the time particles spend in the basin of attraction of the
limit cycles of the underlying noise-free system. When this basin
of attraction is small, as e.g. for ton = 2s for the “φ = (2n + 1)πattractor” which leads to motion to the left, particles all move to
the right in the long-time average.
The spike pattern observed above now follows quite naturally
from the described particle-light-field synchronization. Here,
each spike represents a package of particles which have followed
the same limit cycle dynamics for the same amount of time. In
particular, particles which have moved for 200s = 20T with a
velocity of v ≈ L/T = 33.6µm/10s, have traversed a distance of
x ≈ 20L ≈ 672µm, which corresponds to the first large peak in
Fig. 2 for ton = 2s; the following peaks correspond to particles
having traversed a distance of x ≈ 19L, 18L, 17L.., corresponding
to particles which have either initially ’lost’ time by aligning with
a certain delay, or by moving temporarily into the opposite direction. Finally, there is a small peak of particles having traversed
a distance x > 20L; this corresponds to particles which have been
pushed forward during the on-phases before synchronizing with
the light-field. (The spike pattern is less clean for ton = 6s and
ton = 10s, where the relevant attractors do not correspond to 1:1
resonances.)

5

Torque saturation

In experiments the phototactic alignment rate of a Janus colloid
with the intensity gradient does not generally increase linearly, as
we have assumed so far, but saturates for steep intensity gradients due to thermal coupling 32 . Thus, to compare the flashing
motility ratchet with experiments in the next section, we wish to
understand the impact of saturation effects first. To this end, we
use the following expression for the phototactic alignment rate 32

 C1
1 − exp −C2 v0 (x,t)
ω(x, φ ,t) = v(x,t) sin φ sgn v0 (x,t)
R
(4)
which approximately reduces to Eq. (3) for |v0 (x,t)|  1/C2 and
A = C1C2 /R (and exactly for |v0 (x,t)| → 0). See Fig. 5 for a comparison of Eqs. (3) and (4), both in the saturated and in the unsaturated regime. Here, C2 controls the crossover from the linear
to the saturated region. To see the impact of saturation effects, let
us now explore the transport velocity as a function of ton (Fig. 6,
inset) for C2 = 2.01s as previously determined in 32 . Just as for the
unsaturated case (Fig. 2), the transport increases about linearly
for small ton , reaches a maximum at ton ≈ 2.6s of hvi & 3µm/s
and then decays again, suggesting that saturation effects have little bearing on the flashing motility ratchet. However, at larger

Fig. 6 Impact of torque saturation on particle distribution and transport
velocity. Figures and parameters as Fig. 2 but in the presence of torque
saturation, Eq. (4), (C1 = 0.44; R = 1.365µm;C2 = 2.01s, obtained from experiments).

Fig. 4 Transport mechanism in the flashing motility ratchet without (a)
and with (b) noise for ton = 2s and two representative trajectories (blue
and orange) with initial orientations φ = 3.1 and φ = 5.5. Without noise,
particles fully align with the symmetry axis of the light-field (p × ∇I = 0),
yielding φ = π + 2πn or φ = 2πn (n ∈ Z), representing motion to the left
and to the right, respectively. At late times (middle and lower panel),
particles reach a limit cycle attractor and move periodically, with an average speed of exactly v = L/T (middle panel) either to the left or to the
right. In the presence of noise, the particle orientations do not fully converge but fluctuate. Here particles show a dynamics which is similar to
the noise-free dynamics most of the time (middle panel), but they can
cross-over from one attractor to another one, which can, for example,
lead to temporary motion into the opposite direction (middle panel). The
shown time intervals have been chosen to representatively illustrate the
described dynamics (periodic motion and attractor hopping). Parameters
as in Fig. 2.

Fig. 5 Red and blue curves represent Eqs. (3) and (4), respectively,
deep in the saturated (left) and in the unsaturated (right) regime. Dashed
lines show averages of full curves. Parameters as in Fig. 2

values of ton , the transport plateaus (Fig. 6), rather than decaying towards zero and reaches a finite value of hvi & 1.5µm/s for
ton → 10s. That is, saturation effects create a directed transport
even for a stationary (non-flashing) light field. This special case
has been previously explored in 32 . Why do we obtain a directed
particle transport here even in the absence of flashing? Note first,
that the argument for the absence of transport in a static light pattern as given in section 3 breaks down in the presence of torque
saturation, as ω(x, φ ) is no longer spatially periodic and a particle
crossing a whole spatial periode can therefore experience a net
change of its orientation (even in the absence of noise).
More constructively, on average, particles need significantly
more time to cross the long and shallow b-segments where ∇I
is small and the alignment rate is essentially unsaturated (i.e.
ω ∝ |∇I|) than for crossing the short and steep a-segments, where
ω saturates and is only slightly larger than in the b-segments.
Hence, particles leaving a steep a-segment are aligned only
weakly as compared to those leaving a b-segment. Thus, particles leaving the a-segement to the left are commonly reflected in
the adjacent b-segment, since phototaxis opposes their swimming
direction. Conversely, particles leaving an a-segment to the right
almost certainly manage to cross the adjacent b-segement where
phototaxis is supportive and speeds them up. This breaks the leftright symmetry, initiating a transport to the right. (In the extreme
case of an almost vertical a-segement and an extremely flat and
long b-segment, basically all particles would get reflected, when
leaving an a-segement to the left, and the ratchet would serve as
an “active particle diode”.)
To further illuminate the impact of saturation effects, let us explore the particle distribution in the lattice, say after 20 driving
cycles. From Fig. 6, we can see that the distribution for ton = 2s
is essentially the same as in the absence of saturation effects
(Fig. 2), preserving the shock-wave like profile. As for the transport itself, however, the distribution significantly deviates from
the unsaturated case when ton ∼ T . Following these observations,
for our upcoming experiments we expect that saturation effects
do not play a strong role if ton  T . However, if ton ∼ T , saturaJ
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
, 1–8 | 5

tion effects are expected to significantly impact the transport.

6

Experiments

To test the flashing motility-ratchet, we now compare our results
with experiments. We use light-activated Janus colloids, which
are composed of optically transparent silica spheres (R = 1.36µm)
being capped on one side with 20nm of carbon. The active colloids
are suspended in a critical mixture of water and 2,6-lutidine (lutidine mass fraction 0.286), whose lower critical point is at a temperature of Tc = 34.1◦C. When the solution is kept at a temperature of 30◦C < Tc , the colloids perform diffusive Brownian motion.
Upon laser illumination (at wavelength λ = 532nm), where light
is absorbed at the caps only, the solvent locally demixes. This
creates a concentration gradient accross each colloid’s surface,
leading to self-propulsion. The resulting self-propulsion speed
scales linearly with the laser intensity 46 . The light pattern, and
hence also the motility-pattern, is created by a laser line focus
(λ = 532nm) being scanned across our sample cell by means of a
galvanostatically driven mirror with a frequency of 200Hz. Synchronization of the scanning motion with the input voltage of
an electro-optical modulator leads to a quasi-static illumination
landscape. The alternation between an instensity ladscape and
an homogenous one were fully automated using a customized
software written in LABVIEW. Since the remixing timescale of the
binary mixture is on the order of 100ms 46 , the periodic mirror
motion is fast enough to produce stable particle self-propulsion.
Particle positions and orientations were obtained by digital video
microscopy with a frame rate of 13 fps.
We use a very dilute suspension of microswimmers to avoid
particle interactions and subject it to the described flashing
ratchet. Here we track trajectories of particles initialized in one
and the same a-segment with uncontrolled initial orientations and
let them evolve for 13T . We repeat the experiment several times
and average over N p > 25 trajectories. In Fig. 7a we compare
the resulting transport velocity in experiments with our model
for various flashing times, finding close quantitative agreement.
For the considered parameters, the transport velocity rapidly increases from hvi = 0 at ton = 0s and approaches a maximal speed of
about hvi & 3µm/s for ton ∼ 2 − 3s, which is about 2-3 times larger
than for the static case. For larger switching times, the transport
velocity decreases monotonously with ton . To also compare the
dispersion in the model and in the experiments, we show the standard deviation σ also in Fig. 7a, finding near quantitative agreement. It is instructive to visualize this also in a different way. To
do this, we define the coefficient of variation as CV = hvi/σ (quality factor), which is the ratio of the mean transport velocity over
the standard deviation, shown in Fig. 7b. While there are notable
deviations between experiments and simulations for small and for
large ton (Fig. 7b), we find a rather good agreement in the regime
2s ≤ ton ≤ 8s, where the transport is dominated by flashing, rather
than by torque-saturation effects. This reflects that also in experiments the synchronization between particles and light-field leads
to a transport with little dispersion. It is instructive to also resolve
the time-evolution of the average particle speed in the N-th flashing periode, defined as hẋi(N), where the average is taken both
over the particle ensemble and the N-th flashing period. Here,

6|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–8

both in experiments and in simulations, the transport converges
to its steady state value within a few driving cycles in most cases,
but takes significantly longer in those cases, where dispersion is
large (ton = 1s and ton = 10s).

Fig. 7 Comparison of model and experiments: (a) Average velocity hvi and standard deviation σ , (b) coefficient of variation (CV = hvi/σ ), averaged
over the entire simulation/experiment (see text), as a function of ton . Panel (c) shows the average particle velocity in the N-th flashing cycle hẋi for
different ton shown in the key. Parameters, both in experiments and simulations Tf = ton + toff = 10s, vmax = 8µm/s, voff = 4µm/s; vmin = 0.8µm/s and
C1 = 0.44; R = 1.365µm;C2 = 2.01s from fits to experiments in 32 .

7

Conclusions

Active colloids can synchronize with a sawtooth-shaped flashinglight field and self-organize into a pattern of coherently propagating density spikes. This pattern hardly disperses and yields a
pulsating particle transport, which might be useful e.g. for targeted drug delivery applications. The transport velocity can be
tailored by the parameters of the flashing motility field, and remarkably, it reverts when the particle’s self-propulsion velocity exceeds a certain threshold. Thus, the present setup can be used as
a device for segregating particle ensembles. To observe the latter
aspect also in experiments, it would be interesting to do experiments with mixtures of active colloids which are faster than the
ones used in the present study, in the future. Our results can be

straightforwardly generalized to more complex spatio-temporal
motility patterns including random landscapes in space and time,
and can be used as a platform to transfer ideas from potential
ratchets 29,30,44 to active systems.

Acknowledgments
H.L. and C.B. acknowledge financial support through the priority programme SPP 1726 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation). C.B. acknowledges
financial support by the ERC Advanced Grant ASCIR (Grant
No.693683). B.t.H. gratefully acknowledges received funding
through a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft – HA 8020/1-1.

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
, 1–8 | 7

References
1 P. Romanczuk, M. Bär, W. Ebeling, B. Lindner and
L. Schimansky-Geier, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top., 2012, 202, 1.
2 J. Elgeti, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Rep. Prog. Phys.,
2015, 78, 056601.
3 M. E. Cates, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 042601.
4 W. F. Paxton, K. C. Kistler, C. C. Olmeda, A. Sen, S. K. St.
Angelo, Y. Cao, T. E. Mallouk, P. E. Lammert and V. H. Crespi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13424.
5 J. Palacci, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert and L. Bocquet, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 088304.
6 G. Volpe, I. Buttinoni, D. Vogt, H.-J. Kümmerer and
C. Bechinger, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8810.
7 I. Buttinoni, G. Volpe, F. Kümmel, G. Volpe and C. Bechinger,
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 284129.
8 J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Vatchinsky, P. M. Chaikin and D. J.
Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15978.
9 J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Preska Steinberg, D. J. Pine and P. M.
Chaikin, Science, 2013, 339, 936.
10 J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, S.-H. Kim, G.-R. Yi, D. J. Pine and P. M.
Chaikin, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 2014, 372, 20130372.
11 H. Moyses, J. Palacci, S. Sacanna and D. G. Grier, Soft Matter,
2016, 12, 6357.
12 F. Schmidt, B. Liebchen, H. Löwen and G. Volpe, J. Phys.
Chem., 150, year.
13 W. Wang, L. A. Castro, M. Hoyos and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Nano,
2012, 6, 6122.
14 R. Dreyfus, J. Baudry, M. L. Roper, M. Fermigier, H. A. Stone
and J. Bibette, Nature, 2005, 437, 862.
15 G. Grosjean, G. Lagubeau, A. Darras, M. Hubert, G. Lumay
and N. Vandewalle, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16035.
16 G. Steinbach, S. Gemming and A. Erbe, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2016,
39, 69.
17 A. Kaiser, A. Snezhko and I. S. Aranson, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3,
e1601469.
18 A. Bricard, J.-B. Caussin, N. Desreumaux, O. Dauchot and
D. Bartolo, Nature, 2013, 503, 95.
19 A. Morin, N. Desreumaux, J.-B. Caussin and D. Bartolo, Nat.
Phys., 2017, 13, 63.
20 J. R. Howse, R. A. Jones, A. J. Ryan, T. Gough, R. Vafabakhsh
and R. Golestanian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 048102.
21 C. Bechinger, R. Di Leonardo, H. Löwen, C. Reichhardt,
G. Volpe and G. Volpe, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2016, 88, 045006.
22 W. Gao, D. Kagan, O. S. Pak, C. Clawson, S. Campuzano,
E. Chuluun-Erdene, E. Shipton, E. E. Fullerton, L. Zhang,
E. Lauga and J. Wang, Small, 2012, 8, 460.
23 B.-W. Park, J. Zhuang, O. Yasa and M. Sitti, ACS nano, 2017,
11, 8910.
24 Y. Hong, D. Velegol, N. Chaturvedi and A. Sen, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1423.
25 L. Angelani, A. Costanzo and R. Di Leonardo, EPL, 2011, 96,
68002.

8|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–8

26 A. Pototsky, A. M. Hahn and H. Stark, Phys. Rev. E, 2013, 87,
042124.
27 C. J. Olson Reichhardt and C. Reichhardt, Annu. Rev. Condens.
Matter Phys., 2017, 8, 51–75.
28 A. Zampetaki, P. Schmelcher, H. Löwen and B. Liebchen, New
J. Phys., 2018.
29 P. Reimann, Phys. Rep., 2002, 361, 57.
30 P. Hänggi and F. Marchesoni, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 387.
31 A. K. Mukhopadhyay, B. Liebchen and P. Schmelcher, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 218002.
32 C. Lozano, B. ten Hagen, H. Löwen and C. Bechinger, Nat.
Commun., 2016, 7, 12828.
33 J. Stenhammar, R. Wittkowski, D. Marenduzzo and M. E.
Cates, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501850.
34 M. P. Magiera and L. Brendel, Phys. Rev. E, 2015, 92, 012304.
35 J. Grauer, H. Löwen and L. M. Janssen, Phys. Rev. E, 2018, 97,
022608.
36 A. Geiseler, P. Hänggi, F. Marchesoni, C. Mulhern and
S. Savel’ev, Phys. Rev. E, 2016, 94, 012613.
37 A. Geiseler, P. Hänggi and F. Marchesoni, Entropy, 2017, 19,
97.
38 A. Geiseler, P. Hänggi and F. Marchesoni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7,
41884.
39 N. Koumakis, A. T. Brown, J. Arlt, S. E. Griffiths, V. A. Martinez and W. C. Poon, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09133, 2018.
40 J. Arlt, V. A. Martinez, A. Dawson, T. Pilizota and W. C. Poon,
Nat. Comm., 2018, 9, 768.
41 G. Frangipane, D. Dell’Arciprete, S. Petracchini, C. Maggi,
F. Saglimbeni, S. Bianchi, G. Vizsnyiczai, M. L. Bernardini and
R. Di Leonardo, Elife, 2018, 7, e36608.
42 J. Arlt, V. A. Martinez, A. Dawson, T. Pilizota and W. C. Poon,
arXiv:1902.10083, 2019.
43 T. Bickel, G. Zecua and A. Würger, Phys. Rev. E, 2014, 89,
050303.
44 P. Reimann, Phys. Rep., 1997, 290, 149.
45 Following Eq. (3), the orientations of particles in the steep
a-segments change by a factor b/a faster than in the bsegment. Since there are a/b times less particles in the asegments, the overall change in alignment for particles of any
given initial orientation in the a- and in the b-segment is the
same. More precisely, consider a representative initial ensemble with uniformly distributed positions and orientations, i.e.
with distribution functions P(x, φ , 0) = 1/(2πL) for x ∈ [0, L)
RL

and P(φ , 0) = dxP(x, φ , 0) = 1/(2π). Then, from the Smolu0

chowski equation corresponding to Eqs. (1,2,3), after averaging over space, we obtain P(φ , dt) = P(φ , 0), where dt represents an infinitesimal time step. Since we are not flashing, this
argument can be repeated, yielding P(φ ,t) = P(φ , 0), showing
that no net alignment and hence no transport can occur at
any time.
46 J. R. Gomez-Solano, S. Samin, C. Lozano, P. Ruedas-Batuecas,
R. van Roij and C. Bechinger, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14891.

