NOISE- AND OUTLIER-RESISTANT TOMOGRAPHIC RECONSTRUCTION UNDER
UNKNOWN VIEWING PARAMETERS
Ritwick Chaudhry1 †

Arunabh Ghosh2 †

Ajit Rajwade3∗

1

Adobe Research
Dept. of EE, IIT Bombay
3
Dept. of CSE, IIT Bombay
rchaudhr@adobe.com; arunabhghosh@iitb.ac.in; ajitvr@cse.iitb.ac.in

arXiv:1905.04122v2 [eess.IV] 11 Jun 2019

2

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an algorithm for effectively reconstructing an object from a set of its tomographic projections without any
knowledge of the viewing directions or any prior structural information, in the presence of pathological amounts of noise, unknown
shifts in the projections, and outliers. We introduce a novel statistically motivated pipeline of first processing the projections, then
obtaining an initial estimate for the orientations and the shifts, and
eventually performing a refinement procedure to obtain the final reconstruction. Even in the presence of high noise variance (up to
50% of the average value of the (noiseless) projections) and presence of outliers, we are able to reconstruct the object successfully.
We also provide interesting empirical comparisons of our method
with popular sparsity-based optimization procedures that have been
used earlier for image reconstruction tasks.
Index Terms— Tomography, Tomography under unknown
viewing parameters, Geometric moments
1. INTRODUCTION
Reconstructing the structure of an object from its tomographic projections (hereafter referred to as ‘projections’) is a fundamental research problem that arises in diverse fields, such as medical imaging [1], cryogenic electron microscopy (‘Cryo-EM’) [2], insect tomography [3] and imaging of live, transparent objects [4]. If the
viewing orientations are known a priori, standard algorithms such
as Filtered Backprojection (FBP) [5] can be used to reconstruct the
image. However, there are many scenarios where the viewing orientations are unknown. One such example is Cryo-EM where the
objective is to determine the structure of a macro-molecule from its
projections, which essentially appear in various unknown orientations [2, 6]. Other examples include insect imaging [3], transparent
live object imaging [4], or computed tomography with perturbed geometrical parameters.
Prior Work: In recent times, significant research has emerged
in the field of ‘tomography under unknown viewing parameters’.
Much of this research belongs to one of the following two categories:
(1) Machine learning based approaches [7, 8, 9], which are based on
assumptions on the distribution of the unknown parameters, typically the uniform distribution. However, it might be more likely for
a given structure to have specific orientations [6] and thus would
yield the aforementioned assumption unfounded. (2) Moment-based
*AR thanks IIT-B Seed Grant 14IRCCSG012
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

approaches, which uses the Helgason Ludwig Consistency Conditions (HLCC) [10] to estimate the unknown projection orientations.
It has been proved that in the case where the projections are noiseless, a unique solution exists for the equations [11] under some weak
assumptions. However, as per our empirical observations, a direct
application of the algorithm based on HLCC yields inferior results
in practical applications which often bring with them a whole new
set of challenges such as (i) severe levels of noise in the projections,
(ii) unknown or inaccurately known (albeit small) shifts in the projections, and (iii) presence of outliers. For example, in Cryo-EM,
biological specimens are extremely sensitive, so they must be imaged with low-dose electron beams which leads to extremely high
amounts of noise in the projections. Moreover, samples of the same
biological specimen that are acquired on a single slide may often not
be identical due to contaminants such as ice particles, thus adding
an extra layer of complexity due to outliers [12]. The small shifts
in the projections are the result of a pre-processing procedure called
‘particle picking’ [6].
Contributions: To this end, we present a robust algorithm that
can successfully determine the structure of the object from its projections taken in unknown orientations despite the presence of noise,
outliers, and unknown shifts without expert intervention or prior
structural information. We do not require nor assume any distribution of the projection orientations and thus overcome the limitations
in the machine learning based approaches. By demonstrating the
ability of our algorithm to perform under high levels of noise and
outliers, we signify the effectiveness of this algorithm in practical
situations such as Cryo-EM.
In this paper, we work exclusively with 2D images (and hence
simulated 1D parallel-beam projections) for reconstruction, even
though actual objects are 3D. This follows previous work in the image processing community which has studied the 2D variant of this
problem extensively [7, 13]. Nonetheless, the underlying principles
remain the same, and the computational problem for reconstructing
2D images remains extremely challenging. Although the focus of
this paper is cryo-EM, our algorithm is broadly applicable to other
tomography applications with unknown viewing parameters.
2. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION
2.1. Overview
Here, we briefly describe the flow of the proposed algorithm before
presenting finer details. We start by systematically clustering the
projections and removing the outliers using a robust statistical approach described in Sec. 2.2 and Sec. 2.3. Next, we pre-process

the projections (the ones not removed in the previous step) to obtain
a representative set of less noisy projections using a combination of
averaging, principal component analysis (PCA) and classical Wiener
filtering described in Sec. 2.4 and Sec. 2.5. In Sec. 2.6 we obtain
an initial estimate of the orientations and the shifts of the representative projections using a moment-based approach. Finally, in Sec.
2.7 we optimize for the structure of the unknown object along with a
refinement of the viewing parameters (i.e., the angles and the shifts).
2.2. Robust Clustering
Typically in the case of Cryo-EM, projections are extremely noisy.
Moreover, there may even be a fair number of completely erroneous
projections due to the presence of foreign objects and ice particles
[12]. We henceforth refer to these completely erroneous projections
as ‘outliers of Class 1’. To combat these problems, we seek to cluster the large number of available projections into a small number of
classes, based on orientation and structural similarity. The aim is to
produce a representative set of projections that will be significantly
less noisy, while simultaneously detecting and rejecting outliers of
Class 1. We use the K-means algorithm [14] to cluster the large number of projections into a much smaller number of clusters Kc . The
distance metric used is the `r quasi-norm (0 < r ≤ 1) and therefore
the cluster centroid is expected to be robust to outliers. The objective
function that is minimized is as follows:
c
(Lcentroid )({ξj }K
j=1 ) =

Kc X
X

kpi − ξj kr ,

(1)

j=1 pi ∈χj

where there are Kc clusters, χj represents the j th cluster and ξj represents the j th cluster centroid. The number Kc should be sufficiently large to capture the characteristics of the projection dataset
as well as small enough to fulfill the main motivation of clustering.
In our experiments, K/100 clusters, where K denotes the total number of projections, was sufficient for good results across datasets. To
ensure the robustness of the cluster center to outliers, the value of r is
chosen to be 1, and so the cluster centroid is simply the element-wise
median of the points belonging to the cluster.
2.3. Removal of Class 1 Outliers
After clustering, we remove f % of the projections based on their `2
distance from the closest cluster centroid. It is likely that since a
completely erroneous projection is located far away from the other
projections, a cluster will not be formed close to it. Therefore, removing f % of projections that are placed farthest from any cluster
centroid will remove the Class 1 outliers. A reasonable estimate of
f can be provided by a biologist upon eye-balling the micrograph
(i.e., an image containing projections of several identical copies of
an object, including outliers), and usually, a moderate over-estimate
of f is not a problem.
2.4. Averaging to form a single cluster
After removal of the Class 1 outliers, we define the processed projection p̃j (for cluster index j) within each cluster to be the average
of all the projections assigned to that cluster, and which were not
discarded by the previous step. This is mathematically represented
as follows:
P
pi ∈χj pi (1 − Ij (pi ))
p̃j = P
(2)
pi ∈χj (1 − Ij (pi ))

where Ij (pi ) = 1, when the ith projection belongs to the j th cluster
is discarded, and 0 otherwise.
2.5. Patch-Based Denoising
c
The processed cluster centers {p̃j }K
j=1 as obtained in the previous
step are significantly less noisy. The residual noise is removed by
c
passing the cluster centers ({p̃j }K
j=1 ) through a patch-based PCA
denoising algorithm adapted from [15] (see supplementary material
for more details). Hereafter, we use the symbol q̃i to refer to the
denoised version of the cluster center p̃i .

2.6. Initialization of the orientations and shifts using Helgason
Ludwig Consistency Conditions (HLCC)
Determining the orientations of the projections and correcting the
unknown shifts is a highly non-convex optimization problem. Therefore, we leverage the information available in the image moments
and projection moments to obtain an initial estimate of the shifts
and the orientations simultaneously. The HLCC [10] gives us a relationship between the geometric moments of the underlying image
w(x, y) and those of its unshifted projections at any angle.
HLCC Theorem: The moments
R ∞ R ∞of order p, q of the image
w(x, y) are given by vp,q = −∞ −∞ w(x, y)xp y q dxdy. The
R∞
nth order moment of the projection g(ρ, θ) , −∞ w(x, y)δ(ρ −
R∞
(n)
x cos θ − y sin θ)dxdy is given by mθ = −∞ g(ρ, θ)ρn dρ. If
the projection is shifted by si to give a projection g(ρ, θ, si ), its nth
order moment after reverse shifting by an amount sk can be written
R∞
(n)
as mθ,sk = −∞ S{g(ρ, θ, si ), sk }ρn dρ, where S{., sk } denotes
the reverse shift operation by sk . The above evaluates to the same
(n)
quantity as mθ if sk = si . That is,
(n)

mθ,si =

Z

∞
−∞

(n)

S{g(ρ, θ, si ), sk }ρn dρ = mθ .

(3)

(n)

The HLCC give a relationship between mθ,si and vp,q , which is
defined as
!
n
X
n
(n)
mθ,si =
(cos θ)n−j (sin θ)j vn−j,j .
(4)
j
j=0
Since, in practice, the projections are noisy, Eqn. 4 will not be satisfied exactly. Instead we define an energy function as follows:
E({θi }, v, {si }) =

Kc
k X
X
n=0 i=1

(n)
mθi ,si

−

n
X

!2
(n)
Ai,j vn−j,j

. (5)

j=0
(n)

Note that in this equation, the moments mθi ,si correspond to those
of the ith cluster center q̃i (post-denoising) where 1 ≤ i ≤ Kc .
Also, k denotes the highest order moment to be considered. In practice, a value of k = 7 suffices for all cases. A greater value significantly increases computational time without leading to a discernible
increase in gain. By minimizing this energy function, we derive an
initial estimate of the angles and the shifts using an iterative coordinate descent strategy as implemented in [16]. A small number of
multi-starts (around 10), each with a different random initialization
of the pose parameters, helped further combat the non-convexity of
the objective function E({θi }, v, {si }).

2.7. Optimization strategy to obtain the structure of the object
The estimate provided by the procedure in the previous section, although good, needs to be further refined by a procedure which takes
into account the characteristics of the entire original object. For this,
we consider the following optimization problem:
M({θi }, {si }, w) =

Kc
X

kq̃i,si − Rθi (w)k22 ,

(6)

i=1

where q̃i,si represents a version of q̃i shifted by si , Rθi is the Radon
operator at angle θi and w denotes the image to be reconstructed.
We solve this in an alternating way, simultaneously refining the estimates of the viewing parameters as well as determining the underlying object structure. First, the structure is estimated using a gradient descent step, which effectively makes use of the FBP algorithm.
Next, the orientation and the shift of each projection is estimated using an independent single-dimensional brute-force search. As seen
in Sec. 3, this procedure can determine the structure of the unknown
object, while simultaneously refining the viewing parameters even
under highly adversarial conditions.
Sparsity-based approach: We also attempted to refine the orientations and shift estimates, along with a refinement of the image
w using a sparsity-based optimization technique due to the several
promising results delivered by such techniques in the field of compressed sensing [17]. We considered the following optimization
problem:
L({θi }, β, {si }) =

Kc
X

kq̃i,si − Rθi (U β)k22 + λ1 kβk1 .

(7)

i=1
Kc
c
Here {θi }K
i=1 , {si }i=1 are the Kc unknown angles and shifts for the
c
cluster centers (i.e. {q̃}K
i=1 ), q̃i,si denotes q̃i shifted by si , U denotes
the inverse discrete cosine transform (DCT) operator or any other
sparsifying operator, and β is the vector of DCT or other transform
coefficients of the image to be reconstructed. That is, the image is
represented as w = U β, where β is a sparse vector of transform coefficients. Upon solving this optimization problem in an alternating
fashion using the initial estimates provided by the moment-based estimation, the obtained results exhibited severe artifacts, as we show
in Section 3. A slight error in the initial viewing parameters estimates from Eqn. 5 resulted in the non-convergence of the procedure,
highlighting its sensitivity to errors in the original estimate. Therefore we abandoned this line of action and used the former FBP-based
optimization technique in Eqn. 6 which was significantly more resilient to errors in the initial estimates.

random images taken from different biological complexes. Another
fraction f2 of projections were deliberately generated from a copy
of the actual image, but with a small number (f3 %) of pixel values
(at randomly selected locations) set to 0. We term the corresponding
projections ‘outliers of class 2’. These simulate projections of biological specimens corrupted by overlapping ice particles or minor
structural changes. Some sample illustrative images are presented in
Fig. 1. All projections were subjected to additive i.i.d. noise from
N (0, σ 2 ), where we assume σ to be known in advance, even though
there are techniques to estimate it directly from the noisy projections.

(a) Original image

(b) Class 2 outlier

(c) Class 1 outlier

Fig. 1: The original structure of Holo-Glyceraldehyde-3-Phosphate
Dehydrogenase (left). Outlier of class 2 (center). Outlier of class 3
which is a different biological complex - Guanylate Kinase (right).
Performance of the moment-based solver: The Q = 2 × 104
projections are pre-processed to generate Kc = 180 less noisy representative projections. These projections are passed to the moments
based solver described in Sec. 2.6 which attempts to estimate their
respective orientations. Fig. 2 shows a scatter plot of the Kc = 180
estimated projection angles and the corresponding ‘ground-truth angles’ of the cluster centers (the angle of a cluster center is defined as
the average of the angles of the projections assigned to that cluster).

Fig. 2: Initial orientation estimates based on Eqn. 5: σ = 10%
Noise, f1 = 10% outliers of class 1, f2 = 10% outliers of class 2

3. RESULTS
In this section, we present a comprehensive set of results obtained
using our algorithm on synthetic 2D protein datasets under varying
levels of noise, outliers, shifts and different distributions of projection angles. The images used for our experiments were taken
from the Database of Macromolecular Movements [18] and had size
100 × 100. A total of Q = 2 × 104 projections per image were
simulated using angles from Uniform(0, π)1 . A fraction f1 of these
projections were outliers of class 1, i.e., they were projections of
1 Though we considered the Uniform distribution, our algorithm does not
rely on this assumption or knowledge of the distribution of the orientations.
Later, we also demonstrate our results in the case of a non-uniform distribution of angles.

As seen in Fig. 2, although the moments-based approach provides us with a reasonably good estimate, there is still a need to
refine the estimates to obtain high-quality reconstructions. Our initial attempts at employing a sparsity-based optimization framework
(implemented using the `1 − `s package [19]) failed to yield good
quality reconstructions, an example of which is seen in Fig. 3.
We, therefore, use the more robust FBP based approach to perform a simultaneous refinement of the structure as well the viewing
parameters. As shown in Fig. 4 the error between the refined angles and the ground-truth angles is significantly less when compared
to the original estimates (Fig. 2). In Fig. 5 we exhibit some of
the reconstructions achieved by this algorithm under varying levels
of noise and outliers. Even in the case of pathological amounts of

(a) Original Image

(b) Reconstructed Image

(a) 16.78%

(b) 17.09%

(c) 18.85%

(d) 24.47%

(e) 26.44 %

(f) 32.31%

Fig. 3: An example of the failure of sparsity-based optimization. On
the left is the original image and on the right is our estimated image.

noise, we are able to estimate the structures to a high degree of accuracy. The error metric used to assess the quality of reconstruction
is the Relative Mean Squared Error (RMSE) between the registered
reconstruction (reconstruction aligned with the test image) and the
test image. The registration is needed since the solution can be obtained only up to a global rotation/translation. The RMSE is defined
as RMSE(w, ŵ) = kw − ŵk2 /kwk2 , where ŵ is the registered reconstructed estimate for w.

Fig. 5: Each row demonstrates two reconstructions under the following conditions; Top row: 0% Noise and no outliers of class 1 or class
2; Second row: 10% Noise, 10% outliers of class 1 and 2; Third row:
50% Noise, 5% outliers of class 1 and 2. In each case, original image
is shown on the left and the reconstructed image is shown next to it.
The RMSE is written below each reconstruction.

(a) 29.07%

Fig. 4: Refined orientation estimates based on Eqn. 6: 10% Noise,
10% outliers of class 1, 10% outliers of class 2
Experiments with non-uniform orientation distributions:
In this experiment, we consider the following distribution for the
projection orientations: Uniform(0, π/9) ∪ Uniform(2π/9, π/3) ∪
Uniform(4π/9, 2π/3) ∪ Uniform(7π/9, 8π/9). The reconstructions obtained in Fig. 6 demonstrates that we do not require nor
assume anything about the underlying distribution of orientations.
Experiments with unknown shifts: Even if the projections
are afflicted with random translational errors, our algorithm automatically estimates as well as corrects the shifts to obtain accurate
reconstructions as shown in Fig. 7.
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
From the results presented in the previous section, we conclude that
our algorithm is capable of estimating the original structure from
its tomographic projections at unknown angles, even in the case of
pathological amounts of noise and a high percentage of outliers and
unknown shifts in the projections. Further, our method does not
make any assumption on the distribution of the projection angles,
a limitation of the prior solutions which often assumes a uniform
distribution of angles. An important avenue of future investigation
is analyzing the failure of the sparsity-based optimization framework despite the promising results of compressed sensing in many
applications. Moreover, we will extend our algorithm to the three-

(b) 30.06%

Fig. 6: 2 examples of reconstructions in the case the distribution
of orientations is non-uniform. The relevant parameters are: 20%
Noise, 5% outliers of class 1, 5% outliers of class 2. In each case,
original image is shown on the left and the reconstructed image is
shown next to it. The RMSE is written below each reconstruction.

(a) 20.77%

(b) 20.95%

Fig. 7: 2 examples of reconstructions in the case where the projections have random unknown shifts upto ±2. The relevant parameters
are: 10% Noise, 0% outliers of class 1, 0% outliers of class 2. In each
case, original image is shown on the left and the reconstructed image
is shown next to it. The RMSE is written below each reconstruction.
dimensional case and validate it on actual Cryo-EM datasets, insect
tomography datasets, and CT reconstructions with patient motion.
Supplemental material: For an overall summary of the algorithm
and additional results refer to the supplemental material.
Note: The authors have submitted a different paper [20] which exclusively deals with ab initio tomographic reconstruction of heterogeneous objects (i.e. objects with multiple structures or ‘conformations’). The problem of heterogeneity cannot be solved by reconstructing one conformation while considering the projections of
other conformations as outliers. This is since our algorithm described here deals with only a small percentage of outliers. On the
other hand, unlike the work in this paper, the work in [20] does not
handle outliers of class 1 and class 2.

5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Fessler, “Statistical image reconstruction methods for transmission tomography,” in Handbook of Medical Imaging: Medical Image Processing and Analysis, vol. 2, pp. 1–70. SPIE,
2000.
[2] J. Frank, Three-dimensional electron microscopy of macromolecular assemblies: visualization of biological molecules in
their native state, Oxford University Press, 2006.
[3] J. F. Genise and G. Cladera, “Application of computerized
tomography to study insect traces,” Ichnos, vol. 4, no. 1, pp.
77–81, 4 1995.
[4] A. Levis, Y. Y. Schechner, and R. Talmon, “Statistical tomography of microscopic life,” in CVPR, 2018.
[5] L. A. Feldkamp, L. C. Davis, and J. W. Kress, “Practical conebeam algorithm,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A,
vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 612, 6 1984.
[6] F. J. Sigworth, “Principles of cryo-EM single-particle image
processing,” Microscopy, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 57–67, 2 2016.
[7] S. Basu and Y. Bresler, “Feasibility of tomography with unknown view angles,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1107–1122, 6 2000.
[8] Y. Fang et al., “sLLE: Spherical locally linear embedding with
applications to tomography,” in CVPR 2011. 6 2011, pp. 1129–
1136, IEEE.
[9] R. Coifman, Y. Shkolnisky, F. Sigworth, and A. Singer, “Graph
laplacian tomography from unknown random projections,”
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 17, no. 10, pp.
18911899, 2008.
[10] F. Natterer, The Mathematics of Computerized Tomography,
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1 2001.
[11] S. Basu and Y. Bresler, “Uniqueness of tomography with unknown view angles,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1094–1106, 6 2000.
[12] C. Huang and H. D. Tagare, “Robust w-estimators for cryo-em
class means,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol.
25, no. 2, pp. 893–906, Feb 2016.
[13] A. Singer and H.-T. Wu, “Two-Dimensional Tomography from
Noisy Projections Taken at Unknown Random Directions,”
SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 136–175,
1 2013.
[14] S. Lloyd, “Least squares quantization in PCM,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 129–137, 3
1982.
[15] D.D. Muresan and T.W. Parks, “Adaptive principal components and image denoising,” in Proceedings 2003 International
Conference on Image Processing (Cat. No.03CH37429). vol. 1,
pp. 101–4, IEEE.
[16] E. Malhotra et al, “Tomographic reconstruction from projections with unknown view angles exploiting moment-based relationships,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP). 9 2016, pp. 1759–1763, IEEE.
[17] K. Choi, J. Wang, L. Zhu, T-S Suh, S. Boyd S, and L. Xing,
“Compressed sensing based cone-beam computed tomography
reconstruction with a first-order method,” Medical Physics,
vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 5113–5125, 2010.

[18] M. Gerstein and W. Krebs, “A database of macromolecular
motions,” Tech. Rep. 18, 1998.
[19] SJ. Kim, K. Koh, M. Lustig, S. Boyd, and D. Gorinevsky,
“An Interior-Point Method for Large-Scale -Regularized Least
Squares,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 606–617, 12 2007.
[20] A. Ghosh, R. Chaudhry, and A. Rajwade, “Ab initio tomography with object heterogeneity and unknown viewing parameters,” Accepted to 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP).

