Finite-size effects in exponential random graphs and cluster
evaporation
A. Gorsky1,2 and O. Valba3,4

arXiv:1905.03336v1 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 8 May 2019

1

Institute for Information Transmission Problems of
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia,
2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny 141700, Russia,
3 Department of Applied Mathematics,
National Research University Higher School of Economics, 101000, Moscow, Russia,
4 N.N. Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991, Moscow, Russia.
In this Letter we find numerically the strong finite-size effects in the critical behavior of Erdős-Rényi (ER) networks supplemented with chemical potentials for some
motifs, in particular 2-stars and triangles. For the 2-star model above the critical
value of the chemical potential a ground state looks as star-like graph with the finite set of hubs at ER parameter p < 0.5 or as the single cluster at p > 0.5. It is
found that there exists the critical value of number of nodes N ∗ (p) when the ground
state undergoes clear-cut crossover and at N > N ∗ (p) the network flows via a cluster evaporation to the state involving the small star in the ER environment. The
similar evaporation of the cluster takes place at N > N ∗ (p) in the Strauss model.
We suggest that the entropic trap mechanism is relevant for microscopic mechanism
behind the crossover regime. The possible analogies concerning the strong entropic
finite-size effects in the holographic description of matrix black hole (BH) formation
and evaporation are mentioned.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Exponential random graphs provide examples of the Ising type systems analyzed via the
conventional methods of the statistical physics and in general one can consider canonical,
microcanonical and mixed ensembles. These cases correspond to introducing chemical potentials for relevant observables, fixing the values of these observables or combination of the
chemical potentials for part of the observables and fixing the values of the rest. They can
exhibit the critical behavior and have a rich phase structure in the space of some control
parameters.
Let us recall the known examples of a critical behavior in exponential random graphs.
The network ensemble supplemented with the chemical potential for the open triads (2-star
model) has been solved in thermodynamic limit in mean-field approximation in dense regime
[1] and in sparse regime [2]. The example of the phase transition in the exponential model in
the canonical ensemble with the chemical potential for triangles has been found in [3]. The
single complete graph above the critical value of positive chemical potential for triangles is
formed, the phenomenon has been explained analytically in [4, 5]. At a negative chemical
potential for triangles the network becomes bipartite below some critical value of chemical
potential [6–8]. The critical behavior in microcanonical ensemble with fixed number of links
and triangles has been considered in [9–11]. The mixed ensembles with fixed degrees and

2
chemical potential for triangles has been investigated in [12](see,also [13] for the previous
study). It was discovered that above the critical value of a chemical potential the network
gets defragmentated into the fixed number of weakly connected clusters.
The real networks are finite hence the role of the finite-size effects certainly is important
for applications. Several aspects of the finite-size effects have been elaborated for the scalefree network where they induced the cut-off in a degree distribution [15–20]. The finite size
effects influence the criticality of the epidemic processes [21, 22] while crossover regime at
some network size N ∗ has been found also in the synchronization problem in the scale-free
networks [14]. Very recently the example of the strong finite-size effect in the peculiar phase
transition in the microcanonical ensemble of exponential random graphs has been found in
[23].
The interesting analysis of the finite-size effects in the Anderson model on the random
regular graphs (RRG) has been performed in [24–26]. There was the long-standing controversy concerning the ergodicity of the modes in the delocalized phase and the very existence
of the delocalized non-ergodic phase of the Anderson model on RRG. The careful finite N
analysis demonstrated that there is no additional phase transition between the ergodic and
non-ergodic delocalized phases and instead there is the strong finite-size effect. At some
value of N the system undergoes the crossover behavior from the near critical regime to the
ergodic delocalized state. A kind of RG analysis has been developed in [26] which supports
this picture.
The primary motivation for this study concerns the question about the influence of the
finite-size effects on the critical behavior of the exponential random graphs. It was usually
assumed [7, 8] on the basis of mean-field analysis that the transition to the thermodynamical
limit is smooth. We investigated it numerically and it turned out that the exponential
random graphs undergoes the crossover behavior at some finite N ∗ (p) above the critical
value of the chemical potential. The ground state of the network above the critical chemical
potential looks differently at two sides of crossover. For the 2-star model above the critical
value of the chemical potential the ground state looks as star-like graph of the finite set of
hubs at p < 0.5 or as the single cluster at p > 0.5. It is found that there exists the critical
value of number of nodes N ∗ when the ground state undergoes clear-cut crossover and at
N > N ∗ it flows to the small hub in the ER environment state via a cluster evaporation.
There are two ways to get the crossover regime. Following the first strategy it is useful
to choose the chemical potential for the corresponding motives well above the critical value
and vary N. There is crossover regime at some N when the the network ground state gets
changed. Another way to capture the crossover regime involves the N dependence of the
critical values of the chemical potentials. At N < N ∗ critical chemical potential behaves
as N −1 in agreement with the mean-field solutions to the 2-star and Strauss models while
at N > N ∗ their N-dependence changes drastically. Let us emphasize that the ground
state above N ∗ involves several components with the different mean degrees and can not be
captured via the naive mean-field analysis.
We shall briefly discuss the possible microscopic description of the cluster evaporation
which is responsible for the crossover regime. Due to the non-homogeneity of the network
there are the entropy gradients and therefore the entropic forces. We argue that the entropic
trap could be one of the mechanisms responsible for the cluster evaporation. The emerging
clusters in the matrix models provide the toy model for the black holes formed from the D0
particles in the holographic framework [27, 28]. Our findings concerning the role of N1 effects

3
in the derivation of the ground state could be of some use for the microscopic analysis of
the black hole formation and decay within the matrix model framework.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we consider the different aspects of the
crossover behavior at some critical value N ∗ . In Section 3 we discuss the possible microscopic
explanation of crossover and comment on the gravity analogies. Some open question are
formulated in Conclusion.

II.

FINITE SIZE EFFECTS AND THE CRITICAL BEHAVIOR OF 2-STARS
AND STRAUSS MODELS
A.

The models

We define an ensemble consisting of the set of all simple undirected ER graphs with N
vertices and no self-edges (i.e., networks with either zero or one edge between each pair of
distinct vertices). The partition function for the exponential networks reads as
X
Z=
e−H(G)
(1)
G

where the measure in the sum over all graphs involves the chemical potentials for some types
of motifs, that is some kind of subgraph. For the 2-star model the Hamiltonian reads as
H = θL(G) − µs(G),

(2)

where L(G) is the number of links and s(G) is the number of triads. For the Strauss model
we have
H = θL(G) − νT (G),
(3)
where T (G) is the number of 3 -cycles.
pN(N − 1)
. The
In ER network the links are independent with probability p, that is L =
2
mean-field solution of 2-star model yields the consistency equation for the control parameters


1
1
p=
tanh(µNp − θ) + 1
(4)
2
2
There is the critical line in the model θ = µN corresponding to the first order phase transition
which terminates at the second order transition critical point µN = 1.
To proceed exponential random model with numeric, we use the dynamic algorithm which
replaces the numerical evaluation of the combinatorial problem (3) by running stochastic
evolution of network (the discrete Langevin dynamics), starting from some initial configuration until the evolution converges. The initial state of the network is prepared by connecting
any randomly taken pair of vertices with the probability p and the total number of links
is fixed. Then, one randomly chooses arbitrary link, say, between vertices i and j (i, j)
and switch it to some other pair (k, l) (k 6= i, j; l 6= i, j). The acceptance probability this
elementary permutation is defined by the standard Metropolis rule. According to the graph

4
Hamiltonian, if under the elementary step the number of triads is increased or remains
unchanged, a move is accepted, and if the number of triads is decreased by ∆, a move is
accepted with the probability e−µ∆ . The Metropolis algorithm runs repetitively for a large
set of randomly chosen pairs of links, until it converges.
The Hamiltonian can be written in the form:
X
X
aij ajk ,
H(G) = θ
ai,j − µ
i<j

(5)

i<j<k

where aij = aji is an element of the adjacency matrix having value 1 if an edge exists between
vertices i and j and 0 otherwise. If we consider the complement graph G̃ (bij = 1 − aji ), the
Hamiltonian (5) keeps the same form:
X
X
H(G̃) ∼ α
bi,j − µ
bij bjk ,
(6)
i<j

i<j<k

where α is linear combination of θ, µ and the number of the vertices N.
In 2-star model [1] there is the phase transition at some critical µcr and at µ > µcr a kind
of the dense component gets emerged which depends on the mean vertex degree pN. Hence
similar phase transition with the complete graph formation occurs for the complement graph
G̃. The high-density network state described in [1] is a complete graph, for the fixed number
of vertices the complement graph of this state has a star-like configuration (see Fig.1(d)).
We compare analytically the ground state energies of two optimal configurations and found
the following picture. If the link probability p < 0.5 the optimal configuration is a fat starlike graph (“fat star”), if p > 0.5the ground state is a complete graph, p1 = 0.5 is a natural
critical point (see Fig.1(d), Fig.2(d)). In the Strauss model at ν > νcr the single complete
graph gets emerged [3].
The thermodynamic limit N → ∞ for the 2-star and Strauss models has been considered
in the mean-field or graphon approaches [2, 7, 8]. It was claimed that in the thermodynamic
limit µcr ∝ N −1 and the models tend to the ER networks with rescaled probabilities p∗ .

B.

Crossover behavior at finite N

We have revisited numerically the transition to the thermodynamical limit in 2-star and
Strauss model. Contrary to the general expectations it turned out that the transition is not
smooth and there is the crossover value N ∗ where the ground state of network gets changed.
The typical phase portrait of the model in the parameter (µ, N) plane is shown in Fig.3.
For p < 0.5 it is convenient to calculate the degree assortativity coefficient which is defined
as the Pearson correlation coefficient of degree between pairs of linked nodes:
hP
i2
P
L
L Li=1 ji ki −
j
i=1 i
r=
(7)
h
i2 ,
PL 2
PL
L i=1 ji −
i=1 ji
where L is the number of edges, ji , ki are the degrees of the nodes, connected by the link
i. If the nodes of large degree are connected with nodes with a small number of links, the

5

FIG. 1: Phase portrait of 2-star model in (µ, N )-plane for random graphs of p = 0.1: (a) density
plot of the degree assortativity coefficient r(µ, N ); (b) the assortativity in dependence on the
chemical potential µ for different network sizes; (c) the assortativity in dependence on the network
size N for different value of µ; (d) typical adjacency matrices for different network size and µ = 0.1.
The results are performed over averaging of 100 realization.

assortativity is close to −1, random graphs have the zero assortativity. The ground state
for N < N ∗ gets identified with the dissortative star-like state (“fat star”) while at N > N ∗
we observe the smaller star-like graph with few hubs in the ER environment. The critical
size is N ∗ ≈ 750 for the network density p = 0.1. Let us emphasize that it differs from
the mean-field solution when the ER network without any defects was predicted. In the
mean-field solution it is assumed that the mean degree of the nodes is homogeneous and
correspond to the dense cluster or ER phases. Our numerical analysis demonstrates that
there is the phase at N > N ∗ when the ground state involves at least two components with
different degrees: few linked hubs and the ER vapor around.
For p > 0.5 we observe the same crossover behavior, but from the clustered network state
at N < N ∗ to the smaller star-like graph with few hubs in the ER environment N > Ncr .
The respective phase portrait is shown in Fig.5.
If we fix the value of µ a bit above critical point it is possible to estimate the N ∗ (p)
dependence, substituting in (4) the critical line equation θ = µN:
N∗ =

ln p − ln(1 − p)
µ(2p − 1)

(8)

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 2:
Phase portrait of 2-star model in (µ, N )-plane for random graphs of p = 0.6: (a)
density plot of the clustering coefficient C(µ, N ); (b) the clustering coefficient in dependence on
the chemical potential µ for different network sizes; (c) the clustering coefficient in dependence on
the network size N for different value of µ; (d) typical adjacency matrices for different network size
and µ = 0.1. The results are performed over averaging of 100 realization.

In the Strauss model the crossover does exist as well. At p = 0.1 and at N < 750 the
critical value of chemical potential behaves as νcr ∝ 1/N and the ground state above the
phase transition is identified with the full graph. However at p = 0.1 and at N > 750 there
is crossover regime when the complete graph starts to evaporate and the ground state looks
as the single hub in the ER environment.

FIG. 3: Typical adjacency matrices of the Strauss model for different network sizes above the
critical value of chemical potential (ν = 1.0).

7
C.

Comments on the spectral behavior

The spectral density is a good indicator of the the ground state of the network. There
are some general principles governing the evolution of the spectral density as a function of
chemical potential. First, usually the spectral density in the continuum part of the spectrum
gets modified. Secondly the isolated eigenvalues appear at the clusterization phase transition
since the number of the isolated eigenvalues corresponds to the number of clusters. The
creation of the cluster has been identified as the eigenvalue instanton in [12].
Can we recognize the crossover behavior in the spectral evolution? The answer turns
out to be positive and is pictured at Fig.4. We investigated the dependence of the spectral
density on the chemical potential below and above N ∗ . At N < N ∗ the spectral density
becomes more narrow at the phase transition point. On the other hand at N > N ∗ the
behavior is more rich. First, as result of evaporation the isolated eigenvalues get appeared
symmetrically with respect to the central zone. Since all hubs are identical in the “fat
star”, the eigenvalues at fixed network are degenerate. However since the number of links is
different in each ensemble they form two zones which are analogue of the non-perturbative
zone found in [12]. Increasing N we increase the number of evaporated nodes which results
into the interaction between the star nodes and lifting the degeneration of the eigenvalues.

FIG. 4: Spectral behavior of the 2-star network below and above the crossover. The results are
performed over averaging of 100 realization (p = 0.1).

III.

ON THE MICROSCOPIC MECHANISM FOR CROSSOVER
A.

Localization and entropic trap

Let us discuss the possible microscopic mechanisms responsible for the crossover behavior.
It is natural to assume that the mechanism of the cluster evaporation is of the entropic
nature. Indeed, due to non-homogeneity of network the entropic forces are present and

8
could ”‘keep the nodes” around some center of disorder if the entropic force is strong enough.
Hence we could look for the examples of the localization of trajectories around some center
of disorder at the random graph. We could mention two relevant examples.
First, strong finite-size effects and crossover behavior at some N have been found in the
Anderson model at the regular random graph [24–26]. The crossover size Ncr has been interpreted as the existence of hidden intrinsic localization scale in the model. It was observed
the if N < Ncr the system behaves almost as critical even near the critical line while at
N > Ncr the RG flow pushes the system in the different direction to the ergodic state. This
is similar to what we have found: at small N we have the critical “fat star” or cluster even
apart from the critical line while at N > Ncr they start to evaporate down to ergodic ER
network with small inhomogeneity.
Another interesting possibility for the crossover mechanism can be traced from the heavy
root problem [29]. In that paper the infinite tree-like network with equal node degrees d and
single node with large degree d0 has been considered. It was demonstrated that depending
on a degree of the heavy root the random walks are localized around the heavy root or
escape to infinity. The result has been derived analytically and confirmed numerically. The
critical relation reads as
d0,cr = d2 − d
(9)
The localization of the random walks occurs at d0 > d0,cr and at criticality the interesting
thermal-like behavior was reported.
Let us compare this result with the crossover in the 2-star model. We have found that
at N >> N ∗ the ground state is the single hub and let us interpret it as the version of the
heavy root problem. In such interpretation d0 = N while we can estimate d = pN for the
ER environment. Hence the condition of the entropic trapping of the trajectories around
the hub is
N > (pN)2
(10)
which can be fulfilled only at N < 1/p2 . Of course this estimate is rough enough but it
demonstrates that “fat star” ground state can exist only below some critical value of N. This
is realization of the entropic trap mechanism for crossover in 2-star model. To clarify this
scenario better it is necessary to analyze the heavy root problem for the ER network.

B.

Gravity analogy

It is well-known that large N matrix model was used for the effective summation over 2d
geometries (see [30] for review). The partition function of the matrix model is presented in
the following form
Z
X
Z(tk ) = DMexp(
tk T rM k )
(11)
k

where tk are the chemical potentials for single trace observables and M belongs to some
matrix ensembles. The rich critical behavior of the partition function corresponds to the
criticality of the pure topological 2d gravity if only t2 , t3 are non-vanishing or topological
gravity coupled to matter in the general case of multiple chemical potentials. The analogy
with the exponential graph partition function is clear. In that case tk counts the number of k-cycles in the network and for instance the critical behavior in the Strauss model

9
corresponds to the critical behavior in the pure topological 2d gravity. The Laplacian matrix of the random network L = D − A, where D is diagonal matrix of the mode degrees
D = diag(d1, . . . dN ) and A is a adjacency matrix, is the discretization of the 2d Laplace
operator on the Riemann surface.
The size of the matrix plays the role of the inverse coupling constant in the quantum
gravity gs = 1/N hence large N limit corresponds to the weak coupling regime and the
finite-size effects correspond to the ”‘perturbative”’ corrections. There are also the nonperturbative effects with e−N dependence which are identified in matrix models as eigenvalue
instantons or as the creation of the baby universes in the gravity language [31]. These nonperturbative effects have been identified in the constrained ER networks and RRG in [12]
as the cluster formation. Our findings in this study suggest that account of the finite-size
effects N1 strongly influence the critical behavior and could lead to the crossover-like regime
in the matrix models. Note that in the 2-star model we take into account both singlet and
the non-singlet sectors in matrix model language since the number of 2-stars can not be
presented as the single trace of the power of adjacency matrix of the graph.
Another viewpoint concerning the gravity interpretation of our results is suggested by
the holographic approach for large N boundary theories. The holographic setup provides
the way to describe the dual BH in terms of large number of D0 branes in the boundary
theory [27, 28]. We can consider our exponential random network as the toy boundary large
N theory. The single BH in the holographic dual looks as the full block in the large N
matrix where the diagonal matrix elements represent the positions of the D0 branes and the
off-diagonal elements correspond to the strings connecting D0 branes. The several blocks
at the diagonal represent the configuration of the several black holes while the emission of
the single D0 brane from the black hole looks as one separated element in the matrix on the
diagonal outside the cluster [27, 28] .
Could we learn some lessons from our findings for the toy matrix BH? First note the
the very creation of the cluster or equivalently BH is the dynamical critical phenomena.
It is induced by the proper value of the chemical potential which makes the joining of the
short strings preferable process. This suggests the microscopic mechanism of the toy BH
formation via phase transition. The next point concerns the evaporation of the toy BH which
we could relate with the evaporation of the cluster. Since the coupling constant behaves
as N1 increasing the network size we decrease the perturbative gravity effects and finally at
some critical N ∗ the BH starts to evaporate since ”‘particles” can escape. Certainly this
picture is quite qualitative but it could shed some light at the entropic mechanism behind
the BH formation and evaporation.
The BH analogy is consistent with the embedding of the random network into the AdS
hyperbolic geometry [32]. The key point is the clear relation between the value of the
radial coordinate in AdS and the degree of nodes [32]. The region near the center of AdS
corresponds to the nodes with the highest degrees. The block of a matrix X representing
the toy matrix BH corresponds to the full graph hence it involves the nodes with the same
degrees if we identify X with the Laplacian matrix or the graph. Therefore according the
degree-radial coordinate duality all of them are at the same value of radial coordinate which
presumably can be identified with the position of BH horizon. This is also consistent with
the interpretation of the diagonal values of the matrix in [27, 28] as the positions of D0
branes. When the evaporation of the full graph happens the nodes with smaller degrees get
decoupled and due to the degree-radial coordinate correspondence they occur at the smaller

10
value of the radial coordinate justifying the BH evaporation picture. We shall discuss the
holographic interpretation of the embedding of the random network into hyperbolic geometry
in more details elsewhere.
The evaporation of the “fat star” configuration in 2-star model has the similar interpretation with additional subtlety. Due to the ”‘open-string”’ non-singlet sector in the 2-star
model there is a kind of hair in the ground state which presumably corresponds to the black
hole hair. Indeed apart from the full graph block which represents the horizon there are
finite number of nodes with the smaller degrees which are placed at the different radial
coordinate. Since they are connected with the full graph core we have a kind of BH hair.
Upon the evaporation the “fat star” gets transforms into the single hub but the hair remains
intact.

IV.

CONCLUSION

In this Letter we have found the strong impact of finite-size 1/N effects on critical behavior
of exponential random graphs. Both in 2-star and Strauss models there are the critical
sizes N ∗ (p) when the crossover takes place. The key process at the crossover region is
the evaporation of the “fat star” or the single cluster which represent the ground state at
N < N ∗ . The final stage of the cluster evaporation in 2-star model is the single complete
star.
We have briefly discussed the possible microscopic explanation of the crossover found but
the further analysis is certainly required. It would be interesting to understand what kind
of modification of the mean-field analysis if any is required to describe the crossover regime.
It is also very desirable to elaborate the analogy with the BH evaporation and localization
at heavy root in the random network environment further.
Two further directions are quite evident. First, it would be interesting to extend our
analysis of finite-size effects for the networks with conserved degrees, for instance RRG or
constrained ER networks. In that case above the critical point we have multiple clusters and
generically we have the cascade of the phase transitions instead of the single one. Presumably
we have the cascade of the evaporation of clusters. Since formation of clusters is nothing but
the eigenvalue instanton phenomena suppressed as e−N we have the interesting possibility to
elaborate numerically the analogue of non-perturbative phenomena in the quantum gravity
and interplay between the perturbative and non-perturbative effects.
Another question concerns the elaboration of the finite-size effects in the multicolor exponential graphs. The corresponding analysis will be presented elsewhere [33]. It would be
also interesting to investigate the spectral statistics as function of N which would answer
the question concerning the localization properties of the modes.
We would like to thank A. Andreev and S. Nechaev for the useful discussions. The work
of A.G. is partially supported by Basis Foundation Fellowship and grant RFBR 19-02-00214.
The work of O.V. is partially supported by Basis Foundation Fellowship and grant RFBR

11
18-29-0316.

[1] Park, J. & Newman, M. E. J. (2004) Solution of a 2-star model of a network, Physical Review
E, 70, 066146.
[2] A. Annibale and O.Courtney ’The two-star model: exact solution in the sparse regime and
condensation transition”’ 2015 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 48 365001, arXiv:1504.06458
[3] Strauss, D. (1986) On a General Class of Models for Interaction, SIAM Rev., 28 513.
[4] Park, J. & Newman, M. E. J. (2005) Solution for the properties of a clustered network, Physical
Review E,72 (2).
[5] Burda, Z., Jurkiewicz, J. & Krzywicki, A. (2004) Network transitivity and matrix models,
Physical Review E, 69 (2).
[6] Avetisov, V., Gorsky, A., Maslov, S., Nechaev, S. & Valba, O. (2018) Phase transitions in
social networks inspired by the Schelling model, Physical Review E, 98 (3).
[7] Chatterjee, S. & Diaconis, P. (2013) Estimating and understanding exponential random graph
models, The Annals of Statistics, 41 (5).
[8] Radin, C. & Yin,M. (2013) Phase transitions in exponential random graphs, Annals of Applied
Probability, 23 2458.
[9] Radin, C. & Sadun, L. (2013) Phase transitions in a complex network, Journal of Physics A,
46 20, 305002.
[10] Kenyon, R., Radin, C., and Ren, K., & Sadun, L. (2017) The phases of large networks with
edge and triangle constraints, Journal of Physics A 50 (43).
[11] Kenyon, R., Radin, C., and Ren, K., & Sadun, L. (2017) Multipodal Structure and Phase
Transitions in Large Constrained Graphs, Journal of Statistical Physics, 168, 233.
[12] Avetisov, V., Hovhannisyan, M., Gorsky, A., Nechaev, S., Tamm, M. & Valba, O. (2016)
Eigenvalue tunneling and decay of quenched random network, Physical Review E, 94 (6).
[13] D.Foster, J.Foster, M. Paczuski and P. Grassberger , (2010), Communities, clustering phase
transitions and hysteresis; Pitfalls in network ensembles, Phys. Rev E 81, 046115
[14] R. Torres,M. Di Muro, C. La Rocca and L. Braunstein.(2015) ”‘Synchronization in scale free
networks:The role of finite size effects”’ arxiv:15050275
[15] A. A. Moreira, J. S. Andrade, and L. A. N. Amaral, Phys.Rev. Lett.89, 268703 (2002)
[16] P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, J. Phys. A 35, 9517 (2002)
[17] W. Aiello, F. Chung, and L. Lu, Experimental Math.10,53 (2001)
[18] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Adv. Phys.51,1079 (2002)
[19] S. Mossa, M. Barthelemy, H. E. Stanley, and L. A. N.Amaral, Phys. Rev. Lett.88, 138701
(2002)
[20] Marian Boguna, Romualdo Pastor-Satorras, Alessandro Vespignani ”‘Cut-offs and finite size
effects in scale-free networks”’ Eur. Phys. J. B 38, 205 (2004)
[21] R.May and A. Lloyd (2001) Phys.Rev E64,066112
[22] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani (2002) Phys.Rev. E63,635108
[23] ”‘Nucleation during phase transitions in random networks”’ Joe Neeman, Charles Radin,
Lorenzo Sadun arXiv:1902.07170
[24] Tikhonov, K. S., Mirlin, A. D., Skvortsov, M. A. (2016) ”‘Anderson localization and ergodicity
on random regular graphs”’. Physical Review B, 94(22).

12
[25] Biroli, G., Tarzia, M. (2018) Delocalization and ergodicity of the Anderson model on Bethe
lattices, arXiv:1810.07545.
[26] Tikhonov, K. S., Mirlin, A. D. (2019) Statistics of eigenstates near the localization transition
on random regular graphs. Physical Review B, 99, P. 024202.
[27] E. Berkowitz, M. Hanada and J. Maltz, “Chaos in Matrix Models and Black Hole
Evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D 94, no. 12, 126009 (2016) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.94.126009
[arXiv:1602.01473 [hep-th]].
[28] J. S. Cotler et al., “Black Holes and Random Matrices,” JHEP 1705, 118 (2017) Erratum: [JHEP 1809, 002 (2018)] doi:10.1007/JHEP09(2018)002, 10.1007/JHEP05(2017)118
[arXiv:1611.04650 [hep-th]].
[29] S. K. Nechaev, M. V. Tamm, O. V. Valba ”‘Paths counting on simple graphs: from escape to
localization”’ Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, Volume 2017, May
2017 arXiv:1611.08880
[30] P. H. Ginsparg and G. W. Moore, Lectures on 2-D gravity and 2-D string theory,
hep-th/9304011[16]
[31] F. David, Nonperturbative effects in matrix models and vacua of two-dimensional gravity,
Phys. Lett. B302, 403 (1993) doi:10.1016/0370-2693(93)90417-G [hep-th/9212106
[32] D. Krioukov, F. Papadopoulos, M. Kitsak, A. Vahdat, M. Bogun, Hyperbolic geometry of
complex networks, Physical Review E 82 (3), 036106 (2010)
[33] A. Gorsky and O. Valba, to appear.

