Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good:
Common Patterns as a Pathway to True Impact

arXiv:1905.11519v1 [cs.CY] 27 May 2019

Kush R. Varshney 1 Aleksandra Mojsilović 1

Abstract
The AI for social good movement has now
reached a state in which a large number of one-off
demonstrations have illustrated that partnerships
of AI practitioners and social change organizations are possible and can address problems faced
in sustainable development. In this paper, we
discuss how moving from demonstrations to true
impact on humanity will require a different course
of action, namely open platforms containing foundational AI capabilities to support common needs
of multiple organizations working in similar topical areas. We lend credence to this proposal by
describing three example patterns of social good
problems and their AI-based solutions: natural
language processing for making sense of international development reports, causal inference
for providing guidance to vulnerable individuals, and discrimination-aware classification for
supporting unbiased allocation decisions. We argue that the development of such platforms will
be possible through convenings of social change
organizations, AI companies, and grantmaking
foundations.

1. Introduction
Since its incipient stages seven or eight years ago (Porway,
2011; Catlett & Ghani, 2015; Varshney, 2017), the data
science and artificial intelligence (AI) for social good movement has created a very large portfolio of examples that
show how partnerships between (a) technologists, and (b)
non-profits, social enterprises, government agencies or other
similar mission-driven organizations can touch on the seventeen sustainable development goals (SDGs) (Chui et al.,
2018), which include poverty, hunger, ill health, and inequalities of various sorts (Nilsson et al., 2016). These are
the most difficult of problems because they involve so many
1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Kush R. Varshney <krvarshn@us.ibm.com>.
Appearing at the International Conference on Machine Learning
AI for Social Good Workshop, Long Beach, United States, 2019.

different issues and so many different stakeholders.
Striving to achieve the global goals includes not only technical challenges, but a large number of socio-technical challenges that require the collaboration of many different parties with varying expertise and imagination of what is possible. Thus far, the AI for good movement has increased
the AI literacy of social change organizations and shown
how to formulate pain points in sustainable development as
tangible and tractable AI problems. The breaking down of
collaboration barriers is already remarkable, but should only
be seen as a foundation or ‘Act I’ of a story yet to come.
The movement has included several models of engagement: data science competitions (e.g. DrivenData and Data
Science Bowl), weekend volunteer events (e.g. DataKind
DataDives and hackathons), longer term volunteer-based
consulting projects (e.g. DataKind DataCorps), fellowship
programs (e.g. Data Science for Social Good and IBM Science for Social Good), corporate philanthropy (e.g. Two
Sigma Data Clinic), specialized non-governmental organizations (e.g. Bayes Impact), innovation units within large
development organizations (e.g. United Nations Global
Pulse), and data scientists employed directly by smaller
social change organizations. Irrespective of the engagement model, nearly all efforts and projects have been small
custom-tailored demonstrations or case studies (Chui et al.,
2018; Howson et al., 2018). Arguably, there has not been a
truly measurable and lasting impact from any project in the
broader portfolio.
The most significant bottlenecks identified by Chui et al.
(2018) that have led to this state of affairs are: data inaccessibility, shortages of talent, and ‘last mile’ implementation
challenges. In the remainder of this paper, we focus on the
latter two of these three limiting factors and ask whether
a continuation of the custom-tailored or bespoke approach
taken thus far is what can take us to ‘Act II,’ or whether another approach may be required. We discuss why a platformbased approach that takes advantage of common patterns
in AI formulations for the social good space may be the
preferred route — as long as it is pursued in an open way
and with continued partnerships between the technology
and social sectors that have been essential to the successes
of Act I.

Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good

After discussing the broad idea of open platforms for AI
for social good, we will delve into three specific patterns of
problems we have seen: making sense of international development and humanitarian crisis reports, providing guidance
for vulnerable individuals, and supporting unbiased allocation decisions. Due to page limits, our aim is not to be
comprehensive, but to lend credence to the proposal by illustrating that there are in fact themes containing enough
common required functionality to be candidates for an AI
platform. We could have, of course, discussed other patterns
and other projects within those patterns herein. We have
chosen ones that are closer to the cutting edge of machine
learning research and ones we have personally worked on as
founding co-directors of the IBM Science for Social Good
initiative, and as data ambassadors with DataKind.

2. Proposal of Open Platforms for AI for
Social Good
As we discussed in Section 1, the current modus operandi
of the AI for good movement to do customized one-off
projects has been successful in starting the dialogue between the social sector and the world of AI research and
development, which is in and of itself an important accomplishment. However, let us pause and consider whether this
mode is in humanity’s best interest or whether there may be
alternatives to go forward with.
First let us recount a few realities of the current way of doing
things. One-off solutions require a great deal of time and
effort in creating, both from members of the social change
organization and from the data scientists involved — which
neither have in abundance. There is very limited ability
to reuse assets and learnings from one project to the next
since every new project involves a different organization,
and volunteer data scientists or fellows are often unable
to commit to conducting several projects over time. Also,
custom solutions require the social change organization to
integrate, deploy, monitor, and maintain the work product,
which even the best organizations struggle to do because of
skill and resource limitations.
Burgess (2018) has identified three main categories for creating AI solutions: off-the-shelf AI software, AI platforms,
and bespoke AI builds. He states that “the biggest disadvantage of using [off-the-shelf AI software] is that its
capabilities may not align well enough with your objectives
and required functionality.” This is clearly true for social
good problems because they do tend to have some unique
characteristics as compared to problems in other industries
and sectors. He continues that “for the majority of enterprises, bespoke AI development should be used only when
absolutely necessary, that is, for complex, very large data
problems, or when creating a completely new product or
service that requires technological competitive advantage.”

Although bespoke AI builds are the current practice in AI
for social good, the typically-encountered problems actually
have small datasets and do not require a technological competitive advantage; the core innovation in AI for social good
is typically not on the very fine technical details, but on the
application, adaptation, and combination of technologies to
the real-world problem.
If not off-the-shelf and if not bespoke, we are left with AI
platforms. AI platforms provide sets of foundational capabilities that can be further specialized for particular instantiations or problems, trained on users’ datasets, and deployed
and maintained with relative ease via cloud computing environments. Reusability of the foundational AI capability
is inherent to platforms because the algorithms are created
once and can be improved over time by a dedicated team in
a way that diffuses to deployments automatically. A given
AI platform is used by many different organizations who
tend to have similar, but not exactly the same needs. This
mode makes sense for AI for social good because it significantly reduces the expertise and resource requirements
of the social change organization while also allowing AI
developers, who themselves are scarce, to multiply their
impact by working on the core functionality that may then
be used by many mission-driven organizations.
AI platforms can be highly generic and general or they
can be more specific to particular industries or functions.
For example, AI companies have started creating platform
offerings specific to industries such as agriculture, manufacturing and building management, as well as functions
such as customer service, human resources and advertising
(IBM, 2018). To the best of our knowledge, however, there
is no such AI platform for the sorts of problems typically
encountered in sustainable development and social good.
We believe that this gap reveals a call to action for building
platforms for clusters of problems as a central activity of
Act II of the AI for social good movement.
How will this happen? There must be a convening of three
categories of parties: social change organizations, (private)
AI companies, and grantmaking foundations. To create a
platform for a cluster or common pattern of problems, it is
essential that a good number of social change organizations
participate because a platform created without the input and
feedback of the eventual users will necessarily be suboptimal. The collection of organizations should be somewhat
diverse but also have similar AI needs in order to stretch
the boundaries of the design and capabilities while ensuring
that they are general enough for all use cases. (This is actually just a best practice of user-centered design (Guszcza,
2018).)
AI companies are needed in the convening because they
hold the required skills and talents to build such platforms.
They can also leverage internal tools and practices to make

Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good

the endeavor less daunting. Individual developers working
on a volunteer basis are unlikely to be able to support such
an undertaking, at least in its initial development. By creating AI platforms for social good, the technology solution
creators accrue an additional benefit by learning lessons
applicable for developing platforms in other domains.

education supported by institutions such as the World Bank,
the Asian Development Bank and the European Investment
Bank. It uses this information to alert the civil society of the
local affected population of the plans and supports them in
flagging potential problems and proposing alternatives that
are more in line with the priorities of the local population.

Finally, grantmaking foundations are needed to pull together
social change organizations working in similar areas (many
foundations already support organizations grouped by topical area), give them ‘permission’ to participate in such an
activity that does not immediately advance their mission,
and to provide market validation to participating AI companies. Grantmakers are already starting to understand that
they cannot continue their typical existing practice of earmarking funds solely for programmatic efforts; they must
also support foundational capabilities to enable sustained
impact (Etzel & Pennington, 2017). The overall description
of the convening of grantmakers, AI companies, and social
change organizations is illustrated in Figure 1.

One of us (Varshney) led a group of volunteer data scientists
at a DataKind DataDive aiming to improve and automate
the Early Warning System (Bert, 2018), which at that point
was primarily a manual undertaking performed by overburdened analysts. The main tasks were to take articles
from news feeds, categorize them according to topic, extract
metadata such as the time, place and development bank, and
match them to known development projects using semantic natural language processing (NLP)-based analysis. By
automating much of this work, analysts would be freed to
perform higher-level reasoning about the projects.

The general idea has seemingly started to take root. In January 2019, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Mastercard
Center for Inclusive Growth announced an investment that
“will enable DataKind to move from a project- to a platformbased model, in which it will support more organizations on
a set of common issues” (Shah, 2019).
Before closing this section and describing a few examples
of sets of social change organizations with similar AI needs,
let us bring forth a discussion of openness in the platforms.
As we have described platforms thus far, we have implied
that they enable linear scaling. That is, due to reuse of the
core AI capability in the platform, more and more social
change organizations will have their programmatic efforts
supported with the same amount of AI development effort.
However, when platforms are open, they also enable new
innovations, which has time and again yielded exponential
scaling of impact (Gawer & Cusumano, 2014; Ahuja &
Chan, 2016; Bogers et al., 2018). Open-source toolkits
are already a key component of the fabric of AI research
and development, so it is not unreasonable to desire that
platforms for AI for social good be open from the outset —
to minimize costs to social change organizations who use
them, to allow volunteers to add capabilities, and to unlock
greater innovation.

3. Making Sense of International
Development and Humanitarian Reports
The International Accountability Project (IAP) is an international advocacy organization that, through its Early Warning
System, collects information about planned and early-stage
development projects such as geothermal power plants, irrigation projects and the privatization of early childhood

We have seen the same pattern in several projects we have
conducted in the IBM Science for Social Good initiative.
Analysts at ACAPS collect and summarize secondary information about humanitarian crises (news reports and reports
from various humanitarian agencies) to help prioritize responses; the organization has more-or-less the same AI and
NLP needs as IAP (Pham et al., 2017). The Clinton Global
Initiative, when it was still in existence, wished to analyze
the corpus of commitment reports made by its members to
conduct large philanthropic and development projects. The
purpose was to provide guidance for future projects; this
work also required similar topic analysis of natural language
text and extraction of metadata as for IAP, coupled with
more advanced recommender system algorithms (Lamba
et al., 2017). Similar to IAP, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the International Center
for Advocates Against Discrimination (ICAAD) sought out
NLP algorithms to perform semantic matching of given
snippets of text to target text, in these cases matching sentences of national development plans (UNDP) and items
from the United Nations’ Universal Periodic Review of Human Rights (ICAAD) to individual targets of the SDGs
(ICA, 2016; 2017; Galsurkar et al., 2018).

4. Providing Guidance for Vulnerable
Individuals
CityLink Center is a provider of integrated social services
in Cincinatti, USA. Through coordinated interventions such
as one-on-one counseling sessions on different topics and
group educational classes, it aims to help its clients get out
of poverty. It records progress along several realms of life
such as employment, housing, transportation, education,
and mental health.
In an ongoing project we are conducting through the IBM

Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Grantmaking foundations are starting to understand that they cannot support only programmatic efforts of social change
organizations; they must also support foundational capabilities to enable sustained impact. (b) Even if grantmakers want to support new
solutions and foundational technologies, social change organizations are not in position to create these solutions themselves. Technology
solution creators must also be involved. (c) The same platform can serve as a foundational capability to support not just one, but many
social change organizations with similar missions. (This figure is a modification of a figure by Etzel & Pennington (2017)).

Science for Social Good initiative, CityLink’s longitudinal
event data of interventions and outcomes is being analyzed
to discover the causal links among the various educational
sessions and realms of life. This model can then be used
to provide personalized guidance on future interventions to
maximize the probability of a client graduating out poverty
or to minimize the time taken.
We partnered with Neighborhood Trust Financial Partners, a
financial empowerment services provider to low-wage workers in New York, USA, to improve their WageGoal app that
uses data on spending and income transaction events to provide personalized predictions on when clients may go into
debt and provides guidance on actions to prevent this from
happening (Zhang et al., 2018). We also use personalized
causal inference in our work on analyzing medical claims
data to provide guidance on opioid prescribing to prevent adverse outcomes such as addiction and long-term use which
may lead to overdose deaths (Zhang et al., 2017; Wei &
Johansson, 2018). St. John’s Bread and Life, a provider of
emergency food and other services in Brooklyn, USA and
the International Center for Appropriate and Sustainable
Technology, a non-profit retrofitter of multifamily affordable housing for energy conservation in Colorado and other
states of the USA have similar AI needs as CityLink of understanding client behavior through causal event modeling
and intervention optimization (Helander et al., 2018; IBM).

5. Supporting Unbiased Allocation Decisions
Small-amount mobile money-based loans in East Africa,
such as M-Shwari, are now approved or declined in a
pipeline involving machine learning classifiers (Speakman

et al., 2018). In a recent project of ours, Coston et al. (2019)
examined the fairness of these algorithms with respect to
potentially protected attributes such as gender and age, and
developed algorithms to mitigate unwanted biases in these
allocation decisions that have a profound effect on the typically poor and traditionally-unbanked applicants.
Similarly, our DataKind DataCorps project in partnership
with Simpa Networks, a pay-as-you-go solar panel system
provider in rural India, developed a machine learning classifier as an approval mechanism to predict which applicants
will not fully repay for their systems and will have to have
their systems repossessed (Gerard et al., 2015). A potential
feature for the task, the surname of the applicant, which
strongly correlates with caste and religion, was explicitly
excluded to prevent unwanted bias (Varshney & Alemzadeh,
2017). GiveDirectly, a provider of unconditional cash transfers, participated in a DataCorps project to prioritize villages in western Kenya to be allocated donations based on
poverty levels estimated from satellite imagery (Abelson
et al., 2014). In our post hoc analysis of the first pilot, we
found unwanted biases resulting from inappropriate consideration of buildings in housing compounds that were not
the main house (Varshney et al., 2015). A slightly different
example that fits the AI pattern was our IBM Science for
Social Good project conducted with Echoing Green, a funder of social entrepreneurs. Classifiers to predict fellowship
candidates’ advancement to the semifinalist stage was pursued and potential biases by gender, country of origin, and
educational institution were examined (Garg et al., 2017).

Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good

6. Conclusion

References

The most challenging problems facing humanity today are
succinctly captured by the SDGs, and all of them require
the combination of multiple kinds of expertise to address.
The data science and AI for social good movement has been
working for the last several years to partner AI practitioners
with social change organizations to show the potency of this
combination. Dialogue among these groups is no longer
completely foreign due to the efforts thus far, but to make
measurable progress towards the goals, the current mode of
conducting bespoke projects needs to be enhanced by the
creation of open AI platforms.

Science for social good — IBM Research.
https://www.research.ibm.com/science-for-social-good/.

Platforms will provide reusable base AI capabilities for
common sets of problems faced by groups of social change
organizations in a way that is customizable, deployable, and
maintainable with as little effort as possible. In doing so,
they will overcome the bottlenecks of AI talent shortages
and last mile implementation while also enabling further
innovation beyond the missions of the participating organizations. We feel that the way to achieve such progress
is through consortia of three parties: social change organizations, AI companies, and grantmaking foundations, and
can already imagine several initial candidate social good
platforms through the examples discussed herein.
The third bottleneck identified by Chui et al. (2018) is data
accessibility. We recognize that this is an additional challenge, but also posit that there is enough relevant open data
and data owned by social change organizations to address
their missions already if open innovation platforms were
available to them (Kapoor et al., 2015). Corporate data
philanthropy should catch up soon enough. Moreover, we
recognize that scaling is not the mission of many social
change organizations (Slaughter, 2018); however, it is not
the scaling of the organizations themselves that we are advocating in this work. We are advocating for the creation
of scalable core AI capabilities that will make the work of
all organizations easier, whether they would like to remain
small with a very pointed mission or to grow.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Modest Oprysko for discussions and
Jake Porway for introducing them to the AI for social good
movement. They also thank Dario Gil, John Kelly, Arvind
Krishna, Mahmoud Naghshineh, Giovanni Pacifici, Radha
Ratnaparkhi, and Bob Sutor for supporting the IBM Science
for Social Good initiative and its 36 fellows to-date, the IBM
scientists and engineers who have participated in projects,
and social change organization partners.

Data against discrimination – SDGs and the UPR.
https://icaad.ngo/raise-your-shield-blog/partnershipdatakind-data-scientists-better-understand-systemicforms-discrimination-200-countries/, 2016.
ICAAD’s top ten moments of 2017. https://icaad.ngo/raiseyour-shield-blog/icaads-top-ten-moments-2017/, 2017.
IBM largest ever AI toolset release is tailor made for 9 industries and professions. https://newsroom.ibm.com/201809-24-IBM-Largest-Ever-AI-Toolset-Release-Is-TailorMade-for-9-Industries-and-Professions,
September
2018.
Abelson, B., Varshney, K. R., and Sun, J. Targeting direct
cash transfers to the extremely poor. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, pp. 1563–1572, New York, NY, USA,
August 2014.
Ahuja, S. and Chan, Y. E. Digital innovation: A frugal
ecosystem perspective. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems, Dublin, Ireland, December 2016.
Bert, A.
#DataDive NYC: Follow the volunteer
data scientists, statisticians, coders and hackers as they build solutions for human rights.
https://www.elsevier.com/connect/datadive-nycdata-scientists-are-volunteering-to-build-solutionsfor-human-rights/, June 2018.
Bogers, M., Chesbrough, H., and Moedas, C. Open innovation: Research, practices, and policies. California
Management Review, 60(2):5–16, February 2018.
Burgess, A. The Executive Guide to Artificial Intelligence.
Palgrave MacMillan, London, UK, 2018.
Catlett, C. and Ghani, R. Big data for social good. Big Data,
3(1):1–2, March 2015.
Chui, M., Harryson, M., Manyika, J., Roberts, R., Chung,
R., van Heteren, A., and Nel, P. Applying AI for social
good. Discussion paper, McKinsey & Company, December 2018.
Coston, A., Ramamurthy, K. N., Wei, D., Varshney, K. R.,
Speakman, S., Mustahsan, Z., and Chakraborty, S. Fair
transfer learning with missing protected attributes. In
Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Ethics, and Society, Honolulu, HI, USA,
January 2019.

Open Platforms for Artificial Intelligence for Social Good

Etzel, M. and Pennington, H. Time to reboot grantmaking.
Stanford Social Innovation Review, June 2017.
Galsurkar, J., Singh, M., Wu, L., Vempaty, A., Sushkov, M.,
Iyer, D., Kapto, S., and Varshney, K. R. Assessing national development plans for alignment with sustainable
development goals via semantic search. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7753–7758, New Orleans, LA,
USA, February 2018.
Garg, A., Olteanu, A., Segal, R. B., Katz-Rogozhnikov,
D. A., Kumar, K., Maria, J., Mueller, L., Beers, B., and
Varshney, K. R. Demystifying social entrepreneurship:
An NLP based approach to finding a social good fellow.
In Proceedings of the Data Science for Social Good Conference, Chicago, IL, USA, September 2017.
Gawer, A. and Cusumano, M. A. Industry platforms and
ecosystem innovation. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 31(3):417–433, May 2014.
Gerard, H., Rao, K., Simithraaratchy, M., Varshney, K. R.,
Kabra, K., and Needham, G. P. Predictive modeling of
customer repayment for sustainable pay-as-you-go solar
power in rural India. In Proceedings of the Data for Good
Exchange Conference, New York, NY, USA, September
2015.
Guszcza, J. Smarter together: Why artificial intelligence
needs human-centered design. Deloitte Review, 22:36–45,
January 2018.
Helander, M. E., Mazzoleni, P., Kuang, L., Mason, C., and
Butler, A. Findings from modeling and analyzing a nonprofit organization’s emergency food and community social service operations. In Proceedings of the INFORMS
Analytics Conference, Baltimore, MD, USA, April 2018.
Howson, C., Clougherty Jones, L., Idoine, C., and Beyer, M.
How to use data for good to impact society. Technical
Report G00355735, Gartner, June 2018.
Kapoor, S., Mojsilović, A., Strattner, J. N., and Varshney,
K. R. From open data ecosystems to systems of innovation: A journey to realize the promise of open data. In
Proceedings of the Data for Good Exchange Conference,
New York, NY, USA, September 2015.
Lamba, H., Helander, M. E., Singh, M., Lethif, N., Bhamidipaty, A., Baset, S., Mojsilović, A., and Varshney, K. R.
Understanding the ecospace of philanthropic projects.
IBM Journal of Research and Development, 61(6):6,
November–December 2017.
Nilsson, M., Griggs, D., and Visbeck, M. Map the interactions between sustainable development goals. Nature,
534:320–322, June 2016.

Pham, K. T., Sattigeri, P., Dhurandhar, A., Jacob, A. C.,
Vukovic, M., Chataigner, P., Freire, J., Mojsilović, A.,
and Varshney, K. R. Real-time understanding of humanitarian crises via targeted information retrieval. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 61(6):7, November–
December 2017.
Porway, J. Doing good with data – data without borders. https://www.datakind.org/blog/doing-good-withdata-data-without-borders/, June 2011.
Shah, R. J. Introducing data science for social impact.
https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/blog/introducingdata-science-social-impact/, January 2019.
Slaughter, A.-M. Thinking big for social enterprise can
mean staying small. Financial Times, April 2018.
Speakman, S., Sridharan, S., and Markus, I. Three population covariate shift for mobile phone-based credit scoring.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies, pp. 20, San Jose, CA,
USA, June 2018.
Varshney, K. R. Signal processing for social good. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, 34(3):112, 108, May 2017.
Varshney, K. R. and Alemzadeh, H. On the safety of machine learning: Cyber-physical systems, decision sciences, and data products. Big Data, 5(3):246–255,
September 2017.
Varshney, K. R., Chen, G. H., Abelson, B., Nowocin, K.,
Sakhrani, V., Xu, L., and Spatocco, B. L. Targeting villages for rural development using satellite image analysis.
Big Data, 3(1):41–53, March 2015.
Wei, D. and Johansson, F. D.
Fighting the
opioid
epidemic
with
interpretable
causal
estimation
of
individual
treatment
effect.
https://medium.com/@MITIBMLab/fighting-theopioid-epidemic-with-interpretable-causal-estimationof-individual-treatment-effect-2b2e68ce69d5/, October
2018.
Zhang, J., Iyengar, V. S., Wei, D., Vinzamuri, B., Bastani,
H., Macalalad, A. R., Fischer, A. E., Yuen-Reed, G., Mojsilović, A., and Varshney, K. R. Exploring the causal
relationships between initial opioid prescriptions and outcomes. In Proceedings of the AMIA Workshop on Data
Mining for Medical Informatics, Washington, DC, USA,
November 2017.
Zhang, W., Horesh, R., Ramamurthy, K. N., Wu, L., Yi, J.,
Anderson, K., and Varshney, K. R. Financial forecasting
and analysis for low-wage workers. In Proceedings of
the Data for Good Exchange Conference, New York, NY,
USA, September 2018.

