RUSLAN: RUSSIAN SPOKEN LANGUAGE
CORPUS FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS

arXiv:1906.11645v1 [eess.AS] 26 Jun 2019

Lenar Gabdrakhmanov? , Rustem Garaev? , and Evgenii Razinkov
Institute of Computational Mathematics and Information Technologies
Kazan Federal University
Kazan, Russia
Evgenij.Razinkov@kpfu.ru

Abstract. We present RUSLAN – a new open Russian spoken language
corpus for the text-to-speech task. RUSLAN contains 22200 audio samples with text annotations – more than 31 hours of high-quality speech
of one person – being the largest annotated Russian corpus in terms
of speech duration for a single speaker. We trained an end-to-end neural network for the text-to-speech task on our corpus and evaluated the
quality of the synthesized speech using Mean Opinion Score test. Synthesized speech achieves 4.05 score for naturalness and 3.78 score for
intelligibility on a 5-point MOS scale.

Keywords: Russian Speech Corpus, End-To-End Speech Synthesis, Text-toSpeech

1

Introduction

Spoken language is an essential tool for human communication. In a world of AI
systems and mobile computers, humans also communicate with machines. Ability to communicate with a machine using natural spoken language contributes
greatly to the user experience. Two tasks should be completed in order to make
it possible: speech synthesis and automatic speech recognition.
The main goal of text-to-speech systems is to generate an audio signal containing natural speech corresponding to the input text. There are several possible solutions. Speech synthesis systems based on concatenation and statistical
parametrization might produce acceptable results in terms of quality but they require deeply annotated speech corpora. Providing this level of speech annotation
is a time-consuming process that requires specific lexicology knowledge. Another
possible drawback of this approach is language-dependent system design [20].
Recent advances in deep learning resulted in significant improvements in
speech synthesis task [22,24,12,1,17,15]. Deep learning techniques excel at leveraging large amounts of training data. Thus, the quality of the synthesized speech
for text-to-speech systems based on deep learning is heavily influenced by the
quality and size of the speech corpus.
?

L. Gabdrakhmanov and R. Garaev contributed equally to this work.

2

L. Gabdrakhmanov et al.

Depending on the text-to-speech neural network architecture various levels of
corpus annotation might be required. While WaveNet [22] neural network relies
on extensive annotation (linguistic features, fundamental frequency etc.), textaudio pairs are sufficient for more recent Tacotron [24] end-to-end architecture.
It is much easier to collect text-audio pairs and it would lead to larger corpora
and higher quality of synthesized speech in the future.
While large open speech corpora exist for some of the most widespread languages [4,10,6] this is not the case for many other languages.
Russian is the sixth most widespread language in the world by the number of
native speakers being spoken by approximately 154 million people worldwide [5].
However, publicly available and annotated speech corpora in Russian are not
sufficient. Availability of large amounts of annotated speech is crucial for the
research community both in speech synthesis and recognition.
Amount of speech for a single speaker is an important factor for end-to-end
neural speech synthesis. There are few Russian speech corpora: [23,3] are public
and [16,7] are proprietary, but the amount of speech for a single speaker in
these corpora is less than 7 hours. Up until now, there was only one open-source
Russian language speech corpus exceeding 7 hours in audio duration for a single
speaker namely M-AILABS [21], containing about 20 hours of speech for a single
speaker at most. In this work, we try to facilitate research in speech synthesis in
Russian by providing large publicly available annotated speech corpus.
Our contributions are as follows:
– We collected the largest annotated speech corpus in the Russian language for
a single speaker – RUSLAN (RUSsian spoken LANguage corpus) and made
it publicly available. Our corpus is 50% larger in terms of audio duration
in comparison with the second largest corpus in the Russian language for a
single speaker to date [21].
Speech corpus is publicly available under Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0
license at https://ruslan-corpus.github.io.
– We trained text-to-speech neural network on RUSLAN and evaluated the
quality of the synthesized speech using Mean Opinion Score with 50 participating native speakers as respondents 1 .
– We propose several improvements for Tacotron text-to-speech end-to-end
neural network that allow us to achieve comparable speech quality in fewer
training iterations.

2

Speech Corpus

In this section, we describe RUSLAN speech corpus. The amount of annotated
speech for a single speaker is a key feature of text-to-speech corpora. Therefore,
we focused on maximizing the amount of high-quality speech recording for a
single speaker. Speaker is a 23 years old male who is a native Russian speaker.
1

Audio samples from corpus and examples of synthesized speech can be found at
https://ruslan-corpus.github.io

RUSSIAN SPOKEN LANGUAGE CORPUS FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS

3

The pronunciation is clear and intelligible. The style of the text is narrative, the
speech is neutral. Corpus contains 22200 training samples. Each training sample
is a text-audio pair, where the text is a phrase or a sentence – an excerpt from
works of Russian and American writer Sergei Dovlatov. The number of words
in each training sample varies from 1 to 111 with an average of 12. The Russian
language consists of 33 letters (10 vowels and 23 consonants). The frequency
distribution for the phonemes are provided in Figure 1. Phonemic transcription
was performed as suggested in [25].

Fig. 1. Distribution of the Russian phonemes in the corpus.

2.1

Text preprocessing

Text for each training sample was preprocessed in the following way:
– All numbers and dates were manually replaced by their textual representation.
– Acronyms were manually substituted with their expanded forms.
– All symbols except for Russian letters and punctuation marks were automatically deleted.
2.2

Recording process

Audio samples were recorded in a quiet and noise-protected room using noisereduction hardware. Each sample was recorded separately with a sampling frequency of 44.1 kHz and 16 bit linear PCM and saved in WAV format. Leading
and trailing silent parts were deleted from each audio sample. All text-audio
pairs were additionally verified in order to avoid annotation errors. The signalto-noise ratio is approximately equal to 90 dB. Corpus statistics are presented
in table 1.
Figure 2 shows the ratio of the lengths and ratio of the number of symbols
per sample for the whole corpus.

4

L. Gabdrakhmanov et al.
Table 1. RUSLAN corpus statistics
Total duration
Total number of samples
Total symbols
Total words
Unique words
Min sample duration
Max sample duration
Min number of symbols in one sample
Max number of symbols in one sample
Min number of words in sample
Max number of words in sample

3

31:32:55
22200
1472377
267053
52703
0.61 sec
50.71 sec
9
596
1
111

Neural network for speech synthesis

In order to evaluate sufficiency and completeness of RUSLAN for Russian speech
synthesis, we train a neural network for the text-to-speech task. In this section, we describe our neural network that is heavily based on Tacotron architecture [24] with few changes that improve convergence and synthesized speech
quality which we discuss below.
We employ end-to-end trainable encoder-decoder deep neural network architecture that receives text as an input and produces a linear spectrogram. This
spectrogram is later used for waveform reconstruction. Model architecture is illustrated in Figure 3. We describe the encoder, decoder and audio reconstruction
procedure below.

3.1

Neural network architecture

The input of the model is a text where each distinct character is represented as
a trainable 256-dimensional character embedding vector. Thus, the lookup table
has a shape of 78 × 256 since we use only 78 characters: Russian capital and
lowercase letters, space and punctuation marks – {0 , −(). :; !?}.
The model encoder consists of two parts: pre-net of two fully connected layers
with dropout [18] and CBHL module which is a slight modification of Tacotron
CBHG module. Our main and only modification here is a replacement of GRU
with layer normalized LSTM (LN-LSTM) in bidirectional RNN for faster convergence [9].
Decoder consists of two parts to predict mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
and linear spectrogram respectively. The first part includes pre-net, Attention
RNN and Decoder RNN. We have replaced GRU with LN-LSTM in both Attention RNN [2] and Decoder RNN parts in contrast with the original Tacotron
model. In Tacotron model the second part of the decoder is post-processing
CBHG module, but we again replace it with our CBHL.

RUSSIAN SPOKEN LANGUAGE CORPUS FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS

(a) Duration of samples

5

(b) Number of symbols

Fig. 2. Histograms (a) of the duration of samples, (b) of the number of symbols.

Loss function Since Decoder RNN predicts MFCCs and post-processing CBHL
module predicts linear spectrogram, we employ two different loss functions.
Target values for Decoder RNN are 80-band MFCCs:
Lossmel =

N
1 X mel
|t
− ymel (texti )|1 ,
N i i

(1)

where N is the number of samples in the training set, texti is the i-th text from
the corpus, tmel
is ground truth mel-frequency cepstral coefficients for texti ,
i
ymel (texti ) is MFCCs predicted by Decoder RNN of the neural network given
texti as an input.
Loss function for post-processing CBHL module:
Losslin =

N
1 X lin
|t − ylin (texti )|1 ,
N i i

(2)

where tlin
is ground truth linear-spectral coefficients for texti , ylin (texti ) is
j
linear-spectral coefficients predicted by post-processing CBHL module of the
neural network given texti as an input.
The overall loss function of the neural network is computed as follows:
Loss = Lossmel + Losslin .

(3)

Signal reconstruction In contrast to Tacotron we employ fast Griffin-Lim [11]
algorithm to reconstruct an audio signal from magnitude-only values of the linear
spectrogram.

6

L. Gabdrakhmanov et al.

Fig. 3. Model architecture.

The signal is being recovered iteratively, we stop the process after 300 iterations. Optimization speed α was set to 0.99.
3.2

Training

Text from each text-audio pair from RUSLAN corpus was used as a training
sample and corresponding audio was used to obtain target variables, MFCCs
and a linear spectrogram.
Our model implementation had been training for 300K iterations with a
batch size of 8. The training was performed on a single GTX 1060 with 6 Gb
of onboard memory. We used Adam optimizer [8] with exponential learning rate
decay.

4

Evaluation

Synthesized speech is intelligible, natural and close to human speech. The described model shows good results even on a low amount of steps.
4.1

Mean Opinion Score

Mean Opinion Score (MOS) is the most frequently used method of a subjective
measure of speech quality. MOS is used to evaluate methods of signal processing,

RUSSIAN SPOKEN LANGUAGE CORPUS FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS

7

including speech synthesis. The respondents rate the speech quality on a fivepoint scale. Score 1 corresponds to bad quality, score 5 corresponds to excellent
quality. The final rating of the signal in question is calculated as the mean over
rating scores from all respondents. This method is recommended by ITU and
IEEE for the quality estimation of the synthesized speech [14,19]. The scale of
MOS scores is presented in table 2:
Table 2. MOS scale
Score
5
4
3
2
1

Quality
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Bad

Distortions
Imperceptible
Tangible, but non-irritating
Sensible and slightly annoying
Annoying
Annoying and unpleasant

In our work, we rate speech intelligibility and naturalness. The respondents
were allowed to listen to the samples on their own equipment in an uncontrolled
environment. The scores produced by this method remain very close to those
received in a controlled environment as it was mentioned in the work [13]. 50
respondents participated in the synthesis speech evaluation survey at the age of
20-40: 40% of them were female and 60% were male.
Twenty audio samples consisting of 11 samples of synthesized speech and
9 samples of recorded speech from the corpus were blindly presented to the
respondents. Each respondent got acquainted with the survey rules in advance.
Table 3 shows naturalness and intelligibility scores for the synthesized speech
and original recordings from the corpus. In contrast to the similarity of scores
achieved by real speech, the difference between naturalness and intelligibility
scores for synthesized speech might be explained by the fact that respondents
can understand all words clearly, although there are still some artefacts in audio
due to use of the Fast Griffin-Lim algorithm.
Table 3. Naturalness and intelligibility scores
Type
Naturalness Intelligibility
Real speech
4.83
4.87
Synthesized speech 3.78
4.05

We also evaluated the quality of the speech synthesized by our implementation of the reference Tacotron neural network that had been training on RUSLAN for 300K iterations. Speech synthesized by Tacotron achieved 3.12 MOS
score for intelligibility and 2.17 MOS score for naturalness. It should be noted,
however, that in the original paper Tacotron neural network was trained for 2
million iterations [24].

8

5

L. Gabdrakhmanov et al.

Conclusion

We present RUSLAN spoken language corpus – the largest Russian open speech
corpus for a single speaker for the text-to-speech task. It consists of 22200 textaudio pairs with the total audio duration being 31 hours 32 minutes and exceeds
the second largest Russian corpus for a single speaker by 50%. We evaluate the
sufficiency and the completeness of our corpus by training an end-to-end text-tospeech neural network on RUSLAN. Our model achieves 4.05 for intelligibility
and 3.78 for naturalness on a 5-point MOS scale.

References
1. Arik, S.O., Chrzanowski, M., Coates, A., Diamos, G., Gibiansky, A., Kang, Y.,
Li, X., Miller, J., Ng, A., Raiman, J., et al.: Deep voice: Real-time neural text-tospeech. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.07825 (2017)
2. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., Bengio, Y.: Neural machine translation by jointly learning
to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014)
3. Festvox: Festvox project. http://festvox.org /festival/
4. Garofolo, J.S., Lamel, L.F., Fisher, W.M., Fiscus, J.G., Pallett, D.S.: DARPA
TIMIT acoustic-phonetic continous speech corpus CD-ROM. NIST speech disc
1-1.1. NASA STI/Recon technical report n (1993)
5. Gary F Simons, C.D.F.: Ethnologue: Languages of Africa and Europe, TwentyFirst Edition. Summer Institute of Linguistics, Academic Publications (2018)
6. Honnet, P.E., Lazaridis, A., Garner, P.N., Yamagishi, J.: The SIWIS French speech
synthesis database. Design and recording of a high quality French database for
speech synthesis. Tech. rep., Idiap (2017)
7. Kachkovskaia, T., Kocharov, D., Skrelin, P.A., Volskaya, N.B.: CoRuSS-a New
Prosodically Annotated Corpus of Russian Spontaneous Speech. In: LREC (2016)
8. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
9. Lei Ba, J., Kiros, J.R., Hinton, G.E.: Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 (2016)
10. Panayotov, V., Chen, G., Povey, D., Khudanpur, S.: Librispeech: an ASR corpus
based on public domain audio books. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2015 IEEE International Conference on. pp. 5206–5210. IEEE (2015)
11. Perraudin, N., Balazs, P., Søndergaard, P.L.: A fast Griffin-Lim algorithm. In:
Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), 2013 IEEE
Workshop on. pp. 1–4. IEEE (2013)
12. Ping, W., Peng, K., Gibiansky, A., Arik, S.O., Kannan, A., Narang, S., Raiman,
J., Miller, J.: Deep voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolutional sequence
learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research (2018)
13. Ribeiro, F., Florêncio, D., Zhang, C., Seltzer, M.: Crowdmos: An approach for
crowdsourcing mean opinion score studies. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. pp. 2416–2419. IEEE
(2011)
14. Rothauser, E.: IEEE recommended practice for speech quality measurements.
IEEE Trans. on Audio and Electroacoustics pp. 225–246 (1969)

RUSSIAN SPOKEN LANGUAGE CORPUS FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS

9

15. Shen, J., Pang, R., Weiss, R.J., Schuster, M., Jaitly, N., Yang, Z., Chen, Z., Zhang,
Y., Wang, Y., Skerry-Ryan, R., et al.: Natural tts synthesis by conditioning wavenet
on mel spectrogram predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05884 (2017)
16. Skrelin, P., Volskaya, N., Kocharov, D., Evgrafova, K., Glotova, O., Evdokimova,
V.: Corpres. In: International Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue. pp. 392–
399. Springer (2010)
17. Sotelo, J., Mehri, S., Kumar, K., Santos, J.F., Kastner, K., Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Char2wav: End-to-end speech synthesis. In: Proceedings of International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2017)
18. Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R.:
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research 15(1), 1929–1958 (2014)
19. International Telecommunication Union - Radiocommunication Sector. Subjective
assessment of sound quality (1990)
20. Taylor, P.: Text-to-speech synthesis. Cambridge university press (2009)
21. The M-AILABS Speech Dataset. http://www.m-ailabs.bayern/en/the-mailabsspeech-dataset/
22. Van Den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A.,
Kalchbrenner, N., Senior, A., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Wavenet: A generative model for
raw audio. CoRR abs/1609.03499 (2016)
23. VoxForge: Voxforge.org website
24. Wang, Y., Skerry-Ryan, R., Stanton, D., Wu, Y., Weiss, R.J., Jaitly, N., Yang,
Z., Xiao, Y., Chen, Z., Bengio, S., et al.: Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech
synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10135 (2017)
25. Yakovenko, O., Bondarenko, I., Borovikova, M., Vodolazsky, D.: Algorithms for automatic accentuation and transcription of russian texts in speech recognition systems. In: International Conference on Speech and Computer. pp. 768–777. Springer
(2018)

