1

NSense: A People-centric, non-intrusive
Opportunistic Sensing Tool for Contextualizing
Nearness

arXiv:1906.08029v1 [cs.NI] 19 Jun 2019

Rute Sofia, Saeik Firdose, Luis A. Lopes, Waldir Moreira, Paulo Mendes
COPELABS, University Lusofona
{rute.sofia, saeik.firdose,luis.amaral,waldir.moreira,paulo.mendes}@ulusofona.pt

Abstract—In the context of social well-being and context
awareness several eHealth applications have been focused on
tracking activities, such as sleep or specific fitness habits, with
the purpose of promoting physical well-being with increasing
success. Sensing technology can, however, be applied to improve
social well-being, in addition to physical well-being. This paper
addresses NSense, a tool that has been developed to capture
and to infer social interaction patterns aiming to assist in the
promotion of social well-being. Experiments carried out under
realistic settings validate the NSense performance in terms of
its capability to infer social interaction context based on our
proposed computational utility functions. Traces obtained during
the experiments are available via the CRAWDAD international
trace repository.
Index Terms—opportunistic sensing, wireless, social interaction; proxemics; social well-being promotion.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As technology becomes more pervasive, low-cost sensing
devices such as smartphones are carried around by a large
number of people, thus giving rise to the opportunity of
capturing diverse aspects of the human routine and to take
advantage of inferred patterns to improve several social and
behavioral aspects, thus promoting better living/well-being.
For instance, today there are several tools that bring awareness
to our fitness routine, or even to our daily activity patterns,
e.g., by looking into sleep, motion, as well as other activity
and behavioral patterns. There are also several frameworks that
attempt to gather healthcare data in the cloud so as to assist
in a better prevention of diseases, or in a better control of
conditions, such as asthma.
Derived from advances in communication and in particular,
in networked systems, today the available technology can
be relied upon to take advantage of sensing as well as of
direct communication via short-range wireless technology (e.g.
Bluetooth; Wi-Fi Direct) to assist in better classifying our daily
routines, in a way that is not necessarily intrusive, and in a way
that does not endanger one’s personal sphere. Such advantages
are relevant in the context of promoting well-being in its
multiple dimensions (social, cognitive/mental, and physical),
and improving our daily routines (e.g. by stimulating social
cohesion).
Corresponding Author. COPELABS, University Lusofona Campus, Building U, First Floor, Campo Grande 388, 1749-024 Lisboa.

NSense (Nearness Sense) has been devised as a softwarebased solution to promote social well-being (and consequently,
to assist in the development of frameworks and strategies that
may provide benefits to mental and to cognitive well-being),
by exploring individual and collective nearness contextualization. In the category of non-intrusive sensing, NSense is
one of the first middleware solutions that exploits the notion
of nearness via the use of short-range wireless technology
(Wi-Fi Direct, Bluetooth) together with other sensors while
integrating an efficient sampling and storage strategy (e.g., not
recurring always to geo-positioning information; reducing microphone sampling), thus achieving a sound balance in terms
of storage and battery drainage while performing behavior
inference locally in the personal device, without relying to
external computational devices (e.g., cloud). Moreover, aiming
to ensure a large scale deployment, NSense is designed based
on a modular software architecture, which allows an easy
integration of other sensors.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II goes over
related work explaining how NSense introduces benefits in the
context of social well-being. Section III discusses our perspective on contextualizing nearness, proposing as valid markers
for such context two utility functions: social interaction, that
infers the interaction of devices over time; propinquity, that
measures the probability of social interaction occurring over
time, i.e., the probability of social ties to grow stronger over
time and space. The NSense software architecture is briefly
presented in Section IV which covers the computational and
specification aspects of this tool. Section V is dedicated to
an evaluation of NSense in terms of its capability to capture
nearness under realistic conditions. Section VI concludes the
paper with a summary of findings as well as ongoing research
directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
There are different proposals aiming at exploiting sensing
data produced by smartphones to infer individual behavior.
Such proposals can be divided into two major families, namely,
participatory sensing [1], where the user actively engages in
the data collection activity; opportunistic sensing [2], where
the data collection stage is fully automated with no user involvement, i.e., in a non-intrusive fashion. While participatory
and opportunistic sensing have complementary properties, we

2

believe that a pure opportunistic sensing approach is more
suitable to support large scale deployments and application
diversity.
Most of the available sensing solutions are focused on
the inference of individual behavior. CenceMe [3] has been
designed to allow users to share their sensing experience with
trusted circles on social networks. Such experience relates with
activities such as running; walking; disposition; contextual
surroundings. EmotionSense [4] aims at correlating how the
user feels with user activities, and BeWell [5] aims at tracking
the impact of sleep, physical activity, and social interaction
on the user’s well-being, where social interaction is based on
phone usage (SMS and calls). Both CenceMe and BeWell fall
into the category of non-intrusive sensing. BeWell integrates
speech activity detection to provide a better contextualization
of the user’s social context. Nevertheless, the inference of
conversational activities done by BeWell is not enough to
reliably assess a user social context in terms of how socially
engaged the owner of the device is with different individuals
in a given setting (i.e., home, school, work).
Sociometer [6] focuses on the notion of social engagement
given by proximity and conversational activities to understand
how users interact. Sociometer is a mark in terms of better
understanding cues concerning social context and the fact that
activity recognition can be correlated with social engagement.
Nevertheless, Sociometer falls into the category of intrusive
tools, where social interaction is derived from infra-red proximity technology, which requires clear line-of-sight, while
social engagement can still take place with obstacle between
users and/or without users being facing one another.
Similarly to Sociometer, SociableSense [7] aims at inferring
individual behavior in the context of office environments.
SocialSense is based on a smartphone platform, thus being less
intrusive. SociableSense adaptively controls the sampling rate
of accelerometer, Bluetooth, and microphone sensors in order
to estimate the user’s sociability, and strength of relationship
with colleagues.
With NSense, we aim at inferring nearness based on the
user’s daily routine and social interaction over time and space.
III. I NFERRING N EARNESS
A. Terminology and Notation
This section provides terminology that is required for a
better understanding of the paper. NSense is middleware that
has been designed to run on a personal sensing device such
as a smartphone. As such, a user corresponds to the device
owner and carrier. A device is owned by a person only, and
the identification of the device is associated to its owner only.
Propinquity [8] is used in this work as an indicator of the
probability of devices (and hence, their carriers) to strengthen
over time their nearness. Propinquity refers to the physical
and/or psychological proximity between people. It has been
studied mostly to understand how interpersonal relations develop within the same space. For instance, people living in
the same floor of a building attain a higher propinquity than
those living on different floors. Two people sharing similar
beliefs also attain a higher propinquity than those that do not

share beliefs. Hence, propinquity is a property that is highly
relevant to consider when defining, in networked systems,
social interaction contextualization. Owners of devices that are
in close range to each other, or that meet often, are expected
to have a higher propinquity than owners of devices that do
not meet often. Other aspects, such as environmental sound, or
distance between devices, can assist in inferring propinquity.
Social interaction provides an indication on how much
owners of devices have been interacting over time and space,
derived from aspects such as the distance between such
devices; the sound level activity around the devices; the type
of movement of the devices.
Propinquity and social interaction assist in tracking nearness
derived from the natural networking footprint that devices and
their human carriers leave around. In other words, these two
utility functions are relevant to develop solutions that capture
nearness in a way that is non-intrusive and that does not
jeopardize in any way the personal sphere of citizens.
The parameters considered by NSense in the definition of
a nearness context concern node degree; node motion; social
strength; relative distance; and ambient sound level. The node
degree n(i)t at an instant t is commonly used to characterize
several aspects of networked systems. A deterministic variable,
m(i)t , provides an indication is the node is moving based on
the motion on a three accelerometer axis. The social strength
of node i towards node j in a specific hourly sample h , for
day d, s(i, j)d,h [9] is derived from contact duration between
nodes i and j during a specific time window h in a passive
way. The relative distance between devices i and j, d(i, j)t ,
corresponds to an exponential moving average of the euclidean
distance between the two nodes, following a propagation loss
model. Finally, the environmental sound nl(i)t , measured by
the device based on a sound activity detection algorithm, is
used to classify the environmental sound context based on
noise levels with the help of the deterministic variable v.
B. Relating Classified Activities with Nearness
This section explains how the different parameters are
sensed by NSense and how we believe that such sensing
can assist in inferring, with a reasonable level of accuracy,
a nearness context, eventually leading to ways to stimulate
nearness, if intended. A more detailed explanation of NSense,
its pipelines, as well as aspects concerning classification of
activities and our perspective concerning relation to nearness
is available via a more detailed technical report [10].
Nearness considers both psychological (social) proximity
as well as physical proximity aspects. It is here assumed that
the level of social proximity derived from portable devices
carries a correspondence to the level of social interaction that
devices can capture via sensing interfaces. It is also assumed
that the classification of aspects related to individual behavior,
such as distance towards neighboring devices, motion, as
well as environmental sound level assists in a more accurate
classification of nearness aspects.
A nearness context is therefore modeled by relying on
the two utility functions explained in the previous section.
While the social interaction utility function provides a realistic

3

Table I: Empirical cases and results for correlation between
classification and inference.
Activity

Parameter

1

2

3

Social strength (Proximity)
Sound activity detection
Relative Distance
Motion
Social Interaction
Propinquity
Nearness

s(i, j)
v(i)
d(i, j)
m(i)
si(i, j)
p(i, j)
-

High
Quiet
Short
Stationary
Avg
High
Avg

High
Alert
Large
Stationary
Low
High
Avg

Low
Quiet
Short
Moving
Low
High
Avg

measure on how social interaction is occurring, based on
physical proximity metrics, the propinquity function operates
as a reinforcement that social interaction grows with time stronger times are formed when propinquity is higher, over
time and space [8].
For the purpose of relying on non-intrusive opportunistic
sensing, it is assumed that devices hold the proposed set of
sensors, and that their owners allow data capture in accordance
with the aspects that have been described in the previous
sections. Table I illustrates a potential correlation between the
different activities sensed, and how such sensing can impact
on the modeled propinquity as well as on the modeled social
interaction.
For the sake of explanation, in the provided examples we
assume that the social strength has either high or low values,
while the level of sound is determined by either quiet or alert
values. Likewise, the relative distance is considered to be either
short or large. In terms of motion nodes are classified as being
stationary or moving.
On a first case (cf. Table I, (1)) two nodes i and j meet
frequently and hence their social strength is high. They are
close by (short distance, e.g., 10 meters) as well as stationary.
The sound activity level surrounding them is low (quiet). This
seems to imply that there are conditions to strengthen nearness
for the people carrying the devices. For instance, this could
occur if two strangers share frequently the same bus ride.
While if instead social interaction would be high, then it could
be the case of two friends quietly reading at the same table on
a coffee-shop. It should be highlighted that currently NSense
is simply detecting environmental sound levels only.
In case 2 it is assumed that the distance changes, thus impacting both propinquity as well as social interaction. Nearness
remains average, as propinquity has a high value.
In terms of the impact of motion in the inferrence of a
nearness context (case 3), we assume that when distances between nodes are kept short, independently of whether moving
or not, propinquity is high. For this specific example, social
interaction is low as the social strength between the devices is
also low. Nearness between the people can nevertheless still
be classified as average.
These simplistic examples aim at explaining why a nearness
context requires considering both social interaction as well
as propinquity heuristics. For the next sections, to quantify
propinquity we consider Eq. 1.
p(i) = s(i, j)t ∗

1
(d(i, j)t + 1) ∗ m(i)t

(1)

Figure 1: NSense node architecture.

Propinquity has been modelled to be directly proportional to
the social strength, and inversely proportional to the distance
and motion of the node. Based on our analysis as well as on
prior work [8], the current sound level activity is not relevant
to model propinquity, as this function assists in understanding
how social interaction can become stronger (stronger ties). We
have then modeled social interaction as in Eq. 2, where σ2 =
0.75 is the standard deviation for a normal distribution based
on v, and µ is the mean for such distribution.
si(i, j)t = log(s(i, j)t ) ∗

1
∗e
√
σ ∗ 2Π

−(v−µ)2
2∗σ2
∗

1
(2)
log(d(i, j)t + 10) ∗ m(i)t

IV. NS ENSE A RCHITECTURE
The high-level architecture of NSense is illustrated in Figure
1, where dashed squares represent modules that are not yet
implemented (self-reporting and inference of anxiety levels)
or that have been implemented but are not considered in this
paper (roaming behavior classification [11]).
NSense is an open-source tool licensed under LGPLv3.0
[12] and has been designed to rely on data captured via multiple sensors (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, accelerometer, microphone),
data which is then worked via utility functions that classify
activity in terms of social proximity; relative distance; location; motion; as well as surrounding sound level.
Activity classification is then used to infer about the behavior of the person carrying/owning a device. For the purpose of
this paper the NSense implementation and experiments have
been focused on social interaction contextualization only.
The NSense Service is the component responsible for initiating all of the software modules as well as all configured
sensors, ensuring the modularity necessary for the easy plugin of future sensors and classification modules. The NSense
service is also responsible for controlling data access in the
local SQLite database, as well as, if required, to dump data in
a remote database.
The values required for the inference of behavior are computed by independent classification modules named pipelines,
where a pipeline corresponds to a set of operations performed
by a classification module done over a set of sensors. Classification modules that use more than one sensor, as is the case
of the location module, and sensors that are used by several
modules, as is the case of Wi-Fi.

4

Each pipeline captures raw data from a set of sensors and,
without storing it, transforms such data via the application of
specific utility functions into people-centric actions: ranking
of preferred locations; level of surrounding noise; relative
distance towards current neighboring devices, social strength
towards any encountered devices; motion status of the device.
Only the result of the pipeline computation is kept on the
database, thus reducing storage and energy consumption required in opportunistic sensing.
The operation of NSense is based on four pipelines, each
one encompassing sensing and classification activities. The
location pipeline, based on the MTracker tool [11], performs
non-intrusive classification of the location of the device. This
classification is based on the visited wireless networks, combined with information collected from the network operator
and GPS, as well as the relative distance between neighboring
devices based on Wi-Fi direct.
The proximity pipeline relies on data captured via Bluetooth to estimate the social strength of a device towards all
other encountered devices. This classification is based on the
duration of each encounter. The social strength is the NSense
variable that provides information about the user’s hourly routine through different days. Although the proximity pipeline
considers only the Bluetooth interface, the next version of
NSense will also consider data captured via Wi-Fi direct.
The motion and sound activity detection pipelines follow
an Activity Recognition Chain (ARC) model, which comprises stages for data acquisition, signal pre-processing and
segmentation, feature extraction and selection, training, and
classification. The motion pipeline relies on data captured via
the accelerometer to perform a classification of the type of
movement activity in terms of being stationary or moving,
capturing the percentage of time that a device is either stationary or moving. The sound activity detection pipeline captures
the level of environmental sound derived from the sound
amplitude, to classify in a deterministic way the environmental
sound level.
V. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
This section covers experimentation that we have done with
NSense in order to evaluate a nearness context based on the
proposed propinquity and social interaction functions, over
time and space. The purpose of this performance analysis is
to show that the functions are robust enough to characterize
nearness under realistic settings. The experiments consider
4 Samsung S3 devices running Android 4.2, having NSense
installed as background service. Over different days and time
periods, the devices have been carried by users that share
affiliation. The devices are identified as USense2, USense3,
USense4, and USense51 . The devices continuously sensed
data which has been recorded every minute for different time
periods. For instance, during the first experiment we have
considered a 7-hour period, while on the second experiment
we have considered a 50-hour period. On the last experiment
we have considered a smaller subset of traces extracted over 3
1 The designation of the devices used in the experiment reflect the nomenclature that NSense had at the time of the experiments, i.e., USense.

Figure 2: Experiment I, USense2 towards USense5.
hours. The experiments have been repeated several times over
different days, for 3 weeks.2
On a first set of experiments (Experiment I) we have analyzed the capability and robustness of the functions proposed
to capture the correlation of the different sensed activities over
time and space, for a short period of time (7 hours, from 8
a.m. to 3 p.m. GMT). Then, on a second set of experiments
(Experiment II) we have increased such period to 50 hours to
understand whether or not the functions would still be robust.
In both sets of experiments the results are presented from the
perspective of a specific node, even though data has been
obtained from the perspective of all nodes. On a third set
of experiments (Experiment III) we have analyzed properties
of social proximity and propinquity derived from experiments
between 2 nodes, for a period of 3 hours.
A. Experiment I: Nearness Inference Context, Short Time
Period
On a first scenario we have considered the perspective
of USense2 device in regards to the three other devices
over a period of 22 hours, of which we have extracted a
period of 7 hours, from 8a.m. to 3p.m, having samples been
obtained every minute. Results presented in Figure 2 concern
the perspective of device USense2 towards USense5 3 . The
carriers of these devices share affiliation. For each figure, the
X-axis represents the hours, while the Y-axis provides the
results attained in a logarithmic scale.
Propinquity and social interaction remain stable, while the
social weight slightly increases over time. For the instants
when distance increases, propinquity lowers, as the probability
of having nodes around is lower. A downgrade in social
interaction is also observable, even though such downgrade
is less significant than in propinquity, when both sound levels
go down, and distance increases, as this means that the device
may be getting isolated. Sound impacts social interaction more
than propinquity, as sound is relevant to understand whether
or not the owners of close-by devices are truly interacting.
The social weight between the devices varies slightly over
the period observed. The social weight measures the interaction over time and takes into consideration the fact that
the devices may have frequently met in the past. While
propinquity and social interaction consider the current instant.
2 Traces are available via CRAWDAD, http://crawdad.org/copelabs/usense/,
or http://copelabs.ulusofona.pt/scicommons/index.php/publications/show/844.
3

Due to space constrains, we have selected representative examples of all the experiments carried out. The full set of
results is available via [10].

5

Figure 3: Experiment II results, USense5 towards USense2.

B. Experiment II: Nearness Inference Context, Long Time
Period
Experiment II concerns a longer period of observation,
based on another source node, USense5. Data has been captured over a 50 hour period, and while on the prior set of
experiments the source node (USense2) was stationary most of
the time, in this experiment USense5 has been carried around.
Samples have been collected again every minute between
23.11.2015, 2 p.m. GMT, and 25.11.2015, 4 p.m. GMT;
however, for achieving a better visualization, the results shown
in the charts of Figure 3 are shown per hour. For computing
distance over time, the readings that could not be obtained
were discarded.The X-axis corresponds to hours, where hour
0 corresponds to 23.11.2015, 2 p.m., and hour 50 corresponds
to 25.11.2015, 4 p.m. The results in the Y-axis are presented
in logarithmic scale.
The variations in social interaction and propinquity as well
as in social weight tell us that the two devices have been
interacting on the first two observed hours (period between
23.11.2015, 2 p.m. and 4 p.m.). Between hours 5 and 20
the device has been stationary and distance readings towards
Usense2 were not available. This means that the two devices
were not interacting during that period as captured by the
two proposed functions (propinquity and social interaction).
Then, at hour 21 propinquity increases, due to the fact that
the devices met again and are at a quite close range. Between
hours 20 and 30 (24.11.2015, 10 a.m. and 24.11.2015, 8 p.m.)
the devices interact. However, the environmental sound seems
to be low. This implies that nearness is high (and hence,
propinquity varies), and yet, social interaction may be low
(devices are in close range and yet, environmental sound is
low). During the night period the interaction varies little as
expected, resuming around hour 45 (around 25.11.2015, 10
a.m.).
C. Experiment III: Asymmetry in a Nearness Context
One aspect that we want to understand is whether or
not the social interaction and propinquity patterns can be
correlated based on individual neighbor’s perspective as well
as based on a global perspective of nodes interacting. In other
words: if the carriers of two devices are interacting, then both
devices should exhibit similar nearness patterns, in terms of
propinquity and social interaction.

(a) Usense5 to all neighbors.

(b) USense3 to all neighbors.

Figure 4: Experiment III results, USense5 and USense3 perspective.

Hence, considering again the raw traces extracted during
Experiment II, Figure 4 covers results for a 3-hour observation
period, between hours 2 and 5 (24.11.2015, 4 p.m. and 7 p.m.),
a period which has been randomly selected from the specific
periods where 2 devices, USense3 and USense5 interacted the
most over the period of 50 hours of Experiment II. Figure 4a)
holds results of USense5 towards all of its neighbors, while
Figure 4b) holds results concerning USense3 towards all of its
neighbors.
In all experiments performed under this scenario we have
observed symmetry in terms of social interaction. Similarly,
for this particular case, the captured social interaction pattern
holds symmetry. However, in what concerns propinquity, such
property is now weaker. For instance, between hours 2 and
2.5, propinquity exhibits more variability for USense3 than for
USense5. The reason for this concerns the fact that propinquity
is more significantly affected by distance fluctuations. This
is an aspect that we expected to further analyze in future
research, as our tool exhibited some limitations (delay) in
computing the distance between neighboring nodes.

6

VI. C ONCLUSIONS

AND

F UTURE W ORK

This paper discusses a tool that can assist in a non-intrusive
way a contextualization of nearness, based on two specific
utility functions that model social interaction and propinquity.
Social interaction modeling is relevant to understand whether
or not nearness exists at an instant in time; propinquity is
relevant to assist in a longer-term characterization of such
nearness as well as in assisting to detect abnormal patterns
of behavior (e.g. isolation).
The paper presents a tool, NSense, that has been used
under realistic conditions to validate the proposed concepts of
social interaction and propinquity. We have validated such tool
under realistic settings, showing that the proposed functions
are sound for short-time periods (e.g., 7 hours) as well as
for longer time periods (50 hours) and relevant in a characterization of nearness. Results obtained corroborate that a
nearness context can be based on the proposed functions,
as they assist in understanding patterns of social interaction;
resting periods; abnormal patterns (e.g., social isolation). The
proposed functions are relevant in terms of local (end-user
device) inference, and robust over time. We believe that
the results that they provide can be improved by adequate
individual training, an aspect that is being already addressed.
A second conclusion to draw from the experiments carried
out is that nodes interacting exhibit symmetric patterns of
social interaction. While for the case of propinquity, the pattern
symmetry involving nodes that interact regularly seem to be
weaker - an aspect that we believe may be improved by
creating a method that computes the direct distance via Wi-Fi
quicker.
As ongoing work, we expect to explore this nearness context
modeling to, together with stronger psychological assessment
and validation, assist in promoting social interaction between
familiar strangers. A second line of work that we are developing concerns the fundamental role that social interaction and
propinquity may have as early indicators of social anxiety.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Thanks are due to the COPELABS CitySense project.
The paper acknowledges support from the H2020 UMOBILE
project, grant number 645124.
VIII. R EFERENCES
R EFERENCES
[1] N. D. Lane, S. B. Eisenman, M. Musolesi, E. Miluzzo,
and A. T. Campbell, “Urban Sensing Systems: Opportunistic or Participatory?,” Feb. 2008.
[2] N. D. Lane, E. Miluzzo, H. Lu, D. Peebles, Tanzeem
Choudhury, and A. T. Campbell, “A Survey of Mobile
Phone Sensing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 2010.
[3] E. Miluzzo, N. D. Lane, S. B. Eisenman, and A. T. Campbell, “CenceMe: Injecting Sensing Presence into Social
Networking Applications,” in Proceedings of the 2Nd
European Conference on Smart Sensing and Context,
EuroSSC’07, (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 1–28, SpringerVerlag, 2007.

[4] K. K. Rachuri, M. Musolesi, C. Mascolo, P. J. Rentfrow,
C. Longworth, and A. Aucinas, “EmotionSense: A Mobile Phones Based Adaptive Platform for Experimental
Social Psychology Research,” in Proceedings of the 12th
ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’10, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 281–290,
ACM, 2010.
[5] N. D. Lane, M. Lin, M. Mohammod, X. Yang, H. Lu,
G. Cardone, S. Ali, A. Doryab, E. Berke, A. T. Campbell,
and T. Choudhury, “BeWell: Sensing Sleep, Physical
Activities and Social Interactions to Promote Wellbeing,”
Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 19, pp. 345–359, June 2014.
[6] T. Choudhury and A. Pentland, “Sensing and Modeling
Human Networks Using the Sociometer,” in Proceedings
of the 7th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers, ISWC ’03, (Washington, DC, USA),
pp. 216—-, IEEE Computer Society, 2003.
[7] K. K. Rachuri, C. Mascolo, M. Musolesi, and P. J.
Rentfrow, “SociableSense: Exploring the Trade-offs of
Adaptive Sampling and Computation Offloading for Social Sensing,” in Proceedings of the 17th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
MobiCom ’11, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 73–84, ACM,
2011.
[8] R. Reagans, “Close Encounters: Analyzing How Social
Similarity and Propinquity Contribute to Strong Network
Connections,” Organization Science, vol. 22, pp. 835–
849, Aug. 2011.
[9] W. Moreira, M. de Souza, P. Mendes, and S. Sargento,
“Study on the Effect of Network Dynamics on Opportunistic Routing,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Ad-Hoc Networks and Wireless
(AdHoc Now 2012), July 2012.
[10] R. C. Sofia, S. Firdose, L. A. Lopes, W. Moreira, and
P. Mendes, “NSense: A People-centric, non-intrusive
Opportunistic Sensing Tool for Contextualizing Social
Interaction - Technical Report, COPE-SITI-TR-16-02,”
tech. rep., COPELABS, ULHT, 2016.
[11] R. Sofia, “A Tool to Estimate Roaming Behavior in
Wireless Architectures,” in inProc. WWIC 2015, 2015.
[12] F. Saeik, L. Lopes, P. Reddy, W. Moreira, R. Sofia, and
P. Mendes, “USENSE - Android App on Google Play,”
2015.

