Personalized Multimedia Item and Key Frame Recommendation
Le Wu1 , Lei Chen1 , Yonghui Yang1 , Richang Hong1 ,
Yong Ge2 , Xing Xie3 , Meng Wang1
1
Hefei University of Technology
2
The University of Arizona
3
Microsoft Research
{lewu.ustc,chenlei.hfut, yyh.hfut,hongrc.hfut}@gmail.com, yongge@email.arizona.edu,
xingx@microsoft.com, eric.mengwang@gmail.com

arXiv:1906.00246v2 [cs.IR] 4 Jan 2020

Abstract
When recommending or advertising items to
users, an emerging trend is to present each multimedia item with a key frame image (e.g., the
poster of a movie). As each multimedia item
can be represented as multiple fine-grained visual images (e.g., related images of the movie),
personalized key frame recommendation is necessary in these applications to attract users’
unique visual preferences. However, previous
personalized key frame recommendation models relied on users’ fine-grained image behavior of multimedia items (e.g., user-image interaction behavior), which is often not available in real scenarios. In this paper, we study
the general problem of joint multimedia item
and key frame recommendation in the absence
of the fine-grained user-image behavior. We
argue that the key challenge of this problem
lies in discovering users’ visual profiles for key
frame recommendation, as most recommendation models would fail without any users’ finegrained image behavior. To tackle this challenge, we leverage users’ item behavior by projecting users (items) in two latent spaces: a
collaborative latent space and a visual latent
space. We further design a model to discern
both the collaborative and visual dimensions
of users, and model how users make decisive
item preferences from these two spaces. As
a result, the learned user visual profiles could
be directly applied for key frame recommendation. Finally, experimental results on a realworld dataset clearly show the effectiveness of
our proposed model on the two recommendation tasks.

1

Introduction

Living in a digital world with overwhelming information,
the visual based content, e.g., pictures, and images, is
usually the most eye-catching for users and convey specific views to users [Zhang et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2018;

Chen et al., 2019]. Therefore, when recommending or advertising multimedia items to users, an emerging trend
is to present each multimedia item with a display image, which we call the key frame in this paper. E.g., as
shown in Fig. 1, the movie recommendation page usually displays each movie with a poster to attract users’
attention. Similarly, for (short) video recommendation,
the title cover is directly presented to users to quickly
spot the visual content. Besides, image-based advertising promotes the advertising item with an attractive image, with 80% of marketers use visual assets in the social
media marketing [Stelzner, 2018].
As a key frame distills the visual essence of a multimedia item, key frame extraction and recommendation for multimedia items is widely investigated in
the past [Mundur et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2013;
Lee et al., 2011]. Some researchers focused on how
to summarize representative video content from videos,
or apply image retrieval models from text descriptions
for universal key frame extraction [Mundur et al., 2006;
Wan et al., 2014]. In the real-world, users’ visual preferences are not the same but vary from person to person [Matz et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2019]. By collecting users’ behaviors to the images of the multimedia
items, many recommendation models could be applied
for personalized key frame recommendation [Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005; Rendle et al., 2009; Covington
et al., 2016]. Recently, researchers have made one of
the first few attempts to design a computational KFR
model that is tailored for personalized key frame recommendation in videos [Chen et al., 2017b]. By exploring the time-synchronized comment behavior from video
sharing platforms, the authors proposed to encode both
users’ interests and the visual and textual features of
the frame in a unified multi-modal space to enhance key
frame recommendation performance.
Despite the preliminary attempts for personalized key
frame recommendation, we argue that these models not
well designed due to the following two reasons. First,
as the key frame is a visual essence of a multimedia
item, recommending a key frame is always associated
with the corresponding recommended multimedia item.
Therefore, is it possible to design a model that simultaneously recommends both items and personalized key

Rise
of the
Guard
ians

Rise of the Guardians

Late Blossom

(a) Part of a movie
recommendation page

(b) Typical short video
recommendation page

Figure 1: Three application scenarios with the
frames? Second, most of the current key frame recommendation models relied on the fine-grained frame-level
user preference in the modeling process, i.e., users’ behaviors to the frames of the multimedia item, which is
not available for most platforms. Specifically, without
any users’ frame behavior, the classical collaborative filtering based models fail as these models rely on the userframe behavior for recommendation [Rendle et al., 2009;
Koren et al., 2009]. The content based models also
could not work as these models need users’ actions to
learn the visual dimensions of users [Hu et al., 2018;
Lei et al., 2016]. Therefore, the problem of how to build
the user visual profile for key frame recommendation
when the fine-grained user-image behavior data is not
available remains challenging.
In this paper, we study the general problem of personalized multimedia item and key frame recommendation without fine-grained user-image interaction data.
The key idea of our proposed model is to distinguish
each user’s latent collaborative preference and the visual preference from her multimedia item interaction
history, such that each user’s visual dimensions could
be transferred for visual based key frame recommendation. We design a J oint I tem and key F rame
Recommendation (JIFR) model to discern both the collaborative and visual dimensions of users, and model
how users make item preference decisions from these
two spaces. Finally, extensive experimental results on
a dataset clearly show the effectiveness of our proposed
model for the two personalized recommendation tasks.

2

Lat
e
Blo
sso
m

Problem Definition

In a multimedia item recommender system, there are a
userset U (|U | = M ), and an itemset V (|V| = N ). Each
multimedia item v is composed of many frames, where
each frame is an image that shows a part of the visual
content of this item. Without confusion, we would use
the term of frame and image interchangeably in this paper. E.g., in a movie recommender system, each movie
is a multimedia item. There are many images that could
describe the visual content of this movie, e.g., the official posters in different countries, the trailer posters,
and the frames contained in this video. For video recommendation, it is hard to directly analyze the video
content from frame to frame, a natural practice is to extract several typical frames that summarize the content

(c) Image-based advertising

key frame presentation of a multimedia item.

of this video [Mundur et al., 2006]. Besides, for imagebased advertising, for each advertising content with text
descriptions, many related advertising images (frames)
could be retrieved with text based image retrieval techniques [Wan et al., 2014].
Therefore, besides users and items, all the frames of
the multimedia items in the itemset compose a frameset C (|C| = L). The relationships between items and
frames are represented as a frame-item correlation matrix S ∈ RL×N . We use Sv = [j|sjv = 1] to denote the
frames of a multimedia item v. For each item v, the
key frame is the display image of this multimedia item
when it is presented or recommended to users. Therefore, the key frame belongs to v’s frameset Sv . Besides,
in the multimedia system, users usually show implicit
feedbacks (e.g., watching a movie, clicking an advertisement) to items, which could be represented as a useritem rating matrix R ∈ RM ×N . In this matrix, rai equals
1 if a shows preferences for item i, otherwise it equals 0.
Definition 1 [Multimedia Item and Key Frame
Recommendation] In a multimedia recommender system, there are three kinds of entities: a userset U , an
itemset V , and a frameset C . The item multimedia content is represented as a frame-item correlation matrix S.
Users show item preference with user-item implicit rating
matrix R. For visual based multimedia recommendation,
our goal is two-fold: 1) Multimedia Item Recommendation: Predict each user a’s unknown preference r̂ai
to multimedia item i; 2) Key Frame Recommendation:
For user a and the recommended multimedia item i, predict her unknown find-grained preference to multimedia
content ˆlak , where k is a multimedia image content of
i (ski = 1).

3

The Proposed Model

In this section, we introduce our proposed JIFR model
for multimedia item and key frame recommendation. We
start with the overall intuition, followed by the detailed
model architecture and the model training process. At
the end of this section, we analyze the proposed model.
With the absence of the fine-grained user behavior
data, it is natural to leverage the user-item rating matrix R to learn each user’s profile for key frame recommendation. Therefore, in each user’s decisive process for
multimedia items, we adopt a hybrid recommendation
model that projects users and multimedia items into two

spaces: a latent space to characterize the collaborative
behavior, and a visual space that shows the visual dimensions that influences users’ decisions. Let U ∈ Rd1×M and
V ∈ Rd1×N denote the free user and item latent vectors in
the collaborative space, and W ∈ Rd2×M and X ∈ Rd2×N
are the visual representations of users and items in the
visual dimensions. For the visual dimension construction, as each multimedia item i is composed of multiple
images, its visual representation xi is summarized from
the related visual embeddings of the corresponding frame
set Si as:
X
xi =

k∈Si

Pck
,
|Si |

(1)

where ck is the visual representation of image k. Due to
the success of convolutional neural networks, similar as
many visual modeling approaches, we use the last fully
connected layer in VGG-19 to represent the visual content of each image k as ck ∈ R4096 [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015; He and McAuley, 2016]. Pck transforms the
original item visual content representation from 4096 dimensions into a low latent visual space, which is usually
less than 100 dimensions.
Given the multimedia item representation, each user’s
predicted preference could be seen as a hybrid preference
decision process that combines the collaborative filtering
preference and the visual content preference as:
r̂ai = uTa vi + waT xi ,

(2)

Under the above approach, for each user, by optimizing the user-item based loss function (Eq.(3)), we could
align users and images in the visual space without any
user-image interaction data for multimedia item and key
frame recommendation. However, we argue that the
above approach is not well designed for the proposed
problem due to the overlook of the content indecisiveness and rating indecisiveness in the modeling process.
The content indecisiveness is correlated to the visual representation of each item (Eq.(1)), which refers to which
images are more important to reflect the visual content
of the multimedia item are unknown. E.g., some frames
in the movie convey more visual semantics than other
frames that are not informative. Simply using an average operation that summarizes the item visual representation (Eq.(1)) would neglects the visual highlights of
the item semantics. Besides, the rating indecisiveness
appears in each user-item preference decision process
as shown in Eq.(2), which refers to the implicitness of
whether to concentrate more on the collaborative part or
the visual item part for the preference decision process.
For example, sometimes a user chooses a movie since
this movie is visually stunning, even though this movie
does not follow her historical watching histories. Therefore, the recommendation performance is limited by the
assumption that the hybrid preference is equally contributed by the collaborative and visual content based
models as shown in Eq.(2).

where wa is the visual embedding of user a from the user
visual matrix W. In fact, by summarizing the item visual
content from its related frames, the above equation is
similar to the VBPR model that uncovers the visual and
latent dimensions of users [He and McAuley, 2016].
With the implicit feedbacks of the rating matrix R,
Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) is widely used
for modeling the pair-wise based optimization function [Rendle et al., 2009]:
min LR =

M
X

X

σ(r̂ai − r̂aj ) + λ1 ||Θ1 ||2F ,

(3)

a=1 (i,j)∈D R
a

where Θ1 = [U, V, W] is the parameter set, and σ(x) is a
sigmoid function that transforms the output into range
(0, 1). The training data for user a is DaR = {(i, j)|i ∈
Ra ∧ j ∈ V − Ra }, where Ra denotes the set of implicit
positive feedbacks of a (i.e., rai = 1), and j ∈ V − Ra is an
unobserved feedback.
In key frame decision process, each key frame image
presentation of the current item is the foremost visual
impression to influence and persuade users. By borrowing the learned user visual representation matrix W from
the user-item interaction behavior (Eq.(3)), each user’s
visual preference for image k is predicted as:
ˆ
lak = waT (Pck ),

(4)

where wa is the visual latent embedding of user a learned
from user-item interaction behavior. Please note that,
the predicted ˆlak is only used in the test data for the key
frame recommendation without any training process.

Figure 2: The framework of our proposed JIFR model.

3.1

The Proposed JIFR Model

In this part, we illustrate our proposed J oint I tem and
key F rame Recommendation (JIFR) model, with the
architecture is show in Fig. 2. The key idea of JIFR
are two carefully designed attention networks for dealing
with the content indecisiveness and rating indecisiveness.
Specifically, to tackle the content indecisiveness, the visual content attention attentively learns the visual representation xi of each item. By taking the user-item predicted collaborative rating uTa vi , and the visual content

based rating waT xi , the rating attention module learns
to attentively combine these two kinds of predictions for
rating indecisiveness problem.
Visual Content Attention. For each multimedia item
i, the goal of the visual attention is to select the frames
from the frameset Si that are representative for item
visual representation. Therefore, instead of simply averaging all the related images’ visual embeddings as the
item visual dimension (Eq.(1)), we model the item visual
embedding as:
xi =

L
X

αij sji Pcj ,

(5)

j=1

where sji = 1 if image j belongs to the image element
of multimedia item i. αij denotes the attentive weight
of image j for multimedia item i. The larger the value
of αij , the more the current visual frame contributes to
the item visual content representation.
Since αij is not explicitly given, we model the attentive
weight as a three-layered attention neural network:
αij = w1 × f (W1 [vi , W0 cj ]),

(6)

where Θc = [w1 , W1 , W0 ] is the parameter set in this
three layered attention network, and f (x) is a non-linear
activation function. Specifically, W0 is a dimension reduction matrix that transforms the original visual embeddings (i.e., cj ∈ R4096 ) in a low dimensional visual
space.
Then, the final attentive upload history score αji is
obtained by normalizing the above attention scores as:
exp(αij )
.
k=1 ski exp(αak )

αij = PL

(7)

Hybrid Rating Attention. The hybrid rating attention
part models the importance of the collaborative preference and the content based preference for users’ final
decision making as:
r̂ai = βai1 uTa vi + βai2 waT xi ,

(8)

where the first part models the collaborative predicted
rating, and the second part denotes the user’s visual preference for items. βai1 and βai2 are the weights that balance these two effects for the user’s final preference.
As the underlying reasons for users to balance these
two aspects are unobservable, we model the hybrid rating
attention as:
βai1 = w2 × f (W2 [ua , vi ]),

βai2 = w2 × f (W2 [wa , xi ]).
(9)

Then, the final rating attention values βai1 and βai2
are also normalized as:
βai1 =

exp(βai1 )
= 1 − βai2 .
exp(βai1 ) + exp(βai2 )

(10)

Model Learning and Prediction. With the two
proposed attention networks, the optimization function
is the same as Eq. (3). To optimize the objective function, we implement the model in TensorFlow [Abadi et
al., 2016] to train model parameters with mini-batch

Adam, which is a stochastic gradient descent based optimization model with adaptive learning rates. For the
user-item interaction behavior, we could only observe the
positive feedbacks with huge missing ratings. In practice,
similar as many implicit feedback based optimization approaches, in each iteration, for each positive feedback, we
randomly sample 10 missing feedbacks as pseudo negative feedbacks in the training process [Chen et al., 2017a;
Wu et al., 2017]. As in each iteration, the pseudo negative feedbacks change with each missing record gives
very weak negative signal.
After the model learning process, the multimedia recommendation could be directly computed as in Eq.(8).
For each recommended item, as users and images are
also learned in the visual dimensions, the key frame recommendation could be predicted as in Eq.(4).

3.2

Connections to related models.

VBPR [He and McAuley, 2016] extends the classical collaborative filtering model with the additional visual dimensions of users and items (Eq.(4)).By assigning the
same weight for all of an items’ frames as shown in
Eq (1), and without any hybrid rating attention, our proposed item recommendation task degenerates to VBPR.
ACF [Chen et al., 2017a] is proposed to combine
each user’s historical rated items and the item components with attentive modeling on top the CF model of
SVD++ [Koren et al., 2009]. ACF did not explicitly
model users in the visual space, and could not be transferred for visual key frame recommendation.
VPOI [Wang et al., 2017] is proposed for POI recommendation by leveraging the uploaded images of users at
a particular POI. In VPOI, each item has a free embedding, and the relationship between images and POIs are
used as side information in the regularization terms.
KFR [Chen et al., 2017b] is the one of the first attempts for personalized key frame recommendation. As
KFR relied on users’ fine-grained interaction data with
frames, it fails when the user-frame interaction data is
not available. Besides, KFR is not designed for item
recommendation at the same time.
Attention Mechanism is also closely related to our
modeling techniques. Attention has been widely used
in recommendation, such as the importance of historical
items in CF models [He et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2017b],
the helpfulness of review for recommendation [Chen
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2017b; Cheng et al., 2018],
the strength of social influence for social recommendation [Sun et al., 2018]. In particular, ACCM is an attention based hybrid item recommendation model. It
also fuses users and items in the collaborative space and
the content space for recommendation [Shi et al., 2018].
However, the content representation of users and items
rely on the features of both users and items. As it is
sometimes hard to collect user profiles, this model could
not be applied when users do not have any features, including our proposed problem.
In summary, our proposed model differs greatly from
these related models as we perform both joint person-

CDL
BPR
VBPR(JIFR_NA)
VPOI
ACF
JIFR

0.5

HR@K

NDCG@K

0.4

CDL
BPR
VBPR(JIFR_NA)
VPOI
ACF
JIFR

0.35

0.30

0.3
0.25

0.2

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

Top-K

10

15

20

25

30

Top-K

(a) HR@K

(b) NDCG@K

Figure 3: Item recommendation performance (Better viewed in color).
0.09

Input

0.07
NDCG@K

HR@K

Model
RND
CDL
JIFR_NA
JIFR

0.06

2

3
Top-K

4

(a) HR@K

RND
CDL
JIFR_NA
JIFR

0.03

0.03
1

0.05

5

1

2

3
Top-K

4

5

(b) NDCG@K

BPR [Rendle et al., 2009]
CDL [Lei et al., 2016]
VBPR [He and McAuley, 2016]
VPOI [Wang et al., 2017]
ACF [Chen et al., 2017a]
JIFR NA
JIFR

Figure 4: Key frame recommendation performance.
alized item and key frame recommendation at the same
time. The application scenario has rarely been studied
before. From the technical perspective, we carefully design two levels of attentions for dealing with content indecisiveness and rating indecisiveness, which is tailored
to discern the visual profiles of users for joint item and
key frame recommendation.

4

Experiments

We conduct experiments on a real-world dataset. To
the best of our knowledge, there is no public available
datasets with fine-grained user behavior data for evaluating the key frame recommendation performance. To
this end, we crawl a large dataset from Douban 1 , which
is one of the most popular movie sharing websites in
China. We crawl this dataset as for each movie, this
platform allows users to show their preference to each
frame of this movie by clicking the “Like” button just
below each frame.
After data crawling, we pre-process the data to ensure
each user and each item have at least 5 rating records.
In data splitting process, we randomly select 70% usermovie ratings for training, 10% for validation and 20%
for test. The pruned dataset has 16,166 users, 12,811
movies, 379,767 training movie ratings, 98,425 test movie
ratings, and 4,760 test frame ratings. For each user-item
record in the test data, if the user has rated the images of
this multimedia item, the correlated user-image records
are used for evaluating the key frame recommendation
performance in the test data. Please note that, to make
the proposed model general to the multimedia recommendation scenarios, the fine-grained image ratings in
the training data is not used for model learning.
1

www.douban.com

Rating
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Image
×
√
√
√
√
√
√

Task
Item
Frame
Rec
Rec
√
×
√
√
√
×
√
×
√
×
√
√
√
√

Table 1: The characteristics of the models.

4.1

Overall Performance

We adopt two widely used evaluation metrics to measure the top-K ranking performance: the Hit Ratio (HR@K) and Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (NDCG@K) [He and McAuley, 2016; Sun et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2017a]. In our proposed JIFR model,
we choose the collaborative latent dimension size d1 and
the visual dimension size d2 in the set [16,32,64], and find
when d1 = d2 = 32 reaches the best performance. The
non-linear activation function f (x) in the attention networks is set as the ReLU function. Besides, the regularization parameter is set in range [0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 01],
and λ1 = 0.001 reaches the best performance.
For better illustration, we summarize the details of
the comparison models in Table 1, where the second and
third column shows the input data of each model, and
the last two columns show whether this model could be
used for item recommendation and key frame recommendation. The last two rows are our proposed models, with
JIFR NA is a simplified version of our proposed model
without any attention modeling.
Item Recommendation Performance. In the item
recommendation evaluation process, as the multimedia
item size is large, for each user, we randomly select 1000
unrated items as negative samples, and then mix them
with the positive feedbacks to select the top-K ranking
items. To avoid bias at each time, the process is repeated for 10 times and we report the average results.
Fig. 3 shows the results with different top-K values. In
this figure, some top-K results for CDL are not shown as
the performance is lower than the smallest range values
of the y-axis. This is because CDL is a visual content
based model without any collaborative filtering modeling, while the collaborative signals are very important for
enhancing recommendation performance. Please note

Figure 5: Case study of the key frame recommendation of Interstellar for a typical user a.
that, for item recommendation, our simplified model
JIFR NA degenerates to VBPR without any attentive
modeling. VPOI and VBPR improves over BPR by
leveraging the visual data. ACF further improves the
performance by learning the attentive weights in the
user’s history. Our proposed JIFR model achieves the
best performance by explicitly modeling users and items
in both the latent space and the visual space with two
attention networks. For the two metrics, the improvement of NDCG is larger than HR as NDCG considers
the ranking position of the hit items.
Key Frame Recommendation Performance. For
key frame recommendation, as the detailed user-image
information is not available, the models that relied on the
collaborative information fails, including BPR, VBPR,
KFR [Chen et al., 2017b]. We also show a simplified
RND baseline that randomly selects a frame from the
movie frames for evaluation. In the evaluation process,
all the related frames of this movie is used as the candidate key frames. Please note that, the ranking list size
K for key frame recommendation is very small as we
could only recommend one key frame of each multimedia item, while the item recommendation list could be
larger. As observed in Fig 4, all models improve over
RND, showing the effectiveness of modeling user visual
profile. Among all models, our proposed JIFR model
shows the best performance, followed by the simplified
JIFR NA model. This clearly shows the effectiveness of
discerning the visual profiles and the collaborative interests of users with attentive modeling techniques.
Visual
Att
AVG
AVG
ATT
ATT

Rating
Att
AVG
ATT
AVG
ATT

Item Rec@15
HR
NDCG
/
/
2.25%
2.42%
4.02%
4.44%
5.49%
5.94%

Frame
HR
/
4.20%
8.07%
9.70%

Rec@3
NDCG
/
4.35%
8.62%
10.53%

these two attention networks, the two recommendation
tasks achieve the best performance.
Frame Recommendation Case Study. Fig 5
shows the a case study of the recommended frames for
user a with the movie Interstellar. It is regarded as a
sci-fi that describes a team explorers travel through a
wormhole in space to ensure humanity’s survival. In the
meantime, the love between the leading actor, and his
daughter also touches the audiences. For ease of understanding, we list the training data of this user in the
last column, with each movie is represented with an official poster. In the training data, the liked movies contain both sci-fi and love categories. Our proposed JIFR
model could correctly recommend the key frame, which
is different from the official poster of this movie. However, the remaining models fail. We guess a possible
reason is that, as shown in the four column, most frames
of this movie are correlated to sci-fi. As the comparison models could not distinguish the important of these
frames, the love related visual frame is overwhelmed by
the sci-fi visual frames. Our model tackles this problem
by learning the attentive frame weights for item visual
representation, and user visual representation from her
historical movies.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we studied the general problem of personalized multimedia item and key frame recommendation in the absence of fine-grained user behavior. We
proposed a JIFR model to project both users and items
into a latent collaborative space and a visual space. Two
attention networks are designed to tackle the content indecisiveness and rating indecisiveness for better discerning the visual profiles of users. Finally, extensive experimental results on a real-world dataset clearly showed the
effectiveness of our proposed model for the two recommendation tasks.

Table 2: Improvement of attention modeling.

Acknowledgments
4.2

Detailed Model Analysis

Attention Analysis. Table 2 shows the performance
improvement of different attention networks compared
to the average setting, i.e., αji = PC 1 s for content
k=1 ki
attention modeling, and βai1 = βai2 for rating fusion.
The ranking list value K is set as K = 15 for item recommendation and K = 3 for key frame recommendation.
As can be observed from this table, both attention techniques improve the performance of the two recommendation tasks. On average, the visual attention improvement is larger than the rating attention. By combining

This work was supported in part by grants from
the National Natural Science Foundation of China(
Grant No. 61725203, 61722204, 61602147, 61732008,
61632007), the Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation(Grant No. 1708085QF155), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities(Grant
No. JZ2018HGTB0230).

References
[Abadi et al., 2016] Martı́n Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean,

Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving,
Michael Isard, et al. Tensorflow: a system for largescale machine learning. In OSDI, volume 16, pages
265–283, 2016.
[Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005] Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. Toward the next generation of recommender systems: A survey of the stateof-the-art and possible extensions. TKDE, 17(6):734–
749, 2005.
[Chen et al., 2017a] Jingyuan Chen, Hanwang Zhang,
Xiangnan He, Liqiang Nie, Wei Liu, and Tat-Seng
Chua. Attentive collaborative filtering: Multimedia
recommendation with item-and component-level attention. In SIGIR, pages 335–344, 2017.
[Chen et al., 2017b] Xu Chen,
Yongfeng Zhang,
Qingyao Ai, Hongteng Xu, Junchi Yan, and Zheng
Qin. Personalized key frame recommendation. In
SIGIR, pages 315–324, 2017.
[Chen et al., 2018] Chong Chen, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu,
and Shaoping Ma. Neural attentional rating regression
with review-level explanations. In WWW, pages 1583–
1592, 2018.
[Chen et al., 2019] Lei Chen, Le Wu, Zhenzhen Hu, and
Meng Wang. Quality-aware unpaired image-to-image
translation. TMM, 2019.
[Cheng et al., 2018] Zhiyong Cheng, Ying Ding, Xiangnan He, Lei Zhu, Xuemeng Song, and Mohan S
Kankanhalli. Aˆ 3ncf: An adaptive aspect attention
model for rating prediction. In IJCAI, pages 3748–
3754, 2018.
[Covington et al., 2016] Paul Covington, Jay Adams,
and Emre Sargin. Deep neural networks for youtube
recommendations. In Recsys, pages 191–198, 2016.
[He and McAuley, 2016] Ruining He and Julian
McAuley. Vbpr: Visual bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In AAAI, pages 144–150,
2016.
[He et al., 2018] Xiangnan He, Zhenkui He, Jingkuan
Song, Zhenguang Liu, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Tat-Seng
Chua. Nais: Neural attentive item similarity model
for recommendation. TKDE, 2018.
[Hu et al., 2018] Liang Hu, Songlei Jian, Longbing Cao,
and Qingkui Chen. Interpretable recommendation via
attraction modeling: Learning multilevel attractiveness over multimodal movie contents. In IJCAI, pages
3400–3406, 2018.
[Koren et al., 2009] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and
Chris Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for
recommender systems. Computer, (8):30–37, 2009.
[Lee et al., 2011] Yong Jae Lee, Jaechul Kim, and Kristen Grauman. Key-segments for video object segmentation. In CVPR, pages 1995–2002, 2011.
[Lei et al., 2016] Chenyi Lei, Dong Liu, Weiping Li,
Zheng-Jun Zha, and Houqiang Li. Comparative deep

learning of hybrid representations for image recommendations. In CVPR, pages 2545–2553, 2016.
[Matz et al., 2017] Sandra C Matz, Michal Kosinski,
Gideon Nave, and David J Stillwell. Psychological
targeting as an effective approach to digital mass persuasion. PNAS, 114(48):12714–12719, 2017.
[Mundur et al., 2006] Padmavathi Mundur, Yong Rao,
and Yelena Yesha. Keyframe-based video summarization using delaunay clustering. International Journal
on Digital Libraries, 6(2):219–232, 2006.
[Rendle et al., 2009] Steffen Rendle, Christoph Freudenthaler, Zeno Gantner, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. Bpr:
Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback.
In UAI, pages 452–461, 2009.
[Shi et al., 2018] Shaoyun Shi, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu,
and Shaoping Ma. Attention-based adaptive model
to unify warm and cold starts recommendation. In
CIKM, pages 127–136, 2018.
[Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015] Karen Simonyan and
Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition. In ICLR, 2015.
[Stelzner, 2018] Michael Stelzner. 2018 social media
marketing industry report. Social Media Examiner,
pages 1–44, 2018.
[Sun et al., 2018] Peijie Sun, Le Wu, and Meng Wang.
Attentive recurrent social recommendation. In SIGIR,
pages 185–194, 2018.
[Wan et al., 2014] Ji Wan, Dayong Wang, Steven
Chu Hong Hoi, Pengcheng Wu, Jianke Zhu, Yongdong
Zhang, and Jintao Li. Deep learning for content-based
image retrieval: A comprehensive study. In MM, pages
157–166, 2014.
[Wang et al., 2017] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang
Tang, Kai Shu, Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu.
What your images reveal: Exploiting visual contents for point-of-interest recommendation. In WWW,
pages 391–400, 2017.
[Wu et al., 2017] Le Wu, Yong Ge, Qi Liu, Enhong
Chen, Richang Hong, Junping Du, and Meng Wang.
Modeling the evolution of users preferences and social
links in social networking services. TKDE, 29(6):1240–
1253, 2017.
[Wu et al., 2019] Le Wu, Lei Chen, Richang Hong, Yanjie Fu, Xing Xie, and Meng Wang. A hierarchical attention model for social contextual image recommendation. TKDE, 2019.
[Yin et al., 2018] Yu Yin, Zhenya Huang, Enhong Chen,
Qi Liu, Fuzheng Zhang, Xing Xie, and Guoping
Hu. Transcribing content from structural images with
spotlight mechanism. In SIGKDD, pages 2643–2652,
2018.
[Zhang et al., 2013] Dong Zhang, Omar Javed, and
Mubarak Shah. Video object segmentation through
spatially accurate and temporally dense extraction of

primary object regions. In CVPR, pages 628–635,
2013.
[Zhang et al., 2018] Kun Zhang, Guangyi Lv, Le Wu,
Enhong Chen, Qi Liu, Han Wu, and Fangzhao Wu.
Image-enhanced multi-level sentence representation
net for natural language inference. In ICDM, pages
747–756, 2018.

