A First-Year Research Experience: The Freshman Project in
Physics at Loyola University Chicago
Jonathan Bougie,∗ Asim Gangopadhyaya,† Sherita

arXiv:1906.03302v3 [physics.ed-ph] 2 Jul 2020

Moses,‡ Robert D. Polak,§ and Gordon P. Ramsey¶
Department of Physics, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60660, U.S.A.
Weronika Walkosz∗∗
Current affiliation: Lake Forest College, Lake Forest, IL, 60045, U.S.A.
(Dated: June 21, 2020)

Abstract
Undergraduate research has become an essential mode of engaging and retaining students in
physics. At Loyola University Chicago, first-year physics students have been participating in the
Freshman Projects program for over twenty years, which has coincided with a period of significant
growth for our department. In this paper, we describe how the Freshman Projects program has
played an important role in advancing undergraduate research at Loyola and the profound impact
it has made on our program. We conclude with suggestions for adoption of similar programs at
other institutions.

1

I.

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

In recent decades, faculty members at many colleges and universities have worked to involve undergraduates in research in order to provide them with a deeper and more engaged
learning experience. As college-bound students and their families visit university campuses,
they often ask whether they would be able to participate in meaningful research projects.
Faculty members have responded by making their research more accessible to undergraduates, and increasing numbers of universities are now advertising their record in providing
such opportunities to their undergraduate students. Federal government programs such as
the National Science Foundation-sponsored Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
and private foundations such as the Howard Hughes Medical Institute have also stepped in
by providing resources.1
Studies have shown that great benefits follow from undergraduate research experiences.
The undergraduate research opportunity is a powerful tool that enhances student engagement, incites curiosity, and emboldens professional identification.2 The 2003 Strategic Programs for Innovations in Undergraduate Physics (SPIN-UP) report from the National Task
Force on Undergraduate Physics (NTFUP) identified undergraduate research, faculty mentorship, and a high level of interaction among faculty and students as key elements of
successful departments.3 More recently, the final report of the Joint Task Force on Undergraduate Physics Programs (J-TUPP) includes undergraduate research as an important
element in case studies of programs “which have implemented significant activities to prepare their physics students for diverse careers.”4 Physics graduates report the necessity of
skills such as teamwork, technical writing, oral communication, programming, and the application of physics to practical problems and leadership in managing projects; all of which
can be developed within the context of research experience.5
While recognition of the importance of undergraduate research experiences has become
commonplace, there remain outstanding questions, such as how to best make research accessible to undergraduates, what exactly constitutes undergraduate research, and when in
their academic career students should begin research.6 For example, while many opportunities such as REU experiences and internships exist mostly for upper-division physics
undergraduates, mentoring and student engagement is an important part of attracting and
retaining students in their early years in the major, where substantial erosion in the major
2

can happen.3,4
In this manuscript, we discuss the Freshman Projects (FP) program in the Physics Department at Loyola University Chicago (LUC), which is designed to engage all majors in
the department in research starting from their first year in our program. This program has
been running continuously since the 1995-1996 academic year. In the following sections,
we describe FP at LUC, discuss its role in the development of our department, discuss the
perspectives of various faculty members involved in its implementation, and make some
suggestions as to how similar initiatives could be developed at other institutions.

II.

HISTORY AND CURRENT STATUS OF THE PROGRAM

In the Spring 1996 semester, the first cohort of nine freshmen participated in an ad hoc
research initiative that later gave rise to the FP program. The instructor for the introductory
course for physics majors (AG - one of the authors of this manuscript) asked several of his
colleagues to serve as mentors to provide engaged and deep learning experiences beyond
what could be normally covered in the classroom.
Four groups were formed, and each group of students worked on a project with their
respective mentor during that semester. The four projects that students and their mentors
chose to investigate were: the Inverse Feynman Sprinkler,7 characteristics of high-friction
surfaces, a study of a rolling sphere on a curved surface, and the dynamics of motion in
vertical circles. After designing and performing the experiments, students presented their
results to the department. Students and faculty considered the effort to be a great success.
Given this enthusiastic reception, the department decided to continue these projects with
each subsequent cohort of first-year majors. The FP program was initially integrated into
the second-semester introductory physics lab for majors (PHYS 126L). In 2008, FP became
a separate one-credit course (PHYS 126F). This course is currently required for all students
seeking a B.S. in Physics or any of the interdisciplinary majors that are jointly offered by the
Physics Department. These interdisciplinary majors include the B.S. in Biophysics, B. S. in
Physics with Computer Science, and the B.S. in Theoretical Physics/Applied Mathematics.
We henceforth refer to the complete list of majors who are required to take this course as
“majors in the department” or with similar nomenclature.
Currently, students take FP during the Spring Semester of their first year as a physics
3

major. They generally take this course concurrently with General Physics II (PHYS 126)
and the accompanying Laboratory course (PHYS 126L). Each participating faculty member
is assigned a section of PHYS 126F, with a maximum enrollment of 3-5 students. Each group
must choose a topic of research in consultation with their mentor. Some faculty mentors
choose a project or key area of interest and encourage students who share that interest to
work with them, while others develop the project ideas through guided discussion with their
students.8
Once the Spring Semester begins, the faculty mentor and their students agree on a project
to explore and write a simple proposal outlining their plans. Proposals vary in length but
are generally at least two or three pages. Each proposal should include a statement of the
problem and its motivation, a brief background literature review including key terms and
concepts, a list of materials needed to complete the project, and an accompanying budget
(current maximum is $200 per group, paid for by lab fees). In addition, it needs to outline
the proposed work itself with an estimated timeline to accomplish the project.
Each group must then implement the proposed project, which must include designing
and building an experiment, carrying out related theoretical calculations, and collecting and
analyzing data. As a regular course, each group is scheduled to meet with their mentor once
a week for two hours throughout the semester, with additional work performed between
meetings. Groups have generally been required to keep a scientific notebook to record their
activities throughout the semester.
At the end of the semester, the department sponsors a seminar where each group presents
their work, generally as a 12-minute presentation followed by a 3-minute question-and-answer
period. The Physics faculty, other students, and guests attend this event and the groups
have a chance to answer questions and discuss their work. Over the years, final reporting
has at times incorporated additional written and/or poster presentation components, but
the oral seminar presentation has always been an important element. This format gives
students the experience of publicly presenting their work, allows students to see the work
of the their classmates, and models the format of typical presentations given at professional
conferences. We have found it to be a key part of the project.
While the projects are appropriate for first-year physics students and do not always
involve cutting edge research, the course structure is designed to model several aspects of
scientific research: from proposing a project, to carrying out the elements of the proposal,
4

to presenting the results to a wider audience. Since these projects are open-ended and are
not to be found in any handbook, there is always the “thrill” of discovery in the air.

III.
A.

BENEFITS TO STUDENTS AND THE DEPARTMENT
Project-based Learning

The benefits of research engagement are vast both for students and research mentors,
impacting not only their cognitive and intellectual growth but also leading to professional
advancement.9 While research engagement for undergraduates is generally optional and typically involves upper-level students, FP at Loyola is mandatory and involves students in their
first year of college.
This experience integrates various skill sets in investigating an applied problem just beyond the level of the freshman courses. Learning outcomes for the course include deepening
students’ understanding of introductory physics concepts and familiarizing students with
research methods employed in the field.
Whether the topic is chosen by the mentor or suggested by a student, guiding the group
in choosing a suitable topic is an important part of the faculty mentor’s role and can help
ensure a successful learning experience for students. The topic should be challenging enough
that it will keep students engaged for a semester while also being sufficiently tractable that
first-year students can make significant progress and make a meaningful presentation. One
possible guiding principle is to make projects somewhat scalable, with goals of varying
difficulty levels. That way, if unexpected challenges arrive, some progress will still have
been made, while there is room to expand the project if everything goes smoothly, possibly
even beyond the FP.
One inherent part of research is dealing with unexpected results, and projects rarely
work perfectly as intended at the first try. When a design initially fails or when experimental
results do not match theory, students learn to troubleshoot and check their assumptions. We
have learned that having a sense of ownership of a project helps to actively engage students,
and they frequently challenge themselves and take significant initiative in developing and
furthering their projects. Faculty judgment is important in determining when to step back
and let students wrestle with a problem, when to teach them a new concept or method, and
5

when to guide them in a new direction. Students learn about scientific ethics; if attempts
to fix problems fail, data should not be altered to fit results. Instead, the end result of the
research may be to find explanations for the failure and to learn lessons for the future.
These projects help students develop a variety of skills. Depending on the specific project,
these can include various experimental techniques and the use of the machine shop. Students
may learn programming skills or mathematical methods that may exceed what they would
normally learn in their first year. Learning these skills in conjunction with a specific project
emphasizes the application of this material.
Regardless of the specifics, the experience of approaching an open-ended problem and
developing the knowledge and tools to tackle that problem prepares students for projectbased learning in their advanced laboratory classes. Faculty in upper-level courses can
expect that our majors know how to delve into problems in more depth than end-of-chapter
problems they find in their textbook and how to explore a question when the answer may
not be known. This experience can also help students develop an interest in pursuing future
research opportunities.
By working together as a group during the semester, students learn important teamwork
and project management skills and can form close bonds with their teammates and mentor.
Such bonds have been important in integrating students into our department; helping to
attract and retain students. By writing project proposals and presenting their final results,
students learn how to present scientific results both in oral and written forms. In these ways,
FP fulfills many of the goals established by the J-TUPP report for preparing students for
the contemporary job market.4
Specific assessment rubrics have varied over time and by faculty member. In line with the
course goals, students are expected to participate actively throughout the semester, work
collaboratively as a part of the team, propose and carry out a well-designed investigation
into a chosen topic, and to clearly and professionally present their work to the class. With
appropriate guidance, engaged students can deepen their understanding of physics and learn
important research methods and approaches regardless of whether all goes as expected and
they confirm their initial hypothesis or not. Therefore, our consistent experience is that
most groups successfully achieve the desired outcomes of the course.
With the longevity of our program, we now have a former student who returned to Loyola
as a faculty member (WW- one of the authors of this manuscript) and who is now at Lake
6

Forest College. She has now seen the transformative aspect of the FP from the perspective
of a mentor. Here WW describes her experience:
VIGNETTE: Dr. Weronika Walkosz
As someone who participated in FP as both a student and faculty member, I would
like to outline some of the advantages of Loyola’s FP program on learning, attitude, and
professional development of freshman students and their mentors.
First, my early involvement in research as a freshman student helped me become easily
integrated into Loyola’s Physics community. By working closely with other freshmen and a
mentor on a common project, I was able to form professional relationships that helped me
navigate a demanding physics curriculum. Indeed, my FP partner and I continued learning
from each other, preparing for exams and solving homework problems together. The project
also provided me with an ongoing one-on-one mentorship with a physics faculty member
who could advise me better on my career options. The project also helped me develop
good communication and presentation skills and made me more confident to ask questions
in class.
Second, the early exposure to research taught me personal responsibility and persistence
in solving difficult and often unexplored problems, prepared me for advanced coursework,
and trained me on how deal with uncertainty. I learned to balance my course work with
my research activities, collaboration with independence, factual knowledge with freedom of
thought and discovery. The project helped me realize that even simple phenomena have
many nuances, and their exploration and discovery is not always easy or straightforward.
Third, the project was instrumental in clarifying and preparing me for a career in science.
Through my participation in FP, I have learned how to think, plan, and design as a scientist.
After completing the FP in my first year of college I was able to continue the work in the
following year and apply for scholarships to fund it. A longer commitment to my research
project, in turn, prepared me better for graduate school. The possibility of continuing the
work after the freshman year is one of the most important features of the FP at Loyola that
can lead to peer-reviewed publications, scholarships, participation in national conferences,
or simply help in post-graduation plans.
As a faculty member supervising a project, I was able to see my students participate in the
benefits of project-based learning in a way that paralleled my own experience as a student.
The project allowed the students to focus on an open-ended question understanding and
7

solving of which required exploration, analysis, creativity, communication and collaboration.
It challenged them to take ownership of their own learning, while inspiring and motivating
each other. It also showed them that research requires patience, persistence, and good
management skills.

B.

Ongoing Research and Dissemination

The seminar concluding the semester gives students an experience developing presentation
skills and communicating scientific ideas. In addition, many projects initiated as FP are
presented at the local chapter of the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) or
other symposia. In 2005, our projects were featured in the Chicago Tribune.10
Some FP have blossomed into more advanced research projects and have been presented
at regional, national, and international conferences. Some have also resulted in publications
with students as co-authors, particularly in journals such as Physics Teacher and American
Journal of Physics.
To give a sense of the breadth of topics covered in Freshman Projects, as well as the
potential for some projects to develop beyond the initial investigation, we list here some
recent publications that began as FP, each with student authors or co-authors:
1. A series of FP groups has worked with author GR to study properties of musical
instruments such as instrument shape, size, and method of excitation, and to correlate
these to acoustical properties using tools such as frequency analysis and high-speed
photography. These projects have led to a series of presentations and publications.11–14
2. A group working with author AG conducted a study of magnetic damping by using
a two-pulley system to conduct a controlled drop of a neodymium magnet through
a copper pipe. By using smart pulleys, they recorded the position, velocity, and
acceleration of the magnet as it passed through the pipe and found its terminal velocity
as determined by magnetic damping. Following the FP, they were able to conduct an
analytical study resulting in an article in American Journal of Physics.15
3. Author RP has conducted an ongoing series of FP with students regarding experiments
in optics, discussed in more detail in the vignette later in this section.16–19 He also
worked with a group to use an iPhone app to measure sound frequencies produced by
8

a guitar string; they tested Young’s modulus by measuring the change in string length
created by the gearing of the tuning pegs.20
4. Author SM worked with a group of students who were interested in her field of nanobiophotonics. She worked with her students to design a project to give them experience
using research techniques and instruments used in this field to reduce and study gold
nanoparticles and their effect on Escherichia coli bacteria.21 This project is discussed
further in the vignette in Sec. III C.
It is important to recognize that many students who become excited about their research
in the freshman year continue research through later years, and not always in the same area
as the first year. Therefore, the FP program has encouraged a culture of undergraduate
research for students and faculty in our department that goes beyond publications directly
related to FP.
As one example, several groups of students have worked under the supervision of RP (a
faculty member and one of the authors of this manuscript) on a series of optics projects
with the idea of developing low-cost optics experiments and demonstrations with classroom
application. These groups have presented their results at various professional meetings and
have led to several journal publications. Below, RP describes how his work with students
got started:
VIGNETTE: Dr. Robert Polak
We initially developed a project to create a low-cost student spectrometer and a demonstration of image formation using LEDs and a cylindrical lens. We built the spectrometer
using PVC tubing, dowels, a black drape, a protractor, and a diffraction grating. With these
low-cost materials, we were able to build a spectrometer that could measure the angular location of the zeroth and first-order fringes of a colored LED and used it to calculate the
wavelength of that LED, yielding a result within 5 nm of the accepted value. We also built a
low-cost light source using LEDs, resistors, and a 9-V battery. We used a white panel board
to follow the path of the light and to mark locations of the object, lens and image. This
setup can be used to measure magnification and confirm both the lensmaker and thin-lens
equation.
We presented this project at a local AAPT meeting where it was suggested that we
should attempt to publish it. Working with the students over the summer, we completed
9

a manuscript that was accepted for publication in The Physics Teacher.16 We developed
more experiments and demonstrations over the next two years, starting with understanding
easily observable properties of waves using ripple tanks such as interference and diffraction
and then showing how to demonstrate interference and diffraction of sound and light using
readily available materials.17 This has continued to be a source of inspiration for FP as the
physics is easily accessible for first-year Physics Majors and the development of low-cost
instructional tools meets social justice goals of Loyola University Chicago.
Individual students involved in these projects have often found a path in their academic
career. In one case, a transfer student demonstrated particularly strong experimental skills
in creating these new experiments. She continued to work on the project for the next year,
guiding some work to publication. Based on her strong experimental skills, she earned
the opportunity to participate in an REU experience and then completed her senior year
working with an experimental scientist at Argonne National Laboratory, providing her the
skills needed to pursue graduate studies in optics.

C.

Integration of Faculty Into the Department

In addition to its benefits to students, FP can have benefits for faculty in the department. As well as helping faculty members to find students to work with in their research,
working closely with students and developing collaborative projects has important benefits
in integrating new faculty into the department.
FP can initiate collaboration between faculty members as well, giving faculty opportunities to discuss mentoring strategies and share experiences working with students. Before
they mentor their first project, new faculty should have had the opportunity to hear about
some of the previous projects and to ask questions of other faculty members. Faculty can
be encouraged to discuss their projects with each other, to share resources, and to help each
other when needed. Department meetings can be used to discuss preparation for the project
and to check-in on its progress, and FP can be useful in framing discussions of pedagogy
and mentoring. All faculty in the department should be invited to the seminar at the end
of the Spring semester. Therefore, even if a faculty member is not mentoring a project in a
given year, they can be included in a shared experience making the FP a part of the life of
the department.
10

As one example of the benefits of FP for integrating faculty into the department, SM
(one of the authors of this manuscript) discusses her experience teaching FP in her second
year in the department:
VIGNETTE: Dr. Sherita Moses
Students chose to enroll in my section based on their interest in my area of research
and submitted an interdisciplinary proposal involving nanobiophotonics. The initial class
discussed what would be required to complete the research, including the collaborative
interdisciplinary effort that would be required. My goal was to create hands-on experiences
by exposing my group to different laboratories to train on state-of-the-art instruments of
science. This provided me the opportunity to interact with other scientists in the academic,
as well as the professional community. The resulting research was published,21 and those
undergraduate students are now active members in the Research Gate community.
In my opinion, the benefits of teaching FP included increased student involvement in my
area of research and building student-faculty interactions. This teaching experience resulted
in an addition to my publication portfolio. Finally, what I found to be particularly rewarding were the new relationships formed with other academics and scientists across different
disciplines, forging relationships that will foster future opportunities for original research.
FP is an ideal course to use to develop your faculty members on all tiers. Understanding
your vision, believing in life-long growth, establishing a great network, taking the initiative,
and at all times being a person of integrity exhibit some of the fundamentals of faculty
development.22 Participating in this project at Loyola University Chicago provided these
fundamentals for me.

D.

Impact of FP on a growing department

The project has had a very positive impact on our program since its inception. It has
played a key role in developing and cohering a rapidly growing department as it has coincided
with a period of strong growth. As Table I shows, our department has had a great success
in attracting and retaining growing numbers of students since the introduction of FP. The
graduating class of 1998 was the first class that participated in FP, and there has been a
large increase in the number of graduates since then.
11

TABLE I. Number of graduates from the LUC Physics Department as averaged over seven separate
four-year periods.23 Each year listed indicates the academic year ending in that year; for example,
“1991” indicates AY 1990-1991.
Year range

Average number of grads per
academic year

1991-1994

5.0

1995-1998

5.3

1999-2002

7.5

2003-2006

9.0

2007-2010

23.8

2011-2014

27.8

2015-2018

30.3

This project was an important part of a series of curricular changes that has led to the
revitalization of the department. It has played a role in building a familial atmosphere in
a department with students occupying a central place in the unit at an important stage
in their careers. As the department grew, attention was needed to keep faculty members
accessible to students. Otherwise, students who once could expect relatively individualized
attention from their freshman sequence instructors could easily get lost. Through their FP
mentor, students have another go-to-person to discuss their concerns or to just chat about
their future. They get the opportunity to work closely with a mentor and their peers, and
these experiences can help them to identify closely with the department and to feel welcomed
and integrated into the activity of the department.

IV.
A.

SUGGESTIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SIMILAR PROGRAMS
Faculty Involvement

In the FP course, students and faculty members spend a large amount of time working
together to complete their projects within a semester. Faculty mentoring plays an important
role in guiding students through the project. To ensure success, chosen projects should be
sufficiently complex yet not overwhelming, with well-established goals that can and should
12

be met through collaboration. The role of a mentor is crucial in helping students individually understand the problem and work together to solve it. Although all students should
be actively involved in each aspect of the project, facilitating different students to lead
different aspects of the project gives students a chance to develop collaborative leadership
skills. Therefore, the most important key to success of the program is the buy-in by faculty
members.
The benefits of the program to the faculty and to the department can help ensure faculty
commitment. Faculty can learn more about the physics major at an early stage in their
departmental involvement. Students can be attracted to the department by seeing the
exciting activity of other students and introducing students to research early in their careers
can increase student retention. The potential benefits for the department are therefore
significant.
At Loyola, there was initially no formal credit given to faculty mentors, and yet faculty
involvement was strong due to their appreciation for the potential benefits of the course for
the students and the department. This, however, was not an ideal situation as faculty took
on additional responsibilities for the project without receiving credit; equally importantly,
the transcript of the students did not show that they had carried out research with their
advisors during their freshman year. Therefore, additional incentive can be provided for
faculty if their effort on the project can be counted in some manner towards their teaching
responsibilities, and sometimes to their scholarship. At Loyola, we did this in 2008 by
making FP a separate one-credit course.

B.

Physical Resources

The physical resources required to start a similar program are small. Minimum necessary
resources include: work space (one table per group) and access to lab equipment and computing facilities (which may be as simple as standard laptop computers). While material
supplies needed for building many experimental setups can be acquired at home improvement stores at a reasonable cost, some additional funds may be required. We started the
projects at Loyola with an average budget of $50 per group for supplies, which has been
gradually increased to its current rate of $200 per group. At Loyola, we have been able to
provide this funding by instituting lab fees for lab-based courses in Physics, including FP.
13

The collection of lab fees has occasionally also allowed us to purchase equipment that can be
shared in various FP as well as advanced undergraduate projects. Other resources available
to the department can also be usefully integrated into the FP course. As an example, we
have a machine shop at Loyola that is staffed by a skilled part-time employee. This machinist provides a safety class to FP students and trains them in the use of several tools. The
benefits in attracting and retaining students may also justify the allocation of additional
institutional resources to the department.

C.

Integration Into Curriculum

When considering such a program, it is important to assess its desired role in the curriculum and how to introduce this new element successfully. One possibility is to start it as
a part of the second semester of the introductory physics lecture or the corresponding lab
course, as we did at Loyola. This allows the program to get off the ground with a relatively
minor commitment. Assigning a faculty FP coordinator (which could be the instructor of
the introductory physics class or lab) can help to unify activity across the various groups. If
possible, it may be helpful to start the project as an innovative course, i.e., develop a set of
learning objectives, specific goals, time commitments, grading rubrics and responsibilities for
students and faculty members before implementing the program, as well as an appropriate
assessment plan for future improvements.
It is generally useful to consider the FP experience as a simple model of physics research,
beginning with a proposal that includes requirements for theoretical, experimental and construction components. As the project progresses, students should document their progress
electronically and/or in a lab notebook. Finally, a seminar or poster session to complete the
semester gives students experience in scientific presentation.
To maximize the impact of the activity, groups can be encouraged to present their work
outside the department, such as at a local AAPT meeting, an undergraduate research symposium or a Society of Physics Students regional or national meeting. Depending on the
nature of the project, faculty members and their research groups could consider publication
in an undergraduate research journal, or journals such as The Physics Teacher, American
Journal of Physics, or journals devoted to research on specific areas.
The benefits of the program may trickle in slowly, hence some level of patience is war14

ranted. The faculty should meet as a whole to periodically assess progress and discuss the
projects based on experience and student feedback. There should be a review of the projects
at the end of the semester to decide on any necessary changes for future years. As a part
of their formative first year at LUC that informed their overall experience in our department, we have gotten significant feedback from students regarding FP through Senior exit
interviews as they prepare for graduation and reflect on their experience at Loyola.
Naturally, implementation of these suggestions may need to be modified based on the
available faculty members in a department, its student body, and the resources available.
However, even a subset of these elements, combined with a department’s ideas for their
own project development, could provide an excellent FP experience for a cohort of physics
majors.

V.

CONCLUSIONS

The Freshman Project in Physics has played an important role at Loyola University
Chicago as the department has transformed from a relatively small major to a department
with a number of annual graduates frequently among the top ten undergraduate-only Physics
programs in the country.24 In doing so, it has helped to facilitate interaction between faculty
and students, and has taught students valuable skills that will prepare them for careers in
the Twenty-First Century. We believe that this program can provide a useful model for
incorporating project-based learning at early stages in students’ careers into the curriculum
at other institutions.

VI.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank all of the LUC Physics faculty who have contributed
to the development of the FP program. We would also like to thank Dr. Maria Udo
for discussion during the preliminary stages of this manuscript, and Mr. Thomas Ruubel,
whose excellent record keeping provided some data related to Table I. We also thank the
anonymous reviewers, whose useful questions and suggestions contributed to the revision
15

process.

∗

jbougie@luc.edu

†

agangop@luc.edu

‡

smoses2@ggc.edu

§

rpolak@luc.edu

¶

gramsey@luc.edu

∗∗
1

vwalkosz@lakeforest.edu
L. Guterman, “What good is undergraduate research, anyway?” Chron. Higher Educ., 53 (50),
A12 (2007).

2

M. Graham, J. Frederick, A. Byars-Winston, A. Hunter, and J. Handelsman, “Increasing persistence of college students in STEM,” Science, 341 (6153), 1455–1456 (2013).

3

R.

C.

grams

Hilborn,
for

R.

Innovations

H.
in

Howes,

and

Undergraduate

K.
Physics:

S.

Krane,

“Strategic

Project

report,”

Pro(2003),

<https://www.aapt.org/Programs/projects/spinup/upload/SPIN-UP-Final-Report.pdf>.
4

P. Heron and L. McNeil, “Phys 21:

Preparing physics students for 21st-century ca-

reers. A report by the Joint Task Force on Undergraduate Physics Programs,” (2016).
<https://www.compadre.org/JTUPP/docs/J-Tupp_Report.pdf>
5

L. McNeil and P. Heron, “Preparing physics students for 21st-century careers,” Phys. Today,
70 (11), 38–43 (2017).

6

A. Gangopadhyaya, “Undergraduate research - what is it?” Proc. World Conf. Phys. Educ.
2012 (Ankara, Turkey, 2014), pp. 753–762.

7

R. Feynman, “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!”: Adventures of a Curious Character (Norton, NY, 1985), pp. 63–65.

8

For more information about the current status of the Freshman Project Program, please see the
department website, <https://www.luc.edu/physics/freshman_project.shtml>.

9

J. M. Osborn and K. K. Karukstis, “The benefits of undergraduate research, scholarship, and
creative activity,” in Broadening Participation in Undergraduate Research: Fostering Excellence
and Enhancing the Impact (Council on Undergraduate Research, Washington, D.C., 2009), pp.
41–53.

16

10

S.

Kapos,

“More

than

just

an

experiment,”

Chicago

Tribune

(2005),<https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-2005-02-09-0502090069-story.html>.
11

G. Ramsey, C. Banaszak, and J. Wiseman, “The harmonica as a blues instrument,” Proc. Mtgs.
Acoust., 18, 035003 (2012).

12

J. Wiseman, C. Banaszak, and G. Ramsey, “The harmonica as a blues instrument: Part II,”J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., 132 (3), 1990 (2012).

13

K. Pomian, “A cross correlation of stringed instruments,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 135 (4), 2184–
2184 (2014).

14

G. P. Ramsey and K. Pomian, “Correlating properties of stringed instruments,” Proc. Mtgs.
Acoust., 21 (1), 035006 (2014).

15

B. Irvine, M. Kemnetz, A. Gangopahdhyaya, and T. Ruubel, “Magnet traveling through a
conducting pipe: A variation on the analytical approach,” Am. J. Phys., 82, 273–279 (2014).

16

R. Polak, A. J. Cua, D. J. Perez, M. Q. Robertson, J. A. Stuck, and J. M. Thomas, “Low-cost
student experiments in optics,” Phys. Teach., 52 (7), 442–443 (2014).

17

R. D. Polak, N. Fudala, J. T. Rothchild, S. E. Weiss, and M. Zelek, “Easily accessible experiments demonstrating interference,” Phys. Teach., 54 (2), 120–121 (2016).

18

R. D. Polak, A. Kumar, and M. Schmidt, “A practical lesson in polarization optics: Creating a
3D image using a liquid crystal cell,” Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 646 (1), 132–141 (2017).

19

R. D. Polak, A. R. V. Davenport, A. Fischer, and J. Rafferty, “Determining Young’s modulus
by measuring guitar string frequency,” Phys. Teach., 56 (2), 122–123 (2018).

20

R. Polak, V. Acuesta, J. Cirone, M. B. Conway, J. Summers, and L. Tinawi, “Mario Kart 8: a
case study in total internal reflection,” Phys. Teach., 56, 566–567 (2018).

21

S. Moses, N. Y. Butler, D. Zavala, and S. Jaradat, “The nanobiophotonics of gold nanoparticles
and Allium cepa and its symbiotic effect on Escherichia coli,” J. Bionanoscience, 12 (3), 442–445
(2018).

22

P. H. Phelps,

“Five fundamentals of faculty development,”

Faculty Focus (2016),

<https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/faculty-development/five-fundamentals-faculty-develop
23

Graduation data taken from Physics Department records prior to the 2005-2006 Academic Year
and from Loyola University records from the 2005-2006 Academic Year to the present.

24

P.
sults

J.

Mulvey
from

and
the

S.
2010

Nicholson,
survey

17

“Physics
of

bachelor’s
enrollments

degrees:
and

Redegrees,”

(2012),<https://www.aip.org/sites/default/files/statistics/undergrad/bachdegrees-p-10.pdf>.

18

