Oxygen-vacancy induced magnetic phase transitions in multiferroic thin films
Cesar Menéndez,1 Dewei Chu,1 and Claudio Cazorla1, ∗

arXiv:1906.01117v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jun 2019

1

School of Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

Multiferroics in which giant ferroelectric polarization and magnetism coexist are of tremendous
potential for engineering disruptive applications
in information storage and energy conversion.
Yet the functional properties of multiferroics
are thought to be affected detrimentally by
the presence of point defects, which may be
abundant due to the volatile nature of some constituent atoms and high temperatures involved
in materials preparation. Here, we demonstrate
with theoretical methods that oxygen vacancies
may enhance the functionality of multiferroics
by radically changing their magnetic interactions
in thin films.
Specifically, oxygen vacancies
may restore missing magnetic super-exchange
interactions in large axial ratio phases, leading to
full antiferromagnetic spin ordering, and induce
the stabilization of ferrimagnetic states with a
significant net magnetization of 0.5 µB per formula unit. Our theoretical study should help to
clarify the origins of long-standing controversies
in bismuth ferrite and improve the design of
technological applications based on multiferroics.
Finding multiferroics in which ferroelectricity and
magnetism coexist and influence each other is of great
fundamental and applied interests [1, 2]. Salient technological features of multiferroics include the possibility of controlling the magnetization with electric fields
to design efficient logic and memory devices [3, 4], and
of realizing large piezomagnetic coefficients to facilitate
the miniaturization of antennas and sensors [5, 6]. Furthermore, competition between phases displaying distinct electric polarization and magnetic ordering offers
also encouraging prospects for energy conversion applications like photovoltaics and solid-state cooling [7–9].
Unfortunately, multiferroics are rare in nature, typically present weak magnetoelectric coupling (BiFeO3 )
[10], and require extreme synthesis conditions (PbVO3
and BiCoO3 ) [11, 12]. In addition, magnetoelectric multiferroics mostly are antiferromagnetic hence potential
applications based on external magnetic bias are frustrated due to the little effect on antiparallel magnetic
spins [13]. Common strategies employed to synthesize
bettered multiferroic materials include doping [14, 15],
solid solutions [16, 17], and strain engineering in thin
films [1, 18].
Through epitaxial strain is actually possible to create new multiferroic materials in the laboratory that ex∗

Corresponding Author

hibit giant electric polarization and unexpected magnetic
spin ordering [19–21]. An illustrative example is given
by BiFeO3 (BFO), in which large spontaneous polarization and ferromagnetism (FM) have been observed under
moderate compressive biaxial strains at room temperature [22, 23]. The origins of the net magnetization in
BFO thin films, however, are not clear yet and from a
technological point of view is crucially important to understand them at the fundamental level.
Most magnetic ferroelectrics with chemical formula
AM O3 and perovskite-like structure present antiferromagnetic spin ordering along the three pseudo-Cartesian
directions (AFM-G), due to the dominant role of oxygenmediated super-exchange interactions between neighbouring transition metal atoms M [24–27]. In large axial ratio structures, the covalency of M -O bonds parallel
to the electric polarization is significantly reduced and
consequently magnetic exchange interactions, favouring
parallel magnetic spins, dominate in that direction; the
coexistence of “in-plane” antiferromagnetism and “outof-plane” ferromagnetism leads anyway to null crystal
magnetization (AFM-C, Fig.1a,b) when small spin canting effects are neglected. Therefore, intrinsic and robust
FM in principle is not expected to occur in BFO or any
other similar multiferroic [28–31].
A plausible explanation for the appearance of FM in
AM O3 perovskite oxide thin films is based on extrinsic causes like point defects [23, 32]. The volatile nature of bismuth and high temperatures involved in the
preparation of samples, for instance, make the presence
of oxygen vacancies (VO ) almost inevitable in Bi-based
multiferroics [15, 17]. In fact, oxygen defects may modify significantly the structural and functional properties
of perovskite thin films via changes in the M oxidation
states and their coupling with the lattice strain [33, 34].
However, a number of theoretical works based on firstprinciples methods have agreed in that the combined action of VO and lattice strain may not affect considerably
the magnetic properties of Bi-based multiferroics [35–37].
Here, we present new theoretical evidence showing that
the presence of VO may in fact change radically the
magnetic properties of multiferroic thin films via previously overlooked electro-structural mechanisms. We select BiCoO3 (BCO) as the model multiferroic in which
to perform first-principles calculations based on density
functional theory (DFT) because (i) this material already
exhibits a large axial ratio in the absence of any strain,
and (ii) the magnetic effects that we predict can be realized on substrates that are commonly employed for
growth of epitaxial oxide perovskite thin films (Fig.1c).
In particular, it is found that oxygen vacancies occupying specific lattice positions can induce the stabilization

2

FIG. 1. Sketch of multiferroic BCO in bulk and thin film geometries. a Representation of the super-tetragonal phase (T ,
space group P 4mm) characteristic of bulk BCO and other multiferroics exhibiting giant electric polarization. b Magnetic
structure in the T phase rendering C-type antiferromagnetism (AFM-C); green arrows represent atomic magnetic moments
and their orientation. c Examples of substrates in which to grow BCO thin films displaying the effects predicted in this study;
other well-known materials exhibiting super-tetragonal phases are shown for comparison [19, 22]. “SE” stands for magnetic
super-exchange interactions. Bi, Co, and O atoms are represented with magenta, blue, and red spheres, respectively.

of full antiferromagnetic (AFM-G) super-tetragonal and
ferrimagnetic (FiM) monoclinic polar phases, depending
on the lattice strain. As a consequence, phase competition is enriched and magnetic functionalities further
enhanced in comparison to perfectly stoichiometric thin
films. We show that most of the results obtained in BCO
thin films can be generalized to BFO and other Bi-based
multiferroics, hence our conclusions are of broad applicability and significance to the field of functional materials.

RESULTS

VO -induced effects on phase competition and
functionality. Bulk BCO presents a polar tetragonal
T phase with a large axial ratio of c/a ≈ 1.3 and relatively small lattice paramater a = 3.76 Å [9, 29] (Fig.1a).
The competing structures are a non-polar orthorhombic
O phase and a polar monoclinic M phase (Supplementary Fig.1); both competing phases have cells that are
slightly distorted versions of the ideal cubic perovskite
structure with c/a ≈ 1. The polar phases in BCO present
spontaneous polarizations along quite different crystallographic directions, namely, pseudocubic [001]pc in T
and ∼ [111]pc in M. As regards magnetism, the O and
M phases exhibit G-type antiferromagnetism (AFM-G)
with a quite high Néel temperature, TN ≈ 500 K, whereas
the T phase C-type antiferromagnetism (AFM-C) with
a relatively low TN of ≈ 310 K. In stoichiometric BCO
thin films, and by completely neglecting temperature effects, a multiferroic T → M phase transition involving
large structural, polar, and magnetic changes occurs at
in-plane parameter ain = 3.91 Å [9] (Figs.2a-c).
Figures 2a-c show the influence of neutral oxygen vacancies (Methods), VO , on the structural, ferroelectric,
and magnetic properties of BCO thin films (the accompanying changes in atomic lattice positions and energy

band gap are reported in Supplementary Tables 1-4 and
Supplementary Fig.2). For the smallest in-plane lattice parameters, a T -C phase (magnetic spin ordering
is indicated along with the structure symmetry) containing oxygen vacancies in equatorial (Eq) positions
(Fig.1a) renders the lowest energy. The electric polarization and Néel temperature in T -C(Eq) are significantly
lower than in the analogous stoichiometric phase, in particular, we estimate differences of ∆P ≈ −75 µC cm−2
and ∆TN ≈ −50 K for same in-plane parameters. At
ain = 3.77 Å, an unusual magnetic phase transition
from AFM-C to AFM-G spin ordering occurs along with
the appearance of a small in-plane electric polarization
(Pxy ∼ 10 µC cm−2 ) and change in VO position symmetry. The Néel temperature in the T -G(Ap) phase is lower
than in T -C(Eq) by approximately 50 K. Furthermore, at
ain ≥ 3.91 Å the system adopts a monoclinic ferrimagnetic (FiM) phase with oxygen vacancies in equatorial
positions, M-FiM(Eq), and a considerable net magnetization of ≈ 0.5 µB per formula unit (Fig.2d). The Néel
temperature in the M-FiM(Eq) phase is larger than in
T -G(Ap) and remains close to room temperature almost
independently of ain . (We have checked that the choice of
the DFT energy functional and related technical parameters do not have a significant effect on these conclusions
–Methods, Supplementary Figs.3-5, and Supplementary
Methods–.)
The physical mechanisms responsible for the two
multiferroic phase transitions represented in Fig.2d will
be explained in detail in the next subsections. Let us
now comment briefly on the functionality enhancement
deriving from the T -G(Ap) → M-FiM(Eq) transformation by keeping in mind that the non-stoichiometric M
phase is ferrigmagnetic and polar hence responsive to
both external magnetic and electric fields. First, a large
change in the electric polarization orientation involving
a ≈ 60◦ rotation is observed during the transition

3

FIG. 2. Effects of VO on phase competition and functionality in BCO thin films. a Zero-temperature energy of competing phases
expressed as a function of in-plane lattice parameter. Metastable phases are indicated by grey curves and strain-induced phase
transitions by vertical dashed lines; the oxygen vacancy positions leading to lowest energies, either apical “Ap” or equatorial
“Eq”, are indicated within parentheses. “G” stands for G-type antiferromagnetism, “C” for C-type antiferromagnetism, and
“FiM” for ferrimagnetism. b Electric polarization of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric ground-state phases. c Magnetic
transition temperature of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric ground-state phases. d Phase transition sequence occurring in
non-stoichiometric BCO thin films under increasing ain ; the green arrows represent the magnetic spin ordering in each phase.
e Change in volume, ∆V , change in electric polarization orientation, ∆α, and change in magnetic moment per formula unit,
Mi , associated to the multiferroic T -G → M-FiM phase transition.

(Fig.2e); as a consequence, and in analogy to what has
been observed in Pb(Zr1−x Tix )O3 alloys [38, 39] and
Bi(Fe1−x Cox )O3 thin films [40], it should be possible to
realize large piezoelectric responses under small electric
bias at ain ≈ 3.91 Å. Second, the sizeable changes in
electric polarization and total magnetization in principle should allow for control of the polarization with
magnetic fields and vice versa, which hints at the likely
existence of large magnetoelectric couplings [1, 2]. And

third, the out-of-plane lattice parameter shrinks by an
impressive ≈ 11% (Fig.2e) hence there is the possibility
of realizing giant piezomagnetic responses [5, 6] and
multicaloric effects [8, 9] through the application of
external bias. In a more speculative vein, the change in
VO position symmetry from Eq to Ap could lead to novel
ionic transport phenomena driven by external magnetic,
rather than electric, fields [41]. As we will show later,
similar magnetic phenomena are likely to occur also in

4

FIG. 3. Electronic, structural, and magnetic properties of T BCO thin films. a Stoichiometric T phase. b Non-stoichiometric
T thin films with a stable VO in Eq position and AFM-C spin ordering. The orange plane indicates the two Co ions that are
reduced as a consequence of creating a neutral Eq oxygen vacancy. The red arrow in the d-orbitals occupation sketch indicates
the difference with respect to the stoichiometric case. c Non-stoichiometric T thin films with a stable VO in Ap position and
AFM-G spin ordering. The orange plane indicates the two Co ions that are reduced as a consequence of creating a neutral
Ap oxygen vacancy. d Charge density surface plot corresponding to the stoichiometric T -C phase; the surface over which the
charge density is calculated is indicated by a grey plane in the accompanying structural ball-stick representation. Isovalue paths
are represented with black and coloured lines. e Charge density surface plot corresponding to the non-stoichiometric T -G(Ap)
phase. Regions of interest describing Co–O bonds are indicated with yellow arrows.

other Bi-based multiferroic thin films, including BiFeO3 .
VO -induced magnetic super-exchange interactions in the T phase. Figure 3 summarizes the electronic, structural, and magnetic properties of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric T BCO thin films. In the
stoichiometric T -C phase (Fig.3a), the square-pyramidal
O5 crystal field splits the electronic Co d levels into nondegenerate b2g (dxy ), doubly degenerate eg (dxz , dyz ),
and nondegenerate a1g (dz2 ) and b1g (dx2 −y2 ). Our

first-principles calculations render a high-spin Co state
characterised by the electronic occupation b22g e2g a11g b11g
and atomic spin moment 3.1 µB , in good agreement
with the available experimental data [42]. In the nonstoichiometric T -C(Eq) phase (Fig.3b), the splitting of
electronic d levels remains invariant with respect to
the stoichiometric case and the occupation in the two
cobalt ions nearest to the neutral VO , which become reduced and are electronically equivalent, changes slightly
to b22g e2g a21g b11g (depending on the choice of the tech-

5
nical DFT parameters this electronic distribution may
vary somewhat –Supplementary Fig.5 and Supplementary Methods–).
Interestingly, when VO is created in an apical position
and for specific ain ’s the magnetic spin ordering in the T
phase changes to AFM-G. Figure 3c shows the electronic
density of states of the two reduced cobalt ions in the
T -G(Ap) phase, which in this case turn out to be electronically inequivalent. In particular, the doubly degenerate eg (dxz , dyz ) orbitals in the cobalt ion closest to the
apical VO (Co3, as labelled in Figs.3d,e) undergo a significant energy reduction and become fully populated rendering the occupation state e4g b12g a11g b11g , while the other
reduced metal ion (Co1, as labelled in Figs.3d,e) exhibits
the more usual distribution b22g e2g a21g b11g . These drastic
electronic rearrangements are correlated with the appearance of a strong structural distortion in the system that
pushes Co3 towards the oxygen atom underneath of it
(see inversion of the corresponding O5 square-pyramid
in Figs.3c,e) and tends to restore (partially) the missing
magnetic super-exchange interactions along the out-ofplane direction. This super-exchange restoration mechanism, which is accompanied by an increase in covalency of
the out-of-plane Co1–O–Co3 bonds and eventually leads
to the stabilization of AFM-G spin ordering, is clearly
imaged by plots of the electronic density in the plane
containing Co1 and Co3 and oriented perpendicular to
the substrate (Figs.3d,e and yellow arrows therein).
The VO -induced AFM-C → AFM-G phase transition
disclosed in large axial ratio BCO thin films may
shed some light on uncomprehended experimental
observations of antiferromagnetic spin ordering in other
super-tetragonal multiferroic phases. For instance, in
T BFO thin films several first-principles works have
predicted AFM-C spin ordering [43–45] whereas most
experimental studies indicate that AFM-G dominates
[46, 47]. As it will be explicitly shown later, by considering the presence of oxygen vacancies in BFO thin
films those theoretical and experimental results may be
reconciled.
VO -induced stabilization of a ferrimagnetic M
phase. Figure 4 summarizes the electronic, structural,
and magnetic properties of stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric M BCO thin films. In the stoichiometric M-G phase (Fig.4a), the octahedral O6 crystal field
splits the electronic Co d levels into doubly degenerate eg
(dz2 , dx2 −y2 ) and triply degenerate t2g (dxy , dyz , dxz ); a
strong Jahn-Teller distortion rendering a large Q2 value
of 0.37 Å [48] lifts further the degeneracy in the eg and
t2g manifolds [49] and promotes the electronic occupation
state b22g e2g b11g a11g (Fig.4a). Remarkably, when specific
VO ’s are created in equatorial positions (see next paragraph) the lowest-energy magnetic spin ordering changes
to FiM and the net magnetization per formula unit in
the M-FiM(Eq) phase amounts to ≈ 0.5 µB . The two
Co ions that are reduced by the neutral vacancy present
same magnetic moment orientation, same electronic oc-

cupancy e4g b12g b11g a11g , and sit within the [111]pc plane
(Fig.4b).
How is possible that the two reduced Co ions are located along the diagonal of the pseudo-cubic unit cell
rather than within the equatorial plane (that is, closest
to the neutral VO , in which case the total magnetization
would be null)? The ground-state M-FiM(Eq) phase appears only when highly magnetized oxygen atoms (0.1–
0.2 µB ) occupying equatorial positions in the stoichiometric M-G crystal are removed (Fig.4c). In that case,
as we sketch in Fig.4d, is not possible to reduce two
neighbouring Co ions sitting in the equatorial plane (Co1
and Co2) due to Pauli exclusion principle. Consequently,
pairs of metal ions with same magnetic moment and orientation (Co1 and Co4 in Fig.4d) become reduced. For
the couple of distant Co1 and Co4 ions to change their oxidation state and magnetic moment, however, the crystal
needs to undergo sizable structural distortions involving
the Bi and O atoms surrounding VO (Supplementary Tables 3-4). In particular, the non-magnetic oxygen atom
in apical position just above Co2 acts as a bridge between the equatorial oxygen vacancy and Co4, by lending one of its electrons to the metal ion, hence reducing
it, and receiving one electron from VO (Fig.4d). This
concerted electronic hopping mechanism can be inferred
from plots of the electronic density in the plane containing Co1, Co2, Co3, and Co4 and oriented perpendicular
to the substrate (Figs.4e,f and yellow arrows therein). As
can be appreciated therein, the covalency of the Co4–O
bond is significantly reduced in the M-FiM(Eq) phase as
compared to the stoichiometric case, and a vertical tilt
of the Co2–O bond that brings the apical oxygen closer
to the equatorial VO is also evidenced.
The discovery of FiM spin ordering in the nonstoichiometric M phase motivated us to search for similar
magnetic states, even if metastable, in the other BCO
thin film geometries T and O. The presence of highly
magnetized O atoms was acknowledged in both stoichiometric phases (Supplementary Fig.6), however upon removal of those oxygens we did not observe the appearance
of any net magnetic moment (neglecting small spin canting effects). These results confirm the importance of the
electro-structural mechanisms just described on facilitating the stabilization of FiM spin ordering. For instance,
in the T phase the highly magnetized O atoms appear
in apical positions (Supplementary Fig.6) hence the nonmagnetic oxygens, which occupy equatorial positions and
are somewhat clamped to the substrate, cannot act as
electronic bridges between distant VO ’s and Co’s. Meanwhile, in the O phase, which arguably is quite similar
to M in terms of structure and magnetism (Supplementary Fig.1) [9, 29], the lack of polar order and high dielectric permittivity makes the enabling Bi-O structural
distortions (Supplementary Table 4) to be too high in
energy; consequently, FiM spin ordering is frustrated.
Based on these outcomes, we propose that the following three conditions are necessary for the stabilization of
VO -induced FiM spin ordering in magnetic AM O3 ox-

6

FIG. 4. Electronic, structural, and magnetic properties of M BCO thin films. a Stoichiometric M-G phase. b Nonstoichiometric M thin films with a stable VO in Eq position and FiM spin ordering. The orange plane indicates the two
equivalent Co ions that are reduced as a consequence of creating a neutral Eq oxygen vacancy. The red arrows in the d-orbitals
occupation sketch indicate the difference with respect to the stoichiometric case. c Spin-up (dark green) and spin-down (light
green) electronic charge densities calculated in stoichiometric M BCO thin films considering two perpendicular planes; highly
magnetized oxygen atoms are indicated with red squares. d Inferred electronic hoppings enabling the stabilization of FiM spin
ordering in the M-FiM(Eq) phase; numbers indicate the two events that are likely to occur in a concerted manner; d orbitals
a1g and b1g are disregarded due to their higher energies. e Charge density surface plot corresponding to the stoichiometric
M-G phase; the surface over which the charge density is calculated is indicated by a grey plane in the accompanying structural
ball-stick representation. Isovalue paths are represented with black and coloured lines. f Charge density surface plot corresponding to the non-stoichiometric M-FiM(Eq) phase. Regions of interest describing structural distortions and Co–O bonds
are indicated with yellow arrows.

ide perovskites: (1) lack of inversion symmetry leading
to polar order and structural deformation ease, (2) moderate axial ratio structures with c/a ≈ 1 allowing for
out-of-plane concerted electronic hoppings, and (3) the
existence of highly magnetized oxygen ions.

DISCUSSION

The results obtained in BCO thin films raise the natural question: are there any other multiferroic materials
in which similar VO -induced magnetic phenomena may
occur? To answer this question we investigated the spe-

7

FIG. 5. Magnetic, structural, and vibrational properties of BFO thin films containing VO . a Zero-temperature energy of
competing phases expressed as a function of in-plane lattice parameter. b Structural sketch of non-stoichiometric M phases
considering different magnetic orderings. c Γ-point phonon spectrum calculated in non-stoichiometric monoclinic BFO thin
films; phonon frequencies in the M-G(Ap) phase are higher in average than in M-FiM(Ap) hence the vibrational free energy
in the latter phase is lower. d Spin-up (dark green) and spin-down (light green) electronic charge densities calculated in several
stoichiometric BCO thin films considering two perpendicular planes; highly magnetized oxygen atoms are indicated with red
squares.

cial case of BiFeO3 (BFO) and other Bi-based multiferroic (BiMnO3 and BiCrO3 ) thin films. Figure 5 encloses
the energy, magnetic, and vibrational properties of nonstoichiometric BFO thin films. In order to be consistent with the notation employed heretofore, we label the
usual rhombohedral-like monoclinic phase as M and the
large axial ratio tetragonal-like phase as T (in spite of the
fact that the space groups corresponding to those structures are different in BFO and BCO) [45, 50]. Our zero-

temperature calculations (Fig.5a) predict a ground-state
M-G(Ap) phase at ain ≥ 4.01 Å, followed by T -G(Eq)
at 3.91 ≤ ain ≤ 4.01 Å, and T -C(Eq) at ain ≤ 3.91 Å.
Indeed, when the likely existence of VO is explicitly considered in the simulations a broad ain region appears
in which AFM-G spin ordering is stable in the T phase
(that is missing in the corresponding stoichiometric system [43, 45]). The causes of the stabilization of the T G(Ap) phase in BFO are very similar to those explained

8
previously for T -G(Ap) in BCO thin films (Fig.3; we
note that Ap VO ’s under tensile strain are in some ways
equivalent to Eq VO ’s under compressive strain). As mentioned earlier, these results may shed new light on the
origins of some unresolved discrepancies between theory
and experiments regarding the determination of antiferromagnetic ordering in T BFO thin films [43–47].
By creating an apical VO in the stoichiometric M-C
phase, we found a thus far neglected ferrimagnetic phase
in monoclinic BFO thin films, M-FiM(Ap). In this case
the net magnetization per formula unit amounts also
to ≈ 0.5 µB . Nevertheless, the M-FiM(Ap) phase is
metastable at zero temperature due to a small energy difference of 25 − 30 meV per formula unit with respect to
the ground-state phase (Fig.5a). The atomic structure of
the metastable M-FiM(Ap) and ground-state M-G(Ap)
phases are highly distorted and surprisingly very similar (Fig.5b and Supplementary Tables 5-6). Analysis of
the Γ-point phonon modes (Fig.5c), however, indicates
that the M-FiM(Ap) phase is vibrationally softer than
M-G(Ap). Consequently, the M-FiM(Ap) phase may
be entropically stabilized over M-G(Ap) under increasing temperature since the zero-temperature energy difference between the two states is relatively small and
the vibrational free energy of the former phase is more
favourable [9, 29]. Our theoretical results, therefore, can
be interpreted as evidence showing that the observation
of “ferromagnetic” behaviour in BFO thin films [22] may
be caused by the presence of oxygen vacancies, just as it
has been suggested by other authors [23].
Figure 5d shows the spin-up spin-down charge densities calculated in non-stoichiometric M and T BFO
thin films considering in-plane and out-of-plane surfaces.
The reason why we could find just one FiM solution
through the generation of neutral VO ’s in stoichiometric
M phases is now clear [see requirements (1)–(3) listed at
the end of the previous section]: all oxygen atoms in the
M-G phase are non-magnetic whereas all apical O in the
M-C phase are highly magnetized. The stoichiometric
T -C phase also displays highly magnetized oxygen
atoms in apical positions however, as we have explained
before, FiM spin ordering hardly can be generated
in geometries exhibiting c/a  1. Furthermore, we
repeated the same type of calculations and analysis
in monoclinic-like BiMnO3 and BiCrO3 thin films,
which fulfill conditions (1) and (2) explained above,
and found that the appearance of FiM spin ordering is
also correlated with the presence of highly magnetized
oxygen atoms (Supplementary Fig.7). In particular, a
M-FiM(Ap) phase displaying a net magnetization of
≈ 0.2 µB is found in BiCrO3 . These results confirm that
the simple rules provided in this work for prediction of
FiM phases in non-stoichiometric multiferroic thin films
are robust and general.
In summary, by using first-principles calculations we
have disclosed a number of previously overlooked electrostructural mechanisms induced by the presence of oxygen

vacancies that facilitate the stabilization of unexpected
magnetic states in multiferroic thin films. In particular, AFM-G and FiM spin orderings may naturally appear in large axial ratio and monoclinic phases under
certain lattice strain conditions. Our theoretical results
may clarify the origins of some long-standing controversies in BFO, the paradigm of single-phase multiferroics
and one of the most intensively studied functional materials. We provide general and simple rules to fundamentally understand and systematically predict FiM phases
in non-stoichiometric multiferroics, thus offering new approaches for the rational engineering of bettered functional materials. The present work shows that oxygen
vacancies should be considered as a design opportunity
to create new funcionalities, especially as related to magnetism, in multiferroic thin films.

METHODS

Density functional theory calculations. Firstprinciples spin-polarized calculations based on density
functional theory (DFT) are performed with the generalized gradient approximation proposed by Perdew, Burke
and Ernzerhof (GGA-PBE) as implemented in the VASP
package [51, 52]. We employ the “Hubbard-U” scheme
derived by Dudarev et al. to deal with the 3d electrons
in Co (Fe) atoms and, as done in previous works, a U
value of 6 (4) eV is adopted [9, 28, 29]. We use the
“projected augmented wave” method [53] considering the
following electronic states as valence: Co’s 4s1 3d8 , Fe’s
3p6 4s1 3d7 , Mn’s 4s1 3d6 , Cr’s 4s1 3d5 , Bi’s 6s2 5d10 6p3 ,
and O’s 2s2 2p4 . The energy cut-off is truncated at 650 eV
and we employ
a Γ-centered k-point grid of 4 × 6 × 6
√
√
for a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell containing 20 atoms (that
is, four formula units) [50]. Periodic boundary conditions are applied along the three lattice-vector directions. Thin film geometry relaxations are carried out
by using a conjugated gradient algorithm that allows to
change the simulation-cell volume and atomic positions
while constraining the length and orientation of the two
in-plane lattice vectors. The geometry relaxations are
stopped once the forces acting on the ions are smaller
than 0.01 eV/Å. We have checked the vibrational stability of every phase by estimating the lattice phonons
at the Γ-point with the small-displacement method [54]
and considering central differences for the calculation of
atomic forces derivatives.
Non-stoichiometric phases are generated by removing
one oxygen atom from an apical or equatorial position in
the 20-atoms simulation cell, thus rendering the chemical composition BiCoO3−x with x = 0.25. Apical and
equatorial VO positions are investigated systematically
by generating all inequivalent configurations in all competing phases and considering all possible magnetic spin
orderings (FM, AFM-G, AFM-G, and AFM-A [29]). The
results presented in the main text are obtained by assuming neutral oxygen vacancies since we have found

9
that neutral VO ’s are energetically more favourable than
charged oxygen vacancies (Supplementary Fig.8, Supplementary Table 7, and Supplementary Methods). In particular, we have employed the following well-established
formula to estimate the ranking of VO formation energies
as a function of charge, q, [55]:
q
Edef [VOq ] = E[VOq ] − Estoi + Ecorr
− nO µO +
q [F + v + ∆V ] ,

(1)

where E[VOq ] is the energy of the non-stoichiometric system containing the oxygen vacancy, Estoi the energy of
q
the corresponding stoichiometric system, Ecorr
a finitesize supercell correction, nO the number of created VO ’s
(typically equal to 1 in our calculations), µO the chemical potential of oxygen atoms, F the Fermi energy in
the non-stoichiometric system, v the top energy in the
valence band of the non-stoichiometric system, and ∆V
a term used for aligning the electrostatic potentials of
the stoichiometric and defective supercells. In order to
q
and ∆V , we have followed the methods
calculate Ecorr
explained in work [55]. According to our estimations,
neutral VO ’s (q = 0) are energetically more favourable
than charged vacancies (q = +2 e) by about ∼ 1 eV
per formula unit (Supplementary Fig.8, Supplementary
Table 7, and Supplementary Methods).
We have performed several tests to assess the influence of the adopted DFT exchange-correlation functional
and U value on our theoretical predictions (Supplementary Figs.3-5 and Supplementary Methods). Specifically,
we repeated most calculations by considering the PBEsol
functional [56] and 2 ≤ U ≤ 6 eV values. It is found that
the main conclusions presented in the main text are not
affected qualitatively by the choice of the U parameter
or exchange-correlation functional. At the quantitative
level, the ain parameters at which the phase transitions
occur and the electronic occupations that are deduced
from electronic density plots change a little in some cases
(Supplementary Figs.3-5 and Supplementary Methods);
however, the structural properties and energy ranking of
the competing phases estimated in most ain cases remain
invariant. For a detailed discussion on these technical aspects, see Supplementary Methods.
Regarding the estimation of the electric polarization,
P , we started by employing the Berry phase formalism
[57]. However, the presence of oxygen vacancies induces
a notable reduction in the energy band gap of the system
(Supplementary Fig.2) that in some cases frustrates the
determination of the corresponding Berry phase (due to
the appearance of intermediate metallic phases). In order
to overcome such a limitation, we opted for calculating
the electric polarization perturbatively. Specifically, we

[1] Ramesh, R. & Spaldin, N. A. Multiferroics: progress and
prospects in thin films. Nat. Mater. 6, 21 (2007).

estimate P with the formula [50]:
Pα =

1X ∗
Zκβα uκβ ,
Ω

(2)

κβ

where Ω is the volume of the cell, κ runs over all the
atoms, α, β = x, y, z represent Cartesian directions, uκ
is the displacement vector of the κ-th atom as referred to
a non-polar reference phase, and Zκ∗ the Born effective
charge tensor calculated in the non-polar reference state.
In the stoichiometric phases we do not find the technical limitations just explained for non-stoichiometric
systems, hence in that case we have been able to
compare the P values obtained with the Berry phase
approach (exact) and Eq.(2) (approximate). According
to our estimations, the electric polarizations calculated
perturbatively are accurate to within ∼ 10% of, and
systematically larger than, the P values calculated with
the Berry phase method. It is reasonable to assume then
a similar level of accuracy in the P values estimated in
non-stoichiometric thin films that are reported in Fig.2.
Heisenberg model Monte Carlo simulations. To
simulate the effects of thermal excitations on magnetic
ordering in T , O, and M BCO thin films, we construct several spin Heisenberg models of the form Ĥ =
P
(0)
1
ij Jij Si Sj , in which the value of the involved ex2
change constants are obtained from zero-temperature
DFT calculations (see works [9, 28, 29] for the tech(0)
nical details on the determination of the Jij parameters). We use those models to perform Monte Carlo (MC)
simulations in a periodically-repeated simulation box of
20 × 20 × 20 spins; thermal averages are computed from
runs of 50, 000 MC sweeps after equilibration. These
simulations allow us to monitor the T -dependence of the
magnetic ordering through the computation of the AFMC (in the T phase) and AFM-G (in the P
O and M phases)
order parameters, namely, S C ≡ N1 i (−1)nix +niy Siz
P
and S G ≡ N1 i (−1)nix +niy +niz Siz . Here, nix , niy ,
and niz are the three integers locating the i-th lattice
cell, and N is the total number of spins in the simulation box. For the calculation of S C and S G , we considered only the z component of the spins because a small
symmetry-breaking magnetic anisotropy was introduced
in the Hamiltonian in order to facilitate the numerical
analysis [9, 28, 29].

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding author (C.C.) upon reasonable request.

[2] Spaldin, N. A. & Ramesh, R. Advances in magnetoelectric multiferroics. Nat. Mater. 18, 203 (2019).

10
[3] Heron, J. T. et al. Deterministic switching of ferromagnetism at room temperature using an electric field. Nature 516, 370 (2014).
[4] Allibe, J. et al. Room temperature electrical manipulation of giant magnetoresistance in spin valves exchangebiased with BiFeO3 . Nano Lett. 12, 1141 (2012).
[5] Domann, J. P. & Carman, G. P. Strain powered antennas.
J. Appl. Phys. 121, 044905 (2017).
[6] Nan, T. et al. Acoustically actuated ultra-compact
NEMS magnetoelectric antennas. Nat. Commun. 8, 296
(2017).
[7] Huang, W., Harnagea, C., Benetti, D., Chaker, M., Rosei, F. & Nechache, R. Multiferroic Bi2 FeCrO6 based pi-n heterojunction photovoltaic devices. J. Mater. Chem.
A 5, 10355 (2017).
[8] Stern-Taulats, E., Castán, T., Mañosa, Ll., Planes, A.,
Mathur, N. D. & Moya, X. Multicaloric materials and
effects. MRS Bull. 43, 295 (2018).
[9] Cazorla, C. & Íñiguez, J. Giant direct and inverse electrocaloric effects in multiferroic thin films. Phys. Rev. B
98, 174105 (2018).
[10] Bertinshaw, J. et al. Direct evidence for the spin cycloid in strained nanoscale bismuth ferrite thin films. Nat.
Commun. 7, 12664 (2016).
[11] Belik, A. A., Azuma, M., Saito, T., Shimakawa, Y.
& Takano, M. Crystallographic features and tetragonal
phase stability of PbVO3 , a new member of PbTiO3 family. Chem. Mater. 17, 269 (2005).
[12] Belik, A. A. et al. Neutron powder diffraction study on
the crystal and magnetic structures of BiCoO3 . Chem.
Mater. 18, 798 (2006).
[13] Wang, X., Yang, Q., Wang, L., Zhou, Z., Min, T., Liu,
M. & Sun, N. X. Efield control of the RKKY interaction in FeCoB/Ru/FeCoB/PMNPT (011) multiferroic
heterostructures. Adv. Mater. 30, 1803612 (2018).
[14] Das, R. & Mandal, K. Magnetic, ferroelectric, and magnetoelectric properties of Ba-doped BiFeO3 . J. Magn.
Magn. Mater. 324, 1913 (2012).
[15] Das, R., Sharma, S. & Mandal, K. Aliovalent Ba2+ doping: A way to reduce oxygen vancancy in multiferroic
BiFeO3 . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 401, 129 (2016).
[16] Sakai, H. et al. Displacement-type ferroelectricity with
off-center magnetic ions in perovskite Sr1−x Bax MnO3 .
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 137601 (2011).
[17] Hojo, H., Oka, K., Shimizu, K., Yamamoto, H., Kawabe,
R. & Azuma, M. Development of bismuth ferrite as a
piezoelectric and multiferroic material by cobalt substitution. Adv. Mater. 30, 1705665 (2018).
[18] Martin, L. W. et al. Multiferroics and magnetoelectrics:
thinfilms and nanostructures. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
20, 434220 (2008).
[19] Zhang, L. et al. Giant polarization in super-tetragonal
thin films through interphase strain. Science 361, 494
(2018).
[20] Varga, T. et al. Coupled lattice polarization and ferromagnetism in multiferroic NiTiO3 thin films. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 9, 21879 (2017).
[21] Töpfer, J. & Goodenough, J. G. LaMnO3+δ revisited. J.
Solid State Chem. 130, 117 (1997).
[22] Wang, J. et al. Epitaxial BiFeO3 multiferroic thin film
heterostructures. Science 299, 1719 (2003).
[23] Eerenstein, W., Morrison, F. D., Dho, J., Blamire, M.
G., Scott, J. F. & Mathur, N. D. Comment on “Epitaxial

[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]
[43]

BiFeO3 multiferroic thin film heterostructures”. Science
307, 1203 (2005).
Goodenough, J. B. Theory of the role of covalence in
the perovskite-type manganites (La,M (II))MnO3 . Phys.
Rev. 100, 564 (1955).
Hill, N. A. & Filipetti, A. Why are there any magnetic
ferroelectrics?. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 242, 976 (2002).
Spaldin, N. A. Magnetic Materials: Fundamentals and
Applications. Second Edition, Cambridge University
Press, doi:10.1017/CBO9780511781599.021 (2012).
Bhattacharya, A. & May, S. Magnetic oxide heterostructures. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 44, 65 (2014).
Cazorla, C. & Íñiguez, J. Insights into the phase diagram
of bismuth ferrite from quasiharmonic free-energy calculations. Phys. Rev. B 88, 214430 (2013).
Cazorla, C., Diéguez, O. & Íñiguez, J. Multiple structural transitions driven by spin-phonon couplings in a
perovskite oxide. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700288 (2017).
Singh, D. J. Electronic structure and bond competition
in the polar magnet PbVO3 . Phys. Rev. B 73, 094102
(2006).
Solovyev, I. V. Magnetic structure of the noncentrosymmetric perovskites PbVO3 and BiCoO3 : Theoretical
analysis. Phys. Rev. B 85, 054420 (2012).
Niu, W. et al. Direct demonstration of the emergent magnetism resulting from the multivalence Mn in a LaMnO3
epitaxial thin film system. Adv. Electron. Mater. 4,
1800055 (2018).
Cazorla, C. Lattice effects on the formation of oxygen
vacancies in perovskite thin films. Phys. Rev. Appl. 7,
044025 (2017).
Herklotz, A. et al. Strain coupling of oxygen nonstoichiometry in perovskite thin films. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 29, 493001 (2017).
Ederer, C. & Spaldin, N. A. Influence of strain and oxygen vacancies on the magnetoelectric properties of multiferroic bismuth ferrite. Phys. Rev. B 71, 224103 (2005).
Paudel, T. R., Jaswal, S. S. & Tsymbal, E. Y. Intrinsic
defects in multiferroic BiFeO3 and their effect on magnetism. Phys. Rev. B 85, 104409 (2012).
Chen, X.-Y., Chen, L.-J., Yang, X.-B., Zhao, Y.-J, Ding,
H.-C. & Duan, C.-G. Tuning the polarization and magnetism in BiCoO3 by strain an oxygen vacancy effect: A
first-principle study. J. Appl. Phys. 111, 013901 (2012).
Jaffe, B., Roth, R. S. & Marzullo, S. Piezoelectric properties of lead zirconatelead titanate solidsolution ceramics.
J. Appl. Phys. 25, 809 (1954).
Bellaiche, L., Garcı́a, A. & Vanderbilt, D. Finitetemperature properties of Pb(Zr1−x Tix )O3 alloys from
first principles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5427 (2000).
Shimizu, K., Hojo, H., Ikuhara, Y. & Azuma, M. Enhanced piezoelectric response due to polarization rotation
in cobalt-substituted BiFeO3 epitaxial thin films. Adv.
Mater. 28, 8639 (2016).
Waskaas, M. & Kharkats, Y. I. Magnetoconvection phenomena: A mechanism for influence of magnetic fields on
electrochemical processes. J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 4876
(1999).
Oka, K. et al. Pressure-induced spin-state transition in
BiCoO3 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 9438 (2010).
Hatt, A. J., Spaldin, N. A. & Ederer, C. Strain-induced
isosymmetric phase transition in BiFeO3 . Phys. Rev. B
81, 054109 (2010).

11
[44] Diéguez, O., González-Vázquez, O. E., Wojdel, J. C.
& Íñiguez, J. First-principles predictions of low-energy
phases of multiferroic BiFeO3 . Phys. Rev. B 83, 094105
(2011).
[45] Heo, Y. et al. Impact of isovalent and aliovalent doping
on mechanical properties of mixed phase BiFeO3 . ACS
Nano 11, 2805 (2017).
[46] Béa, H. et al. Evidence for room-temperature multiferroicity in a compound with a giant axial ratio. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 102, 217603 (2009).
[47] MacDougall, G. J. et al. Antiferromagnetic transitions in
tetragonal-like BiFeO3 . Phys. Rev. B 85, 100406 (2012).
[48] Rivero, P. & Cazorla, C. Revisiting the zero-temperature
phase diagram of stoichiometric SrCoO3 with firstprinciples methods. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18, 30686
(2016).
[49] Halcrow, M. A. Jahn-Teller distortions in transition
metal compounds, and their importance in functional
molecular and inorganic materials. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42,
1784 (2013).
[50] Cazorla, C. & Stengel, M. Electrostatic engineering of
strained ferroelectric perovskites from first principles.
Phys. Rev. B 92, 214108 (2015).
[51] Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
[52] Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized
gradient approximation made simple. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865 (1996).
[53] Blöchl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys.
Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
[54] Cazorla, C. & Boronat, J. Simulation and understanding of atomic and molecular quantum crystals Rev. Mod.
Phys. 89, 035003 (2017).
[55] Komsa, H.-P., Rantala, P. P. & Pasquarello, A. Finitesize supercell correction schemes for charged defect calculations. Phys. Rev. B 86, 045112 (2012).
[56] Perdew, J. P. et al. Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, 136406 (2008).

[57] King-Smith, R. D. & D. Vanderbilt, D. Theory of polarization of crystalline solids. Phys. Rev. B 47, 1651(R)
(1993).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Computational resources and technical assistance
were provided by the Australian Government and the
Government of Western Australia through the National
Computational Infrastructure (NCI) and Magnus under
the National Computational Merit Allocation Scheme
and The Pawsey Supercomputing Centre.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

C.C. conceived the study and planned the research.
C.M. and C.C. performed the theoretical calculations.
Results were discussed by C.M., D.C., and C.C. The
manuscript was written by C.M., D.C., and C.C.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information is available in the online
version of the paper.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

