The application of muon tomography to the imaging of railway tunnels
L.F. Thompson,∗ J.P. Stowell, and S.J. Fargher
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, S3 7RH, UK.

C.A. Steer, K.L. Loughney, and E.M. O’Sullivan
Applied Physics, St Marys University, Waldegrave Road, Twickenham TW1 4SX, UK.

J.G. Gluyas
Department of Earth Sciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.

arXiv:1906.05814v1 [physics.ins-det] 13 Jun 2019

S.W. Blaney and R.J. Pidcock
Central Alliance, Alliance House, South Park Way, Wakefield, WF2 0XJ, UK
(Dated: June 14, 2019)
Cosmic Ray Muon Radiography utilizes highly-penetrating cosmic ray muons to image the density
profile of an object of interest. Here we report on the first trial to use a portable field-deployable
cosmic ray tracking system in order to image the whole overburden of a UK railway tunnel with short
duration scans (c. 30 minutes). A unknown overburden void was identified and, post-trial, confirmed
by railway authorities. These experiments demonstrate the identification of hidden construction
shafts with high levels of statistical significance as density anomalies within the data.

I.

RAILWAY INFRASTRUCTURE AND
MAINTENANCE

The United Kingdom’s railway network is currently
estimated to extend to more than 20,000 miles of track
as well as more than 40,000 tunnels, viaducts and bridges.
Much of the current infrastructure was constructed in the
19th century and is still in use today [1], made possible
by a robust safety regime.
Railway tunnels present significant challenges in assuring their safety over long time periods. Hidden degradation of tunnel linings, where water ingress, differential
settlement and other phenomena can lead to so-called
voids opening up.
Similarly, large historic construction shafts, used by
the 19th century engineering teams to speed up completion, are also of concern. When a railway tunnel was
finished, some vertical construction shafts would be used
for ventilation and some sealed over within the tunnel
and surface and left. The 1953 hidden shaft collapse in
Swinton, near Manchester, England, starkly illustrates
that a lack of construction shaft identification and then
remediation can cause fatalities for urban populations at
the surface [2].
Searching for, and monitoring tunnel voids can be
time-consuming and may involve many personnel working in potentially hazardous environments. Investigations typically require intrusive drilling into the tunnel
lining to discern the presence, or not, of hidden voids and
poorly back-filled shafts. Intrusive drilling investigations
may cause instabilities and partial failure for marginal
linings or, as a shaft is drilled into, the outpouring of
collected groundwater. The possibility of an alternate

∗

l.thompson@sheffield.ac.uk

non-invasive technique for rapidly and accurately detecting overburden changes without placing personnel at risk
is clearly advantageous.
Cosmic ray muon radiography poses an ideal solution
to this problem, provided imaging systems are capable
of meeting the strict timing and portability requirements
required for working in live railway tunnels. Cosmic ray
muons are also highly penetrating, with significant fluxes
capable of passing through hundreds of metres of rock
and soil overburden, as a result the technique has previously been successfully applied to the imaging of Eqyptian pyramids [3, 4], nuclear reactors [5], volcanoes [6]
and an underground tunnel [7].

II.

THE ALFRETON OLD TUNNEL

Situated between Alfreton and Langley Mill in Nottinghamshire, Alfreton Old Tunnel is a disused straight
railway tunnel which is 770 m long along its axis from
the Langley Mill entrance (53◦ 05’22.3”N,1◦ 21’31.5”W)
to the Alfreton entrance (53◦ 05’43.5”N,1◦ 21’54.6”W).
The Old Tunnel was constructed in 1862 and was built
using three known construction shafts which were retained for ventilation, these open shafts are visible both
from the surface and from inside the tunnel. Alfreton
Old Tunnel is sited 28 metres West of the New Tunnel,
which was constructed in 1902 and is still in use to the
present-day. Unlike the Alfreton New Tunnel, where temporary construction (and subsequently hidden) shafts are
well documented [8], no records of temporary construction shafts could be found for the Old Tunnel.
The area above the tunnel is undeveloped, consisting
mainly of scrub growth other than the main A38 dual
carriageway and a minor road which both cross over the
line of the tunnel. Between the Alfreton entrance and

2

Alfreton Portal

770

m

A38 Trunk
Road
Minor
Road
Langley Mill Portal

FIG. 1. Representation of the Alfreton Old and New Tunnels
and surrounding using open source LiDAR data [9].

the A38 spoil mounds (from the tunnel’s construction)
are apparent, up to approximately 7m high. Figure 1 depicts the results of a topographical survey of the tunnels
and surrounding area. Preliminary data from this survey
was used in estimates of the tunnel overburden along a
straight line directly above the tunnel, which has a maximum, around the middle of the tunnel, of approximately
30 m.

III. INSTRUMENTATION, DATA
ACQUISITION AND TRIGGERING

The muon tomography system design focused on a
number of features key to field deployment including robustness, ease of operation and low power budget. The
system comprises 2 horizontal layers of EJ-200 plastic
scintillator. The upper layer is segmented into 6 independent rectangular bar detectors each 90 cm × 15 cm
× 4 cm in size. Similarly the lower layer is segmented
into 3 independent square paddle detectors; each 30 cm
× 30 cm × 4 cm in size. Each individual detector is contained in a light-tight housing and coupled to a photomultiplier tube for signal readout. In both layers detectors are placed next to one another with their longest
side running perpendicular to the tunnel length and their
shortest dimension running vertically. The top layer is
fixed 76 cm above the bottom, giving the system a 100◦
field of view along the axis of the tunnel, and a 76◦ field
of view along its width.
Data from each individual detector is processed using a CAEN DT5740 digitizer, sampling each channel at
62.5 MHz [10]. The digitizer is triggered from a built-in
hardware-based logical OR signal of the lower three detector paddles. The effective detection area of the system
is therefore dictated by the area of the combined lower
detectors (30 cm × 90 cm). Once a trigger is registered,
the signal from each of the 9 detectors is read out and a
second software trigger is formed from a logical AND of
any upper layer bar with any lower layer paddle within
a time window of 64 ns. Specifically, for a detector to
be considered in the software trigger it has to observe a

signal above a pre-defined threshold. These thresholds
are optimised for each detector individually to maximise
muon triggering efficiency, whilst rejecting background
signals such as dark noise, etc. After threshold optimisation, the estimated efficiency for detecting through-going
muons within a single detector was between 88% and
98%. For each trigger an event record is saved containing an event time and pulse height for every triggered
channel. In effect, this permits 18 different solid angle
regions to be sampled simultaneously.
As the system needed to be operated within the tunnel, it was required to be portable, and to be capable of
being run remotely with no mains voltage. With a total
footprint of 1.3 m × 1.3 m, the system is small enough
to be installed and operated in the back of a commercially available Ford Transit Custom 270 van. Overall the
system’s power requirements are typically 50 W. Consequently a large capacity battery and DC/AC converter
provides sufficient power to run the full system for 50
hours without recharging the battery

IV.

ALFRETON FIELD TRIAL

The muon rate drops significantly as a function of
overburden, therefore initial feasibility studies were performed to understand the minimum exposure time required to identify voiding or significant density changes
with a high reliability. Simulations of muons generated
with the CRY library [11], propagated using Geant4 [12]
through a 3D reconstruction of the Alfreton Old Tunnel overburden found that exposure times as short as 30
minutes are sufficient to identify open voids and voiding
behind the tunnel lining. These simulations were used to
inform the required exposure times necessary for scanning the entire length of the Alfreton Old Tunnel.
The Alfreton Old Tunnel data-taking campaign consisted of up to 8 hour shifts for 12 days. Each day
the system was transported to the site and assembled
in the morning, mimicking operating conditions on a
live railway tunnel. Before operation in the tunnel, or
in some cases overnight, several open-sky measurements
were taken of the unobstructed muon flux through the
system for later calibration. During data taking, the system was positioned relative to existing tunnel distance
markers that are fixed to the walls at approximately 20 m
intervals. A laser range finder was then used to further
constrain the system location to within 20 cm of a chosen position along the tunnel length. Similarly, the laser
range finder was used to position the system mid-way
along the tunnel cross-section to ensure the apex of the
tunnel was kept in the centre of the system’s field of view.
Data were taken along the entire tunnel at 10 m intervals with more than 150 runs being taken in total. For
scans around overburden regions of interest the intervals
were reduced to 5 m. At each position, 20 or 30 minutes
of muon flux data were taken, as well as pressure and
temperature readings in 30-second increments.

3

FIG. 2. Comparison of measured muon rate with the expected rate (from topographical information) and inferred rate along
the full length of the tunnel. Distances measured from the Langley Mill entrance.

V.

DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION

The principal analysis tool comprises simply summing
triggers across the full system as described in section III
and converting this to a muon rate per 30 minutes. Figure 2 depicts the variation of this muon rate as a function
of distance along the tunnel relative to the Langley Mill
portal. The errors displayed on the rate for each data
run are purely statistical. The broad features of this
figure concur with the expected rate derived from the topographical survey discussed in section II. A rapidly reducing muon flux at both tunnel entrances was observed,
as the overburden increases, as well as a minimum in the
muon flux at 400 m from the Langley Mill entrance where
the overburden is the greatest.
Superimposed on Figure 2 is the known location of the
three open shafts (in light grey). Figure 3 provides a
photo of one such open shaft. The variation in the rate
at the open shafts is very clear and highly statistically
significant (up to 10 standard deviations when compared
to the average trend of the data either side). Any hidden
shaft would be expected to create similar variations in
the data. Figure 4 provides a zoom of the data around
the open shaft at 220 m as an indication of the variation of the flux under the open shafts. Since the shaft is
comparable in size to the data taking intervals, a sharp
increase is seen when directly under the shaft relative to
the points directly either side.
Returning to Figure 2, whilst there is general agreement, it is clear that there are several areas where there
is a disagreement between the expected and measured
rate. Note that the discontinuity in the data at 350 m is
known to be due to a change in efficiency as a result of ex-

FIG. 3. Photo of an open ventilation shaft in the Alfreton
Old Tunnel, the shaft’s diameter is 3 m

changing a faulty cable and is not related to an overburden change. Between 150 m and 200 m and also between
600 m and 700 m, the measured muon rate is less than
expected from the overburden measurement, indicating

4

FIG. 4. Comparison of measured muon rate with the expected
rate and inferred rate around the known open shaft at 220 m
from the Langley Mill portal end of the tunnel.

FIG. 5. Comparison of measured muon rate with the expected
rate and inferred rate around the suspected hidden shaft at
80 m

a region of higher than expected density/overburden in
the ground above the tunnel After a careful comparison of
all possible bar and paddle trigger combinations in this
region, it was concluded that the observed discrepancy
was due to some larger scale effect and not the presence
of a localised high density feature. Since the topography
data was sampled in a straight line along the top of the
tunnel, it is expected that if additional density variations
due to the landscape exist away from this line, but are
still within the field of view of the detector, such features would become apparent in the data. This could be
corrected for by performing a higher precision topography scan (∼10 m resolution) of the overburden above the
tunnel, covering the entire angular field of view of the detector. However, in some cases, where access is limited,
or historic knowledge has been lost, such fine scale topography information may be unavailable. Therefore, it
was advantageous to consider if muon tomography could
be used to identify voiding with only limited access to
this information.
The level of redundancy in the system data, which simultaneously records 18 angular bins, provides the opportunity to address the question of the erroneous expected muon flux from the topographical survey. By
making an assumption on the average surrounding rock
density, the decrease in muon flux rates compared to the
open sky measurement for a given bar and paddle trigger combination can be used to infer the rock thickness
along a specific line of sight. Overlaying information from
multiple lines of sight and positions can be used to triangulate the average surface height at a given position.
The mean surface height for any given position along the
tunnel provides an estimate of the overburden given an

assumed rock density. In cases where the rock density is
not well known, or expected to vary significantly, these
inferred overburden estimates can be combined with a
limited number of manually measured overburden points
to further refine the overburden estimate determined in
this way. Furthermore, using a wide binning (e.g. ∼20 m)
allows the overburden to be estimated with weak dependence on small scale features of interest such as ∼5 m
shafts. When the overburden is calculated in this way it
is possible to infer an updated rate estimate as seen in
Figure 2 which removes the large-scale features observed
in the previous estimate. This technique is a promising one for general overburden calculations in areas with
limited ground-level access.
In addition to the three known open shafts there are
additional points along the tunnel where there is poor
agreement between observed and inferred muon rates
which may be indicative of hidden features that result
in overburden changes. One in particular, that at 80 m,
was investigated by introducing additional scan points
at finer 2.5 m spacings. As illustrated in Figure 5, at
80 m there is a statistically significant excess in the muon
flux compared with both the expected and inferred flux,
however, unlike the case for the open shafts, this feature
appears to be broader in extension which may imply a
hidden shaft that has undergone some degradation, such
as material infall from the sides and/or partial infill. Following disclosure of the results of this blind test to the
rail authorities, the authors have subsequently been made
aware of pre-existing concerns that there is a hidden void
in this area.These suspected voided regions are also approximately at the same positions as the known hidden
shafts in the Alfreton New Tunnel, providing further con-

5

The first whole-length overburden measurements of a
railway tunnel have been performed to search for potentially dangerous voids, such as hidden construction
shafts. Cosmic ray muon radiography has been demonstrated as a viable technique for the identification of void-

ing and significant density changes inside railway tunnel
overburden. A portable system with limited angular resolution has been shown to be capable of imaging open
shafts with high statistical significance inside the Alfreton Old Tunnel in the UK within a short exposure time
of only 100 hours. In this blind test, one hidden void
above the Alfreton Old Tunnel was identified and, posttrial, confirmed by rail authorities. The use of redundant
data to predict the tunnel’s overburden illustrates the
power of the cosmic ray muon radiography technique as
a practical method for overburden mapping even when
full topographical information is not available.

[1] H. J. Pragnell, Early British Railway Tunnels: the Implications for planners, landowners and passengers between
1830 and 1870, Ph.D. thesis, University of York (2016),
http://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/16826/.
[2] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clifton Hall Tunnel.
[3] L. W. Alvarez et al., Science 167, 832 (1970).
[4] K. Morishima et al., Nature 552, 386 (2017).
[5] H. Miyadera et al., AIP Advances 3 (2013),
10.1063/1.4808210.
[6] H. K. M. Tanaka et al., Nature Communications 5 (2014),
10.1038/ncomms4381.

[7] E. Guardincerri et al., Pure and Applied Geophysics 174,
2133 (2017).
[8] E. F. C. Trench, Minutes of the Proceedings of
the Institution of Civil Engineers 161, 116 (1905),
https://doi.org/10.1680/imotp.1905.17053.
[9] Contains public sector information licensed under the
Open Government Licence v3.0.
[10] https://www.caen.it/products/dt5740/.
[11] C. Hagmann et al.,
(2007), 10.1109/NSSMIC.2007.4437209.
[12] https://geant4.web.cern.ch/.

fidence. It should be stressed that this information was
not made available to the authors at the time of the trial.

VI.

CONCLUSION

