Thermalization of non-stochastic Hamiltonian systems
K. S. Glavatskiy

arXiv:1906.12041v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 28 Jun 2019

Centre for Complex Systems, The University of Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia
V. L. Kulinskii
Department of Theoretical Physics, Odessa National University,
Dvoryanskaya 2, 65026 Odessa, Ukraine
(Dated: July 1, 2019)

Abstract
Ability of dynamical systems to relax to equilibrium has been investigated since the invention of statistical mechanics, which establishes the connection between dynamics of many-body
Hamiltonian systems and phenomenological thermodynamics. The key link in this connection is
stochasticity, which translates the deterministic evolution of a dynamical system to its probabilistic
exploration of the state space. To-date research focuses on determining the conditions of stochasticity for particular systems. Here we propose an alternative agenda and prove thermalization
for non-stochastic Hamiltonian systems. This shows that thermalization happens in both stochastic and non-stochastic systems, reducing the need to rely on stochasticity in a “coarse-grained”
analysis. The result is valid for an arbitrary classical Hamiltonian system and does not rely on
the thermodynamic limit or the particular form of the interaction potential. It utilizes the property of adiabatic invariance, and reveals a deep relation between the structure of the microscopic
Hamiltonian and macroscopic thermodynamics.

1

Stochasticity plays crucial role in the foundations of statistical mechanics [1]. Evolution
of a physical system consisting of large number of interacting particles is deterministic, yet
such system typically reveals thermodynamic behavior. The latter can be derived from
statistical mechanics [2], provided the underlying dynamical system is stochastic. Despite
a number of rigorous results [3, 4] in ergodic theory [5] and stochastic dynamical systems
[6], ergodicity of a general dynamical system still has the notion of a hypothesis, and for
the purposes of statistical mechanics the stochasticity of such system is simply postulated.
This leaves open the question of the possibility of thermalization of an arbitrary dynamical
system.
In this letter we present an alternative approach to address this question. In particular, we
prove that stochasticity is not required for a dynamical system to experience thermalization,
i.e. to reveal thermodynamic behavior. To do this we consider an opposite of a stochastic
dynamical system, a completely integrable system, and prove that it can also be described
using the thermodynamic approach. We further relax the integrability condition and show
that the same result also holds for a partially integrable system. The results are presented
for a classical Hamiltonian system and do not depend on the type of interactions between
the particles.
Consider a dynamical system of N particles which has the energy E and performs finite
motion within the volume V . The system is either completely or partially integrable and is
described by a classical Hamiltonian H. Neither N nor V needs to be large, i.e. the system
does not need to be in the thermodynamic limit. Below we derive thermodynamics for such
system. In particular, we show, that one can identify the deterministic temperature T and
the deterministic pressure P , which consistently resemble the thermodynamic temperature
and pressure respectively. Furthermore, we show that one can also identify the deterministic
entropy S, so that the evolution of the system as a whole is described by the standard
thermodynamic equation
dE = T dS − P dV

(1)

which expresses the combination of the first and the second laws of thermodynamics for
equilibrium processes.
Thermodynamic approach provides a reduced description of the system, and uses just few
thermodynamic variables instead of a large number of dynamic variables (which is of the
order of the Avogadro’s number). This implies some sort of coarse-graining of the dynamical
2

system. In statistical mechanics this is realized by state space averaging of dynamic variables.
An alternative approach is to use time averaging of dynamic variables. Typical experimental
measurements are not instantaneous: they represent some mean value over the time of
measurement, which is typically much larger than a characteristic microscopic time. In this
analysis we will use the following time average of a dynamic variable x
Z
1 τ
hxi ≡ lim
x(t) dt
(2)
τ →∞ τ 0
Completely integrable system. We first focus on completely integrable systems. For a
system in D-dimensional space this means that there exists DN integrals of motion. The
standard mechanical description uses the positions qi and the momenta pi ≡ mi vi as the
canonical variables, where i indicates the particle number. For an integrable system it is
more convenient to use the actions Ii and the angles φi as the canonical variables. The
equations of motion q̇ = Hp (q, p) and ṗ = −Hq (q, p) (here dot over the variable indicates
the time derivative and the subscript indicates the partial derivative) upon the canonical
transformation [7] take a simple form: I˙ = 0 and φ̇ = HI (I, φ). This means that the action
variables Ii are the integrals of motion. The action variable is defined as the abbreviated
action of the corresponding degree of freedom
I
1
pi dqi
(3)
Ii =
2π
where the integration is taken over the trajectory of the corresponding particle during one
period. Complete integrability of the system guarantees that each of the DN trajectories
are closed, so the integral in Eq. (3) is well defined (see Fig. 1).
Consider now a process, during which the volume of the dynamical system changes slowly.
In this case each of the action variables introduced by Eq. (3) remains constant, I˙i = 0, i.e. is
invariant under slow volume change [7]. Invariance of a property during slow transformation
of the parameters of the dynamic system is called the adiabatic invariance and has been
studied extensively for dynamical systems [8]. The name “adiabatic” here shares the same
meaning with the adiabatic process in thermodynamics, during which the system evolves
while being isolated from the environment.
In the following paragraphs we derive two main equations, Eq. (4) and Eq. (5), for this
analysis. In particular, show that the adiabatic process for the considered dynamical system
is described by the following equation:
1

hKi 2 V
3

1
D

=J

(4)

where K ≡

PDN
i

mi vi2 /2 is the total kinetic energy of the system, while J depends on

the abbreviated actions Ii and the particles’ parameters. Since every Ii is constant during
this process, so is J, which is the adiabatic invariant as well. If the transformation of the
dynamical system is such that J changes, the corresponding process is no longer adiabatic.
However, Eq. (4) still describes this process. For a general (nonadiabatic) process, during
which each of Ii and therefore J may change, we differentiate both sides of Eq. (4) and
obtain
1 d hKi
1 dV
dJ
+
=
2 hKi
D V
J

(5)

We first introduce the notion of the “trajectory average” as the temporal average of a
Rτ
dynamic variable over the period of motion along a specific trajectory: hxiτ ≡ τ −1 0 x(t) dt.
p
We next introduce the characteristic length of the particle’s trajectory ai ≡ hvi2 i τi . The

system is bounded in a box and without loss of generality we may assume that the box is

cubic, so its edge length is equal to L and the volume is V = LD . The trajectory length is
then proportional to the box length ai = δi L, where the proportionality coefficient δi is the
parameter of the particular trajectory.
Transforming the integral (3) over the trajectory into the integral over the period of
motion τi along the trajectory, we obtain Ii = hKi iτi τi /π, where Ki ≡ mi vi2 /2 is the kinetic
energy of the particle i. Multiplying both sides of this equation with τi , we obtain that
Ii τi = mi a2i . Substituting τi from this expression back to the expression for Ii we obtain for
the average kinetic energy of the particle hKi i = (2π 2 Ii2 )/(mi δi2 L2 ).

P
Finally, we calculate the average kinetic energy of the entire dynamic system, h i Ki i.

The entire dynamical system is not necessarily periodic, since the individual periods τi are,
in general, not mutually commensurable. Because of this, the averaging time for the entire
system does not equal to the period of any individual period, and may be chosen indepenP
dently, representing the “observation time” τ . For any finite τ the average h i Ki iτ depends

on the observation time and therefore does not reflect the properties of the dynamical sysP
P
tem alone: h i Ki iτ = i hKi iτi + o(1/τ ), where o is the little-o notation. In the limit of
P
P
infinite time, however, hKi∞ ≡ h i Ki i∞ = i hKi i∞ . Using Eq. (2), hKi ≡ hKi∞ , so that
P
P
2 2
2
hKi = V −(2/D) i (2π 2 Ii2 )/(mi δi2 ). Denoting J 2 ≡ DN
i=1 2π Ii /(mi δi ) we obtain Eq. (4).
Having Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) established, we introduce the deterministic temperature Td ,

4

the deterministic pressure Pd and the deterministic entropy Sd as
1
hKi
Td ≡
2
DN
Pd ≡ −

∂ hHi
∂V

dSd ≡ DN

(6)
J=const

dJ
J

Denoting the potential energy of the system U ≡ H − K, the deterministic pressure is
evaluated as Pd = N Td /V − (∂ hUi /∂V )J . Furthermore, substituting Eq. (6) in Eq. (5)
we obtain for the average kinetic energy d hKi = Td dSd − (N Td /V ) dV and for the average
total energy (i.e. the internal energy)
d hHi = Td dSd − Pd dV

(7)

which is nothing but Eq. (1).
It is evident that the meanings of the deterministic temperature and pressure introduced
by Eq. (6) reflects the corresponding meaning of the thermodynamic temperature, pressure
and entropy, which are revealed by statistical mechanics for stochastic systems. In particular, 1/2 of the deterministic temperature is equal to the average kinetic energy of one degree
of freedom. Note, that the notion of the deterministic temperature does not require actual
equipartion of the energy, so the deterministic degrees of freedom may have different energy.
Furthermore, the deterministic pressure is the sum of the ideal gas contribution and the
“configurational” contribution. This corresponds to the exact expression for the instantahP
i
2
~
~
neous microscopic pressure, P = (3V )−1
m
v
+
F
·
~
r
i i
i
i , where Fi is the total force on
i

the particle i which has the position ~ri . For ergodic systems this leads to the virial expresR
sion for the pressure P = T N/V − (1/6) r g(r) du(r), where g(r) is the pair correlation
function and u(r) is the intermolecular pair potential [9].

We should emphasize, that the above derivation (e.g. Eq. (4) and Eq. (5)) utilizes the
deterministic quantities only. At no step of this derivation any thermodynamic or statistical
assumption has been made. Yet, this procedure allows us to introduce the deterministic
analogues of the thermodynamic variables and obtain the deterministic analogues of the
thermodynamic equations. An important observation is that the entropy of a dynamical
system is its adiabatic invariant.
5

Despite we are not using any statistical assumption, for the thermodynamic description
we do not need to trace the evolution of every individual particle of the dynamical system.
This means that the dynamical system allows further coarse-graining. In particular, both
the Hamiltonian of the system H and the adiabatic invariant J are independent of order
of particles counting. This means that the system has the symmetry with respect to the
particles permutations or, in other words, the particles are indistinguishable, just like in
the statistical description. Similarly to the classical statistical description, the deterministic
entropy is defined up to an integration constant So , which is independent of the temperature
and the volume. The explicit expression for the deterministic entropy, which takes into
account the above arguments is therefore Sd = So + log(J DN /N!). Indeterminacy of So does
not affect the thermodynamic behavior of the dynamical system, since only the entropy
change, but not the entropy itself, is measurable in thermodynamics. Furthermore, the
factor N! guarantees additivity of the entropy and reflects the indistinguishability of the
particles.
Illustrative example: ideal gas. We next illustrate our result using a specific example,
the ideal gas. It is a good model system, since it represents both a mechanical system with
a simple Hamiltonian allowing exact analytical calculations and a thermodynamic system
which is used as a zero-approximation for many real gases. In particular, we consider N
point particles of mass m enclosed in a D-dimensional cubic box of volume V = LD . The
particles do not interact with each other, experiencing elastic collisions with the walls only.
The momentum of each particle pi remains the same between two consecutive collisions
with either wall. The potential energy of the system is zero, so the total energy is E =
PDN 2
i=1 pi /(2m). We investigate how this energy changes during the thermodynamic process

of equilibrium volume variation, which for the mechanical system corresponds to slow motion
of one of the box walls with a constant velocity w << vi .
Since there is no interaction between the particles, the motion of every degree of free-

dom is independent of each other. When a particle collides with the moving wall, the
absolute value of its velocity changes by 2w.
box, so the trajectory parameter δi = 2.

Every particle travels across the entire

The distance which is passed by the mov-

ing wall between two subsequent collisions of the particle and the non-moving wall is
∆L = w [L/(vi − w) + {L + w L/(vi − w)}/(vi − 2w)]. Evaluating the integral in Eq. (3)
over the particle’s trajectory between two subsequent collisions with the non-moving wall
6

we obtain Ii = m vi L/π. Substituting two consecutive values of vi and L in this expression
one can show that Ii (L) = const, i.e. Ii does not change when the wall moves, which means
that Ii is an adiabatic invariant.
Evaluating the expression for the total adiabatic invariant we obtain J =
1/2
 PDN 2
I
/(2m)
. Furthermore, a general process is described by the equation
π
i=1 i

E 1/2 V 1/D = J, which has the form of Eq. (4) with E used instead of hKi. For the process of slow variation of the system’s volume (i.e. when J = const) the energy variation is
dE = −(2/D) E V dV . For a general process (i.e. when J changes), we obtain Eq. (5) with
E used instead of hKi. Note, that for the ideal gas the equations contain instantaneous
value of the total energy, not the average one. This is a consequence of the system being
the ideal gas. Furthermore, for the ideal gas hHi = E.
Introducing the deterministic temperature, the deterministic pressure and the deterministic entropy according to Eq. (6), we obtain the equation of state and the equation of the
process respectively:
Pd V = N Td

(8)
Pd V 1+2/D = (2/D) J 2
The equation of state is identical to the thermodynamic equation of state for the ideal
gas. Furthermore, for D = 3 and for the process of slow variation of the system’s volume
(J = const) the equation of process is identical to the thermodynamic adiabatic equation
for the ideal gas with the adiabatic index γ ≡ 1 + 2/D = 5/3. Furthermore, it follows from
the definition of Sd that
dSd, ig = N



D dTd dV
+
2 Td
V



(9)

which for D = 3 is identical to the thermodynamic expression for the entropy variation of
the ideal gas.
The dynamical system of ideal gas can be viewed as the limiting case of both the statistical
description and the deterministic description. We will use this fact to establish the expression
for the integration constant So for the deterministic entropy. The statistical mechanical
expression for the entropy is given in terms of the phase space volume accessible to the
system [10]:
Se, ig



zDN V N (2m E)DN/2
= log
N!
(2π~)DN

7



(10)

where zDN ≡ π DN/2/(DN/2)! is the volume of the DN-dimensional unit sphere. Comparing
√

Se, ig with Sd, ig we obtain So = log zDN + DN log 2m/(2π~) .
In a general dynamical system different degrees of freedom are characterized by differ-

ent values of parameters (e.g. different particle’s masses), so it might be convenient to
introduce new action variables Yi with the ideal gas reference. In particular, we define
Yi ≡ (Ii /~) (2/δi ) (m/mi )1/2 . For the ideal gas (mi = m, δi = 2) this gives Yi = Ii /~. The
above expression for the integration constant So represents this particular reference state,
and the expression for the deterministic entropy for a general dynamical system takes the
following form


zDN
Sd = log
N!
The quantity (

P

i



DN

1 X 2
Y
22 i=1 i

DN/2 

(11)

Yi2 )1/2 can be interpreted as the diameter of the DN-dimensional sphere

in the phase space of the dynamical system.
Partially integrable systems. Consider now a dynamical system with DN degrees of
freedom which has M integrals of motions, where M < DN. This means that the system is
partially integrable and there exist only M adiabatic invariants Ii . The Hamiltonian of this
system can therefore be represented as a sum of M individual terms, which correspond to M
integrable degrees of freedom, and the residual term which includes the remaining DN − M
degrees of freedom:
HDN (1, . . . , DN ) =

M
X

Hi (i) + HDN−M (M +1, . . . , DN )

(12)

i=1

If the residual term represents an ergodic system, then the above analysis can still be applied
to the whole dynamical system. Indeed, a DN −M dimensional ergodic system can be viewed
as a single quasi-particle which performs a periodic motion in the corresponding DN − M
dimensional space, so the initial DN dimensional dynamical system can be viewed as a new
M + 1 times integrable dynamical system.
To see this we note that the abbreviated action of a single particle i defined by Eq. (3)
RR
H
is equal to the phase space volume of that particle Ωi ≡ (2π)−1
dpi dqi , since pi dqi =
RR
dpi dqi (see Fig. 1). The motion of this particle along the phase space surface, which

bounds the corresponding phase space volume, is ergodic. This means that the phase space

volume Ωi available to a single particle is an adiabatic invariant. For an ergodic system of
Q RR
G particles the phase space volume ΩG (1, . . . , G) ≡ (2π)−G Gg=1
dpg dqg is an adiabatic
8

invariant as well [11, 12] and can therefore be represented by a single variable ΩG which is
the analogue of the abbreviated action for an ergodic system.
For the partially integrable system we therefore can identify M abbreviated actions Ii
which correspond to the integrable degrees of freedom, and one abbreviated action which
corresponds to the ergodic system described by the residual Hamiltonian HDN−M , having in
total M + 1 abbreviated actions. The initial partially integrable system with DN degrees
of freedom can therefore be reduced to a completely integrable system with M + 1 degrees
of freedom corresponding to M + 1 quasi-particles. The analysis of integrable dynamical
systems is then applied directly for the new system, replacing DN in all the formulas with
M + 1. In the limiting case of completely ergodic system we have M = 0, and all the
expressions in this paper reduce to the standard statistical mechanical expressions.
Note, that the deterministic temperature and pressure of a partially integrable system
defined by Eq. (6) do not necessarily coincide with the statistical temperature and pressure
of the corresponding ergodic subsystem. Such state, being formally a non-equilibrium one,
is, however, stable: because the integrable degrees of freedom are decoupled from the ergodic
subsystem, there is no means for the system to “equilibrate”, i.e. to equalize the corresponding temperatures and the pressures. Still, the evolution of the whole system is described by
Eq. (1), the statement of the first and the second laws of thermodynamics for equilibrium
processes, which means that the system as a whole is nevertheless in equilibrium. A notable
example of such system is nonthermal plasma [13].
Concluding remarks. The above analysis shows that an arbitrary dynamical system
which is described by a classical Hamiltonian can be thermalized, i.e. reveals the thermodynamic behavior. While stochasticity of many deterministic dynamical systems is realized via
dynamical chaos, so they are naturally thermalized, we show that non-stochastic dynamical
systems undergo thermalization as well. This is especially important as it allows one to
not investigate thermalization of each particular system. Rather, we have proved a general
result for any classical Hamiltonian system.
It is important to realize that in order the system the be able to thermalize, its underlying
dynamics needs to be Hamiltonian. In particular, it should be described by the Hamiltonian
equations of motion, while the Hamiltonian itself has to consist of the kinetic component,
which is second order in the particles momenta, and the potential component, which depends
on the particles positions only. In contrast, no stochasticity is required. Furthermore, the
9

thermodynamic limit is not required: neither the volume nor the number of particles need to
be large in order for the system to undergo thermalization. In fact, the number of particles
can be as small as one, and we are still able to define the temperature and the entropy in the
same way, and also able to derive the fundamental thermodynamic relation (1). This also
emphasizes the role of the so-called observation time τ . The exact results are formulated
for the “macroscopic” variables, which are the averages of the corresponding “microscopic”
variables over infinite time. For any finite τ the accuracy of this averaging increases with
τ , and when τ is much larger than the characteristic microscopic time, it is safe to impose
that τ = ∞. This is the case, in particular, for slow transformations of the system, and is
similar to problem of the observation time in statistical mechanics.
Finally, we emphasize the role of the adiabatic invariance. Classical equilibrium thermodynamics is valid for slow and gradual transformations of the system, which are exactly the
conditions for adiabatic transformations of a dynamical system. Furthermore, our analysis
utilizes the direct correspondence between a thermodynamic process, during which the system is thermodynamically isolated from the environment, and a mechanical process, during
which the system possesses one (or many) mechanical adiabatic invariants. In particular, we
have demonstrated that the entropy of a thermodynamic system is the adiabatic invariant
of the corresponding dynamical system.
V.K. is grateful to Mr. Konstantin Yun for financial support of the research.

[1] Calvin C. Moore.

Ergodic theorem, ergodic theory, and statistical mechanics.

PNAS,

112:1907–1911, 2015.
[2] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz. Statistical Physics. Course of theoretical physics. Pergamon
Press, 3rd english edition, 1986.
[3] Nándor Simányi. Proof of the ergodic hypothesis for typical hard ball systems. Annales Henri
Poincaré, 5:203–233, 2004.
[4] Ya. G. Sinai. On the foundations of the ergodic hypothesis for a dynamical system of statistical
mechanics. Sov. Math Dokl., 4:1818–1822, 1963.
[5] I. P. Kornfeld, Ya. G. Sinai, and S. V. Fomin. Ergodic Theory. Nauka, Moscow, 1980.
[6] G. M. Zaslavsky. Chaos in Dynamic Systems. Harwood Academic Publishers, New York,

10

pi

Ii = const
(area)

qi

trajectory

FIG. 1: Schematic representation of the individual trajectory and the state space in the beginning
of the process (filled area) and in the end of the process (waved area). The abbreviated action Ii ,
which is equal to the area bounded by the trajectory, is preserved during adiabatic transformation.
The arrows attached to the trajectory indicate the direction of its transformation.
1985.
[7] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz. Mechanics. Course of theoretical physics. ButterworthHeinemann, 3rd english edition, 1976.
[8] P.Lochak and C. Meunier. Multiphase Averaging for Classical Systems With Applications to

11

Adiabatic Theorems. Springer Verlag, New York, 1988.
[9] J. S. Rowlinson and B. Widom. Molecular Theory of Capillarity. Dover, New York, 2003.
[10] Ryogo Kubo. Statistical Mechanics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1965.
[11] P. Hertz. Uber die mechanischen grundlagen der thermodynamik. Annalen der Physik, 12:225–
274, 1910.
[12] P. Hertz. Uber die mechanischen grundlagen der thermodynamik. Annalen der Physik, 12:537–
552, 1910.
[13] Jack L.Kerrebrock. Non-equilibrium ionization due to electron heating: I. theory. AIAA
Journal, 2 (6):1072–1087, 1964.

12

