Clearly Discriminate the Continuum Band and Exciton State
of the Hybrid Lead Bromide Perovskite
Jiangjian Shi,1 Yiming Li,1,4 Jionghua Wu,1,4 Huijue Wu,1 Yanhong Luo,1,4 Dongmei Li,1,4
Jacek J. Jasieniak,3* Qingbo Meng1,2*
1. Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing Key
Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China.
2. Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3. ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science, Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.
4. Department of Physics Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, P. R. China

*Corresponding authors:
jacek.jasieniak@monash.edu,
qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn.

Abstract: Electronic states of the hybrid perovskite enable their promising applications as
distinctive optoelectronic materials. The understanding of their electronic structures and
charge characters remains highly controversial. The electronic mechanism such as
reabsorption, Urbach tail and indirect band for interpreting dual-peak emissions is one of the
controversial focuses. Herein, we report that through heterojunction enhanced exciton
dissociation and global tracing of multiple radiative electronic states across wide temperature
regions, we have succeeded in directly observing free carrier emissions from the hybrid lead
bromide perovskite and clearly discriminating the direct continuum band and exciton states.
The widely-concerned dual-peak emissions are clarified to be excitonic, arising from two
types of exciton states of the perovskite. These excitons possess giant binding energies and
superior phase stability compared to conventional inorganic semiconductors, providing
important implications for exploiting the excitonic mechanism for realizing novel
optoelectronic applications.

Key words: Hybrid perovskite, dual-peak emission, free carrier, exciton

Introduction
Hybrid lead halide perovskites have emerged as lucrative optoelectronic materials for
light-emitting, detecting and photovoltaic applications, owing to their advantages in the
bandgap, carrier lifetime and light absorption.1-12 These advantages have arisen because of
the distinctive semiconductor and photophysics properties that such materials possess,
including ultrahigh bandedge density of states,13 ultralow charge trapping cross-section,14 and
low defect densities.15 Recent findings, including the ultraslow hot carrier cooling,16-17
ultralong polarization memory,18 giant spin-orbit Rashba splitting19 and weak electron-lattice
coupling,20 further increase mystery of the perovskites. Underlying these alluring
characteristics are intrinsic electronic properties of the halide perovskite materials, while
electronic structure ultimately determines their photoelectric and energy conversion
mechanisms and performances.21-22 As such, exploring and exploiting electronic states of the
hybrid perovskite would help improve performance of current devices and expand research
and application horizons of these materials.
Although a variety of efforts were paid, a clear understanding of the intrinsic electronic
structure and charge-carrier characters of the perovskite remains lacking, and controversies
on these properties have always been ongoing. These endless controversies arise because of
the observed complicated spectroscopic characteristics and distinct scenarios proposed for
interpreting them. The origin for dual-peak emissions within both the single crystal and
polycrystalline perovskites is one of the controversial focuses.23-30 Reabsorption provided a
satisfied explanation for this phenomenon within the single crystal methylammonium lead
bromide (MAPbBr3) where the light scattered from the crystal edges produces the second
emission peak;23 however, this cannot account for the MAPbBr3 thin film because light
reabsorption and edge scattering are negligible here.20 Indirect band structure induced by the
static or dynamical Rashba effect arising from the strong spin-orbit coupling and symmetry
breaking is another common interpretation28-30 since a giant Rashba splitting within
MAPbBr3 was indeed observed using angular resolved photoelectron spectroscopy.19 The
indirect band structure scenario was also proposed to explain an observed unusual
temperature-dependent second-order radiative recombination velocity.31 However, this needs
to be carefully rechecked because a different experimental result of the radiative

recombination velocity was observed recently.32 Moreover, whether the Rashba effect and its
relevant theoretical prediction can indeed be reflected by the photophysics characteristics in
conventional experiments is still an open question. The dual-peak emission was also
attributed to the exciton states of the perovskite;20 however, this phenomenon was recently
claimed to arise from free carriers of the MAPbBr3.29 Essentially, these controversies
regarding the dual-peak emission are debates and explorations on the bandedge electronic
structure and charge nature (i.e. direct-indirect band and exciton-free carrier characters) of
hybrid perovskites.
Herein, we provide a new and important experimental finding to clarify the controversial
bandedge electronic structure of the MAPbBr3 perovskite. By enhancing the exciton
dissociation, we realized an observation of higher-energy emissions arising from free carriers
that populated within the direct continuum bands. These emissions are clearly distinct from
the exciton dual emissions in the energy space and exhibit little signature of indirect states.
Comparisons of direct bandgap and exciton energy level derived from light absorption and
photoluminescence (PL) of the MAPbBr3, respectively, make a confirmation of this energy
landscape. A bound exciton state was further determined according to its correlation to the
traps of the perovskite. These findings help to conclude that (1) the commonly observed
dual-peak emission of the MAPbBr3 is arisen from the dual exciton states and not the free
carriers of the perovskite; (2) the free carrier emission is arisen from the direct continuum
band; and (3) excitons dominate the charge species and photophysics characteristics of the
MAPbBr3 even at room temperature. Therefore, this work draws a clear picture of fine
structure of the multiple electronic states within the MAPbBr3 including continuum band,
free (FE) and bound excitons (BE), and trap states, and provides fresh insight into clearly
understanding the electronic structure and photophysics mechanisms of the hybrid perovskite.
Moreover, these findings present important opportunities of exploiting tunable electronic
states and especially the room-temperature stabilized exciton states for realizing more
abundant optoelectronic applications of the hybrid perovskite materials.

Results
Dual-peak emissions within the hybrid perovskites including both the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3

have been widely concerned.23-30 MAPbBr3 was usually chosen for further photophysics
mechanism studies because (1) it gives emissions in the visible regions which is much easier
to be optically probed and (2) it possesses more stable crystal phase and spectroscopic
structures across wide temperature regions. Figure 1(a) presents typical PL spectra of the
MAPbBr3 film at room temperature at different decay times after the photoexcitation.
Shoulders in the lower-energy regime can be unambiguously observed. The PL spectra
probed at 1 ns is extracted for further emission peak fittings. Clearly, these asymmetric
spectra are composed of two emission bands centered at ~2.32 eV and 2.24 eV, respectively,
which is denoted as peak 1 and peak 2 for clarity here and in the following will be
demonstrated to originate from FE and BE states, respectively. Due to Stokes shifts arising
from phonon involvement or tail state, these two emission bands are located obviously below
both the direct bandgap (Eg) and the exciton energy level of the MAPbBr3, which makes it
difficult to determine their photophysics mechanism by direct energy level comparisons. The
reabsorption mechanism once proposed can be firstly excluded here by using a reflection PL
configuration and eliminating the edge light scattering. As such, this dual-peak emission
behavior possesses a direct correlation to bandedge electronic structures of the MAPbBr3.

Figure 1. Dual-peak emissions of the MAPbBr3. (a) Typical emission spectra of the
MAPbBr3 film at room temperature. The dual peaks are decoupled by using
multiple-Gaussian fittings. Possible charge characters and energy band structure to interpret
the dual-peak emission, including (b) mixed charge species within the perovskite (e.g. free
carrier, free and bound excitons) and (c) indirect band structure of the perovskite. Charge
transfer can occur between the conduction band (CB), indirect band and the valence band
(VB).

Figure 1(b-c) presents a summary of current understandings of charge species and energy
band structure of the perovskite to account for the dual-peak emission. It was generally
believed that free carrier dominates the charge species and thus the radiative recombination
(photon emissions) of the perovskite.29, 33 Excitons including FE and BE may also exist
within the perovskite, influencing the photophysics characteristics.20,34 For free carriers, it
was proposed that indirect band structure could influence their distribution properties and
result in dual-peak emissions.28-31 This indirect band and its relevant local electric field were
believed to be able to prolong the carrier lifetime and enhance exciton dissociation, beneficial
for photovoltaic or photodetector devices, however stifling the light emitting and optical gain
performances.30 Nonetheless, all of these understandings are still in controversial.

Figure 2. A direct observation of the continuum band emission of MAPbBr3. PL spectra
of the perovskite MAPbBr3 films, and their multiple-peak fittings (a. without and b. with a
PCBM layer on the surface). The insets depict the PL measurement configuration. (c) Fitting
of the continuum band emission spectrum according to the carrier distribution derived from
joint density of states (JDOS) of the perovskite and the Fermi-Dirac function. (d) An
experimental relationship between the free exciton emission intensity (IFE) and the free carrier
emission intensity (IFC) of the MAPbBr3/PCBM sample. This relationship can be well fitted
using a power-law equation. (e) Two-dimensional pseudocolor plots of transient PL for the
MAPbBr3/PCBM film as functions of emission energy and time. The dashed lines depict
evolutions of the FC and FE emission peak position with time.

These controversies arise because that the dual-peak emission spectra of the perovskite only
provide limited information about the energy structure, and that diversified electron-lattice
properties of the perovskite can complicate the emission characteristics. Nonetheless, if we
could observe optical response, such as PL emission, from the non-prominent electronic
states, it will then be possible to determine the mechanisms for the current spectroscopic
structure. Under the guidance of this idea, we introduced an organic [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric
acid methyl ester (PCBM) layer onto surface of the MAPbBr3 film to construct a
MAPbBr3/PCBM heterojunction.35 The electric field within the bulk perovskite induced by
this heterojunction would significantly enhance the exciton dissociation and the proportion of
free carriers, and thus modulate the spectroscopic features. To avoid the interface influence of
the PCBM layer, we probed PL spectra of the perovskite from the opposite side, that is, from
the quartz substrate side, and used an excitation wavelength of 445 nm (~2.8 eV) to obtain a
short optical penetration depth of <100 nm. The pump fluence of the excitation pulse is ~1 nJ
cm-2, which is low enough to avoid nonlinear effects and multi-particle scatterings.
Surprisingly, a new emission band located at the higher-energy side to the original dual-peak
emission appeared. This phenomenon can always be observed across the whole studied
temperature range from 10 to 300K (Supplementary Figure S1). In the meanwhile, the
intensity of the original dual-peak emissions and especially the lower-energy emission band
(BE) is obviously weakened. Figure 2(a-b) present the PL spectra of the MAPbBr3 and
MAPbBr3/PCBM samples at 150K, where the emission bands are qualitatively decoupled
using multiple-Gaussian fittings. Specially, the above-mentioned dual-peak emissions located
at ~2.3 eV and ~2.26 eV, respectively, can be observed in both samples. For the
MAPbBr3/PCBM sample, a new asymmetric emission band appears at ~2.38 eV, which is
denoted as FC for clarity here and we will confirm its emission mechanism in the following.
Notably, this new emission band should arise from the bulk region of the MAPbBr3 thin film
because the PL emission was collected from the quartz side with a reflection configuration
(as depicted in the inset of Figure 2(a-b)) and the PCBM layer would not influence the
quartz/MAPbBr3 interface. The non-local electric field and charge redistribution within the
MAPbBr3 caused by the PCBM heterojunction can be the origin for this result. Clearly, both

the electric field and charge redistribution can weaken the stability of the exciton.21-22 Thus,
we infer that the original dual-peak emission is excitonic and the new emission band is
originated from the free carriers populated within the continuum bands.
We take a closer look at this new emission band, as presented in Figure 2(c). This asymmetric
emission band exhibits a broad extending toward the high-energy side and seems possess a
relatively sharp cutoff edge at the low energy side. This spectral signature is similar to the
free carrier emissions from continuum bands.22 To demonstrate this scenario, we firstly
attempted to make a fitting of this energy (E)-dispersed emission band (IFC(E)) according to
the carrier distribution within the continuum bands, which can be described using the joint
density of states (JDOS) and the Fermi-Dirac function (f(E)), that is,22, 32
I FC  E  ~ JDOS  E   f  E 
~  E  Eg 

1

2


 E  Ef
 1  exp 
 K BT


-1

 ,



(1)

where Ef is the quasi Fermi energy level, KB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute
temperature. Further considering the broadening of continuum bands,36 equation (1) provides
a satisfied fitting of this emission band in energy region from 2.37 eV to 2.6 eV, thereby
supporting the reasonability of attributing this new emission band to free carriers.
More evidence can be obtained by studying the experimental relationship between the FE
emission intensity (IFE) and the free carrier emission intensity (IFC) of the MAPbBr3/PCBM
sample under different excitation intensities. As in Figure 2(d), the IFC exhibits approximately
half-power dependence to the IFE, while the IFC is linear to the excitation intensity. This result
may be beyond our expectation because it is usually thought that the IFC possesses quadratic
dependence to the excitation intensity while the IFE exhibits a linear relationship.29-30 Here, it
should be noted that this previous idea is valid only when studying the relationship between
the transient PL peak at the initial time after photoexcitation and the excitation intensity and
without significant charge transfer, such as charge trapping or exciton dissociation.37-38 If the
materials under different excitation intensities possess a same emission mechanism and
without any significant change in PL quantum yields, the steady-state or time integrated PL
intensity of all the emission bands, no matter the free carrier or the exciton, should follow a
linear dependence to the excitation intensity. This is linear optics. Thus, previous works that

using the quadratic or super-quadratic relationships between the PL intensity and the
excitation intensity to determine the free carrier mechanism of the above-mentioned
dual-peak emissions may not be reliable.
The experimental relationship of IFC ~ IFE0.59 we observed here can be well interpreted by
using the Saha-Langmuir theory which describes the population balance between the free
carrier and the exciton within one semiconductor system. Under low excitation intensities, the
free carrier density is approximately linear to while the free exciton density is quadratic to the
excitation intensity (Supplementary Figure S2). Under high excitation intensities, the free
carrier density is half-power to and the free exciton density is linear to the excitation
intensity.39 Therefore, free carrier density is always exhibits a half-power relationship to the
free exciton density, which consequently result in a relationship of IFC ~ IFE1/2. This agrees
well with our experimental result, thereby further supporting that the new emission band is
arisen from free carriers and the original dual-peak emissions are excitonic.
We further measured two-dimensional PL spectra at different decay times to observe the
dynamics behavior of these emission bands (Figure 2(e)). Under the time resolution of our
transient PL measurement, the FE and FC emissions rise to their peaks simultaneously, at ~
1.5 ns after the photoexcitation. This time is significantly shorter than the charge transport
time of the perovskite,12 which helps us to completely exclude the possibility that new
emission band is induced by the interface states of the MAPbBr3/PCBM heterojunction.
Clearly, the FC decay lifetime is much shorter than that of the excitons, confirming their
different charge recombination or transport mechanisms. More interestingly, the FC emission
exhibits a slight red-shift with time while the peak position of the exciton emissions remains
unchanged across the whole time range. This arises because the Fermion nature determines
that free carriers would relocated toward lower-energy states when their density is reduced
with time due to recombination or interface extraction while the energy level and distribution
of the exciton (Boson) is almost independent to their density.21-22 Gathering the above results
together, we can conclude that it is reasonable to attribute the original dual-peak emissions
and the new observed higher-energy emission band to excitons and free carriers, respectively.

Figure 3. Distinguish between continuum band and exciton state emissions. (a)
Two-dimensional pseudocolor plots of steady-state PL spectra for the MAPbBr3 film as
functions of emission energy and temperature. The emission bands including FE, BE, shallow
trap (ST) and deep traps (DTs) across the whole temperature range are decoupled from each
other, as indicated by the dashed lines. (b) Peaks fittings of emission spectra at 70K and 300K,
respectively. (c) Comparisons of direct bandgap and exciton energy level of the MAPbBr3
derived from light absorption and PL, respectively.

To confirm our findings, a direct comparison of the emission energy positions to the energy
levels derived from light absorption of the MAPbBr3 was made. Because of the existence of
multiple radiative electronic states within the MAPbBr3,20 we made a global tracing of the
emission bands across the whole temperature range from 10K to 300K. The spectral features
and energy position of each band were successfully decoupled by following several rules
(Supplementary Figure S3), including (1) spectra residual should be the least under
multi-Gaussian-peaks fittings, (2) emission energy position, intensity and full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of adjacent temperatures should be continuous, and (3) emission bands
of different samples should be similar to each other and without any untraceable mutation.
Under these rules, up to five emission bands have been found within the MAPbBr3 sample at
temperatures lower than 100K (Figure 3(a)). These emission bands can be assigned to FE, BE,
shallow and deep traps, respectively, where the trap states will be further studied elsewhere.

Figure 3(b) gives two examples of the emission bands fittings at 70K and 300K, respectively.
After the orthorhombic-tetragonal phase transition, these trap emissions cannot be observed
anymore, while both the FE and BE emissions are retained up to the room temperature. The
FC emission spectra across the whole temperature range can always be fitted by equation (1).
Figure 3(c) summarizes the energy levels derived from the light absorption (reused from a
previous work36) and PL spectra of the MAPbBr3, respectively. Clearly, the Eg derived from
the PL (PL-FC) is always close to the Eg from the light absorption (Abs-FC) and energy level
of the FE derived from the PL (PL-FE) is close to that from the light absorption (Abs-FE),
especially at temperatures lower than 150K. These results confirm that the widely-concerned
dual-peak emissions are indeed arisen from the exciton of the MAPbBr3. The energy
difference (ΔE) between the PL-FE and Abs-FE at high temperatures may come from the
phonon effect because it can be well fitted by using a temperature-dependent phonon
occupation model,30 that is, ΔE=ΔE0+A/(exp(Eph/KBT)-1), where A is a prefactor, Eph is the
photon energy and ΔE0 is a temperature-independent term. The Eph is derived to be ~26 meV,
almost same to the longitudinal optical phonon (LO) energy that derived from the
temperature-dependent FWHM of the FE emission (Supplementary Figure S4). This photon
energy is also very close to the value of the ΔE at room temperature, indicating that the FE
emission is a FE-LO process.
The energy position of the BE emission peak is also presented in Figure 3(c), which exhibits
a non-monotonous evolution with temperature. This evolution relationship does not agree
with the theoretical prediction using the above phonon occupation model (dashed line in
Figure 3(c)). The giant ΔE of >70 meV at both room temperature and low temperatures
between this emission position and the FE energy level is far beyond the phonon energy of
the perovskite.40 Therefore, the BE emission here should not be a phonon replica of the FE
state. In addition, the giant ΔE excludes the possibility of biexciton and trion (Supplementary
Table 1).21 Clearly, this emission possesses dependence to the crystal phase of the perovskite
and exhibits a turning due to the phase transition, which is a little similar to the transition
behavior of the trap state within the MAPbBr3 as we once reported.20 We have also
previously shown that a certain level of trap density is necessary for producing this BE
emission.20 As such, we infer that this emission is closely correlated to the trap state of the

perovskite, implying the possibility of bound exciton.

Figure 4. Determination of bound exciton (BE) within the MAPbBr3. (a) An experimental
relationship between the ionization energy of trap states and energy difference (ΔE) of the PL
dual emission peaks. The dashed lines are guides for eyes, illustrating a sharp increase in the
ΔE when additional deep traps are introduced. (b) A direct comparison of binding energies of
the BE state (EbBE) between the perovskite and the conventional silicon within the Haynes
rule framework. (c) Structures of multiple energy states that participated in the photoelectric
conversion processes of the MAPbBr3 perovskite.

Bound exciton is formed by the Coulomb interaction between a free exciton and a trap
center,21 as depicted in Figure 1(b), with binding energies (EbBE) correlated to the ionization
energy of the traps. By controlling the crystallization of the MAPbBr3 films, we can tune
their trap state properties in experiment.41 Figure 4(a) presents the relationship between ΔE of
the PL emission dual peaks and the ionization energy of traps determined from the thermal
admittance spectroscopy (Supplementary Figure S5).42 Two types of trap states were
observed within these samples, that is, shallow traps with ionization energies (EIST) ranging
from 0.05 eV to 0.18 eV and deep traps with ionization energies (EIDT) larger than 0.2 eV.
The shallow traps exist within all the perovskite films while the deep traps only appear under
certain perovskite crystallization conditions. For these MAPbBr3 who only possess shallow
traps, their ΔE is lower than 0.02 eV and exhibits a slight dependence to the EIST; surprisingly,

the ΔE is significantly increased to >0.05 eV and beyond the original dependence between ΔE
and the EIST when additional deep traps are introduced. This means that the giant ΔE of the
dual-peak emission of the MAPbBr3 is induced by the deep traps, which is a clear signature
of BE states. A comparison of the EbBE to the EIDT within the Haynes rule framework21
provides another support for the BE state scenario, where the EbBE is calculated from the
energy difference between the BE emission position and energy level of the free exciton. A
quasi linear relationship exists between the EbBE and the EIDT (Figure 4(b)), agreeing well
with the Haynes rule that the EbBE is usually in the range between 0.1 EIDT and 0.3 EIDT.21
Therefore, we can conclude that we have clearly discriminated the continuum band and
exciton states of the perovskite MAPbBr3. The dual-peak emissions should be excitonic;
specially, the second peak arises from the BE state.
In previous works, this second emission band was ascribed to the free carriers populated
within indirect bands induced by static or dynamical Rashba effect.29-30 This interpretation
may be attractive because it can enhance the mystery of the perovskite materials. However,
completely reliable experimental and theoretical results remain lacking. Firstly, as discussed
above, the dependence between the emission intensity and excitation intensity can hardly be
used to determine the emission mechanism if significant charge transfer occurs within the
material system. It has been widely demonstrated that rapid charge transfer exists between
multiple electronic states of both the bromide and the iodide perovskites with an
orthorhombic phase at low temperatures.20,

29

Secondly, most of the experimental results

about the temperature-dependent second-order radiative recombination velocity do not agree
with the indirect band model but strongly suggest that the emission is from direct band.32
Thirdly, it is inherently unreasonable to attribute the emission band of the bromide perovskite
at low temperatures such as 50K or 77K to the free carriers because the charge species are
dominated by excitons at such low temperatures according to the Saha-Langmuir theory
(Supplementary Figure S2). Based on the above three major reasons, more other details in
previous works and our own experimental results presented above, we prefer to doubt the
reasonability of the indirect band (or indirect tail band) scenario in interpreting the
photoelectric characteristics of the perovskite. Nonetheless, whether an indirect band
structure or Rashba effect really exist and influence other physics properties of the perovskite

is still an open question.

Discussions
Based on the above determined emission mechanisms, we have established a clear physics
picture of the electronic structure that directly participating in the photoelectric processes of
the MAPbBr3 (Figure 4(c)). Below the direct continuum band, MAPbBr3 possesses two types
of exciton states (i.e. FE and BE), resulting in the widely-concerned dual-peak emissions.
The deep trap states within the MAPbBr3 contributes to formations of the BE state. These
findings provide important experimental evidences for eliminating controversies on energy
structure of the perovskite, and shed new insight into the charge-carrier character of these
materials. Moreover, the confirmed exciton states here bring endless opportunities for
excitonic applications of the perovskite materials.
The MAPbBr3 possesses an exciton binding energy of ~40 meV, which is much higher than
that of inorganic semiconductors with a similar Eg, such as ZnTe (~12 meV) and CdS (~25
meV), as well as wider Eg candidates, such as GaN (~25 meV) and ZnS (~28 meV).21 Firstly,
this large binding energy helps to stabilize the excitonic phase of the perovskite at relatively
high temperatures. In our observations here, excitons still dominate the charge occupation
and recombination properties of the MAPbBr3 at room temperature. This mainly benefits
from an ordered lattice and bandedge structure of the perovskite, which exhibits little band
fluctuation and tail states.27 In fact, we have observed that excitonic effect of the perovskite
can be significantly weakened when increasing the band fluctuation by disordering the film
crystallization.41 A weak electron-lattice coupling strength of the lead-halide perovskites may
also lead to large charge transition energy barriers between the excitons and free carriers, and
thus contribute to the stabilization of exciton states.20 In addition, possible couplings between
exciton and other quasi-particles, such as forming exciton polariton,21 may also help to
stabilize the excitonic phase of the MAPbBr3 at room temperature. Secondly, this large
binding energy leads to a high Mott density of ~5×1017 cm-3 at room temperature.41 This
helps to stabilize the excitonic phase at high photoexcitation densities, which provides a
sufficient space for realizing population inversions of the exciton state and especially the BE
state. In our other experiments, optical amplification of the BE spontaneous emission have

been realized, which also further support the reliability of our above results.41
The EbBE of ~100 meV of the MAPbBr3 is among the largest reported for bulk
semiconductors,20 which has approached the upper limit of Haynes rule, as presented by a
direct comparison between the MAPbBr3 and the silicon.43 It is evident that what enables
such optoelectronic properties to emerge within perovskites is the underlying presence of
tunable defects.44 The relatively wide and stable phase regime of this ternary semiconductor
provides a large parameter space for self-doping and trap-state engineering using simple
solution processes. These BE states located much below the bandedge can help extend the
light absorption edge of the perovskite; while the strong electric field within the perovskite
devices make these BE charges possible to delocalization and to contribute to photocurrent
enhancement. With exciton states being sensitive to external fields, such as electric or
magnetic, high sensitive electrical-optical and magnetic-optical coupled devices can be
expected for based on the hybrid perovskite material. Moreover, the spin properties of the
exciton state provide implications for quantum manipulation and communication.45 The
highly stabilized exciton nature of the perovskite helps to make these applications practical at
high temperatures, possibly even at room temperature. Each of these exciting prospects
requires a greater level of understanding into the nature of the carrier and exciton states
within perovskite materials.
In summary, through heterojunction enhanced exciton dissociation and global tracing of the
multiple radiative electronics states across wide temperature regions, we have succeeded in
observing the free carrier emission from the MAPbBr3 and clearly discriminating the direct
continuum band and exciton states of the hybrid perovskite materials. Our findings show that
direct and not the indirect band results in the free carrier emission; and more importantly
excitons and not free carriers dominate the emission and photophysics characteristics of the
MAPbBr3 even at room temperature. The widely-concerned and controversial dual-peak
emissions have been clarified to arise from two types of exciton states, that is, FE and BE
states. These two excitons possess giant binding energies and superior phase stability
compared to conventional inorganic semiconductors, which provides important implications
for exploiting the excitonic mechanism for realizing novel optoelectronic applications, such
as extending the light absorption for enhancing photoresponse of perovskite solar cell and

photodetector, achieving low-threshold and high-gain perovskite excitonic stimulated
emission,

and

developing

electrical-magnetic-optical

coupled

and

even

quantum

manipulation devices.

Methods
Perovskite film deposition and characterizations. The MAPbBr3 samples were deposited by
using an anti-solvent method, where chlorobenzene is used as the anti-solvent. Briefly, a 1M
MAPbBr3 (or MAPbI3) precursor solution in dimethylformamide (DMF) was firstly spread
onto a quartz glass/compact Al2O3 substrate. A few of certain seconds after the beginning of
spin coating at 4000 rpm, the chlorobenzene was dropping onto the film to produce a fast
crystallisation of the perovskite. To adjust the film deposition process, the addition time for
applying the anti-solvent was controlled as described in the main text. After 30 s of spinning,
the film was transferred to a hot plate at 100 °C and annealed for 10 min. A 50 mg/ml PMMA
solution was finally spin coated onto the perovskite film for protection. The phase of the final
perovskite was characterised by a Panalytical X-ray diffractometer. The averaged thickness of
each film is measured by using a step profiler.
Optical characterization. The light transmission and reflectance of the perovskite film were
measured with a UV-vis spectrometer (Shimadzu 3600). The light absorption is calculated
from the transmission and reflectance. The steady-state and transient PL of the perovskite
film were measured using an Edinburgh Fluorescence Spectrometer (FLS 920). A 445 nm
pulsed diode laser (EPL-445, ~5 nJ cm-2, 62 ps) was used as the excitation source. A circular
adjustable neutral density filter was adopted to adjust the excitation intensity. The PL was
collected in the reflectance mode, where a PMT together with a TCSPC module was applied
to detect the time-resolved or time-integrated PL. For temperature dependent measurements,
an ARS liquid helium cryostat was employed as the sample chamber under vacuum, where
the temperature was controlled using a Lakeshore controller. The perovskite film on the glass
substrate was directly fixed to the optical sample holder by screws. During the temperature
adjustment, the system was firstly stabilised for at least 5 min at each temperature. Before the
PL measurements, the perovskite sample was always kept in the dark without any bias light
or laser illumination to avoid the possible production of charge accumulation and a local

electric field.
For the femtosecond transient absorption measurement, a high energy pulse generated from
the femtosecond amplifier and the OPA were used as the pump light, and a white light
generated by focusing the 800 nm (35 fs) pulse onto a 2 mm-thick sapphire and filtered by a
short-pass filter (775 nm, Sigmakoki) was used as the probe light. The probe light was
vertically focused onto the sample through a series of achromatic lens, with a final probe spot
diameter of <1 mm. The pump light was focused onto the same centre by a concave mirror,
with a spot diameter of ~5 mm. There was an angle of ~20° between the pump and probe
light, that is, non-degenerate configuration. The time delay between these two pulses was
controlled by using an Electric stage (Zolix) together with a hollow retroreflector (Newport).
The transmitted probe light was detected by a CMOS optical fibre spectrometer (Avantes,
AvaSpec-ULS2048CL-EVO) with a single-pulse mode (integrating time 30 μs). A pinhole 10
cm away from the sample is put in this light path to eliminate the light scattering from pump
light and PL. With multiple spectra recording and calculating, the noise of the ΔA is lower
than 0.1 mOD. The chirp of the probe pulse was calibrated by measuring the Kerr effect of
CS2. The VSL measurement was performed based on another CCD array optical fibre
spectrometer (Ocean optics QE pro).
Electrical characterization. The trap states of the MAPbBr3 film were measured by using
thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS). The frequency-dependent capacitances of the
FTO/compact TiO2/MAPbBr3/Spiro/Au cells were measured by using an electrochemical
station (Princeton). The cell was placed inside a vacuum chamber of a low-temperature probe
station (Lakeshore TTPX) with liquid nitrogen as the cooling source. The bandwidth of the
electrical probe was 1 GHz. For capacitance measurement, the cell was always measured
under dark conditions with no bias voltage being applied to the cell. The data analysis was
performed according to published literature describing TAS. The trap state energy levels were
derived from the Arrhenius curves. Mott-Schottky curves were also measured to help obtain
trap density approximations.

References
1. Kojima, A., Teshima, K., Shirai, Y., and Miyasaka, T. Organometal halide perovskites as

visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 6050-6051 (2009).
2. Kim, H.S., et al. Lead iodide perovskite sensitized all-solid-state submicron thin film
mesoscopic solar cell with efficiency exceeding 9%. Sci. Rep. 2, 591 (2012).
3. Lee, M.M., Teuscher, J., Miyasaka, T., Murakami, T.N., and Snaith, H.J. Efficient hybrid
solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites. Science 338,
643-647 (2012).
4. Saliba, M., et al. Incorporation of rubidium cations into perovskite solar cells improves
photovoltaic performance. Science 354, 206-209 (2016).
5. Yang, W.S., et al. Iodide management in formamidinium-lead-halidebased perovskite
layers for efficient solar cells. Science 356, 1376-1379 (2017).
6. Jiang, Q., Zhao, Y., Zhang, X., Yang, X., Chen, Y., Chu, Z., Ye, Q., Li, X., Yin, Z., You, J.
Surface passivation of perovskite film for efficient solar cells. Nat. Photon. 13, 460-466
(2019).
7. Cao, Y., et al. Perovskite light-emitting diodes based on spontaneously formed
submicrometre-scale structures. Nature 562, 249-253 (2018).
8. Lin, K., et al. Perovskite light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency exceeding
20 per cent. Nature 562, 245-248 (2018).
9. Fang, Y., Dong, Q., Shao, Y., Yuan, Y., Huang, J. Highly narrowband perovskite
single-crystal photodetectors enabled by surface-charge recombination. Nat. Photon. 9,
679-686 (2015).
10. Kim, Y. C., Kim, K. H., Son, D. Y., Jeong, D. N., Seo, J. Y., Choi, Y. S., Han, I. T., Lee, S.
Y., Park, N. G. Printable organometallic perovskite enables large-area, low-dose X-ray
imaging. Nature 550, 87-91 (2017).
11. Xing, G., Mathews, N., Sun, S., Lim, S., Lam, Y.M., Grätzel, M., Mhaisalkar, S., and Sum,
T.C. Long-range balanced electron and hole-transport lengths in organic-inorganic
CH3NH3PbI3. Science 342, 344-347 (2013).
12. Stranks, S.D., Eperon, G.E., Grancini, G., Menelaou, C., Alcocer, M.J., Leijtens, T., Herz,
L.M., Petrozza, A., and Snaith, H.J. Electron-hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer
in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber. Science 342, 341-344 (2013).
13. Yin, W.J., Shi, T., and Yan, Y. Unique properties of halide perovskites as possible origins

of the superior solar cell performance. Adv. Mater. 26, 4653-4658 (2014).
14. Shi, J., Li, Y., Li, Y. S., Li, D., Luo, Y., Wu, H., Meng, Q. From Ultrafast to Ultraslow:
Charge-Carrier Dynamics of Perovskite Solar Cells. Joule 2, 879-901 (2018).
15. Shi, D., et al. Low trap-state density and long carrier diffusion in organolead trihalide
perovskite single crystals. Science 347, 519-522 (2015).
16. Yang, Y., Ostrowski, D.P., France, R.M., Zhu, K., van de Lagemaat, J., Luther, J.M., and
Beard, M.C. Observation of a hot phonon bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites. Nat. Photon.
10, 53-59 (2015).
17. Zhu, H., Miyata, K., Fu, Y., Wang, J., Joshi, P., Niesner, D., Williams, K.W., Jin, S., and
Zhu, X.-Y. Screening in crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid perovskites.
Science 353, 1409-1413 (2016).
18. Rivett, J. P. H., et al. Long-lived polarization memory in the electronic states of
lead-halide perovskites from local structural dynamics. Nat. Commun. 9, 3531 (2018).
19. Niesner, D. et al. Giant Rashba splitting in CH3NH3PbBr3 organic-inorganic perovskite.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 126401 (2016).
20. Shi, J., Zhang, H., Li, Y., Jasieniak, J., Li, Y., Wu, H., Luo, Y., Li, D., and Meng, Q.
Identification of high-temperature exciton states and their phase-dependent trapping
behaviour in lead halide perovskites. Energy Environ. Sci. 11, 1460-1469 (2018).
21. Klingshirn, C. F. Semiconductor optics (4th). Springer, 2012.
22. Pankove, J. I. Optical processes in semiconductors. Dover Pub. New York, 1971.
23. Fang, Y. J., Wei, H. T., Dong, Q. F. & Huang, J. S. Quantification of reabsorption and
re-emission processes to determine photon recycling efficiency in perovskite single crystals.
Nat. Commun. 8, 14417 (2017).
24. Priante, D. et al. The recombination mechanisms leading to amplified spontaneous
emission at the true-green wavelength in CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106,
081902 (2015).
25. Wu, B. et al. Discerning the surface and bulk recombination kinetics of organic-inorganic
halide perovskite single crystals. Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1600551 (2016).
26. Dar, M. I. et al. Origin of unusual bandgap shift and dual emission in organic-inorganic
lead halide perovskites. Sci. Adv. 2, e1601156 (2016).

27. Wenger, B., Nayak, P. K., Wen, X., Kesava, S. V., Noel, N. K., Snaith, H. J. Consolidation
of the optoelectronic properties of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals. Nat. Commun. 8,
590 (2017).
28. Wang, T., Daiber, B., Frost, J. M., Mann, S. A., Garnett, E. C., Walsh, A., Ehrler, B.
Indirect to direct bandgap transition in methylammonium lead halide perovskite. Energy
Environ. Sci. 10, 509-515 (2017).
29. Fu, J., Janaludin, N. F., Wu, B., Li, M., Solanki, A., Ng, Y. F., Mhaisalkar, S., Huan, C. H.
A., Sum, T. C. Localized Traps Limited Recombination in Lead Bromide Perovskites. Adv.
Energy Mater. 9, 1803119 (2019).
30. Wu, B., et al. Indirect tail states formation by thermal-induced polar fluctuations in halide
perovskites. Nat. Commun. 10, 484 (2019).
31. Hutter, E.M., Gélvez-Rueda, M.C., Osherov, A., Bulovic, V., Grozema, F.C., Stranks, S.D.,
and Savenije, T.J. Direct-indirect character of the bandgap in methylammonium lead iodide
perovskite. Nat. Mater. 16, 115-120 (2016).
32. Davis, C.L., Filip, M.R., Patel, J.B., Crothers, T.W., Verdi, C., Wright, A.D., Milot, R.L.,
Giustino,

F.,

Johnston,

M.B.,

and

Herz,

L.M.

Bimolecular

recombination

in

methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite is an inverse absorption process. Nat. Commun. 9,
293 (2018).
33. D’Innocenzo, V., Grancini, G., Alcocer, M. J. P., Kandada, A. R. S., Stranks, S. D., Lee,
M. M., Lanzani, G., Snaith, H. J., Petrozza, A. Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead
tri-halide perovskites. Nat. Commun. 5, 3586 (2014).
34. He, H., et al. Exciton localization in solution-processed organolead trihalide perovskites.
Nat. Commun. 7, 10896 (2015).
35. Wu, Y., Yang, X., Chen, W., Yue, Y., Cai, M., Xie, F., Bi, E., Islam, A., Han. L. Perovskite
solar cells with 18.21% efficiency and area over 1 cm2 fabricated by heterojunction
engineering. Nat. Energy 1, 16148 (2016).
36. Soufiani, A. M., Huang, F., Reece, P., Sheng, R., Ho-Baillie, A., Green, M. A. Polaronic
exciton binding energy in iodide and bromide organic-inorganic lead halide perovskites. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 107, 231902 (2015).
37. Yamada, Y., Nakamura, T., Endo, M., Wakamiya, A., Kanemitsu, Y. Photocarrier

Recombination Dynamics in Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 for Solar Cell Applications. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 136, 11610-11613 (2014).
38. Saba., M., et al. Correlated electron-hole plasma in organometal perovskites. Nat.
Commun. 5, 5049 (2014).
39. Wang, W., et al. Interplay between Exciton and Free Carriers in Organolead Perovskite
Films. Sci. Rep. 7, 14760 (2017).
40. Li, B., et al. Polar rotor scattering as atomic-level origin of low mobility and thermal
conductivity of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3. Nat. Commun. 8, 16086 (2017).
41. Shi, J., Li, Y., Wu, J., Wu, H., Luo, Y., Li, D., Jasieniak, J., Meng, Q. Low-threshold
Stimulated Emission of Hybrid Perovskites at Room Temperature through Defect-Mediated
Bound Excitons. arXiv:1902.07371, 2019.
42. Walter, T., Herberholz, R., Muller, C., Schock, H. W. Determination of defect
distributions from admittance measurements and application to Cu(In,Ga)Se2 based
heterojunctions. J. Appl. Phys. 80, 4411-4420 (1996).
43. Haynes, J. R. Experimental proof of the existence of a new electronic complex in silicon.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 361-363 (1960).
44. Shi, T., Yin, W., Hong, F., Zhu, K. and Yan, Y. Unipolar self-doping behavior in
perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 103902 (2015).
45. Zrenner, A., Beham, E., Stufler, S., Findeis, F., Bichler, M. and Abstreiter, G. Coherent
properties of a two-level system based on a quantum-dot photodiode. Nature 418, 612-614
(2002).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11874402, 91733301,
51761145042, 51421002, 51627803, 51872321) and the International Partnership Program of
Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. 112111KYSB20170089). JJ would like to acknowledge
funding through the ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science (CE170100026).

Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Author contributions
J. Shi designed this study, and made experimental measurements, theoretical calculations and
analysis; Y. Li prepared the sample and made photoluminescence measurements; J. Wu
assisted in capacitance and transient absorption measurements and data extraction; H. Wu, Y.
Luo and D. Li participated in organizing the measurement setups and assisted in the sample
preparation; J. Jasieniak conceived and supported this project and participated in
experimental and theoretical analysis; Q. Meng conceived and supported this project. All of
authors contributed to the discussion. The manuscript was written by J. Shi, corrected by J.
Jasieniak and Q. Meng and approved by all contributions.

Additional information
Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper.

