1

Providentia – A Large-Scale Sensor System for the
Assistance of Autonomous Vehicles and Its
Evaluation

arXiv:1906.06789v4 [cs.RO] 20 Jul 2020

Annkathrin Krämmer∗ , Christoph Schöller∗ , Dhiraj Gulati, Venkatnarayanan Lakshminarasimhan,
Franz Kurz, Dominik Rosenbaum, Claus Lenz, and Alois Knoll

Abstract—The environmental perception of an autonomous
vehicle is limited by its physical sensor ranges and algorithmic performance, as well as by occlusions that degrade its
understanding of an ongoing traffic situation. This not only
poses a significant threat to safety and limits driving speeds,
but it can also lead to inconvenient maneuvers. Intelligent
Infrastructure Systems can help to alleviate these problems.
An Intelligent Infrastructure System can fill in the gaps in a
vehicle’s perception and extend its field of view by providing
additional detailed information about its surroundings, in the
form of a digital model of the current traffic situation, i.e. a
digital twin. However, detailed descriptions of such systems and
working prototypes demonstrating their feasibility are scarce. In
this paper, we propose a hardware and software architecture
that enables such a reliable Intelligent Infrastructure System to
be built. We have implemented this system in the real world
and demonstrate its ability to create an accurate digital twin
of an extended highway stretch, thus enhancing an autonomous
vehicle’s perception beyond the limits of its on-board sensors.
Furthermore, we evaluate the digital twin with respect to its
spatial accuracy, precision, and recall by using aerial images and
earth observation methods for generating ground truth data.
Index Terms—Intelligent infrastructure system, autonomous
driving, sensor system, data fusion, digital twin, extended environmental perception, evaluation with aerial images.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE environmental perception and resulting scene and
situation understanding of an autonomous vehicle are
limited by the available sensor ranges and object detection
performance. Even in the vicinity of the vehicle, the existence
of occlusions leads to incomplete information about its environment. The resulting uncertainties pose a safety threat not
only to the autonomous vehicle itself but also to other road
users. To enable it to operate safely, it is necessary to reduce its
driving speed, which in turn slows down traffic. This results in
A. Krämmer and C. Schöller are with fortiss GmbH, 80805 Munich,
Germany, and also with the Department of Informatics, Technical University
of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany.
D. Gulati and V. Lakshminarasimhan were with fortiss GmbH and are now
with Mentor Graphics, a Siemens Business, 80634 Munich, Germany and the
Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich,
Germany respectively.
F. Kurz and D. Rosenbaum are with the German Aerospace Center (DLR),
82234 Wessling, Germany.
Claus Lenz is with Cognition Factory GmbH, 80797 Munich, Germany.
A. Knoll is with the Department of Informatics, Technical University of
Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany.
∗ A. Krämmer and C. Schöller contributed equally to this work.
This research was funded by the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital
Infrastructure of Germany.

Fig. 1. One of the Providentia measurement points on the A9 highway. The
two radars directed towards the north are installed on the other side of the
gantry bridge and are therefore not visible from this perspective.

impaired driving comfort, as the vehicle spontaneously reacts
to unforeseen scenarios.
Intelligent Infrastructure Systems (IIS) can alleviate these
problems by providing autonomous vehicles – as well as
conventional vehicles and drivers – with additional information
about each road user and the overall traffic situation [1],
[2]. In particular, an IIS can observe and detect road users
from multiple superior perspectives, with extended coverage
compared to that of an individual vehicle. Providing a vehicle
with this additional information gives it a better understanding
of its surrounding scene and enables it to plan its maneuvers
more safely and conveniently. Furthermore, an IIS with the
described capabilities enables a multitude of services that
further support decision making.
However, actually building such a system involves a number
of challenges, such as the right choice of hardware and sensors,
and their optimal deployment and utilization in a complex
software stack. Its perception must remain reliable and robust
in a wide variety of weather, light and traffic conditions. Ensuring such reliability necessitates a combination of multimodal
sensors, redundant road coverage with overlapping field of
views (FoV), accurate calibration [3], and robust detection and
data fusion algorithms.
Since we sketched ideas about how such a system could
be designed in previous work [4], in this paper we propose a
concrete, scalable architecture. This architecture is the result
of experience we made with the real world build-up of the
IIS Providentia (see Fig. 1). It includes the system’s hardware
as well as the software to operate it. In terms of hardware,

2

we discuss the choice of sensors, the network architecture and
the deployment of edge computing devices to enable fast and
distributed processing of heavy sensor loads. We outline our
software stack and the detection and fusion algorithms used to
generate an accurate and consistent model of the world, which
we call the digital twin. The digital twin includes information
such as position, velocity, vehicle type and a unique identifier
for every observed vehicle. By providing this digital twin to
an autonomous driving research vehicle, we demonstrate that
it can be used to extend the limits of the vehicle’s perception
beyond its on-board sensors.
For autonomous vehicles to trust the digital twin for maneuver planning, its accuracy and reliability must be known.
However, a thorough evaluation requires precise ground truth
about the traffic situation on the highway. This is non-trivial
to obtain. To solve this issue, we took aerial images of the
highway to generate an approximate ground truth and use it
to evaluate our system, as explained in [5]. In this paper,
we describe in detail the methods used for this evaluation.
We present the results of our evaluation of the Providentia
system and analyze the system’s performance in real world
applications. Our evaluation methodology is not specific to our
system and can serve as a general framework for the evaluation
of IIS.
II. R ELATED W ORK
First ideas for assisting vehicles, as well as monitoring and
controlling traffic with an IIS have already been developed in
the PATH [6] and PROMETHEUS [7] projects in 1986. Recently, with autonomous driving gaining popularity, the need
for IIS that are able to support autonomous vehicles has further
increased. Several new projects have therefore been initiated,
with the goal of developing prototypical IIS. However, their
focuses differ widely and few detailed system descriptions
are available. The research project DIGINETPS [8] focuses
in particular on communication topics, considers the detection
of pedestrians and cyclists for intersection management, and
the communication of traffic signals to vehicles. Similarly,
the Veronika project [9] focuses on communication between
vehicles and traffic signals with the aim of reducing emissions and energy consumption. On the other hand, a system
being developed in the Test Area Autonomous Driving BadenWürttemberg [10] focuses on providing information for the
testing and evaluation of autonomous driving functions by
capturing the traffic with multiple sensors. Furthermore, the
local highway operator in Austria is transforming its existing
road operator system into an IIS [11]. It is also aiming to establish a validation test track and actively supports autonomous
vehicles. In the MEC-View project, Gabb et al. [12] focus on
how data from an IIS can be fused into a vehicle’s on-board
perception system.
Instead of the IIS itself, many research contributions propose methods of making algorithmic use of the information
provided by an IIS, or optimizing their function. With regard
to communication networks, Jeffrey Miller [13] proposes an
architecture for efficient vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-toinfrastructure communication, while Igor Kabashkin [14] analyses the reliability of bidirectional vehicle-to-infrastructure

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the Providentia sensor setup, with overlapping FoVs for redundancy.

communication. In the project KoRA9 [15], Geissler et al. [16]
formulate an optimization problem that maximizes sensor coverage to locate suitable sensor placements in an IIS. Popular
areas of research in the field of computer vision that are related
to IIS include traffic density prediction [17], [18] and vehicle
re-identification [19], [20]. Other topics involving information
provided by an IIS include danger recognition [21] and vehicle
motion prediction [22], [23].
Unlike the aforementioned projects and algorithmic literature, this paper focuses on the overall system architecture and
implementation of an IIS that generates a digital twin of the
highway. The aim of our system is to complete and extend a
vehicle’s perception and to provide information that enables
the implementation of various algorithms and applications
based on it. To this end, we conduct a thorough evaluation
of our system’s performance by considering the overall traffic
rather than trajectories from a single test vehicle. Thereby we
account for a broad variety of vehicle types, colors and driving
behaviors. In particular, we evaluate the spatial accuracy as
well as the detection rate, i.e. the system’s performance with
respect to missing vehicles and false detections.
III. P ROVIDENTIA S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe the design of the Providentia
system, including the hardware and software setup and the
algorithms used for detection, calibration and fusion.
Providentia is a large-scale distributed sensor system consisting of multimodal sensors, multiple edge computing units,
a complex software architecture, and a broad range of stateof-the-art algorithms. It is built along the A9 highway close
to Munich. Its primary purpose is to provide a real-time and
reliable digital twin of the current road traffic at any given
time or day of the year, for use in a variety of applications.
A. Hardware and Software Setup
At the time of writing, two gantry bridges – separated
by a distance of approximately 440 m – have been equipped
with sensors and computing hardware. Each of these gantry
bridges represents one measurement point in our system as
illustrated in Fig. 1. To achieve high perception robustness, we
use sensors of different measurement modalities that cover the
entire stretch between our measurement points redundantly.
Fig. 2 illustrates the overall setting of the system with the
redundant coverage of the highway.
Each measurement point comprises eight sensors with two
cameras and two radars per viewing direction. In each direction, one radar covers the right-hand side while the other

3

Fig. 3.

Platform architecture of the Providentia system.

covers the left-hand side of the highway. The cameras have
focal lengths of 16 mm and 50 mm to enable them to capture
both the far and near ranges. By combining sensors with
different measuring principles, our system is able to operate in
varying traffic, light and weather conditions. Besides having
redundant coverage with the sensors on each measurement
point, we also selected the positions of the two measurement
points in such a way that their overall FoVs overlap. This
further increases redundancy and thus robustness, and allows
smooth transitions while tracking vehicles as they move from
one measurement point to the other. In addition, covering the
highway stretch from different viewing directions helps to
resolve detection errors and occlusions.
The system employs specialized 24 GHz traffic monitoring
radars made by SmartMicro, of the generation UMRR-0C,
with a type 40 antenna. The cameras are Basler acA1920-50gc.
All the sensors at a single measurement point are connected
to a Data Fusion Unit (DFU), which serves as a local edge
computing unit and runs with Ubuntu 16.04 Server. It is
equipped with two INTEL Xeon E5-2630v4 2.2 GHz CPUs
with 64 GB RAM and two NVIDIA Tesla V100 SXM2 GPUs.
All sensor measurements from the cameras and radars are fed
into the detection and data fusion toolchain running on this
edge computing unit. This results in object lists containing all
the road users tracked in the FoV of that measurement point.
Each DFU transmits this object list to a backend machine via
a fibre optic network, where they are finally fused into the
digital twin that covers the entire observed highway stretch.
The full architecture is shown in Fig. 3. We use ROS on
all computing units to ensure seamless connectivity. The final
digital twin is communicated either to autonomous vehicles
or to a frontend, where it can be visualized as required for
drivers or operators.
B. Object Detection
The first step towards creating the digital twin of the
highway is to detect and classify the vehicles on the highway.
Our traffic radars are capable ex-works of detecting objects
and providing time-stamped positions and velocities in their
respective local sensor coordinate systems on street level.

We transform this output of each radar into our system’s
global Cartesian coordinate system using the radar calibration
parameters in preparation for data fusion.
Detection and classification of objects in the camera images
are performed by the DFU edge devices next to the highway.
The system’s cameras publish time-stamped images that are
tagged with a unique camera identifier. To ensure scalability
and safety even in the event of camera failures, our modular
object detection pipelines subscribe to each image stream separately. The object detection pipelines are constantly monitored
to supervise and analyze detection performance. The modular
services are automatically restarted in the event of any failures.
Not only are the multiple camera streams processed in parallel,
the object detection can also work with various detection
networks. This allows us to configure the object detection
to optimally balance between low computation time and high
accuracy, depending on the requirements that the application
of our system poses. To this end, we performed extensive
research on state-of-the-art detection algorithms, based on
neural networks [24].
At the time of writing, we have been using the
YOLOv3 [25] architecture as our detection network in the
object detection pipelines. In addition to regressing twodimensional bounding boxes with a confidence score, this
network classifies the detected vehicles into types as car,
truck, bus or motorcycle. The output is then published prior
to transformation.
To compute the three-dimensional positions of the vehicles
from the camera detections in the images, we shoot a ray
through the lower-edge midpoint of the bounding box and
intersect it with the street-level ground plane that we know
from our camera calibration. We transform the resulting vehicle detections in the same manner as the detections of the
radars into our system’s global Cartesian coordinate system.
All of the resulting measurements are then ready to be fused
into a consistent world model and are fed into the data fusion
pipeline, starting with a tracking module.
C. Calibration
Precise calibration of each sensor and measurement point is
necessary to make all of the transformations possible. While

4

we intrinsically calibrated the cameras individually with the
common checkerboard method prior to installation, the overall
extrinsic calibration of the system is non-trivial. Not only does
our system possess a high number of sensors and degrees of
freedom, but it also makes use of sensors with heterogeneous
measurement principles. To obtain an approximate starting
point for our calibration algorithms, we measured the positions of all sensors using a modern laser distance meter. We
determined the sensor angles for our cameras with a digital
angle finder and spirit level, while for the radars we used their
built-in calibration algorithms. We then refined these estimates
for the cameras using vanishing point methods [26]. To finetune the inter-sensor calibration, we manually minimized the
projection and re-projection errors for all sensor pairs, both
in the images and on road level in the three-dimensional
global coordinate system. To calibrate the system as a whole
with respect to the world (GPS coordinates), we used a GPS
receiver and localized the measurement points within a high
definition map.
D. Data Fusion
When it comes to the sensor data fusion, a large-scale
system such as ours poses many challenges. On the highway, we can observe a very large number of vehicles that
have to be tracked in real time. Therefore, the data fusion
system has to scale for hundreds of vehicles. In addition, the
number of targets is not known in advance and our fusion
must be robust with respect to clutter and detection failures.
Conventional filtering methods that handle each observed
vehicle separately, such as multiple Kalman filters or multiple
hypotheses tracking [27], require to explicitly solve a complex
association problem between the system’s sensor detections
and tracked vehicles. This severely limits scalability. For this
reason, we use the random finite set (RFS) framework [28],
[29], specifically the Gaussian mixture probability hypothesis
density (GM-PHD) filter [30]. This filter avoids the explicit
data association step and has proven to balance our runtime and scalability constraints well. Additionally, it handles
time-varying target numbers, clutter and detection uncertainty
within the filtering recursion.
We add tracking capabilities to our GM-PHD filter by
extending it with ideas taken from Panta et al. [31]. In
particular, we make use of the tree structure that naturally
arises in the GM-PHD filter recursion and appropriate track
management methods. With the resulting tracker we track
the measurements of each sensor in parallel. For motion and
sensor models, we use a standard constant velocity kinematic
model [32] and a zero-mean Gaussian white noise observation
model, respectively. All parameters for our sensor and scenario
specifications were tuned empirically. To fuse the tracked data
from different sensors and measurement points, we adapt the
method from Vasic et al. [33] that is based on generalized
covariance intersection [34]. In order to ensure scalability
and easy extension of our system setup, we implement a
hierarchical data fusion concept, in which we first perform
independent local sensor fusion at each measurement point
leading to vehicle tracklets. Second-level fusion of all measurement points is then performed on the backend. This step

(a) Camera Image

(b) Digital Twin
Fig. 4. Qualitative example of how our system captures the real world (a) in
a digital twin (b). We recreate the scene with generalized models for different
vehicle types for visualization purposes. During operation, all information is
sent to the autonomous vehicle in form of a sparse object list.

generates the consistent model of the whole highway scene
covered by our system, that we refer to as the digital twin. It is
transformed to GPS coordinates depending on the application
it is communicated to.
IV. D IGITAL T WIN AND E XTENSION OF V EHICULAR
P ERCEPTION
The digital twin represents the main output of the Providentia system. It consists of the position, velocity, and type
of every vehicle observed, with each one assigned a unique
tracking identifier. It can be used by vehicles on the highway
stretch to improve their decision making and to implement
additional services that can be provided by the infrastructure
itself. Such services might include motion prediction for each
vehicle, congestion recognition, lane recommendations, and
collision warnings. In this section, we illustrate our system’s
ability to capture highway traffic and demonstrate its potential
for extending an autonomous vehicle’s perception of the scene.
Our qualitative examples were captured in our testbed
under real-world conditions. Currently, our system redundantly
covers a stretch of about 440 m of the road, which corresponds
to the distance between the two measurement points. Fig. 4
shows an example of a digital twin of current traffic on the
highway as computed by our system. It is a visualization of
the information that is also sent to autonomous vehicles to
extend their perception. Our system is able to reliably detect
the vehicles passing through the testbed. This is only possible

5

Fig. 5. An autonomous vehicle driving through our testbed. The dots visualize the vehicle’s lidar measurements and the purple cubes represent the vehicles
perceived by the Providentia system. While the vehicle’s own lidar range is severely limited, its perception and resulting scene understanding are extended
into the far distance using information from our system.

by fusing multiple sensor perspectives. The update rate for the
digital twin depends on the type of the used object detection
network and varies between approximately 5 Hz and 15 Hz.
As mentioned in Sec. III, this represents a trade-off between
detection speed and accuracy. As our aim in this study is to
generate an accurate and reliable digital twin, we use a network
version with high quality detections and achieve a frequency
of 5.4 Hz.
We also transmitted this digital twin to our autonomous
driving research vehicle fortuna [35] for the purpose of extending its environmental perception and situation understanding.
Vehicles perceive their environment by means of lidars, which
have limited measurement ranges and the point cloud density
in the distance becomes increasingly sparse. Vehicular cameras
can capture a more distant environment than lidars are able to,
but objects that are too far away appear small on the image
and cannot be reliably detected. Furthermore, the vehicle’s low
perspective is prone to severe occlusions. Fig. 5 illustrates how
an autonomous vehicle driving through our system perceives
its environment. The violet cubes represent vehicles detected
by our system. We observed that the point cloud density
of our vehicle’s lidars drops significantly at a distance of
approximately 80 m, but our system’s digital twin extends
the vehicle’s environmental perception to up to 400 m. In
principle, a system such as ours is able to extend the perception
of a vehicle even further, since we designed it with scalability
in mind. The maximum distance is only limited by the existing
number of built-up measurement points.

However, as we explained in [5], the evaluation of the system’s digital twin is a challenging task. To merely evaluate the
detection performance of individual sensors is insufficient to
judge the system’s performance, as the calibration between the
sensors and the fusion algorithms are of paramount importance
for the quality of the digital twin and must therefore also be
included in the evaluation. End-to-end evaluation of the system
requires ground truth information of the traffic on the testbed
over an extended period of time. This implies having the exact
positions of all the vehicles on the observed stretch of highway.
Labeling the images from the cameras within the system is not
sufficient, as it would only provide ground truth information
in image coordinates but not in the real world. Neither is using
a single, localized test vehicle sufficient, as the system must
be able to handle a wide variety of vehicle colors and shapes.
Furthermore, the usefulness of simulations is also limited. In
reality, the system is subject not only to various lighting and
vibration effects, but also to the decisions of drivers, which
are hard to model.
One way of approximating the required ground truth is to
record aerial images of the testbed. These have an ideal –
almost orthogonal – top-down perspective of the highway. This
perspective avoids all inter-vehicle occlusions, and due to their
regular contours, vehicles are easy to detect and distinguish. In
this section, we will describe how we captured and processed
these images to generate ground truth data that is suitable for
evaluating our system. We also explain the evaluation itself in
detail and discuss the results together with their implications
for the performance of our system.

V. E VALUATION OF THE D IGITAL T WIN
To decide what applications can be realized with our system,
it is crucial to know the spatial accuracy and detection rate of
the digital twin that it generates. For example, using the digital
twin for maneuver planning in autonomous vehicles requires
high position accuracy, whereas position accuracy is less important for the detection of traffic jams. Knowing the statistical
certainty and uncertainty of the system’s measurements also
makes it possible to define safety margins that vehicles have
to take into account when using the provided information.

A. Ground Truth Generation
As previously outlined in [5], to generate such an aerial view
ground truth, the Providentia testbed was recorded using a 4k
camera system mounted on a H135 helicopter. Both the camera
system and the Providentia system were synchronized with
GPS time. The 4k camera system consists of three Canon EOS
1D-X Mark II cameras oriented in different viewing directions,
each recording images at a resolution of 20.2 megapixels. The
cameras to the left and right covered the northern and southern

6

Fig. 6. Crop of an aerial image including vehicle detections, taken with the
helicopter’s left-hand camera that captures part of our testbed. Note that the
current system only detects cars and not trucks.

parts of the testbed respectively with an overlapping FoV. The
third, nadir-looking camera of the system was not used. The
cameras captured images simultaneously at a rate of one image
per second at a flight altitude of 450 m above ground, covering
an area of 600 m × 250 m. With a focal length of 50 mm, each
image pixel corresponds to 6 cm on the ground. In addition, an
IGI Compact MEMS GNSS/IMU system was used to estimate
the position and orientation of the sensors during flight to
enable georeferencing of the images captured. To optimize the
georeferencing accuracy, bundle adjustment with tie points and
ground control points was performed.
We use a neural network that has been trained and evaluated
with the DLR-MVDA dataset [36] for object detection in all
aerial images. Due to the lack of trucks in the training data, it is
only able to detect cars. This is why we focus on this object
type within the digital twin in our evaluation. To compute
the positions of the detected vehicles on the road, we cast
rays through all four bounding box corner positions in the
aerial image and intersect them with a lidar terrain model of
the highway surface to compute local UTM coordinates. To
obtain the final ground truth data that we use in our evaluation,
we compute the center position of each vehicle. We filter
out all vehicles that are detected outside of the Providentia
system’s field of view or are clearly erroneous, such as vehicle
detections oriented perpendicularly to the driving direction and
vehicles detected twice in the overlap of the two camera FoVs.
The quality of the obtained ground truth depends on the
accuracy of the object detections in the aerial images. The
detection quality is the subject of on-going research [37]. Our
ground truth dataset rarely contained false or severely misplaced detections and only a few dark-colored vehicles were
missed. The position accuracy of the detected vehicles depends
on the georeferencing accuracy of the images. Specifically,
it depends on the calibration accuracy of the 4k system, the
quality of the tie and ground control points used for bundle
adjustment, and the accuracy of the underlying terrain model.
The overall absolute accuracy on the present dataset lies in
the centimeter range. The accuracy of this georeferencing is
demonstrated in [38].
Fig. 6 shows a captured aerial image with vehicle detections.
Even though the testbed was not always fully covered by the
helicopters’ cameras, we captured enough vehicles to perform
a reliable and statistically significant evaluation. In total, we
generated 2 minutes of ground truth data containing 2139 valid
vehicle observations.

Fig. 7. Associations between detections from our system and ground truth
data. Only ground truth detections within the displayed ellipse are associated and actual associations are marked with a line between corresponding
detections.

B. Evaluation Methodology
To compare our digital twin with the ground truth data,
we first transform the aerial detections from UTM into the
Cartesian world coordinate system used by Providentia in
which the digital twin is defined. In the next step, we match all
ground truth frames with those frames of the digital twin with
the closest corresponding timestamp. Note that the digital twin
has a higher frequency of 5.4 Hz than the ground truth with
1 Hz, and they are slightly offset with respect to each other.
We account for the time difference between matched frames
by extrapolating the Providentia detections with a constant
velocity prediction. This is sufficiently accurate, as the average
time difference is only 50 ms.
In order to evaluate the spatial accuracy and the detection
rate of the digital twin, it is necessary to establish associations
between the detected vehicles in the digital twin and the
ground truth. For this purpose we use the Hungarian algorithm [39], which guarantees an optimal one-to-one assignment. A weighted Euclidean distance is used for computing
the cost matrix, putting more emphasis on the longitudinal
distance between vehicles than on their lateral distance. This
accounts for the fact that the estimates in the digital twin
have a greater variance in the driving direction (see the RMSE
results in Sec. V-C), while vehicles driving on nearby lanes can
be close, but should not be associated. We chose the weights
empirically, such that they represent a 13.5 m by 2.2 m ellipse
around the ground truth object, with the major axis aligned
with the driving direction (see Fig. 7). Based on this ellipse,
we also perform a gating, in which all associations outside
of the ellipse are rejected. Overall, these parameters lead to
accurate and reasonable associations.
With these associations established, we evaluate the spatial
accuracy of the digital twin by computing the root-meansquare error (RMSE). It represents the standard deviation of
the metric error between the vehicle positions in the digital
twin and the ground truth positions. In addition to spatial
accuracy, the detection rate of our system is important for
evaluating its overall performance. Appropriate metrics for
this are precision and recall. The precision of our system
states which percentage of vehicles detected by our system

7

Fig. 8. Positioning errors in the digital twin for each ground truth vehicle on the highway. The camera icons represent the measurement point positions.
Severe errors are rare and are mostly due to unfavorable camera perspectives (on the top lane) or a great distance to the sensor (towards the middle of the
testbed).

TABLE I
R ESULTS OF THE E VALUATION OF THE P ROVIDENTIA D IGITAL T WIN
RMSE

RMSE x

RMSE y

Precision

Recall

3.31 m

3.27 m

0.53 m

99.38 %

97.42 %

C. Results

Fig. 9. Distribution of positioning errors in the digital twin compared to the
aerial ground truth. Our system is very accurate in most cases. In 50 % of
cases the errors are less than 2.16 m, i.e. lie within the vehicle’s extent, and
in 95 % of cases the errors are less than 6.55 m.

were actually present. Its recall refers to the percentage of
vehicles in the testbed successfully detected by our system.
To evaluate these metrics, we projected the detections from
our system onto the aerial camera images and manually
counted the true positives, false positives and false negatives.
Automatic computation of false detections would result in an
inaccurate false positive count, as the helicopter was moving
and occasionally only covered parts of our testbed with its
FoV.
The evaluation of our system was performed during the day
with a medium traffic volume. Furthermore, we only used the
cameras of our system, because during the day these are more
accurate than our installed radars in terms of their ability to
estimate vehicle positions. In our evaluation, we considered the
area enclosed by the two measurement points that we cover
redundantly.

Our results for the spatial accuracy and detection rate of
the digital twin are summarized in Table I. By evaluating
the positioning accuracy of our system, we achieve an RMSE
of 3.31 m. Of this error, the longitudinal direction makes up
the major part with 3.27 m, while the RMSE in the lateral
direction is only 0.53 m. This high lateral accuracy allows us
to reliably determine the lane for each vehicle.
The major part of both positioning errors can be explained
by our current lack of information regarding the extents of the
objects. Because our camera detections are two-dimensional
bounding boxes in the image plane, the vehicles’ lengths
are not taken into account for estimating their position, and
their widths can only be approximated because of perspective
errors. Therefore, the detection positions in our system are
generally placed either at the rears or at the fronts of the
vehicles, depending on the perspective. Hence, the position
estimate in the digital twin varies over the vehicle extent within
the testbed. However, in the ground truth, the position of an
object is specified at its center. Taking this into account, our
spatial accuracy is very promising. As the ground truth cars
driving through the testbed over the course of our evaluation
have an average length of approximately 4.6 m, the placement
of a detection at the rear or front would already cause a
displacement of about 2.3 m to the center. Additionally, Fig. 9
shows the distribution of our positioning errors. In 50 % of
cases, our error is less than 2.16 m, i.e. the digital twin
detections lie within the car’s extent, while in 95 % of cases,
it is less than 6.55 m. This indicates that by incorporating
the vehicles’ extents from the sensors, e.g. by computing
three-dimensional bounding boxes, this error could be greatly
reduced.
Fig. 8 shows how the positioning errors are distributed over
our testbed. Larger positioning errors are relatively rare and
mainly occur towards the middle of the testbed. This is the

8

area in which the vehicles are farthest away from all the
sensors. This means that the resolution of the vehicles in
the image is the smallest, which results in higher uncertainty
in the bounding box estimates. Also, the way we compute
the vehicle positions from the camera detections, i.e. by
intersecting rays with the road (see Sec. III-B), is more
sensitive to inaccuracies over large distances. Furthermore, as
the road is only approximately planar, deviations from this
plane have a greater influence at the distance because the rays
intersect the ground plane at a flatter angle. Additionally, our
sensors are exposed to vibrations that make them susceptible
to calibration inaccuracies. Angular calibration inaccuracies in
particular have a greater influence the greater the distance.
Based on the distribution of errors, it is also evident that the
left-hand measurement point has an advantageous perspective
of the road, as compared to the right-hand measurement point.
Its sensors are positioned more centrally on the highway and
are better aligned with the driving direction of the vehicles.
The right-hand measurement point has a more oblique perspective of the vehicles, resulting in the lower-edge midpoints
of the bounding boxes deviating more from the actual middle
of the vehicles. For this reason, the errors in the middle of the
testbed tend to be larger towards the right-hand measurement
point. Moreover, it is because of the measurement points’
perspectives that the top lane is the most error-prone. The
sensors of both measurement points are installed on gantry
bridges over the opposite side of the highway. Despite these
perspective errors, our overall positioning accuracy is high,
especially closer to the measurement points.
As for the detection rate, our system achieves a precision
of 99.38 %. This means that almost all cars detected by our
system do actually exist and are correct, meaning that we
have very few false positives. Our system achieves a recall
of 97.43 %. This means that we detect 97.43 % of the ground
truth cars on the highway and miss only 2.57 % of them.
However, most of the false negatives – about 55 % – occur
at the boundary of the Providentia system’s overall FoV. One
reason for this is that it is difficult to determine an exact FoV
boundary because of the vibrations that our sensors are subject
to. This means that there are cars in the ground truth that we
did not filter out but that are just slightly outside of the current
actual FoV and cannot be detected by our system. These are
not actual false negatives. The second reason is that the object
detector might not detect a vehicle when it first appears on the
camera image due to it being only captured partially. And once
detected, the birth model of the tracker only initializes tracks
from two consecutive detections to reduce noise (thus the
few false positives). Therefore, the tracker needs an additional
timestep before establishing the car as an estimate in the digital
twin.
With only about 45 % of the false negatives occurring within
the testbed, this leads to an additional increase of approximately 1.4 % in recall, when excluding the boundaries. This
can be considered to be the actual recall of our system, since
detections do not need to be communicated to autonomous
vehicles during the initialization phase.
It is important to note that we analyzed precision and recall
on a frame-by-frame basis. Hence, when we do not detect a

vehicle, it does not imply that it is passing through the testbed
completely undetected. This is very unlikely to happen. Rather,
at specific moments in time, certain vehicles may be briefly
lost. This mostly occurs as described above in specific areas,
or due to occlusions caused by large vehicles such as trucks.
Overall, our system achieves a high degree of reliability,
both in terms of positioning accuracy and detection rate.
VI. C ONCLUSION
To improve the safety and comfort of autonomous vehicles,
one should not rely solely on on-board sensors, but their
perception and scene understanding should be extended by
adding information available from a modern IIS. With its
superior sensor perspectives and spatial distribution, an IIS
can provide information far beyond the perception range of
an individual vehicle. This can resolve occlusions and lead to
better long-term planning of the vehicle.
While there is much research currently being done on
specific components and use-cases of IIS, information on
building up an entire system is sparse. This paper describes
how a modern IIS can be successfully designed and built. This
includes the hardware and sensor setup, detection algorithms,
calibration, and data fusion. With our evaluation we have
shown that our system is able to achieve reasonable results
at capturing traffic on an observed highway stretch and that it
can generate a reliable digital twin in near real time. We have
further demonstrated that it is possible to integrate the information captured by our system into the environmental model of
an autonomous vehicle to extend its limited perception range.
Our extensive quantitative evaluation has shown that our
system is characterized by both a high detection rate and
spatial accuracy. The primary purpose of our system is to
enhance the perception of autonomous vehicles in the testbed.
But based on the results of our evaluation, it is also evident that
a such a system could be used for applications such as traffic
prediction or the detection of emerging traffic jams, wrongway drivers and immobile vehicles. Traffic flow management
with lane and speed recommendations could be another possible application. Beyond this, the system could be used as a
reference for testing, evaluating and developing autonomous
driving functions.
Both in general and taking into consideration the above,
our system could be improved in terms of the update rate of
its digital twin, its night-time functionality and its operation in
adverse weather conditions, as well as during traffic jams with
severe occlusions. Taking into account the vehicles’ spatial
extents would improve its positioning accuracy and reduce
errors caused by different camera perspectives. Furthermore,
methods of automatically calibrating the system as a whole
would greatly improve its performance and reliability. Vibrations, oscillations of measurement points and temperature
changes can lead to deterioration even of accurately calibrated
systems if they are not continuously adjusted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure of Germany in the projects

9

Providentia and Providentia++. We would like to express our
gratitude to the entire Providentia team for their contributions that made this paper possible, namely its current and
former team members: Vincent Aravantinos, Maida Bakovic,
Markus Bonk, Martin Büchel, Müge Güzet, Gereon Hinz,
Simon Klenk, Juri Kuhn, Daniel Malovetz, Philipp Quentin,
Maximilian Schnettler, Uzair Sharif, Gesa Wiegand, as well as
all our project partners. Furthermore, we would like to thank
IPG for providing the visualization software.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. N. Qureshi and A. H. Abdullah, “A survey on intelligent transportation systems,” Middle-East J. Sci. Res. (MEJSR), vol. 15, no. 5, pp.
629–642, 2013.
[2] H. Menouar, I. Guvenc, K. Akkaya, A. S. Uluagac, A. Kadri, and
A. Tuncer, “Uav-enabled intelligent transportation systems for the smart
city: Applications and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 3,
pp. 22–28, 2017.
[3] C. Schöller, M. Schnettler, A. Krämmer, G. Hinz, M. Bakovic, M. Güzet,
and A. Knoll, “Targetless rotational auto-calibration of radar and camera
for intelligent transportation systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst. (ITSC), 2019, pp. 3934–3941.
[4] G. Hinz, M. Büchel, F. Diehl, G. Chen, A. Krämmer, J. Kuhn,
V. Lakshminarasimhan, M. Schellmann, U. Baumgarten, and A. Knoll,
“Designing a far-reaching view for highway traffic scenarios with 5gbased intelligent infrastructure,” in 8. Tag. Fahrerassist., 2017.
[5] A. Krämmer, C. Schöller, F. Kurz, D. Rosenbaum, and A. Knoll,
“Vorausschauende Wahrnehmung für sicheres automatisiertes Fahren.
Validierung intelligenter Infrastruktursysteme am Beispiel von Providentia,” Int. Verkehrsw., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 26–31, 2020.
[6] S. E. Shladover, “The california path program of ivhs research and its
approach to vehicle-highway automation,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles
Symp. (IV), 1992, pp. 347–352.
[7] H.-H. Braess and G. Reichart, “Prometheus: A vision of the intelligent
car on intelligent roads? an attempted critical appraisal. I,” Automobiltechn. Zeitschr. (ATZ), vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 200–205, 1995.
[8] Diginetps - the digitally connected protocol track. Accessed: June 8,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://diginet-ps.de/en/home/
[9] Veronika. Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
bmvi.de/SharedDocs/DE/Artikel/DG/AVF-projekte/veronika.html
[10] Test area autonomous driving Baden-Württemberg – field test for
research and innovation. Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://taf-bw.de/en/
[11] S. Seebacher, B. Datler, J. Erhart, G. Greiner, M. Harrer, P. Hrassnig,
A. Präsent, C. Schwarzl, and M. Ullrich, “Infrastructure data fusion for
validation and future enhancements of autonomous vehicles’ perception
on austrian motorways,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Connec. Vehicles Expo
(ICCVE), 2019, pp. 1–7.
[12] M. Gabb, H. Digel, T. Müller, and R.-W. Henn, “Infrastructure-supported
perception and track-level fusion using edge computing,” in Proc. IEEE
Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), 2019, pp. 1739–1745.
[13] J. Miller, “Vehicle-to-vehicle-to-infrastructure (v2v2i) intelligent transportation system architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV),
2008, pp. 715–720.
[14] I. Kabashkin, “Reliability of bidirectional v2x communications in the
intelligent transport systems,” in Adv. Wireless Opt. Commun. (RTUWO),
2015, pp. 159–163.
[15] Kooperative Radarsensoren für das digitale Testfeld A9 - KoRA9.
Accessed: July 10, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.bmvi.de/
SharedDocs/DE/Artikel/DG/AVF-projekte/KoRA9.html
[16] F. Geissler and R. Gräfe, “Optimized sensor placement for dependable
roadside infrastructures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.
(ITSC), 2019, pp. 2408–2413.
[17] S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. P. Costeira, and J. M. F. Moura, “Fcn-rlstm: Deep
spatio-temporal neural networks for vehicle counting in city cameras,”
in Int. Conf. Comput. Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 3667–3676.
[18] ——, “Understanding traffic density from large-scale web camera data,”
in Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2017, pp. 4264–
4273.
[19] Y. Shen, T. Xiao, H. Li, S. Yi, and X. Wang, “Learning deep neural
networks for vehicle re-id with visual-spatio-temporal path proposals,”
in Int. Conf. Comput. Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 1918–1927.

[20] Y. Zhou and L. Shao, “Viewpoint-aware attentive multi-view inference
for vehicle re-identification,” in Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), 2018, pp. 6489–6498.
[21] L. Yu, D. Zhang, X. Chen, and A. Hauptmann, “Traffic danger recognition with surveillance cameras without training data,” in Int. Conf. Adv.
Video Signal Surveill. (AVSS), 2018, pp. 378–383.
[22] F. Diehl, T. Brunner, M. Truong Le, and A. Knoll, “Graph neural
networks for modelling traffic participant interaction,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.01254v2
[23] J. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Xiong, T. Wang, H. Huang, and Z. Zhong, “An
integrated approach to probabilistic vehicle trajectory prediction via
driver characteristic and intention estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), 2019, pp. 3526–3532.
[24] F. Altenberger and C. Lenz, “A non-technical survey on deep
convolutional neural network architectures,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02129
[25] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “Yolov3: An incremental improvement,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02767
[26] N. K. Kanhere and S. T. Birchfield, “A taxonomy and analysis of camera
calibration methods for traffic monitoring applications,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 441–452, 2010.
[27] S. S. Blackman, “Multiple hypothesis tracking for multiple target
tracking,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 5–18,
2004.
[28] R. P. S. Mahler, Statistical multisource-multitarget information fusion.
Artech House, 2007.
[29] ——, Advances in statistical multisource-multitarget information fusion.
Artech House, 2014.
[30] B.-N. Vo and W.-K. Ma, “The gaussian mixture probability hypothesis
density filter,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4091–
4104, 2006.
[31] K. Panta, D. E. Clark, and B.-N. Vo, “Data association and track
management for the gaussian mixture probability hypothesis density
filter,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 1003–
1016, 2009.
[32] C. Schöller, V. Aravantinos, F. Lay, and A. Knoll, “What the constant
velocity model can teach us about pedestrian motion prediction,” Robot.
Autom. Lett. (RA-L), vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1696–1703, 2020.
[33] M. Vasic and A. Martinoli, “A collaborative sensor fusion algorithm for
multi-object tracking using a gaussian mixture probability hypothesis
density filter,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), 2015,
pp. 491–498.
[34] R. P. S. Mahler, “Optimal/robust distributed data fusion: A unified
approach,” in Signal Process., Sensor Fusion, Target Recognit. IX, vol.
4052, 2000, pp. 128–138.
[35] T. Kessler, J. Bernhard, M. Büchel, K. Esterle, P. Hart, D. Malovetz,
M. Truong Le, F. Diehl, T. Brunner, and A. Knoll, “Bridging the gap
between open source software and vehicle hardware for autonomous
driving,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), 2019, pp. 1612–
1619.
[36] Dlr dataset for multi-class vehicle detection and orientation in
aerial imagery (DLR-MVDA). Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.dlr.de/eoc/en/desktopdefault.aspx/tabid-12760/
22294 read-52777/
[37] S. M. Azimi, C. Henry, L. Sommer, A. Schumann, and E. Vig,
“Skyscapes – fine-grained semantic understanding of aerial scenes,” in
Int. Conf. Comput. Vision (ICCV), 2019, pp. 7393–7403.
[38] F. Kurz, T. Krauß, H. Runge, D. Rosenbaum, and P. Angelo, “Precise
aerial image orientation using sar ground control points for mapping of
urban landmarks,” in Int. Arch. Photogram., Remote Sens., Spatial Inf.
Sci. (ISPRS Archives), vol. 42, no. 2, 2019, pp. 61–66.
[39] J. Munkres, “Algorithms for the assignment and transportation problems,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 32–38, 1957.

