Astron Astrophys Rev manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Small solar system bodies as granular media
D. Hestroffer · P. Sánchez · L. Staron ·
A. Campo Bagatin · S. Eggl · W. Losert ·
N. Murdoch · E. Opsomer · F. Radjai ·
D. C. Richardson · M. Salazar · D. J.
Scheeres · S. Schwartz · N. Taberlet · H.
Yano

arXiv:1907.02615v1 [astro-ph.EP] 4 Jul 2019

Received: date / Accepted: date

Made possible by the International Space Science Institute (ISSI, Bern) support to the international team “Asteroids & Self Gravitating Bodies as Granular Systems”
D. Hestroffer
IMCCE, Paris Observatory, université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Univ. Lille, F-75014
Paris, France
Tel.: +33 1 4051 2260
E-mail: daniel.hestroffer@obspm.fr
P. Sánchez
CCAR, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
L. Staron
Inst. Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, F-75005 Paris, France
A. Campo Bagatin
Departamento de Fı́sica, Ingenierı́a de Sistemas y Teorı́a de la Señal, Universidad de Alicante,
E-03080 Alicante, Spain
Instituto Universitario de Fı́sica Aplicada a las Ciencias y las Tecnologı́as, Universidad de
Alicante, E-03080 Alicante, Spain
S. Eggl
IMCCE, Paris Observatory, université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Univ. Lille, F-75014
Paris, France
LSST / DiRAC Institute, Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98105, USA
W. Losert
Institute for Physical Science and Technology, and Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
N. Murdoch
DEOS/SSPA, Institut Supérieur de l’Aéronautique et de l’Espace (ISAE-SUPAERO), Université de Toulouse, 31400 Toulouse, France
E. Opsomer
GRASP, Research Unit CESAM, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium
F. Radjai
LMGC, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, F-34090 Montpellier, France
D. C. Richardson
Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
M. Salazar

2

D. Hestroffer et al.

Abstract Asteroids and other Small Solar System Bodies (SSSBs) are of high
general and scientific interest in many aspects. The origin, formation, and evolution
of our Solar System (and other planetary systems) can be better understood by
analysing the constitution and physical properties of small bodies in the Solar
System. Currently, two space missions (Hayabusa 2, OSIRIS-REx) have recently
arrived at their respective targets and will bring a sample of the asteroids back to
Earth. Other small body missions have also been selected by, or proposed to, space
agencies. The threat posed to our planet by Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) is also
considered at the international level, and this has prompted dedicated research
on possible mitigation techniques. The DART mission, for example, will test the
kinetic impact technique. Even ideas for industrial exploitation have risen during
the last years. Lastly, the origin of water and life on Earth appears to be connected
to asteroids. Hence, future space mission projects will undoubtedly target some
asteroids or other SSSBs.
In all these cases and research topics, specific knowledge of the structure and
mechanical behaviour of the surface as well as the bulk of those celestial bodies is
crucial. In contrast to large telluric planets and dwarf planets, a large proportion of
such small bodies is believed to consist of gravitational aggregates (‘rubble piles’)
with no—or low—internal cohesion, with varying macro-porosity and surface properties (from smooth regolith covered terrain, to very rough collection of boulders),
and varying topography (craters, depressions, ridges). Bodies with such structure
can sustain some plastic deformation without being disrupted in contrast to the
classical visco-elastic models that are generally valid for planets, dwarf planets,
and large satellites. These SSSBs are hence better described through granular mechanics theories, which have been a subject of intense theoretical, experimental,
and numerical research over the last four decades.
This being the case, it has been necessary to use the theoretical, numerical and
experimental tools developed within Soil Mechanics, Granular Dynamics, Celestial Mechanics, Chemistry, Condensed Matter Physics, Planetary and Computer
Sciences, to name the main ones, in order to understand the data collected and
analysed by observational astronomy (visible, thermal, and radio), and different
space missions.
In this paper, we present a review of the multi-disciplinary research carried out
by these different scientific communities in an effort to study SSSBs.

LICB, Univ. de Bourgogne, CNRS, F-21078 Dijon, France
D. J. Scheeres
Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
S. Schwartz
Labratoire Lagrange, Univ. Nice, CNRS, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, F-06304 Nice, France
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
N. Taberlet
Université de Lyon, Laboratoire de Physique, École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS, F69364 Lyon, France
H. Yano
JAXA/Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, 3-1-1 Yoshinodai, Chuo-ku, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 252-5210, Japan

Small solar system bodies as granular media

3

Keywords Small bodies of the Solar System SSSB, minor planets, asteroids:
general · gravitational aggregates · granular media · methods: numerical,
laboratory, observational · planetary formation

1 Introduction
Small Solar System Bodies (SSSBs) correspond to a class of Solar System objects,
all orbiting around the Sun, that are smaller than dwarf planets and are likely not
internally differentiated. With the exception of active comets—that has bright and
large comas—the SSSBs appeared stellar-like (not resolved) in the 19th century
telescopes, thus explaining the origin of the ‘asteroid’ designation. This naming
and classification has evolved with time, between minor planet and asteroid designation, to end up in 2006, with the definition of the SSSB class, following an IAU
resolution (van der Hucht 2008). So, Small Solar System Bodies currently include
most of the asteroids, Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs) and comets. SSSBs are
hence found in different regions of the Solar System: Near Earth Objects (NEOs)
orbiting in the vicinity of the Earth (with perihelion q ≤ 1.3 AU), Main Belt Asteroids (MBAs) orbiting between Mars and Jupiter, Trojan asteroids co-orbiting
Jupiter or other major planets, Centaurs orbiting between Jupiter and Neptune,
and in the belt of trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) beyond the orbit of Neptune
(with semi-major axis a ≥ 30 AU). Additionally, and because they share some
properties with these small bodies, we shall also consider in the rest of the paper
some small planetary satellites (orbiting around a planet, and hence not strictly
speaking SSSBs).
These small icy or rocky bodies are of particular interest for fundamental scientific research to understand the formation and evolution of planetary systems in
general, and of our Solar System in particular. SSSBs, being pristine in general, or
having experienced little geological evolution, are valuable tracers of the early time
of the Solar System. Asteroids, comets and planetesimals are also believed to be
the source of water on Earth through past collisions (Morbidelli et al 2000; O’Brien
et al 2014; Bancelin et al 2017, and references therein) and so they have been proposed to be the fundamental bricks that formed an environment apt to support
life on Earth. Space missions are of great value to deepen our understanding of
SSSBs, as will be seen in Sect. 2. Following the success of the Hayabusa space
mission that visited the asteroid (25143) Itokawa, other sample-return missions
(Hayabusa 2, OSIRIS-REx) are currently underway and will greatly enhance our
scientific knowledge about asteroids. The Martians Moons eXplorer (MMX) will
target small planetary satellites as part of a sample return mission, the missions
Lucy and Psyche have recently been approved to target a metallic asteroid and
several Jupiter Trojans, respectively, and other missions have also been proposed
to space agencies (MarcoPolo-R, Phobos-Grunt-2, ZhengHe, Castalia, DePhine,
OKEANOS, ...).
On a more societal aspect, there are a number of asteroids (potentially hazardous asteroids - PHAs) with a non-zero probability of impacting the Earth.
These impacts can yield extinction level events at planetary scales on astronomical/geological time frames of several tens of million of years, or more local natural
disasters on a hundred-years time-frame (Board et al 2010; Pelton and Allahdadi
2015, and references therein). Understanding our vulnerability to such PHAs (for

4

D. Hestroffer et al.

life and goods) necessitates a detailed understanding of the results of an impact
on the ground (land or water), the physics of the entry in the atmosphere, and the
structure and properties of the asteroid itself. In addition to the DART space mission, several missions have been proposed to assess the mitigation techniques and
capabilities, including their dependence to the asteroid’s properties (Don Quijote,
AIDA with DART and its complementary part HERA, NEOTwIST).
The interest in asteroids has also increased during the last decade for economic
reasons, in exploration and exploitation. Near Earth Asteroids were the intended
target for the next human exploration, or resource collection by a redirect mission
(the Asteroid Redirect Mission, ARM, currently dismissed) before considering a
human mission to Mars. Extraction of possible extra-terrestrial resources in space
(In-Space or In-Situ Resource Utilisation - ISRU) is raising interest from industries
for business purposes, mostly for use in space and for sustaining habited missions
in space. This is pushing governments to adopt laws in agreement with the Outer
Space Treaty1 of the UNO-SO. This also requires a thorough understanding of
the targeted object and moreover, where and how to mine potential resources
(Galache et al 2017). As a consequence of these interests, several space missions
have targeted, or are proposed to target, asteroids, comets, and satellites; with
a prevalence to Near Earth asteroids - because of their proximity to Earth (and
therefore reduced mission duration and costs). Main belt asteroids are mostly seen
as an opportunity fly-by during a cruise to a planet.
Presently, more than 700,000 asteroids have been identified and discovery is
still progressing with current surveys (for instance, the discovery rate is of more
than 1800/year for only NEOs (Chamberlin 2018)), and more is to come as the
limiting magnitude of these surveys is pushed to track fainter objects. The recent
WISE/NEOWISE space mission (Masiero et al 2014) has revised downward the estimation of the total population of asteroids by size range; however, a large fraction
of objects smaller than approximately 100 meters still remains to be discovered.
The whole mass of TNOs is estimated to be at least one order of magnitude larger
than that of asteroids, but they are very faint and few details on their structure
are known – except in the case of the dwarf planet Pluto. Therefore, most of the
current discussion in this paper will be focused on asteroids.
There is no strict classification of objects by size, in the size-range of several
meters to hundreds of kilometres. Even if small in size, compared to planets or
giant satellites, asteroids can no longer be considered as tiny point-like masses and
have gained interest as small worlds on their own right. Moreover, asteroids are
driven by a great variety of both dynamical and physical mechanisms and show a
large variety and diversity of composition, size, shapes, morphology, and surface
properties according to what is observed. Indeed, asteroid orbital dynamics are
mainly driven by their interaction with the Sun through gravity and other gravitaional or non-gravitaional perturbations. In this respect, they are considered as
test particles for some General Relativity tests (Will 2014). However, given the
accuracy reached in many studies on their dynamics (either short- or long-term)
it appears that the effects connected to their physical properties can no longer be
neglected. The size and shape have a direct effect on astrometric measurements, or
photocentre offset to the centre of mass, and subsequently on their orbit determi1 http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introouterspacetreaty.
html

Small solar system bodies as granular media

5

nation or improvement (Hestroffer 1998). Mutual perturbations between asteroids
or by telluric planets are affecting their orbit propagation (e.g. Hilton 2002; Mouret
et al 2007). Even without considering such secondary effects, the mass and density are fundamental parameters that characterise an asteroid. After the discovery
of binary asteroids in the early 1990s, such as (243) Ida-Dactyl (Chapman et al
1995) from space, and (45) Eugenia from ground-based telescope (Merline et al
1999), and some space probe visits to asteroids, as the recent mission to (25143)
Itokawa (Fujiwara et al 2006), mass and porosities2 could be estimated, completely
renewing our interpretation of these objects from a geological point of view.
Many asteroids and small bodies are supposed to be ‘rubble-piles’ (a terminology introduced by C.R. Chapman (1977) for asteroids shattered as the result of
impacts, and gravitationally reaccumulated into a single body) and not monolithic
bodies governed only by material strength. This term of rubble-pile is however confusing due to conflict with the different structural interpretation commonly used in
Geology. For this reason, other terms have been proposed: gravitational aggregates,
self-gravitating aggregates and, more recently, granular asteroids. These low bulk
density asteroids are thus gravitational aggregates held together mostly by mutual gravity (Richardson et al 2002; Bagatin et al 2001), with surfaces covered by
ponds, craters, grooves, boulders, large topographic slopes, etc. For instance, the
17 km size asteroid (433) Eros shows a large crater and a smooth and deep surface
of regolith, while (25143) Itokawa, approximately 500 m large, presents a shallow
layer of gravel-like grains. All these observations have revealed a number of surface
features that are yet to be fully understood (Murdoch et al 2015). In contrast to
large gas giants or planetary bodies that are generally in hydrostatic equilibrium,
these smaller bodies are able to sustain comparatively large shear stresses, yields,
and plastic deformation. Their surfaces and interiors as well can be modelled as
granular media formed by particles ranging from dust to boulders. So, during the
last two decades, asteroids have often been modelled as granular systems, with
many works from different groups and authors; a summary can be found in a few
review papers (Richardson et al 2002; Murdoch et al 2015; Scheeres et al 2015;
Hestroffer et al 2017; Campo Bagatin et al 2018b, and references therein). However, a comprehensive theory of granular media is elusive, depending on a large
set of parameters and not easily scalable to planetary objects.
In the following sections we provide a review of the concept of granular systems, its application to small bodies in planetary science, and connected open
questions. We start with Sect. 2 that presents the current knowledge on the bodies under study, what has been learned from observations and the models that have
been developed. Section 3 gives a general introduction on the theory of grains and
granular systems, and what should be relevant for planetary science of gravitational aggregate objects. Section 4 will present the general modelling techniques
to study granular media as either a continuum (FEM) or as a discrete (DEM) system. In Sect. 5 we explore experiments on granular systems either on the ground
(that is under Earth’s gravity), or in a micro-gravity environment. After presenting benchmark cases in Sect. 6, and applications to the study of cohesion, spin-up
and YORP effect, segregation, and post-impact re-accumulation, we give a general
perspective in Sect. 7.
2

More precisely the macroscopic porosity.

6

D. Hestroffer et al.

2 Asteroids and small bodies
2.1 Observations and knowledge
Asteroids were long suspected to be monolithic, possibly differentiated bodies,
dry and dense, in particular in the inner regions of the Solar System, with bare
rock surfaces. However, during the last thirty years, our vision of asteroids’ surfaces and interiors has considerably evolved. This is a result of the particular
advancement in observational techniques (from the ground and from space) that
has allowed us to remotely characterise a number of SSSBs. Over time, this has
resulted in a significant progress of our knowledge and understanding of asteroids,
satellites and comets, which has increased even further with the analysis of the
data collected through in-situ space exploration. Since the first review book on asteroids (Chapman 1977) we have not only increased, but deepened our knowledge
of their physical characteristics (sizes, shapes and masses, composition, thermal
inertia, albedos, etc., and their statistics). Astronomers and planetary scientists
have also discovered new features, objects or phenomena (Yarkovsky, YORP, planetary migration, binaries and multiple systems, tumblers, fast rotators, main-belt
comets MBC and active asteroids, to mention a few) which were described in the
subsequent books Asteroids II, III, and IV (Gehrels and Matthews 1979; Binzel
et al 1989; Bottke et al 2002; Michel et al 2015). The same holds true for comets
(Wilkening and Matthews 1982; Festou et al 2004), though to a lesser degree.
2.1.1 Asteroids and collisions
The population of asteroids originates from steady-state collisional dynamics (Dohnanyi
1969), so that the number density distribution, for a mass m, follows a power law,
with:
N (m) ∝ m−11/6
(1)
with the smaller objects being more numerous. C. R. Chapman proposed that—as
a result of the inter-collisional evolution—larger asteroids would be fractured or
constitute a recollection of fragments that did not escape after the catastrophic collision; he introduced the terminology of ‘rubble pile’ (Chapman 1977) (see Sect. 1).
Such bodies would hence be self-gravitating collections of blocks—or gravitational
aggregates—with more or less fractured rocks, with no or little internal cohesion,
sometimes highly fractured and porous bodies, with more or less coherent arrangements of the constituting blocks. This vision has been confirmed with the
estimation of porosity (Britt and Consolmagno 2001), see Eq.( 2), for some of the
asteroids for which the bulk density could be measured. Space missions to small
bodies (see Table 1), either as flybys or rendez-vous, have considerably improved
our knowledge of these bodies, by bringing detailed measurements and observations of their interiors and surfaces. Flybys are valuable even if they are only brief
encounters, unfortunately, however, they are not systematically incorporated in
mission trajectories.
The NASA NEAR mission showed that the bare rock surface predictions for
(433) Eros were incorrect. Indeed, this in-situ mission—followed by other space
missions—revealed a substantial layer of unconsolidated rocky material and dust
(regolith) covering the surface of (951) Gaspra, (243) Ida, (433) Eros, (21) Lutetia,

Small solar system bodies as granular media

7

and (25143) Itokawa (Murdoch et al 2015). Additionally, this regolith seems to be
active: there is evidence of motion in the form of landslides, particle migration,
particle size sorting and regolith production. So, the geophysical characteristics of
the surfaces of small planetary bodies appear to be diverse and complex (Murdoch et al 2015). Also, observations made by the Hubble Space Telescope of the
disruption events of active asteroids P2013/R3 (Jewitt et al 2014) and P2013/P5
(Jewitt et al 2013) imply that not only asteroid surfaces are covered by regolith,
but that their internal structure is granular and not monolithic.
The usual assumption—that prevailed for more than a century—that asteroids
are single monoliths, is also incorrect. While long speculated in the end of last century (Weidenschilling et al 1989), and albeit negative result from surveys around
the largest minor planets (Gehrels et al 1987), evidence has been obtained only in
the last decades that “binary asteroids do exist” (Merline et al 2002). It is noteworthy that there are no satellites orbiting around the largest asteroids of the main
belt (the dwarf planets), but satellites and moons are found in different asteroid
dynamical classes (Near Earth Objects, main belt asteroids, Trojans, Centaurs,
trans-Neptunian Objects, ...). Furthermore, some have rings (Braga-Ribas et al
2014; Ortiz et al 2017). The number of detected gravitationally bounded binaries
and multiple systems, and also asteroid pairs, has rapidly increased, showing also
a higher proportion of systems in the NEO and TNO populations; though – due to
observational bias – they are not all sampled identically. The formation scenario
of these binary or multiple systems, containing a variety of mass fraction, separation distances, angular momentum values, etc. is not fully understood. Different
mechanisms can be required within various populations of asteroids. For examples,
formation mechanisms can include fission and mass shedding, post catastrophic
collision, re-accumulation, capture, ... (Noll et al 2008; Margot et al 2015; Walsh
and Jacobson 2015; Tardivel et al 2018).
2.1.2 Spin rate, size, and shape
There are several fundamental parameters to characterise asteroids, both physical
and dynamical. One such fundamental parameter is the spin-rate or period of rotation, that can be obtained relatively easily together with the object’s brightness.
The spin period is obtained with some confidence from the light-curve (for those
objects that are not spheroidal in shape); while the size is generally estimated
from the brightness, sometimes by assuming the object’s albedo (when no direct
or radiometric measure is available). This provides information for a spin-rate versus size plot, which gives a good view of some of the general properties of the
objects we are studying (Fig. 1). In particular, two features are apparent: 1) a
spin barrier at about P ≈ 2.4 hr for the larger objects, and 2) the existence of
fast and superfast rotators (Pravec and Harris 2000; Pravec et al 2002; Scheeres
et al 2015). The spin barrier was supposed to be good evidence that most large
objects in the range 1 − 100 km – in particular close to spin limit – are granular
in nature or ‘rubble-piles’, and not monolithic (Bagatin et al 2001), but this is
merely the fact that such large bodies are in a gravity dominated regime (Scheeres
et al 2015) which does not necessarily imply cohesionless aggregates. Fast rotators
on the other hand, must be either monolithic rocks with natural strength, or have
additional cohesion to bound a granular structure (see Sect. 4); such differences
are however not recognisable from simply the size and spin-rate parameters.

8

D. Hestroffer et al.

Fig. 1 Spin period for more than 5500 asteroids as function of their estimated diameter. A
‘spin barrier,’ above which no large objects is rotating, is apparent. This is consistent with a
gravitational aggregate structure of loose conglomerations held together by mutual gravitation,
yet it is due mainly to a gravity dominated regime. Conversely, small objects—in the strength
dominated regime—can spin very fast, with full rotation within minutes; a possible hint towards
a more monolithic structure, or presence of additional cohesive strength. Near Earth objects
are predominant in the population of objects smaller than approximately 1 km. (Source: the
LCBD light curve database (Warner et al 2009)).

When these bodies reach their critical spin rate, which is dictated by their size,
density and internal strength and strength distribution, they will undergo deformation, surface mass shedding, fission or catastrophic disruption events (Hirabayashi
et al 2015; Sánchez and Scheeres 2016, 2018). Particles that are ejected near the
equatorial plane can supposedly re-accumulate and form moonlet(s) (Walsh et al
2008). A more abrupt fission event could also produce a binary system (Tardivel et al 2018) or could be at the origin of the observed asteroid pairs (Pravec
et al 2010; Sánchez and Scheeres 2016; Zhang et al 2018). Only the structurally
strongest asteroids will reach the 2.4 h spin barrier. More generally, whatever the
spin-rate is, the surface gravity on a body of several 100 m size is in any case weak
(approx. 10−3 − 10−6 g), and escape velocities are in the cm/s range.
Our modelling of asteroid shapes has dramatically evolved during the last
decades. The observed periodic variation in an asteroid lightcurve over a rotation period can be explained by either a variation of the projected surface for a
non-spherical or non-spheroidal shape, or by a variation in albedo of the observed
surface (Russell 1906). It eventually appears that such variations are mainly driven
by shape effects (Kaasalainen and Torppa 2001; Kaasalainen et al 2001; Li et al
2015). Starting from simple tri-axial ellipsoid models spinning about their shortest

Small solar system bodies as granular media

9

axis (as an outcome of collisional and dynamical processes), or more sophisticated
cellinoids (Lu et al 2016), we now have tools to derive convex and non-convex
topographic shapes (Kaasalainen et al 2002). Stellar occultations and high angular resolution observations valuably complete that information and modelling
(Durech et al 2015), as well as radiometric and polarimetric observations for size
and albedo (Masiero et al 2017; Stansberry et al 2008; Harris and Lagerros 2002;
Delbo et al 2015; Belskaya et al 2015, and references therein). Radar observations—
by analysing the echoed wavefront on the asteroid’s surface—also provide information on shape and more detailed physical properties (Ostro et al 2002; Benner
et al 2015). The body’s shape and outer envelope can be related to its internal
structure, and also modify its spin barrier level (Harris 1996; Holsapple 2001).
2.1.3 Mass, bulk-density, and porosity
Binaries and multiple systems are of particular interest since, as a result of collisions, they could correspond to the case proposed by Chapman (1977) and likely
be gravitational aggregates. Moreover, binaries are of particular interest here, because by deriving their mutual orbits, it is possible to derive another fundamental
parameter: the (total) mass of the asteroidal system.
Measuring the mass is a difficult goal to reach which can be achieved from the
careful astrometric observations of binary systems, or otherwise from the analysis
of their gravitational perturbation during a rendez-vous or a fly-by with a space
probe, or a close encounter with another (small, target) asteroid. Such close encounters between asteroids are much more frequent than space mission fly-bys, but
far less precise or accurate, and require high accuracy astrometric measurement
together with a global inversion to take into account all the effects (Mouret et al
2007; Baer and Chesley 2017). In any case, estimating the mass of any small planetary object studied is of high importance as it allows an indication of its density,
porosity, internal structure or internal mass distribution, and its global behaviour
to stresses or impacts. Given the bulk density ρ of a small body (generally measured from the knowledge of mass and volume, with some uncertainty), and ρg
the mean density of the material that constitutes the constituting grains (generally unknown, and estimated from the taxonomic class), the macro-porosity3 p is
defined by:
p = 1 − ρg /ρ
(2)
It is a scale invariant parameter that also measures the intersticial voids in the
global structure of the body. The bulk density uncertainty is dominated by the
error on the volume which can be large. Besides, the porosity estimation depends
on our knowledge of the interior material or internal constituents, and the densities
of analogue meteorites (i.e., those representing a good match to the asteroid taxonomic class). Progress in the classification, and determination of such meteorite
densities and micro-porosities has been achieved in laboratories. However, the meteorites collected on Earth may not always be the best analogue for representing
an asteroid as a whole, as it could also be formed of other materials, containing
volatiles or fragile material, or having regions with different porosities. This means
3 Micro-porosity on the other hand is in the matrix of the grains or meteorites. Microporosity is a porosity that will survive entry in the atmosphere.

10

D. Hestroffer et al.

1e22

Coherent asteroids

1e20

Transition zone

Mass [kg]

1e18

1e16

average S
1e14

1e12

average C

‘Ruble pile’
asteroids

Fractured
asteroids

1e10
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

Porosity [vol. %]

Fig. 2 Possible internal structure arrangement of gravitational aggregates, based on their
macro-porosity (adapted from Britt et al (2002); Carry (2012)). Note that the uncertainty on
the porosity is generally large (±5% and more).

that our knowledge on asteroids’ porosity remains limited to a few objects, and
with substantial uncertainty (see Fig. 2).
Porosity and material strength play crucial roles in how asteroids react to impacts of smaller debris or ”projectiles” as they determine how shock-waves and
damage zones caused by the disruption event propagate through the target (e.g.
Asphaug et al 1998; Jutzi et al 2010; Syal et al 2013). Several studies have found,
for instance, that strength dominated asteroids below a few hundred meters in
size are more difficult to disrupt if they are porous (Jutzi and Michel 2014, and
references therein). For larger asteroids self-gravity starts to dominate, and the
role of porosity becomes less clear cut. Cases where a collision leads to an asteroid’s disruption has been discussed extensively in literature (see e.g. Henych and
Holsapple 2018). Comparing the imparted kinetic energy per unit mass Q to the
specific energy needed to disrupt a target Q∗ can provide useful first insights. Let
(Henych and Holsapple 2018):
Q=

1 m u2
,
2 M

Q∗ = (44R−0.6µ + 68R3µ ) [cos(φ) U ]2−3µ ,

(3)

where m is the mass of the projectile, M the mass of the asteroid, R[km] the
radius of the asteroid in kilometers, u[m/s] the relative impact velocity in m/s,
and U the same quantity in km/s. Furthermore, φ denotes the impact angle and
µ is the so-called “point-source scaling-law exponent” that is around µ = 0.4 for
porous materials and µ = 0.55 for non-porous rock-like material. Both, Q and Q∗
are given in units of J/kg. The ratio between Q/Q∗ determines whether or not
enough energy has been deposited to disrupt the target. A value of Q/Q∗ ≈ 1
characterises an impact that dismantles about 50% of the body. A value much

Small solar system bodies as granular media

11

Fig. 3 Disruption limits for collisions as a function of impactor and target size. The relative
velocity at impact is 5 km/s, typical for main belt collisions. The target asteroids are assumed
to be non-porous and spherical (µ = 0.55) with a density of 3500 kg/m3 .

greater than unity indicates pulverisation. On the other hand, Q/Q∗  1 describes
a simple cratering event. Fig. 3 shows that typical main belt collision speeds suffice
for relatively small ”projectiles” to affect the structural integrity of kilometer-sized
asteroids. Catastrophic disruption is more likely to occur in collisions between main
belt asteroids of similar size.
The result of a post-catastrophic re-accumulation should be a loosely bound
gravitational aggregate (e.g. Tanga et al 2009a; Michel and Richardson 2013).
Surprisingly, low bulk densities of the order of 1200 − 1500 kg/m3 were observed
on some asteroids, either single or binaries (e.g. Mathilde, Eugenia, ...), while
chondritic or silicate material densities are of the order of 2500 − 3500 kg/m3 . This
is supposed to be evidence of the presence of large voids in the interior of the
body, that can be connected to macro porosity of the order of 40 − 50 %. How
force chains and friction are acting, or how the blocks are arranged inside of the
body, is not clear. The mechanism that prevents the fine regolith grains at the
smooth upper surface from filling the voids in the case of porous bodies could be
linked to friction (Britt and Consolmagno 2001), but needs to be better understood
with regard to seismic shaking and segregation mechanism. How asteroids react
to collisions isn’t clear neither; collisions could either increase the porosity, voids,
and fragments, or otherwise reduce the porosity through compaction. The asteroid
(253) Mathilde is an example of an object with very high macro-porosity with
smooth surface and large craters indicating that it has survived major impacts.
However, the actual internal structure, or the size distribution of its constituent
particles remains unknown.
From the knowledge of asteroids mass and porosity, Britt et al (2002) identified
three classes of objects that could reflect different internal structures: coherent,
fractured, and loosely consolidated (see Fig. 2). Further, Richardson et al (2002)

12

D. Hestroffer et al.

Increasing cracks

Gravitational
aggregates

Coherent
aggregates

rubble pile

coherent
rubble pile

Shattered
0

Fractured

Increasing voids

Macro porosity

1

Monolithic

Relative Tensile Strength (RTS)

1

Fig. 4 Relative tensile strength (RTS) and porosity parameter space (adapted from Richardson et al (2002)).

schematically characterised gravitational aggregates by relative tensile strength
(RTS), in addition to macro-porosity (see Fig. 4). These are driving parameters
that qualitatively identify different classes of internal structures and global mechanical behaviour. So, there could be different regimes between strength dominated and gravity dominated bodies (see Holsapple et al 2002), with different
reactions to mechanical tensile or compressive stresses and impacts. Thus, bodies
in the range of concern in this paper are in the transition regime between purely
strength dominated (like stones and meteorites) and gravity dominated coherent
bodies (like major planets), and can react differently to impacts and cratering
(Asphaug et al 2002; Britt et al 2002). For instance, porous and structurally weak
bodies may, through stress dissipation, be highly resistant to catastrophic disruption. Additionally, it modifies the cumulative size-distribution slope from Eq. (1)
(Bottke et al 2005, and references therein). Lastly, all the mechanisms present in
granular media can govern gravitational aggregates’ shapes, strength and failure
limits (Scheeres et al 2015) (impacts, landslides, fission, tides, ...).

Small solar system bodies as granular media

13

Table 1 List of flown space missions to small bodies ((Hestroffer et al 2017, updated)). Missions to the dwarf planets Ceres, Vesta, and Pluto, or to large planetary satellites, have not
been included here; while two launched and ongoing—not yet achieved—sample-return missions have been included. These are mainly NASA, JAXA, and ESA space agencies interplanetary missions, with contributions from national agencies, CNSA, and former USSR for the
‘Halley armada’ and Phobos2. Legend for mission type: F=fly-by ; O=orbit or/and hovering
; SR=sample return ; L=landing ; I=impact ; Date is given at arrival.
Target
Asteroids
(101955) Bennu
(162173) Ryugu
(4179) Toutatis
(21) Lutetia
(2867) Steins
(25143) Itokawa
(5535) AnneFrank
(433) Eros
(2685) Masursky
(9969) Braille
(253) Mathilde
(243) Ida+Dactyl
(951) Gaspra
Comets
67P/ChuryumovGerasimenko
103P/Hartley 2
9P/Tempel 1
81P/Wild 2
19P/Borrelly
Grigg-Skjellerup
1P/Halley
21P/Giacobini-Zinner
Moons
M1 Phobos
M2 Deimos
satellites of Saturn

Mission

Type

Date

OSIRIS-REx
Hayabusa2
Chang’E 2
Rosetta
Rosetta
Hayabusa
Stardust
NEAR Shoemaker
Cassini/Huygens
Deep Space 1
NEAR Shoemaker
Galileo
Galileo

O+SR
O+SR
F
F
F
O+SR
F
O+L
F
F
F
F
F

Dec. 2018
June 2018
Dec. 2012
July 2010
Sep. 2008
June 2005
Nov. 2002
Feb. 2000
Jan. 2000
Jan. 1999
June 1997
Aug. 1993
Oct. 1991

Rosetta

O+L

Aug. 2014

EPOXI (Deep Impact ext.)
Deep Impact, Stardust
Stardust
Deep Space 1
Giotto
The Halley armada:
Vega 1&2, Sakigake,
Suisei, Giotto, ICE
ICE

F
O+I
O+SR
F
F

Nov. 2010
July 2005, 2011
Jan. 2004
Sep. 2001
July 1992

F

March 1986

F

Sep. 1985

MEX, ODY, MGS,
Viking1 + Phobos2
MEX, ODY, MGS, Viking2
Cassini

F+O
F
O

2004, 2001, 1997,
1989, 1976
2004, 2001, 1997, 1976
2000-2017

2.2 Links between asteroids, planetary satellites, and comets
Comets and asteroids show very distinctive physical and dynamical properties.
On the dynamical side, first, objects with parabolic or hyperbolic orbits, i.e. eccentricities e ≥ 1, would be categorized as comets (or interstellar objects (Meech
et al 2017)). Next, the Tisserand parameter TJ for a body whose periodic orbit is
characterised by a semi-major axis a, eccentricity e, and inclination i:
TJ =

aJ
+2
a

r

a
(1 − e2 ) cos i
aJ

(4)

given here with respect to the massive Jupiter (with orbit aJ ≈ 5.2 AU), is a
well known dynamical parameter that broadly separates objects that are strongly
perturbed by Jupiter, or not, as a function of their encounter velocity. This helps
to separate the orbital classes between asteroids (typically TJ > 3), and comets

14

D. Hestroffer et al.

(typically TJ < 2 for Halley type comets - HTC, and 2 < TJ < 3 for Jupiter
family comets - JFC). On the physical and visible side, when approaching the Sun
at approximately less than 3 AU, a comet begins to sublimate its volatiles, giving
rise to a large and bright coma and tail, making comets very distinct in appearance
to asteroids.
Now, extinct comets, after having lost their volatiles and after a dynamical evolution bringing them in the Near-Earth orbiting region, are difficult to distinguish
from asteroids using remote observations: (“a comet in disguise” Kerr 1985; Weissman et al 2002). On the other hand, the old viewpoint that asteroids—as a kind of
minor planet—are dry with no volatiles, possibly differentiated with iron core and
mantle and hence dense, while all objects beyond the snow line at approximately
5 AU are icy bodies that have retained their volatiles, has changed. Indeed, ‘active
asteroids’ (and not only the large dwarf planet Ceres) or ‘main belt comets’ have
been observed in the main belt, well below the hypothesised snow line (“a comet
among the asteroids” Hsieh and Jewitt 2006; Jewitt et al 2015). Moreover, as difficult as it is, ices have been detected on the surface of a few asteroids (Rivkin and
Emery 2010; Campins et al 2010), and it has been shown that volatiles can have
long lifetimes if buried under a moderate layer of regolith (Schorghofer 2008; Delbo
et al 2015, and reference therein). So, volatiles can be present in asteroids as it is
the case in comets, albeit in different proportions. Conversely, some Centaurs have
shown activity at large distance from the Sun, invalidating the commonly accepted
scenario of possible activity (Jewitt 2009). Moreover, in-situ collection of comet
grains by the Stardust mission has revealed the presence of silicates, so that comets
are not only made of volatiles and interstellar dust but share also some composition
with—closer to Sun—asteroids. This has been confirmed by the Rosetta mission,
which gives more insight into the grains and dust, composed of compact grains and
fluffy aggregates (Levasseur-Regourd et al 2015), rich in carbon and non-hydrated
minerals (Bardyn et al 2017). This is supported by our current understanding of
the formation and dynamical evolution of the whole Solar System, showing a big
mixing of the distant and inner regions (DeMeo et al 2015) with conglomerates
that include refractive material and volatiles, hence erasing or fading any initial
solar nebula density or composition gradient. Lastly, the derived masses of some
asteroids show very low bulk densities, which is assumed to reflect a high porosity (Mathilde density of ≈ 1.3 (Yeomans et al 1997), Eugenia density of ≈ 1.2
(Merline et al 1999)), similarly to comets. The same low densities have been found
for Phobos and Deimos (with values of 1.5 and 1.9, respectively (Rosenblatt et al
2016)), for Trojans and TNOs (Patroclus density of ≈ 0.8 (Marchis et al 2006)),
and other extremely low densities are found in comets and small Saturnian moons
(Thomas 2010).
This all has pushed a change of paradigm in the last decades in our understanding of the real differences between the different classes of minor bodies,
bringing forth the concept of an asteroid-comet continuum (Bockelée-Morvan et al
2016). Additionally, the irregular satellites of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune,
the small moons of Pluto, the moons of Mars Phobos and Deimos, etc., have been
hypothesized to be either captured asteroids or TNOs (Peale and Canup 2015,
and references therein). Such capture origin remains sometimes unclear, and impact scenarios are also possible as in the case of Mars. Nevertheless—whatever
their origin—the similarities in size, surface and composition remain. Thus asteroids, comets and small moons show common features. Although they have some

Small solar system bodies as granular media

15

variation and gradients, for instance in the constituent ingredients or even with
different formation mechanisms, their final global structure and general mechanical
behaviour could still be modelled with a similar approach.

2.3 Summary and Open questions
We have a general knowledge of the surface composition of these small bodies,
from telescopic observations, and sometimes of their surface roughness through
thermal inertia (Delbo et al 2015; Müller et al 2017). But detailed knowledge on
the presence of regolith, craters, boulders and ‘chaotic terrain’, or other geological
features is much more limited. And in that case, they have shown a large diversity that is still difficult to predict, or to unequivocally correlate with observable
data such as size, taxonomic type and spin-rate. We also expect to see segregation phenomena acting at the surface of these bodies. However size or density
segregation and sorting in granular media, and moreover, how it really behaves on
self-gravitating small granular bodies, is still a matter of research. Exploration of
these small bodies has now entered a new era with landers and sample return devices that are designed to make contact with their surfaces. This was started with
the Hayabusa and Rosetta missions, and we are awaiting the event—and success—
of both Hayabusa-2 and OSIRIS-REx missions. In all these cases, or in the case of
the DART kinetic impactor on Didymos’ secondary, different mechanisms and scenarios have been considered and the actual reaction and behaviour of the surface
will be of high interest for our general understanding. Many space missions are
motivated for scientific, or exploration reasons, often requiring a contact with the
surface, or landing and manoeuvring. Response of the surface during anchoring,
drilling, or sampling is of the utmost importance and needs a better understanding
of the physics of granular media in low gravitational conditions (Daniels 2013).
The same applies for mitigation in space of a Potentially Hazardous Asteroid
(PHA) that would likely impact the Earth. In that case, the threatening asteroid’s material properties can play a fundamental role when changing its trajectory
via impulsive deflection techniques, or when attempting its complete disruption
(Ahrens and Harris 1992; Sanchez et al 2009; Sugimoto et al 2014; Eggl et al 2015).
As seen before, detailed knowledge on asteroids’ surface composition and terrain has been obtained for only a small sample of targets, but still nothing is certain about their interior. Tomography (Hérique et al 2018), seismic investigation
(Murdoch et al 2017b) (either passive or active), in addition to classical planetary
geodesy (Yeomans et al 2000; Konopliv et al 2002; Abe et al 2006; Rosenblatt et al
2008; Andert et al 2010; Jacobson et al 2007; Paetzold 2017; McMahon et al 2018),
and possibly with CubeSats (Walker et al 2016; Murdoch et al 2016; Hestroffer
et al 2017), adapted to low-gravity small bodies and their perturbed environments
have been proposed as viable techniques to probe the interior, and internal structure of relatively small asteroids. At present, most of the available evidence on the
internal composition of small solar system bodies is indirect: bulk-density, rotation
periods, and crater sizes. As said before, it has been observed that several asteroid
classes can be defined in the asteroidal population depending on their bulk porosity, reflecting different degrees of porosity (Britt et al 2002). At the moment, the
origin of such porosity is not completely understood, yet we think that collisions
could likely have played a role. However, this alone does not explain for instance

16

D. Hestroffer et al.

the differences between asteroids Mathilde and Itokawa which have similar bulk
densities, but different surface characteristics.
Given these observational facts, it is evident that we need to better understand
the possible evolution of asteroids: how gravitational aggregates evolve under the
YORP effect, how this depends on size/mass, on internal cohesion or other contact
forces. What is the formation mechanism of binaries and multiple systems: continuous mass shedding, fission, or reaccumulation? How strong are these objects to
meteoritic bombardment and tides, kinetic impactor, sampling mechanism, etc.?
Given the large variety and diversity among these objects we should limit our
assumptions, as we often need to span large parameter sets. Most of these require
theoretical and numerical modelling, benchmarking, and experiments. This is the
focus of the following sections.

3 Granular systems and Granular mechanics
3.1 What are grains?
A grain is a discrete, rigid, macroscopic particle that can interact with other
particles through dissipative contacts, and the motion of which can be accurately
described by Newtonian dynamics4 . This means that the behaviour of the grains
is dominated by particle interactions and gravity forces, in comparison to which
thermodynamic agitation appears negligible (Jaeger et al 1996a). The behaviour
of an assembly of grains without cohesion or adhesive forces is dictated by the
interactions at the individual grain scale. In dense granular systems, aside from
the gravitational attraction, the interactions are essentially mechanical contact
forces, which can be decomposed into normal forces (arising from the elasto-plastic
behavior of the material) and tangential forces (due to the frictional properties of
the grains).
Although grains found in nature and asteroids can display a variety of shapes,
the case study of spherical grains has been at the focus of theoretical and experimental studies in view of shedding light on the mechanical properties of generic
granular materials. A good approximation of the repulsive force involved when
two rigid spherical grains—assumed to be identical—are in contact, is given by
the Hertz Law (Landau and Lifshitz 1986):
√
2R
FHertz = E
δ 3/2
(5)
3(1 − ν 2 )
where R is the radius of the grains, E is Young’s modulus and ν is Poisson’s ratio
of the material, and δ = 2R − r (where r is the distance between the centres of
the grains) is the overlap that represents the elastic deflection at the contact area
(Agnolin and Roux 2007b). The details of the calculation are somewhat accessory
but the striking result is the non-linearity of the interaction, since the repulsive
force scales as the 3/2 power of the overlap. This specific power arises from the
spherical shape of grains, although the calculation is based on the theory of linear
elasticity. However, the nonlinear nature of the grain-grain interactions remains
valid for a wide variety of particle shapes and for large contact deformations.
4

Possibly including relativistic effects, but this is not relevant in this paper on small bodies.

Small solar system bodies as granular media

17

In addition to the elastic component of the normal force, there exist dissipative effects during particle collisions. Energy dissipation can originate from the
visco-elastic properties of grains as well as their plasticity, causing irreversible
deformations at the contact scale, which result in inelastic collisions and solid
friction (Andreotti et al 2013). Friction is a fundamental aspect as it leads to an
indeterminacy problem. Indeed, Coulomb’s law for solid friction sets only bounds
on the value of the tangential forces between two solid bodies. Hence, the internal
mechanical state of an assembly of grains is not uniquely determined by the position and velocity of the grains, but may display residual stresses which induce
strongly history-dependent mechanical responses (Toiya et al 2004; Agnolin and
Roux 2007a).
Due to the rigidity of the individual grains, granular packings may sustain
intense forces, which propagate into the system through force chains. Force chains
are a manifestation of the high heterogeneity of granular systems in general, and
explain why the mean stress state in a granular system does not fully describe the
actual mechanical behaviour exhibited by the system (Liu et al 1995; Jaeger et al
1996b; Radjai et al 1996; Radjai 2015).
On Earth, other effects include cohesion forces caused by capillary bridges due
to the humidity, air drag acting on particles or thermal agitation (Radjai and
Richefeu 2009a; Andreotti et al 2013). Due to the absence of atmosphere, these
effects appear to be negligible in small asteroids. At the same time, the extremely
weak gravitational environment will make other forces, particularly van der Waals
cohesion and electrostatic forces, appear comparatively stronger and therefore,
important in the behaviour of the system. On asteroids, electrostatic forces, which
are typically of the order of 10−6 N, can easily exceed the gravitational forces in a
micro-gravity environment. However, an appropriate modelling of such forces still
remains challenging (Hartzell and Carter 2017).

3.2 What are granular systems?
A granular system is a collection of grains that interact through binary or multiple contact interactions, and whose mean behaviour results from the collective
dynamics of the grains. Due to the complexity and richness of the grain-scale interactions, granular systems display a wide variety of behaviours (thixotropic solid,
liquid, gas), depending on the external mechanical excitation or loading (Jaeger
et al 1996b; Patrick et al 2005).
In the presence of a large input of energy in the system (for instance, large
slope angles, vibrating boundary conditions), grains form dilute assemblies which
are reminiscent of molecular gases. Binary collisions occur between grains whose
mean free path is larger than their typical diameter. Examples of such gaseous
systems include some of the less dense planetary rings, in which individual grains
interact through rare collisions. In less energetic settings, granular systems flow in
dense packings dominated by long-lasting multiple contact interactions, and frictional dissipation. Rock avalanches or landslides as observed on Earth and Mars
(Lucchitta 1979; Neuffer and Schultz 2006) mostly fall into this category. In this
case, the mean behaviour is reminiscent of that of a viscous fluid, however with
strongly non-Newtonian properties. Finally, at equilibrium or in quasi-static flow,
a collection of grains may resist stress without immediate deformation, a behaviour

18

D. Hestroffer et al.

characteristic of a solid (Liu and Nagel 1998; Gao et al 2014). ‘Rubble-pile’ asteroids fall in this category and may undergo gravitational, tidal or centrifugal forces
without rearranging.
It appears therefore vain to propose a general theoretical framework for the
description of such a wide range of behaviours. Instead, specific theories have been
developed, or adapted, for each specific state. Kinetic theory (based on the classical
thermodynamics molecular kinetic theory) has proven to be very successful in
modelling and describing the physics of dilute assemblies of grains (Jenkins and
Richman 1985; Brilliantov and Pöschel 2010). On the other hand, classical soilmechanics and structural engineering theories are often applied to describe the
mechanical properties of dense granular material under slow deformation (Terzaghi
et al 1996; McCarthy and McCarthy 1977). Finally, hydraulic equations (or the
more complex Navier-Stokes equation) are applied to describe the liquid state of
granular matter, coupled with semi-empirical models for the effective viscosity
(MiDi-GDR 2004). These models will be presented in greater details in Sect. 4.

3.3 Phenomenology
When a flow starts, it will do so for slope angles lower than the angle at which
avalanching started, thereby implying a modification of its frictional properties,
often referred to as the hysteretic behaviour of the granular pile. While flowing,
the internal friction will be affected by the flow dynamics and the pressure, and
thus the context of the flow itself will strongly affect the properties of the granular
mass (MiDi-GDR 2004). The characterisation of the internal friction of model
granular media has thus prompted many research activities. A significant amount
of progress has been made, but there are still many aspects relevant to asteroids
to explore, including cohesive forces and grain size segregation. A model for the
granular rheology in the simple case of mono-sized non-cohesive grains will be
presented in Sect. 4.
Another important aspect of granular behaviour in the context of small solar
system bodies is their ability to segregate grains according to their size. This phenomenon is omnipresent on Earth, in geophysical flows (debris and rocks flows)
which classically involve grain sizes covering three to four orders of magnitude,
but also in human activities (food industry, civil engineering, powder technologies
etc). When a granular bed is submitted to vibrations or is flowing, larger grains
and smaller grains tend to separate, with the larger grains classically rising to the
surface of the granular system (also the potential level on Earth). Essentially, this
phenomenon results from the higher probability that smaller grains have to fill in
the gaps opening in the system while flowing or shaking, a mechanism known as
the kinetic sieve (Savage and Lun 1988). Size segregation results in patterns that
may partly affect the properties of the system. In the case of unconfined flows for
instance (like rock flows), larger boulders are segregated at the front and pushed
aside by the flow, forming channels or levées which will in turn affect the flow
dynamics (Félix and Thomas 2004). In the context of small solar system bodies, understanding the dynamics of segregation may allow for the interpretation
of grain size distribution at the surface of asteroids in terms of formation history, structure, exposure to impacts or other sources of agitation. Although much
studied, the general formulation of a lift force that would describe the segregation

Small solar system bodies as granular media

19

dynamics is still mostly lacking (Guillard et al 2014). Presenting existing models is
beyond the scope of the present paper, however, interesting insights will be found
in Kudrolli (2004a).

3.4 What is relevant?
The previous sections have clearly outlined an introduction to the study of granular matter, granular media, the intricacies of some puzzling phenomena observed
in nature and shed some light on our understanding of their inner workings. The
following sections on the other hand, will provide the reader with a more in-depth,
theoretically strict and sound explanation of the current theoretical, experimental
and numerical methods that have been developed and used to study granular systems. However, as insightful as this all is, we need to answer two very fundamental
questions, as otherwise, all this knowledge will simply be inapplicable:
1. are small Solar System bodies granular in nature? and if so,
2. how does all we know about granular dynamics relate to them?
The answer to the first question came as a result of the space missions that
visited these bodies (see Table 1). As seen in Sect. 2, snapshot images taken of
those asteroids showed them to be covered with surface regolith, to be heavily
cratered, and in the case of Ida to have a binary asteroid companion which itself had a regolith covering. Since these initial observations, the space-based and
ground-based observations of asteroids have grown along with the realisation that
these bodies are fundamentally granular in nature and hence that their physical
evolution must be described using principles of granular mechanics applied to these
extreme environments, which brings us to answer the second question.
Since other planetary bodies apart from the Earth have been out of human
reach for most of our history, most of our knowledge of granular systems is restricted to systems on Earth. What this means is that they were all subjected to
an almost constant gravitational field with a magnitude of ≈ 9.81 m.s−2 , in which
cohesive and electrostatic forces were negligible, except for fine powders (with diameters ≈ 10−6 m). The accumulated knowledge collected by early builders (Fall
et al 2014), engineers, scientists (Faraday 1831) and the common farmer had these
two premises that were true for any practical purpose, but not so much for asteroids, comets, or even the Moon. Additionally, on Earth grains always interact
with fluids (Burtally et al 2002; Kok et al 2012), be this in the form of wind (and
atmosphere) or water currents (and humidity) in most cases.
Given the size and shape differences between the Earth and small planetary
bodies, the gravity vector on their surfaces is not as strong as on Earth and changes
dramatically from point to point. This is compounded by the rotational state of
these bodies, and the possible influence of solar wind and solar radiation pressure.
In spite of these environmental differences, phenomena such as size segregation,
phase transitions and granular flows have either been hinted (Sierks et al 2011) or
observed directly (Jewitt et al 2013) and this is precisely the point: these are only
environmental differences. Fundamentally, each individual grain is still solid, graingrain interactions are still governed by surface, contact forces, these interactions
are still very dissipative, and individual grains still follow the laws of Newtonian
physics. Therefore, there is no fundamental difference between granular systems

20

D. Hestroffer et al.

on Earth and those in SSSBs; not even for two solitary grains colliding in the
vast emptiness of space. In that sense, a diffuse planetary ring (e.g. Wisdom and
Tremaine 1988; Salo 2001; Tiscareno and Murray 2018) could be seen as a selfgravitating granular gas, whereas SSSBs could be seen as self-gravitating granular
systems in a condensed, solid phase which will be the focus of the rest of this
paper. That being the case, the theoretical, numerical and experimental tools and
methods that have been already developed should still be adequate to study them
as long as we allow for the implementation of a correct gravitational field, and
cohesive and electrostatic forces at the bare minimum. As Scheeres et al (2010)
point out, cohesive and electrostatic forces become important due to the greatly
reduced magnitude of the gravitational field in comparison to Earth’s gravity.
This is the approach that many scientists in the Planetary Sciences and Granular Dynamics community have taken. Numerical tools need to implement particleparticle cohesive and electrostatic forces as well as self-gravity in the case of discrete element methods (DEM) (Richardson et al 2000; Stadel 2001; Sánchez and
Scheeres 2011; Richardson et al 2011). Whereas in the case of finite element methods (FEM) (Hirabayashi et al 2016; Hirabayashi and Scheeres 2014; Holsapple
2004), the specific geometry of the gravitational field is calculated from the specific shape of the studied body, with a given rheology and equation of state of the
material. Experiments need to be carried out in droptowers (Sunday et al 2016),
and in aeroplanes that perform a number of parabolic flights to emulate lower
gravitational conditions (milli-g levels for tens of seconds are common) (Murdoch
et al 2013a). In the best case scenario, experiments can be carried out in the International Space Station as this guarantees micro-gravity conditions for extended
periods of time (Fries et al 2016; Fries et al 2018). The following sections in this
paper will detail how this has been carried out, the caveats and main results.

4 Physical Models
4.1 Continuum models
Granular systems are by definition discrete, namely made of a multitude of individual macroscopic components whose state can be individually described in classical
terms: position, velocities, contact and volume forces. However, when zooming out
and observing the motion of a granular system as a whole (flowing for instance),
a mean behaviour emerges from the multiple interactions of the individual grains:
they can be described as an equivalent continuum media, with effective mean
properties. Nevertheless, because grain interactions are dissipative in nature, and
energy is constantly lost within the granular mass, the theoretical step necessary to
derive continuum equations and properties from individual grain-scale behaviour
is far from straightforward. As was described in Sect. 3, depending on the external
energy available to the system, a granular mass can exist in a dilute state and
behave like a gas, or flow in a dense state and resemble a viscous fluid, and eventually stop and become like a solid with specific elasto-plastic properties. Each of
these three states of granular matter can borrow the theoretical tools classically
used in thermodynamics, fluids mechanics and soil mechanics respectively. We will
provide a short introduction to each of them in the following. However, in nature,
granular systems very quickly transit from one state to the other: a granular flow

Small solar system bodies as granular media

21

down a steep slope will transform into a gas but will soon stop solid on a gentle topography, while a static granular heap may start deforming as the result of
a quake or any other perturbation, leading to shear banding (namely failure) or
rapid flow. The physical understanding and modelling of these transitions remain
a challenge, and little will be said here on these aspects.

4.1.1 Granular gases
When a granular mass is very dilute, grains interact through short-lived binary
collisions, in between which each experiences an independent free flight over a distance comparable to their diameter. In this situation, they resemble the molecules
of a gas. Because grains are macroscopic, they do not exhibit a temperature in
the thermodynamical sense. However, by analogy with molecular gas, where temperature describes the fluctuating part of the kinetic energy, one may introduce a
granular temperature as the mean grain’s velocity fluctuations (Ogawa 1978; Haff
1983; Jenkins and Savage 1983):
T = hδv 2 i = h(v − V )2 i,

(6)

where v and V are the grain’s individual velocity and the mean velocity respectively. The definition of a granular temperature lays the basis for the derivation
of a kinetic theory of granular gases, by analogy with molecular gases. Based on
the Boltzmann equation, it implies a complex mathematical formulation that is
beyond the scope of the present paper. Here, we will only introduce how transport
coefficients can be derived from simple arguments about the transfer of momentum during collisions. Let’s consider a collection of grains of diameter D interacting
through binary collisions with a typical free-flight distance `. Between two collisions, grains cover the distance ` with a typical velocity given by the velocity
fluctuations δv = T 1/2 from Eq. (6), so that the typical collision rate is T 1/2 /`.
During a collision, grains exchange a momentum of the order of mδv = ρD3 δv,
where m and ρ are the mass and density of a grain. The pressure in the media, given by the total amount of momentum transfer per unit of time (namely,
(ρD3 δv) × (T 1/2 /`)) over an effective section area D2 , will thus obey:
P 'ρ

D
T
`

(7)

and we recover the proportionality between pressure and temperature observed in
molecular gases.
When the granular gas is sheared with a shear stress τ , it deforms with a shear
rate γ̇ = du/dz accordingly (where u is the velocity in the shear direction), thus
defining the viscosity η = τ /γ̇. The transfer of momentum in the shear direction is
thus mdu = ρD3 du times the collision rate T 1/2 /` over the effective section area
D2 . Considering moreover that du/dz ' du/D, since D represents the minimum
length scale over which gradients may develop in the media, we obtain for the
viscosity:
D2 √
η'ρ
T
(8)
`

22

D. Hestroffer et al.

Again, we recover the same proportionality between temperature and viscosity
as in molecular gases. Using similar arguments, we can recover the thermal conductivity, which relates temperature gradients to the heat flux (i.e. kinetic energy
flux), as in molecular gases.
An important aspect of granular gases however is that they lose energy during
collisions which are inelastic. Introducing the coefficient of restitution during a
collision e, the kinetic energy lost per collision is ∆E = ρD3 (1 − e2 )δv 2 = ρD3 (1 −
e2 )T . The rate of dissipation (per unit time and volume) is thus:
Γ =ρ

(1 − e2 ) 3/2
T
`

(9)

Associated to conservation equations, these coefficients provide a simple constitutive model to describe granular gases. Moreover, they illustrate the problem
posed by granular systems and their rigidity. Indeed, in a granular gas, the free
flight distance ` is not much larger than the grain size and can rapidly vanish if
collisions are highly dissipative. In that case, ` → 0 and all coefficients diverge.
More elaborate theories will be found in Andreotti et al (2013), as well as how
kinetic theory has been successfully applied to Saturn’s rings, probably the most
famous example of granular gas in space (Goldreich and Tremaine 1978; Spahn
and Schmidt 2006; Richardson 1994).
4.1.2 Soil Mechanics
At rest, granular systems can sustain shear stresses and remain static, at equilibrium. This is for instance the case when one consider a granular heap, or the face
of a dune: part of the weight of the granular material is sustained by the slope,
without the latter starting to flow. This is true however only if the slope does not
exceed a certain critical value θc , which defines the internal angle of friction of the
material. Past this value, the material flows until a new equilibrium is reached. In
a similar fashion, a granular material in a shear cell, where both applied pressure
P and shear stress τ are controlled, will start to deform and flow only when the
shear stress reaches a certain critical value τc . This critical value is proportional
to the pressure P , and the coefficient of proportionality µ (coefficient of friction)
defines the internal friction of the material:
τc = µ P = tan φ P

(10)

where φ is the angle of repose defined by Coulomb (1776). This provides at first
order a plastic criterion for the failure of granular material: either the shear stress
is below the friction threshold and the system remains static, or the shear stress
reaches the friction threshold and the system undergoes plastic, irreversible, transformations.
This is the basis of the Mohr-Coulomb criteria (see Fig.5), a well-known tool of
soils mechanics, which generalises the above criteria to a fully three-dimensional
system for which the direction of the failure is not known a priori. In this case, the
ratio τ /P must be evaluated in all possible directions. The derivation of Mohr’s
circle implies no specific subtleties: it is recovered by projecting the forces applied
to a given surface as a function of the surface inclination, and the details of the
calculation will be found in Andreotti et al (2013). It provides a graphic way of

Small solar system bodies as granular media

23

τ

shear stress

Failure envelope
τc = C + σ tan φ

Mohr circle

φ

C

normal stress
σ3

P

σ1

σ

Fig. 5 The Mohr-Coulomb failure criteria and Mohr’s circle. The failure criterion represents
the linear envelope that is obtained from a plot of the shear strength τ of a material versus
the applied normal stress σ, where φ is the angle of friction, considering also cohesion c.

understanding the distance of a given stress state to the material plastic limit. The
existence of cohesive forces between the grains is easily taken into account by the
addition of an effective cohesion C to the critical stress τc , which is then defined
as follows:
τc = C + µ P
(11)
so that, in contrast to a purely loosely bound media, the higher the cohesion, the
higher the stress that can be sustained before failure of the granular material.
The static angle of repose is the maximum slope that can be supported before the
formation of an avalanche, and a dynamic angle of repose is the slope that results
after this avalanche has taken place. However, for granular matter, a resisting difficulty lies in the unambiguous definition of the frictional properties, as explained
in Sect. 3.3 above. Moreover, granular matter behaves differently if densely or
loosely packed, and probably also in different gravity regimes. This difference of
behaviour is specifically important when a packing is subjected to a shear stress.
If initially densely packed, a granular packing will need to dilate to adapt to the
shear. This will lead to the localisation of the deformation and the occurrence of
shear banding. By contrast, an initially loose packing will adapt shear stresses
by deforming in an homogeneous fashion. Hence, a given granular material will
exhibit a different flow rule depending on its initial state. Critical state theories
address these aspects, relating the system distance to the plastic limit (i.e. to
failure) to its volume fraction (Roux and Radjai 1998).
Finite element methods (FEM) have been used in this context to see how friction can account for the global shapes and stabilities of small bodies, or derive
stresses and yields in their interior, and possible failures or surface shedding conditions. The gravitational field is computed from a specific (and approximated)
shape of the body, with a given rheology and possible equation of state of the material. This has been applied to both asteroids (Hirabayashi et al 2016; Hirabayashi
and Scheeres 2015; Sharma 2013; Harris et al 2009; Sharma et al 2009; Holsapple
2004, 2001), and small planetary satellites (Dobrovolskis 1982; Kay and Dombard
2018).

24

D. Hestroffer et al.

4.1.3 Fluid Mechanics
In many natural situations, granular matter flows in a dense state that makes it
resemble a liquid. In this case, grains are interacting through simultaneous multiple (rather than binary) collisions with many neighbours, while undergoing large
deformation, so that theoretical frameworks borrowed from molecular thermodynamics or soil mechanics are not relevant. Here, fluid mechanics provides the basic
tools, however with many modifications needed. These tools are essentially the
mass conservation, and the Navier-Stokes equation which relates the velocity gradients to the pressure gradients and most importantly, the viscous or frictional
dissipation.
Considering that granular flows, such as rocks or debris flows, are often thin
compared to their longitudinal extension, a handy simplification consists in assuming that vertical velocities are negligible, and that the motion of the flow is
accurately described by solving the one- or two-dimensional problem along the
flow path (Savage 1989). In this case, the problem essentially reduces to solving
numerically the mass and energy conservation equations which relate flow height
and mean flow longitudinal velocity:
∂h
∂
+
(hū) = 0,
∂t
∂x


∂hū
∂
∂h
¯
2
+
(hu ) = ρ g h tan θ − µ −
cos θ,
∂t
∂x
∂x

(12)

∂
∂
and ∂x
are the
where h is the flow height, ū the flow longitudinal velocity, ∂t
gradients in time and in space, ρ the flow density, g the gravity, θ the slope of
the topography. The main problem to correctly apply the model to real flows is to
have an accurate description of the friction coefficient µ, which balances the two
driving forces: gravity and pressure gradients. In depth averaged equations such
as Eqs. (12), the coefficient of friction is a basal term, namely it encompasses all
the dissipation that occurs in the bulk and at the interface with the substrate into
a single scalar describing frictional interactions at the bottom of the flow. As a
result, much effort has been devoted to understanding what controls the value of
µ in real flows (Brian Dade and Huppert 1998; Kelfoun 2011; Lucas et al 2014),
on Earth as well as on other planetary bodies.
When the flow configuration is such that the shallow-layer approximation no
longer holds (namely when both longitudinal and normal velocities shape the flow),
as for instance in vertical collapses or flow through apertures, the full Navier-Stokes
equation must be solved, which is challenging in terms of numerical techniques.
An important difficulty is to handle the fact that the flow viscosity may become
infinite is some places, where the granular matter turns to a solid-like behaviour,
and starts to creep slowly instead of flowing. Here, the viscosity is often defined
using the frictional properties of the flow through an effective coefficient of friction
µ. The numerical resolution of such complex flows is computationally expensive
and its applicability to natural flows down realistic topographies is limited. However, because these more challenging flow situations provide valuable benchmarking cases to test rheological models for viscosity, they have been the subject of
much research is recent years (Jop et al 2006; Pouliquen et al 2006; Lagrée et al

Small solar system bodies as granular media

25

2011; Staron et al 2012; Kou et al 2017). The rheology of granular flows is more
specifically introduced in the next section.

4.1.4 The rheology of granular flows
As we have seen in previous sections, dense granular matter is in essence frictional
and defining a coefficient of friction µ is both the simplest and the most efficient
way to describe it. Moreover, friction is a finite scalar: it does not diverge nor fall to
zero, so that constraining its value experimentally seems feasible. A great variety
of configurations have been employed to the task, and the wealth of measurements
gathered has eventually led to the identification of a non-dimensional number
which controls the value of the friction coefficient of flowing granular matter: the
inertial number I (MiDi-GDR 2004). The inertial number can be understood as
the ratio of the two characteristic time-scales dominating in a granular flow: the
time scale of macroscopic deformation given by the shear rate γ̇, and the time
scale of grain-scale rearrangements under the local pressure P . For a collection of
grains of diameter d and density ρ,
d | γ̇ |
I= p
.
P/ρ

(13)

The dependence of the coefficient of friction µ on I is phenomenological and implies
the knowledge of three parameters: two extremal values µ1 and µ2 for the friction,
and a coefficient I0 setting how quickly µ evolves between the two:
µ(I) = µ1 +

µ2 − µ1
.
I0 /I + 1

(14)

Although the existence of three independent parameters might be seen as limiting
the predictive value of the µ(I) dependence, the latter has proven very efficient in
many flow configurations. By definition, friction relates pressure and shear stress.
As such, it does not describe the way the system deforms or flows in response to a
solicitation, and additional operations are needed to turn it into a full rheological
description. This is done by deriving an effective viscosity ηeff using the norm of
the shear rate and the pressure:

ηeff =

µ(I) | γ̇ |
.
P

(15)

This operation is valid only if deformations and shear stresses are aligned, which
is satisfied for rapid flows. However, this might not be strictly the case for slow
motion verging to creep, for which the µ(I) rheology may not be sufficient. In
these slow regimes moreover, non-local effects may start to play a role, whereby
distant shear deformations need to be taken into account to describe the local state.
Non-locality is however much beyond the scope of this introduction to granular
behaviour; further reading may include Bouzid et al (2015), and references therein.

26

D. Hestroffer et al.

4.2 Discrete, Numerical Models
In contrast to continuum models and finite element methods (FEM) in Sect. 4.1
above, discrete methods are modelling granular media as a collection particles that
conserve some of the geophysical characteristics of the aggregates to be studied and
the real particles. Several computer simulations of granular material, structures,
and flows have been developed (Radjaı̈ and Dubois 2011; Mehta 2012, and other
references in the sections below). A discrete element method (DEM) is any of a
family of numerical methods that simulates the dynamics of an ensemble of solid,
macroscopic, particles. In these methods, the particles possess not only translational, but also rotational degrees of freedom and the motion of each particle is
calculated over time individually, in accordance with its interaction with the rest
of the particles in the system. The particles that constitute the aggregates can
be subject in general to a variety of external forces fields (long range) and contact forces (short range). In particular, for Planetary Sciences applications, these
fields are self-gravity (for an asteroid size body), imposed micro- and milli-gravity
fields (for asteroid surfaces). Below, we introduce three of these methods, the first
two have already been used for the simulation of SSSBs with mutual gravitational
attraction and the third is starting to be used with the same purpose.
4.2.1 Soft Spheres DEM - SSDEM
The soft-sphere discrete element (or molecular dynamics, SSDEM) method for
simulating granular material consists in applying Newton’s laws of motion to individual deformable spheres. Each individual grain can be submitted to long-distance
forces (most often gravity) and interacts with its neighbours through direct, longlasting collisions. The method is time-driven, and consists in computing the positions and velocities (both translational and rotational) of each grain at time t + dt
based on the state of the system at time t. The search for contacts and the integration of the equations of motion can be optimized using the appropriate numerical
methods, e. g. the Verlet (Verlet 1967) or linked list (Mattson and Rice 1999)
methods, and the leapfrog (Hut et al 1995) or the predictor-corrector (Butcher
2016) integration schemes, respectively.
Great care must be given to the choice of the force models (Radjai et al 1997).
The normal force acting between two spheres is given by the Hertzian contact
(see Eq. (5) and Sect. 3.1) but a dissipative component needs to be included to
model the inelasticity of granular collisions. Most often, the material is considered either visco-elastic (adding a viscous term to the normal force) or plastic
(mimicking irreversible deformations of the grains) (Shäfer et al 1996). In spite
of this, many SSDEM codes have implemented a linear spring-dashpot contact
law due to its analytical simplicity and the fact that the coefficient of restitution
is independent of the impact velocity (Herrmann and Luding 1998). The modelling of the frictional tangential forces also deserves attention. Several methods
have been proposed, among which the most widely used are the simple regularized Coulomb’s law (appropriate for loose systems with no residual stress) and the
history-dependent Cundall model (Cundall and Strack 1979).
The main advantage of the soft-sphere discrete element method lies in its truly
physical modelling. The forces are computed from solid mechanics and integrated
using fundamental laws of physics, while other methods, including event-driven

Small solar system bodies as granular media

27

simulations (HSDEM, Sect. 4.2.2) and cellular automata, may rely on somewhat
arbitrary choices. The SSDEM soft-sphere method also has the advantage of computational efficiency, which allows for simulations of a large number of grains
(typically up to several millions).
4.2.2 Hard Spheres DEM - HSDEM
In the hard-sphere discrete element method (HSDEM), impacts are treated as instantaneous and point contact, so restitution and momentum conservation equations are used (rather than integrating over the contact duration). This is appropriate in the ballistic regime, where the time to cover the mean free path (tf ) is much
greater than time the particles stay in contact during a collision (tc ). This being
the physical reality, the approximation that the numerical method makes is to assume that the duration of a collision is exactly equal to zero (tc = 0), making the
collisions instantaneous and sound speed infinite. This implies that by construction, all collisions are exclusively binary, and particles cannot sustain long-lasting
contacts. The instantaneity of the collisions is artificial, but the approximation is
valid for kinetically active systems. In the context of granular matter, this method
is well suited to the simulation of granular gases and granular flows in a collisional
regime, though more generally (and originally) it was used for the simulation of
dilute molecular gases (Alder and Wainwright 1960).
Numerically, given a set of particles that form the granular system and their
dynamical state (position, velocity and forces on them, including e.g. mutual gravity) the method considers that the particles will move ballistically from collision
to collision (Alder and Wainwright 1959). This implies that the order in which
collisions happen must be calculated in advance, based on the known state of the
system. Every single collision marks an instant at which a pair of particles stops
moving ballistically and exchanges momentum. The method calculates the amount
of time that needs to pass between the present instant and all the possible collisions
in the system as the particles move ballistically. Then a list of collisions in hierarchical (chronological) order is build and all particles move for the needed amount
time so that the first collision in the list takes place. At this moment, the system
has changed, the collision list has to be rebuilt and the process is indefinitely repeated. A brute force approach to the building of the list would be to update the
entire system and, though simple, it is very inefficient for large systems. To solve
that, Lubachevsky (1991) suggested to update only the two particles involved in
the last collision.
From a computation standpoint, HSDEM poses a challenge for parallel processing, since for maximum realism the particle collisions should be treated in time
order, so there is a computational bottleneck as these processes only ever involve
2 particles at a time. In contrast, in SSDEM, since particle contacts are finite in
duration and treated as extra forces in the equations of motion, no bookkeeping is
required to treat the collisions in time order, and everything can be parallelised.
Both HSDEM and SSDEM need to identify particle neighbours in order to check
for potential (HSDEM) or occurring (SSDEM) collisions. The brute-force neighbour search is an intrinsically order N 2 calculation; tree codes or other data sorting
methods can reduce this to order N log(N ) or better (Richardson et al 2011; Rocchetti et al 2017). This however, implies that some collisions could be missed and
so care must be taken to make sure that this does not happen. Finally, in HSDEM,

28

D. Hestroffer et al.

if the timestep is much less than the relevant dynamical time(s), the trajectories
can be treated as linear and any collisions can be predicted in advance; in SSDEM,
timesteps need to be small enough to resolve the restoring forces on contact. This
means HSDEM methods are generally much faster than SSDEM in the ballistic
regime (e.g. collision and ejectas); the opposite is true in the dense/quasi-static
regime, when parallelism wins out despite the tiny steps needed in SSDEM to
resolve contact forces.
4.2.3 Non-Smooth Contact Dynamics CD
The contact dynamics (CD) method is based on a mathematical formulation of
nonsmooth dynamics, and the subsequent algorithmic developments by J. J. Moreau
and M. Jean (Moreau 1994; Jean 1999; Radjai and Richefeu 2009b; Radjaı̈ and
Dubois 2011). As in HSDEM, the particles are assumed to be perfectly rigid (nondeformable), but their contacts can persist in time as in the SSDEM case.
In the CD method, the rigid-body equations of motion are integrated for all
particles using ‘contact laws’ (instead of contact force laws as in SSDEM) expressing mutual exclusion and dry friction between particles. The equations of motion
for each particle are formulated as differential inclusions in which possible velocity
jumps replace accelerations. The unilateral contact interactions and Coulomb friction law are treated as complementarity relations, or set-valued contact laws. The
time-stepping scheme is implicit but requires explicit determination of the contact
network. Due to implicit time integration, inherent in the CD method, this scheme
is unconditionally stable. At a given step of evolution, all kinematic constraints
implied by lasting contacts and friction are simultaneously taken into account—
together with the equations of dynamics—in order to determine all velocities and
contact forces in the system, by means of an iterative process pertaining to the
non-linear Gauss-Seidel method. The latter consists in solving a single contact
problem, with other contact forces set to their values from the previous iteration,
and iteratively updating the forces and velocities until a convergence criterion is
fulfilled. The iterations in a time step are stopped when the calculated contact
forces are stable with respect to the update procedure. The convergence criterion
is based on the variation of the mean contact force and/or velocity between two
successive iterations. In this process, no distinction is made between smooth evolution of a system of rigid particles during one time step and nonsmooth evolution
in time due to collisions or dry friction effects. The uniqueness of the solution at
each time step is not guaranteed by the CD method, as the particles are perfectly
rigid. However, by initializing each step of calculation with the forces calculated in
the preceding step, the set of admissible solutions shrinks to fluctuations which are
basically below the numerical resolution. In this way, the solution remains close
to the present state of forces. When dealing with complex-shaped particles, the
same iterative process can be applied although several contact points may occur
between two neighbouring particles. The multiple contacts between two particles
are treated as independent unilateral constraints.
The implicit time-stepping scheme makes the method unconditionally stable.
Hence, as the small elastic response times are absent from the model, much larger
times steps can be used as compared to the SSDEM. The CD method has been
extensively employed for the simulation of granular materials in 2D and 3D with
various particle shapes.

Small solar system bodies as granular media

29

4.2.4 N-body codes, dealing with mutual attraction
Long-range forces such as inter-particle gravity are expensive to compute, since
every particle in the system contributes a force on every other particle. There is
a great variety of cosmological N-body codes (e.g. Klypin 2017), with various approximations used to reduce the force cost. The particle mesh method (Hockney
and Eastwood 1988) can be used to compute the potential in Fourier space, but it
is not accurate for small separations. One popular approach is to use a tree code,
which assigns particles to cells and approximates forces from distant cells by expanding the gravitational potential around the cell’s centre of mass to some fixed
order. The computation cost is reduced to O(N log(N )) – where N is the number
of particles in the system – instead of O(N 2 ) in the direct pair-wise summation.
Various tree algorithms exist, but one of the most widely used is the oct-tree due
to Barnes and Hut (1986). Briefly, the space occupied by particles in the system is
subdivided recursively into nested cubical cells until each particle uniquely occupies its own cell. To compute the force on a particle, the largest cells are considered
first; if a cell subtends an angle less than some critical value (the opening-angle
parameter, θ), its contribution to the force is obtained from its moments (see below). Otherwise, its occupied sub-cells are considered recursively in turn until the
θ criterion is satisfied, or the sub-cell contains only a single particle. The speed
and accuracy of the method depends on both θ and the expansion order. As an
example, the acceleration up to quadrupole order is given by Richardson (1993):
a=−

M
Q·r
5 (r · Q · r)r
r+ 5 −
,
r3
r
2
r7

(16)

where the gravitational constant G = 1, r is the vector between the particle under
consideration and the cell’s centre of mass, M is the total mass in the cell, and Q
is the quadrupole moment tensor given by
Qjk =

X

mi (3xi,j xi,k − ri2 δjk ),

(17)

i

where ri = (xi,1 , xi,2 , xi,3 ) is the position of particle i in the cell relative to the
cell’s centre of mass, and δjk is the Kronecker delta function. Note the quadrupole
moment of a cell can be computed recursively from the moments of its sub-cells
using the shift theorem (Hernquist 1987). Higher order increases the complexity
but improves the accuracy for a given θ. A typical goal is to achieve an average
force accuracy of 1% or better, which generally requires at least quadrupole order
and θ < 0.7 rad (≈ 40 deg). Other optimizations are possible to improve efficiency,
such as allowing more than one particle to occupy a terminal sub-cell (see Wadsley
et al (2004) for a discussion). Note that most trees are not momentum conserving
(they violate Newton’s third law of equal and opposite forces); fast multipole
methods (FMM) can be momentum conserving, but are more complex, and still
approximate the force (Greengard and Rokhlin 1987). A big advantage to using
a tree for computing forces is that it can also be used to find particle neighbours
in N log(N ) time or better (the moments are not needed for this). Parallelising
tree codes can be complex, but a basic strategy is to use a balanced spatial tree
to distribute equal work among processors, then each processor has its own tree
for its particles (Wadsley et al 2004).

30

D. Hestroffer et al.

Another approach, though following the same basic idea (details in Sánchez
and Scheeres (2011, 2012)), is to divide the simulation space with a static grid and
keep the distances between their geometrical centres, and their powers, in memory
so that look-up tables can be used. The static-grid geometry takes advantage of
the fact that the simulations of self-gravitating aggregates usually requires the
particles to be concentrated in a region of space and not disperse. Whereas the
data kept in memory avoids unnecessary, repeated calculations.

4.2.5 Monodisperse, polydisperse spheres, and other shapes
In nature, grains are found in various sizes and shapes, from round beads to
complex anisotropic particles. The morphology of the individual grains impacts
strongly the global behaviour of the entire granular media (Cleary and Sawley
2002; Pena et al 2007; Lu and McDowell 2007; Donev et al 2004). Moreover, phenomena such as convection and segregation may arise in polydisperse systems (Kudrolli 2004a; Dziugys and Navakas 2009; Metzger et al 2011; Rietz and Stannarius
2008; Miyamoto et al 2007), see Sect. 5.2. Since the handling of the contacts in SSDEM relies on sphere interaction, a common method to build particles of complex
shape is to agglomerate several spheres (Ferellec and McDowell 2010; Thomas and
Bray 1999). For this, spheres of different sizes are glued together allowing large
overlaps in order to minimize bumpy edges along the surface. This procedure can
be used to create macroscopic rugosity (Ludewig and Vandewalle 2012) as well as
anisotropic particles like ellipsoids (Vu-Quoc et al 2000) and even more complex
bodies.
Regarding the algorithm, only few modifications have to be made in order
to simulate complex shapes. Indeed, the contact detection between two particles
remains a contact detection between their respective constitutive spheres. Moreover, the mass and the inertia matrix of each agglomerate are calculated at their
creation so that the different forces and momenta can be easily integrated during
the simulation. However, a major drawback remains: the large number of spheres
that is required to model each particle will strongly impact the computational
time. Along with this, the increased complexity of the equations of motion for the
aggregates and the additional memory requirements which makes parallelism very
difficult.
Another approach to simulating realistic granular systems and the behaviour
of non-spherical is the implementation of rolling and twisting friction (Ai et al
2011). This still relies on spherical particles, but the additional friction terms will
change the way they rotate on top of one another to mimic the individual and
bulk-behaviour of non-spherical particles. DEM methods were adapted to include
grains of polyhedra shapes. The main difficulty when moving from a sphere-based
grains to more complex shapes is the implementation of a fast contact detection
algorithm. This can be done thanks to development obtained in the video game
industry (Movshovitz et al 2012). Lastly, in the CD method, exact particle shapes
can be used since the constraints of mutual exclusion and dry friction do not refer
to particle shape. Thus the CD method allows for considering general polyhedral
shapes, and other complex-shaped particles with multiple contacts (Azéma et al
2017), but with considerably increasing computational cost.

Small solar system bodies as granular media

31

4.3 Limitations
As any other numerical method that has been developed in order to study a
physical system, the methods presented here have limitations which have to be
taken into account, so that results are not misinterpreted and methods are not
misapplied.
First off, one of the main common limitations of DEM codes is the number
of particles that can be simulated given the computational and time constraints.
Though some naturally occurring granular systems, and in particular laboratory
experiments, can be replicated and simulated almost grain by grain, many more
consist of more particles than is possible to simulate with the current computational facilities available for research. Therefore, a compromise must be reached
between the number of particles that form a real system and those that can be
simulated for any practical purpose. Ideally, we want a simulation with enough
particles so that some characteristic parameters such as angle of friction, angle of
repose, cohesive/tensile/compressive strength, bulk density and filling fraction—
among the most commonly used—match the real system. The inclusion of selfgravity in the calculations only exacerbates this problem. DEM methods however
can handle a large number of particles with the aid of HPC computing.
Another common limitation is the size distribution and shapes that can be
used for the particles. In general, very wide size distributions are not simulated
as the number of particles required to have a representative system grows to impractical levels. As an example, for a 50/50 mixture by volume of 1 mm and 1 cm
spherical particles, for every 1 cm particle particle there are up to ≈740 of the
small 1 mm size particles, depending on the packing. Additionally, the contact
detection algorithms rely on the search for the closest neighbours to avoid unnecessary checks and for that the simulation space is divided into cells that are large
enough to contain the largest particle. A large size disparity means that any given
cell will contain a great number of small particles that are too far away to collide.
However, the contact detection algorithm will be forced to search for possible contacts when almost none is possible. As for the shapes, an increasing complexity
in the particle shape means more sophisticated contact detection algorithms and
equations of motion, which will in turn require greater computing time. Besides,
Procopio and Zavaliangos (2005) analysing the case of compaction with multiple
particle FEM method, showed that compaction is not only porosity driven. The
mechanical response of an assembly of particles during dense packing with finite
elements models (FEM) is softer than in discrete element models (DEM), which
are generally limited to non-interacting contacts, or need to be corrected to allow
densities larger than approximately 0.8 (Harthong et al 2009).
For HSDEM, the premise that the free time path is much larger than the duration of collision, tf  tc , is of paramount importance as this determines the
systems that can accurately be simulated with this method. More specifically, this
method can be used to simulate the behaviour of molecular and granular gases,
systems in a collisional regime. The premise begins to be untrue for systems in frictional regimes (granular liquids) and condensed phases (granular solids). In these
latter regimes, the particles sustain long-lasting contacts and the approximation
of tc = 0 is no longer valid. Furthermore, if applied to these systems, unless the
restitution equations are modified, the particles, not being able to stay in contact,
will try to collide infinitely often in a finite amount of time. This is what has been

32

D. Hestroffer et al.

defined as inelastic collapse (McNamara and Young 1994). Even with this modification however, unless in a crystalline structure, the system will have an angle of
friction between 0o − 5o and will behave as a granular liquid.
For SSDEM one specific limitation is the time step (δt) needed for the integration of the equations of motion. The magnitude of δt is determined by two characteristics of the simulated system: the stiffness of the grains - given by the contact
model (linear spring-dashpot, Hertzian spring-dashpot are commonly used), and
the characteristic collision speed. In general, in SSDEM codes the stiffness of the
grains is underestimated in order to avoid a too small δt as it is chosen as a fraction of tc . Using a δt which is too large compared to tc would result in missed
collisions or particles overlapping excessively as the collision dynamics cannot be
accurately resolved. On the other hand, the grains cannot be so soft that the overlap of the particles is too great for a typical collision (1% overlap is common).
It is worth mentioning that changing the stiffness does fundamentally change the
material behaviour; if it is important to the problem, this parameter can be tuned
to better capture the critical physics (e.g. sound speed), at the expense of a smaller
maximum overlap and therefore a smaller timestep. Thus, a compromise must be
reached so that the simulation is still realistic without being impractically slow.
This makes this method much slower than HSDEM for highly active, rarefied
systems and much better suited for more densely packed, quasi-static systems.
As to the CD method, it has the advantage of allowing for much larger time
steps than the SSDEM but needs sweeping the contact network a number of times
in order to determine the contact forces and particle velocities at each time step,
until the convergence criterion (precision on forces and velocities) is reached. The
number of iterations increases with both the number of particles and the required
precision (Radjai and Richefeu 2009b). Hence, in practice, CD simulations can be
either much faster or slower than SSDEM simulations, depending on the precision
used. Obviously, the CD method is more adequate than the SSDEM when the
ratio of external stress to the particle stiffness (leading to small particle deformations) is small and when the real stiffness matters for the physical behaviour of
a granular material. Moreover, except for spherical particles for which the Hertz
force law is classical, there is no general force law for contacts between particles of
arbitrary shape (for example, for face-face contacts between polyhedral particles).
For this reason, in applications of the SSDEM arbitrary particle shapes are generally modelled as aggregates of spherical particles. Besides, it is also important to
consider the parallelisation potential of different methods. To this respect the CD
method, being based on a global determination of forces by iterations, cannot be
as efficiently parallelised as the SSDEM.

5 Experiments
5.1 Lab experiments on ground
Ground-based impact experiments have provided fundamental insights into granular flows. The experiments on a wide range of flows provide a basis for understanding granular flows on asteroids, but with the strong caveat that a number
of observations are linked to ground-based environmental conditions very distinct
from small bodies in space. In particular, humidity and the air surrounding gran-

Small solar system bodies as granular media

33

ular matter in most ground-based experiments affect the behaviour of granular
systems. For example, analyses of ejecta flow showed the importance of interstitial
air in driving very high ejecta flows (Lohse et al 2004). Moreover the gravity field
of the Earth is predominant, thus experiments in vacuum and in micro-gravity
would be closer to reality.
Since there are a number of possible interaction forces between grains, groundbased experiments also provide important insights into the relative importance
of various physical mechanisms in granular materials. Here, intuition from molecular or atomic systems often leads our intuition astray. For example, collisions
between dielectric molecules tend to neutralise the system for molecules or atoms
of equal type. It requires mixtures of different materials to charge molecular systems through collisions. However, Pähtz et al (2010) found that granular particles
of equal types, colliding under dry conditions, can accumulate charge. The key
insight is that during collisions of granular matter only the areas near a contact
point neutralise. Thus in the presence of electric fields (e.g. due to charges of
neighbouring particles) collisions can charge particles.
Similarly, Shinbrot et al (2004) discovered through ground-based experiments
that the features of Martian gullies typically associated with fluid immersed granular flows, may also be observed in dry flows when the flow speeds are high compared
to the typical settling speeds, an effect expected to be enhanced under the reduced
gravity conditions of Mars.
For slow granular flows and plastic deformations of granular matter, where
grains remain in contact with each other and rearrange through rolling or sliding, gravity in the bulk of the flow is small compared to contact forces between
particles. Thus ground-based experiments will yield flows that are also expected
under microgravity conditions. New experiments allow us to measure translations
of all particles in three dimensions in slow granular flows (Dijksman et al 2012).
First studies on these systems have provided insights into the important question
of reversibility and ageing of granular matter at the particle level. More recent
experimental studies also allow for analysis of the rotations of particles within a
three dimensional granular flows (Harrington et al 2014).
Finally, earth-based experiments have revealed one of the most ubiquitous
differences between granular matter and atomic or molecular matter: segregation
of particles by size, weight, or shape.

5.2 Segregation
An intriguing feature of polydisperse granular matter is their tendency to segregate
when submitted to external constraints. The phenomenon is omnipresent in nature
but also in diverse processes implying the handling of granular matter. From an
industrial point of view, segregation is often considered as a parasitic effect that
hinders the homogeneous mixing of components (Poux et al 1991) especially since
it can be triggered by any variation in mechanical properties of the grains. Despite
most of its driving mechanisms are related to gravity, granular segregation is also
observed in low gravity environment where it is held responsible for particular
surface granulometry of small celestial bodies covered by regolith (Miyamoto et al
2007; Asphaug 2009; Gundlach and Blum 2013). Generally speaking, granular
segregation is observed and studied in various situations. Segregation is observed

34

D. Hestroffer et al.

in both rapid granular flows and plastic flows for almost all conditions (Ottino
and Khakhar 2000; Jaeger et al 1996a), and often accompanied by convective
flows (Rognon and Einav 2010). For mixtures of large and small, or heavy and
light particles the tendency of granular flows to segregate manifests itself in the
Brazil Nut Effect (BNE), where large or heavy particles rise to the top. For plastic
flows driven by periodic forcing, the onset of segregation with increasing forcing
amplitude was seen to coincide with the onset of convective flow (Harrington et al
2013).
When grains are slowly poured onto a plate a heap forms and starts to grow.
However, the slope angle between the pile’s surface and the plate will never exceed
a limit value called the angle of repose that depends on the size, shape and rugosity
of the grains. When a binary mixture flows down a heap, segregation occurs since
the different mechanical properties of both species lead to different angles of repose.
This phenomenon is known as granular stratification and results in the formation
of layers in which grains of different species are separated (Makse et al 1998;
Koeppe et al 1998; Aranson and Tsimring 2006; Fan et al 2012; Shimokawa et al
2015). The formation of strata is linked to the avalanches along the heap’s surface.
As the granular matter flows down the heap, voids are created along the surface.
These voids are more likely to be filled by small grains with creates a downward
flux of the latter while large grains remain on the top (Savage 1993; Cizeau et al
1999; Kudrolli 2004b; Gray and Thornton 2005; Schröter et al 2006; Gray and
Ancey 2011). Each of the so obtained pair of layers grows, by the propagation of
a kink, from the bottom to the top of the pile.
Segregation can also be studied in a rotating cylinder partially filled by a granular mixture. Its this case, radial segregation occurs quite rapidly: small and rough
particles migrate towards the centre while large and smooth grains rotate around
them (Khakhar et al 1997; Hill et al 2004; Hajra and Khakhar 2011). Under certain
conditions, the radial core develops more complex patterns (Khakhar et al 2003;
Zuriguel et al 2006). If the cylinder is long and narrow, radial segregation is often
followed by axial segregation where patterns of segregated bands appear along the
axis of rotation (Zik et al 1994; Clement et al 1995; Cantelaube and Bideau 1995;
Caps et al 2003; Fischer et al 2009). This phenomenon is well known and was
observed for the first time by Oyama (1939). The mechanics of axial segregation
are related to the different dynamic angles of repose of the rotated grains, i.e. the
angle of the slope in the drum for continuous flow regime (Makse 1999; Orpe and
Khakhar 2001; Seiden and Thomas 2011). Moreover, axial segregation has recently
been observed in the case of a spherical container, rotating about its horizontal
axis (Finger et al 2016).
When a granular mixture is vibrated vertically (i.e. on Earth’s gravity), larger
particles rise to the top of the system. This phenomenon, known as Brazil Nut
Effect, has been studied for a long time (Rosato et al 1987; Möbius et al 2001;
Garcimartin et al 2002; Godoy et al 2008; Metzger et al 2011; Matsumura et al
2014) and is linked to mechanisms such as percolation and granular convection
(Knight et al 1993; Hong et al 2001; Huerta and Ruiz-Suarez 2004). Under the
effect of vertical shaking, the particles in the system lift off. The voids that are
created that way are easily filled by the small grains which leads to a ratchet-like
rise of the large ones. Moreover, the vibration induced convection in the container
creates a wide upward flow in the central part of the system but only a thin
downward flow along its boundaries so that all sorts of grains can rise to the

Small solar system bodies as granular media

35

surface but only small particles can dive back to the bottom. Investigations during
parabolic flights (Güttler et al 2013) have shown that BNE can be observed in
low gravity conditions even though its driving mechanisms are strongly linked
to gravity, although sometimes in a complex manner (Staron 2016). This result
consolidates the theory that certain surface structures on asteroids are created by
this kind of segregation (Miyamoto et al 2007).
Segregation has also been observed in granular gases (Pöschel and Brilliantov
2003). Unlike in continuous media, thermal agitation is not enough to generate the
motion of the particles composing a granular gas. Furthermore, collisions between
grains are dissipative so that external energy has to be injected permanently (often
through vibrations) into the system in order to maintain a stationary gas like
regime. Depending on the filling properties and driving mechanism of the system,
granular gases exhibit intriguing phenomena such as anomalous scaling of pressure
and non Gaussian velocity distribution (Rouyer and Menon 2000; Losert et al
1999; Tatsumi et al 2009; Falcon et al 2013; Scholz and Pöschel 2017). If one
stops the external energy supply, the average energy in the system decays which
is known as the cooling of a granular gas. After a while, slow and dense regions
called cluster form in the cold regions of the system (Goldhirsch and Zanetti 1993;
McNamara and Young 1994; Maaß et al 2008; Brilliantov et al 2018). In the case
of binary granular gases it has been shown that clustering can be followed by a
particular kind of segregation where domains of the same granular species tend to
merge together (Cattuto and Marconi 2004). In denser granular gases, clustering
can occur despite of an external energy injection (Falcon et al 1999; Noirhomme
et al 2017). In these systems, a large and slow domain forms in the centre of
the container and acts as a liquid phase coexisting with a surrounding gas phase.
Here again, in the case of a binary mixture, clustering goes hand in hand with
segregation. It has been shown that the different granular species segregate within
the cluster, giving rise to a layered structure of the bulk (Serero et al 2009; Opsomer
et al 2014, 2017).

5.3 Experiments in microgravity
Microgravity experiments can be realized by several means. However, in all of
them, the key mechanism to approach weightlessness is free falling. Indeed, experiments in droptowers, in parabolic flights, and even in the international space
station are falling down towards earth all together with their measuring instruments (Pletser 2004; Von Kampen et al 2006), see Fig. 6. Granular materials have
been studied in microgravity for about two decades. In particular, granular gases
have been the focus of this research since the microgravity conditions allow for a
more homogeneous distribution of the particles in the system (Pöschel and Brilliantov 2003; Heisselmann et al 2010; Hou et al 2008; Leconte et al 2006). In the
late nineties, Falcon et al (1999) observed for the first time clustering of a continuously driven granular gas during the Mini-Texus 5 rocket experiment. Since
then, the transition from granular gas to cluster has been investigated numerically
(Opsomer et al 2011; Noirhomme et al 2017) and experimentally (Maaß et al 2008;
Tatsumi et al 2009), and is nowadays in the focus of the VIP-Gran Topical Team of

36

D. Hestroffer et al.

the European Space Agency5 . Experiments with driven rod shaped particles were
realized in a REXUS flight. Thanks to a precise tracking of the anisotropic particles, non-Gaussian velocity distributions and energy non-equipartition could be
highlighted (Harth et al 2013). In another experiment (Lee et al 2015), free falling
charged particles have been studied. The authors report the observations of individual collide-and-capture events between particles, including Kepler-like orbits.
Other parabolic flights have studied granular convection in varying gravitational
conditions (Murdoch et al 2013), and shear reversal in regolith dynamics (Murdoch
et al 2013b). Bouncing and cohesion through Van der Walls force on aggregates or
clusters of small grains (< 1 mm) have been tested on ZARM droptower (Brisset
et al 2017) at 10−6 g, as well as on sub-orbital rocket down to 10−3 g (Brisset et al
2016). Low velocity impacts (2-40 cm/s) of larger (approx. 10cm) projectile on a
granular surface have been tested using an Atwood machine installed in a small
droptower (Sunday et al 2016). This system, which uses a system of pulleys and
counterweights, allows the effective surface acceleration of the granular material to
be varied from 0.2 − 1 m/s2 (Murdoch et al 2017a). The latter experiment showed
shallow penetration (<1/4 of the projectile diameter) and no rebound; nevertheless further experiments using other surface materials, impactor properties, and
gravity regimes could be performed to confirm this behaviour.
Segregation mechanisms of denser systems with an intruder were also studied
during parabolic flights (Güttler et al 2013). A large particle is placed at the
bottom of an assembly of smaller ones. Through the shaking of the cell, the intruder
rises up to the surface of the pile (the Brazil Nut Effect, see Sect. 5.2 above). The
uprise speed was then measured for different values of gravity (Earth, Moon and
Mars gravity) and a first scaling law was proposed. In bi-disperse granular media,
segregation phenomena can occur even in microgravity (Louge et al 2012; Opsomer
et al 2017). The driving mechanism is no longer convection and percolation as on
Earth, but rather the gradients in the fluctuation energy of the grains. Though not
many experiments involving granular matter have been carried out to date in the
ISS, the Strata-1 experiment (Fries et al 2016; Fries et al 2018) was the first to put
different mixtures of grains in orbit for a long period of time. The samples ranged
from spherical glass beads to glass shards, to crushed meteorite simulants and even
a real crushed meteorite sample. At the moment, the results of this experiment are
still being analysed (Dove et al 2018) and the Strata equipment is being repurposed
as the Hermes facility (John et al 2018) that will be made available to other
researchers in the near future. One of the advantages of running experiments in
the ISS is the long duration and quality of the microgravity environment which
are essential in order to observe the evolution of systems that take more than a
few seconds to be finalised and therefore, could not be carried out in droptower or
parabolic flights due to their short duration.

5 SpaceGrains
ESA
Topical
https://spacegrains.org

Team

from

the

European

Space

Agency.

Small solar system bodies as granular media

37

1000

Min.

Day-Year

****
100
10

1~2 wks
(10-3 ~ 10-4)

1

Long

22wk~1yr
wk~1 yr
-3 ~ 10-5)
(10-３
(10
~ 10-5)

ISS
Soyuz

Retrievable Free Flyers
1 wk~1 yr
(10-4 ~ 10-6)

10

Expendable
Sounding Rockets
Sub-Orbital
Reusable
5-10 min.
3~5 min.

5

(10-4 ~ 10-5)

(10-3 ~ 10-4)

Sec.

30

Balloon Capsule

20 Parabolic Flights
~30 sec.(10-4)
20~30 sec.
Drop Tower
(10-1 ~ 10-2)
4.5-9 sec.(10-5)
5
Small Tower
10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

Dust aggregate
Granular Surface
Mobility

Hypervelocity Impacts

2 sec.(10-2 ~ 10-3)
10-1

Brazil nuts effect
Bouncing

Non-G Effect,
Dust Levitation
Bouncing
Convection

10

10-0

Gardening,
Granular
Convection,
Re-accumulation

10-6

Short
Short

Gravity Level
(g)
Itokawa
Ryugu, Bennu

Ceres, Vesta

Moon

Earth

Fig. 6 Schematic summary of low- to micro-gravity experiments available, with different
duration of the gravity environment.

6 Benchmarking cases
6.1 Macro- and micro-scale benchmarks: what to learn from observations
Theoretical development, numerical modelling, and experiments of granular systems in low- and self-gravity regime, all concur to a better understanding of asteroids. This is often needed for studying sample return mechanisms, for estimating
the outcomes of high-velocity impacts, collisions and ejecta, or for predicting lowvelocity impacts and bouncing of platforms on the surface, etc. (e.g. Biele et al
2017; Thuillet et al 2017; Murdoch et al 2017a; Ballouz 2017). In this section, we
will focus in the following on segregation phenomenon, long-term evolution spin-up
and mass shedding, and analysis of the reaccumulation process. Several computer
simulations have been proposed to tackle the analysis of self-gravitating planetary bodies as granular systems, starting mostly with HSDEM (Richardson 1993;
Richardson et al 2011; Leinhardt et al 2000; Murdoch et al 2012; Michel et al 2002;
Walsh and Richardson 2006; Tanga et al 2009b; Walsh et al 2012; Campo Bagatin

38

D. Hestroffer et al.

et al 2018b), and later with SSDEM (Sánchez and Scheeres 2011; Schwartz et al
2012; Tancredi et al 2012), see Sect. 4.

6.2 Segregation
Shaking that gives rise to segregation (see Sect. 5.2) can have different origins
on asteroids (reaccumulation, impacts, tides, stress cycles, ...), with different frequencies and amplitudes. Seismic shaking has been proposed as a mechanism to
resurface asteroids and account for the presence of ponds on (433) Eros (Cheng
et al 2002; Richardson et al 2004), or boulders on (25143) Itokawa (Saito et al
2006; Miyamoto et al 2007), or young surfaces on specific classes of Near-Earth
asteroids (Binzel et al 2010). In addition to flows, the BNE could then be effective
on asteroids and provide segregation on regolith grains. This has been simulated
numerically by methods presented in Sect. 4 (Sánchez and Scheeres 2009; Tancredi
et al 2012; Murdoch et al 2012; Matsumura et al 2014; Perera et al 2016; Maurel
et al 2017), with hard-sphere DEM, and later soft-sphere DEM. Perera et al (2016)
suggest that the mechanism of the BNE that is most relevant—in presence of a
binary size-distribution—is that of percolation, and not convection, and that the
innermost regions remain unsorted. Further, Maurel et al (2017) have performed
numerical simulations investigating the BNE in an unconfined environment. They
show that, under Earth gravity (1 g), a void-filling mechanism is predominant,
in contrast to more classical granular convection-driven BNE in the presence of
walls. While this void-filling mechanism remains relevant in a lower gravity regime
(10−4 g), it is however differently influenced by the friction properties of the particles. Last, Chujo et al (2017) have analysed the BNE (as well as the reverse BNE,
occurring when oscillation frequency is high, and the bulk density of the larger
particles is larger than that of the smaller ones) in a low-gravity environment with
an intruder, under ‘less-convective’ conditions. They also point out that the amplitude and frequency of vibrations that may be induced on small bodies is still
not well known.

6.3 Rotation, spin-up, mass shedding
6.3.1 The YORP Effect:
It has been generally accepted that solar radiation pressure, the absorption, reemission and reflection of photons emitted by the Sun, can, over the lifetime of
SSSBs, produce not only an acceleration of its orbit (the Yarkovsky effect) but also
a net that will change their rotation state (Rubincam 2000). For this torque to
appear however, it is essential for solar photons to impact a body with an irregular
shape as otherwise photons would be re-emitted or reflected in symmetric directions and their effect would average out. An asymmetric body on the other hand
would be similar to a propeller; sunlight bouncing off the blades and causing it to
change its rotation. This is what is defined as the Yarkovsky-O’Keefe-RadzievskiiPaddack effect (YORP for short).

Small solar system bodies as granular media

39

6.3.2 Deformation and Disruption
Given that SSSBs are granular in nature, their structure can yield/fail under stress.
Events that can cause this structural failure could be rotation at high enough spin
rates Ω, collisions and planetary flybys. From these, in this section we will focus
our attention on the failure that is produced due to high rotation rates.
As previously explained, the interaction of an irregularly shaped body and solar
photons, over millennia, can produce a net torque that can change the rotation
rate of a SSSB. Though it is possible to calculate the critical rotation period for a
SSSB of arbitrary shape numerically, it is useful to start with a simpler shape so
that we can obtain some insight. For this, we could start with a sphere of radius
r and bulk density ρ.
For a gravitationally bound aggregate, the critical spin period
Pc = 2π/Ωc
can be calculated by equating the acceleration of gravity at the surface of a sphere
with the centrifugal acceleration at the equator, just as it was done by Pravec and
Harris (2000). This would allow us to derive a criterion for the critical limit of
rotation period, depending only on the density of the sphere ρ,
Gm
= Ωc2 r → Pc =
r2

r

3π
Gρ

(18)

where G is the gravitational constant and m is the mass of the sphere. For a
bulk density between 2000–3000 kg.m−3 , this expression gives us a spin period Pc
between 2 − 2.3 h. Conversely, the spin barrier of the observed asteroid population
is ≈ 2.4 h (see Sect. 2.1, Fig. 1). Though this simple calculation provides a first
approximation into the make-up of asteroids, there is a feature that it can not
explain. For the smaller asteroids (below ≈ 100 − 200 m), this spin barrier does
not seem to exist (Pravec and Harris 2000). Additionally, this spin barrier might
more accurately be described as a deformation or a fission barrier, as asteroids
reaching it would have to deform or go through a fission process as their structure
would fail at such high spin rates (Jewitt et al 2013, 2014; Hirabayashi et al 2014;
Walsh and Richardson 2008; Sánchez and Scheeres 2016; Hirabayashi and Scheeres
2015).
From here, we can take one step further and study what happens to tri-axial
ellipsoids when subjected to high spin rates. The form in which these bodies would
fail can also be solved analytically, though this requires the use of Soil Mechanics theories—elastic-plastic theories to be more precise (Holsapple 2001; Sharma
et al 2009)—in particular, limit analyses. Within this approach, one seeks the
maximum load that a body (whatever its nature) can sustain without failing. This
circumvents the need to know the past history of the body. For these theories to be
applied, a framework is needed; a basic principle for many granular (soil or gravel)
or solid (rock) geological materials is that the shear yield stress on any plane increases with the normal pressure on that plane. The simplest criterion of that type
is the Mohr-Coloumb (Drucker-Prager is another, more sophisticated possibility)
yield criterion (Holsapple 2001), determined solely by a cohesive strength and an
angle of friction. Also required is some ‘flow rule’ to determine the flow: some prescription of the plastic deformations that occur when the stresses meet or exceed

40

D. Hestroffer et al.

the yield criteria. Then, in principle, it should be possible to trace a particular
loading history and determine the resulting stress fields.
By doing this, it was possible to determine that most asteroids shapes and
rotation rates were well within the equilibrium limits for low angles of friction
which are typical for dry, cohesionless soils and so the observed shape and spin
rate of the asteroid population could not be used to assert that these bodies had
to be cohesive. This analysis however, could not be applied to comets where small
cohesive forces could provide additional strength to the structure.
This, of course would mean that the source of the strength of asteroids is
purely gravitational – in the case they are not monoliths – and that all observed
asteroids should be below the spin barrier. However, it was observed that the small
asteroid population6 (approximately < 100 − 200 m) contained not only fast, but
even super-fast rotators with periods of only a few minutes possibly depending
on their taxonomic type (Pravec and Harris 2000; Warner et al 2009; Taylor et al
2012; Perna et al 2016). This is what has led scientists to believe that cohesive
forces could be important for these granular systems; or, otherwise, that the small
fast-spinning asteroids are essentially monolithic rocks (e.g., Polishook et al 2016).
At this moment we have to make a point about nomenclature. We will use the
word cohesion and cohesive force to refer to the surface-surface attractive force
between any two grains in contact. The term cohesive strength will be used to
refer to the parameter in the different yield criteria which is defined as the shear
stress at zero normal stress. Complementary to this, the term tensile strength is
defined as the normal stress at zero shear stress. These two could be related for
specific materials, but there are indications that their relationship can change at
very small loads (Kim et al 2009).
The deformation of ideal spherical and ellipsoidal self-gravitating aggregates
can also be studied with the same theoretical tools presented above (Holsapple
2001, 2004) and extended to allow for cohesive and therefore, tensile strength
(Holsapple 2007).
By doing this, it was found that the presence of tensile and cohesive strength
for a large body (> 10 km) makes no difference in the permissible spin. That
is, gravitational effects dominate the strength of the body. This implies that the
observed spin limit for large bodies cannot be used to infer zero-strength (cohesive/tensile) granular asteroids. On the other hand, the strength that allows the
higher spins of the smaller and fast-spinning km-sized bodies is only on the order
of 10 − 100 kPa, a very small value compared to small terrestrial rocks. Additionally, it is stated that the strength needed for small granular asteroids to become
fast rotators could be originated in an accumulated slight bonding between their
constitutive particles.
For asteroids between approximately 0.2 and 10 km, cohesive strength does not
seem to influence the maximum spin rate they can reach, but it affects the overall
shape of the bodies. This could partially explain the shapes and surface morphology of asteroids Itokawa, Ryugu and Bennu for which photographic evidence is
available.
Though the theoretical results described above provided great insight into the
mechanisms that shaped the observed asteroid population as well as their internal
6 Sizes, when not measured directly, are estimated from the absolute magnitude H and by
assuming an albedo of 0.2

Small solar system bodies as granular media

41

structure, questions about the origin of their cohesive strength as well as the origin
of binary asteroids, and asteroid pairs were still unanswered. Other questions, more
related to planetary defence and space exploration, also needed answers.
One weakness of the theoretical models used in the above described research
is that they are not dynamical. That is, they cannot show the reshaping of the
bodies and are always constrained to ellipsoidal shapes. It is here where the use of
DEM codes becomes important. The use of these kinds of codes followed the same
path as the theoretical efforts, that is, start with spherical and ellipsoidal shapes,
no cohesive strength and the added numerical particularity of having only monodisperse spherical particles as the constituents of the aggregates. A drawback of
this last point was that crystallization was unavoidable, but even this was used
to emulate higher angles of friction (Walsh and Richardson 2008) when needed.
These aggregates would reproduce the behaviour of ensembles of particles with
friction angles of ≈ 40o when crystallized and between 0o − 5o when the particles
were randomly packed (not naturally found for granular matter).
The influential work of Walsh et al (Walsh and Richardson 2008; Walsh et al
2012) provided evidence supporting the idea that binary asteroids could be continuously formed through the shedding of asteroid material at high enough spin
rates and its subsequent reaccumulation to form the secondary of a binary system.
However, there were questions about the needed time for this process (Jacobson
and Scheeres 2011) to take place as well as the influence of the crystallization of the
aggregate. Besides, the final axisymmetric top-shapes may be a particular outcome
from the simulation of Walsh and Richardson (2008), as shown by Cotto-Figueroa
et al (2015) who analysed the coupled spin-shape evolution with different initial
configurations of the aggregated particles, and reducing crystallisation effects. Including polydisperse spheres and different block shapes adds extra complexity and
realism to the simulation models (Walsh and Richardson 2008; Walsh et al 2012;
Michel and Richardson 2013; Campo Bagatin et al 2018a).
Subsequent studies carried out by Sánchez and Scheeres (2011) using a SSDEM
code did implement random packings—as in Comito et al (2011), and in contrast
to Walsh and Richardson (2008)—so that crystallisation was explicitly avoided,
and they started to study the influence of surface-surface friction. Their studies
showed that this type of simulation fully agreed with the theoretical models of
Soil Mechanics (Sánchez and Scheeres 2012) for aggregates with angles of friction
of ≈ 12o and ≈ 25o (these angles of friction are not naturally found in nature for
gravel). That is, the aggregates followed the deformation path that was determined
by the theory and at the correct spin rates. Additionally, it was found that the
aggregates failed at the centre, not producing granular flows on the surface which
was the failure mode showed by Walsh and Richardson (2008). One intriguing
feature was however, that at times the aggregates would split into two almost
symmetrical pieces and some others, it would simply eject individual particles.
Besides, Tanga et al (2013) showed that particle ejection is not incompatible with
splitting, as the two can occur in the same system if the spin-up phase is continued.
6.3.3 Cohesive Strength
Even though it had already been established that a hypothetical fast rotating
gravitational aggregate would necessarily have some cohesive strength, its source
had not been established. To tackle this problem, the work of Scheeres et al (2010)

42

D. Hestroffer et al.

attributed this to the comparatively strong van der Waals forces. If we define
a bond number B to be the ratio between the cohesive/adhesive attachment a
particle feels and its weight in an asteroid environment, this ratio becomes 1 for
centimetre-size particles in the ideal case. Of course small SSSBs with high spin
rates can either be strong monoliths or gravitational aggregates with relatively
weak cohesion; indeed, the observed spin rates of fast rotators do not require the
high cohesive strength of solid rock (Sánchez and Scheeres 2014).
Supported in these findings, Sánchez and Scheeres (2014), using the same DEM
code, find that the tensile strength of an ensemble of self-gravitating spherical particles is inversely proportional to the average particle size. This result allows them
to study self-gravitating aggregates with realistic asteroid sizes, friction angles and
tensile strength, but without the burden of having to simulate an impractically
large number of particles (Sánchez and Scheeres 2014). Angles of friction of ≈ 35o
were obtained through the implementation of rolling resistance (Ai et al 2011). In
essence, in their model, the larger boulders are embedded in a cohesive matrix that
holds the entire aggregate together. In a way, this would be a van der Waals cement. They calculate that a cohesive strength between 25-100 Pa would be enough
to explain why asteroids approximately < 100 − 200 m in size could have spin periods below the 2.2 h of the spin barrier. Other works compared the hard-sphere
and soft-sphere DEM simulations including cohesion as well (Schwartz et al 2013).
Studies of observed fast-rotating asteroids also confirm to have cohesive strengths
that are far below what would be expected for competent rocks (Rozitis et al 2014;
Hirabayashi and Scheeres 2015; Hirabayashi et al 2014).
Additionally, a subsequent study by Sánchez and Scheeres (2016) found that
the amount of deformation of a self-gravitating aggregate is greater for low angles
of friction and vice-versa. Whereas the amount of cohesion was directly related
to the fission process. That is, at low or no cohesion, particles would be ejected
in a one-by-one-fashion, producing a tail. Whilst at high cohesion, the aggregates
would eject larger, coherent groups of particles at once. This could result in the
aggregate going through a catastrophic disruption process that would break the
body in several coherent pieces. For the most cohesive cases, the aggregates would
split in two symmetrical pieces. Similar work by Zhang et al (2018), incorporating
friction and cohesive interactions in the manner suggested by Sánchez and Scheeres
(2016), confirmed most of these results.
6.3.4 Internal Structure
Up to this point, one assumption made by most studies is that the modelled
aggregates and asteroids had completely homogeneous interiors. However, this is
not necessarily the case. For instance, it is also believed that in a post-catastrophic
collision large blocks with lower velocities reaccumulate first, and are at the centre
of the body, while smaller material could be kept closer to the surface by friction
(Britt and Consolmagno 2001). In this regard, it has been shown through theory
and simulations that a spherical aggregate with a central core, which is structurally
stronger than its external shell, would avoid the initial internal failure prevalent in
homogeneous aggregates and fail at the surface (Walsh et al 2012; Scheeres 2015;
Hirabayashi 2014; Hirabayashi et al 2015). In numerical simulations, such structure
was the only one able to reproduce the surface slope of asteroid 1999 KW4 (Sánchez
2015) when the radius of the core was ≈ 0.7Rb , where Rb is the radius of the

Small solar system bodies as granular media

43

aggregate, in agreement with Walsh et al (2012), and as predicted by the theory.
Those researchers also explain the surface shedding process found by Walsh and
Richardson (2008). Essentially, the crystalline packing used in the Walsh et al.
numerical simulations had intrinsically built an interior which was stronger than
the outermost shell formed by surface particles. These aggregates were originally
built to fail at the surface though the crystalline packing was used only as a tool
to avoid the fluid-like behaviour of the grains when simulated with an HSDEM
code.
On the other hand, aggregates with weak cores and strong shells have been
studied only through numerical simulations. Upon rotation, these aggregates locate
the greatest stress at their centre where a severely weakened interior would fail
long before the stronger shell. This means that an equatorial ridge would not be
formed by granular flow —which would not happen under these conditions— but
rather by the global deformation of the body. Preliminary results also show that
if the core is about ≈ 0.5Rb , it is possible to obtain a shape similar to that of
asteroid Itokawa, though its reproducibility has still to be proven (Sánchez and
Scheeres 2018).
A possible confirmation of this correlation between fission size, cohesion and internal structure came from a study of the equatorial cavities in asteroids 2008 EV5
and 2000 DP107 that had previously been attributed to impact events (Busch et al
2011). Tardivel et al (2018) showed that if a hypothetical original body with a filled
cavity rotated at high enough spin rate, the first place to fail in tension would be
exactly where the cavity appears at the moment. Kinetic sieving (Gray and Thornton 2005), produced as a result of surface flow, which should in turn be produced
by a strong core, could produce a ‘rocky equator’ (size segregation with a flow
of the largest rocks to the equator) and explain the low tensile strength of this
specific region for this fission mechanism to work.
Therefore, all these studies suggest that the shape of granular asteroids, and
the specific form towards which they evolve under rotation, are intrinsically linked
to internal structure and structural strength (Sánchez and Scheeres 2018). Examples of this statement have already been mentioned, namely asteroids Itokawa,
1999 KW4, 2008 EV5 and 2000 DP107. Additionally, late in 2013 two more observed asteroids, P/2013 R3 and P/2013 P5 were termed active asteroids. Both
structures failed, but in very different ways (Jewitt et al 2013, 2014). The former broke apart in several coherent pieces, whereas the latter exhibited several
long tails. If we assume that the aggregate and core approach can be applied to
these two bodies, asteroid P/2013 R3 might have had a homogeneous interior and
asteroid P/2013 P5 a strong core (Hirabayashi et al 2015; Sánchez and Scheeres
2016).
6.3.5 Scaling
As has been proven by the authors cited above, the cohesive strength of a selfgravitating aggregate could become important for small (approximately ≤ 100 m)
bodies. This would imply that the onset of deformation or disruption is the result of
an interplay between the effects of material properties (cohesion, density, porosity,
particle size distribution, friction) and gravitational forces which depend on the
aggregate size and mass. Intuitively, increasing the size of a cohesive aggregate
should be equivalent (structurally) to reducing the value of cohesive strength and

44

D. Hestroffer et al.

vice-versa (Sánchez and Scheeres 2015). However, the scaling was not very clear.
To solve this, Azéma et al (2018) analysed the stress-strain behaviour and microstructure of a granular asteroid, modelled as a cohesive granular agglomerate of
spherical particles, subjected to vertical compression. Based on this, they defined
a modified inertial number that relates the particle-particle tensile strength (as
defined by Sánchez and Scheeres (2014)) and the overburden pressure generated
inside the aggregate by gravity alone. This newly defined scaling still needs to be
tested against previous results.

6.4 Post-impact reaccumulation
The evolution of fragments resulting from catastrophic disruption determines the
distribution of aggregates that will reaccumulate by self-gravity. SPH plus N-body
simulations indicate that the ejecta cloud shall typically collapse into multiple
gravitational aggregates, while particles with higher velocities can escape from the
system. Fragments with kinetic energy smaller than gravitational binding energy
shall wind up in the largest remnant—which by definition has less than 50% of the
original progenitor’s mass in a catastrophic collision. The mass distribution and
angular momenta of the resulting aggregates, and how they relate to the parent
body’s mass and spin, are a heritage of the impact conditions under which the
parent object was disrupted. Very energetic collisions, relative to the parent body’s
binding energy, will result in a final aggregate of much lower mass, and composed
of the fragments that were ejected at the lowest speeds. These are likely the largest
fragments, though it still needs some further investigation. An off-centre collision
will show its signature in a high-angular-momentum aggregate body. In any case,
fragments of diverse shape and size will comprise the aggregated bodies, as shown
in laboratory experiments of catastrophic collisions (e.g., Durda et al 2015).
Numerical simulations oriented to post-catastrophic gravitational reaccumulation were initially focused on deriving the mass and size distribution of asteroid families (Michel et al 2001, 2015). They showed that larger family members are likely reaccumulation products rather than discrete competent fragments.
Gravitational aggregates obtained as a product of less catastrophic—shattering
collisions—will have voids in between fragments, largely contributing to its global
(macro-)porosity. An aggregate porosity is the result of the particular packing
of a polydisperse collection of its components. Recently, due to the influence of
granular dynamics, granular packing configurations have been investigated both
experimentally and numerically—including studies in different gravitational environments. Attempts to understand the observed global shapes and structures of
aggregates through DEM numerical simulation have been performed by several
authors (Tanga et al 2009a; Comito 2012; Michel and Richardson 2013; Schwartz
et al 2018; Campo Bagatin et al 2018a). Originally, Farinella et al (1981) suggested
that such a reaccumulation process would produce elongated tri-axial asteroids,
following equilibrium figures of incompressible fluids. This is however not strictly
the case for bodies smaller than ∼ 100 − 200 km in diameter, where shape can significantly depart from a fluid-equilibrium figure, thanks to friction and sustained
shear stresses(Holsapple 2004, 2007). However, Tanga et al (2009b) showed that external mechanisms (e.g., low-energy impacts) can gradually reshape the bulk of the
body, pushing it toward a minimum-energy state while remaining compatible with

Small solar system bodies as granular media

45

observed shapes and spins. Nevertheless, a careful examination of the equilibrium
figures show that these are very loosely defined by flat minima in the energy potential of the self-gravitating, rotating body (Tanga et al 2009a). As such, tri-axial
ellipsoids significantly far from equilibrium are possible with minimal strength.
Moreover, Richardson et al (2009) analysed resulting shapes from re-accumulation
and rotational disruption, including variable material strength/cohesion and irregular pieces (modelled as ‘bonded aggregates’) in the DEM pkdgrav code (Stadel
2001; Richardson et al 2000; Schwartz et al 2012). Other simulations have been
performed to describe the outcome of a catastrophic disruption on a gravitational
aggregate. Michel and Richardson (2013) show that the general shape of an asteroid like Itokawa, together with the presence of boulders on its surface, can be the
natural result of the reaccumulation process, given some specific material parameters for the aggregate (strength, bouncing coefficient, ...). Ballouz et al (2015)
showed the influence on the catastrophic disruption threshold when taking into
account the initial spin of the parent body, and some frictional effect and shear
strength; but they didn’t consider material fragmentation, heating and compaction
from hyper-velocity impacts. Recent numerical simulations of the reaccumulation
process by Campo Bagatin et al (2018b,a) were based on such pkdgrav code. Using
irregular rigid fragments instead of spherical individual particles, they study the
packing fraction and the shapes of the final aggregates. They find that the bulk
macro-porosity of aggregate asteroids can be related to the mass fraction of the
largest component of the aggregate structure (Campo Bagatin et al 2018b). This
in turn may be related to the specific energy of the collision that formed the aggregate itself. Then, some relationship between the macro-porosity of an asteroid
and the kind of event that produced the object itself may be assessed. Studying
the shapes of the aggregates formed at the end of the reaccumulation process,
Campo Bagatin et al (2018b) find a general mechanism to explain some asteroid
shapes, in particular bilobated (‘contact binary’) asteroids.
The reaccumulation process, while relatively short on astronomical times scales
(from a few hours to several days, depending on total mass and collision boundary
conditions), can be complex and result in phenomena like shaking and segregation
as seen above, re-arrangements of grains and blocks and compaction (Ben-Naim
et al 1998; Patrick et al 2005; Yu et al 2017) that can be difficult to model given
uncertainties in the initial conditions of the aggregate cloud. However, numerical simulations have shown at least that bilobated shapes and satellites can be
formed from continuous mass shedding (Walsh and Richardson 2008; Walsh et al
2012), from fission, or—over a shorter time-scale—from the reaccumulation process (Tanga et al 2013; Schwartz et al 2018; Campo Bagatin et al 2018a).

7 Discussions and prospective
From a scientific point of view, surveys and space missions will allow us to address many of the topics and questions raised here. As an example LSST and Gaia
will bring deeper knowledge and insights on a much larger number of solar system objects. The Gaia mission, now that the second catalogue has been released
(Gaia-Collaboration et al 2018), is promising to gather valuable data of physical
and dynamical properties for hundreds of thousands of small bodies (Hestroffer
et al 2010); and LSST will extend this to fainter objects, by orders of magnitude

46

D. Hestroffer et al.

(Jones et al 2009; Schwamb et al 2018). Possibly the first thing we can learn from
on-going and new space missions is that their successes highly depend on our ability to understand their targets—small asteroids and comets—as self-gravitating
granular systems. JAXA’s Hayabusa and Hayabusa-2 missions, as well as NASA’s
OSIRIS-REx, Rosetta and DART missions have already had to deal with the complexities of these systems due to their design. The Hayabusa mission had as one
of its objectives to shoot a small pellet to the surface of the asteroid Itokawa and
capture the ejecta material to bring it back to Earth as a sample. Unfortunately
the system failed and the sample canister was sealed without the pellet being fired.
At its return to Earth it was found that in spite of that, some of the dust of the
surface had been luckily collected. The Hayabusa-2 mission, currently at asteroid
Ryugu, did land the MASCOT and Minerva pods on the surface of the asteroid.
This manoeuvre has encompassed a very detailed study of the interaction of the
landing pod with the surface of the asteroid of which almost nothing was known.
The usual characterising parameters such as porosity, angle of friction, strength
or even surface density, boulder abundance, or topography are not known and the
science team has had to work with a large range of parameters to make sure of
their success. Something similar can be said about the OSIRIS-REx mission, whose
main science objective is to return a sample of asteroid Bennu to Earth for subsequent analysis. The Touch-and-Go-Sample-Acquisition-Mechanism (TAGSAM)
had to go through a thorough design and testing process that involved not only
experimentation, but also two teams carrying out numerical simulations to make
sure that, regardless of the variations in the characteristics of the surface of the
asteroid, the sample would be acquired and sealed safely. Of these missions, the
Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART, Cheng et al 2016) mission is the only
one that has not been launched yet, and much of the work of the different working
groups that form the science team has been focused on the geophysical characteristics of Didymos. Hopefully, the complementary Hera/AIDA mission will be
able to complete the picture (Michel et al 2018). All these missions will give more
detailed information on the surface, not only from remote imaging, but also from
a gentle touch down and physical interactions (Hayabusa, Hayabusa-2, OSIRISREx). They will also show how the surface and body react to high-speed impacts,
cratering, ejecta generating, and transfer of linear momentum (DART, Hayabusa2). We still need to learn more for future applications, on the possible anchoring
processes, bouncing at the surface, and how the regolith can react to different tools
for exploration or excavation, depending for instance on its compaction or particle
size distribution.
Unfortunately, the search for knowledge is not the only reason to obtain a better
understanding about asteroid Geophysics. A precise understanding of the composition and mechanics of asteroids is essential to guarantee that humankind can
protect itself from potential impactors and other hazardous asteroids. Whether an
asteroid produces a blast in the atmosphere or an impact on the ground depends—
for a given size or mass—on the asteroid’s global properties. Deflection demonstration missions can help resolve some of the challenges encountered in asteroid
deflection by providing ground truths. The DART mission, for instance, is a NASA
mission concept intended to demonstrate the change of the state of motion of an asteroid through a kinetic impact. Targeting the moonlet of the near-Earth asteroid
(65803) Didymos, DART would alter the orbital period of the binary asteroid system. Measurements of this alteration would then allow us to draw conclusions on

Small solar system bodies as granular media

47

the composition and dynamics of the binary asteroid system on the one hand and
kinetic impactor-based deflection techniques, on the other hand. The European
space agency (ESA) is currently investigating a concept for an observer spacecraft, Hera, that would allow for a more detailed in situ assessment of the effects
of the DART impact. Another deflection demonstration mission concept named
NEOTwIST has been developed in the framework of EU’s NEOShield project
(Harris et al 2013; Drube et al 2016). NEOTwIST would use a kinetic impactor
to spin up the well characterises asteroid (25143) Itokawa (Eggl et al 2016). The
resulting change in the spin state, would provide clues as to the magnitude and
direction of the momentum enhancement vector. The data acquired during deflection tests would be invaluable to gauge simulations and structure models that will
be used to predict the outcomes of future deflection mission.
Regardless of the final application of acquired knowledge, furthering our understanding of the interior, internal structure and evolution of asteroids is needed.
This understanding can be obtained through the determination of their gravity
fields, tomography, and through seismic experiments and such experiments can
only be obtained from future space missions. On the other hand, laboratory experiments need to approach the conditions of low gravity, vacuum, without specific
confinement, particle-size dispersion, etc., in order to better understand and model
the many phenomena at play. Segregation, clustering, and internal cohesion are
some of the mechanisms and properties that need further study. Numerical simulations have reached a high level of fidelity to model Earth-based experiments
and can predict phenomena on low-gravity surfaces as well as on self-gravitating
bodies, but would greatly benefit from experimental validation.
Having said all this, there are definitely a few things that we have been able
to learn from the successes and failures in these missions: first off, that small
asteroids are not only monoliths with bare surfaces. If we start with that, other
things have come to light as a consequence. As the gravitational fields of small
asteroids are very weak, cohesive, adhesive and electrostatic forces can be as, if not
more, important than particle weight. This could facilitate the formation of very
porous interiors. Since asteroids can sustain shear stresses, their shapes are not
going to be regular. Due to their formation and evolution processes, they are likely
to be formed by particles with sizes that range from microns to tens of meters.
They are indeed affected by the YORP effect and, so, apart from the collisional
evolution, we need to take into account their rotational evolution, strength, internal
heterogeneities and individual shapes and surface features if we really want to
understand them.
We have seen that our objects of study span a large space of physical and
dynamical parameters, with orders of magnitudes in size and mass range, with
orders of magnitude in spin-rate range, different taxonomic class which could mean
different constituent materials, large differences in their bulk densities, different
distances from the Sun and different thermal environments. Each asteroid is indeed
a small world that can provide much insight about asteroids as granular systems,
but not as much as to paint a complete picture. Space missions and observations of
specific targets remain circumstantial, which means that theoretical, experimental
and modelling efforts are needed to bridge the knowledge gap.
All these examples show the need for a great interdisciplinary effort. Really, it
is not only Granular Dynamics, Soil Mechanics or Aerospace Engineering, but all
of these disciplines together that have some of the tools necessary to study Small

48

D. Hestroffer et al.

Solar System Bodies, and only a true interdisciplinary effort will bring further
understanding.
Additional notes: Since the elaboration and submission of this paper manuscript,
two exploration and sample-return missions,Hayabusa2 (from JAXA) and OSIRISREx (from NASA), have arrived to their respective targets. While more results
will be published in the future, both target asteroids appear to be gravitational
aggregates.
In June of 2018 the Hayabusa2 spacecraft arrived at asteroid (162173) Ryugu
and begin its exploration and characterisation of that body Watanabe et al (2019).
In August the spacecraft made a descent close to the surface to measure the total
gravitational attraction of that body which, when combined with its shape determination yielded a bulk density of 1190 kg/m3 . The surface of Ryugu was rocky
enough so that the planned touchdown sampling was delayed until February 2019,
however the spacecraft successfully made contact with the surface and exercised
its sampling procedure at that time.
In December 2018 the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft arrived at asteroid (101955)
Bennu and began to characterise that body Lauretta et al (2019). The overall bulk
density of the asteroid was found to be 1190 kg/m3 , the same value as Ryugu, and
both of their macro-porosities were estimated to be up to 50%, consistent with
being a ‘rubble pile’ Scheeres et al (2019); Watanabe et al (2019). The surface of
both Bennu and Ryugu were seen to be uniformly covered by boulders across a
large size distribution, with very few regions covered by finer regolith Walsh et al
(2019); Sugita et al (2019). At a morphological level, both Ryugu and Bennu have
many similarities, and thus future comparisons between the bodies will be of great
interest.
Acknowledgements This work is a direct result of support by the International Space Science Institute, ISSI Bern, Switzerland, through the hosting and provision of financial support
for the international team “Asteroids & Self Gravitating Bodies as Granular Systems” led by
DH. The authors would like to thank the ISSI Institute and staff for their support, and the
Paris observatory for financial support. Thanks to MIAPP, Munich Institute for Astro and
Particle Physics of the DFG cluster of excellence “Origin and Structure of the Universe” and
participants of the the workshop on NEOS for fruitful discussions. EO thanks Prodex (Belspo)
and ESA (Topical Team No. 4000103461) for financial support. DCR was supported in part by
NASA grant NNX15AH90G awarded by the Solar System Workings program. SRS acknowledges support from the Academies of Excellence: Complex systems and Space, environment,
risk, and resilience, part of the IDEX JEDI of the Université Côte d’Azur. SE acknowledges
support from the DiRAC Institute in the Department of Astronomy at the University of Washington. The DIRAC Institute is supported through generous gifts from the Charles and Lisa
Simonyi Fund for Arts and Sciences, and the Washington Research Foundation.
We are grateful to all the other members of the ISSI international team for discussions, exchanges, inputs, and contributions. We are grateful to Brian Warner for kindly providing us
an up-to-date ‘spin-rate versus diameter’ figure.
This work has made use of Wm R. Johnston archive data http://www.johnstonsarchive.net,
and intensive use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System.

References
Abe S, Mukai T, Hirata N, Barnouin-Jha OS, Cheng AF, Demura H, Gaskell RW, Hashimoto
T, Hiraoka K, Honda T, et al (2006) Mass and local topography measurements of Itokawa
by Hayabusa. Science 312(5778):1344–1347

Small solar system bodies as granular media

49

Agnolin I, Roux JN (2007a) Internal states of model isotropic granular packings. I. Assembling
process, geometry, and contact networks. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 76(61):061302
Agnolin I, Roux JN (2007b) Internal states of model isotropic granular packings. III. Elastic
properties. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 76:061304
Ahrens TJ, Harris AW (1992) Deflection and fragmentation of near-Earth asteroids. Nature
360(6403):429–433
Ai J, Chen JF, Rotter JM, Ooi JY (2011) Assessment of rolling resistance models in discrete
element simulations. Powder Technology 206(3):269–282, DOI 10.1016/j.powtec.2010.09.
030
Alder BJ, Wainwright TE (1959) Studies in Molecular Dynamics. I. General Method. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 31(2):459–466, DOI 10.1063/1.1730376
Alder BJ, Wainwright TE (1960) Studies in Molecular Dynamics. II. Behavior of a Small
Number of Elastic Spheres. The Journal of Chemical Physics 33(5):1439–1451, DOI 10.
1063/1.1731425
Andert T, Rosenblatt P, Pätzold M, Häusler B, Dehant V, Tyler G, Marty J (2010) Precise
mass determination and the nature of Phobos. Geophysical Research Letters 37(9)
Andreotti B, Forterre Y, Pouliquen O (2013) Granular media: between fluid and solid. Cambridge University Press
Aranson IS, Tsimring LS (2006) Patterns and collective behavior in granular media: Theoretical
concepts. Review of Modern Physics 78:641
Asphaug E (2009) Growth and Evolution of Asteroids. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary
Sciences 37:413–448
Asphaug E, Ostro SJ, Hudson R, Scheeres DJ, Benz W (1998) Disruption of kilometre-sized
asteroids by energetic collisions. Nature 393(6684):437
Asphaug E, Ryan EV, Zuber MT (2002) Asteroid Interiors. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi
P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, pp 463–484
Azéma E, Estrada N, Preechawuttipong I, Delenne JY, Radjai F (2017) Systematic description
of the effect of particle shape on the strength properties of granular media. In: EPJ Web
of Conferences, EDP Sciences, vol 140, p 06026
Azéma E, Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2018) Scaling behavior of cohesive self-gravitating aggregates. Phys Rev E 98:030901, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevE.98.030901
Baer J, Chesley SR (2017) Simultaneous Mass Determination for Gravitationally Coupled
Asteroids. The Astronomical Journal 154(2):76
Bagatin AC, Petit JM, Farinella P (2001) How many rubble piles are in the asteroid belt?
Icarus 149(1):198–209
Ballouz R (2017) Numerical Simulations of Granular Physics in the Solar System. PhD thesis,
University of Maryland, College Park
Ballouz RL, Richardson DC, Michel P, Schwartz SR, Yu Y (2015) Numerical simulations of collisional disruption of rotating gravitational aggregates: Dependence on material properties.
Planetary and Space Science 107:29–35
Bancelin D, Pilat-Lohinger E, Maindl TI, Ragossnig F, Schäfer C (2017) The influence of
orbital resonances on the water transport to objects in the circumprimary habitable zone
of binary star systems. The Astronomical Journal 153(6):269
Bardyn A, Baklouti D, Cottin H, Fray N, Briois C, Paquette J, Stenzel O, Engrand C, Fischer
H, Hornung K, et al (2017) Carbon-rich dust in comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko
measured by COSIMA/Rosetta. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
469(Suppl 2):S712–S722
Barnes J, Hut P (1986) A hierarchical O(N log N ) force-calculation algorithm. Nature 324:446–
449, DOI 10.1038/324446a0
Belskaya I, Cellino A, Gil-Hutton R, Muinonen K, Shkuratov Y (2015) Asteroid polarimetry.
In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
AZ, pp 151–163
Ben-Naim E, Knight J, Nowak E, Jaeger H, Nagel S (1998) Slow relaxation in granular compaction. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 123(1-4):380–385
Benner LAM, Busch MW, Giorgini JD, Taylor PA, Margot JL (2015) Radar Observations of
Near-Earth and Main-Belt Asteroids. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV,
University of Arizona Press, pp 165–182, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch009
Biele J, Kesseler L, Grimm CD, Schröder S, Mierheim O, Lange M, Ho TM (2017) Experimental
Determination of the Structural Coefficient of Restitution of a Bouncing Asteroid Lander.

50

D. Hestroffer et al.

ArXiv e-prints 1705.00701
Binzel RP, Gehrels T, Matthews MS (eds) (1989) Asteroids II. Proceedings of the Conference,
Tucson, AZ, Mar. 8–11, 1988
Binzel RP, Morbidelli A, Merouane S, DeMeo FE, Birlan M, Vernazza P, Thomas CA, Rivkin
AS, Bus SJ, Tokunaga AT (2010) Earth encounters as the origin of fresh surfaces on
near-Earth asteroids. Nature 463(7279):331
Board SS, Council NR, et al (2010) Defending planet earth: Near-Earth-Object surveys and
hazard mitigation strategies. National Academies Press
Bockelée-Morvan D, Gil-Hutton R, Hestroffer D, Belskaya IN, Davidsson BJ, Dotto E, Fitzsimmons A, Kawakita H, Mothe-Diniz T, Licandro J, et al (2016) Division F Commission 15:
Physical Study of Comets and Minor Planets. Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union 11(T29A):316–339
Bottke WF Jr, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel RP (eds) (2002) Asteroids III
Bottke WF Jr, Durda DD, Nesvornỳ D, Jedicke R, Morbidelli A, Vokrouhlickỳ D, Levison H
(2005) The fossilized size distribution of the main asteroid belt. Icarus 175(1):111–140
Bouzid M, Izzet A, Trulsson M, Clément E, Claudin P, Andreotti B (2015) Non-local rheology
in dense granular flows. The European Physical Journal E 38(11):125
Braga-Ribas F, Sicardy B, Ortiz J, Snodgrass C, Roques F, Vieira-Martins R, Camargo J,
Assafin M, Duffard R, Jehin E, et al (2014) A ring system detected around the Centaur
(10199) Chariklo. Nature 508(7494):72
Brian Dade W, Huppert HE (1998) Long-runout rockfalls. Geology 26(9):803–806
Brilliantov NV, Pöschel T (2010) Kinetic theory of granular gases. Oxford University Press
Brilliantov NV, Formella A, Pöschel T (2018) Increasing Temperature of Cooling Granular
Gases. Nature Communications 9:797
Brisset J, Heißelmann D, Kothe S, Weidling R, Blum J (2016) Submillimetre-sized dust aggregate collision and growth properties. Experimental study of a multi-particle system on
a suborbital rocket. Astron Astrophys 593:A3
Brisset J, Heißelmann D, Kothe S, Weidling R, Blum J (2017) Low-velocity collision behaviour
of clusters composed of sub-millimetre sized dust aggregates. Astron Astrophys 603:A66
Britt DT, Consolmagno GJ (2001) Modeling the structure of high porosity asteroids. Icarus
152(1):134–139
Britt DT, Yeomans D, Housen K, Consolmagno G (2002) Asteroid Density, Porosity, and
Structure. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, pp 485–500
Burtally N, King PJ, Swift MR (2002) Spontaneous Air-Driven Separation in Vertically
Vibrated Fine Granular Mixtures. Science 295(5561):1877–1879, DOI 10.1126/science.
1066850
Busch MW, Ostro SJ, Benner LAM, Brozovic M, Giorgini JD, Jao JS, Scheeres DJ, Magri C,
Nolan MC, Howell ES, Taylor PA, Margot JL, Brisken W (2011) Radar observations and
the shape of near-Earth ASTEROID 2008 EV5. Icarus 212:649–660, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.
2011.01.013, 1101.3794
Butcher JC (2016) Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations. John Wiley & Sons
Campins H, Hargrove K, Pinilla-Alonso N, Howell ES, Kelley MS, Licandro J, Mothé-Diniz
T, Fernández Y, Ziffer J (2010) Water ice and organics on the surface of the asteroid 24
Themis. Nature 464(7293):1320
Campo Bagatin A, Alemañ RA, Benavidez PG, Richardson DC (2018a) Gravitational Reaccumulation as the Origin of Most Contact Binaries and Other Small Body Shapes.
Icarus submitted
Campo Bagatin A, Alemañ RA, Benavidez PG, Richardson DC (2018b) Internal structure of
asteroid gravitational aggregates. Icarus 302:343–359
Cantelaube F, Bideau D (1995) Radial Segregation in a 2d Drum: An Experimental Analysis.
Europhysics Letters 30:3
Caps H, Michel R, Lecoq N, Vandewalle N (2003) Long lasting instabilities in granular mixtures. Physica A 326:313
Carry B (2012) Density of asteroids. Planetary and Space Science 73(1):98–118
Cattuto C, Marconi UMB (2004) Ordering Phenomena in Cooling Granular Mixtures. Physical
Review Letters 92:174502
Chamberlin A (2018) NEO Discovery Statistics. URL http://neo.jpl.nasa.gov/stats
Chapman C (1977) The Evolution of Asteroids as Meteorite Parent-Bodies. In: IAU Colloquium 39, Cambridge University Press, vol 39, pp 265–275

Small solar system bodies as granular media

51

Chapman C, Veverka J, Thomas P, Klaasen K, Belton M, Harch A, McEwen A, Johnson
T, Helfenstein P, Davies M, et al (1995) Discovery and physical properties of Dactyl, a
satellite of asteroid 243 Ida. Nature 374(6525):783–785
Cheng AF, Izenberg N, Chapman CR, Zuber MT (2002) Ponded deposits on asteroid 433 Eros.
Meteoritics and Planetary Science 37:1095–1105, DOI 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2002.tb00880.x
Cheng AF, Michel P, Jutzi M, Rivkin AS, Stickle A, Barnouin O, Ernst C, Atchison J, Pravec
P, Richardson DC, et al (2016) Asteroid Impact & Deflection Assessment mission: Kinetic
impactor. Planetary and Space Science 121:27–35
Chujo T, Mori O, Kawaguchi J, Yano H (2017) Categorization of Brazil nut effect and its
reverse under less-convective conditions for microgravity geology. Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society 474(4):4447–4459
Cizeau P, Makse HA, Stanley HE (1999) Mechanisms of granular spontaneous stratification
and segregation in two-dimensional silos. Physical Review E 59:4408
Cleary PW, Sawley ML (2002) DEM modelling of industrial granular flows: 3D case studies
and the effect of particle shape on hopper discharge. Applied Mathematical Modelling
26:89–111
Clement E, Rajchenbach J, Duran J (1995) Mixing of a Granular Material in a Bidimensional
Rotating Drum. Europhysics Letters 30:1
Comito C (2012) Numerical N-body approach to binary asteroid formation and evolution. PhD
thesis, Università degli studi di Torino; Université Nice Sophia Antipolis
Comito C, Thirouin A, Campo Bagatin A, Tanga P, Ortiz JL, Richardson DC (2011) Deformation and splitting of asteroids by YORP spin-up. In: EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting 2011,
p 420
Cotto-Figueroa D, Statler TS, Richardson DC, Tanga P (2015) Coupled spin and shape evolution of small rubble-pile asteroids: Self-limitation of the YORP effect. The Astrophysical
Journal 803(1):25
Cundall PA, Strack OD (1979) A discrete numerical model for granular assemblies. Geotechnique 29(1):47–65
Daniels KE (2013) Rubble-pile near Earth objects: insights from granular physics. In: Asteroids, Springer, pp 271–286
Delbo M, Mueller M, Emery JP, Rozitis B, Capria MT (2015) Asteroid thermophysical modeling. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press,
Tucson, pp 107–128
DeMeo F, Alexander C, Walsh K, Chapman C, Binzel R (2015) The compositional structure
of the asteroid belt. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of
Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 13–41, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch002
Dijksman JA, Rietz F, Lõrincz KA, van Hecke M, Losert W (2012) Invited Article: Refractive
index matched scanning of dense granular materials. Review of Scientific Instruments
83(1):011301, DOI 10.1063/1.3674173
Dobrovolskis AR (1982) Internal stresses in Phobos and other triaxial bodies. Icarus 52(1):136–
148
Dohnanyi J (1969) Collisional model of asteroids and their debris. Journal of Geophysical
Research 74(10):2531–2554
Donev A, Cisse I, Sachs EA Dand Variano, Stillinger FH, Connelly R, Torquato S, Chaikin
PM (2004) Improving the density of jammed disordered packings using ellipsoids. Science
303:990–993
Dove A, Anderson S, Gomer G, Fraser M, John K, Fries M (2018) Regolith Stratification and
Migration in an Asteroid-Like Environment. In: Lunar and Planetary Science Conference,
Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 49, p 2993
Drube L, Harris AW, Engel K, Falke A, Johann U, Eggl S, Cano JL, Ávila JM, Schwartz
SR, Michel P (2016) The NEOTωIST mission (Near-Earth Object Transfer of angular
momentum spin test). Acta Astronautica 127:103–111, DOI 10.1016/j.actaastro.2016.05.
009
Durda DD, Bagatin AC, Alemañ RA, Flynn GJ, Strait MM, Clayton AN, Patmore EB (2015)
The shapes of fragments from catastrophic disruption events: Effects of target shape and
impact speed. Planetary and Space Science 107:77–83, DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2014.10.006,
{VIII} Workshop on Catastrophic Disruption in the Solar System
Durech J, Carry B, Delbo M, Kaasalainen M, Viikinkoski M (2015) Asteroid Models from
Multiple Data Sources. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University
of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 183–202, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch010

52

D. Hestroffer et al.

Dziugys A, Navakas R (2009) The role of friction in mixing and segregation of granular material. Granular Matter 11:403–416
Eggl S, Hestroffer D, Thuillot W, Bancelin D, Cano JL, Cichocki F (2015) Post mitigation
impact risk analysis for asteroid deflection demonstration missions. Advances in Space
Research 56:528–548, DOI 10.1016/j.asr.2015.02.030
Eggl S, Hestroffer D, Cano JL, Ávila JM, Drube L, Harris AW, Falke A, Johann U, Engel K,
Schwartz SR, Michel P (2016) Dealing with uncertainties in asteroid deflection demonstration missions: NEOTωIST. In: Chesley SR, Morbidelli A, Jedicke R, Farnocchia D (eds)
IAU Symposium, IAU Symposium, vol 318, pp 231–238, DOI 10.1017/S1743921315008698,
1601.02103
Falcon E, Wunenburger R, Evesque P, Fauve S, Chabot C, Garrabos Y, Beysens D (1999)
Cluster formation in a granular medium fluidized by vibrations in low gravity. Physical
Review Letters 83:440
Falcon E, Bacri JC, Laroche C (2013) Equation of state of a granular gas homogeneously
driven by particle rotations. Europhysical Letters 103:64004
Fall A, Weber B, Pakpour M, Lenoir N, Shahidzadeh N, Fiscina J, Wagner C, Bonn
D (2014) Sliding Friction on Wet and Dry Sand. Phys Rev Lett 112:175502, DOI
10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.175502
Fan Y, Boukerkour Y, Blanc T, Umbanhowar P, Ottino JM, Lueptow RM (2012) Stratification,
segregation, and mixing of granular materials in quasi-two-dimensional bounded heaps.
Physical Review E 86:051305
Faraday M (1831) On a Peculiar Class of Acoustical Figures; and on Certain Forms Assumed
by Groups of Particles upon Vibrating Elastic Surfaces. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London 121:299–340, URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/107936
Farinella P, Paolicchi P, Tedesco E, Zappala V (1981) Triaxial equilibrium ellipsoids among
the asteroids? Icarus 46(1):114–123
Félix G, Thomas N (2004) Relation between dry granular flow regimes and morphology of
deposits: formation of levées in pyroclastic deposits. Earth and Planetary Science Letters
221(1-4):197–213
Ferellec JF, McDowell GR (2010) A method to model realistic particle shape and inertia in
DEM. Granular Matter 12:459–467
Festou M, Keller HU, Weaver HA (2004) Comets II. University of Arizona Press
Finger T, von Rüling F, Lévay S, Szabó B, Börzsönyi T, Stannarius R (2016) Segregation of
granular mixtures in a spherical tumbler. Physical Review E 93:032903
Fischer D, Finger T, Angenstein F, Stannarius R (2009) Diffusive and subdiffusive axial transport of granular material in rotating mixers. Physical Review E 80:061302
Fries M, Abell P, Brisset J, Britt D, Colwell J, Durda D, Dove A, Graham L, Hartzell C, John
K, Leonard M, Love S, Sánchez DP, Scheeres DJ (2016) Strata-1: An International Space
Station Experiment into Fundamental Regolith Properties in Microgravity. In: Lunar and
Planetary Science Conference, Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 47, p 2799
Fries M, Abell P, Brisset J, Britt D, Colwell J, Dove A, Durda D, Graham L, Hartzell C,
Hrovat K, John K, Karrer D, Leonard M, Love S, Morgan J, Poppin J, Rodriguez V,
Sánchez-Lana P, Scheeres D, Whizin A (2018) The Strata-1 experiment on small body
regolith segregation. Acta Astronautica 142:87 – 94, DOI 10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.10.025
Fujiwara A, Kawaguchi J, Yeomans D, Abe M, Mukai T, Okada T, Saito J, Yano H, Yoshikawa
M, Scheeres D, et al (2006) The rubble-pile asteroid Itokawa as observed by Hayabusa.
Science 312(5778):1330–1334
Gaia-Collaboration, Spoto F, Tanga P, Mignard F, Berthier J, Carry B, Cellino A (2018)
Gaia Data Release 2 - Observations of solar system objects. Astronomy and Astrophysics
616:A13, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201832900
Galache J, Graps A, Asime 2016 Contributors (2017) ASIME 2016 White Paper: Answers to
Questions from the Asteroid Miners. In: European Planetary Science Congress, vol 11, p
985
Gao Z, Zhao J, Li XS, Dafalias YF (2014) A critical state sand plasticity model accounting
for fabric evolution. Int J Numer Anal Meth Geomech 38:370–390
Garcimartin A, Maza D, Ilquimiche JL, Zuriguel I (2002) Convective motion in a vibrated
granular layer. Physical Review E 65:031303
Gehrels T, Matthews MS (eds) (1979) Asteroids
Gehrels T, Drummond J, Levenson N (1987) The absence of satellites of asteroids. Icarus
70(2):257–263

Small solar system bodies as granular media

53

Godoy S, Risso D, Soto R, Cordero P (2008) Rise of a Brazil nut: A transition line. Physical
Review E 78:031301
Goldhirsch I, Zanetti G (1993) Clustering instability in dissipative gases. Physical Review
Letters 70:1619
Goldreich P, Tremaine S (1978) The velocity dispersion in Saturn’s rings. Icarus 34(2):227–239
Gray JNMT, Ancey C (2011) Multi-component particle size-segregation in shallow granular
avalanches. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 678:535–558
Gray JNMT, Thornton AR (2005) A theory for particle size segregation in shallow granular
free-surface flows. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 461:1447
Greengard L, Rokhlin V (1987) A fast algorithm for particle simulations. Journal of Computational Physics 73(2):325–348, DOI 10.1016/0021-9991(87)90140-9
Guillard F, Forterre Y, Pouliquen O (2014) Lift forces in granular media. Physics of Fluids
26(4):043301
Gundlach B, Blum G (2013) A new method to determine the grain size of planetary regolith.
Icarus 223:479–492
Güttler C, von Borstel I, Schräpler R, Blum J (2013) Granular convection and the Brazil nut
effect in reduced gravity. Physical Review E 87:044201
Haff P (1983) Grain flow as a fluid-mechanical phenomenon. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
134:401–430
Hajra SK, Khakhar DV (2011) Radial Segregation of ternary granular mixtures in rotating
cylinders. Granular Matter 13(4):475–486
Harrington M, Weijs JH, Losert W (2013) Suppression and Emergence of Granular Segregation
under Cyclic Shear. Phys Rev Lett 111:078001, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.078001
Harrington M, Lin M, Nordstrom KN, Losert W (2014) Experimental measurements of orientation and rotation of dense 3D packings of spheres. Granular Matter 16(2):185–191,
DOI 10.1007/s10035-013-0474-0
Harris A, Barucci M, Cano J, Fitzsimmons A, Fulchignoni M, Green S, Hestroffer D, Lappas V,
Lork W, Michel P, et al (2013) The European Union funded NEOShield project: a global
approach to near-Earth object impact threat mitigation. Acta Astronautica 90(1):80–84
Harris AW (1996) The Rotation Rates of Very Small Asteroids: Evidence for ’Rubble Pile’
Structure. In: Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 27
Harris AW, Lagerros JS (2002) Asteroids in the thermal infrared. In: Bottke W, Cellino A,
Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ
Harris AW, Fahnestock EG, Pravec P (2009) On the shapes and spins of ‘rubble pile’ asteroids.
Icarus 199(2):310–318
Harth K, Kornek U, Trittel T, Strachauer U, Höme S, Will K, Stannarius R (2013) Granular
gases of rod-shaped grains in microgravity. Physical Review Letters 110:144102
Harthong B, Jérier JF, Dorémus P, Imbault D, Donzé FV (2009) Modeling of high-density
compaction of granular materials by the discrete element method. International Journal
of Solids and Structures 46(18):3357–3364
Hartzell C, Carter D (2017) Electrostatic forces on grains near asteroids and comets. In: EPJ
Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences, vol 140, p 14009
Heisselmann D, Blum J, Fraser HJ, Wolling K (2010) Microgravity experiments on the collisional behavior of Saturnian ring particles. Icarus 206:424–430
Henych T, Holsapple KA (2018) Interpretations of family size distributions: The Datura example. Icarus 304:127–134, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.05.018, asteroids and Space Debris
Hérique A, Agnus B, Asphaug E, Barucci A, Beck P, Bellerose J, Biele J, Bonal L, Bousquet
P, Bruzzone L, et al (2018) Direct observations of asteroid interior and regolith structure:
Science measurement requirements. Advances in Space Research in press
Hernquist L (1987) Performance characteristics of tree codes. Astrophys J Suppl Ser 64:715–
734, DOI 10.1086/191215
Herrmann H, Luding S (1998) Modeling granular media on the computer. Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics 10:189–231, DOI 10.1007/s001610050089
Hestroffer D (1998) Photocentre displacement of minor planets: analysis of HIPPARCOS astrometry. Astron Astrophys336:776–781
Hestroffer D, dell’Oro A, Cellino A, Tanga P (2010) The Gaia mission and the asteroids. In:
Souchay JJ, Dvorak R (eds) Dynamics of Small Solar System Bodies and Exoplanets,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 251–340, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-04458-8 6

54

D. Hestroffer et al.

Hestroffer D, Agnan M, Segret B, Quinsac G, Vannitsen J, Rosenblatt P, Miau JJ (2017)
BIRDY - Interplanetary CubeSat for planetary geodesy of Small Solar System Bodies
(SSSB). AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts
Hestroffer D, Bagatı́n AC, Losert W, Opsomer E, Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ, Staron L, Taberlet
N, Yano H, Eggl S, et al (2017) Small solar system bodies as granular systems. In: EPJ
Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences, vol 140, p 14011
Hill KM, Gioia G, Amaravadi D (2004) Radial Segregation Patterns in Rotating Granular
Mixtures: Waviness Selection. Physical Review Letters 93:224301
Hilton JL (2002) Asteroid Masses and Densities. In: Asteroids III, pp 103–112
Hirabayashi M (2014) Structural failure of two-density-layer cohesionless biaxial ellipsoids.
Icarus 236(0):178–180, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.02.024
Hirabayashi M, Scheeres DJ (2014) Analysis of Asteroid (216) Kleopatra Using Dynamical and
Structural Constraints. The Astrophysical Journal 780(2):160
Hirabayashi M, Scheeres DJ (2015) Stress and Failure Analysis of Rapidly Rotating Asteroid
(29075) 1950DA. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 798(1):L8
Hirabayashi M, Scheeres DJ, Sánchez DP, Gabriel T (2014) Constraints on the Physical Properties of Main Belt Comet P/2013 R3 from its Breakup Event. The Astrophysical Journal
Letters 789(1):L12
Hirabayashi M, Sánchez DP, Scheeres DJ (2015) Internal Structure of Asteroids Having Surface
Shedding Due to Rotational Instability. The Astrophysical Journal 808(1):63
Hirabayashi M, Scheeres DJ, Chesley SR, Marchi S, McMahon JW, Steckloff J, Mottola S,
Naidu SP, Bowling T (2016) Fission and reconfiguration of bilobate comets as revealed by
67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko. Nature 534(7607):352
Hockney RW, Eastwood JW (1988) Computer Simulation Using Particles. CRC Press
Holsapple K, Giblin I, Housen K, Nakamura A, Ryan E (2002) Asteroid Impacts: Laboratory
Experiments and Scaling Laws. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds)
Asteroids III, pp 443–462
Holsapple KA (2001) Equilibrium Configurations of Solid Cohesionless Bodies. Icarus
154(2):432–448, DOI 10.1006/icar.2001.6683
Holsapple KA (2004) Equilibrium figures of spinning bodies with self-gravity. Icarus 172:272–
303, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2004.05.023
Holsapple KA (2007) Spin limits of Solar System bodies: From the small fast-rotators to 2003
EL61. Icarus 187(2):500–509, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2006.08.012
Hong DC, Quinn PV, Luding S (2001) Reverse Brazil Nut Problem: Competition between
Percolation and Condensation. Physical Review Letters 86:15
Hou M, Liu R, Zhai G, Sun Z, Lu K, Garrabos Y, Evesque P (2008) Velocity distribution
of vibration-driven granular gas in Knudsen regime in microgravity. Microgravity Science
and Technology 20:73–80
Hsieh HH, Jewitt D (2006) A population of comets in the main asteroid belt. Science
312(5773):561–563
van der Hucht KA (2008) Proceedings of the Twenty Sixth General Assembly Prague 2006:
Transactions of the International Astronomical Union XXVIB, vol 26. Cambridge University Press
Huerta DA, Ruiz-Suarez JC (2004) Vibration-Induced Granular Segregation: A Phenomenon
Driven by Three Mechanisms. Physical Review Letters 92:11
Hut P, Makino J, McMillan S (1995) Building a better leapfrog. The Astrophysical Journal
443:L93–L96
Jacobson R, Spitale J, Porco C, Beurle K, Cooper N, Evans M, Murray C (2007) Revised
orbits of Saturn’s small inner satellites. The Astronomical Journal 135(1):261
Jacobson SA, Scheeres DJ (2011) Dynamics of rotationally fissioned asteroids: Source of observed small asteroid systems. Icarus 214:161–178, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.04.009
Jaeger HM, Nagel SR, Behringer RP (1996a) Granular solids, liquids, and gases. Rev Mod
Phys 68:1259–1273, DOI {10.1103/RevModPhys.68.1259}
Jaeger HM, Nagel SR, Behringer RP (1996b) The physics of granular materials. Physics Today
49(4):32–38
Jean M (1999) The non-smooth contact dynamics method. Computer methods in applied
mechanics and engineering 177(3-4):235–257
Jenkins J, Richman M (1985) Kinetic theory for plane flows of a dense gas of identical, rough,
inelastic, circular disks. The Physics of Fluids 28(12):3485–3494

Small solar system bodies as granular media

55

Jenkins JT, Savage SB (1983) A theory for the rapid flow of identical, smooth, nearly elastic,
spherical particles. Journal of fluid mechanics 130:187–202
Jewitt D (2009) The Active Centaurs. The Astronomical Journal 137:4296–4312, DOI 10.1088/
0004-6256/137/5/4296
Jewitt D, Agarwal J, Weaver H, Mutchler M, Larson S (2013) The Extraordinary Multi-tailed
Main-belt Comet P/2013 P5. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 778(1):L21
Jewitt D, Agarwal J, Li J, Weaver H, Mutchler M, Larson S (2014) Disintegrating Asteroid
P/2013 R3. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 784(1):L8
Jewitt D, Hsieh H, Agarwal J (2015) The Active Asteroids. In: Michel P, DeMeo FE, Bottke
WF (eds) Asteroids IV, pp 221–241, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch012
John KK, Saucedo VL, Fisher KR, Fries MD, Dove AR, Leonard MJ, Graham LD, Abell PA
(2018) Hermes Microgravity Research Facility on the ISS. In: Lunar and Planetary Science
Conference, Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 49, p 1790
Jones R, Chesley S, Connolly A, Harris A, Ivezic Z, Knezevic Z, Kubica J, Milani A, Trilling
D, Collaboration LSSS, et al (2009) Solar System science with LSST. Earth, Moon, and
Planets 105(2-4):101–105
Jop P, Forterre Y, Pouliquen O (2006) A constitutive law for dense granular flows. Nature
441(7094):727
Jutzi M, Michel P (2014) Hypervelocity impacts on asteroids and momentum transfer I. Numerical simulations using porous targets. Icarus 229:247–253
Jutzi M, Michel P, Benz W, Richardson DC (2010) Fragment properties at the catastrophic
disruption threshold: The effect of the parent body’s internal structure. Icarus 207(1):54–
65, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.11.016
Kaasalainen M, Torppa J (2001) Optimization Methods for Asteroid Lightcurve Inversion. I.
Shape Determination. Icarus 153:24–36
Kaasalainen M, Torppa J, Muinonen K (2001) Optimization Methods for Asteroid Lightcurve
Inversion. II. The Complete Inverse Problem. Icarus 153:37–51
Kaasalainen M, Mottola S, Fulchignoni M (2002) Asteroid models from disk-integrated data.
In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, University of Arizona
Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 139–150
Kay JP, Dombard AJ (2018) Formation of the bulge of Iapetus through long-wavelength folding
of the lithosphere. Icarus 302:237–244
Kelfoun K (2011) Suitability of simple rheological laws for the numerical simulation of dense
pyroclastic flows and long-runout volcanic avalanches. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth 116(B8)
Kerr RA (1985) Could an asteroid be a comet in disguise; two asteroids of the inner solar
system are strong candidates for once-active comets that now masquerade as inert hunks
of rock. Science 227:930–932
Khakhar DV, McCarthy J, Shinbrot T, Ottino JM (1997) Radial segregation of granular mixtures in rotating cylinders. Physics of Fluids 9:3600
Khakhar DV, Orpe VA, Hajra SK (2003) Segregation of granular materials in rotating cylinders. Physica A 318:126
Kim T, Nam J, Yun J, Lee K, You S (2009) Relationship between cohesion and tensile strength
in wet sand at low normal stresses. In: Proc. of 17th Intern. Conf. on Soil Mechanics
and Geotechnical Engineering, Olexandria, 2009, JOS Press, Amsterdam, Berlin, Tokyo,
Washington, vol 367, p 364
Klypin A (2017) Methods for cosmological N-body simulations. URL http://www.
skiesanduniverses.org/resources/KlypinNbody.pdf
Knight JB, Jaeger HM, Nagel S (1993) Vibration-Induced Size Separation in Granular Media:
The Convection Connection. Physical Review Letters 70:24
Koeppe JP, Enz M, Kakalios J (1998) Phase diagram for avalanche stratification of granular
media. Physical Review E 58:R4104
Kok JF, Parteli EJR, Michaels TI, Karam DB (2012) The physics of wind-blown sand and
dust. Reports on Progress in Physics 75(10):106901
Konopliv AS, Miller JK, Owen WM, Yeomans DK, Giorgini JD, Garmier R, Barriot JP (2002)
A global solution for the gravity field, rotation, landmarks, and ephemeris of Eros. Icarus
160(2):289–299
Kou B, Cao Y, Li J, Xia C, Li Z, Dong H, Zhang A, Zhang J, Kob W, Wang Y (2017) Granular
materials flow like complex fluids. Nature 551(7680):360

56

D. Hestroffer et al.

Kudrolli A (2004a) Size separation in vibrated granular matter. Reports on Progress in Physics
67(3):209
Kudrolli A (2004b) Size separation in vibrated granular matter. Reports on Progress in Physics
67:209
Lagrée PY, Staron L, Popinet S (2011) The granular column collapse as a continuum: validity of
a two-dimensional Navier–Stokes model with a µ (I)-rheology. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
686:378–408
Landau LD, Lifshitz E (1986) Theory of Elasticity, vol. 7. Course of Theoretical Physics 3:109
Lauretta D, DellaGiustina D, Bennett C, Golish D, Becker K, Balram-Knutson S, Barnouin O,
Becker T, Bottke W, Boynton W, et al (2019) The unexpected surface of asteroid (101955)
Bennu. Nature p 1
Leconte M, Garrabos Y, Falcon E, Lecoutre-Chabot C, Palencia F, Evesque P, Beysens D
(2006) Microgravity experiments on vibrated granular gases in a dilute regime: nonclassical statistics. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 7:07012
Lee V, Waitukaitis SR, Miskin MZ, Jaeger HM (2015) Direct observation of particle interactions and clustering in charged granular streams. Nature Physics 11:733–737
Leinhardt ZM, Richardson DC, Quinn T (2000) Direct N-body Simulations of Rubble Pile
Collisions. Icarus 146:133–151, DOI 10.1006/icar.2000.6370, astro-ph/9908221
Levasseur-Regourd AC, Rotundi A, Bentley M, Della Corte V, Fulle M, Hadamcik E, Hilchenbach M, Hines D, Lasue J, Merouane S, et al (2015) Physical properties of dust particles in
cometary comae: from clues to evidence with the Rosetta mission. In: European Planetary
Science Congress 2015, vol 10, pp EPSC2015–932
Li JY, Helfenstein P, Buratti B, Takir D, Clark BE (2015) Asteroid Photometry. In: Michel
P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp
129–150, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch007
Liu AJ, Nagel SR (1998) Nonlinear dynamics: Jamming is not just cool any more. Nature
396(6706):21–22
Liu C, Nagel SR, Schecter DA, Coppersmith SN, Majumdar S, Narayan O, Witten TA (1995)
Force Fluctuations in Bead Packs. Science 269:513
Lohse D, Bergmann R, Mikkelsen R, Zeilstra C, van der Meer D, Versluis M, van der Weele K,
van der Hoef M, Kuipers H (2004) Impact on Soft Sand: Void Collapse and Jet Formation.
Phys Rev Lett 93:198003, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.198003
Losert W, Cooper DGW, Delour A Jand Kudrolli, Gollub JP (1999) Velocity statistics in
excited granular media. Chaos 9:682
Louge MY, Jenkins JT, Xu H, Arnarson BO (2012) Granular segregation in collisional shearing
flows. In: Aref H, Phillips JW (eds) Mechanics for a New Millennium
Lu M, McDowell GR (2007) The importance of modelling ballast particle shape in the discrete
element method. Granular Matter 9:69
Lu XP, Cellino A, Hestroffer D, Ip WH (2016) Cellinoid shape model for Hipparcos data.
Icarus 267:24–33
Lubachevsky BD (1991) How to simulate billiards and similar systems. Journal of Computational Physics 94(2):255 – 283, DOI 10.1016/0021-9991(91)90222-7
Lucas A, Mangeney A, Ampuero JP (2014) Frictional velocity-weakening in landslides on Earth
and on other planetary bodies. Nature Communications 5:3417
Lucchitta BK (1979) Landslides in Valles Marineris, Mars. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth 84(B14):8097–8113
Ludewig F, Vandewalle N (2012) Strong interlocking of nonconvex particles in random packings. Physical Review E 85:051307
Maaß CC, Isert N, Maret G, Aegerter CM (2008) Experimental investigation of the freely
cooling granular gas. Physical Review Letters 100:248001
Makse HA (1999) Continuous avalanche segregation of granular mixtures in thin rotating
drums. Physical Review Letters 83:3186
Makse HA, Ball RC, Stanley HE, Warr S (1998) Dynamics of granular stratification. Physical
Review Letters 58:3357
Marchis F, Hestroffer D, Descamps P, Berthier J, Bouchez AH, Campbell RD, Chin JC,
Van Dam MA, Hartman SK, Johansson EM, et al (2006) A low density of 0.8 g cm−3 for
the Trojan binary asteroid 617 Patroclus. Nature 439(7076):565
Margot JL, Pravec P, Taylor P, Carry B, Jacobson S (2015) Asteroid systems: binaries, triples,
and pairs. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona
Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 355–374

Small solar system bodies as granular media

57

Masiero JR, Grav T, Mainzer AK, Nugent CR, Bauer JM, Stevenson R, Sonnett S (2014)
Main-belt Asteroids with WISE/NEOWISE: Near-infrared Albedos. The Astrophysical
Journal 791:121, DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/791/2/121, 1406.6645
Masiero JR, Nugent C, Mainzer AK, Wright EL, Bauer JM, Cutri RM, Grav T, Kramer E,
Sonnett S (2017) NEOWISE Reactivation Mission Year Three: Asteroid Diameters and
Albedos. The Astronomical Journal 154(4):168
Matsumura S, Richardson DC, Michel P, Schwartz SR, Ballouz RL (2014) The Brazil nut
effect and its application to asteroids. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
443:3368–3380
Mattson W, Rice BM (1999) Near-neighbor calculations using a modified cell-linked list
method. Computer Physics Communications 119(2-3):135–148
Maurel C, Ballouz RL, Richardson DC, Michel P, Schwartz SR (2017) Numerical simulations of
oscillation-driven regolith motion: Brazil-nut effect. Mon Not R Astron Soc 464:2866–2881,
DOI 10.1093/mnras/stw2641
McCarthy DF, McCarthy DF (1977) Essentials of soil mechanics and foundations. Reston
Publishing Company
McMahon J, Scheeres D, Hesar S, Farnocchia D, Chesley S, Lauretta D (2018) The OSIRISREx radio science experiment at Bennu. Space Science Reviews 214(1):43
McNamara S, Young WR (1994) Inelastic collapse in two dimensions. Phys Rev E 50:R28–R31,
DOI 10.1103/PhysRevE.50.R28
Meech KJ, Weryk R, Micheli M, Kleyna JT, Hainaut OR, Jedicke R, Wainscoat RJ, Chambers
KC, Keane JV, Petric A, et al (2017) A brief visit from a red and extremely elongated
interstellar asteroid. Nature 552(7685):378
Mehta A (2012) Granular Matter: an interdisciplinary approach. Springer
Merline WJ, Close L, Dumas C, Chapman C, Roddier F, Menard F, Slater D, Duvert G,
Shelton C, Morgan T (1999) Discovery of a moon orbiting the asteroid 45 Eugenia. Nature
401(6753):565
Merline WJ, Weidenschilling SJ, Durda DD, Margot JL, Pravec P, Storrs AD (2002) Asteroids
do have satellites. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, Univ.
of Arizona, Tucson, pp 289–312
Metzger MJ, Remy B, Glasser BJ (2011) All the Brazil nuts are not on top: Vibration induced
granular size segregation of binary, ternary and multi-sized mixtures. Powder technology
205:42–51
Michel P, Richardson DC (2013) Collision and gravitational reaccumulation: Possible formation
mechanism of the asteroid Itokawa. Astron Astrophys 554:L1
Michel P, Benz W, Tanga P, Richardson DC (2001) Collisions and gravitational reaccumulation: Forming asteroid families and satellites. Science 294(5547):1696–1700
Michel P, Tanga P, Benz W, Richardson DC (2002) Formation of Asteroid Families by Catastrophic Disruption: Simulations with Fragmentation and Gravitational Reaccumulation.
Icarus 160:10–23, DOI 10.1006/icar.2002.6948
Michel P, DeMeo FE, Bottke WF (eds) (2015) Asteroids IV. DOI 10.2458/azu uapress
9780816532131
Michel P, Richardson DC, Durda DD, Jutzi M, Asphaug E (2015) Collisional formation and
modeling of asteroid families. In: Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 341–354
Michel P, Kueppers M, Sierks H, Carnelli I, Cheng AF, Mellab K, Granvik M, Kestilä A,
Kohout T, Muinonen K, et al (2018) European component of the AIDA mission to a
binary asteroid: Characterization and interpretation of the impact of the DART mission.
Advances in Space Research in press
MiDi-GDR (2004) On dense granular flows. The European Physical Journal E 14(4):341–365
Miyamoto H, Yano H, Scheeres DJ, Abe S, Barnouin-Jha O, Cheng AF, Demura H, Gaskell
RW, Hirata N, Ishiguro M, Michikami T, Nakamura AM, Nakamura R, Saito J, Sasaki S
(2007) Regolith Migration and Sorting on Asteroid Itokawa. Science DOI 10.1126/science.
1134390
Möbius M, Lauderdale BE, Nagel SR, Jaeger HM (2001) Brazil-nut effect: Size separation of
granular particles. Nature 414:270
Morbidelli A, Chambers J, Lunine J, Petit JM, Robert F, Valsecchi G, Cyr K (2000) Source
regions and timescales for the delivery of water to the Earth. Meteoritics & Planetary
Science 35(6):1309–1320

58

D. Hestroffer et al.

Moreau JJ (1994) Some numerical methods in multibody dynamics: application to granular
materials. European journal of mechanics A Solids 13:93–114
Mouret S, Hestroffer D, Mignard F (2007) Asteroid masses and improvement with Gaia. Astron
Astrophys472:1017–1027, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361:20077479
Movshovitz N, Asphaug E, Korycansky D (2012) Numerical modeling of the disruption of
comet D/1993 F2 Shoemaker-Levy 9 representing the progenitor by a gravitationally bound
assemblage of randomly shaped polyhedra. The Astrophysical Journal 759(2):93
Müller T, Marciniak A, Kiss C, Duffard R, Alı́-Lagoa V, Bartczak P, Butkiewicz-Bak M,
Dudziński G, Fernández-Valenzuela E, Marton G, et al (2017) Small Bodies Near and Far
(SBNAF): a benchmark study on physical and thermal properties of small bodies in the
Solar System. Advances in Space Research in press
Murdoch N, Michel P, Richardson DC, Nordstrom K, Berardi CR, Green SF, Losert W (2012)
Numerical simulations of granular dynamics II: Particle dynamics in a shaken granular
material. Icarus 219(1):321–335
Murdoch N, Rozitis B, Green S, Lophem TL, Michel P, Losert W (2013a) Granular shear
flow in varying gravitational environments. Granular Matter 15(2):129–137, DOI 10.1007/
s10035-013-0395-y
Murdoch N, Rozitis B, Green S, Michel P, de Lophem TL, Losert W (2013b) Simulating
regoliths in microgravity. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 433(1):506–
514
Murdoch N, Rozitis B, Nordstrom K, Green S, Michel P, de Lophem T, Losert W (2013)
Granular Convection in Microgravity. Physical Review Letters 110(1):018307, DOI 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.110.018307
Murdoch N, Sánchez P, Schwartz SR, Miyamoto H (2015) Asteroid Surface Geophysics. In:
Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
AZ, pp 767–792, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch039
Murdoch N, Cadu A, Mimoun D, Karatekin O, Garcia R, Carrasco J, Garcia de Quiros J,
Vasseur H, Ritter B, Eubanks M, et al (2016) Investigating the surface and subsurface
properties of the Didymos binary asteroid with a landed CubeSat. In: EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts, vol 18, p 12140
Murdoch N, Avila Martinez I, Sunday C, Zenou E, Cherrier O, Cadu A, Gourinat Y (2017a)
An experimental study of low-velocity impacts into granular material in reduced gravity.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 468(2):1259–1272
Murdoch N, Hempel S, Pou L, Cadu A, Garcia RF, Mimoun D, Margerin L, Karatekin O
(2017b) Probing the internal structure of the asteroid Didymoon with a passive seismic
investigation. Planetary and Space Science 144:89–105
Neuffer D, Schultz R (2006) Mechanisms of slope failure in Valles Marineris, Mars. Quarterly
Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology 39(3):227–240
Noirhomme M, Ludewig N Fand Vandewalle, Opsomer E (2017) Cluster growth in driven
granular gases. Physical Review E 95:022905
Noll KS, Grundy WM, Chiang EI, Margot JL, Kern SD (2008) Binaries in the Kuiper Belt. In:
Barucci, M A, Boehnhardt, H, Cruikshank, D P, & Morbidelli, A (ed) The Solar System
Beyond Neptune, pp 345–363
O’Brien DP, Walsh KJ, Morbidelli A, Raymond SN, Mandell AM (2014) Water delivery and
giant impacts in the ’Grand Tack’ scenario. Icarus 239:74–84
Ogawa S (1978) Multitemperature theory of granular materials. In: Proc. of the US-Japan Seminar on Continuum Mechanical and Statistical Approaches in the Mechanics of Granular
Materials, Gakajutsu Bunken Fukyu-Kai, pp 208–217
Opsomer E, Ludewig F, Vandewalle N (2011) Phase transitions in vibrated granular systems
in microgravity. Physical Review E 84:051306
Opsomer E, Vandewalle N, Noirhomme M, Ludewig F (2014) Clustering and segregation in
driven granular fluids. The European Physical Journal Special Topics 37:115
Opsomer E, Noirhomme M, Vandewalle N, Falcon E, Merminod S (2017) Segregation and pattern formation in dilute granular media under microgravity conditions. npj Microgravity
3:1
Orpe A, Khakhar DV (2001) Scaling relations for granular flow in quasi-two-dimensional rotating cylinders. Physical Review E 64:031302
Ortiz JL, Santos-Sanz P, Sicardy B, Benedetti-Rossi G, Bérard D, Morales N, Duffard R,
Braga-Ribas F, Hopp U, Ries C, et al (2017) The size, shape, density and ring of the
dwarf planet Haumea from a stellar occultation. Nature 550(7675):219

Small solar system bodies as granular media

59

Ostro SJ, Hudson RS, Benner LAM, Giorgini JD, Magri C, Margot JL, Nolan MC (2002)
Asteroid Radar Astronomy. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids
III, pp 151–168
Ottino JM, Khakhar DV (2000) Mixing and Segregation of Granular Materials. Annual Review
of Fluid Mechanics 32(1):55–91, DOI 10.1146/annurev.fluid.32.1.55
Oyama Y (1939) Axial segregation of granular materials. Bull Inst Phys Chem Res (Tokyo),
Rept 5 18:600
Paetzold M (2017) Mass Determination of Small Bodies in the Solar System. AGU Fall Meeting
Abstracts
Pähtz T, Herrmann HJ, Shinbrot T (2010) Why do particle clouds generate electric charges?
Nature Physics 6:364, DOI 10.1038/nphys1631
Patrick R, Nicodemi M, Delannay R, Ribiere P, Bideau D (2005) Slow relaxation and compaction of granular systems. Nature materials 4(2):121
Peale S, Canup R (2015) The origin of the natural satellites. in Planets and Moons, Treatise
on Geophys, vol 10, pp 559–604
Pelton JN, Allahdadi F (eds) (2015) Handbook of Cosmic Hazards and Planetary Defense.
Springer
Pena AA, Garcia-Rojo R, Herrmann HJ (2007) Influence of particle shape on sheared dense
granular media. Granular Matter 9:279–291
Perera V, Jackson AP, Asphaug E, Ballouz RL (2016) The spherical Brazil nut effect and its
significance to asteroids. Icarus 278:194–203
Perna D, Dotto E, Ieva S, Barucci MA, Bernardi F, Fornasier S, De Luise F, Perozzi E, Rossi A,
Mazzotta Epifani E, Micheli M, Deshapriya JDP (2016) Grasping the Nature of Potentially
Hazardous Asteroids. The Astronomical Journal 151:11, DOI 10.3847/0004-6256/151/1/11
Pletser V (2004) Short duration microgravity experiments in physical and life sciences during
parabolic flights: the first 30 ESA campaigns. Acta Astronautica 55:829–854
Polishook D, Moskovitz N, Binzel R, Burt B, DeMeo F, Hinkle M, Lockhart M, Mommert M,
Person M, Thirouin A, et al (2016) A 2 km-size asteroid challenging the rubble-pile spin
barrier–A case for cohesion. Icarus 267:243–254
Pöschel T, Brilliantov NV (2003) Granular gas dynamics. Springer
Pouliquen O, Cassar C, Jop P, Forterre Y, Nicolas M (2006) Flow of dense granular material:
towards simple constitutive laws. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment
2006(07):P07020
Poux M, Fayote P, Bertrand J, Bridons D, Bousquet J (1991) Strong interlocking of nonconvex
particles in random packings. Powder Technology 8:63
Pravec P, Harris AW (2000) Fast and Slow Rotation of Asteroids. Icarus 148(1):12–20, DOI
10.1006/icar.2000.6482
Pravec P, Harris AW, Michalowski T (2002) Asteroid Rotations. In: Bottke W, Cellino A,
Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, pp 113–122
Pravec P, Vokrouhlickỳ D, Polishook D, Scheeres DJ, Harris AW, Galad A, Vaduvescu O, Pozo
F, Barr A, Longa P, et al (2010) Formation of asteroid pairs by rotational fission. Nature
466(7310):1085
Procopio AT, Zavaliangos A (2005) Simulation of multi-axial compaction of granular media from loose to high relative densities. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids
53(7):1523–1551
Radjai F (2015) Modeling force transmission in granular materials. Comptes Rendus Physique
16:3–9
Radjaı̈ F, Dubois F (2011) Discrete-element modeling of granular materials. Wiley-ISTE
Radjai F, Richefeu V (2009a) Bond anisotropy and cohesion of wet granular materials. Phil
Trans R Soc A 367:5123–5138
Radjai F, Richefeu V (2009b) Contact dynamics as a nonsmooth discrete element method.
Mechanics of Materials 41(6):715–728
Radjai F, Jean M, Moreau JJ, Roux S (1996) Force Distributions in Dense Two-Dimensional
Granular Systems. Phys Rev Lett 77(2):274–
Radjai F, Schäfer J, Dipple S, Wolf D (1997) Collective friction of an array of particles: A
crucial test for numerical algorithms. Journal de Physique I 7(9):1053–1070
Richardson D, Michel P, Walsh K, Flynn K (2009) Numerical simulations of asteroids modelled
as gravitational aggregates with cohesion. Planetary and Space Science 57(2):183–192
Richardson DC (1993) A new tree code method for simulation of planetesimal dynamics. Mon
Not R Astron Soc 261:396–414, DOI 10.1093/mnras/261.2.396

60

D. Hestroffer et al.

Richardson DC (1994) Tree Code Simulations of Planetary Rings. Mon Not R Astron Soc
269:493, DOI 10.1093/mnras/269.2.493
Richardson DC, Quinn T, Stadel J, Lake G (2000) Direct Large-Scale N-Body Simulations of
Planetesimal Dynamics. Icarus 143(1):45–59, DOI 10.1006/icar.1999.6243
Richardson DC, Leinhardt ZM, Melosh HJ, Bottke WF Jr, Asphaug E (2002) Gravitational
Aggregates: Evidence and Evolution. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds)
Asteroids III, pp 501–515
Richardson DC, Walsh KJ, Murdoch N, Michel P (2011) Numerical simulations of granular
dynamics: I. Hard-sphere discrete element method and tests. Icarus 212(1):427–437
Richardson JE, Melosh HJ, Greenberg R (2004) Impact-induced seismic activity on Asteroid
433 Eros: A surface modification process. Science 306(5701):1526–1529
Rietz F, Stannarius R (2008) On the brink of jamming: Granular convection in densely filled
containers. Physical Review Letters 100(7):078002, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.078002
Rivkin AS, Emery JP (2010) Detection of ice and organics on an asteroidal surface. Nature
464(7293):1322
Rocchetti N, Frascarelli D, Nesmachnow S, Tancredi G (2017) Performance Improvements of
a Parallel Multithreading Self-gravity Algorithm. In: Latin American High Performance
Computing Conference, Springer, pp 291–306
Rognon P, Einav I (2010) Thermal Transients and Convective Particle Motion in Dense Granular Materials. Phys Rev Lett 105:218301, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.218301
Rosato A, Starndburg KJ, Prinz F, Swendsen RH (1987) Why the Brazil Nuts are on the Top:
Size Segregation of Particulate Matter by Shaking. Physical Review Letters 58:1038
Rosenblatt P, Lainey V, Le Maistre S, Marty J, Dehant V, Pätzold M, Van Hoolst T, Häusler
B (2008) Accurate Mars Express orbits to improve the determination of the mass and
ephemeris of the Martian moons. Planetary and Space science 56(7):1043–1053
Rosenblatt P, Charnoz S, Dunseath KM, Terao-Dunseath M, Trinh A, Hyodo R, Genda H,
Toupin S (2016) Accretion of Phobos and Deimos in an extended debris disc stirred by
transient moons. Nature Geoscience 9(8):581–583
Roux S, Radjai F (1998) Texture-dependent rigid-plastic behavior. In: Physics of dry granular
media, Springer, pp 229–236
Rouyer F, Menon N (2000) Velocity Fluctuations in a Homogeneous 2D Granular Gas in
Steady State. Physical Review Letters 85:3676
Rozitis B, MacLennan E, Emery JP (2014) Cohesive forces prevent the rotational breakup
of rubble-pile asteroid (29075) 1950 DA. Nature 512(7513):174–176, DOI 10.1038/
nature13632
Rubincam DP (2000) Radiative Spin-up and Spin-down of Small Asteroids. Icarus 148(1):2–11,
DOI 10.1006/icar.2000.6485
Russell HN (1906) On the light-variations of asteroids and satellites. Astrophys J 24:1–18,
DOI 10.1086/141361
Saito J, Miyamoto H, Nakamura R, Ishiguro M, Michikami T, Nakamura A, Demura H,
Sasaki S, Hirata N, Honda C, et al (2006) Detailed images of asteroid 25143 Itokawa
from Hayabusa. Science 312(5778):1341–1344
Salo H (2001) Numerical simulations of the collisional dynamics of planetary rings. In: Granular
Gases, Springer, pp 328–349
Sánchez DP, Scheeres DJ (2012) DEM simulation of rotation-induced reshaping and disruption
of rubble-pile asteroids. Icarus 218(2):876–894, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.01.014
Sánchez DP, Scheeres DJ (2015) Scaling Rule Between Cohesive Forces and the Size of a
Self-Gravitating Aggregate. In: 46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, p 2556
Sánchez P (2015) Asteroid Evolution: Role of Geotechnical Properties”, doi =
”10.1017/S1743921315008583. Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union
10(S318):111–121
Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2009) Granular Mechanics in Asteroid Regolith: Simulating and Scaling the Brazil Nut Effects. In: Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 40, p 2228
Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2011) Simulating Asteroid Rubble Piles with a Self-gravitating Softsphere Distinct Element Method Model. The Astrophysical Journal 727(2):120
Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2014) The strength of regolith and rubble pile asteroids. Meteoritics
& Planetary Science 49(5):788–811, DOI 10.1111/maps.12293
Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2016) Disruption patterns of rotating self-gravitating aggregates: A
survey on angle of friction and tensile strength. Icarus 271:453–471, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.

Small solar system bodies as granular media

61

2016.01.016
Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2018) Rotational evolution of self-gravitating aggregates with cores
of variable strength. Planetary and Space Science DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2018.04.001
Sanchez P, Colombo C, Vasile M, Radice G (2009) Multicriteria comparison among several
mitigation strategies for dangerous near-Earth objects. Journal of Guidance, Control, and
Dynamics 32(1):121–142
Savage S, Lun C (1988) Particle size segregation in inclined chute flow of dry cohesionless
granular solids. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 189:311–335
Savage SB (1989) Flow of granular materials. In: Theoretical and applied mechanics, Elsevier,
pp 241–266
Savage SB (1993) Disorder and Granular Media. D. Bideau, North-Holland, Amsterdam
Scheeres D (2015) Landslides and Mass shedding on spinning spheroidal asteroids. Icarus
247(0):1–17, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.09.017
Scheeres D, Hartzell C, Sánchez P, Swift M (2010) Scaling forces to asteroid surfaces: The role
of cohesion. Icarus 210(2):968–984, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2010.07.009
Scheeres D, McMahon J, French A, Brack D, Chesley S, Farnocchia D, Takahashi Y, Leonard
J, Geeraert J, Page B, et al (2019) The dynamic geophysical environment of (101955)
Bennu based on OSIRIS-REx measurements. Nature Astronomy 3(4):352
Scheeres DJ, Britt D, Carry B, Holsapple KA (2015) Asteroid Interiors and Morphology. In:
Michel P, DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
AZ, pp 745–766, DOI 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch038
Scholz C, Pöschel T (2017) Velocity Distribution of a Homogeneously Driven Two-Dimensional
Granular Gas. Physical Review Letters 118:198003
Schorghofer N (2008) The lifetime of ice on main belt asteroids. The Astrophysical Journal
682(1):697
Schröter M, Ulrich S, Kerft J, Swift JB, Swinney HL (2006) Mechanisms in the size segregation
of a binary granular mixture. Physical Review E 74:011307
Schwamb ME, Jones RL, Chesley SR, Fitzsimmons A, Fraser WC, Holman MJ, Hsieh H,
Ragozzine D, Thomas CA, Trilling DE, Brown ME, Bannister MT, Bodewits D, de ValBorro M, Gerdes D, Granvik M, Kelley MSP, Knight MM, Seaman RL, Ye QZ, Young LA
(2018) Large Synoptic Survey Telescope Solar System Science Roadmap. ArXiv e-prints
1802.01783
Schwartz SR, Richardson DC, Michel P (2012) An implementation of the soft-sphere discrete element method in a high-performance parallel gravity tree-code. Granular Matter
14(3):363–380
Schwartz SR, Michel P, Richardson DC (2013) Numerically simulating impact disruptions of
cohesive glass bead agglomerates using the soft-sphere discrete element method. Icarus
226(1):67–76
Schwartz SR, Michel P, Jutzi M, Marchi S, Zhang Y, Richardson DC (2018) Catastrophic
disruptions as the origin of bilobate comets. Nature Astronomy pp 379–382
Seiden G, Thomas PJ (2011) Complexity, segregation, and pattern formation in rotating-drum
flows. Review of Modern Physics 83:1323
Serero D, Noskowicz SH, Tan ML, Goldhirsch I (2009) Binary granular gas mixtures: Theory,
layering effects and some open questions. The European Physical Journal Special Topics
179:221–247
Shäfer J, Dippel S, Wolf D (1996) Force schemes in simulations of granular materials. Journal
de Physique I 6(1):5–20
Sharma I (2013) Structural stability of rubble-pile asteroids. Icarus 223(1):367–382
Sharma I, Jenkins JT, Burns JA (2009) Dynamical passage to approximate equilibrium shapes
for spinning, gravitating rubble asteroids. Icarus 200(1):304–322, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.
2008.11.003
Shimokawa M, Suetsugu Y, Hiroshige R, Hirano T, Sakaguchi H (2015) Pattern formation in
a sandpile of ternary granular mixtures. Physical Review E 91:062205
Shinbrot T, Duong NH, Kwan L, Alvarez MM (2004) Dry granular flows can generate surface
features resembling those seen in Martian gullies. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 101(23):8542–8546, DOI 10.1073/pnas.0308251101
Sierks H, Lamy P, Barbieri C, Koschny D, Rickman H, Rodrigo R, A’Hearn MF, Angrilli
F, Barucci MA, Bertaux JL, Bertini I, Besse S, Carry B, Cremonese G, Da Deppo V,
Davidsson B, Debei S, De Cecco M, De Leon J, Ferri F, Fornasier S, Fulle M, Hviid
SF, Gaskell RW, Groussin O, Gutierrez P, Ip W, Jorda L, Kaasalainen M, Keller HU,

62

D. Hestroffer et al.

Knollenberg J, Kramm R, Kührt E, Küppers M, Lara L, Lazzarin M, Leyrat C, Moreno
JJL, Magrin S, Marchi S, Marzari F, Massironi M, Michalik H, Moissl R, Naletto G,
Preusker F, Sabau L, Sabolo W, Scholten F, Snodgrass C, Thomas N, Tubiana C, Vernazza
P, Vincent JB, Wenzel KP, Andert T, Pätzold M, Weiss BP (2011) Images of Asteroid
21 Lutetia: A Remnant Planetesimal from the Early Solar System. Science 334:487, DOI
10.1126/science.1207325
Spahn F, Schmidt J (2006) Hydrodynamic description of planetary rings. GAMM-Mitteilungen
29(1):118–143
Stadel JG (2001) Cosmological N-body simulations and their analysis. PhD thesis, University
of Washington, Washington, DC
Stansberry J, Grundy W, Brown M, Cruikshank D, Spencer J, Trilling D, Margot J (2008)
Physical Properties of Kuiper Belt and Centaur Objects: Constraints from the Spitzer
Space Telescope. In: Barucci MA, Boehnhardt H, Cruikshank DP, Morbidelli A (eds) The
Solar System Beyond Neptune, pp 161–179
Staron L (2016) Segregation mechanisms in granular systems: role of gravity and velocity
fluctuations. In: EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts, vol 18, p 8047
Staron L, Lagrée PY, Popinet S (2012) The granular silo as a continuum plastic flow: The
hour-glass vs. the clepsydra. Physics of Fluids 24(10):103301
Sugimoto Y, Radice G, Ceriotti M, Sanchez JP (2014) Hazardous near Earth asteroid mitigation campaign planning based on uncertain information on fundamental asteroid characteristics. Acta Astronautica 103:333–357, DOI 10.1016/j.actaastro.2014.02.022
Sugita S, Honda R, Morota T, Kameda S, Sawada H, Tatsumi E, Yamada M, Honda C, Yokota
Y, Kouyama T, et al (2019) The geomorphology, color, and thermal properties of Ryugu:
Implications for parent-body processes. Science 364(6437):eaaw0422
Sunday C, Murdoch N, Cherrier O, Serrano SM, Nardi CV, Janin T, Martinez IA, Gourinat Y,
Mimoun D (2016) A novel facility for reduced-gravity testing: A setup for studying lowvelocity collisions into granular surfaces. Review of Scientific Instruments 87(8):084504,
DOI 10.1063/1.4961575
Syal MB, Dearborn DS, Schultz PH (2013) Limits on the use of nuclear explosives for asteroid
deflection. Acta Astronautica 90(1):103–111, DOI 10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.10.025, nEO
Planetary Defense: From Threat to Action - Selected Papers from the 2011 IAA Planetary
Defense Conference
Tancredi G, Maciel A, Heredia L, Richeri P, Nesmachnow S (2012) Granular physics in lowgravity environments using discrete element method. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 420(4):3368–3380
Tanga P, Comito C, Paolicchi P, Hestroffer D, Cellino A, Dell’Oro A, Richardson DC, Walsh
K, Delbo M (2009a) Rubble-pile reshaping reproduces overall asteroid shapes. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 706(1):L197
Tanga P, Hestroffer D, Delbo M, Richardson DC (2009b) Asteroid rotation and shapes
from numerical simulations of gravitational re-accumulation. Planetary and Space Science
57(2):193–200
Tanga P, Campo Bagatin A, Thirouin A, Cellino A, Comito C, Ortiz J, Hestroffer D, Richardson D (2013) Possible routes to spin up fission for the formation of asteroid binaries and
pairs. In: European Planetary Science Congress, vol 8
Tardivel S, Sánchez P, Scheeres DJ (2018) Equatorial cavities on asteroids, an evidence of
fission events. Icarus 304:192–208, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.06.037
Tatsumi S, Murayama Y, Hayakawa H, Sano M (2009) Experimental study on the kinetics of
granular gases under microgravity. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 641:521–539
Taylor PA, Howell ES, Nolan MC, Thane AA (2012) The Shape and Spin Distributions of NearEarth Asteroids Observed with the Arecibo Radar System. In: American Astronomical
Society Meeting Abstracts #220, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, vol
220, p 128.02
Terzaghi K, Peck RB, Mesri G (1996) Soil mechanics in engineering practice. John Wiley &
Sons
Thomas P (2010) Sizes, shapes, and derived properties of the Saturnian satellites after the
Cassini nominal mission. Icarus 208(1):395–401
Thomas PA, Bray JD (1999) Capturing nonspherical shape of granular media with disk clusters. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 125:169–178
Thuillet F, Maurel C, Michel P, Biele J, Ballouz RL, Richardson DC (2017) Numerical Simulations of Surface Package Landing on a Low-Gravity Granular Surface: Application to the

Small solar system bodies as granular media

63

Landing of MASCOT onboard Hayabusa2. In: Lunar and Planetary Science Conference,
Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol 48, p 1810
Tiscareno MS, Murray CD (2018) Planetary Ring Systems: Properties, Structure, and Evolution, vol 19. Cambridge University Press
Toiya M, Stambaugh J, Losert W (2004) Transient and oscillatory granular shear flow. Physical
Review Letters 93(8):088001
Verlet L (1967) Computer ‘experiments’ on classical fluids. I. Thermodynamical properties of
Lennard-Jones molecules. Physical Review 159(1):98
Von Kampen P, Kaczmarczik U, Rath HJ (2006) The new Drop Tower catapult system. Acta
Astronautica 59:278–283
Vu-Quoc L, Zhang X, Walton OR (2000) A 3-D discrete-element method for dry granular
flows of ellipsoidal particles. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering
187:483–528
Wadsley JW, Stadel J, Quinn T (2004) Gasoline: a flexible, parallel implementation
of TreeSPH. New Astronomy 9:137–158, DOI 10.1016/j.newast.2003.08.004, astro-ph/
0303521
Walker R, Binns D, Carnelli I, Kueppers M, Galvez A (2016) CubeSat Opportunity Payload
Intersatellite Network Sensors (COPINS) on the ESA Asteroid Impact Mission (AIM). In:
5th Interplanetary CubeSat Workshop (iCubeSat)
Walsh K, Richardson D (2008) A steady-state model of NEA binaries formed by tidal disruption
of gravitational aggregates. Icarus 193(2):553–566
Walsh K, Jawin E, Ballouz RL, Barnouin O, Bierhaus E, Connolly H, Molaro J, McCoy
T, Delbo M, Hartzell C, et al (2019) Craters, boulders and regolith of (101955) Bennu
indicative of an old and dynamic surface. Nature Geoscience p 1
Walsh KJ, Jacobson SA (2015) Formation and evolution of binary asteroids. In: Michel P,
DeMeo F, Bottke W (eds) Asteroids IV, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp
375–393
Walsh KJ, Richardson DC (2006) Binary near-Earth asteroid formation: Rubble pile model of
tidal disruptions. Icarus 180(1):201–216
Walsh KJ, Richardson DC, Michel P (2008) Rotational breakup as the origin of small binary
asteroids. Nature 454(7201):188
Walsh KJ, Richardson DC, Michel P (2012) Spin-up of rubble-pile asteroids: Disruption, satellite formation, and equilibrium shapes. Icarus 220(2):514–529, DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.icarus.2012.04.029
Warner BD, Harris AW, Pravec P (2009) The asteroid lightcurve database. Icarus 202:134–146,
DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.02.003, updated 2018 June 24. http://www.minorplanet.info/
lightcurvedatabase.html
Watanabe S, Hirabayashi M, Hirata N, Hirata N, Noguchi R, Shimaki Y, Ikeda H, Tatsumi
E, Yoshikawa M, Kikuchi S, et al (2019) Hayabusa2 arrives at the carbonaceous asteroid
162173 RyuguA spinning top–shaped rubble pile. Science 364(6437):268–272
Weidenschilling SJ, Paolicchi P, Zappala V (1989) Do asteroids have satellites? In: Binzel R,
Gehrels T, Matthews M (eds) Asteroids II, University of Arizona Press, pp 643–658
Weissman PR, A’Hearn MF, McFadden L, Rickman H (2002) Evolution of comets into asteroids. In: Bottke W, Cellino A, Paolicchi P, Binzel R (eds) Asteroids III, University of
Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, pp 669–686
Wilkening LL, Matthews MS (1982) Comets. University of Arizona Press
Will CM (2014) The Confrontation between General Relativity and Experiment. Living Reviews in Relativity 17:4, DOI 10.12942/lrr-2014-4, 1403.7377
Wisdom J, Tremaine S (1988) Local simulations of planetary rings. The Astronomical Journal
95:925–940
Yeomans D, Antreasian P, Barriot JP, Chesley S, Dunham D, Farquhar R, Giorgini J, Helfrich C, Konopliv A, McAdams J, et al (2000) Radio science results during the NEARShoemaker spacecraft rendezvous with Eros. Science 289(5487):2085–2088
Yeomans DK, Barriot JP, Dunham D, Farquhar R, Giorgini J, Helfrich C, Konopliv A,
McAdams J, Miller J, Owen W, et al (1997) Estimating the mass of asteroid 253 Mathilde
from tracking data during the NEAR flyby. Science 278(5346):2106–2109
Yu Y, Richardson DC, Michel P (2017) Structural analysis of rubble-pile asteroids applied to
collisional evolution. Astrodynamics 1(1):57–69
Zhang Y, Richardson DC, Barnouin OS, Michel P, Schwartz SR, Ballouz RL (2018) Rotational
Failure of Rubble-pile Bodies: Influences of Shear and Cohesive Strengths. The Astrophys-

64

D. Hestroffer et al.

ical Journal 857(1):15
Zik O, Levine D, Lipson SG, Shtrikman S, Stavans J (1994) Rotationally Induced Segregation
of Granular Materials. Physical Review Letters 73:644
Zuriguel I, Gray JMNT, Peixinho J, Mullin T (2006) Pattern selection by a granular wave in
a rotating drum. Physical Review E 73:061302

