Can a Robot Hear the Shape and Dimensions of a Room?

arXiv:1907.01169v1 [cs.SD] 2 Jul 2019

Linh Nguyen1 , Jaime Valls Miro1 and Xiaojun Qiu2

Abstract— Knowing the geometry of a space is desirable
for many applications, e.g. sound source localization, sound
field reproduction or auralization. In circumstances where only
acoustic signals can be obtained, estimating the geometry of
a room is a challenging propostition. Existing methods have
been proposed to reconstruct a room from the room impulse
responses (RIRs). However, the sound source and microphones
must be deployed in a feasible region of the room for it to
work, which is impractical when the room is unknown. This
work propose to employ a robot equipped with a sound source
and four acoustic sensors, to follow a proposed path planning
strategy to moves around the room to collect first image sources
for room geometry estimation. The strategy can effectively
drives the robot from a random initial location through the
room so that the room geometry is guaranteed to be revelaed.
Effectiveness of the proposed approach is extensively validated
in a synthetic environment, where the results obtained are
highly promising.

I. INTRODUCTION
Room geometry including shape and wall locations or
dimension of a room plays a very crucial role in many
applications. For instance, geometrical characteristics of a
room can ameliorate accuracy of results for applications
such as indoor sound source localization [1], [2], sound
field reproduction [3] and mapping a 3D sound source in
autonomous robotic systems [4]. Likewise, in other applications including teleconferencing, virtual reality and auralization, geometrical information of a room can be exploited
to create a hallucination or counterbalance effect of room
reverberations [5]. Particularly for scenarios where no other
sensor modalities (e.g. laser range finders or cameras) can be
used, infering room geometries directly from acoustic signals
is desirable.
In recent years, several methods have been proposed to
estimate the shape of a room from the room impulse response
(RIR) [6]–[9]. For instance, Dokmanić et al. [5] employed
properties of Euclidean distance matrices to localize image
sources (ISs) [10] of the real source (virtual sound sources
located behind a reflective wall at a distance equal to the
distance of the source from the wall), which are then used
to estimate room shape. Jager et al. [6] proposed to formulate
room reconstruction as a maximum independent set problem,
where combinations of echoes are presented at nodes in a
graph, and solved by graph theory. The the computational
complexity of their work was improved by Coutino et al. [7],
1 Linh Nguyen and Jaime Valls Miro are with Centre for Autonomous Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New
South Wales 2007, Australia vanlinh.nguyen@uts.edu.au and

jaime.vallsmiro@uts.edu.au
2 Xiaojun Qiu is with Centre for Audio, Acoustics and Vibration, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales 2007, Australia

xiaojun.qiu@uts.edu.au

Fig. 1: Room Impulse Response (RIRs), where Time of
Arrivals (TOAs) from any first Image Source (IS) to microphone i depicted in red.
who exploited a subspace based filtering and proposed the
use of a single source and a greedy algorithm to find feasible
combinations of reflections. Likewise, the work of Crocco et
al. [9] used a greedy algorithm to address the NP-hard echo
labelling problem for room shape estimation in polynomial
time. In previous work by some of the authors [11], an
intuitive geometrical approach was proposed to identify the
first ISs before estimating the room geometry.
In addition to static deployment of source and microphones in the aforementioned works, a mobile robot has been
exploited in several attempts to reconstruct room shapes.
In [12], [13], the authors utilized a collocated loudspeaker
and microphone mobile node to collect first order echoes,
which are then employed to reconstruct room shape. Similarly, Kreković et al. [14] proposed to use a robot to
record room impulse responses (RIRs) when it travels on
a predefined path in a room. They then employed the fast
simultaneous localization and mapping algorithm to establish
the room shape. It is telling, however, that none of these
works has considered how the acoustic mobile device should
navigate around the room. Moreover, as remarked in [5],
[13] the sound source and acoustic sensors must be located
in a feasible region - a point where all the first echoes
of the emitted signal can be received. However, since the
room is initially unknown, finding these regions a priori is
impractical. Should this not be observed (e.g. in the corners
of a room), it is often the case that higher order ISs come
before first ISs in the RIR signals, as shown in Fig. 1, an
effect that is only but compounded by signal noise.
Addresing the path planning problem for a robot carrying
an acoustic package able to emit and record sound signals is
thus proposed in this work to recover the shape of a room.
Taking advantage of the robot movements, the proposed
scheme does not rely on having to collect all the first ISs
corresponding to all the walls in a room at each single

step. This, in turn, allows for the the sound source and
acoustic sensor device to be deployed at any location in the
room. A navigational algorithm is proposed to autonomously
direct the robot around the room in a manner that can
most effectively accumulate geometrical characteristics of
the room over time, so as to establish the first ISs of an
acoustic source and therefore guarante successful recovery
of the room shape.
The paper is arranged as follows. Section II delineates
the problem of acoustically estimating room geometries.
The suggested sampling algorithm producing robot paths is
discussed in Section III. Simulation results are presented in
Section IV before conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Omnidirectionality of the sound source is assumed in this
work, as well as the existance of an array K of omnidirectional acoustic microphones. More sensor unit details
will be provided in Section III-A. The discussion will focus
on 2D scenarios, leaving the extension to 3D for future
work. Moreover, the actual extraction of RIRs from the
sound recordings is outside the scope of this work. The
interested reader is referred to [15] for more details of a
well-known technique. Finally, it can be safely assumed that
the microphones can be kept from colliding with the room
walls while the robot is running.
A. Modelling
It has been established in the literature that the shape of a
room can be acoustically obtained from the corresponding
room impulse responses (RIRs), which can be extracted
from sound signals recorded by microphones [5], [11], [14].
Theoretically, RIRs contain direct sound from the source,
arbitrary reflections of sound or echoes and measurement
noises. In other words, sound propagation can be seen as
a family of RIRs, and at each acoustic sensor RIR can be
mathematically represented by
X
hk (t) =
βi δ(t − τk,i ) + (t), k ∈ {1, · · · , K} (1)
i≥0

where (t) is measurement noise, which is independent from
the signals at each acoustic sensor. βi is a factor that is
dependent of the absorption coefficient of the wall i > 0. δ
is the Dirac delta impulse induced by the real sound source
or the reflections/echoes. τk,i is the propagation time or
the time of arrival (TOA) from the sound sources or the
reflections/echoes to the microphone k, specified by
k I∗,i − Mk k
,
(2)
c
where I∗,i is the location of any image source as a mirror
of the real source across the wall i. Mk is the location of
the microphone k while c and k · k denote the speed of
sound propagation and the Euclidean distance, respectively.
It is noticed that in (1), when i = 0, the elements of RIRs
directly come from the acoustic source.
Moreover, the reflection of sound, or echo, can be modelled by an image source (IS) [10], which is considered
τk,i =

Fig. 2: Principle of image sources.
as a mirror image of the real acoustic source across a
corresponding wall, as illustrated in Fig. 2. It can be seen
how there are first and higher order image sources (ISs). In
an idealistic scenario, the first IS (Ii ) is a mirror image of the
source (S) across the wall i. Likewise, the second IS (Iij ) is a
mirror image of the first IS (Ii ) across the wall j. Physically,
the first IS (Ii ) can be explained as a reflection of sound from
the source (S) on the wall i to the microphone (M) while the
second IS (Iij ) can be accounted for the reflection of sound
from the source (S) on the wall i and then on the wall j
before reaching to the microphone (M), as shown in the red
lines and light blue lines in Fig. 2, respectively.
Therefore, we can now consider the Time Of Arrivals
(TOA) as the time it takes for the sound to travel from either
the real source or ISs to a microphone. In other words, if
TOA is known, a distance from the microphone to either the
real source or corresponding IS can be inversely computed,
given c. It is apparent that if the RIRs are measured, the
TOAs can be easily obtained by simply processing the
impulse signals, e.g. picking the signal peaks over time.
On the other hands, there is a link between ISs and the
room geometry: if the location of the first IS is known,
given the real source location, a corresponding wall line
can be found. However, knowing TOAs and the distances
from ISs to the microphones does not guarantee knowing
the locations of ISs since the distances from ISs to the
microphones are unlabelled. Moreover, due to noise, acoustic
sensors record reflections/echoes in an arbitrary order. For
instance, as shown in Fig. 1, the fourth peak of all the RIRs,
which does not correspond to any first IS, arrives earlier than
the two other first ISs. Similarly, for mic 1, the fourth of the
first ISs arrives at the eleventh peak, while on mic. 2 arrives
at the eighth peak of their RIRs, yet they represent the same
wall (line) in the room. How to find the first IS from the
RIRs is thus critical, and is discussed next.
B. Common Image Sources
Given the TOA from RIRs and then a distance d from
a possible IS to a microphone, there are infinite possible

C. Room Shape Reconstruction

Fig. 3: Robot mechanism for collecting sound signals.
locations of the IS at that distance: the locations on a circle
centred at the microphone location with a radius of distance
d. Furthermore, if there is only one microphone, it is not
possible to find the first IS corresponding to a wall. For
instance, on the RIR of mic. 1 in Fig. 1, the first ISs
arrive arbitrarily, corresponding to the second, third, fifth
and eleventh peaks, respectively. Therefore, in practice, it has
been proposed to employ multiple acoustic sensors for room
shape estimation [5], and in this work four microphones
are employed to reconstruct the shape of a 2D polygonal
room [11].
Let us consider two RIR signals as demonstrated in Fig.
1. For each RIR, there are multiple potential but unlocated
corresponding ISs. If one can smartly combine those ISs, it is
possible to find a location of a common IS from all the RIR
signals, which would corresponds to a wall in the room. If we
define I = (x, y) as a location of any IS and Mk = (xk , yk )
as the location of the microphone k, k ∈ {1, · · · , 4}, then
a location for the common IS can be derived from (2) by
solving
I × M = b,
(3)
where

"
#
(M1 − M2 )T
M=
"

b = 0.5

(M2 − M3 )T

,

x21 − x22 + y12 − y22 − (τ1 c)2 + (τ2 c)2
x22 − x23 + y22 − y32 − (τ2 c)2 + (τ3 c)2

#

Theoretically, if an acoustic source and accompanied microphones are located in a feasible region of a room [5],
[13], the several common ISs that are located closer to
the real sound source than any other ISs are regarded as
the fist ISs.Once locations of the first ISs are computed,
the corresponding wall lines can be easily established as
illustrated in Fig. 2, and the room can then be reconstructed
according to the following theorem:
Theorem 1: A 2D polygonal room can be constructed if
and only if any an established wall line has two intersections
with other established wall lines.
Proof: Geometrically, the proof is straightforward.
Therefore, this work aims to find the first ISs of the real
acoustic source to reconstruct the room geometry. A path
planning strategy is next proposed whereby common ISs are
accumulatively collected and verified over time.
III. ROBOT MOTION PLANNING
A. Sensing Configuration
The robotic sensing unit proposed in this work to emit
and record the sound signals is demonstrated in Fig. 3. In
this design, the acoustic source is embedded on a robot
while the four microphones are installed on four robot
arms, which can rotate around the robot, hence allowing
the microphones to be located at different positions [11].
Since distance between source and microphone plays a
considerable role in forming the spectrum of RIRs, it is also
proposed that the microphones can be flexibly extend along
the robot arms, hence being able to adjust its distance to
the source as required. This design enables the system to
collect more information on geometrical characteristics of the
room even when the robot is stationary. This reconfigurabiliy
increases the chances of finding first IS as the robot moves
to any location in the room. This is particularly effective
to overcome issues when the robot moves to a corner, as
discussed in more detail in Section III-C.
B. Clustering

.

Here τ1 , τ2 and τ3 are one of the TOAs on the RIRs
collected by mc.i 1, 2 and 3, respectively. As discussed in
our previous work [11], an additional fourth acoustic sensor
is employed to verify the common ISs. In other words,
two other equations similar to (3) can be established and
solved, then three sets of solutions are exploited to sort out
the common ISs. In practice, any IS location close to its
counterpart, which is less than a pre-defined small distance,
is kept for further processing.
Moreover, the common IS can be further verified to be a
realistic IS, or derive from noise, by the use of a reflective
point, i.e. the intersection between the line from the IS to
a microphone and a potential wall line. If the reflective
point and the real sound source are in different sides of a
reconstructed or potential wall line, the corresponding IS is
treated as noise and removed from the list of common ISs.

By taking advantage of the rotating arms configuration the
system is equipped with more opportunities to guarantee the
common first ISs. In other words, given a fixed sound source,
at every set of the microphone locations, the system reports a
set of the potential common first ISs. When the microphones
rotate through multiple orientations, the multiple sets of the
potential common first ISs are grouped and then clustered
by using a nearest neighbour technique. The biggest cluster,
which is closest to the real sound source as compared to
other possible clusters, is considered as the group of correct
common first ISs obtained by the acoustic sensors. This
can be seen in the example demonstrated in Fig. 4. The
common ISs reported are located at points marked by the red
and yellow stars. It can be clearly seen that those common
ISs are not the expected first ISs. Nonetheless, when the
microphones were rotated around the acoustic source (every
10 degrees), at every stop, the system reports the common
ISs. After 36 iterations, all the common ISs are clustered,

D. Sampling Path

Fig. 4: Robot arm rotation comparisons: without rotation,
the system reports the wrong common first IS (red and
yellow stars); with rotation, the system reports a set of 31
approximate common first ISs (blue stars).

Fig. 5: Propagation of sound in room corners.
and the biggest group including 31 common ISs (blue stars,
approximately located at the point (-4, 0) ), would be the
nominated location of the first would-be IS.
C. Corner Issues
Since the room geometry is unknown, it is likely that a
mobile robot may travel through a corner of the room. In this
case, when a microphone is located close to the walls a issue
appears where the TOAs from the first or higher order ISs to
the microphone are very similar. An illustrative example is
shown in Fig. 5, where the TOA from the source to the red
microphone reflecting exclusively on wall i (corresponding
to the first IS, depicted in orange), and that from the source
reflecting on both walls i and j (corresponding to the second
IS, depicted in purple), are very close. Under the influence of
noises, the system may mistakenly report the second IS rather
than the expected first IS as the common ones. A simulation
example is illustrated by Fig. 6a, whereby by only rotating
the acoustic sensors around the source and clustering the
common ISs, the system reported the best location for the
most common ISs (red stars) around (-2, -2), which is not
a location of any first IS for the real source. To address the
issue, it is proposed to simultaneously move the microphones
along the robot arms to different locations, hence changing
the distance between source and the acoustic sensors and
resulting in different RIRs. When the microphones become
closer to the acoustic source, as seen in Fig. 6b, the system
was able to reported many common ISs (blue stars), with
the most common ISs approximately located at (0, -2), the
actual location of the fist IS of the acoustic source.

This section will discuss a sampling strategy for the robot
to navigate in unknown environments so that the room
geometry can be recoverd in an effective manner. While
a robot has been used in the literature for the purpose
of room shape estimation [13], [14] while traversing on a
predefined path, planning in new environmets that has not
been investigated yet. It is noted that since the room is
unknown, it is presumed that origin of the coordinate is
always at the initial location of the robot.
The premise behind the strategy is that to establish new
line wall in a room is to drive the robot to at least three
stops. At each stop the system would report a location of
the common first ISs as described thus far in the paper,
representing the largest clusters and closest to the real source
as compared with the other possible clusters in that iteration.
Theoretically, if a first IS is found, given two locations of
both the source and its first IS, a wall line of a room, which
is perpendicular to the line from the source to the first IS, is
uniquely formed. However, given the noisy RIRs as captured
by the acoustic sensors, and the erroneousness in processing
the sound signals, the system may indeed report the wrong
common first IS. Hence, the common ISs coming from a
single stop are not certain to correspond with a real wall in
the room. Furthermore, extensive experimentation has also
revealed that in some scenarios, especially when the robot
travels to “infeasible” regions such as corners of the room,
and even with two stops of the robot, the system can still
report the common second ISs, matching to the wrong room
wall. Therefore, a more robust three-stop strategy for the
robot is suggested, where the common ISs are employed
to verify the established wall line obtained from the two
previous robot stops.
The process to drive the robot to three stops to form a
wall line is as follows: at the first robot stop, it is assumed
that a location of the common first ISs is found, and a wall
line w1 is obtained. It is then proposed that the robot should
move on a line that is parallel to the obtained wall line w1
for a given distance. However, there are always two possible
directions the robot should move on that parallel line, hence
two possible locations for the next stop of the robot. In the
proposed algorithm it is proposed that the robot will move to
the possible location that is further to the already established
or examined walls in the room, effectively prefering room
exploration over exploitation in the search. Moving the robot
along a line parallel to the obtained wall line w1 aims to
increase the chance to find the common first ISs for the same
wall line w1 . At the second robot stop, if another wall line
w2 is obtained from its corresponding common first ISs and
approximate to w1 , the robot should move to a third stop to
verify them. The robot will thus be instructed to drive along
a line parallel to w2 to a similar predefined distance. At the
third robot stop, if the system is able to form a wall line w3
that is approximate to both w1 and w2 , then a real wall line
of the room is established and confirmed.
In the cases where, at the second or third robot stops, the

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6: Issues around corners: (a) the microphones are far from the source and cannot find common first ISs and (b) the
microphones move closer to the source and be able to find common first ISs. Axis units are in meter.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7: Some illustrations of the robot movements to collect acoustic signals, successfully estimate the room shape and
compute the room dimension. The initial robot location is marked by a red triangle. Axis units are in meter.

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8: Histograms of the absolute errors in the room
dimension estimation: (a) in the fixed room scenario and (b)
in the random room scenario.

Fig. 9: Histograms of the robot steps required to construct
the room geometry: (a) in the fixed room scenario and (b)
in the random room scenario.

system cannot find a wall line that is approximate to w1 or
both w1 and w2 , the distance between the source and the
microphones can be modified At each change, the system
reports a new wall line and compares it with w1 or both w1
and w2 . If approximate matches can be found, the system
proceeds as normal. Otherwise, the robot moves randomly
to a new location and the system restarts the searching
procedure.
It is important to understand the definition of wall approximation for w1 , w2 and w3 . Two wall lines are approximate
when their angles to the horizontal line remain similar. To
avoid being parallel, two perpendicular vectors projected
from the initial robot location to them should have the same
directions and approximate magnitudes.
It should also be noted that after a wall line is found
and confirmed, the proposed approach utilizes the second

biggest cluster of the common ISs in the current robot stop
to establish the next wall line for the room, following the
aforesaid procedure. The room is fully constructed when
any an established wall line has two intersections with other
established wall lines as proven by Theorem 1.
To examine the proposed algorithm please refer to the
examples in Fig. 7. There are three scenarios where the robot
starts from a random locations as shown in Figures 7a, 7b
and 7d, while in Fig. 7c the robot start from the middle
of the room. In all these four illustrations, the system was
able to effectively find the room shape, localize the wall
lines and compute the dimension. The real wall lines of the
room are plotted in blue, while the estimates are framed
in red lines. The estimation error is smaller than 1 cm. It
can also be noticed that in these figures, though the origin
of the original coordinate was located at the initial robot
location as delineated in the proposed algorithm, all plots

were transformed to a common coordinate for a consistent
presentation.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To demonstrate effective of the proposed approach, we
extensively carried out different experiments on a synthetic
simulation environment by using an RIR generator [16], and
an implementation of the acoustic image method [10]. In
the simulated room, the reverberation time was set to 0.8
s while the sampling rate and the sound propagation speed
were set to 96 kHz and 343 m/s, respectively. The sensing
configuration shown in Fig. 3 was employed. The extension
distance between the real sound source and the acoustic
sensors along the robot arms could reach to a maximum of
0.5 m. The maximum distance the robot could move at each
step was set to 0.5 m.
The RIRs were first recorded by the microphones and
then processed to pick their peaks over time, which were
employed to compute the TOAs. Each TOA corresponds to
a potential IS and the common ISs can be found by following
the procedure described in Section II-B.
During the experiments the room geometry was unknown.
In other words, the initial location of the robot was random;
and due to this randomness, we repeated the experiments
at each simulation 1000 Monte-Carlo trials. Two scenarios
were considered: (i) the simulated room was sized by 6 m
× 5 m, and (ii) the simulated room was randomly sized.
After running the simulations, in all the experiments, the
robot system was able to find the correct rectangular room
shape. That is, at each experiment the robot stopped running
when four wall lines were found. More importantly, the
proposed algorithm successfully localized the wall lines in
the room, resulting in highly accurate room dimensions as
illustrated by Fig. 8, depicting the absolute errors between the
real wall lines and the estimated wall lines. Absolute errors in
the room dimension estimation in both scenarios considered
are 95 percent smaller than 1 cm, and mostly around 0.35
cm. It shows that the estimation errors are not dependent
on room dimension or the initial location of the robot. The
numbers of the robot steps required in all the experiments to
successfully construct the room geometry are summarized in
Fig. 9. Similar to the room dimension estimation errors, the
number of robot steps in all the experiments is independent
to the geometrical characteristics of the room. That is, in
about 95 percent of the experimental cases, the robot was
required to run less than 100 steps to securely shape the
room, where the numbers are most likely at 44 and 48 steps
for the paths followed by the obot in the fixed and random
rooms respectvely
V. CONCLUSIONS
The paper has discussed a new and efficient approach to
construct room geometry from acoustic signals only by the
use of a mobile robot, a sound source and four microphones.
The robot carries the source and acoustic sensors to travel
around a room, where the common first ISs are accumulatively extracted from the collected RIRs. Moreover, the robot

navigation is driven by an effective path planning strategy to
guarantee the room geometry to be successfully estimated
in a reasonable time. The key advantages of the proposed
method are that the robot can start from a random location
and is applicable to any-sized room. The results obtained in
the extensive simulation experiments have demonstrated the
efficacy of the proposed algorithm.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Nguyen, J. VallsMiro, and X. Qiu, “Multilevel B-Splines based
learning approach for sound source localization,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 19(10), pp. 3871 – 3881, 2019.
[2] L. Nguyen and J. VallsMiro, “Acoustic sensor networks and mobile
robotics for sound source localization,” in Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Control and Automation, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
July 2019, pp. 1–6, to appear.
[3] T. Betlehem and T. Abhayapala, “Theory and design of sound field
reproduction in reverberant rooms,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 117, pp. 2100–2111, 2005.
[4] D. Su, K. Nakamura, K. Nakadai, and J. VallsMiro, “Robust sound
source mapping using three-layered selective audio rays for mobile
robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conferece on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Daejeon, Korea, October 2016, pp. 2771–2777.
[5] I. Dokmanić, R. Parhizkar, A. Walther, Y. M. Lu, and M. Vetterli,
“Acoustic echoes reveal room shape,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 110(30),
pp. 12 186–12 191, 2013.
[6] I. Jager, R. Heusdens, and N. D. Gaubitch, “Room geometry estimation
from acoustic echoes using graph-based echo labeling,” in Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
Shanghai, China, March 2016, pp. 1–5.
[7] M. Coutino, M. B. Moller, J. K. Nielsen, and R. Heusdens, “Greedy
alternative for room geometry estimation from acoustic echoes: A
subspace-based method,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, New Orleans, LA, USA,
March 2017, pp. 366–370.
[8] M. Crocco, A. Trucco, and A. D. Bue, “Uncalibrated 3d room
geometry estimation from sound impulse responses,” Journal of the
Franklin Institute, vol. 354, p. 86788709, 2017.
[9] ——, “Room reflectors estimation from sound by greedy iterative
approach,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, April 2018,
pp. 6877–6881.
[10] J. Allen and D. Berkley, “Image method for efficiently simulating
small room acoustics,” Journal of Acoustical Society of Ameria, vol.
65(4), pp. 943–950, 1979.
[11] T. Rajapaksha, X. Qiu, E. Cheng, and I. Burnett, “Geometrical room
geometry estimation from room impulse responses,” in Proc. EEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
Shanghai, China, March 2016, pp. 331–335.
[12] F. Peng, T. Wang, and B. Chen, “Room shape reconstruction with a
single mobile acoustic sensor,” in Proc. IEEE IEEE Global Conference
on Signal and Information Processing, Orlando, FL, USA, December
2015, pp. 1116–1120.
[13] T. Wang, F. Peng, and B. Chen, “First order echo based room shape
recovery using a single mobile device,” in Proc. EEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Shanghai,
China, March 2016, pp. 21–25.
[14] M. Kreković, I. Dokmanić, and M. Vetterli, “Echoslam: Simultaneous
localization and mapping with acoustic echoes,” in Proc. EEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
Shanghai, China, March 2016, pp. 11–15.
[15] A. Farina, “Simultaneous measurement of impulse response and
distortion with a swept-sine technique,” in Audio Engineering
Society Convention 108, Februay 2000. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=10211
[16] E. A. P. Habets, “Room impulse response generator,” 2010.
[Online]. Available: https://www.audiolabs-erlangen.de/fau/professor/
habets/software/rir-generator

