IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

1

Towards Self-Powered Internet of Underwater
Things Devices

arXiv:1907.11652v1 [eess.SP] 23 Jul 2019

Jose Ilton de Oliveira Filho, Student Member, IEEE, Abderrahmen Trichili, Member, IEEE, Boon S. Ooi, Senior
Member, IEEE Mohamed-Slim Alouini, Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Nabil Salama, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Exploiting light beams to carry information and
deliver power is mooted as a potential technology to recharge
batteries of future generation Internet of things (IoT) and
Internet of underwater things (IoUT) devices while providing optical connectivity. Simultaneous lightwave information and power
transfer (SLIPT) has been recently proposed as an efficient way
for wireless power transfer between communicating terminals.
In this article, we provide an overview of the various SLIPT
techniques in time, power, and space domains. We additionally
demonstrate two SLPIT scenarios through underwater channels.
Moreover, we discuss the open issues related to the hardware as
well as system deployment in harsh environments.

demonstrated the use of a low-cost Silicon solar cell to decode
low-frequency VLC signals and harvest optical energy over a
short propagation distance of 40 cm. In [7], authors proposed
the use of VLC systems with energy harvesting capabilities
for night gathering events. Diamantoulakis et al. proposed new
strategies to enhance the efficiency and optimize between the
communication and the energy harvesting functions for indoor
applications through visible and infrared wireless communications.

Index Terms—SLIPT, energy harvesting, free space optics,
underwater optical communication

I. I NTRODUCTION
IRELESS power transfer has received a considerable
attention in recent years. Radio frequency (RF) simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) was
proposed as a technique to transmit information and harvest
energy by converting energy from an electromagnetic field into
the electrical domain [1], [2]. SWIPT is considered as a future
generation energy transfer technology in wireless communication networks. However, besides the RF spectrum scarcity,
RF energy harvesting suffers from relatively low efficiency
and major technical problems related to the transmitting, and
receiving circuits [3]. Additional challenges are imposed by
the electromagnetic safety and health concerns raised over the
high power RF applications (references are within [3]). SWIPT
can be equally a source of interference to data transmission,
and RF pollution.
One alternative to the use of electromagnetic radiation to
harvest energy is lightwaves emitted by light emitting diodes
(LEDs) and lasers sources. Using light beams, it is possible
to simultaneously perform a transfer of energy and efficiently
deliver data streams. Simultaneous lightwave information and
power transfer (SLIPT) can provide significant performance
compared to RF-based SWIPT taking the advantage of the
free-license optical wireless technology [4]. Lightwave energy
harvesting can be also a complementary technology to visible
light communication (VLC) as proposed in [5], [6], [7].
In a dual-hop VLC/RF configuration, Rakia et al. proposed
harvesting energy from the VLC hop, by extracting the direct
current (DC) component of the receiver illuminated by an
LED [5]. The harvested energy is then harnessed to retransmit the information over the RF link. Authors of [6],

W

Authors are with the Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences &
Engineering in King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Makkah Province, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Fig. 1. Different SLIPT techniques: (a) time switching, (b) power splitting,
and (c) spatial splitting.

Motivated by the low-cost of the optical communication/energy harvesting circuits components compared to their
RF counterparts, SLIPT can be equally a cost effective solution for energy-constrained wireless systems including remote
sensors, autonomous self-powered devices. SLIPT can be also
very promising for applications in RF-sensitive environment
and applications such as medical, smart houses, and aerospace
[8].
Another potential application of SLIPT is powering Internet
of underwater things (IoUT) devices. This is motivated by

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

2

Fig. 2. Illustration of the use of self-powered IoUT devices in an underwater environment.

the high demands for underwater communication systems due
to the on-going expansion of human activities in underwater
environments such as marine life monitoring, pollution control/tracking, marine current power grid connections, underwater exploration, scientific data collection, undersea earthquakes
monitoring, and offshore oil field exploration/monitoring.
Wireless transmission under water can be achieved through
radio, acoustic, or optical waves. Traditionally, acoustic communication has been used for underwater applications for
more than 50 years and can cover long ranges up to several Kilometers. The typical frequencies associated with this
communication type are 10 Hz to 1 MHz. However, it is
well known that this technology suffers from a very small
available bandwidth, and large latencies due to the low propagation speed. RF waves suffer from high attenuation in seawater and can propagate over long distances only at extra
low frequencies (30-300 Hz). This requires large antennas
and high transmission powers which make them unappealing
for most practical purposes. Compared to acoustic and RF
communications, underwater optical wireless communication
(UWOC) through ocean water can covers large bandwidth and
involve transmitting high data amount in the order of sevral
Gbit/s. SLIPT as a complementary technology to UWOC can
provide continuous connectivity and wireless powering for
devices and sensors in difficult-access locations.
In this paper, we present the different concepts of optical
SWIPT or SLIPT. We then provide experimental demonstrations of time switching SPLIT in an underwater environment
for IoUT applications. We further discuss the open problems
and propose key solutions for the deployment of underwater
SLIPT-based devices.
II. SLIPT S YSTEM D ESIGN AND C ONCEPT
Different possible techniques in various domains including,
time, power, and space can be adopted to transmit information
and harvest energy.

A. Time Switching
In a time switching configuration, the receiver, which is
possibly a low-cost solar cell, switches between the energy
harvesting mode and the information decoding mode, better
known as the photovoltaic and the photoconductive modes,
respectively. Both SLIPT functions are performed over two
different time slots t1 and t2 , as can be seen in Fig. 1 (a). The
quantity of harvested energy is ruled by the conversion efficiency of the solar cell. With the advances in the development
of high-speed light sources, the maximum transmission rate
that could be achieved is mainly restricted by the bandwidth
of the solar cell. Synchronizing the photovoltaic mode and the
photoconductive mode is crucial and can be done via hardware
programming. The switching function can be fulfilled via a
low-power relay.

B. Power Splitting
Within the power splitting approach, the receiving terminal
is simultaneously charged while decoding information carried
by the incident light beam, as can be seen in Fig. 1 (b). A
key device needed for this configuration is the power splitter,
which splits the incident power into α and (1 − α) quantities.
The αPR power portion is used to harvest energy, while the
(1 − α)PR portion is used to decode the received signal.
The power splitting component can be either a passive beam
splitter, which splits the incident beam from a light source into
two or more beams, with (un)evenly fixed distributed power
portions. It can be also a splitter with variable splitting ratios,
which can potentially increase the system complexity. Differently from the time switching approach, using power splitting,
the simultaneous energy and power transfer is fulfilled. With
this method, it is also possible to achieve higher transmission
rates because the decoding can be performed via a high-speed
photodiode (PD).

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

Fig. 3.

3

Schematic illustrating the experimental setup of time switching underwater SLIPT and its block diagram program.

C. Spatial Splitting
The spatial splitting approach is applied on a configuration
involving multiple transmitters and multiple receivers with
information decoding and energy harvesting capabilities, as
depicted in Fig. 1 (c). Each transmitter can transfer data or
energy, and each receiver can harvest energy from multiple
transmitters. Time switching can be applied within this configuration where the same receiver can act as an “energy
harvester” and “signal decoder” over different time slots.
III. D EMONSTRATIONS
Multiple theoretical and experimental SLIPT-related studies,
in free space and underwater media, have been proposed in
the literature. Wang et al. proposed a novel design of a solar
panel as a photo-receiver [9]. Authors of [10] established a
VLC link and used an organic solar panel as a receiver. Earlier
demonstrations also involved the use of a 5 cm2 solar panel
as a receiver for an underwater communication link over a 7
m long water tank [11]. A Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) solar
cell was further used to perform a 0.5 Gb/s transmission
over a 2 m-long free space link [12]. Here, we demonstrate
two communication and energy harvesting scenarios over
underwater media using two devices, which can be potentially
charged through light beams emitted from a source fixed
on a boat or an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) that
could be used in real-life marine environmental monitoring
and scientific data collection applications, as depicted in Fig.
2. In a first experiment, we charge the battery of a submerged
module with temperature and turbidity sensors, and transmit
commands using a single laser. The temperature sensor is then
used to monitor the variable temperature of a water tank. In a
second demonstration, we report charging the capacitor of an
IoUT device equipped with a camera and a low-power laser
for real-time video streaming.
A. Self-Powered Sensor Module
The experimental setup of the first demonstration is depicted
in Fig. 3. The transmitter is composed by an Arduino Mega

with a laser drive connected to a 430 nm laser diode (LD),
and is fixed outside of a 1.5-m-long water tank. The receiver,
a self-powered sensor platform formed by a a 55 × 70 mm
solar cell, with a 3-dB bandwidth of 30 KHz in photovoltaic
mode, and an electric circuitry, is placed inside the water tank.
The state of the solar cell is controlled via a low-power relay,
which changes the connection of the solar cell to the circuit.
The solar cell can then have two possible states:
•

•

It directly deliver power to a battery or a super-capacitor,
at the same time its charge is monitored by a wake-up
circuit.
It is reverse-voltage-biased and the output current passes
through a transimpedance amplifier and a comparator.
Both circuits are implemented by a programmable system
on-chip (PSoC). The main circuit is connected to a
low-power microcontroller that receives the signal and
processes the data (saving the data or executing the
commands).

We should stress that in some of the previously demonstrated
SLIPT circuits, such as the one in [11], the harvested energy
and the data rate are directly associated to the frequency of
the electrical signal due to the coupling capacitor and inductor.
Moreover, the feasibility of incorporating a maximum power
point tracking (MPPT) for the solar cells with the existing
circuit methodology has not been demonstrated before to
the best of our knowledge. Through our circuit design, in
the energy harvesting mode, we allow the implementation
of any MPPT circuit without affecting the data-transmission,
as both solar cell modes are independent. We also note that
one of the major challenges for the deployment of UWOC
systems is fulfilling the pointing, acquisition and tracking
(PAT) requirements. Using the solar cell as a photo-detector
can reduce the strict PAT requirements. As depicted in Fig. 3,
the module wake-up upon receiving a light beam on the solar
panel. The battery voltage VB is then measured. If VB < Vth ,
where Vth is a threshold voltage of 3.6V for our module,
the sensors start measuring turbidity and/or temperature. The

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

collected data is saved on a secure digital (SD) card fixed on
the module, which then enters to a sleep mode. If VB ≥ Vth ,
the solar panel switches to a receiver mode and receive
commands, which include switching on/off a particular sensor,
and sending/re-transmitting the saved data on the memory
card. Upon executing all the needed commands, the solar panel
switches to energy harvesting mode and when reaching a full
battery charge, the module enters to the sleep mode. The full
charge of the 840 mW module battery takes approximately 124
mins using the blue laser and the reached throughput when
the solar panel acts as an information receiver is equal to 500
kbit/s. The temperature sensor is then switched on to measure
the temperature inside the water tank over a time window
of more than two hours. The water temperature is controlled
using two chillers fixed on the two sides of the tank. The
temperature evolution as a function of time is shown in Fig. 4.

4

the device. The use of the large-area solar panel to harvest
energy and decode information eased the PAT requirements
compared to state-of-the art UWOC systems based on limited
active area detectors. However, water motion significantly
affected the pointing of the device’s laser towards the detector.

Fig. 5. (a) Self-powered underwater camera. Photograph of the module
(b) being charged by an LED source, (c) transmitting information (video
streaming) with a red laser, and (d) deployed in a coral reef in the Red Sea.

IV. O PEN P ROBLEMS

Fig. 4. Temperature evolution of the water tank as a function of time.

B. Self-Powered Underwater Camera
The second demonstration involves an IoUT device
equipped with an analog camera for underwater live video
streaming, as shown in Fig. 5 (a). The IoUT is formed by
an analog front-end PSoC circuit, powered by a 5 F supercapacitor, which can be charged via a solar panel (similar to
the 55 × 70 mm used to perform the first demonstration). A
low-power red laser is also connected to the circuit for video
transmission. The device is fixed at the bottom of a vertical
tank with sea water. Using an LED source, as seen in Fig. 5
(b), that is fixed 30 cm away from the solar panel, the full
super-capcitor charge takes approximately 1h 30min. Once
fully charged, the device is used to establish a 1 minute-lomg
real-time streaming of a video captured by the analog camera,
as seen in Fig. 5 (c).
The real-life deployment of the self-powered device in the Red
Sea (location known as Abu Gisha island) is shown in Fig 5
(d). With the strong water movement that significantly shakes

There are different challenges associated with the various
SLIPT techniques, which are either related to the hardware
such as the bandwidth of the solar cell and the battery life time
or the propagation effects over wireless underwater media.
Here we discuss the open problems of the SLIPT technology
and propose future research directions with the objective of
coping with deployment challenges.
A. Hardware Challenges
One of the main challenges for SLIPT is to increase the
transmission rate of optical communication links. The problem
lies with the bandwidth of the receiving terminal, which is
limited by the decoding bandwidth of the solar cell, mainly
for time switching SLIPT configurations. The bandwidth of
commercially available solar cells is usually restricted to a
few tens of KHz. Using advanced modulation formats such
as M-quadrature amplitude modulation-orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (M-QAM OFDM) can potentially scale
the transmission capacity by several orders of magnitude.
However, implementing such techniques requires the use of
a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) at the transmitter and
an analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) at the receiver, which
comes at a major cost, which is the battery energy consumption. Limitations on data transmission rates can be alleviated

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

5

TABLE I
C URRENT CONSUMPTION FOR DIFFERENT ENABLED FEATURES
Source

Current
Consumption

Throughput

Enabled Features

3.7 V

102 mA

500 Kbit/s

Wi-Fi, Bluetooth

3.7 V

36 mA

500 Kbit/s

IoT with clock at 10MHz

3.7 V

11 mA

115.2 Kbit/s

SoC with microcontroller
at 3MHz

5V

110 mA

-

Video streaming

3.7 V

7 mA

-

Sensing and saving data

5V

236 mA

500 Kbit/s

Video streaming,
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth

in a power splitting SLIPT approach where a high-bandwidth
PD can be used to decode the information signals instead of
the solar detector at the expense of the pointing errors since the
detection areas of commercially available high-bandwidth PDs
are limited to only few tens of mm2 , due to the limit imposed
by the resistor-capacitor (RC) time constant [13], which results
in a strict angle of view that requires maintaining a perfect
system alignment. Using high-speed PDs can also generate
additional complexity for the power splitter, which should be
adapted to deliver sufficient power to decode the signals.
Additional challenges are related to the life time of the IoUT
device ’s battery, which is subject to the enabled features and
the information transmission rate. To provide an idea on the
impact of enabled features and data throughput on the energy
consumption levels of IoUT devices, we collected in Table I
the current consumption portion of a fully awake device for
various energy sources with different characteristics as well as
data throughput levels (data decoded by the solar cell in the
photoconductive mode).
B. Propagation Effects
When propagating through the water, the intensity of a light
beam decays exponentially along the propagation direction z,
from the initial intensity I0 following Beer’s law expressed
as I = I0 exp(−αz), with α being the absorption coefficient.
α is obtained by summing the contribution of two main
phenomena, b and c, which are the absorption and the scattering coefficients, respectively. Beams propagating through
the water can be also subject to turbulence, which is due to
random temperature in-homogeneity, salinity variations or airbubbles. Temperature fluctuations and salinity variations result
in rapid changes in the refractive index of the water, while airbubbles block partially or completely the light beam. Statistical
models to estimate the impact of turbulence on the underwater
link under several conditions are existing in the literature [14].
When designing a link to simultaneously transfer power and
information in an underwater channel, attenuation as well as
turbulence effects should be taken into account to ensure the
delivery of a sufficient amount of power to perform the two
SLIPT functions.
A possible way to reduce the impact of turbulence is two use
multiple wavelegths for the information transfer and energy
harvesting functions. The use of multiple wavelengths can

provide a diversity gain over a harsh underwater environment,
if different copies of the same signal are encoded over distinct
carrier wavelengths that are affected differently by turbulenceinduced distortions [15]. For example, light attenuation in
clear seawater is minimum in the blue-green region, while
longer wavelengths are more effective to mitigate the effect
of turbulence. At clear water, the use of multiple wavelengths
to carry independent data streams can considerable scale the
transmission capacity. Taking the example of a two-wavelength
system, one wavelength can be used to transfer energy while
the other can carry the data streams ensuring a continuous
connectivity of the device. The two wavelengths can be also
used to transmit two independent data streams and charge
the battery at the same time if a power splitting approach
is adopted.

C. Beam Divergence
While propagating through an unguided medium, a light
beam tends to diverge leading to an increase of the radius.
Losses due to beam divergence can be denoted as geometrical
attenuation, which scales with the propagation distance and
related to the used laser or LED source at the transmitter
(including the collimation system, if used) as well as the
operating wavelength. Taking into account beam divergence is
crucial for SLIPT systems. The power portion at the receiver
should fulfill the two SLIPT functions.

D. Path Obstructions
Obstructed propagation path is another limiting factor for
underwater SLIPT, which can be overcome using the enhanced
scattering of the ultraviolet (UV) light that can be harnessed to
establish non-line of sight (NLoS) connections. Nonetheless,
this requires having solar-blind solar cells to harvest energy
from UV light. This technique should be also carefully studied
to avoid UV exposure health-related issues.

V. C ONCLUSION
Throughout this article, we provided an overview of the
SLIPT technology. SLIPT is a key technology for green
energy transfer that could exploit different degrees of freedom including time, power, and space. We presented two
underwater experimental demonstrations of time switching
SLIPT. In a first proof-of-concept test, we charged the battery
of a submerged module using a blue laser and successfully
transmitted commands with a transmission rate of 500 Kbit/s
through a 1.5 m underwater link. We also collected data using
the self-powered temperature sensor. In the second experiment,
we report transmitting commands and charging the capacitor
of a device equipped with a low-power red laser and analogcamera. SLIPT is still a largely unexplored field and requires
deeper research efforts to overcome several major technical
issues and channel-related challenges before its wide-scale
deployment.

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by funding from King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology. The authors would like
to thank the Red Sea Research Center and Coastal & Marine
Resources Core Lab (CMOR) for helping in the testing, and
deployment of the prototypes.

6

Abderrahmen Trichili received his diplôme d’ingénieur and PhD degree
in Information and Communication Technology from l’École Supérieur des
Communications de Tunis (SUP’COM, Tunisia) in 2013 and 2017, respectively. He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow in CEMSE at KAUST. His
current areas of interest include space division multiplexing, orbital angular
momentum multiplexing, free-space optical communication, and underwater
wireless optical communication systems.

R EFERENCES
[1] I. Krikidis, S. Timotheou, S. Nikolaou, G. Zheng, D. W. K. Ng, and
R. Schober, “Simultaneous wireless information and power transfer in
modern communication systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 11,
pp. 104–110, Nov. 2014.
[2] X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han, “Wireless networks
with RF energy harvesting: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 757–789, 2nd Quart. 2015.
[3] T. D. Ponnimbaduge Perera, D. N. K. Jayakody, S. K. Sharma, S.
Chatzinotas, and J. Li, “Simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer (SWIPT): Recent advances and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 264–302, 1st Quart. 2018.
[4] P. D. Diamantoulakis, G. K. Karagiannidis, and Z. Ding, “Simultaneous
lightwave information and power transfer (SLIPT),” IEEE Trans. Green
Commun. NetW., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 764–773, Sep. 2018.
[5] T. Rakia, H. Yang, F. Gebali and M.-S. Alouini, “Optimal design of
dual-hop VLC/RF communication system with energy harvesting,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1979–1982, Oct. 2016.
[6] S.-M. Kim, and J.-S. Won, “Simultaneous reception of visible light
communication and optical energy using a solar cell receiver,” 2013
International Conference on ICT Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, 2013, pp.
896-897.
[7] A. M. Abdelhady, O. Amin, A. Chaaban, and M.-S. Alouini, “Resource allocation for outdoor visible light communications with energy harvesting
capabilities,” 2017 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Singapore,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[8] G. Pan, P. D. Diamantoulakis, Z. Ma, Z. Ding and G. K. Karagiannidis,
“Simultaneous lightwave information and power transfer: Policies, techniques, and future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 28250-28257,
2019.
[9] Z. Wang, D. Tsonev, S. Videv, and H. Haas, “On the design of a solarpanel receiver for optical wireless communications with simultaneous
energy harvesting,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1612–
1623, Aug. 2015.
[10] S. Zhang, D. Tsonev, S. Videv, S. Ghosh, G. A. Turnbull, I. D. W.
Samuel, and H. Haas, “Organic solar cells as high-speed data detectors
for visible light communication,” Optica, vol. 2, pp. 607–610, 2015.
[11] M. Kong, B. Sun, R. Sarwar, J. Shen, Y. Chen, F. Qu, J. Han, J. Chen,
H. Qin, and J. Xu, “Underwater wireless optical communication using a
lens-free solar panel receiver,” Opt. Commun., vol. 426, pp. 94–98, 2018.
[12] J. Fakidis, S. Videv, H. Helmers and H. Haas, “0.5-Gb/s OFDM-based
laser data and power transfer using a GaAs photovoltaic cell,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 841–844, May 2018.
[13] Z. P. Zhao, J. G. Liu, Y. Liu, N. H. Zhu, “High-speed photodetectors in
optical communication system,” J. Semicond., vol. 38, 121001, 2017.
[14] E. Zedini, H. M. Oubei, A. Kammoun, M. Hamdi, B. S. Ooi, and M.-S.
Alouini, “Unified statistical channel model for turbulence-induced fading
in underwater wireless optical communication systems,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 2893–2907, Apr. 2019.
[15] H. M. Oubei, X. Sun, T. K. Ng, O. Alkhazragi, M.-S. Alouini and
S. Boon Ooi, “Scintillations of RGB laser beams in weak temperature
and salinity-induced oceanic turbulence," in 2018 Fourth Underwater
Communications and Networking Conference (UComms), Lerici, 2018,
pp. 1-4.

Jose Ilton de O. Filho received the B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering
from Federal University of Piaui, Brazil, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the
M.Sc. degree in Electro-Physics at King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Makkah Province, Saudi Arabia. His current
areas of interest include instrumentation, sensing, optical communication, and
wireless energy harvesting.

Boon S. Ooi is a Professor of Electrical Engineering at KAUST. He received
the PhD degree from the University of Glasgow (UK) in 1994. He joined
KAUST from Lehigh University (USA) in 2009. His recent research is concerned with the study of III-nitride-based materials and devices and lasers for
applications such as solid-state lighting, visible-light and underwater wireless
optical communications, and energy-harvesting devices. He has served on the
technical program committee of CLEO, IPC, ISLC, and IEDM. He currently
serves on the editorial board of Optics Express and IEEE Photonics Journal.
He is a Fellow of OSA, SPIE, and IoP (UK).

Mohamed-Slim Alouini was born in Tunis, Tunisia. He received the PhD
degree in Electrical Engineering from the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), Pasadena, CA, USA, in 1998. He served as a faculty member
in the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, then in the Texas
A&M University at Qatar, Education City, Doha, Qatar before joining KAUST,
Thuwal, Makkah Province, Saudi Arabia as a Professor of Electrical Engineering in 2009. His current research interests include the modeling, design,
and performance analysis of wireless communication systems.

Khaled N. Salama received the B.S. degree from the Department Electronics
and Communications, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, in 1997, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2000 and 2005, respectively. He
was an Assistant Professor at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA,
between 2005 and 2009. He joined King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST) in January 2009, where he is now a professor, and
was the founding Program Chair until August 2011. He is the director of
the sensors initiative a consortium of 9 universities (KAUST, MIT, UCLA,
GATECH, Brown University, Georgia Tech, TU Delft, Swansea University,
the University of Regensburg and the Australian Institute of Marine Science
(AIMS). His work on CMOS sensors for molecular detection has been funded
by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), awarded the Stanford-Berkeley Innovators
Challenge Award in biological sciences and was acquired by Lumina Inc. He
is the author of 250 papers and 18 US patents on low-power mixed signal
circuits for intelligent fully integrated sensors and neuromorphic circuits using
memristor devices.

