(py)LIon: a package for simulating trapped ion trajectories
E. Bentinea,∗, C. J. Foota , D. Trypogeorgosb
a Clarendon

Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK
BEC Center and Dipartimento di Fisica, Universitá di Trento, 38123 Povo, Italy

b INO-CNR

arXiv:1907.10514v1 [physics.comp-ph] 24 Jul 2019

Abstract
The (py)LIon package is a set of tools to simulate the classical trajectories of ensembles of ions in electrodynamic traps.
Molecular dynamics simulations are performed using LAMMPS, an efficient and feature-rich program. (py)LIon has
been validated by comparison with the analytic theory describing ion trap dynamics. Notable features include GPUaccelerated force calculations, and treating collections of ions as rigid bodies to enable investigations of the rotational
dynamics of large, mesoscopic charged particles.
Keywords: LAMMPS, ion traps, molecular dynamics

PROGRAM SUMMARY
Manuscript Title: (py)LIon: a package for simulating trapped
ion trajectories
Authors: E. Bentine, C. J. Foot, D. Trypogeorgos
Program Title: (py)LIon
Licensing provisions: MIT
Programming language: Matlab, Python
Computer: pc, cluster
Operating system: Windows, Linux, Mac
RAM: size-dependent
Number of processors used: user-configurable
Keywords: LAMMPS, ion trap, electrodynamic trap, molecular dynamics
Classification: 2 Atomic Physics, 12 Gases and Fluids, 16
Molecular Physics and Physical Chemistry
Subprograms used: LAMMPS
Nature of problem: Simulating the dynamics of ions and mesoscopic charged particles confined in an electrodynamic trap using molecular dynamics methods
Solution method: Provide a tested, feature-rich API to configure molecular dynamics calculations in LAMMPS
Unusual features: (py)LIon can treat collections of ions as rigid
bodies to simulate larger objects confined in electrodynamic
traps. GPU acceleration is provided through the LAMMPS
gpu package.
Running time: Size-dependent, ranges from seconds to hours
on a recent workstation.

1. Introduction
Electrodynamic ion traps, also known as Paul traps, are
widely used in physics and chemistry to confine charged
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: elliot.bentine@physics.ox.ac.uk

Preprint submitted to Computer Physics Communications

particles [1]. Their applications include mass spectrometry, quantum chemistry, ultra-high precision frequency
measurements, and quantum computation [2, 3, 4, 5]. The
dynamics of ions confined in these traps can be simulated
using molecular dynamics techniques [6, 7, 8], in which
classical equations of motion for the ions are integrated.
Molecular dynamics techniques are also widely used in
chemistry to simulate the interactions and properties of
macromolecules, membranes, polymers and other systems
by computing the trajectories of the constituent atoms. A
number of programs have been developed to simulate these
systems [9, 10, 11, 12], which typically comprise thousands
to millions of atoms and are dominated by short-range
forces. These codes are efficient and feature-rich, with
numerous accelerated methods for integration and both
long- and short-ranged force calculations.
The (py)LIon package is a set of tools to simulate the
classical trajectories of ions in electrodynamic traps. The
time-integration is performed using LAMMPS1 , an established classical molecular dynamics code, which is more
typically used for biological and materials modelling [9].
(py)LIon offers a robust way to author ion trap simulations, with a simplified workflow that is geared towards
the atomic physics community. In addition, the results
from (py)LIon have been verified by comparison to analytical descriptions of ion trap dynamics.
Performing simulations in LAMMPS allows (py)LIon to
leverage a number of advanced methods, models and features. For instance, calculations can be performed using a
graphics processing unit (GPU), which decreases the time
taken to calculate the Coulomb repulsion between large
numbers of ions [6]. Additionally, (py)LIon supports fixing
individual particles together to create rigid bodies. This
feature enables the rotational dynamics of trapped ions
1 Large-scale

Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator
July 25, 2019

to be simulated, which is particularly interesting for systems of larger ions [13, 14, 15]. Such investigations are not
possible in other ion trap simulation packages, which are
restricted to point-like particles.
This paper describes the use and implementation of
(py)LIon as follows. In Section 2, we describe the dynamics of charged particles in electrodynamic traps. In
Section 3, we provide an overview of (py)LIon, and describe the features of a typical simulation. In Section 4,
we walk through example scripts and benchmark the performance of (py)LIon. In Section 5, we validate the output
of (py)LIon by comparing test simulations to analytic results. In Section 6, we provide details of (py)LIon’s implementation and discuss the configuration of LAMMPS. We
conclude in Section 7, and provide information for getting
started in Section 8.
(py)LIon is available for both Matlab and Python. The
workflow is similar for both languages, and for brevity we
describe only the Matlab package in detail here.

An ensemble of trapped ions experience both the external trapping fields and a mutual Coulomb interaction.
The total potential energy in the pseudopotential approximation is
V (~x) =

(4)

i6=j

where Ui (~x) = Mi (~
ωi2 · ~x2i )/2 is the confining potential
for ions i, j of mass Mi , secular frequencies ω
~ i /2π =
{ωx , ωy , ωz }/2π and charge Qi . 0 is the permittivity of
free space, and N the number of ions. Equation 4 excludes effects such as heating arising from the micromotion of the ions, which require a treatment using the full
time-dependent electric field of Eq. (1).
The ground state configuration of the system is an ordered structure called a Coulomb crystal. The system
crystallises at sufficiently low temperatures where the kinetic energy of the ions is negligible compared to the trapping potential and the repulsive Coulomb forces, which fix
the positions of the ions. This is achieved in practice using methods such as laser cooling or buffer gas cooling to
extract kinetic energy from the ion ensemble.

2. Dynamics of trapped ions
Electrodynamic traps confine ions using a combination of dc and ac electric fields that exert an oscillating,
position-dependent force on a charged particle to circumvent Earnshaw’s theorem and allow trapping [16, 17]. An
ion of charge Q and mass M in a linear Paul trap is confined by the quadrupole electric field

3. Overview of (py)LIon
(py)LIon provides high-level functions to configure and
execute simulations of charged particles in ion traps.
Figure 1 shows the process flow of a typical program.
(py)LIon translates a configured simulation into an input file and submits it to LAMMPS, which performs the
molecular dynamics. Once the simulation is complete, process control reverts to the chosen environment for postprocessing and analysis.
The configuration of a typical simulation in (py)LIon
proceeds as follows:

κU0
V0
cos Ωt (xêx − yêy ) + 2 (2zêz − xêx − yêy ),
R02
Z0
(1)
where V0 , U0 are the amplitudes of the ac and dc voltages, R0 , Z0 are characteristic lengths along the radial and
axial directions that are related to the distance between
the trap electrodes, and κ is a geometrical factor [18, 17].
The quantities êi indicate unit vectors along the Cartesian
axes. The ion’s motion in each dimension m separates into
a rapid ‘micromotion’ at frequency Ω and a slow oscillation
at the secular frequency ωm . The pseudopotential approximation is often used, in which one neglects the micromotion and treats the ion as being trapped in an effective
harmonic potential with secular frequency ωm /2π, where
r
Ω
1 2
ωm '
am + qm
.
(2)
2
2
E(x, t) =

1. Create the simulation and specify the domain.
2. Define the atomic species used and create ions.
3. Configure the trap parameters, using either the full
electric fields or the pseudopotential approximation.
4. Configure other applied forces, e.g. laser cooling, bias
electric fields, Langevin baths.
5. Select which parameters to save, and the periodicity
with which to save them.
6. Run the simulation to integrate the equations of motion.

The am and qm are the Mathieu coefficients, defined as
1
4QκU0
ax = ay = − az = −
,
2
M Z02 Ω2
2QV0
qx = −qy =
, qz = 0.
M R02 Ω2

N
N
X
1X
Qi Qj
1
Ui (~x) +
,
2 i=1
8π0 |~xj − ~xi |
i,j=1

For clarity, commands and syntax in (py)LIon are shown
like so .

(3)

3.1. Creating the simulation
An instance of the LAMMPSSimulation class represents a simulation, which we refer to by the shorthand
sim . High-level (py)LIon commands modify this object, which contains all the information required to generate the LAMMPS input file. The sim object has a

The pseudopotential approximation is strictly valid only
for |qm |, |am |  1, but it remains accurate to 1% up to
q = 0.4.
2

Conﬁgure simula�on

3.3. Adding ions

sim.AddAtoms(createIonCloud(radius, ions, N))
linearPaulTrap(sim, oscV,endV,z0,r0,kappa,RF,ions);
...
sim.Execute();

sim.AddAtomType(charge, mass) adds a new atomic
species, defined by its charge in units of elementary charge
+e, and mass in atomic mass units. Once a species is defined, ions can be placed in the simulation. For instance,
the command atomCloud(sim, radius, species, N)

write input ﬁle
run LAMMPS

creates N ions of the desired species randomly placed
within the stated radius . For more precise control over
the ion positions, such as when defining ions to form a
rigid body, placeAtoms(sim, atomType, x, y, z) inserts ions at the coordinates specified by the column vectors x , y , z . Each ion is assigned a unique ID when
placed.
Groups of ions can be specified using either the constituent atomic species or the unique IDs of the ions. This
allows fields and forces to be applied to specific collections
of ions. Setting the Rigid parameter of the group to true
fixes the relative positions of ions in the group, so binding
them together as a rigid body.

setup
apply forces

monitor
integrate mo�on
write output
load output

3.4. Forces and fields
3.4.1. Electric fields and confinement
efield(Ex, Ey, Ez) creates a static, uniform elec~ = Ex êx + Ey êy + Ez êz . Linear
tric field of the form E
Paul traps are defined using linearPT (for full fields)
or linearPseudoPT (for the pseudopotential approximation), with a parameterization of the fields as in Eq. (1).
Multi-species simulations that use the pseudopotential approximation must define a separate linearPseudoPT for
each charged atomic species because the pseudopotential
trap frequencies depend on the specific charge Q/M .

Analyse
[timestep, ~, x,y,z] = readDump('positions.txt');
plot3(x,y,z);
Figure 1: Flow diagram depicting configuration and execution of
a LAMMPS simulation using (py)LIon. A simulation is defined
through high-level commands in the chosen environment (grey).
When the simulation is executed an input file to configure LAMMPS
is generated and a LAMMPS child process spawned (blue). An
asynchronous loop monitors progress and checks for errors. Timedependent properties of the simulation are written to output file(s).
On completion control reverts back to the main environment for
post-processing and analysis.

3.4.2. Cooling the motion of ions
(py)LIon offers two solutions to simulate cooling: coupling to a Langevin bath, and laser cooling.
langevinBath(T, dampingTime, group) creates a

few global configuration properties. The NeighbourList
style and the CoulombCutoff and NeighbourSkin distances (see Section 6.3) configure the pairwise interactions.
The GPUAccel switch enables or disables acceleration using a GPU (see Section 4.4). TimeStep sets the step duration used for time evolution of the system. When unset,
(py)LIon attempts to select an appropriate step size by
considering the fastest timescale of the simulation, which
is typically the period of the oscillating quadrupole field.
3.2. Simulation domain

Langevin bath with temperature T in Kelvin and
dampingTime equal to the 1/e velocity-relaxation time in
seconds. The optional argument group allows the bath to
be applied to a chosen group, which permits e.g. speciesselective cooling or heating of ions. The bath applies both
a damping force to reduce the kinetic energy of the ions
and stochastic kicks so that ions thermalise at the temperature of the bath [19].
laserCool(species, gamma) provides an anisotropic

sim.SetSimulationDomain defines a volume of space
within which the ion trajectories are integrated. This must
be specified before adding ions or forces to the simulation.
(py)LIon will expand the simulation domain during time
evolution when required, but the specified domain must
contain all ions at the start of the simulation.

cooling mechanism for a particular ion species , by only
damping motion parallel to the given direction ~γ . We
model laser cooling as a viscous force flaser = −M (~γ · ~v )~γ
along the direction of an applied beam that is proportional
to the velocity ~v of each ion [19]. Our implementation does
not exert a stochastic force and so the temperature is reduced to zero.
3

3.5. Minimisation

include ion id s. These are used by the readDump command to reconstruct trajectories when loading the output
file.

The energy of a cloud of randomly placed ions comes
from a combination of the inter-ion Coulomb repulsion,
the potential energy in the trap, and the kinetic energy
of the ions. The minimize command uses a modified
time-integration method that is well-suited for driving the
system to its minimum energy configuration. This method
damps the equations of motion to extract energy and also
limits the distance that each ion can move in a single time
step.
Strong damping generally affects the strength of confinement experienced by ions in a Paul trap [20, 21]. Using
minimisation with the full oscillating electric fields of
the linearPT command will therefore lead to an incorrect
minimum energy configuration, because the damped minimisation algorithm changes the effective harmonic trap
frequencies. To avoid this effect, minimisation should only
be performed when using the linearPseudoPT confinement, which uses fixed harmonic trap frequencies that are
unaffected by the presence of damping.

3.8. Execution
sim.Execute()
runs a configured simulation.
(py)LIon generates the LAMMPS input file, launches
the LAMMPS executable, and monitors its progress via
an asynchronous update loop that handles errors and
provides diagnostic information2 . The process terminates
automatically after completion of a simulation, or if the
user aborts a (py)LIon simulation. (py)LIon will raise an
exception if the sim object is modified after execution.
This guarantees that the state of sim remains a faithful
description of the executed simulation.
4. Examples
4.1. Coulomb crystal of a single species
We define the electric fields of an ion trap, confine a
small cloud of calcium ions, and cool them into a Coulomb
crystal by coupling them to a Langevin bath.

3.6. Time evolution
evolve(N) advances the simulation by integrating the
Newtonian equations of motion for N steps. By interleaving evolve with other commands it is possible to add
or remove forces and fields at specific times in the simulation, creating complex sequences where trap parameters
are varied in the time-domain. An example of this is given
in Section 4.2.

sim = LAMMPSSimulation();
sim.SetSimulationDomain(1e-3,1e-3,1e-3);
caIons = sim.AddAtomType(1, 40);
createIonCloud(sim, 1e-3, caIons, 100, 1);
RF = 3.85e6;
sim.Add(linearPT(300, 7, 2.75e-3, 3.5e-3, 0.3, RF));

3.7. Writing/reading data

T = 1e-3;
sim.Add(langevinBath(T, 10e-6, sim.Group(caIons)));

The dump(filename, variables, steps) command
writes time-dependent per-ion variables to the given
filename at regular intervals every steps timesteps.

sim.Add(dump(’pos.txt’, {’id’, ’x’, ’y’, ’z’}, 1));
secularVel = timeAvg({’vx’, ’vy’, ’vz’}, 1/RF);
sim.Add(dump(’secV.txt’, {’id’, secularVel}));

The cell array variables contains a mixture of string
literals and/or LAMMPSVariable s, which are the internal representation of a variable in (py)LIon. The
command timeAvg(variables, duration) creates a

sim.Add(evolve(20000));
sim.Execute();

LAMMPSVariable that represents a time-average of another variable. For example, timeAvg(’vx’, 1/RF) averages the velocity in the êx -direction over an rf period.
Literals are a shorthand representation for selecting the
properties of ions to be output from the simulation and
can be any of the following types:

First, we create the LAMMPSSimulation instance that
will represent the simulation and configure a 1 mm ×
1 mm × 1 mm initial simulation domain for the ions. We
define the 40 Ca+ species with M = 40 amu and charge
Q = 1 e. A cloud of 100 randomly-placed ions is added to
the simulation domain with createIonCloud . We add a
linear Paul trap with an oscillating voltage of 300 V, endcap voltage of 7 V, r0 = 2.75 mm, z0 = 3.5 mm, geometric
constant κ = 0.3 and frequency Ω/2π = 3.85 MHz.
To cool the translational motion of the ions, we couple
them to a Langevin bath that damps the velocity of the
ions with a relaxation time of 10 µs, and also delivers a

1. ion coordinates: x , y , z
2. ion velocities: vx , vy , vz
3. the id of each ion
4. time-independent ion properties: mass , charge
The order of ions in the output file may change as they
move between processor partitions during the simulation.
To enable the reordering of data during postprocessing, the
dump command automatically configures output files to

2 A useful list of LAMMPS error codes can be found in the documentation [22]

4

small random kick to each ion every time-step such that
the temperature of the ensemble relaxes to 1 mK.
We configure sim to output data using dump . In this
example we output the positions of ions every timestep
and time-averaged secular velocities every period of the
oscillating field, 2π/Ω. The command evolve instructs
the simulation to integrate for 20000 steps. Finally, the
configured sim is executed, which writes the input file,
launches the LAMMPS process and runs the simulation.
The resulting trajectories and equilibrium positions are
shown in Figure 2.

allBath = langevinBath(1e-3, 30e-6);
sim.Add(allBath);
sim.Add(evolve(100000));
sim.Add(dump(’output.txt’, {’id’, ’x’, ’y’, ’z’,
timeAvg({’vx’, ’vy’, ’vz’}, 1/rf)}, 20));
sim.Add(evolve(60000));
sim.Remove(allBath);
sim.Add(laserCool(Ca40, [1e5 0 0]));
sim.Add(evolve(120000));
sim.Execute();

We start by defining the sim object and this time we
set GPUAccel to enable GPU acceleration. We create the
two ion clouds, define the Paul trap parameters as before,
and couple both species to a Langevin bath at 1 mK. The
first evolve brings both species to thermal equilibrium
with the bath. At this time tcool we remove the bath with
sim.Remove , add laser-cooling along the x̂-axis to the
40
Ca+ ions, and evolve the system again.
Figure 3 shows the final equilibrium positions and the
kinetic energy of both species. The lighter NH+
3 ions are
confined tightly in the centre of the trap while the heavier
40
Ca+ ions form a sheath around them. The energy of
both species is damped over time; it takes longer for the
NH+
3 ions to reach the equilibrium temperature since they
are only indirectly cooled via interactions with the cloud
of laser-cooled 40 Ca+ ions.

Figure 2: The formation of a 100-ion Coulomb crystal. Ions start
from random positions at a high temperature. A structure forms as
their motion is cooled by the action of the Langevin bath over many
time-steps. (a) Time evolution of the positions of ions along êz ,
showing a gaseous phase of random, changing positions that transitions to an ordered structure. For clarity, only 30 ions are shown,
and one trajectory is highlighted in black. (b) & (c) Front and side
views of the final positions of ions, illustrating the ordered Coulomb
crystal structure. The shading indicates distance from the camera,
with ions that are further away rendered in darker colours.

4.2. Sympathetic cooling
(py)LIon supports multiple ion species and the application of species-selective forces. In this example we model
the sympathetic cooling of NH+
3 ions by laser-cooled calcium ions [23, 24].
sim = LAMMPSSimulation();
sim.GPUAccel = 1;
SetSimulationDomain(sim, 1e-3,1e-3,1e-3);

40 Ca+
Figure 3: A dual-species simulation of 20 NH+
3 ions and 50
ions in a linear Paul trap, seen (a) from the side and (b) along the
axis of the trap. The NH+
3 ions (blue) are confined tightly to the axis
of the trap, while the lower charge-to-mass ratio 40 Ca+ ions (red)
form a sheath that surrounds them. c) At tcool (black, dashed line)
a 1 mK Langevin bath is removed and laser cooling is applied to the
x̂-axis motion of the 40 Ca+ ions. The temperature of the 40 Ca+
ensemble is cooled quickly, while the interaction between the species
causes sympathetic cooling of the NH+
3 ions at a slower rate.

NH3 = AddAtomType(sim, 1, 17);
Ca40 = AddAtomType(sim, 1, 40);
createIonCloud(sim, 5e-4, NH3, 20);
createIonCloud(sim, 5e-4, Ca40, 50);
rf = 5.634e6;
sim.Add(linearPT(252.2, 5, 10e-3, 3.5e-3, 0.3, rf));

5

4.3. Charged rigid body
This example simulates a group of ions which are bound
together to create a rigid body. This body then interacts
with a cloud of ions.
sim = LAMMPSSimulation();
sim.SetSimulationDomain(1e-3,1e-3,1e-3);
mass = 40; charge = 1;
Ca = sim.AddAtomType(charge, mass);
createIonCloud(sim, 1e-4, Ca, 30);
rodz = (-2:0.5:2) * 5e-6;
rody = zeros(size(rodz));
rodx = zeros(size(rodz));
rodAtoms = placeAtoms(sim, Ca, rodx’, rody’, rodz’);
rod = sim.Group(rodAtoms);
rod.Rigid = true;
RF = 3.85e6;
sim.Add(linearPT(500, 15, 2.75e-3, 3.5e-3, 0.3, RF));
sim.Add(langevinBath(0, 1e-5));
Figure 4: A cloud of 40 Ca+ ions and a rigid rod, which is composed
of 9 ions fixed together. After cooling via coupling to a Langevin
bath, the ions and rod arrange into a Coulomb crystal. (a) The
final positions of ions in the cloud (blue) and the rod (red). (b)
The polar angles θ(t) and φ(t) describe the orientation of the rod.
These quantities are plotted against time t, showing that the rod
initially tumbles before aligning with respect to the trap and other
ions and performing a small thermal motion. (c) Two panels showing
a top view of ion positions at early times in the simulation, before
the Coulomb crystal has formed. The plot shows the free ions as
transparent so that the rod is clearly visible. The specific times
shown are illustrated by the vertical lines in panel b.

sim.Add(dump(’pos.txt’, {’id’, ’x’, ’y’, ’z’}, 2));
secularVel = timeAvg({’vx’, ’vy’, ’vz’}, 1/RF)
sim.Add(dump(’secV.txt’, {’id’, secularVel}));
sim.Add(evolve(5000));
sim.Execute();

We start as before, configuring a simulation with two
sets of calcium ions. The first are placed randomly, while
the second set of ions are arranged in a line and grouped
together, forming a rod. Setting the Rigid property of
the group to true fixes the relative positions of ions. The
system is coupled to a zero temperature bath and forms a
Coulomb crystal after time evolution. Figure 4 shows the
results of the simulation. Ions in the rod form a rigid body,
which moves and rotates according to the forces applied
to the constituent ions.

Setting sim.GPUAccel to true enables GPU acceleration. This reduces the calculation time for pairwise interactions between large numbers of ions, and becomes
advantageous when simulating more than a few hundred
ions (see Figure 5). GPU Acceleration corresponds to an
order-of-magnitude improvement in time for N ≈ 1000.
For N < 300, GPU acceleration becomes inefficient because of the overhead required to configure tasks on the
GPU.

4.4. Benchmarking
Our benchmark simulations are performed for different
numbers of ions N and using two standard workstations: a
Dell Optiplex 9020 with an i7-4790 4-core CPU at 3.6 GHz
and 8 GB of RAM, and a Lenovo ThinkCentre M900 with
an i7-6700 4-core CPU at 3.4 GHz and 24 GB of RAM.
In addition, the Lenovo is fitted with an nVidia Titan XP
GPU, which has 12 GB of GDDR5 RAM and a processor
frequency of 1.5 GHz.
The computation time in the CPU-only simulations begins to scale as N 2 above N ≈ 30 ions, where it becomes
dominated by calculation of the long-ranged Coulomb repulsion. The brute-force method used involves looping
over interacting pairs, the total number of which is proportional to N 2 . For N < 30 the step computation time
is independent of ion number, indicating that an overhead
in the LAMMPS integration loop limits the speed of the
calculation.

5. Verifications
(py)LIon is distributed with a test suite which verifies
functionality by comparing generated output to analytic
results. These validations provide a means to detect if
modifications introduce errors, ensuring the integrity of
(py)LIon during further development. This section describes each test simulation, the expected behaviour, and
the functionality tested.
5.1. Secular motion frequencies
SecularFrequencies pseudoPot.m and fullRF.m
test the (py)LIon implementation of the linear Paul trap,
6

Figure 5: Average computation time per timestep in the benchmark
simulations, as a function of ion number. Dashed lines denote CPUonly simulations, solid lines show simulations that are accelerated
by the GPU. See text for discussion and a description of the two
workstations used.

Figure 6:
Secular frequencies ωu /2π measured from simulations
of a single ion in a linear Paul trap. Those in the radial direction
(black) and along êz (blue) are compared to theory (solid lines), for
simulations using either the pseudopotential (circles) or full electric
fields (crosses).

using either the pseudopotential approximation or the full
electric fields respectively. These verifications configure a
linear Paul trap, simulate the motion of a single ion and
compare the single ion oscillation frequencies to those predicted by eq. (2) (see Figure 6). We take the measured
oscillation frequency along each axis to be the Fourier component with the largest amplitude.

the pseudopotential approximation. The normal modes
are excited by delivering a periodic kick to the ensemble,
which is implemented by randomising the velocities of the
ions. The kicks are broadband enough to excite all the
normal modes in the Coulomb crystal, and are sufficiently
small in amplitude that the crystal does not ‘melt’. The
positions of the ions are written to a file twice for every rf
cycle, so that all the modes are visible in the final spectrum, and the amplitudes of these modes are calculated
by Fourier transforming the trajectories.
The frequencies of the normal modes for a chain of N
ions are the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix [26] constructed from the spatial derivatives of Eq. (4). For small
numbers of ions (N < 7) the theoretical values are tabulated in Ref. [25]. Figure 8 shows that the theoretical
normal modes are in agreement with those calculated by
(py)LIon.

5.2. Equilibrium separation
The lowest energy configuration when ωx,y  ωz is a linear Coulomb crystal of N ions aligned along the axis êz .
The position of the ith ion, zi , depends on the interplay between the confinement along the êz -axis, which compresses
the chain, and the Coulomb repulsion from the other ions.
These positions may be found by minimising the potential
energy of Eq. (4). The separation between neighbouring
ions increases away from the centre of the chain, where the
minimum separation is approximately [25]
2.018
zmin
= 0.559 ,
l
N

with l3 =

Q2
.
4π0 M ωz2

(5)

5.4. Cooling mechanisms

AxialSeparation.m minimises the energy of ions arranged in a linear Coulomb crystal, and compares the simulated positions zi to those predicted by theory [25] (see
Figure 7). Simulations of these equilibrium positions test
the implementations of both the Coulomb interaction and
the axial confinement strength of the Paul trap.

LaserCooling.m simulates the trajectories of free,
non-interacting ions that are strongly laser-cooled along
a single randomly-chosen direction, with a characteristic
damping time τ = 1 µs. It then projects the velocity of
each ion onto the laser-cooling axis, fits them with an exponential function and compares the result of the fit to τ .
The perpendicular velocity components are unaffected by
the laser-cooling force.
LangevinBath.m simulates groups of free, noninteracting atoms. Each group j is coupled to a distinct
Langevin bath with time constant cj and temperature Φj .
The equipartition theorem relates the temperature Tj of

5.3. Normal modes of motion
NormalModes Linear.m simulates the normal mode
spectrum for a fixed number of ions in a Coulomb crystal.
First it drives the system to its lowest energy configuration, then allows it to evolve without any damping using
7

Figure 7: Normalised equilibrium positions z/l of N ions in a linear chain. There is good agreement between theoretical predictions
(black dots) and simulation results (blue circles) performed using the
pseudopotential approximation. For even N > 1, the two neighbouring ions that are closest are those at z = ±zmin /2 (solid black lines).
For odd N > 1, they are the pairs positioned at z = 0 and z = ±zmin
(dotted black lines).

Figure 8: The spectral decomposition of each axial normal mode
is shown for simulations of N -ion linear Coulomb crystals, where
N ∈ {1, 7}. The vertical axis denotes frequency, normalised with
respect to ωz . The frequency spectrum for each normal mode is
shown as a vertical colored stripe; the logarithm of intensities are
plotted using a colour map where yellow depicts a maximum and
grey depicts vanishing amplitude. The maximum amplitude of each
mode is in agreement with the predicted frequency of that normal
mode (black dot).

each group to its kinetic energy, 3kB Tj = M hvx2 + vy2 + vz2 i,
where kB is the Boltzmann constant. Figure 9 shows Tj
for each group as a function of time, along with theoretical
curves (no fit) showing the predicted temperature as each
ensemble thermalizes with the associated bath in accordance with Newton’s law of cooling.

6.2. Ions in LAMMPS
The LAMMPS atom style charge command configures the simulation to represent ions as atoms with a velocity, position, id and atom type. The create atoms
command adds atoms one-by-one to the input file, placing
a single atom of specified type and position each time. The
mass and set type commands subsequently configure
the different atom types.

6. Implementation Details
Having described the usage and validity of our package,
we now address its implementation. Although an understanding of LAMMPS is not required to use (py)LIon, in
this section we provide pertinent details of the LAMMPS
configuration and features used, which are useful for implementing new features. For clarity, the commands specific
to LAMMPS are indicated like so .

6.3. Interactions
To determine which atoms should interact through pairwise potentials, LAMMPS creates neighbour lists of atoms
within a threshold distance of each other. The threshold
is equal to the force cut-off distance plus a skin distance
which for greater values reduces the frequency at which the
list becomes invalid and must be rebuilt. This approach is
computationally efficient for systems of short-ranged forces
in which atoms frequently aquire new neighbours, but is
redundant for systems of ions because each ion interacts
with all other ions for the duration of the simulation. As
such, (py)LIon configures LAMMPS to build the neighbour list once at the start of the simulation using the nsq
style, and with all ions listed as neighbours.
The pair style command specifies the interaction
model used between neighbouring atoms. (py)LIon disables short-ranged interactions such as Van der Waals
forces because the spatial separation between ions is typically orders of magnitude larger than the length scales

6.1. Input file preamble
The input file starts with a declaration of the static
properties of the simulation. All quantities are defined in terms of SI units using units si .
The
package gpu and suffix gpu commands toggle GPU
acceleration on/off by overriding fix3 styles in LAMMPS
with equivalent GPU implementations [27, 28, 29]. The
boundary , region and create box commands define
a non-periodic simulation region.
3 a fix in LAMMPS refers to an operation applied during integration.

8

the text fix <fixID> all efield <Ex> <Ey> <Ez> to
the input file, using a unique identifier <fixID> for the
force and specifying the components of the electric field.
6.5. Integration
The nve integrator updates the positions of single
atoms at each integration step according to the Newtonian equations of motion. We work in the NVE ensemble
in which the system is isolated and the total number of
ions is conserved. The rigid integrator calculates the
motion of rigid bodies, maintaining the relative position
of their constituent atoms. timestep defines the fixed
step duration used for time integration. (py)LIon configures LAMMPS to print diagnostic information about compute resource usage every 10000 steps using the thermo
command.
To minimise the energy of an ensemble the minimize
and min style quickmin commands offer alternative integration schemes that converge in a smaller number of
steps (see Section 3.5).

Figure 9: Groups of free, non-interacting atoms are each coupled
to a different Langevin bath and the dynamics simulated. Measured
temperatures Tj of each group are shown as solid lines, while dotted
lines show the predicted temperature of that group, given the known
coupling strength and temperature Φj of the associated bath.

7. Conclusion
(py)LIon allows full configuration and execution of ion
trap simulations from within a Matlab or Python environment. It offloads the computationally intensive part
to LAMMPS, while the environment of choice is used for
configuration and analysis. No knowledge of LAMMPS’
specialist command language is required.
Molecular dynamics codes such as LAMMPS are typically associated with calculation of short-range interatomic forces that drive mesoscopic material and biophysical processes. We have shown that LAMMPS can also efficiently model systems where long range interactions are
dominant, such as electrodynamically confined clouds of
ions. Wrapping LAMMPS brings a number of features to
(py)LIon, e.g. support for rigidly bound clusters of ions,
and GPU acceleration. (py)LIon complements LAMMPS
by providing high-level specialised functions that simplify
the description of the ion trap system.
All functionality of (py)LIon has been verified by a
thorough comparison to theory. We have used (py)LIon
to simulate a range of single/multiple species and multifrequency systems [31, 32]. LAMMPS is a mature code
with many other features that can be implemented in
(py)LIon. These include electric fields defined by finite element methods (using the atc package), and ion-neutral
interactions using direct-simulation Monte Carlo methods. These future extensions will allow (py)LIon to deal
with even more complex scenarios, such as: the cooling
of large, levitated objects via interaction with a buffer
gas or feedback [33]; rarefied gas dynamics to simulate
ion collisions with a buffer gas [34]; coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of protein structures in aqueous Paul traps [35, 36]; studies of cold molecule produc-

of these forces. The pair style coul/cut defines a truncated Coulomb interaction. The default cut-off distance is
chosen to be 10 m, which makes it effectively infinite for
typical-size systems.
The pairwise interaction represents the most computationally intense part of the integration. A brute force
method that directly sums these forces scales as O(N 2 ),
which becomes unfavourable for large particle numbers,
but is well-suited to parallel computation. Other methods for calculating long-ranged forces are implemented in
LAMMPS, such as multi-level summation [30]. Ewald
summation and particle-particle/particle-mesh methods
are also available for systems with periodic boundary conditions [28], although these are not suited to ion traps. We
have found that (py)LIon performs well using the bruteforce summation method for our typical simulation sizes
of 100 atoms (see Section 4.4), and so have not exposed
these other methods to (py)LIon.
6.4. Simulation elements
The remainder of the input file describes successive definitions of forces, variables, output, and evolution. These
are each contained in the ordered array sim.Elements
as InputFileElement s. (py)LIon enumerates the array, generating the required input file content by invoking each element’s createInputFileText function.
This is also the mechanism by which (py)LIon can be
extended; the extension only needs to implement the
createInputFileText method to return the appropriate
input file text required to configure the targeted LAMMPS
feature. For instance, a (py)LIon efield element inserts
9

tion/reactions [37]; and interactions of ions with polar
molecules [38].

[11] J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, L. Kal, K. Schulten, Scalable molecular dynamics with namd, Journal of Computational Chemistry 26 (16) 1781–1802. arXiv:https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jcc.20289, doi:
10.1002/jcc.20289.
[12] H. Berendsen, D. van der Spoel, R. van Drunen, GROMACS:
A message-passing parallel molecular dynamics implementation,
Computer Physics Communications 91 (1) (1995) 43 – 56. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(95)00042-E.
[13] E. Hesse, Z. Ulanowski, P. Kaye, Stability characteristics of
cylindrical fibres in an electrodynamic balance designed for
single particle investigation, Journal of Aerosol Science 33.
doi:10.1016/S0021-8502(01)00153-7.
[14] B. E. Kane, Levitated spinning graphene flakes in an electric
quadrupole ion trap 82 (11) 115441. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.
82.115441.
[15] T. Delord, L. Nicolas, Y. Chassagneux, G. Hétet, Strong coupling between a single nitrogen-vacancy spin and the rotational
mode of diamonds levitating in an ion trap, Phys. Rev. A 96 (6)
(2017) 063810. arXiv:1702.00774, doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.96.
063810.
[16] C. J. Foot, Atomic Physics, OUP Oxford.
[17] D. J. Berkeland, J. D. Miller, J. C. Bergquist, W. M. Itano,
D. J. Wineland, Minimization of ion micromotion in a Paul
trap 83 (10) 5025–5033. doi:10.1063/1.367318.
[18] S. Willitsch, M. T. Bell, A. D. Gingell, T. P. Softley, Chemical applications of laser- and sympathetically-cooled ions in ion
traps 10 (48) 7200–7210. doi:10.1039/B813408C.
[19] C. B. Zhang, D. Offenberg, B. Roth, M. A. Wilson, S. Schiller,
Molecular-dynamics simulations of cold single-species and multispecies ion ensembles in a linear Paul trap 76 (1) 012719.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.76.012719.
[20] M. Nasse, C. Foot, Influence of background pressure on the
stability region of a Paul trap 22 563–573. doi:10.1088/
0143-0807/22/6/301.
[21] T. Hasegawa, K. Uehara, Dynamics of a single particle in a
Paul trap in the presence of the damping force 61 159–163.
doi:10.1007/BF01090937.
[22] LAMMPS user manual, https://lammps.sandia.gov/doc/
Manual.html, accessed: 2019-05-29.
[23] K. Okada, M. Wada, T. Takayanagi, S. Ohtani, H. A. Schuessler,
Characterization of ion coulomb crystals in a linear paul trap,
Phys. Rev. A 81 (2010) 013420. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.81.
013420.
[24] A. Ostendorf, C. B. Zhang, M. A. Wilson, D. Offenberg,
B. Roth, S. Schiller, Sympathetic cooling of complex molecular ions to millikelvin temperatures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006)
243005. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.243005.
[25] D. James, Quantum dynamics of cold trapped ions with application to quantum computation, Applied Physics B 66 (2)
(1998) 181–190. doi:10.1007/s003400050373.
[26] D. Kielpinski, B. E. King, C. J. Myatt, C. A. Sackett, Q. A.
Turchette, W. M. Itano, C. Monroe, D. J. Wineland, W. H.
Zurek, Sympathetic cooling of trapped ions for quantum logic
61 (3) 032310. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.61.032310.
[27] S. J. P. A. N. T. W. M. Brown, P. Wang, Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance computers - short
range forces, Comp. Phys. Comm. 182 (2011) 898–911.
[28] W. M. Brown, A. Kohlmeyer, S. J. Plimpton, A. N. Tharrington, Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance computers particleparticle particle-mesh, Computer
Physics Communications 183 (3) (2012) 449 – 459. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2011.10.012.
[29] Y. M. W. M. Brown, Implementing molecular dynamics on
hybrid high performance computers three-body potentials,
Comp. Phys. Comm. 184 (2013) 2785–2793.
[30] D. J. Hardy, J. E. Stone, K. Schulten, Multilevel summation
of electrostatic potentials using graphics processing units, Parallel Computing 35 (3) (2009) 164 – 177, revolutionary Technologies for Acceleration of Emerging Petascale Applications.

8. Getting Started
Up-to-date stable releases of LAMMPS are available
at http://lammps.sandia.gov/. Multiple build options
for LAMMPS exist. At least the misc package must
be included, and optionally the rigid and gpu 4 packages for rigid-body and GPU support respectively. The
most recent version of (py)LIon’s MATLAB distribution is available at bitbucket.org/footgroup/lion.git,
and further documentation and examples can be found
in the source.
For instructions to install and configure (py)LIon, please see the readme file.
The
Python version of (py)LIon can be downloaded from
bitbucket.org/dtrypogeorgos/pylion, along with documentation explaining how to get started.
Acknowledgements
EB acknowledges support from a Doctoral Training Studentship funded by the EPSRC. The authors thank Tiffany
Harte and Michal Hejduk for comments on the manuscript.
References
[1] W. Paul, Electromagnetic traps for charged and neutral particles, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 (1990) 531–540. doi:10.1103/
RevModPhys.62.531.
[2] Quadrupole Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry, Volume 165, Second
Edition, Wiley-VCH.
[3] G. C. Stafford, P. E. Kelley, J. E. P. Syka, W. E. Reynolds,
J. F. J. Todd, Recent improvements in and analytical applications of advanced ion trap technology 60 (1) 85–98. doi:
10.1016/0168-1176(84)80077-4.
[4] Ion Traps, International Series of Monographs on Physics, Oxford University Press.
[5] J. Benhelm, G. Kirchmair, C. F. Roos, R. Blatt, Towards faulttolerant quantum computing with trapped ions 4 (6) 463–466.
doi:10.1038/nphys961.
[6] S. Van Gorp, M. Beck, M. Breitenfeldt, V. De Leebeeck,
P. Friedag, A. Herlert, T. Iitaka, J. Mader, V. Kozlov, S. Roccia,
G. Soti, M. Tandecki, E. Traykov, F. Wauters, C. Weinheimer,
D. Zkouck, N. Severijns, Simbuca, using a graphics card to simulate Coulomb interactions in a penning trap 638 (1) 192–200.
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2010.11.032.
[7] D. A. Dahl, J. E. Delmore, A. D. Appelhans, SIMION PC/PS2
electrostatic lens design program 61 (1) 607–609. doi:10.1063/
1.1141932.
[8] S. Schiller, C. Lammerzahl, Molecular dynamics simulation of
sympathetic crystallization of molecular ions 68 (5) 053406.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.68.053406.
[9] C. Trott, L. Winterfeld, General purpose Molecular Dynamics
Simulations on GPUs: Issues of Pair Forces and Scaling to large
ClustersarXiv:1009.4330.
[10] T. Matthey, T. Cickovski, S. Hampton, A. Ko, Q. Ma, PROTOMOL, an Object-Oriented Framework for Prototyping Novel
Algorithms for Molecular Dynamics, in: In Computational ScienceICCS 2003, International Conference, and St.

4 The

gpu package is included by default in all windows binaries.

10

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2008.12.005.
[31] C. J. Foot, D. Trypogeorgos, E. Bentine, A. Gardner, M. Keller,
Two-frequency operation of a Paul trap to optimise confinement
of two species of ions 430 117–125. doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2018.
05.007.
[32] D. Trypogeorgos, C. J. Foot, Cotrapping different species in
ion traps using multiple radio frequencies 94 (2) 023609. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.94.023609.
[33] P. Nagornykh, B. E. Kane, Parametric stabilization and cooling of microparticles in a quadrupole ion trap, in: Optical
Trapping and Optical Micromanipulation XI, Vol. 9164, International Society for Optics and Photonics, p. 916405. doi:
10.1117/12.2064969.
[34] G. A. Bird, Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct Simulation
of Gas Flows, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press, USA.
[35] W. Guan, S. Joseph, J. H. Park, P. S. Krstic, M. A. Reed,
Paul trapping of charged particles in aqueous solution 108 (23)
9326–9330. arXiv:21606331, doi:10.1073/pnas.1100977108.
[36] S. Joseph, W. Guan, M. A. Reed, P. S. Krstic, Long DNA
segment in a linear nanoscale Paul trap 21 (1) 015103. arXiv:
19946172, doi:10.1088/0957-4484/21/1/015103.
[37] M. T. Bell, T. P. Softley, Ultracold molecules and ultracold
chemistry 107 (2) 99–132. doi:10.1080/00268970902724955.
[38] Z. Idziaszek, T. Calarco, P. Zoller, Ion-assisted ground-state
cooling of a trapped polar molecule 83 (5) 053413. doi:10.
1103/PhysRevA.83.053413.

11

