Strong pairing in two dimensions: Pseudogaps, domes, and other implications
Xiaoyu Wang,1 Qijin Chen,2, 3 and K. Levin1

arXiv:1907.06121v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 14 Feb 2020

2

1
James Franck Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
Shanghai Branch, National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and Department of Modern Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Shanghai 201315, China
3
Zhejiang Institute of Modern Physics and Department of Physics,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China

This paper addresses the transition from the normal to the superfluid state in strongly correlated two dimensional fermionic superconductors and Fermi gases. We arrive at the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature TBKT as a function of attractive pairing strength by associating it with the onset of “quasi-condensation”
in the normal phase. Our approach builds on a criterion for determining the BKT transition temperature for
atomic gases which is based on a well established Quantum Monte Carlo analysis of the phase space density.
This latter quantity, when derived from BCS-BEC crossover theory for fermions, leads to non-monotonic behavior for TBKT as a function of the attractive interaction or inverse scattering length. In Fermi gases, this implies
a robust superconducting dome followed by a long tail from the flat BEC asymptote, rather similar to what is
observed experimentally. For lattice systems we find that TBKT has an absolute maximum of the order of 0.1EF .
We discuss how our results compare with those derived from the Nelson Kosterlitz criterion based on the mean
field superfluid density and the approach to the transition from below. While there is agreement in the strict
mean-field BCS regime at weak coupling, we find that at moderate pairing strength bosonic excitations cause a
substantial increase in TBKT followed by an often dramatic decrease before the system enters the BEC regime.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recently there has been a resurgence of interest in superconductivity in (quasi-)2D materials. This has been driven by
exciting discoveries of novel superconductors such as magicangle twisted bilayer graphene [1], FeSe monolayers [2, 3]
and transition metal dichalcogenides [4–6]. Many of these and
other interesting superconductors [1, 7–9] appear to belong to
the more strongly correlated class which is distinct from BCSEliashberg superconductors and can be argued [10] to be intermediate between the BCS and Bose-Einstein condensation
(BEC) limits. The challenge then is to develop an understanding of strongly correlated superconductivity in two dimensions where the long-range superconducting instability is replaced by a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition
[11, 12]. Meeting this challenge is essential: an in-depth understanding of these quasi-2D superconductors, requires that
we abandon the predictions of BCS theory. At issue, also is
whether strict BCS theory is appropriate for computing even
the superfluid stiffness; one might expect that this should be
obtained by including contributions of preformed pairs, not
present in BCS theory, at the BKT transition temperature.
Arriving at this formalism is the goal of this paper which
addresses BKT superconductivity in the presence of strong
pairing correlations. Our attention is on the approach and calculation of TBKT from the normal state, following the extensive body of work on BKT in atomic Bose systems [13]. This
is complementary to the research which addresses TBKT from
the superfluid side [14–19]. In a seminal work [20], Halperin
and Nelson have used a fluctuation approach to address the
physics of approaching the transition from above. We argue
in this paper that, in line with their thinking and with Ref. [21],
the normal state in question should reflect stronger pairing
correlations, particularly those that lead to a stable, observable “pseudogap”.
We stress here that understanding BKT in fermionic sys-

tems is not as straightforward as in their bosonic counterparts.
Indeed the experimental realization of the BKT model was
established in superfluid helium films [22] many years ago.
There is also a convincing case for the observation of BKT
in atomic Bose gases [13]. The nature of the transition and
whether or not it is present in superconducting films has been
a subject of debate [23–26]. For this reason it is important
to pursue a number of different approaches which address
fermionic BKT. This provides the underlying motivation for
our paper and leads us to study the transition when approached
from the normal phase. We do so following the methodology
introduced for atomic gases [13, 27, 28].
In determining physical variables and consequences, a notable complication is that plots of TBKT as a function of the
attractive pairing interaction strength g are non-monotonic, so
that knowing TBKT does not uniquely determine other fundamental properties. Indeed, Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC)
simulations [29, 30] and other more analytic calculations for
the case of a lattice dispersion [15], show plots of TBKT vs g
which exhibit a superconducting “dome” shape. It is generally
argued [29] that this dome lies just beneath the intersection of
two curves: an increasing trend on the BCS side and a decreasing contribution at larger g representing the BEC asymptotics,
as is shown schematically in Figure 1(a). Similar arguments
are presented for the case of a Fermi gas, except that the BEC
limit, rather than decreasing with increasing coupling constant
g, reaches a constant asymptote, as shown in Figure 1(b).
A central result of this paper is that when the instability is
approached from the normal state, we, too, find robust domes
for the lattice dispersion, and in addition we find they are
present as well for the case of a gas dispersion. Importantly,
these non-monotonicities appear in the intermediate coupling
regime, away from the BEC regime. Here a Fermi surface
is still present, as one would expect in any physical 2D superconducting system. The dome arises from a competition
between a rising trend of BCS pairing on the BCS side and

2
(a) T

(b) T

lattice

gas

BEC

BEC

BCS
pairing attraction

t2 /g

EF /8
BCS
pairing attraction

FIG. 1. Schematic curves showing theoretical expectations from the
literature for the behavior of TBKT vs coupling strength g for (a) lattice and (b) gas dispersions. The predicted curves are embedded inside the two curves labeled “BCS” and “BEC”. Panel (b) can be
compared with the data points in Fig 5, where some differences are
evident.

the strong suppression of Tc due to formation of pairs and the
concurrent onset of a pseudogap, well before the BEC regime
is accessed.
The approach in this paper is to combine a pairing fluctuation theory [31–33] for BCS-BEC crossover with a description
[13, 34, 35] of BKT for bosons, and, thereby, establish a 2D
BCS-BEC crossover theory with a finite transition temperature. Because the BKT criterion approaches the instability
from the normal state [13, 34, 35] it reflects the phenomenon
of quasi-condensation or “presuperfluidity” [28, 36, 37].
From a theoretical perspective quasi-condensation appears
when the bosonic chemical potential becomes sufficiently
small, but non-zero. This leads to a large number of noncondensed pairs having very small (but not strictly zero) momentum. When approaching the transition from above, it
is found [13, 34, 35] that the BKT temperature depends on
the ratio of the effective pair density, nB (T ), representing
the areal number density of bosons, to their effective mass,
MB (T ). The transition occurs when this ratio (which is proportional to the bosonic phase space density) reaches a critical
value established from previous, (lattice) QMC calculations
[34].
We emphasize that these bosons are a composite made up
of fermions and the fundamental bosonic variables nB and MB
must depend on the fermionic excitation gap ∆(T ) (which is
non-vanishing even at TBKT ). In a true Bose system nB and
MB are fixed in temperature. In fermionic superfluids both
depend on T and interaction strength. The non-monotonicity
we observe depends on a competition between nB (T ), which
increases, and 1/MB (T ), which decreases with increasing g.
That the effective number of fermion pairs increases as the attraction becomes stronger should be clear [38]. The pair mass,
on the other hand, can be understood as reflecting the inverse
square of the pair size; the mass is light in strict BCS and becomes heavier with increased attraction while still remaining
within the fermionic regime.
There is a large body of work which addresses the BKT
transition as approached from below using the NelsonKosterlitz [39] condition. This criterion depends on a presumed form for the superfluid density ρs . In earlier calcu-

lations it was often assumed that this quantity can be calculated at the mean field level generalized to include stronger g,
via a mean field treatment of the crossover from BCS through
BEC. This theory presumes that the destruction of the superfluid stiffness derives entirely from fermionic degrees of freedom. Application of this mean field picture for the case of a
lattice dispersion [15] or a Fermi gas [14, 17] generally leads
to plots similar to Figs 1(a) and (b).
Clearly, both theoretical approaches (using either the superfluid density or quasi-condensation) need to be simultaneously pursued by the community if progress is to be
made. It should be cautioned, however, that neither of these
two schemes explicitly accommodates the important vortexantivortex excitations which presumably affect the size of
TBKT , although how much is not precisely known. Importantly, in this paper we discuss the relation between the
two, and demonstrate agreement at the weak coupling, BCS
level. However, as the attractive coupling constant g is increased in magnitude, bosonic excitations become more significant. Through our comparison we are able to characterize these bosonic contributions; these also turn out to be nonmonotonic, causing an increase in TBKT in the near “unitary”
regime and a decrease very close to the onset of the BEC
regime.
We stress that our approach which is based on the onset of
quasi-condensation is more directly connected to those experiments where BKT is most clearly observed as in 2D Bose superfluids [13, 34, 35] and in 2D Fermi superfluids [27, 40] as
well. A quasi-condensation approach presumes that the interboson interactions are sufficiently weak. In fermionic systems, while there may be strong inter-fermion interactions, the
inter-boson correlations inherent in a BCS-like ground state
are not presumed to be large. Indeed, in the BEC regime,
the inter-pair interaction becomes progressively weaker as the
inter-fermion attraction becomes stronger.
Finally, we end this section by noting that other consequences of strong pairing correlations should be a central feature of the normal state. Indeed, the foundation for using
phase only (XY) models in 2D systems depends on having
a substantial pairing at the transition temperature [21]. Thus,
one should characterize a given superconductor by the pair of
temperatures TBKT and the pseudogap onset temperature T ∗ ,
which then removes the ambiguity associated with the nonmonotonicity in the transition temperature. Pseudogap effects
are enhanced in 2D systems and have been clearly observed in
2D atomic Fermi gases [40, 41]. For a transition temperature
of, for example 0.08EF , which is rather strong coupling, we
find that the pseudogap onset temperature is about twice this
temperature.

A.

Outline

We now present an outline of the remaining sections of
this paper. Section II of the paper presents a brief review of
our BCS-BEC crossover theory based on a self-consistent T matrix approximation. The goal of this discussion is to show
how to obtain the important bosonic quantities nB and MB for

3
general g from their fermionic counterparts.
In Section III we discuss the case of 2D superfluids and
present an expression for the BKT transition temperature
which is widely used in the bosonic literature [13, 35]. As in
Refs. 27 and 28, we show how to apply it to fermionic superfluids (with both lattice and continuum dispersions). Contrasting with this “quasi-condensation” approach to the BKT temperature, is the more widely used criterion based on the superfluid density, ρs , as discussed in Section IV. We present comparison plots of TBKT in the two approaches from above and
below the transition. These are indistinguishable in the weak
coupling BCS regime. However, at moderate or strong coupling, bosonic contributions, which are absent in the meanfield ρs approach, become increasingly more important. By
comparing these two schemes, we are able to characterize and
quantify these bosonic contributions which are interestingly
non-monotonic as a function of increasing g.
Reasonable quantitative comparisons with Fermi gas experiments are presented in Section V, along with predictions for
the behavior in the lattice case. Comparisons with QMC results on the attractive Hubbard model indicate some deviation
(roughly within a factor of 2). We show how to associate the
measured transition temperature with other attendant properties such as the size of the pseudogap. Following a discussion
in Section VI, our conclusions are presented in Section VII.

II.
A.

BACKGROUND

Theory of BCS-BEC crossover

The incorporation of stronger than BCS pairing attraction is
an important component in addressing BKT in superconductors. In 2D the s-wave pairing instability is always accompanied by two-body bound states [42] suggesting that pairing effects are amplified. We thus invoke an extended form of BCS
theory associated with a BCS–BEC crossover. This represents
an analytic approach to the attractive Hubbard model. Just beyond the BCS regime, we show that the transition temperature
for three dimensional systems is to be associated with a BEClike condensation of preformed pairs. In two dimensions,
Tc ≡ 0, but, in a similar way, we argue quasi-condensation
of preformed pairs depends on a very similar set of parameters which appear in both 2D and 3D: nB and MB .
Our approach is intimately tied to the observation [43] that
the BCS ground state wavefunction
Ψ0 = Πk (uk + vk c†k,↑ c†−k,↓ )|0i

(1)

has a greater applicability than had been appreciated at the
time of its original proposal. Here uk and vk are the BCS
coherence factors. As the strength of the attractive pairing interaction g between fermions is increased, this wavefunction
is capable of describing a continuous evolution from BCS-like
behavior to a form of Bose-Einstein condensation. The BEC
regime sets in when the fermionic chemical potential µ becomes negative and at this point, the underlying Fermi surface
disappears.

We extend this ground state to finite temperature following an approach to BCS theory proposed by Kadanoff and
Martin [31, 44]. While in strict BCS theory all bosonic degrees of freedom (fermion pairs) appear only at (and below)
the transition as condensed pairs, with stronger attraction noncondensed pairs are present. They are accompanied by the
existence of a normal state pairing gap or pseudogap, which
is particularly pronounced for a 2D system. For the purposes
of our BKT analysis what will be important is to quantify the
number of these preformed pairs nB and their effective mass
MB .
To do so we can associate the underlying structure of BCS
theory with a two particle propagator, called tpg , which is
given by
X
1
t−1
G(iωl , k)G0 (iΩn − iωl , q − k)
pg (iΩn , q) = − + T
g
iωl ,k

(2)
where G0 is the bare fermion Green’s function, and the
dressed Green’s function G assumes the BCS
p form with the
Bogoliubov quasiparticle dispersion Ek = ξk2 + ∆2 . We
define ξk = k − µ. A detailed derivation of Eq. (2) can
be found in Ref. [45]. Analytically continuing Eq. (2) [for
4-vector Q ≡ (q, Ω) 6= 0] leads to

1 X 1 − f (Ek ) − f (ξk−q ) 2
t−1
(Q)
=
−
+
u
pg
g
Ek + ξk−q − Ω − i0+ k
k
(3)

f (Ek ) − f (ξk−q )
2
−
v .
Ek − ξk−q + Ω + i0+ k
Then, as a generalization of the usual Thouless condition,
we recognize that the statement
t−1
pg (0) = 0
effectively leads to the usual BCS temperature dependent gap
equation for ∆(T ). We can think of this familiar gap equation
as a BEC condition that the pairs associated with tpg (which
are necessarily non-condensed) have zero chemical potential
µpair = 0 for all T ≤ Tc .
For the most part our interest will be on the long wavelength and low frequency limit, where the pair propagator can
be approximated as
tpg (Q) ≈

a−1
0
Ω−

q2
2MB

+ µpair + iγ

.

(4)

Here a−1
0 characterizes the pair fluctuation strength, γ is the
decay rate due to the two-fermion continuum, and MB is the
effective pair mass. Both a0 and MB can be determined
via Taylor expansion of t−1
pg (Q) in Ω and q. In particular,
P
2
a0 ∆ = [n/2 − k f (ξk )] [46]. In the presence of a quasiparticle excitation gap, the pair decay rate at low frequencies
vanishes. It is small compared to Ωq = q 2 /(2MB ) when finite momentum pairs make a significant contribution to the
self energy (away from the BCS limit). From now on we omit
iγ in the pair propagator. We should note that the pair mass
MB is now accessible through Eq. (4).

4
Next we focus on these non-condensed pairs in the normal
state [31, 32], where the pairs have non-zero chemical potential µpair which smoothly vanishes at the transition into the
ordered phase. Here we identify the pairing gap ∆ with the
pseudogap so that ∆ ≡ ∆pg . This excitation gap is to be
distinguished from the order parameter. The self consistency
condition can be written as t−1
pg (0) = a0 µpair . In two dimensions µpair (T ) will be shown to assume small values, but never
reach zero, except at T = 0. By contrast, in three dimensions
µpair (T ) vanishes at and below a finite Tc .
To obtain nB we note that the self energy associated with
the dressed Green’s function is more completely given by
X
Σ(iωl , k) = T
tpg (iΩn , q)G0 (−iωl + iΩn , −k + q)
iΩn ,q

≈ −∆2 G0 (−iωl , −k),

(5)

where in this last step we have assumed that the system is
near an instability where tpg (Q) is strongly peaked at Q = 0.
Eq. (5) is a standard approximation in the cuprate literature
for the pseudogap-related self-energy [33, 47].
We stress that this second line in Eq. (5) is the only approximation used here, aside from the overarching assumption implicit in Eq. (1) that we are dealing with a BCS-like gap
equation and ground state, importantly extended to BCS–BEC
crossover. Note that this approximation effectively ignores
Hartree as well as incoherent contributions to the fermionic
self-energy, which may, as well, introduce particle-hole asymmetry effects. There is an additional complication (for the lattice case) near half filling associated with competing charge
density wave order in the particle-hole channel [29]. For simplicity, we ignore this here. It is, however, advantageous to
adopt the approximation in Eq. (5) in the vicinity of small µpair
(which is appropriate near TBKT ) for analytical tractability.
Combined with the parametrization in Eq. (4), we derive the
following self-consistent equations for a fixed-density system
consisting of fermionic and bosonic quasi-particles:


1 X 1 − 2f (Ek )
a0 µpair = − +
,
(6)
g
2Ek
k

X  q2
− µpair = a0 ∆2 ,
(7)
nB =
b
2MB
q

X
ξk
n=
1−
(1 − 2f (Ek )) ,
(8)
Ek
k

where b(x) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Here a0
and MB depend on the three parameters µ, ∆, T , and can be
deduced through Taylor expansions.
For a 2D system, these equations can be solved selfconsistently for (∆, µ, µpair ) at low T and for given interaction
strength g. The zero T solution can be taken as the limit of
T → 0 so that µpair remains finite in Eq. (7) [48]. We emphasize that both nB and MB are a function of temperature, and
should be determined self-consistently via Eqs. (6-8) when
solving for TBKT .
What should be clear from this analysis is that in BCS-BEC
crossover theory the normal state consists effectively of an ad-

mixture of fermions (with number n − 2nB and chemical potential µ) and bosons (with number nB and chemical potential
µpair ). Equation (7) appears physically reasonable in establishing the direct correspondence between the number of bosons
and the energy scale ∆ for binding fermions.
B.

Behavior of the 3D transition temperature: Hints about 2D

It is useful to present a few analytic results from this formalism. The 3D transition temperature for a gas dispersion is
associated with the condition µpair = 0 at Tc . This enters in
the boson number equation Eq. (7), and after some algebra,
leads to

2/3
2/3
2π
nB
n
Tc ≈
∝ B ,
MB ζ(3/2)
MB
where both nB and MB are temperature dependent and calculated at Tc . In a very compact way this equation encapsulates
the behavior of BCS-BEC crossover theory, beyond the strict
weak coupling limit. It should be viewed as reflecting the condensation temperature of preformed pairs. Importantly, these
represent the emergent bosons which are central to a treatment
of BCS-BEC crossover. We note that the dependence on nB
is similar to what is found in an ideal Bose gas, but it should
be stressed here that inter-boson interactions are present, as is
reflected in the superfluidity [49] and in the collective modes
[50, 51] of BCS-BEC systems. Inter-boson interactions are
associated with both the pairing interaction and the Pauli repulsion of the underlying fermionic constituents in the pairs.
If, instead, one considers a 2D system, by analogy the associated number to mass ratio which determines the transition,
the transition temperature might be expected to be nB /MB
where nB (T ), represents now the areal number density of
bosons, and MB (T ), their effective mass. We show in the
next section that this same ratio (known as the phase space
density) appears in the BKT criterion applied by the atomic
Bose gas community [13]. Here, however, the bosonic variables are temperature dependent and depend on the fermionic
excitation gap ∆(T ) and chemical potential µ.
This ratio nB /MB and its 3D analogue determine the shape
of the transition curves as a function of g. Indeed, the frac2/3
tional power nB is not very different quantitatively from nB ,
away from the nB → 0 limit. In this way, we will see that
the shape of the curves in 2D BKT are not too dissimilar from
their 3D counterparts.
To elucidate the physics, it is useful to present in Fig. 2 an
anticipatory plot of TBKT as a function of coupling constant
in a way which serves to identify the boson and fermion constituents. What we indicate in Fig. 2 is the relative admixture
of broken pairs (fermions) and pairs (bosons) as the interaction strength is continuously varied. The small boxes in Fig. 2
should be viewed as representative “cartoons” which characterize this pseudogap phase. A very small transition temperature is expected when the boson number is almost zero, as
shown in the low g regime. The largest TBKT is found in an
intermediate state consisting of bosonic and fermionic quasiparticles. At the highest value for g, all signs of the fermionic

5

(a)

0.3
T BKT
T

0.1

*

0.08

0.2

0.06

0.15

0.04
0.02

0.1

0

0.05

0

(b)

0
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

FIG. 2. The nature of the (normal) state as one varies the strength of
the pairing interaction and traverses the (schematic, red) BKT transition curve. The black curve indicates the pairing onset temperature
T ∗ . This figure serves to define pictorially what is meant by the number of bosons nB . The square boxes represent the relative admixture
of fermions and fermion pairs (bosons) at the onset of the transition
for several values of g. The bosons are indicated by the paired spins
surrounded by dashed lines. The unpaired fermions are indicated by
single spins. The bosons (preformed pairs) become more numerous
as the interaction strength g increases.

constituents are gone and the transition begins to approach
zero as t2 /g. The pseudogap is present whenever there are a
finite number of pairs at the transition temperature; it becomes
progressively larger, the larger the number of pairs.

III.

BKT CRITERION AS APPROACHED FROM THE
NORMAL STATE: BKT IN ATOMIC GASES

In the next two sections we discuss two types of criteria
which have been used to establish TBKT and follow this with a
comparison. It is useful to consider Eq. (7) next for the strictly
two dimensional case where there is no true condensate, away
from the ground state. This equation can be inverted exactly
to give the pair chemical potential:



2
µpair = T ln 1 − e−nB λB = T ln 1 − e−DB .
(9)
The size of |µpair |, which measures how close the normal
fluid is to a long range-ordered superfluid phase, reflects the
bosonicpphase-space density: DB (T ) ≡ nB (T )λ2B , where
λB ≡ 2π/MB T is the de Broglie thermal wavelength for
the pairs. In this notation kB = 1 and ~ = 1. Importantly,
in two dimensions, DB determines the pair chemical potential
µpair , so that there is quasi-condensation [28, 36] when DB is
sufficiently large or |µpair | is sufficiently small.
When approached from the high temperature side [13, 52],
the bosonic BKT transition is known to occur [34] when the
temperature dependent phase space density reaches a critical
value
DBcrit ≡ DB (TBKT ) = ln(C/g̃)

(10)

n B /n

g/E F

5

10

15

20

g/E F
0.5

4

0.4

3

0.3
2

MB

T/EF

0.25

0.2
1

0.1
0
0

5

10

15

0
20

g/E F

FIG. 3. (a) Comparison of the ratios nB /MB and 41 ρMF
(without
s
DBcrit ) in the two approaches for the lattice case for n = 0.1. The
temperature used throughout this figure is taken to be the critical
BKT temperature for the 14 ρMF
calculation. The difference between
s
the two curves reflects bosonic contributions to the destruction of
superfluid phase stiffness which are not present in the mean field approach. Panel (b) shows the two components in the (more bosonic)
quasi-condensation picture nB and MB . This figure indicates that it is
a suppression of the pair mass at moderate interaction strength which
leads to an enhanced maximum in the ratios, plotted above. Here EF
is taken to be the non-interacting Fermi energy, with EF ≈ 0.604t,
and we take the lattice constant to be unity.

where the dimensionless coupling constant g̃ reflects the size
of the 3D inter-boson scattering length aB , along with the 2D
localization length. The constant C ≈ 380 has been established by QMC [34], based on a tight binding lattice, but quite
generally argued to be universal. If one parameterizes the 2D
confinement
p by a trap of frequency ω0 , it follows that [35]
g̃ = aB 8πMB ω0 /~.
Estimates of DBcrit for fermionic superfluids are available in
the literature [27, 28]. The values range from around 4.9 to
6.45. Here we use the value, DBcrit = 4.9, which best fits
the data on Fermi gases [27]. This can be compared with the
counterparts in atomic Bose gases which are typically [37]
around 8. These are not order of magnitude variations and
the uncertainty does not significantly affect the shape of the
curves for TBKT vs g; however, it does affect somewhat their
position on the vertical axis.
Thus, based on the atomic Bose [13, 35, 37] and Fermi gas
literature [28] we apply the BKT criterion
4 nB (T )
2T
=
π
DBcrit MB (T )

(11)

6

(a)

A.

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
-6

(b)

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-ln (k F a2D )

1.5

0.5
0.4

M B /m

n B /n

1
0.3
0.2

0.5

0.1
0
-6

0
-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-ln (k F a2D )

FIG. 4. (a) Comparison of the ratios nB /MB and 14 ρMF
in the two
s
approaches for the gas case. The temperature used throughout this
figure is taken to be the critical BKT temperature for the 14 ρMF
cals
culation. The difference between the two curves reflects bosonic contributions to the destruction of stiffness, absent in the mean field approach. Panel (b) shows the two components nB and MB . This figure
indicates that it is a suppression of the pair mass at moderate interaction strength which leads to an enhanced maximum in the ratios.

at T = TBKT . We stress that nB and MB in the above equation
reflect the fermionic degrees of freedom, through the pairing
gap ∆(T ).
IV.

BKT CRITERION DERIVED FROM SUPERFLUID
DENSITY: NELSON-KOSTERLITZ CONDITION

When approached from the low temperature side, the BKT
transition [16, 53] occurs at a universal value of the bosonic
superfluid density. The transition temperature can be defined
[39] in terms of the superfluid component of DB such that
DBs (TBKT ) = 4 .

(12)

To tie the two approaches together, we can, however, extract
an inequality
DBcrit > 4 .

(13)

This reflects the fact that the total bosonic phase space density
must exceed its superfluid counterpart, given in Eq. (12) [54].
If we use BCS-BEC mean field theory [15] to evaluate the
superfluid density ρMF
s , Eq. (12) is equivalent to the condition
that at TBKT , the superfluid density satisfies
2T
1 MF
ρs (T ) =
4
π

(14)

Comparison of the Two BKT Criteria

Of central importance is to compare these two schemes for
the BKT transition temperature obtained when approached
from the normal state using Eq. (11) or alternatively using
Eq. (14). The detailed numerical results in this section and
the next are based on Eqs. (6)–(8) along with Eq. (11). This
comparison is presented in Fig. 3 for the case of a lattice dispersion and in Fig. 4 for the Fermi gas case.
Figures 3 and 4 plot the effective “stiffness ratios” nB /MB
and 14 nms (without DBcrit ) in the two approaches. The temperature used throughout this figure is taken to be the critical BKT
temperature for the 14 nms calculation. For the Fermi gas case,
in place of the attractive coupling constant g, we
Pintroduce
the 2D fermionic scattering length a2D via g −1 = k 2k1+ ,
B
where k = k 2 /2m and B = 1/ma22D .
We see that the agreement is very good in the strict BCS
regime, for small coupling g. This largely derives from the
fact that here TBKT is close to the pairing onset temperature
T ∗ . Both theories yield the same T ∗ . We can refer to Fig 2
to see that in this regime the two BKT criteria yield equivalent results, as the only quasi-particles in the normal state are
fermionic and both are associated with the same pairing onset
T ∗.
A central difference is that the quasi-condensation approach
leads to a higher maximum at intermediate coupling and a
more dramatic plummet in TBKT beyond the maximum. A
slight kink appears exactly when the fermionic chemical potential reaches zero and one might expect this feature as nB
has to have a discontinuity in slope. Here the boson number
density is precisely half the fermion density and all fermions
are paired. Asymptotically, in the BEC regime, the two curves
also coincide as expected [55].
Understanding the physical origin of these two principal
differences is particularly important for arriving at a more
complete physical picture of the BKT transition in a fermionic
system. Both of these effects arise from the bosonic contributions to the phase stiffness which are missing in the mean field
approximation to ρs . We refer to the lower panels of Fig. 3 and
4 to help understand this behavior.
Plotted in these lower panels are the two components in the
quasi-condensation picture nB and MB , with a rescaling for
better visibility. This rescaling will not affect the deduced ratio plot (except for an overall normalization). The origin of the
important non-monotonic effects in the ratio can now be seen.
We see that nB and MB rise just beyond the BCS regime where
pseudogap effects associated with meta-stable non-condensed
pairs begin to emerge. Notably, the pair mass increases more
slowly (in the plots) giving rise to the maximum in the ratio,
which overshoots the ρs -based plot [56]. The origin of this
slower rise in MB is important to understand. It derives from
an increased stability of non-condensed pairs which is associated with the onset of the pseudogap. Stabilization arises
because the presence of a pseudogap means that there is an energy cost, inhibiting the dissociation of pairs (into fermions).
We can think of MB as very roughly representing the inverse
square of the pair size. Hence a smaller pair mass reflects an
increased coherence length of pairs. In this way the transition

7

(a)

(b)

FIG. 5. (a) Overlay of present theory and experiment for TBKT versus scattering length a2D in a Fermi gas. The color variations indicate
the measured quasi-condensate fractions [27]. (b) is from Ref. [36], representing similar calculations with a trap included. Here the color
variations also represent the calculated condensation fractions.

temperature exhibits a higher maximum TBKT .
At increasingly stronger coupling, the bosons contribute a
second structural feature in the TBKT plots which appears as
a downturn after the maximum, but before the BEC regime is
reached. This result has been anticipated [19]: bosonic quasiparticles are expected to provide alternative mechanisms for
exciting the condensate. Hence they lead to a reduction in the
phase stiffness and related transition temperature.
We end by summarizing the essential points from this comparison, which apply to both the lattice and gas dispersion
cases. The mean field ρs approach is missing bosonic contributions [57]. In the strict BCS regime these can be neglected and in that regime the two calculations of TBKT are
equivalent. (This equivalence is insured by the particular T
matrix used here.) The most important consequence of including non-condensed pairs in the gas case is that they lead
to a maximum at intermediate coupling. This derives from the
extended stabilization of pairs and concomitant reduction in
their mass. In the lattice case, for the same general reason,
these pairs enhance an existing (weaker) maximum.
We end this section by noting that correlation functions have also been addressed [28, 36] within this quasicondensation approach. Theoretically we find that a screened
algebraic decay best fits our numerically obtained results.

V.

NUMERICAL RESULTS

We can compare our theoretical framework directly to
Fermi gas experiments [27, 28] on trapped superfluids (although, in contrast to Ref. 36 trap effects have not been included). Unlike the curve shown Fig. 4 for the mean field
scheme, the experiments at intermediate coupling exhibit a
non-monotonic behavior. In particular when ln(kF a2D ) ≈ 1,
there is an enhancement of the critical temperature. While
the extreme BCS limit is not apparent in these experiments,
TBKT must ultimately reach zero at weak coupling, so there is
a dome like feature [27] followed by a nearly constant BEC
asymptote.
The left panel of Fig. 5 presents a direct comparison between our calculated TBKT and the experimental data in units

of EF versus − ln(kF a2D ), with EF being the non-interacting
Fermi energy and kF the Fermi wave-vector. From right to
left on the horizontal axis represents the transition from BCSlike to BEC. The theory curve (black solid) is overlaid on top
of the data showing colored contours of the quasi-condensate
fraction, Nq /N . While the data points are incomplete, with
large error bars, in the phase diagram, the overall agreement
between theory and data is reasonably good. The dome structure in the data for both TBKT and Nq /N is most apparent in
the edge of the red and green contours, for ln(kF a2D ) > −1.
We find a kink near ln(kF a2D ) = 0 where the fermionic chemical potential µ = 0. Both theory and experiment have to
exhibit a decrease in the transition temperature toward the
BCS limit. Beyond the dip which establishes the BEC regime,
TBKT ≈ 0.1EF . (The calculated asymptotic value is slightly
different from 81 by a factor of 4/4.9, since the critical value
DBcrit is slightly larger than 4.) This figure is consistent with
the expected asymptotic values for nB = n/2 and MB = 2m.
We emphasize that by presenting this figure we are not
claiming absolute agreement with experiment. (Although,
perhaps surprisingly, within error bars, our theory curve
passes through all but one data point with no adjustable parameters). The experimental figure should be viewed as a relevant benchmark to help the community arrive at an understanding of BKT in fermionic superfluids, which is a rather
unique case where there is rather systematic data. Notably,
here we are dealing with greater complications than, for example, in a prototypical BKT system such as helium-4.
We replot in the right panel of Fig. 5 from Ref. [36] the theoretically calculated TBKT curve and the contours showing the
quasi-condensate fraction, when trap effects are included. Evidently, these trap effects do not qualitatively affect the general
behavior we report above [58].
We now focus exclusively on the lattice case. Figure 6 provides a summary of our results at two representative electron
densities. Panels (a-c) are characteristic of low electron density n = 0.3. As shown in (a), at weak to intermediate couplings, TBKT has a dome shape followed by a long slow tail.
Each dome we find is accompanied by a dip where the chemical potential µ changes sign. The downturn of TBKT on the
stronger coupling side of the dome is caused by the increasing

8

T*

20

4

0.3

15

3

0.2

10

0.1

5

1

0
15

0

0.15

0.15

0.1

n B /n

0.1
0.05

0.05
0

0
0

5

10

15

0

g/E F

(d) 0.3

(e)

5

10

80

0.4

60

0

-1
2
-2

0

g/E F
0.5

1

(f)

5

-3
15

10

g/E F

4

1

T BKT

0.25

0.3

T*

0.8

3

0.1

40
0.2

0.1

0.1

0.05
0

0
0

2

4

6

8

0

2

g/E F

4

g/E F

6

8

/E F

0.3

2t M B

0.2

0.15

n B /n

T/EF

0.2

0.6
2

/E F

T/EF

μ=0

0.4

0.2

5

/E F

0.25

(c)

25

0.5

0.2

/E F

(b)

T BKT

2t M B

(a) 0.3

0.4

20

1

0

0

0.2
0
0

2

4

6

8

g/E F

FIG. 6. BKT temperatures and related parameters for the pair number, pair mass, the pairing gap ∆ and the fermionic chemical potential µ,
for the lattice case. Also indicated is the pairing onset temperature T ∗ . Upper panels (a-c) show results for low electron density at n = 0.3,
whereas lower panels (d-f) shows results for high density at n = 0.7. Panels (b,c,e,f) are obtained at the respective BKT transition temperatures.
Note a difference in the range of coupling g/EF studied for low and high electron densities. Here EF ≈ 1.67t for n = 0.3 , and EF ≈ 3.28t
for n = 0.7. In panel (a), asymptotically we observe MB ∼ g/t2 and nB ∼ n/2 as expected in the BEC regime.

contributions of pairing fluctuations due to increasing pairing strength. The increasing pairing gap reduces the Fermi
level. In addition, these fluctuations lead to a growing pseudogap at and above TBKT , which depletes the density of states
and thus suppresses TBKT . These two combined effects are
so strong that TBKT starts to decrease in the intermediate pairing strength regime, before the Fermi surface shrinks to zero
when µ = 0. Beyond this point, the Fermi surface is gone, so
that all fermions are paired up.
Panel (b) shows how the above picture can be regarded as
driven by a competition between an increase in the density
of Cooper pairs nB (which saturates to n/2 above gc ) and an
even stronger increase in the mass MB . Here the critical coupling gc is associated with the point where µ changes sign, as
depicted in panel (c). For strong coupling g > gc , the normal
state essentially consists purely of bosonic pairs without unbound fermions (except at the highest T ). Note that the pair
mass scales linearly with g. This gives rise to the expected
asymptotic tail in TBKT ∝ t2 /g. We emphasize here that the
dome at intermediate couplings is not determined by the t2 /g
asymptotics seen in strong coupling. For completeness, in
Fig. 6(a) we also present the temperature T ∗ where the pseudogap sets in. Over most of the BKT dome, the magnitude
of the gap ∆(TBKT ) at the transition temperature is essentially
unchanged from its zero-temperature value.
Panels (d-f) are representative results for high electron densities (here we use n = 0.7 for illustrative purposes). Just as in
the previous case with n = 0.3, there is also a superconducting dome in the range of g/EF . 8. In addition, the maximal
transition temperature TBKT ∼ 0.1EF in both cases. However,

a notable difference is that we do not find the long asymptotic
tail as it is not possible to achieve a purely bosonic regime
where all electrons bind into Cooper pairs. This is reflected in
the fact that the fermionic chemical potential (panel (f)) never
changes sign before TBKT reaches zero. This occurs concurrently with the vanishing of M1B , corresponding to Cooper pair
localization [59].
The fact that the fermionic regime is so robust at high densities is intimately connected to the (near-) particle-hole symmetry of the underlying lattice Hamiltonian. In a bipartite lattice at exactly half-filling, the fermionic chemical potential is
pinned at µ = 2dt (where d is the dimension), regardless of
the interaction strength. As a result a purely bosonic regime
can never be achieved.
Interestingly, within our approach, we observe re-entrant
superconductivity in a narrow range of intermediate electron
densities around n = 0.55. Here in addition to the dome for
g < gc , there is a strong coupling tail with t2 /g asymptotic
behavior that sets in at a slightly larger g. Similar re-entrant
behavior has been observed elsewhere [60].
We can compare to earlier QMC data on the attractive Hubbard model at n = 0.7 [30]. There it was found that the BKT
transition temperature reaches a maximum of about 0.175t
which occurs at g = 5t, as compared with the maximum we
find of 0.33t which occurs at g ≈ 6.8t. (The TBKT calculated
using the mean-field superfluid density yields a maximum of
0.24t around 4t, also larger than the QMC result). The QMC
data do not extend beyond g = 8t. It is likely that the selfenergy based approximation [33, 47] we make as shown in
Eq. (5) leads to an over estimate of particle-hole symmetry

9
T ∗ /EF

∆/EF

T ∗ (K)

∆ (K)

0.15
0.17

0.22
0.29

2.7
3.1

4.2
5.5

TABLE I. Estimates of physical quantities for the case Tc /EF ≈ 0.08
based on our calculations for n = 0.3 (in top line) and n = 0.7 in
bottom line. To convert to units of temperature, we assume Tc =
1.5 K. Here ∆ is the pairing gap at the BKT transition. We find
g/EF = 1.87 and 1.06 for the low and high densities respectively.

gests (from Fig. 3) that this particular material is outside of
the regime where the mean field ρs approach is applicable.
Rather bosonic excitations must be included.
This emphasizes that there are two important temperature
scales: T ∗ and TBKT . In general, it is the pair of temperatures
[21] which provides full characterization of a given BKT system. If it is known that Tc /EF ≈ 0.08 with Tc ≈ 1.5 K then
one can read off from the phase diagram we present, the size
of the pairing gap (around 4 − 5 K) and the size of the pairing
onset temperature: (T ∗ ≈ 3 K).
VII.

and may be in part responsible for the differences from the
QMC data. Additionally, the absence of particle-hole fluctuations, as in generic T -matrix approaches, may lead to over
estimates of the transition temperature and pairing gap [61–
63]. Also important may be short-ranged charge density wave
fluctuations which are neglected in the present study.

CONCLUSIONS

We turn to Table I for a more quantitative summary of the
various energy and length scales in the intermediate coupling
regime; here for a given ratio of TBKT /EF , there are two possible values of the coupling strength g/EF . For concreteness we
choose the ratio to be 0.08, motivated by estimates made for
twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) [1]. We want to firmly stress
that this paper does not incorporate the band structure or other
complexities of this material. (Also note that the maximum
transition temperature of the Monte Carlo calculations [30]
does not appear to be sufficiently large to reach this value.)
[64]. Nonetheless, as in more conventional BCS theory, once
one knows the transition temperature a number of additional
properties can be quantified regardless of the underlying microscopic details.
Of particular interest are the size of the pseudogap ∆ at the
transition in comparison to TBKT and the pairing onset temperature. The lower of the two g values appears most reasonable physically when compared to estimates in TBG [65]. In
both cases the amplitude of ∆ is relatively the same at TBKT
and T = 0; notably, for the smaller g, the chemical potential
is close to EF , so that the system is far from BEC. For this
more likely situation, we note that the pairing onset temperature T ∗ is roughly twice TBKT . When it differs significantly
from TBKT , this is a crucially important parameter as it sug-

We have stressed that understanding BKT in fermionic systems is not as straightforward as its bosonic counterpart. Indeed the experimental realization of the BKT model was established in superfluid helium films [22] many years ago.
There is also a pretty convincing case for the observation of
BKT in atomic Bose gases [13]. Whether or not this model
applies to superconducting films has been a subject of debate
[23–26]. For this reason it is important to pursue a number
of different approaches for addressing fermionic BKT. We argue that this provides the underlying motivation for our paper.
Here we study the transition when approached from the normal phase, following the methodology introduced for atomic
gases [13, 27, 28].
An additional motivation for this paper is based on the excitement behind the recent discoveries of novel 2D superconductors which appears to be largely based on the hope that
these (often engineered) systems can produce new forms of
high temperature superconductivity. Also exciting is the possibility that they will serve to teach us about mechanisms for
existing high Tc (say, cuprate) systems.
Our paper argues for a somewhat more modest perspective.
Independent of the specifics of the attractive interaction mechanism, in these 2D systems, there is an absolute maximum to
the transition temperature TBKT . It can be rather high, say of
the order of 0.1EF as found here, or somewhat lower (0.05EF
as found in Monte Carlo [30]), but it does ultimately set an
important limit.
Acknowledgments- XW and KL were supported by the University of Chicago Materials Research Science and Engineering Center, which is funded by the National Science Foundation under award number DMR-1420709. QC was supported
by NSF of China (Grant No. 11774309). We thank Zhiqiang
Wang for useful conversations and preparation of a figure.

[1] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Takashi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature 556, 26160 (2018).
[2] Q.-Y. Wang, Z. Li, W.-H. Zhang, Z.-C. Zhang, J.-S. Zhang,
W. Li, H. Ding, Y.-B. Ou, P. Deng, K. Chang, J. Wen, C.L. Song, K. He, J.-F. Jia, S.-H. Ji, Y.-Y. Wang, L.-L. Wang,
X. Chen, X.-C. Ma, and Q.-K. Xue, Chin. Phys. Lett. 29,
037402 (2012).
[3] D. Huang and J. E. Hoffman, Annual Review of Condensed

Matter Physics 8, 311 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1146/annurevconmatphys-031016-025242.
[4] J. Lu, O. Zheliuk, Q. Chen, I. Leermakers, N. Hussey,
U. Zeitler, and J. Ye, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sciences 115, 3551
(2018).
[5] B. Uchoa, G. G. Cabrera, and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B
71, 184509 (2005).
[6] Y.-T. Hsu, A. Vaezi, M. H. Fischer, and E.-A. Kim, Nature

VI.

DISCUSSION

10
Commun. 8, 14985 (2017).
[7] I. Bozovic, X. He, J. Wu, and A. T. Bollinger, Nature 536, 309
(2016).
[8] S. Kasahara, T. Watashige, T. Hanaguri, Y. Kohsaka, T. Yamashita, Y. Shimoyama, Y. Mizukami, R. Endo, H. Ikeda,
K. Aoyama, T. Terashima, S. Uji, T. Wolf, H. von Löhneysen,
T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111, 16309 (2014).
[9] G. Cheng, M. Tomczyk, S. Lu, J. P. Veazey, M. Huang, P. Irvin,
S. Ryu, H. Lee, C.-B. Eom, C. S. Hellberg, and J. Levy, Nature
521, 196 (2015).
[10] Y. J. Uemura, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 16, S4515 (2004).
[11] V. Berezinskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 34, 610 (1972).
[12] J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless, J. Phys. C. Solid State 6,
1181 (1973).
[13] J. V. José, 40 Years of Berezinskii-KosterlitzThouless
Theory
(WORLD
SCIENTIFIC,
2013)
https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/pdf/10.1142/8572.
[14] E. Babaev and H. Kleinert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 12083 (1999).
[15] P. J. H. Denteneer, G. An, and J. M. J. van Leeuwen, Phys. Rev.
B 47, 6256 (1993).
[16] L. Benfatto, C. Castellani, and T. Giamarchi, Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 117008 (2007).
[17] L. Salasnich, P. A. Marchetti, and F. Toigo, Phys. Rev. A 88,
053612 (2013).
[18] A. M. Fischer and M. M. Parish, Phys. Rev. B 90, 214503
(2014).
[19] G. Bighin and L. Salasnich, Phys. Rev. B 93, 014519 (2016).
[20] B. Halperin and D. R. Nelson, Jour. Low Temp. Phys. 36, 599
(1979).
[21] W. Zhao, G. Wang, M. Liu, W. Zang, Y. Wang, M. Chen,
Y. Guo, K. He, X. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xie, Q. Niu,
L. Wang, X. Ma, J. Jain, M. Chan, and Q.-K. Xue, Solid State
Comm. 165, 59 (2013).
[22] D. J. Bishop and J. D. Reppy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 1727 (1978).
[23] M. Gabay and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2138 (1993).
[24] J. Holzer, R. S. Newrock, C. J. Lobb, T. Aouaroun, and S. T.
Herbert, Phys. Rev. B 63, 184508 (2001).
[25] R. W. Crane, N. P. Armitage, A. Johansson, G. Sambandamurthy, D. Shahar, and G. Grüner, Phys. Rev. B 75, 094506
(2007).
[26] M. Mondal, S. Kumar, M. Chand, A. Kamlapure, G. Saraswat,
G. Seibold, L. Benfatto, and P. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 217003 (2011).
[27] M. G. Ries, A. N. Wenz, G. Zürn, L. Bayha, I. Boettcher,
D. Kedar, P. A. Murthy, M. Neidig, T. Lompe, and S. Jochim,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 230401 (2015).
[28] P. a. Murthy, I. Boettcher, L. Bayha, M. Holzmann, D. Kedar,
M. Neidig, M. G. Ries, a. N. Wenz, G. Zürn, and S. Jochim,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 10401 (2015).
[29] R. T. Scalettar, E. Y. Loh, J. E. Gubernatis, A. Moreo, S. R.
White, D. J. Scalapino, R. L. Sugar, and E. Dagotto, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 63, 218 (1989).
[30] T. Paiva, R. Scalettar, M. Randeria, and N. Trivedi, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 104, 066406 (2010).
[31] Q. J. Chen, J. Stajic, S. N. Tan, and K. Levin, Phys. Rep. 412,
1 (2005).
[32] Q. J. Chen, I. Kosztin, B. Jankó, and K. Levin, Phys. Rev. B
59, 7083 (1999).
[33] J. Maly, B. Jankó, and K. Levin, Physica C: Superconductivity
321, 113 (1999).
[34] N. Prokof’ev and B. Svistunov, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043608
(2002).
[35] P. Cladé, C. Ryu, A. Ramanathan, K. Helmerson, and W. D.

Phillips, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 170401 (2009).
[36] C.-T. Wu, B. M. Anderson, R. Boyack, and K. Levin, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 240401 (2015).
[37] S. Tung, G. Lamporesi, D. Lobser, L. Xia, and E. A. Cornell,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 230408 (2010).
[38] While all fermions are regarded as paired at zero T , the residue
of the pair propagator (i.e., spectral weight of pairs) is small in
the BCS regime.
[39] D. R. Nelson and J. M. Kosterlitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1201
(1977).
[40] P. Murthy, M. Neidig, R. Klemt, L. Bayha, I. Boettcher, T. Enss,
M. Holten, G. Zurn, P. M. Preiss, and S. Jochim, Science 359,
452 (2018).
[41] M. Feld, B. Frohlich, E. Vogt, K. M, and M. Kohl, Nature 480,
75 (2011).
[42] M. Randeria, J.-M. Duan, and L.-Y. Shieh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,
981 (1989).
[43] A. J. Leggett, in Modern Trends in the Theory of Condensed
Matter (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980) pp. 13–27.
[44] L. Kadanoff and P. Martin, Phys. Rev. 124, 670 (1961).
[45] Q. J. Chen, Generalization of BCS theory to short coherence length superconductors: A BCS–Bose-Einstein crossover
scenario,, Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago (2000),
arXiv:1801.06266.
[46] Expressions for MB in various situations can be found in
Ref. [45].
[47] M. R. Norman, M. Randeria, H. Ding, and J. C. Campuzano,
Phys. Rev. B 57, R11093 (1998).
[48] Alternatively, at very low T , where µpair is very small, one can
set it to zero in Eq. (6) so that Eqs. (6) and (8) reduce to the
BCS-Leggett mean-field equations [43], which can be solved
for (µ, ∆). This then also fixes the value of a0 and MB and
thus nB . Finally, one determines µpair as a function of (low) T
via Eq. (7). While this alternative procedure is an approximation
at nonzero T , it becomes exact in the T → 0 limit, where µpair
necessarily vanishes. Therefore, we conclude that at T = 0,
the pair density nB is completely determined by the mean-field
solution of the ground state, (and so is MB ).
[49] Q. J. Chen, I. Kosztin, B. Jankó, and K. Levin, Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 4708 (1998).
[50] I. Kosztin, Q. J. Chen, Y.-J. Kao, and K. Levin, Phys. Rev. B
61, 11662 (2000).
[51] I. Kosztin, Q. J. Chen, B. Jankó, and K. Levin, Phys. Rev. B
58, R5936 (1998).
[52] A. Hadzibabic, P. Kruger, M. Cheneau, B. Battelier, and J. Dalibard, Nature 441, 1118 (2006).
[53] D. J. Scalapino, S. R. White, and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 47,
7995 (1993).
[54] Indeed, via renormalization group analysis and high precision
Monte Carlo simulations, it is shown that the renormalized and
the mean-field based superfluid densities in the vicinity of the
Kosterlitz-Thouless transition point are different [34]. Therefore, one needs to use a different DB other than 4.0 in the BKT
condition if one is to use the mean-field based superfluid phase
stiffness.
[55] In the BEC regime, one has nB = n/2, MB = 2m, and
ns /m ≈ n/m at low T , so that ns /4m = nB /MB .
[56] In the BCS regime for the Fermi gas case in Fig. 4, MB scales
as (kF a)−2 , nB scales as (kF a)−3 and then crosses over to
(kF a)−2 in the unitary regime. Thus, nB /MB scales as 1/kF a
to 1.
[57] Indeed, one might imagine that since phase stiffness comes
from the quantum phase-number duality and the phase is that
of pairing field; thus the number must be that of pairs as well.

11
One would then expect that phase stiffness must be sensitive to
the effective pair mass. This mass evidently does not appear in
the superfluid density in the gas case since ρs (T = 0) = n/m
is independent of interaction effects.
[58] As a word of caution, it should be noted that the experimental set-up for the atomic Fermi gases is only quasi-2D, with
a small tunneling tz between neighboring pancakes. Both this
quasi-two-dimensionality and the trap effect make it possible to
have a true long range order at low T , and they can introduce
quantitative corrections to TBKT as well. To quantify these corrections requires sophisticated calculations, beyond the scope
of the current work. We emphasize that the true long range order transition Tc , controlled by tz and ω, is likely much lower
than TBKT , and thus here we ignore its influence altogether.
[59] Beyond the critical value for g, MB changes sign, reflecting a

breakdown of the approximations leading to Eq. (4).
[60] Y. M. Che, J. B. Wang, and Q. J. Chen, Phys. Rev. A 93, 063611
(2016).
[61] L. P. Gor’kov and T. K. Melik-Barkhudarov, Sov. Phys. JETP
13, 1018 (1961), [J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys. (USSR) 40, 14521458 (1961)].
[62] Q. J. Chen, Sci. Rep. 6, 25772 (2016).
[63] D. S. Petrov, M. A. Baranov, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev.
A 67, 031601 (2003).
[64] Nonetheless, we do assume that the superconductivity in TBG
does come from attractive interactions between electrons, so
that our general argument for the origin of the dome structure
in Tc remains valid.
[65] E. F. Talantsev, R. C. Mataira,
and W. P. Crump,
arXiv:1902.07410 (2019).

