T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR
C ORRECTION : FROM VALIDATION S TUDIES TO I NTERVENTION
T RIALS
A P REPRINT

arXiv:1907.10722v3 [stat.ME] 2 Apr 2020

Benjamin Ackerman∗
Department of Biostatistics
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Baltimore, MD 21205
backer10@jhu.edu

Juned Siddique
Department of Preventive Medicine
Northwestern University
Chicago, IL 60611

Elizabeth A. Stuart
Departments of Mental Health, Biostatistics, and
Health Policy and Management
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Baltimore, MD 21205

April 6, 2020

A BSTRACT
Many lifestyle intervention trials depend on collecting self-reported outcomes, like dietary intake, to
assess the intervention’s effectiveness. Self-reported outcome measures are subject to measurement
error, which could impact treatment effect estimation. External validation studies measure both selfreported outcomes and an accompanying biomarker, and can therefore be used for measurement error
correction. Most validation data, though, are only relevant for outcomes under control conditions.
Statistical methods have been developed to use external validation data to correct for outcome
measurement error under control, and then conduct sensitivity analyses around the error under
treatment to obtain estimates of the corrected average treatment effect. However, an assumption
underlying this approach is that the measurement error structure of the outcome is the same in both
the validation sample and the intervention trial, so that the error correction is transportable to the
trial. This may not always be a valid assumption to make. In this paper, we propose an approach that
adjusts the validation sample to better resemble the trial sample and thus leads to more transportable
measurement error corrections. We also formally investigate when bias due to poor transportability
may arise. Lastly, we examine the method performance using simulation, and illustrate them using
PREMIER, a multi-arm lifestyle intervention trial measuring self-reported sodium intake as an
outcome, and OPEN, a validation study that measures both self-reported diet and urinary biomarkers.
Keywords causal inference · lifestyle intervention trial · measurement error · transportability

1

Introduction

Lifestyle intervention trials aim to establish how changes to human behavior, such as physical activity or food intake,
can impact and improve health outcomes. In such trials, it is important to obtain accurate measures on these behaviors;
∗

This is work in progress currently undergoing review. Please contact Benjamin Ackerman (backer10@jhu.edu) with any
questions, comments or concerns.

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

however, reliable measures are often expensive and burdensome for participants to collect. Self-reported measures are
therefore commonly collected as proxies of the truth. For example, food frequency questionnaires or interviewer-assisted
24-hour dietary recall may be administered in nutrition studies to quantify sodium intake instead of having participants
routinely collect urine samples. While self-reported measures are more feasible to obtain, they are prone to measurement
error, as participants may not be able to accurately quantify their behaviors, or may misreport their true actions (Willett,
2012).
Measurement error can lead to biased, less precise estimates of a treatment’s effect on the outcome (Rothman et al.,
2008). In nutrition intervention studies, self-reported dietary intake measures have been shown to differ from the truth
both randomly and systematically, which impacts the inferences drawn on the effectiveness of such lifestyle interventions
(Natarajan et al., 2010; Espeland et al., 2001; Forster et al., 1990). Much of the attention in the measurement error
literature has been paid to when measurement error is present in either the exposure of interest or in covariates
(Carroll et al., 2006; Buonaccorsi, 2010; Keogh and White, 2014). Less work, however, has focused on correcting for
misclassification or measurement error of study outcomes (Keogh et al., 2016), which is particularly worrisome for
trials that focus on self-reported behavioral outcomes (Spring et al., 2018, 2012). This is in part because measurement
error in the outcome will only lead to a biased estimate of the average treatment effect if the error is differential with
respect to the intervention (Natarajan et al., 2010).
Existing measurement error methods, whether for covariates or outcomes, often rely on the use of a validation sample,
or a group of individuals where both the truth and the observed mis-measured value are recorded (?Wong et al.,
1999b). Such validation data can either be internal, where the reliable biomarkers are collected on a chosen subset of
individuals within the primary study, or external, where a study is conducted on a separate set of individuals with the
sole intention of modeling the error structure. Internal validation studies are typically more feasible to embed within a
large observational study cohort (Jenab et al., 2009), while it is rather rare to see intervention trials, given added costs
of biomarker sample collection and added burden to trial participants. External validation samples also typically only
collect measures under a “usual care" setting, which usually corresponds to a control condition in a trial, making it
infeasible to directly correct for the error under both the treatment and control conditions based on the information
available to researchers. Siddique et al. (2019) developed methodology for modeling the measurement error under the
control condition using an external validation sample, followed by sensitivity analyses to obtain a range of plausible
values for the treatment effect.
While external validation samples play an important role in correcting for measurement error, concerns have been
raised over external validation studies not always being “transportable," such that the measurement error correction
from an external study may not accurately apply to the main study of interest (Bound et al., 2001; Carroll et al., 2006;
Courtemanche et al., 2015). Previous efforts to address transportability have involved combining external validation
data with internal validation data (Lyles et al., 2007), though such an approach cannot be implemented in intervention
studies without any internal validation.

2

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

In this paper, we address the issue of transportability when using external validation data to correct for measurement
error of a continuous outcome in lifestyle intervention trials. Using a potential outcomes framework, we formalize cases
when assumptions of measurement error transportability are violated and quantify the resulting additional bias that is
introduced when estimating the average treatment effect. We then propose a weighting method for transportability,
calibrating the validation data to the intervention trial to better estimate the measurement error.

2

Definitions

In order to set up the transportability issue, we will first provide some definitions and describe the measurement
error problem more formally. Let A denote treatment assignment (0 = control, 1 = treatment), let S denote sample
membership (v = validation, rct = intervention study), and let ns = the sample size of study s. Let Z denote the
outcome measured without error, Y denote Z measured with error, and let X denote a pre-treatment covariate. Z(a)
and Y (a) will denote potential outcomes under treatment a, such that Y (a) = Z(a) + (a), where (a) ∼ N (µa , σa2 ).
Here, we are assuming a simple classical measurement error structure, where the error terms are Normally distributed
such that their distributions can differ across treatment groups. To expand upon this notation, let Y s (a) denote the
outcome measured with error under treatment a in dataset s. We can define the potential outcomes measured with error
under different treatment conditions in different study samples in the following way:
2

Y rct (0) = Z(0) + rct (0)

rct
rct (0) ∼ N (µrct
)
0 , σ0

Y rct (1) = Z(1) + rct (1)

rct
rct (1) ∼ N (µrct
)
1 , σ1

2

Y v (0) = Z(0) + v (0)

v (0) ∼ N (µv0 , σ0v 2 )

Y v (1) = Z(1) + v (1)

v (1) ∼ N (µv1 , σ1v 2 )

Note that Z(a) does not differ by study sample, because conceptually, we do not consider someone’s underlying true
potential outcomes to differ by which study they are in. However, we use the sample superscripts to suggest that a
person’s potential outcomes measured with error can, in fact, differ by study sample, because the measurement error
parameters could differ by study sample. Using these definitions, we will now formalize when the average treatment
effect in the intervention trial will be biased when estimated using an outcome variable measured with error instead of a
variable measured without error.

2.1

ATE Bias under Outcome Measurement Error

Suppose the estimand of interest in an intervention trial is the average treatment effect (ATE) of the intervention on the
outcome measured without error, defined as ∆ = E[Z(1) − Z(0)]. However, since we do not observe Z(0) or Z(1) in
the intervention study, we can only attempt to estimate ∆ using Y , the observed outcome measured with error, in the
3

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

intervention study with the following naive estimator:
Pnrct
Pnrct
Yi Ai
i=1 Yi (1 − Ai )
ˆ = Pi=1
P
−
∆
nrct
nrct
A
i
i=1
i=1 (1 − Ai )

(1)

ˆ as an estimate for ∆ as:
Using Equation 1, we can derive the bias of ∆
rct
rct
bias∆
ˆ = µ1 − µ0

(2)

In other words, estimating ∆ using the mis-measured outcome will be a biased estimate if the means of the outcome
error under treatment and control conditions are different. Note that if the measurement error is either classical or
differential with respect to treatment, but the errors under treatment and control conditions are centered around the same
ˆ will still be an unbiased estimate of ∆ (its variance may be inflated, though this is not the focus of the
value, then ∆
current paper). Throughout this paper, we will therefore focus on the case where the measurement error is differential
rct
with respect to treatment, such that in the trial, µrct
0 6= µ1 .

One challenge to correcting for bias∆
ˆ is that the true outcomes measured without error, Z(0) and Z(1), are typically
rct
unobserved in an intervention trial. Therefore, the error means µrct
0 or µ1 cannot be estimated using the trial data
rct
alone. One strategy is to utilize information from an external validation study to estimate µrct
0 or µ1 by making an

assumption of transportability. However, external validation studies typically only measure the outcomes under a single
control condition, as described in Table 1 below.
Table 1: Observables by study sample. Cells shaded in grey denote observed measures, while blank cells denote
unobserved quantities.
validation
intervention study

S=v
S = rct

Z(0)
X

Z(1)

Y(0)
X
X

Y(1)
X

X
X
X

Note that if the potential outcomes under treatment, Z(1) and Y (1), were also observed in the validation sample, then
the validation study would be considered an intervention trial in itself. Such a scenario is highly unlikely, given the
intention and design of external validation studies. To account for this, Siddique et al. (2019) propose using external
validation data to estimate the error mean under control conditions, µrct
0 . We will consider the following naive estimator
for µrct
0 :
µ̂naive
=
0

nv
1 X
(Yi − Zi )
nv i=1

(3)

Observe that µ̂naive
is an unbiased estimate of µv0 , the error mean under control in the validation sample. By assuming
0
that transportability holds, we are also assuming that it is an unbiased estimate for µrct
0 , the error mean under control in
the intervention study.
Lastly, Siddique et al. (2019) conduct sensitivity analyses around the error under treatment (µrct
1 ) to obtain a plausible
range of estimates for ∆. We build on this work by proposing a solution to when the transportability assumption is
violated, and µ̂naive
is therefore a biased estimate for the error mean under control in the intervention study, µrct
0
0 .
4

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 3, we describe the transportability assumption evoked to
estimate µrct
0 using validation data and discuss its plausibility. We then formalize when the transportability assumption
will be violated, and how much bias is introduced as a result. Then, in Section 4, we propose the utilization of propensity
score-type weighting methods to decrease the bias of estimating µrct
0 using validation data, followed by a simulation
illustrating the performance of the weighting methods in Section 5. We apply the methods to a data example in Section
6, and conclude with a discussion of outcome measurement error and the utilization of validation data, along with some
limitations, in Section 7.

3

Transportability

ˆ is a biased estimate of ∆ in an intervention trial, and external validation data is therefore utilized to
Suppose ∆
rct
rct
partially account for bias∆
ˆ by estimating the mean error under control, µ0 . In order to obtain an estimate for µ0 , a

transportability assumption must be made. Formally, the assumption is as follows:
f (Y v (1), Y v (0)|Z(1), Z(0), X) = f (Y rct (1), Y rct (0)|Z(1), Z(0), X)
2

v2
rct
This transportability assumption implies that, under Normality, µv0 = µrct
(and also that µv1 = µrct
0 and σ0 = σ0
1
2

and σ1v 2 = σ1rct ). In other words, the assumption states that the measurement error structures for the potential outcomes
in the validation sample are the same as they are in the intervention study. This assumption also implies that µ̂naive
,
0
which estimates the error mean under control using validation data, is an unbiased estimate of µrct
0 . However, the
transportability assumption may not hold in some cases, which would introduce additional bias when estimating the ∆.
We will now describe when the transportability assumption will be violated.

3.1

Bias from transportability violation (biasµ̂0 )

In order to formalize when there will be bias in estimating µrct
0 using validation data, consider the case where we
2
have a single covariate, X, such that X = β0 + β1 1S=v + X , where X has mean 0 and variance σX
. Observe that

β0 = E[X|S = rct] and β1 = E[X|S = v] − E[X|S = rct]. In other words, β1 represents the difference in mean of
covariate X across the two datasets (trial and validation data).
Next, recalling the classical measurement error structure of Y = Z + , consider when the error term is distributed as
 ∼ N (α0 + α1 A + α2 X, σY2 ) such that the measurement error is differential with respect to both treatment and X. By
performing a substitution for X, we obtain the following:

 ∼ N (α0 + α1 A + α2 {β0 + β1 1S=v + X }, σY2 )
5

(4)

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Recall that µsa = E[Y s (a)] − E[Z(a)]. The measurement error mean parameters under each treatment condition in
each dataset can therefore be expressed as follows:
µrct
0 = α0 + α2 β0
µrct
1 = α0 + α2 β0 + α1
µv0 = α0 + α2 (β0 + β1 )
µv1 = α0 + α2 (β0 + β1 ) + α1
First, notice that bias∆
ˆ , which is the difference in error means between treatment and control conditions in the trial,
can be expressed as α1 . Next, we can derive the bias of µ̂naive
, which uses validation data, as an estimate of µrct
0
0 as
follows:
biasµ̂0 = µv0 − µrct
0 = α2 β1

(5)

The transportability assumption will therefore be violated if α2 6= 0 and β1 6= 0. In other words, if a covariate X
impacts the measurement error structure (α2 6= 0), and the distribution of X differs across the trial and the validation
sample (β1 6= 0), then µ̂naive
will be a biased estimate of µrct
0
0 . This also extends to when there are multiple covariates
that meet these two conditions.
The transportability assumption violation, and the introduction of biasµ̂0 , may also increase bias∆
ˆ . Observe that if we
substitute the estimate µ̂naive
for µrct
0
0 in Equation 2, we obtain the following:
naive
g ˆ = µrct
bias
1 − µ̂0
∆
rct
g ˆ ] = µrct
E[bias
1 − µ0 − α2 β1
∆

= α1 − α2 β1
This motivates the proposal of a weighted estimator for µrct
0 , that reduces biasµ̂0 , which we present in Section 4.
Table 2 summarizes the discussion on the two potential biases, bias∆
ˆ and biasµ̂0 , providing different cases for researchers
to consider when these biases should be of concern. While this may not be an exhaustive list of all possible scenarios,
we think of these as the most plausible scenarios in practice that researchers may encounter. Only Scenario VI, in which
the measurement error is differential in the trial with respect to A, differential in the trial and validation sample with
respect to X, and the distribution of X differs between the trial and the validation sample, violates the transportability
assumption. Scenario V is technically possible, where biasµ̂0 6= 0 while bias∆
ˆ = 0. However, note that the motivation
for outcome measurement error correction is only really when the measurement error is differential by treatment (i.e.
bias∆
ˆ 6= 0), so Scenario V is therefore highly unlikely.

6

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Table 2: Conditions under which to be concerned about bias in the AT E (bias∆
ˆ ) and/or bias in the measurement error
(ME) correction (biasµ̂0 )
Scenario

ME differs
by A

ME differs
by X

X differs
by sample

bias∆
ˆ

biasµ̂0

0

0

X

rct
µrct
0 = µ1
α1

0

X

rct
µrct
0 6= µ1
α1

0

I
II
III

X

rct
µrct
0 6= µ1

IV

X

X

α1
rct
µrct
0 6= µ1

X

V

X

0
rct
µrct
0 = µ1

VI

X

X

X

α1
rct
µrct
0 6= µ1

3.2

α2 6= 0,
but β1 = 0
0
β1 6= 0,
but α2 = 0
α2 β1
β1 6= 0
and α2 6= 0
α2 β1
β1 6= 0
and α2 6= 0

Additional Assumptions

In addition to the transportability assumption, we make a parametric assumption that the measurement error model
form is the same across the two samples. In other words, we assume that if the measurement error is differential with
respect to a given covariate in the validation sample, then it is also differential with respect to that covariate in the
intervention trial (i.e. if age impacts the measurement error structure in the validation sample, it also does so in the
trial). This assumption extends to the presence of higher order terms, such as interactions or quadratic terms, that they
be present in both samples. We also must assume that there are no unobserved covariates that impact the measurement
error and differ between the two samples. Lastly, we must make an assumption of common support, that the range of all
covariates in the validation sample are covered by their respective ranges in the intervention trial. For example, we
cannot transport an estimate from a validation study where the oldest participant is fifty years old to an intervention trial
with participants over the age of fifty. Another way to frame this is that each trial participant has a nonzero probability
of participating in the external validation study. The plausibility of these assumptions are discussed further in Section 7.

4

Weighting-Based Approach to Reduce Transportability Bias

We will now describe the use of propensity score-type weights to reduce the transportability bias. Propensity scores
have been traditionally used in non-experimental studies, where treatment is not randomized, to make treatment groups
more similar on pre-treatment covariates using matching or weighting methods (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). This
7

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

approach has since been applied to the fields of transportability and generalizability, where propensity scores are used
to model the conditional probability of trial participation (instead of treatment assignment). The probabilities are
subsequently used to weight a randomized trial so it better resembles a well-defined target population on observed
pre-treatment covariates (Stuart et al., 2018; Kern et al., 2016; Dahabreh et al., 2018).
Previous work has demonstrated similar benefits of implementing propensity score-type weighting methods when
using external validation data to adjust for missing confounders (McCandless et al., 2012) and when evaluating disease
prediction models in samples that differ from the target population (Powers et al., 2019). Here, we are interested in
addressing the transportability violation by weighting the external validation sample so that it better resembles the
intervention study of interest on a set of observed pre-treatment covariates.
In brief, we will do so by modeling the probability of study membership (trial vs. validation study), and then weighting
the validation sample before estimating µ0 . Consider the following model of study participation:

logit(P (S = rct)) = θt X

(6)

Where X is a set of observed covariates measured in both the trial and the validation data. We can then predict the
probability of trial participation as
êi = ê(X) = expit(θ̂t X)

(7)

Similar to ATT weighting for non-experimental studies, we then construct the following weights:

ŵi =





êi
1−êi

if S = v
(8)


0

if S = rct

Using these weights, we can then estimate µrct
0 using validation data with the following estimator:
µ̂weighted
0

Pnv
=

ŵ (Y −
i=1
Pniv i
i=1 ŵi

Zi )

(9)

Individuals in the validation sample that are more similar to the trial participants will have greater predicted probabilities
of being trial participants, and will therefore have larger weights. Members of the external validation sample that are
most dissimilar to the trial sample will be down-weighted towards zero. In this way, we can obtain a weighted estimate
of the error mean under control in the validation sample, µv0 , such that we reduce the bias of this estimate as an estimate
for µrct
0 due to covariate differences across samples. Details on estimating the standard error for inference can be found
in the Supplemental Materials.

4.1

Weighting under Misspecification of the Sample Membership Model

Recall that the error estimate in the validation sample will be a biased estimate of the error in the trial if there exists
a set of covariates that impact the measurement error structure and that also differ by sample. We therefore want to
8

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

include all observed covariates that fall into this category when fitting the model of sample membership. If we fit the
correct model of sample membership accounting for all such Xs in the true form, then we should be able to eliminate
the bias of our µ0 estimate through this weighting procedure (as is the case when transporting trial results to a target
population using inverse odds weighting, see proof in Westreich et al. (2017)). In practice, however, it can be quite
challenging to fit the correct sample membership model (i.e. there may be complex interactions or higher order terms
in the true model that are omitted). Fitting a simpler, misspecified sample membership model may lead to a smaller
reduction of the bias when weighting. In the next section, we describe a simulation study, where we demonstrate the
performance of the proposed weighting methods under increasingly complex true sample membership models, and
varying amounts of model misspecification.

5

Simulation

We now conduct a simulation study to assess the weighting methods described in Section 4 on decreasing biasµ̂0 . We
consider four covariates, and vary the following: (1) the degree to which each X impacts the measurement error model,
(2) the degree to which each X impacts the trial membership model, and (3) the degree of misspecification of the trial
membership model that is fit using the validation sample.
5.1

Simulation Setup

Consider the following measurement error model of Y :

Y = α0 + α1 Z + α2 A + α3 X1 + α4 X2 + α5 X3 + α6 X4 + Y
where Y ∼ N (0, σY2 ). Since we only require that the Xs impact the error structure in some capacity, we do not
consider other, more complex true structures of the measurement error model in this simulation study.
We vary the true underlying models of sample membership by considering the following seven model forms:
1. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4
2. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X32
3. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X42
4. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X3 X4
5. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X3 X4 + X32 + X42
6. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X1 X4
7. S ∼ X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X1 X3
We parameterize the coefficients for the covariates X1 , X2 , X3 , and X4 as {γ1 , 0, 12 γ1 , 2γ1 } in the measurement model,
and as {0, γ2 , 2γ2 , 12 γ2 } in the trial membership model (See Supplemental Table 5). In doing so, we establish that
9

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

covariate X1 impacts sample membership but not measurement error, X2 impacts measurement error but not sample
membership, X3 weakly impacts sample membership and strongly impacts measurement error, and X4 strongly impacts
sample membership and weakly impacts measurement error. We set any quadratic term coefficients to 50% of the
original X’s coefficient (i.e. if X3 has a coefficient of 12 γ1 , then X32 would have a coefficient of 14 γ1 ). For interaction
terms, the coefficient is set to the average of the two Xs’ original coefficients (i.e. the coefficient for a X1 X3 interaction
term would be 34 γ1 ).
The two parameters γ1 and γ2 function as scaling parameters, varying from 0 to 1 by increments of 0.2. Observe that
when γ1 = 0, the four covariates do not impact sample membership at all, and the trial membership probabilities are
expected to be 0.5 in both study samples. As γ1 increases to 1, the impact of the variables on sample membership
increases, and the overlap of the probabilities across the two samples decreases. In this way, γ1 can be considered a
function of the absolute standardized mean difference (ASMD) of the participation probabilities between the trial and
the validation sample. When γ2 = 0, then the measurement error is not differential with respect to any of the covariates,
and as γ2 increases, so does the impact of the covariates on the measurement error structure. Note that when either
γ1 = 0 or γ2 = 0, then we expect that biasµ̂0 = 0.
For each of the seven true trial membership models, we fit both the true model, which is correctly specified, as well as a
main-effects-only model. The main-effects-only model will be misspecified when the true model has interaction and/or
quadratic terms. This type of misspecification illustrates a plausible scenario, in which researchers may fit a simple
multi-variable logistic regression model to estimate the trial participation probabilities, ignoring potential complexities
in the underlying true model form.
In order to quantify the degree of model misspecification (DoM), Lenis et al. (2018) propose a unit-independent,
informative metric:

ηS =

N
1 X |π̂i − πˆiC |
N i=1 σπ̂C

where π̂i is the predicted probability of being in the trial under the specified model, and π̂iC is the predicted probability of
being in the trial under the true selection model. We use the DoM metric to relate the amount of model misspecification
across scenarios.
In total, there are 756 simulation scenarios that vary by: (6 values for γ1 ) × (6 values for γ2 ) × (7 true trial membership
models) × (3 weighting options: unweighted naive estimator, weighted estimator with correctly specified weights, and
weighted estimator with misspecified weights). We iterate over each scenario 1000 times, and will now describe the
data generation process.

10

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

5.2

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Data Generation

Consider one particular scenario from the 756 scenarios outlined above. We start by simulating a population of four
X covariates (N = 1000000) according to a multivariate Normal distribution with mean 0, variance 1, where there is
no correlation between the Xs. Based on the scenario’s γ1 value and true trial membership model form - suppose the
simplest true form for example - we generate the probability of being in the trial (vs. the validation sample) for the
whole population as follows:
1
pi = expit(γ1 X1i + 0X2i + γ1 X3i + 2γ1 X4i )
2
for i = 1, ..., N . Next, we generate the binary sample membership variable S for each member of the population as
Si ∼ Bernoulli(pi ) for i = 1, ..., N . Note that while each pi is determined by the scenario’s specified parameters, S is
assigned with a degree of randomness, such that each person in the population theoretically has a chance of being “in
the trial" or “in the validation sample" across each different simulation run.
After assigning S, we randomly sample members for the trial and validation samples, each of size n = 1000. In this step,
we observe the differences in the covariates across the two samples as specified by the γ1 scaling parameter. We then
generate the true potential outcomes Z(0) and Z(1) as Z(0) ∼ N (0, 1) and Z(1) ∼ N (2, 1), and the mis-measured
potential outcomes Y (0) and Y (1) as:

1
Y (a) ∼ N Z(a) + 0X1 + γ2 X2 + 2γ2 X3 + γ2 X4 , 1.5
2
such that the variance of Y (a) is 1.5 times the variance of Z(a).
We assign treatment A as Bernoulli(0.5) in the trial and 0 in the validation sample. Lastly, we generate the observed
outcomes Z and Y as Z = A × Z(1) + (1 − A) × Z(0) and Y = A × Y (1) + (1 − A) × Y (0).

5.3

Simulation Results

Figure 1 shows the absolute biasµ̂0 , or the transportability bias, across simulation scenarios. Each column represents a
different underlying true sample membership model structure, increasing in complexity and degree of misspecification
from left to right (see Supplemental Figure 3 for DoM by sample membership model form). The strength of the
impact of the Xs on the measurement error (γ2 ) increases by row, from top to bottom. The x axis depicts the absolute
standardized mean difference (ASMD) of the true selection probabilities across the samples, representing an increasing
difference between the X distributions across the samples (γ1 ) (see Supplemental Figure 4). Note that scenarios where
the ASMD is greater than 1 represent fairly extreme, less realistic settings. The three lines represent the absolute bias
of the naive estimator, the weighted estimator with misspecified weights, and the weighted estimator with correctly
specified weights.
First, note that in the top row, the absolute bias is zero under all cases, because the measurement error is not differential
with respect to any of the covariates (Table 2, Scenarios II and IV). Next, note that in all of the plots, the absolute bias
11

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 1: Bias of estimating the error mean under control using validation data. Each column represents a different
true sample membership model. From top to bottom row, the γ2 “scale" parameter for the impact of the Xs on the
measurement error increases, meaning the strength of the relationship between Y and the Xs is increasing in magnitude.
The different line types and colors represent the different weighting approaches: Unweighted (blue dotted dash),
weighted by fitting the simplest additive model (“Weighted - Misspecified", red solid), and weighted by fitting the true
selection model (“Weighted - True", green dash). This figure appears in color in the electronic version of this article.

is zero when the ASMD is zero, or when the distribution of covariates in the trial and validation sample do not differ
(Table 2, Scenarios II and III). Under the same true sample membership model (for a given column), as the impact of
the Xs on the measurement error model increases (from top to bottom row), and as the distributional difference of the
Xs increases between the samples (from left to right of the x axis), the absolute biasµ̂0 also increases.
When the selection model is correctly specified, and the resulting predicted probabilities are used to construct the
weights, the weighted estimator is nearly unbiased in all scenarios (except for when the impacts of the Xs on the
measurement error model and on sample membership are extremely, somewhat unrealistically, large). In practice,
though, model misspecification is very plausible, as it may be common for researchers to fit a main-effects-only model
of the covariates to predict the sample membership probabilities, unable to identify the true model form. Under varying
amounts of model misspecification, we see that the weighted estimator still performs fairly well in reducing biasµ̂0 . As
the severity of the transportability assumption violation increases, the weighted estimator with misspecified weights
does appear to perform worse than the weighted estimator with correctly specified weights under certain scenarios,
particularly when the omitted interaction and/or quadratic terms are for covariates that more strongly impact sample
membership and measurement error. For example, in column 4, the main-effects-only model omits an interaction
between X3 and X4 , the two variables that impact both models. That weighted estimator performs worse than the
12

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 2: Empirical coverage of 95% CI for estimators of µrct
0 . Each column represents a different true sample
membership model. From top to bottom row, the γ2 “scale" parameter for the impact of the Xs on the measurement
error increases, meaning the strength of the relationship between Y and the Xs is increasing in magnitude. The different
line types and colors represent the different weighting approaches: Unweighted (blue dotted dash), weighted by fitting
the simplest additive model (“Weighted - Misspecified", red solid), and weighted by fitting the true selection model
(“Weighted - True", green dash). This figure appears in color in the electronic version of this article.

main-effects-only model that omits an X1 X3 interaction (column 3), and the model that omits an X1 X4 interaction
(column 4), as X1 does not impact the measurement error structure at all.
Figure 2 shows the empirical 95% confidence interval coverage of the different estimators for µrct
0 . First, observe
that across all scenarios in which the covariates impact the measurement error (rows 2-6), the coverage of the naive
estimator sharply decreases towards zero as the intervention trial differs more greatly from the validation sample on
pre-treatment covariates. Note also, though, that the weighting approaches (even with a misspecified model) generally
yield substantially better confidence interval coverage than does the naive approach. This aligns with the pattern
in Figure 1, in which the naive estimator becomes increasingly biased as the samples become less similar on the
covariates. Next, note that the weighted estimator with correctly specified weights tends to have better coverage than
the weighted estimator with misspecified weights, though the coverage also decreases in the more extreme cases of
covariate differences between the samples. Still, the rate of coverage decline for the weighted estimators by covariate
differences is far smaller than that of the naive estimator. Also, note that for the more plausible scenarios (ASMD < 1),
the coverage of the weighted estimators is still fairly good, and far better than that of the naive estimator.
In the cases where the measurement error is not differential with respect to the Xs (top row), the weighted estimators
seem to have worse coverage than the naive estimator, even though they are all unbiased. This is due to the presence of
13

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

large/extreme weights, which shift the point estimates of µrct
0 further away from the truth and therefore increase the
variability of the weighted estimators, even though they are still unbiased. Trimming extreme weights (especially in the
less plausible scenarios where ASMD > 1), resulted in better coverage across these settings. However, in cases where
the measurement error is not differential with respect to covariates, and the transportability assumption is not believed
to be violated, then the weighting approach may not be preferable.
Overall, though, it appears that any weighting, whether by fitting a main-effects-only model, the true selection model,
or anything in between, greatly improves the transportability of the control group error mean from the validation sample
to the trial. When there are concerns about measurement error corrections not transporting properly from an external
validation sample to an intervention trial, these simulation results highlight that the weighting method proposed in
Section 4 can help reduce the bias and improve coverage due to poor transportability.

6

Data Example

We now apply the methods described in Section 4 to a lifestyle intervention trial, PREMIER, using OPEN, an external
validation sample.
In PREMIER, 810 individuals were randomized to either one of two behavioral/dietary recommendations, or to standard
care, to estimate the effect of the intervention on blood pressure reduction (Svetkey et al., 2003). For illustrative
purposes, instead of blood pressure, we focus on self-reported sodium intake, measured by 24-hour recall, as the
outcome of interest. We also combine the two intervention groups into one “treatment" group. PREMIER is a rather
unique intervention trial, in that urinary sodium intake was also collected at each time point in addition to the selfreported intake, providing an opportunity for us to evaluate the method performance. Note that this is atypical for an
intervention trial to collect. We use sodium intake at 18 months followup as the outcome of interest (though note that in
the original trial, the primary time point of interest for analysis was 6 months), and we limit the sample only to those
who have both self-reported and urinary sodium intake measures at 18 months (n = 670).
OPEN is an external validation study that measures both self-reported sodium (via 24-hour recall) and urinary sodium
(via a 24-hour urine sample) on a sample of 484 study participants, with the goal of understanding the structure and
amount of measurement error among self-reported dietary outcomes (Subar et al., 2003). Using PREMIER and OPEN,
we will demonstrate that the measurement error of dietary sodium intake is differential with respect to pre-treatment
covariates, and that the distribution of these factors also differ between the intervention trial and the validation study.
Therefore, the transportability assumption is violated, and µ̂naive
, which is estimated in OPEN, is a biased estimate for
0
µrct
0 in PREMIER.
Table 3 describes the distribution of covariates across the two studies, along with the ASMD of each covariate between
the two studies. Observe that BMI differs greatly between the two studies. Additionally, the OPEN population appears
to be older, more male and less racially diverse than PREMIER.
14

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Table 3: Distribution of Covariates by Study

Male
Age
≤ 40
41-45
46-50
51-55
56-60
≥ 61
BMI
Black
Education
College
Grad School

OPEN (n=484)

PREMIER (n=810)

ASMD

0.54

0.38

0.33

0.03
0.17
0.21
0.20
0.15
0.24
27.87
0.06

0.14
0.17
0.24
0.21
0.13
0.12
33.06
0.34

0.42
0.01
0.06
0.03
0.05
0.30
0.95
0.81

0.55
0.32

0.59
0.32

0.08
0.00

In order to implement the methods described in Section 4, we form a “stacked" dataset, comprised of data from
PREMIER and OPEN, which contains variables for sample membership (S), treatment (A), self-reported dietary
sodium intake (Y ), urinary sodium intake (Z), and the following common covariates (X): age category, sex, race, BMI
and education. Certain covariates, like age and education, are categorized to ensure consistency in measures across
datasets, and race is utilized as a dichotomous variable, indicating if individuals identify as Black or not. Again, note
that typically Z would be coded as missing when S = rct; however, the unique nature of PREMIER allows us to
observe Z in the trial.
By comparing the difference in outcome means by measurement type in PREMIER, it appears that the self-reported
dietary sodium measures under-report the true sodium intake in both treatment arms, and bias∆
ˆ at 18 months is estimated
to be 0.028 (see Supplemental Table 6). While this difference is not significant (see Supplemental Table 7), we still
proceed to assess the feasibility of transporting the error mean under control from OPEN to PREMIER for illustrative
purposes.
We fit a linear model to determine which covariates significantly impact the measurement error under control conditions,
using data from both PREMIER and OPEN (see Supplemental Table 8). The error under control appears to be
differential with respect to sex and race, and also weakly differential with respect to education. Given the output of this
model, and the covariate distributions shown in Table 3, we therefore have reason to believe that the transportability
assumption is violated.
Next, we fit a sample membership model using all five covariates, which includes covariates that impact both the
measurement error and sample membership, as well as covariates that just differ between the two samples. To fit the
model, we use generalized boosted models (GBM), an algorithm that allows for flexible, nonlinear relationships when
modeling study membership by a large number of covariates (McCaffrey et al., 2004). We examine the distributions
of predicted sample membership probabilities (see Supplemental Figure 5), which have an ASM D = 1.47. This is
unsurprising, given the large differences between the two samples’ distributions of race and BMI. There are some
15

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Table 4: Estimated Error Mean under Control Conditions in the Validation Sample, and Associated Bias, by Weighting
Method
6 months
Method

µ̂0

Unweighted

-0.228

Weighted

-0.326

µrct
0
-0.227

18 months
biasµ̂0

µ̂0

-0.001

-0.228

-0.099

-0.321

µrct
0

biasµ̂0
0.077

-0.305

-0.016

outliers in the resulting validation sample weights that are more than ten times the average of the weights. We therefore
implement weight trimming to account for the extreme weights, setting all validation sample weights in the top decile
to the 90th percentile weight value (Lee et al., 2011) (see Supplemental Figure 6 for the distribution of the trimmed
weights in the validation sample).
Lastly, we use the weights to estimate µ̂weighted
. Table 4 shows both the unweighted and weighted estimates, along
0
with the estimate of µrct
0 in PREMIER (which again, is usually not estimable when only self-reported outcomes are
collected). Observe that for the outcome at 18 months, the absolute bias of the µ̂0 estimate, biasµ̂0 , decreases by about
80% after implementing the weighting method.
In the data example, note that the ASMD of the sample membership probabilities between OPEN and PREMIER is
quite large (1.47), and that some of the covariates are extremely different from one another. Even after weighting,
OPEN is still a bit dissimilar from PREMIER by BMI and race (see Supplemental Figure 7). Additionally, by fitting the
selection model using GBM, we are able fitting a model somewhere between the true form and the main-effects-only
form. We therefore see that these results reflect the simulation findings under rather extreme cases, suggesting that the
weighting may help to a certain extent, but that the differences between the validation sample and trial may lend to
sub-optimal performance.

7

Discussion

When using self-reported measures as outcomes in a lifestyle intervention study, it is important to correct for any
potential measurement error in order to make accurate inferences on the effect of the treatment in the study population.
While measurement error is a well documented issue, particularly in nutritional epidemiology, there is still much need
for increased method implementation in applied research studies, as well as improved methodology for different types
of error (Jurek et al., 2006; Brakenhoff et al., 2018). We highlight the importance of considering transportability when
utilizing external validation studies to correct for outcome measurement error. Using externally estimated measurement
error may introduce additional biases to the ATE estimate in cases where validation samples are dissimilar from the
primary intervention study of interest. We show that weighting the validation sample to better resemble the intervention
study can reduce such biases, and improve upon the transportability of the measurement error estimated in the external
sample. However, in some extreme cases, it may still be inappropriate to transport if the validation sample is vastly
different from the trial on a set of observed characteristics. Additionally, it is important to remember that while
16

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

researchers are often concerned about measurement error, it will only lead to a biased ATE estimate when the outcome
error is differential with respect to treatment and the error means are thereby different across treatment groups. Such bias
would prompt the usage of external validation data for outcome measurement error correction, and thus the concerns
about transportability (see Table 2).
There are several limitations to the work presented in this paper. First, we assume that the measurement error model
structure (i.e. the model relating the measurement error to the covariates) in both the intervention study and the
validation sample are the same. It is possible that such relationships may differ between studies, even though in practice,
this would be untestable without observing the outcome without measurement error in the trial itself. Further research
is needed to understand transportability and to apply the methods proposed in this paper when relaxing this assumption.
Second, we assume in this work that we are able to fully observe all covariates that impact the outcome measurement
error structure in both the intervention study and the validation sample. Due to data availability, certain important
variables may be unobserved in practice, either in one of the datasets, or in both, which may hinder the performance of
these methods. Sensitivity analyses should be adapted and applied to address these concerns (Nguyen et al., 2017).
Lastly, as seen with PREMIER, transportability may vary by time-point with longitudinal outcomes, warranting further
investigation into how transportability and measurement error may vary over time.
This work has focused on the use of external validation samples only, and further research is needed to evaluate the
differences in transportability between internal and external validation samples. In some cases, internal validation
samples may still be preferable when possible to incorporate into study design, particularly such that true outcome
measures can be obtained under different treatment conditions. When it is infeasible to collect internal validation data,
researchers designing external validation studies should still consider the possible relevant trial study populations to
which the validation sample will be applied to. Taking such steps when designing validation studies will also help
ensure better transportability when using information from external data sources to correct for outcome measurement
error.

References
Bound, J., Brown, C., and Mathiowetz, N. (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In Handbook of econometrics,
volume 5, pages 3705–3843. Elsevier.
Brakenhoff, T. B., Mitroiu, M., Keogh, R. H., Moons, K. G., Groenwold, R. H., and van Smeden, M. (2018).
Measurement error is often neglected in medical literature: a systematic review. Journal of clinical epidemiology 98,
89–97.
Buonaccorsi, J. P. (2010). Measurement error: models, methods, and applications. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Carroll, R. J., Ruppert, D., Stefanski, L. A., and Crainiceanu, C. M. (2006). Measurement error in nonlinear models: a
modern perspective. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
17

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J. C., and Stewart, J. (2015). Adjusting body mass for measurement error with invalid
validation data. Economics & Human Biology 19, 275–293.
Dahabreh, I. J., Robertson, S. E., Tchetgen, E. J. T., Stuart, E. A., and Hernán, M. A. (2018). Generalizing causal
inferences from individuals in randomized trials to all trial-eligible individuals. Biometrics .
Espeland, M. A., Kumanyika, S., Wilson, A. C., Wilcox, S., Chao, D., Bahnson, J., Reboussin, D. M., Easter, L., Zheng,
B., GROUP, T. C. R., et al. (2001). Lifestyle interventions influence relative errors in self-reported diet intake of
sodium and potassium. Annals of epidemiology 11, 85–93.
Forster, J. L., Jeffery, R. W., VanNatta, M., and Pirie, P. (1990). Hypertension prevention trial: do 24-h food records
capture usual eating behavior in a dietary change study? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 51, 253–257.
Jenab, M., Slimani, N., Bictash, M., Ferrari, P., and Bingham, S. A. (2009). Biomarkers in nutritional epidemiology:
applications, needs and new horizons. Human genetics 125, 507–525.
Jurek, A. M., Maldonado, G., Greenland, S., and Church, T. R. (2006). Exposure-measurement error is frequently
ignored when interpreting epidemiologic study results. European journal of epidemiology 21, 871–876.
Keogh, R. H., Carroll, R. J., Tooze, J. A., Kirkpatrick, S. I., and Freedman, L. S. (2016). Statistical issues related to
dietary intake as the response variable in intervention trials. Statistics in medicine 35, 4493–4508.
Keogh, R. H. and White, I. R. (2014). A toolkit for measurement error correction, with a focus on nutritional
epidemiology. Statistics in medicine 33, 2137–2155.
Kern, H. L., Stuart, E. A., Hill, J., and Green, D. P. (2016). Assessing methods for generalizing experimental impact
estimates to target populations. Journal of research on educational effectiveness 9, 103–127.
Lee, B. K., Lessler, J., and Stuart, E. A. (2011). Weight trimming and propensity score weighting. PloS one 6, e18174.
Lenis, D., Ackerman, B., and Stuart, E. A. (2018). Measuring model misspecification: Application to propensity score
methods with complex survey data. Computational statistics & data analysis 128, 48–57.
Lyles, R. H., Zhang, F., and Drews-Botsch, C. (2007). Combining internal and external validation data to correct for
exposure misclassification: a case study. Epidemiology 18, 321–328.
McCaffrey, D. F., Ridgeway, G., and Morral, A. R. (2004). Propensity score estimation with boosted regression for
evaluating causal effects in observational studies. Psychological methods 9, 403.
McCandless, L. C., Richardson, S., and Best, N. (2012). Adjustment for missing confounders using external validation
data and propensity scores. Journal of the American Statistical Association 107, 40–51.
Natarajan, L., Pu, M., Fan, J., Levine, R. A., Patterson, R. E., Thomson, C. A., Rock, C. L., and Pierce, J. P. (2010).
Measurement error of dietary self-report in intervention trials. American journal of epidemiology 172, 819–827.
Nguyen, T. Q., Ebnesajjad, C., Cole, S. R., Stuart, E. A., et al. (2017). Sensitivity analysis for an unobserved moderator
in rct-to-target-population generalization of treatment effects. The Annals of Applied Statistics 11, 225–247.
18

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Powers, S., McGuire, V., Bernstein, L., Canchola, A. J., and Whittemore, A. S. (2019). Evaluating disease prediction
models using a cohort whose covariate distribution differs from that of the target population. Statistical methods in
medical research 28, 309–320.
Price, J. (1972). Extension of covariance selection mathematics. Annals of human genetics, 35(4), 485–490.
Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal
effects. Biometrika 70, 41–55.
Rothman, K. J., Greenland, S., Lash, T. L., et al. (2008). Modern epidemiology, volume 3. Wolters Kluwer
Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Philadelphia.
Siddique, J., Daniels, M. J., Carroll, R. J., Raghunathan, T. E., Stuart, E. A., and Freedman, L. S. (2019). Measurement
error correction and sensitivity analysis in longitudinal dietary intervention studies using an external validation study.
Biometrics .
Spring, B., Pellegrini, C., McFadden, H., Pfammatter, A. F., Stump, T. K., Siddique, J., King, A. C., and Hedeker, D.
(2018). Multicomponent mhealth intervention for large, sustained change in multiple diet and activity risk behaviors:
The make better choices 2 randomized controlled trial. Journal of medical Internet research 20, e10528.
Spring, B., Schneider, K., McFadden, H. G., Vaughn, J., Kozak, A. T., Smith, M., Moller, A. C., Epstein, L. H., DeMott,
A., Hedeker, D., et al. (2012). Multiple behavior changes in diet and activity: a randomized controlled trial using
mobile technology. Archives of internal medicine 172, 789–796.
Stuart, E. A., Ackerman, B., and Westreich, D. (2018). Generalizability of randomized trial results to target populations:
design and analysis possibilities. Research on social work practice 28, 532–537.
Subar, A. F., Kipnis, V., Troiano, R. P., Midthune, D., Schoeller, D. A., Bingham, S., Sharbaugh, C. O., Trabulsi,
J., Runswick, S., Ballard-Barbash, R., et al. (2003). Using intake biomarkers to evaluate the extent of dietary
misreporting in a large sample of adults: the open study. American journal of epidemiology 158, 1–13.
Svetkey, L. P., Harsha, D. W., Vollmer, W. M., Stevens, V. J., Obarzanek, E., Elmer, P. J., Lin, P.-H., Champagne, C.,
Simons-Morton, D. G., Aickin, M., et al. (2003). Premier: a clinical trial of comprehensive lifestyle modification for
blood pressure control: rationale, design and baseline characteristics. Annals of epidemiology 13, 462–471.
Westreich, D., Edwards, J. K., Lesko, C. R., Stuart, E., and Cole, S. R. (2017). Transportability of trial results using
inverse odds of sampling weights. American journal of epidemiology 186, 1010–1014.
Willett, W. (2012). Nutritional epidemiology, volume 40. Oxford university press.
Wong, M., Day, N., Bashir, S., and Duffy, S. (1999a). Measurement error in epidemiology: the design of validation
studies i: univariate situation. Statistics in medicine 18, 2815–2829.
Wong, M., Day, N., and Wareham, N. (1999b). Measurement error in epidemiology: the design of validation studies ii:
bivariate situation. Statistics in medicine 18, 2831–2845.

19

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Supplemental Material
R Code
All code for the simulation and data example can be found in the following GitHub repository:
https://github.com/benjamin-ackerman/ME_transportability
Derivation of Standard Error for µ̂weighted
0
Recall that

µ̂weighted
0

Pnv

w (Y −
i=1
Pniv i
i=1 wi

=

Zi )

Let Y ∗ and Z ∗ be the weighted vectors of Y and Z in the validation sample. Since Y and Z are paired measurements
and are not independent, var(Y ∗ − Z ∗ ) = var(Y ∗ ) + var(Z ∗ ) − 2cov(Y ∗ , Z ∗ ).
According to Price (1972),
∗

 Pnv

∗

cov(Y , Z ) =

i


wi (Yi − Ȳ ∗ )(Zi − Z̄ ∗ )
Pnv
i wi

where
Pnv
wi Yi
Ȳ ∗ = Pi=1
nv
wi
Pni=1
v
i=1 wi Zi
Z̄ ∗ = P
nv
i=1 wi
var(Y ∗ ) = cov(Y ∗ , Y ∗ )
var(Z ∗ ) = cov(Z ∗ , Z ∗ )

Therefore, seµ̂weighted =
0

p
var(Y ∗ − Z ∗ )/n and can be used to construct a 95% confidence interval.

Supplemental Tables and Figures
Table 5: Scaled coefficients for covariates by model type
S model
Y model

X1
γ1
0

X2
0
γ2

20

X3
1
2 γ1
2γ2

X4
2γ1
1
2 γ2

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Table 6: Self-reported and Urinary Sodium Outcomes by Study and Treatment Group
OPEN

PREMIER
6 months

18 months

Control

Control

Treatment

Control

Treatment

8.220
8.450
-0.227

7.850
8.070
-0.228

7.640
7.970
-0.323

7.840
8.140
-0.299

7.690
8.020
-0.327

Self-Reported (Y)
Urine (Z)
µsa

Table 7: T-test comparing measurement error by treatment group in PREMIER
Timepoint

bias∆
ˆ

6 months
18 months

0.1108736
0.0282937

95% CI

p-value

(0.0162, 0.206)
(-0.065, 0.122)

0.0217971
0.5517550

Table 8: Regression Coefficients for modeling effect of covariates on measurement error term
term

estimate

std.error

statistic

p.value

Intercept
log(sodium urine)
Sex
Age 41-45
Age 46-50

5.90
0.24
0.20
0.06
0.06

0.41
0.05
0.04
0.10
0.10

14.53
4.74
5.33
0.65
0.63

0.0000000
0.0000029
0.0000002
0.5178708
0.5302275

Age 51-55
Age 56-60
Age > 60
BMI
College Education

-0.07
-0.06
0.00
0.00
0.09

0.10
0.10
0.09
0.00
0.05

-0.78
-0.61
0.03
1.21
1.72

0.4365246
0.5419625
0.9789308
0.2275847
0.0864365

Grad School Education
Black

0.10
-0.28

0.05
0.07

1.84
-3.89

0.0668818
0.0001163

21

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 3: Degree of Misspecification (DoM) of fitting the main effects model under different true S model forms. As
expected, when the true model is the main effects model, there is no misspecification, and the most misspecified model
is the model with the most terms. Also note that the degree of misspecification increases when the true S model form
depends on the more influential covariates.

22

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 4: The relationship between the ‘scale’ parameter (γ1 ) and the ASMD between the true selection probabilities
across the trial and the validation data. There’s slight variation across the different true selection models, though this
could be due to simulation variability.

23

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 5: Predicted Probabilities of Trial Membership by Sample

Figure 6: Distribution of the trimmed weights in OPEN validation sample

24

T RANSPORTABILITY OF O UTCOME M EASUREMENT E RROR

ACKERMAN ET AL . ( PREPRINT )

Figure 7: Love plot comparing the covariate distributions in the intervention trial PREMIER (pink) and validation
sample OPEN (blue), pre-and-post weighting the validation sample

25

