Understanding black hole evaporation using explicitly computed Penrose diagrams
Joseph C Schindler,∗ Anthony Aguirre, and Amita Kuttner

arXiv:1907.04879v3 [gr-qc] 10 Jan 2020

University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
(Dated: August 2018)
Explicitly computed Penrose diagrams are plotted for a classical model of black hole formation
and evaporation, in which black holes form by the accretion of infalling spherical shells of matter
and subsequently evaporate by emitting spherical shells of Hawking radiation. This model is based
on known semiclassical effects, but is not a full solution of semiclassical gravity. The method allows
arbitrary interior metrics of the form ds2 = −f (r) dt2 + f (r)−1 dr2 + r2 dΩ2 , including singular
and nonsingular models. Matter dynamics are visualized by explicitly plotting proper density in the
diagrams, as well as by tracking the location of trapped surfaces and energy condition violations. The
most illustrative model accurately approximates the standard time evolution for black hole thermal
evaporation; its time dependence and causal structure are analyzed by inspection of the diagram.
The resulting insights contradict some common intuitions and assumptions, and we point out some
examples in the literature with assumptions that do not hold up in this more detailed model. Based
on the new diagrams, we argue for an improved understanding of the Hawking radiation process,
propose an alternate definition of “black hole” in the presence of evaporation, and suggest some
implications regarding information preservation and unitarity.
PACS numbers: 04.20.Cv, 04.70.Bw, 04.70.Dy
Keywords: general relativity, semiclassical gravity, black hole evaporation, Penrose diagram

I.

INTRODUCTION

The discovery that black holes (BHs) theoretically
evaporate [1–4] in apparently thermal radiation has
raised a number of fundamental questions over the years,
chief among them the issue of how to reconcile such evaporation with unitary evolution that preserves information, and how to reconcile descriptions of a BH by an
infalling observer with those of an exterior observer.
We contend that a full understanding of these issues
can greatly benefit from a more detailed understanding
of the spacetime structure of an evaporating black hole.
Accordingly, in this work we provide a well-defined class
of spacetimes representing a classical model of BH formation and evaporation, and construct explicitly computed
Penrose diagrams for these models using the formalism
recently developed in [5].
Our model corresponds to spherical BHs which form
by accreting infalling spherical null shells of matter, and
evaporate by emitting spherical null shells of Hawking
radiation from near the horizon (notably, the emission
location is fixed by energy conservation considerations).
Interior metrics including both singular and nonsingular
centers are within the scope of our methods. In the most
detailed version of the model, continuous time evolution
for both the accretion and evaporation processes is approximated by the use of many shells.
The basic structure of the model is motivated by its
similarity to renormalized stress tensors usually associated with the evaporation process [6]. It is quite similar
in spirit to the models first presented by Hiscock [7, 8]

∗

jcschind@ucsc.edu

and Hayward [9], and our more sophisticated diagrams
may be roughly thought of as numerically calculated versions of the diagram that Hayward originally sketched
(although his and our models do differ slightly). By
plotting Penrose diagrams for this model in a way that
accurately represents both the global and local causal
structure of the exact four-dimensional geometry, we are
able to attain a more detailed view of the structure of an
evaporating BH metric than was previously possible.
Many aspects of the “true” dynamics of an evaporating BH remain unknown. There are many proposals for
the BH end state [10–12], and questions have been raised
about in what regimes evaporation dominates the dynamics [13]. Nonetheless, BH evaporation appears to be
a phenomenon which probably can occur, and for now
seems likely to dominate if the environment becomes sufficiently cold. If so, one expects evaporation from macroscopic masses down to near the Planck scale, at which
point semiclassical arguments fail and many alternatives
seem plausible.
But while the physical relevance of BH evaporation
may be up for debate, its importance in the literature
certainly is not — its study has spawned some famous
questions [3, 14, 15], and reasoning about these questions
almost invariably draws on assumptions about classical
spacetime diagrams.
There is no reason to think that any classical model
can fully capture a spacetime in which quantum effects
are important. But in limits where classical relativity
is useful, a more detailed BH model can provide some
insight. Here we investigate a simple, concrete model,
which hopefully captures most generic aspects of an evaporating BH spacetime, and for which explicit Penrose diagrams can be attained. No direct calculation of the

2

r =0

H

+
J

semiclassical stress tensor is attempted, but we point
out various reasons to think the model is closer to selfconsistency than existing models. A more complete semiclassical treatment may be possible in the future.
We use the new diagrams to address, within the context of our classical model, some persistent questions
about BH spacetimes:

S3

r =0
B

S2

• Can a BH form in a finite time as viewed by a
distant observer? (Answer: Yes.)
• Of the many types of “horizon” associated with BH
spacetimes (event, apparent, dynamical, trapping,
Killing, etc.), which one has physical meaning in
terms of the BH boundary? (Answer: The apparent
horizon at the hypersurface r = 2m.1 )
• What is the causal structure of the apparent horizon? (Answer: The outer apparent horizon is timelike during evaporation, and spacelike during accretion.)
• Within the context of a purely classical model, does
it make sense to think of Hawking radiation as being emitted from a certain location? And if so,
where? (Answer: Yes, from just outside the apparent horizon, which during evaporation is a timelike
surface.)
• In evaporating nonsingular BH models, in terms of
causal structure: Where exactly are the regions of
high density and pressure, where are energy conditions violated, and where are the inner and outer
horizons relative to the core? (Answer: See diagrams.)
• Is it possible to escape the trapped region if the
BH is evaporating? (Answer: Yes, but it requires
very good timing. Falling too far past the apparent
horizon ensures your destruction in the singularity
or (in nonsingular models) core.)
Within our model, these questions have clear, unambiguous answers. To what extent these questions continue to
make sense in a fully quantum gravitational description
remains unknown.
We also apply these diagrams to the analysis of some
broader questions: What is the proper definition of a BH?

1

This hypersurface is the unique spherically symmetric marginally
trapped tube in spacetime, making it a distinguished hypersurface foliated by apparent horizons [16]. It is also the boundary of the unique spherical “trapping nucleus” (see appendix).
This boundary is associated with trapped surfaces, and is not
a “causal horizon” in the traditional sense. Its physical significance within the model is established in Sec. II. Non-spherical
generalizations are discussed in Sec. VIII.

J

r =0

−

S1

Figure 1. (Color online). Conventional Penrose diagram of an
evaporating black hole. The hole forms via the infall of null
dust (red arrow) and forms an event horizon (black dotted).
At some point the black hole evaporates, leaving Minkowski
space. Such a diagram usually does not represent any spacetime — the mechanism of evaporation is left ambiguous, and
the nature of point B is totally unclear. In the obvious
classical-spacetime interpretations of this diagram, however,
point B must be considered a naked singularity that creates
a Cauchy horizon H (red dotted), raising questions about the
applicability of this diagram for analyzing potentially unitary
BH evaporation. Below, we attempt to eliminate these ambiguities by constructing Penrose diagrams for well-defined
spacetime models of BH evolution.

What is the correct interpretation of the Hawking radiation mechanism? Is information preserved during BH
evolution? The discussion of these and other questions is
taken up in the later sections of the paper.
The traditional spacetime diagram for an evaporating
BH is depicted in Fig. 1. It is essentially the outline
of a Schwarzschild BH (formed by collapse) attached to
Minkowski space in an unspecified way. There are a few
reasons to be wary of this diagram, and to think it may
benefit from a more formal treatment.
First, the traditional diagram is ambiguous about what
spacetime it is meant to represent — it does not correspond to any particular model of BH evolution. The
mechanism of evaporation is left unspecified, and the nature of point B (where all physics of the evaporation
process is hidden) is totally unclear. Since a sketch like
this inherently captures no more information than the
assumptions put into creating it, it is difficult to learn
anything from such a diagram.
Second, any reasonable translation of the traditional
diagram to a classical spacetime has a naked singularity
and corresponding Cauchy horizon; this can be shown
both in simple examples and on general grounds.2 This
appears to have been noticed at least by Hawking [2] and

2

In the simplest rigorous interpretation of the standard diagram,
where the BH is annihilated by an incoming spherical null shell
(for example as in Fig. 2a), a point must be excised from the

3

r=
maposi
ss tive
ou
t

r−

in

r+

r =0

ass

rev

Schwarzschild
(m >0)

Minkowski
(m =0)

∞

r=

r=

∞

n

tio
cre

ac

r =0

em

2m

tiv

rev

maposi
ss tive
ou
t

r =0

∞

negative
mass in

ga

final Minkowski space for gluing to be topologically allowed near
B, which creates a Cauchy horizon. The general argument relies
on theorems of Geroch [17] — since the domain of dependence of
a surface is globally hyperbolic, the assumption that the region
beyond H is determined by S1 contradicts continuity of the past
and future volumes within a globally hyperbolic space.

ne

(iii) The equilibrium black hole solutions locally have
the form ds2 = −f (r) dt2 + f (r)−1 dr2 + r2 dΩ2 .

∞

(ii) The process is quasistatic, allowing dynamical evolution to be modeled by a sequence of equilibrium
BH solutions joined across null shells of matter
(such null shells may represent either truly light-like
radiation, or highly accelerated timelike matter).

Minkowski
(m =0)

r=

(i) The black hole is non-rotating and spherically symmetric.

r =0

n

We model the process of black hole formation and
evaporation according to the following assumptions:

(b)

Minkowski
(m =0)

tio
cre

II. SHELL MODEL OF BLACK HOLE
FORMATION AND EVAPORATION

(a)

ac

Birrell and Davies [18] from the beginning, but is forgotten in most modern discussions. In particular, many
discussions of the information preservation problem (see
for instance [14] for a highly referenced example) make
essential use of supposed Cauchy surfaces within this diagram, including surfaces on both sides of the evaporation
event. But if the spacetime underlying the diagram has
a naked singularity and is not globally hyperbolic, no
such Cauchy surfaces can be assumed to exist. Because
of this hidden assumption of unpredictability, the usefulness of such a diagram in analyzing possibly unitary BH
evaporation must be called into question.
Recognizing these shortcomings, and that evaporation
may profoundly change the character of the BH spacetime diagram, a number of studies have suggested improved diagrams that more easily allow an interpretation
in which information is preserved [9–11, 19–26]. These
form a useful background for investigating BH evaporation and related issues, and we build most directly on the
work of Hayward [9], who has provided the most minimal
and generic model.
By extending this type of model to a form in which
explicit Penrose diagrams can be attained, we explore
the structure of these improved models while resolving
the ambiguity and hidden assumptions inherent to hand
drawn diagrams. The new diagrams (Figs. 4–7) are simultaneously both Penrose diagrams and exact coordinate diagrams, allowing a detailed picture of the exact
geometry. A discussion of the diagram formalism, and
an explanation of some key aspects of interpreting the
new diagrams, is provided in Section IV.

Hayward
( m > 0)

Minkowski
(m =0)

Figure 2. (Color online). Schematic illustration of Penrose
diagrams for the shell model in simple cases. (a) The simplest
singular case: a Schwarzschild black hole forms by collapse of
a spherical null shell, and evaporates by emitting a single
burst of Hawking radiation, which nucleates at a radius rev =
rhor + lev just outside the apparent horizon at rhor = 2m.
(b) The simplest nonsingular case: a Hayward black hole (see
below) forms and evaporates in the same way.

(iv) Stellar collapse and mass accretion is modeled by
a sequence of ingoing spherical null matter shells,
incident from infinity.
(v) Hawking radiation is modeled by pairs of spherical
null matter shells. Each pair consists of an outgoing positive-mass shell and ingoing negative-mass
shell. Each pair nucleates at a fixed radial distance
lev outside the apparent horizon at r = 2m, with
both shells propagating toward the future. Nucleation points violate the DTR relation (an equation
related to energy conservation, see appendix), but
the amount of violation is arbitrarily small in the
lev → 0 limit. If lev ≈ lpl , tiny DTR violations may
be considered small quantum fluctuations. In this
sense, in our semiclassical model, energy conservation forces Hawking radiation to be emitted from
just outside the horizon.
This model is a slightly generalized discrete approximation to that proposed originally by Hayward [9], and
the evaporation mechanism agrees, heuristically, with the
classic calculation by Davies, Fulling, and Unruh of the
stress tensor for a quantum scalar field in the presence of
a static BH [6]. We construct spacetimes applying this
model, and their corresponding Penrose diagrams, by the
methods of [5]. It is assumed that physically realistic
models are achieved by first taking the limit lev → lpl at
each shell of Hawking radiation, then taking the continuous (many-shell) limit.
The simplest example of this approach, in which formation and evaporation each occur in a single burst, is

4
depicted schematically in Fig. 2 for both singular and
nonsingular interior cases; the exact diagrams will be
given later. More realistic models are obtained by using an arbitrarily large number of shells and piecewise
regions to approximate the desired smooth dynamics.

r−

1

m(r)/m
ρ/ρ0
pΩ /ρ0
p
− χfec /ρ20

0
r+

III. MATTER CONTENT OF SHELL MODELS
WITH SCHWARZSCHILD OR HAYWARD
INTERIOR

A benefit of explicit diagrams is that matter dynamics during the formation and evaporation processes can
be quantitatively tracked. We are concerned with four
quantities:
(i) The proper density and pressures of the bulk (equilibrium) spacetime, defined (up to a sign) as eigenvalues of Gµ ν /(8π). For metrics of form (1) these
include a density ρ, a transverse pressure pt = −ρ,
and an angular pressure pΩ . Also useful is the mass
function m(r) defined by f (r) = 1 − 2m(r)/r.
(ii) The location of trapped surfaces in the bulk spacetime, as characterized by the trapped spheres region (see appendix). Trapped spheres occur where
f (r) < 0 in the metric (1), and the trapped
spheres region is bounded by apparent horizons
where f (r) = 0 (see appendix).
(iii) The location and magnitude of energy condition
(EC) violations in both the bulk spacetime and on
the null shells, quantified by the EC violation functions χnec , χwec , and χfec (see appendix).
(iv) The local surface density σ of null shells, which is
proportional to the mass jump [m(r)] across the
shell (see appendix). The proportionality is positive (negative) for a shell which is radially ingoing
(outgoing) towards the future.
A detailed general analysis of the matter content for models of the present type is given in the appendix.
Our setup allows for a variety of models of the black
hole interior; any metric of the “strongly spherically symmetric” form
ds2 = −f (r) dt2 + f (r)−1 dr2 + r2 dΩ2

(1)

is allowed. Metrics of this type can be either singular or
nonsingular at r = 0 (for definition and properties see
appendix). Nonsingular models have the advantage that
all matter is made explicit in the stress tensor, whereas
singular solutions contain a matter contribution hidden
in the singularity. Although classical theorems do predict
singularity formation in gravitational collapse [27], nonsingular solutions are thought to arise in effective semiclassical approximations if quantum gravitational effects

−1

l = 0.01
2m = 1.00
rcore ≈ 0.05

0

1

r/rcore 2

3

Figure 3. (Color online). Matter content of the Hayward
spacetime. Density and pressure are maximized
 at r = 0,
3
3
4
with maximum density ρ0 = 8πl
2 = m/ 3 πrcore . The FEC
violation function χfec (see appendix) shows non-negligible
violations occur near the core surface; NEC and WEC are
violated at negative-mass shells in the dynamic model, but
not here in the bulk. The plot shows a small BH, but is
mostly parameter-independent: increasing m pushes the horizons at r− ≈ l (dashed) left and at r+ ≈ 2m (off scale) right,
with no other effects. Spheres are trapped surfaces for all
r− < r < r+ , which we call the trapped spheres region.

regulate curvature at the Planck scale. Nonsingular solutions often violate classical energy conditions, but since
quantum field theories are well known to do the same,
this is not a major defect [28].
A number of common metrics are of the form (1), including
Minkowski
de Sitter
Anti de Sitter
Schwarzschild
Reissner-Nordstrom
Hayward

f (r) = 1,
f (r) = 1 − r2 /L2 ,
f (r) = 1 + r2 /L2 ,
f (r) = 1 − 2m/r,
f (r) = 1 − 2m/r + Q2 /r2 ,
f (r) = 1 − 2mr2 /(r3 + 2ml2 ),

among others. We limit for now our consideration to
two simple cases: Schwarzschild (singular) and Hayward
(nonsingular) interiors.
We take the Schwarzschild metric to model BHs containing a singularity. As is well known, the matter content is trivial: the spacetime contains a vacuum everywhere outside the singularity at r = 0. Trapped spheres
occur in the interval 0 < r < 2m, with a horizon located
at r = 2m. For two Schwarzschild solutions of mass parameter m± = m ± ∆m/2 joined at a null shell, the mass
jump [m(r)] = ∆m is a constant, and ingoing (outgoing)
positive-mass shells increase (decrease) mass toward the
future. There are no EC violations.
Black holes with nonsingular interior we model by the
Hayward metric, with
f (r) = 1 −

2mr2
.
r3 + 2ml2

(2)

5
Density, pressures, and energy condition violations associated with this metric are shown in Fig. 3.
This metric has parameters l and m; l determines
the proper density measured at the core and defines the
length scale on which curvature is regulated by quantum
gravitational effects, while m determines the black hole
mass measured by a distant observer. In our models, l is
held fixed at a small value, while only m varies across
shells. Physically, one assumes that l ≈ lpl , and that
2m  l except in the final moments of evaporation.
When 2m  l, a radial slice of Hayward spacetime is
split into three intervals by horizons at
r− ≈ l
r+ ≈ 2m

(inner horizon),
(outer horizon),

with trapped spheres occuring in the interval
r− < r < r+

(trapped spheres region).

The matter distribution describes an extremely dense
(Planck scale density) core of length scale
rcore = (2ml2 )1/3 ,

(3)

which (except in the final moments of evaporation) obeys
l  rcore  2m. It is thus useful to think of the following
regions:
r  rcore ,
r ≈ rcore ,
r  rcore ,

Quantum Gravity Core,
Core Surface,
Nearly Schwarzschild Vacuum.

The core contains a homogeneous distribution of extreme density and pressure (Ricci curvature ∼ l−2 ),
with metric closely approximating de Sitter. Far away
from the core, the metric closely approximates the traditional Schwarzschild vacuum (Ricci curvature vanishes
like (r/rcore )−6 ). The core surface is characterized by a
rapid change in density and pressure accompanied by EC
violations. It is satisfying that the core extends outside
the inner apparent horizon: despite the lack of a singularity, trapped matter is doomed to quantum gravity
decomposition.
When Hayward regions of mass parameter
m± = m ± ∆m/2 are joined across a null shell junction,
the resulting mass jump is
2
r3
[m(r)] = ∆m

2|∆m|l2

r3

2|∆m|l2

+


m 2
|∆m|

−1

,

(4)

which develops monotonically from zero at r = 0 to
∆m at r → ∞ for small ∆m/m. Far from r = 0, this
closely approximates the Schwarzschild case, with a constant mass jump ∆m. Near r = 0, the shell mass gradually approaches zero over lengths of order (2|∆m|l2 )1/3 ,
as the shell is absorbed into (or generated by) the quantum gravity region.

It is often convenient to describe spacetimes of the
form (1) in double-null Eddington-Finklestein coordinates (u, v) defined by
du = dt − f (r)−1 dr,
dv = dt + f (r)−1 dr.

(5)

An integration constant in each coordinate acts as an
unphysical overall time translation. For asymptotically
flat cases, the coordinate v runs along past null infinity
(at constant u = −∞), while u runs along future null
infinity (at constant v = ∞).
How generic is the Hayward metric for describing nonsingular BHs? If we restrict to the form (1), very generic:
assuming the topology of a stellar-collapse BH, so that
r → 0 is included in the spacetime, the asymptotic behaviors as r → 0 and r → ∞ are fixed by physical considerations (nonsingularity, monotonic density, approximately
Schwarzschild), so the only freedom in f (r) involves the
transition to vacuum at the core surface. Since details
of the mass profile at the core surface have no important
effect on causal structure (no additional horizons are introduced without a drastic change), the exact form of
f (r) is not important. On the other hand, there does
exists a freedom to generalize (1) by including a redshift
factor α(r) such that
ds2 = −α(r)2 f (r) dt2 + f (r)−1 dr2 + r2 dΩ2 ,

(6)

while maintaining the same qualitative picture. Including this redshift factor leaves the proper density unchanged, but alters the curvature scalars and proper pressures, in addition to modifying proper times measured by
fixed-radius observers. The possibility of including a redshift factor seems physically admissible (so long as care is
taken to make sure it introduces no undesirable effects),
and is worth further consideration; one interesting application of this approach was given recently in [29]. While
we do not include the metric (6) in our full analysis (it is
outside the scope of our algorithm for generating Penrose diagrams), we do not expect the omission to have a
major effect on the resulting diagrams, since the redshift
factor does not significantly alter the causal structure.
In what follows, the matter content that has been described throughout this section will be plotted in spacetime diagrams to visualize the flow of matter during BH
formation and evaporation.
IV.

DIAGRAM FORMALISM

The new diagrams presented here (Figs. 4–7), which
are constructed using the methods developed in [5], may
look somewhat strange to those used to only outlines and
sketches. A few comments are in order.
The diagrams are obtained by directly finding a global,
compact, double-null coordinate system for the spacetime — in this sense they are not just Penrose diagrams,

6
but also exact spacetime coordinate diagrams.3 This allows all aspects of the exact four-dimensional geometry
to be captured in the diagram, including both the global
and local (interior) causal structure. No conformal information is thrown away. Each point in the diagram
represents a spherical symmetry surface, and, because
of the symmetry, it makes sense to discuss the exact
Riemann curvature (as well as anything derived from it,
like proper densities and pressures) and exact geometry
at any point of the diagram. We make use of this to
precisely plot the matter content, trapped surfaces, and
other features within the diagram. That these coordinate diagrams simultaneously act as Penrose diagrams,
correctly portraying the causal structure in the usual way,
is ensured within our formalism [5].
Given any spacetime, there exists the freedom to deform it by arbitrary conformal transformations without
disrupting the causal structure. Consequently, there is
sometimes assumed to be a corresponding freedom to
conformally distort Penrose diagrams. But while it is
true that conformal deformations preserve causal structure of the diagram, such deformations do not preserve
the geometry of the spacetime which is supposed to be
represented. Since we are interested in exactly representing the full spacetime geometry (and not merely conformally related spacetimes), arbitrary conformal distortions to the diagram cannot be allowed.
Despite this restriction, there remains a large amount
of freedom to distort the diagram by change of coordinates. In particular, any change of coordinates which acts
conformally on the metric4 yields another valid diagram.
In practice, this freedom amounts to separately deforming the U and V coordinates (which are some null coordinates defining the diagram) by any monotonic functions.
While the freedom to deform Penrose diagrams is well
known, it is not widely recognized just how different a
set of valid deformations can make a diagram appear.
We will see in Fig. 5 that three causally equivalent di-

agrams paint what, at first glance, appear to be three
very different pictures of the same spacetime. The key
point in reconciling the apparent difference is that in any
single diagram, some features are squished beyond recognition. This is unavoidable, since evaporating BH spacetimes contain a number of length/time scales (Planck
scale, horizon scale, formation timescale, evaporation
timescale, and in nonsingular models: core scale) which
can be drastically different.
For instance, in any model where the BH has a macroscopic mass, the Planck scale, horizon scale, and evaporation timescale (and in nonsingular models, the core size)
are all extremely different. Any individual diagram will
only clearly represent one of these scales at a time (the
rest being squished into points lines and edges). Gaining
a clear understanding of the complete causal structure
therefore requires the use of multiple diagrams. By carefully inspecting and comparing a few, the full story can
be pieced together.
While allowing more general (non-coordinate) conformal transformations in the diagram plane would, in
a strictly pointwise-causal-structure sense, allow more
scales to be depicted simultaneously by ignoring distance
information, it would also (as discussed above) destroy
the exact representation of the four-dimensional geometry which is essential to our analysis. This implies a
lesson about sketching diagrams: If one wishes to accurately depict details of the internal structure, the class
of allowed diagram deformations may be more restricted
than naively assumed.
For more details on how these diagrams are constructed, a more general formalism for the analysis of
Penrose diagrams (including, for example, a strict definition of what a Penrose diagram is), and further discussion
of the relation between Penrose diagrams and conformal
transformations, consult [5]5 .

V.
3

4

The usefulness of the direct coordinate approach to causal diagrams was always made clear by Carter [30, 31] and others
(e.g. [32]), but is not always made explicit in modern treatments,
which sometimes put more emphasis on conformal mappings following Penrose’s original method [33, 34]. But the conformal
transformation aspect of Penrose diagrams is actually slightly
misleading in four dimensions, since it is common to construct
diagrams for spacetimes which are neither conformally flat nor
conformally related to anything interesting (see [35]). It is only
the two-dimensional diagram plane (normal to the symmetry directions) which is necessarily conformally flat. The coordinate
diagram approach is more in the spirit of Carter than Penrose,
and it would be justified to alternately call these Penrose-Carter
diagrams, but that name is longer and less traditional. For more
details about the theory of these diagrams, see [5].
That is, when restricted to the two-dimensional diagram plane
(see footnote 3) it alters the metric only by an explicit conformal
factor. This preserves the causal structure of the coordinate
system [5].

DIAGRAMS FOR SIMPLE MODELS

Explicitly computed diagrams are shown in Fig. 4 for
the simple models depicted schematically in Fig. 2. The
parameters were chosen to emphasize certain qualitative
aspects, but are not particularly realistic (see Fig. 5 for
an improved model). The simple models capture most
qualitative features of the more detailed diagrams, and
several features in particular are worth noting.
Immediately apparent is the similar location of the
Schwarzschild singularity and the Hayward core surface

5

The methods of [5] have been implemented in a software module xhorizon for Python, which is under development by the
authors and available under a free open source license at
https://github.com/jcschindler01/xhorizon.

7

Figure 4. (Color online). Penrose diagrams for (a) singular and (b) nonsingular black holes which form by accreting a single
shell of infalling matter and evaporate by emitting a single blast of Hawking radiation (see Fig. 2 for an illustrative schematic).
Parameters are chosen to illustrate qualitative features, but the time evolution and relative length scales are not realistic (see
Fig. 5 for improved model). Positive-mass (accretion and outgoing Hawking radiation, gray dashed) and negative-mass (ingoing
Hawking radiation, gray dotted) shells separate the spacetime into piecewise regions, with Hawking radiation nucleating at a
tiny radial distance lev outside the horizon of the region to its past. In diagrams with many shells, shell masses are indicated by
grayscale darkness (darkness proportional to 1 + 2 ∆m/M ). The curvature cutoff length scale l (which has physical significance
only in Hayward regions) is held fixed across all regions, while the mass parameter m (which in every region determines the
gravitational mass measured by a distant observer) varies. The total mass M is the maximum value of m in any region,
and locally m is visualized by the linewidth of the conformal boundary at r = ∞ in each region (linewidth proportional to
1 + 2m/M ). Tick marks (gray) along r = ∞ mark off equal increments of proper time for an infinitely distant observer at
constant radius (i.e. constant increments of du and dv along null infinity). The trapped spheres region (black dot-hatch fill),
bounded by horizons (black) where f (r) = 0, contains closed trapped spheres. Background coloring is determined by the local
proper density ρ (orange color scale) scaled by the maximum density ρ0 = 3/(8πl2 ). The Hayward core is clearly visible as
a dark orange region in the density plot, and the core surface almost exactly corresponds to the singularity location in the
Schwarzschild case. Notably, distant observers near future null infinity begin to observe Hawking radiation at the same moment
they see the infalling accretion shell fall through its own horizon. Lines of constant radius are shown at small (dr = l/2, teal)
and large (dr = 2M/2, magenta) length scales; even where they appear bundled or strongly kinked, they do in fact remain
continuous. One strange-looking feature of this diagram is the appearance of a set of wiggly kinks and a few stray tick marks to
the future (measured along future infinity) of the final evaporation shell, before the very stretched out area; this is an artifact of
the unrealistic parameters, and in more realistic models these kinks and tick marks all coincide with the final shell. Coordinates
V and U defining the axes are basically arbitrary null global coordinates, defined further in [5]. The same visualization scheme
described here is used in all examples below.

8
(this coincidence is generic, see [5]); the two surfaces almost exactly coincide. The intersection of the singularity
with timelike r = 0 corresponds to the point B in Fig. 1,
about which questions were raised in the introduction.
From a technical perspective, this point creates a Cauchy
horizon in Fig. 4a since topological matching conditions
require that B be excised from the final Minkowski space.
It is probably more physical, however, to examine the nature of point B by looking at the corresponding point in
Fig. 4b. Clearly, a surface like S2 of Fig. 1, terminating at
the point corresponding to B, is not a Cauchy surface in
the regularized spacetime. At least to the extent that the
singularity cuts off an unknown semiclassical spacetime,
this shows on physical grounds that B should be considered a naked singularity. This picture is likely generic
to nonsingular extensions of the Schwarzschild solution,
as the causal structure of the core does not depend on
details of the metric. While the spacetime of Fig. 4b is
globally hyperbolic, the above analysis has an important
consequence: the spacetime of Fig. 4a is not.
A natural question to ask about an evaporating BH
is whether it’s possible to escape after falling through
the apparent horizon. Formally, do there exist timelike
curves intersecting the trapped region but avoiding the
core or singularity? According to our shell model, the
answer is yes, as is evident from Fig. 4. Indeed, as seen
even more clearly in Fig. 5, during evaporation the apparent horizon forms a timelike surface of decreasing radius,
despite being locally null within each piecewise region.
For an observer who barely crosses the horizon, it’s possible to wait for the horizon to “evaporate past,” allowing an escape. Nonetheless, all timelike observers in the
trapped region are radially infalling, and will eventually
be doomed to destruction in the core if the black hole is
long-lived relative to their ability to accelerate.
Tick marks along null infinity in Fig. 4 represent constant intervals du = const and dv = const along future
and past null infinity respectively. Aside from specifying
equal increments of proper time for distant observers,
these ticks are useful for analyzing particle creation by
the spacetime in quantum field theoretic computations.
In the standard analysis, in and out vacuum modes are
associated with the u and v coordinates, and the thermal
Hawking flux is associated with an infinite phase buildup
found by comparing dv increments to traced-back du increments at past null infinity [2]. Noting that the tick
marks have an additive opacity (so that darker marks
actually show many superimposed ticks), it’s clear that
some approximation to the usual phase buildup effect is
present in both Fig. 4 and the subsequent examples.
While the simple single-burst models capture many
aspects of the more realistic diagrams, they also differ
in certain respects. Most importantly, realistic models
have four very different length scales, corresponding to
lpl , rcore , M , and the BH lifetime τev (where l and lev
are both on the lpl scale). As a consequence, more real-

istic diagrams tend to have very sharply kinked features,
and features can be clearly portrayed only for one length
scale at a time, with other features relegated to lines,
bundles, and corners. Another difference between Fig. 4
and more advanced models is quite noticeable: as also
described in the caption, the separation (measured along
future infinity) between kinks in the lines r = const and
the final evaporation shell is an artifact of the unrealistic
parameters of Fig. 4. In Fig. 5 and other realistic models, all diagram features associated with the final step of
evaporation coincide with the final shell.

VI. DIAGRAMS FOR A NONSINGULAR
MODEL WITH MORE REALISTIC TIME
EVOLUTION

A more detailed model is attained by approximating continuous time evolution with a large number of
shells and piecewise regions. A diagram of this type,
constructed based on a Hayward interior of fixed curvature cutoff length scale l, is presented in Fig. 5. Its
parameters, justification, and implications are discussed
below. While we have chosen here to work with a nonsingular model, all the diagrams can be translated to the
Schwarzschild case by simply replacing the core surface
with a singularity and ignoring the interior region (see [5]
for why this is valid).
The desired time evolution is specified by a pair of
mass functions mu (u) and mv (v) describing the mass as
a function time measured by distant observers at future
and past null infinity, respectively. The mass functions
are mutually independent outside the requirement
mu (−∞) = mv (∞) = M,

(7)

where M represents the total maximum mass of the BH.
The function mv (v) defines dynamics for the process of
BH formation and accretion. The correct form is determined by astrophysical processes, and is of little interest
to us here. As a rough estimate, we assume the BH accretes half its total mass in an initial burst at v = 0, then
accretes the remainder linearly until a time v = τf when
it is fully formed:


v < 0,
 0,
(8)
mv (v) = M ( 21 + 21 τvf ), 0 < v < τf ,


M,
τf < v.

Inspection of the diagrams reveals that during accretion,
the outer horizon where f (r) = 0 is spacelike.
The function mu (u), meanwhile, defines the dynamics
for BH evaporation. It is chosen to respect the thermal
evaporation rate
dm
∝ −m−2
du

(9)

9

Figure 5. (Color online). Penrose diagrams for a nonsingular Hayward black hole which forms gradually then evaporates by
slowly emitting thermal radiation with a standard time dependence (see (8-10)). The visualization scheme and associated legend
are the same as in Fig. 4. As discussed in Section IV, these diagrams accurately capture both global and local (interior) structure,
since they are constructed by directly finding a compact global double-null coordinate system for the spacetime. Although
the three diagrams depicted in (a,b,c) appear vastly different, they all are derived from exactly the same spacetime — they
have strictly the same causal structure, and are related by conformal transformations in the U V plane. (These “conformal”
transformations are induced by coordinate transformations, so no geometric information is lost, see Section IV.) While the
conformal freedom in Penrose diagrams is well known, it is not widely recognized how drastically different these transformations
can make the spacetime appear, or that no single diagram will clearly depict the various widely different timescales of BH
evolution (formation, evaporation, Planck scale) simultaneously. Inevitably, in any diagram, some features will be squished
beyond recognition; hence the need to compare multiple diagrams to gain a full understanding of the spacetime. Here, different
transformations are used to highlight features (a) during accretion, (b) during evaporation, and (c) near the end of evaporation.
In comparing the causal structure between them, note that some lines appearing null are only nearly null, and that some
features are hidden by being very squished. For example in (a), the entire evaporation process (which includes important
timelike features visible in (b,c)) is squished into a tiny, seemingly null, line. Similarly, parts of the high density region (orange)
in (b), and all of the high density region in (c), are squished and hidden behind the future part of the nearly null segment of
r = 0. The important qualitative features of these diagrams are summarized in Section VIII. Parameters were chosen to be as
realistic as numerically allowed, providing a strong hierarchy of the formation, evaporation, and interior length/time scales (an
overall scale factor is irrelevant). Since the BH length scales are so small compared to the evaporation rate, lines r = const
at 2M (magenta) and smaller length scales are very close together and each appear as a single bundle; an additional set of
r = const lines has been added with spacing dr = τev /20 (faint purple) to display larger scales. Although some lines of constant
radius may seem discontinuous, they are in fact just strongly kinked; their continuity can be confirmed by gradually adjusting
the parameters from less extreme values. For example, faint purple lines approaching the evaporating horizon in (a) do not
disappear, but closely hug the horizon in a bundle until reappearing in the far future region. The opacity of the tick mark near
the moment of evaporation in (a) shows that many tick marks have piled up there; this is the phase pileup usually associated
with Hawking radiation in particle creation calculations. The same phase pileup can be observed in (b,c); in all cases one
expects interesting results wherever the dv ticks are very mismatched with traced-back du ticks. Panels (d,e) confirm that the
numerically generated dynamics closely approximate the desired behavior.

10
arising from blackbody radiation calculations in a
Schwarzschild spacetime [36]. In particular, we choose


u < 0,
 M,

1/3
(10)
mu (u) = M 1 − τu
, 0 < u < τev ,
ev



0,
τev < u.

The location of u = 0 is set by the requirement that
Hawking pairs nucleate just outside the horizon; a distant
observer sees evaporation begin at the same moment they
see the infalling shells fall through their own horizon.
Once evaporation begins, the horizon is timelike.
While more realistic than the single-shell case, this
is still only a toy model, meant to capture the commonly considered, highly idealized, case where an initially large spherical BH evaporates entirely by emitting
blackbody radiation. The true spacetime of an evaporating BH is expected to differ in many ways, including
corrections to the time dependence due to temperaturedependent emission effects and due to deviations from the
Schwarzschild metric, as well as more intractable differences (like the necessity of including charge and rotation).
Moreover, it seems likely that once an evaporating BH
approaches the Planck scale its dynamics may be greatly
modified. But in the absence of a widely accepted model
for the BH end state, continuing Schwarzschild blackbody evaporation until the BH’s disappearance seems like
a conservative option. In any case, regardless of these details, this model should help attain an accurate qualitative picture of any BH emitting roughly thermal Hawking
radiation during part of its lifespan.
Choosing a sequence of shells approximating the ideal
accretion dynamics is trivial, but approximating the
evaporation dynamics is slightly more involved. We consider the shell approximation successful if both mu (u)
and mv (v) are reasonably well approximated, with all
evaporation shells nucleating at a fixed radial distance lev
outside the apparent (outer) horizon r+ of the region to
its past (a basic assumption of our shell model). During
evaporation, each shell nucleation point is defined by its
coordinates (u, v, r) and (u0 , v 0 , r0 ) in the past and future
regions containing it. Any two of (u, v, r) determine the
third, and the radii r = r0 measured on each side must
be equal. Regions between evaporation shells are characterized by their mass m and duration (du, dv) measured
by observers at future and past null infinity. A suitable
sequence of shell parameters is specified as follows. As
a first estimate, we sample values at equal intervals of
u ∈ (0, τev ) from the continuous dynamics
1/3
m(u) = M 1 − u/τev
,
r(u) = 2 m(u) + lev ,


v(u) = u + 2 FS r(u), m(u) ,

r
− 1 is a tortoise funcwhere FS (r, m) = r + 2m ln 2m
tion [5] for a mass m Schwarzschild metric, yielding a

sequence (mi , ui , vi ) of mass parameters and shell coordinates. The parameters thus obtained would be exact
for a continuously evolving Schwarzschild spacetime, but
are not quite consistent with our discretized (and possibly non-Schwarzchild) model; this is corrected by adjusting the ui values to ensure that nucleation points lie
exactly lev outside the outer apparent horizon. This process determines the discrete dynamics up to an overall
time translation. One might expect that the small adjustment of ui always leads to a valid approximation of
the ideal dynamics, but in practice the method can break
down if the BH mass and lifetime are not mutually consistent.6 Whether the approximation was successful can
be checked empirically; Figs. 5d–5e demonstrate that the
desired continuous dynamics was correctly attained for
the spacetime of Fig. 5.
Three different diagrams are needed to visualize different aspects of the spacetime in Fig. 5, due to the presence of vastly different timescales in the problem. Each
panel corresponds to a different (conformally related) coordinate transformation in the U V plane, depicting the
process as “viewed” from one of three different times.
(The exact form of the coordinate transformations is determined by which region is used as the “seed” for a chain
of shell matching transformations.) Together, they paint
an intuitive picture. Early observers see the BH accrete
mass, forming a BH with a long-lived nearly null horizon,
behind which lies the dense core (space between the horizon and core exists but is squished away in this diagram).
Intermediate-time observers looking far into the past see
the outer surface of accretion shells shrouded by a horizon, with sparse Hawking radiation to their past and a
final evaporation blast in their future. And late time
observers simply see Hawking radiation emitted from a
timelike horizon. The detail view of Fig. 6 emphasizes observers near the horizon at early times, and shows clearly
the horizon transitioning from spacelike to timelike as accretion gives way to evaporation.
In the following section, we will see that a similar
model can be extended to include cosmological models
with nonzero background curvature.

6

Page has shown based on quantum and thermodynamic analysis
that for an evaporating Schwarschild BH one expects




τev
M 3
=A
,
tpl
mpl
where A ∼ 1000 is a unitless constant determined by physical
considerations [36]. (The precise value of A depends on various
factors since the proportionality constant in the evaporation rate
is, in less idealized cases, temperature dependent.) Our model
seems to work well unless the nominal evaporation time is much
shorter than dictated by this relation, with the Planck scale set
by lev (in geometric units lev = lpl = tpl = mpl ). Since our
model is purely geometric, the reason this relation must be enforced is not trivial.

11

Figure 6. (Color online). Detail view of horizon and core
dynamics during formation and the early stages of evaporation, for a spacetime similar to Fig. 5 but with somewhat less
realistic parameters (in the sense that the mass and lifetime
are not mutually consistent). Although the parameters are
less realistic, the features depicted are qualitatively accurate.
Details like these are not visible in more quantitatively accurate diagrams, where the extreme hierarchy of length and
time scales prevents accretion and evaporation features from
being depicted simultaneously. Compare to the region where
accretion shells meet the core in Fig. 5a. Note that the apparently teal region is in fact a bundle of closely spaced lines
of constant radius just outside the core.

Figure 7. (Color online). Penrose diagrams for single-burst
shell models with (a) negative and (b) positive background
curvature, with metrics (11) corresponding to the Hay-AdS
and Hay-dS BH spacetimes. Parameters were chosen for
maximum visibility of qualitative features. Density color
scale here depicts ρ − ρbg , with constant background density ρbg = ±3/(8πL2 ) (positive for dS). In (b), an additional
set of lines r = const (faint purple) have been added with
spacing dr = L/2 to depict larger length scales. Note that,
in addition to BH trapping, the dS case includes cosmological trapped regions having nothing to do with the BH. Tick
marks no longer correspond to proper time, but still represent
equal increments of du and dv. Notably, inspecting the tick
marks shows that the phase pileup typically associated with
Hawking radiation is still present in the u and v coordinates,
even without the assumption of asymptotic flatness.

VII. DIAGRAMS INCLUDING
BACKGROUND CURVATURE

Fig. 4b. The results are depicted in Fig. 7.7
While many discussions of BH evaporation assume, for
simplicity, an asymptotically flat exterior, it is also interesting to consider BHs evaporating in alternative cosmologies. We therefore provide, in this section, Penrose
diagrams for nonsingular BHs evaporating within asymptotically de Sitter (dS) and Anti de Sitter (AdS) spacetimes. Let us suppose, for both dS and AdS cases, that
the background curvature is characterized by a length
scale L such that l  2m  L (l and m being parameters
of a Hayward metric, see above). That is, the black hole
is small compared to background curvature length scales.
A nonsingular BH in a background of constant curvature may be described by (1) with
f (r) = 1 −

r2
2mr2
± 2,
2
3
2ml + r
L

Having constructed single-burst models, the question
arises of how to properly add continuous time dependence. Assuming 2m  L, the spacetime is nearly
asymptotically flat on length scales much smaller than L,
and there is a class of observers, similar to distant
Schwarzschild observers, for whom 2m  robs  L and
f (r) ≈ 1. It seems reasonable to assume that these
nearly-asymptotically-flat observers should measure the
usual thermal dependence, in which case the earlier prescription in terms of mu (u) and mv (v) carries over unmodified. For a cosmologically-sized BH, however, how
the detailed structure would look is less clear.

(11)

which we refer to as the Hay-AdS (+) and Hay-dS (−)
metrics. By fixing l and L while varying m across shells,
we can construct single-burst forming and evaporating
black hole models analogous to the flat space version of

7

Maximally extending BH metrics in a dS background generically
leads to an infinite chain of BHs and asymptotic infinities. To
avoid this issue we modify the Hay-dS spacetime to transition
to pure dS space far away from the BH. The transition occurs
inside the cosmological horizon on the side of dS with no BH,
and has no important effects.

12
VIII.

which can be inferred from Fig. 5b). The core surface is spacelike, while the boundary of the doomed
region is null.

WHAT IS A BLACK HOLE?

The causal structure encoded in these diagrams invites
us to revisit a subtle question: What is a black hole?
A number of authors, most famously Hawking [37], have
already argued that the traditional global definitions
(e.g. in terms of an event horizon) are not useful when
evaporation is taken into account — and we will make
a more detailed case for this proposition below. While
the natural context for defining black holes is quantum
gravity, to the extent that BHs have a classical spacetime description, a general relativistic definition should
be possible. To motivate an improved definition, let us
review some of the features of the spacetime of Fig. 5:
(i) The spacetime has no event horizon, and is globally
hyperbolic.
(ii) A distant external observer sees collapsing matter
fall through its own apparent horizon in a finite
amount of (the observer’s) proper time. At the
same moment the observer sees this crossing occur
and the apparent horizon form, they begin to receive Hawking radiation (compare Figs. 4b, 5a, 6).
In general, distant observers see Hawking radiation
if and only if they are looking back at the apparent
horizon.

(vii) The inner boundary of the trapped region (the inner
horizon) lies entirely within the core; it is timelike
during accretion and spacelike during evaporation
(Fig. 6). In the final moments of evaporation, the
inner horizon, core surface, and outer horizon all
come together.
(viii) The core maintains a constant Planck scale density.
As the BH mass changes over time, the core, which
for large BHs is significantly larger than Planck
scale in radius, adjusts in size to accommodate the
total mass.
(ix) The proper time experienced at r = 0 within the
core (to the extent that it corresponds to the classical value) is of the same order of magnitude as the
BH lifetime experienced by distant observers. However, this could potentially be modified by altering
the Hayward metric to include a redshift factor (see
discussion surrounding (6)).
(x) Time evolution starting from initial data in the distant past and proceeding through the process of BH
formation, accretion, and evaporation down to the
Planck scale (including the emission of the majority of the Hawking radiation) can be described by a
continuous family of Cauchy surfaces entirely to the
past of the (quantum gravity) core (this is seen most
clearly in Fig. 5c), on which semiclassical physics
should apply. Evolution beyond the final moment
of evaporation, when the BH disappears entirely,
involves evolving Cauchy surfaces through the core,
and requires a quantum gravitational description.

(iii) Hawking radiation is emitted from a timelike surface
(Fig. 5c). The emission surface is just barely outside
the apparent horizon, which itself is also a timelike
surface in the continuous limit (Fig. 5c).
(iv) The part of the diagram intuitively considered “part
of the BH” consists of the trapped region and core.
The trapped region is “trapped” in the sense that
all future-directed curves are radially ingoing. The
core is an ultradense quantum gravity plasma.
(v) During evaporation, the outer boundary of the
trapped region is a timelike apparent horizon
(Fig. 5c). During formation, a spacelike portion
of the apparent horizon occurs inside the infalling
matter (Fig. 6). External observers previous to
the emission of any Hawking radiation see the apparent horizon as a nearly null surface in the future (Fig. 5a); in order to receive Hawking radiation, such observers must go “around the corner”
to where the horizon appears timelike.
(vi) Some trapped observers, who have just barely fallen
in, can escape the BH without intercepting the core
by accelerating out of the trapped region during
evaporation. Others, who have fallen too far in already, are doomed to destruction in the core. This
“region of no escape” is quantified by the past domain of dependence of the core (the location of

Inspired by the above observations, we propose a definition which depends on only local quantities and is consistent with all common black hole models: A black hole
is a future-trapped region surrounding and feeding into
an ultra-dense core.8 Both the core and trapped region
should be considered a part of the BH; one might propose
to call this a core and shroud definition. Insofar as a singularity acts as a placeholder for a dense point mass, this
definition includes both singular and nonsingular models.
This definition departs from tradition, by focusing on
the trapped region and apparent horizon, rather than the
region of “no escape to infinity” and corresponding event

8

The phrase “feeding into” signifies that the inner future boundary of the trapped region lies on or within the core, and the
phrase “surrounding” implies that the core lies within future
light-sheets [38] of the relevant closed trapped surfaces. Recall
also that the trapped region is “trapped” in the sense of trapped
surfaces, not of “no escape.”

13
horizon. The traditional “event horizon” definition has
several disadvantages. Most importantly, the location of
an event horizon (which is typically defined as the boundary of the past of future infinity) is determined by the entire future history of the BH, and cannot be determined
by any local data. Thus, even when it is clear that a
“BH-like object” locally exists, the presence or absence
of a BH by the traditional definition depends strongly on
the BH end state (for example whether the BH later accretes additional mass, and whether the final dynamics
are dominated by evaporation, remnant outcomes [10],
mass inflation instability [12], or a bounce [11]). In contrast, the location of a core and trapped region can be
determined by local data in a finite time.
Moreover, even without invoking nonsingular models,
it’s not clear that rotating or charged BHs form an event
horizon at all when evaporation is taken into account.
For example, the naive translation of Fig. 1 to a ReissnerNordstrom metric leads to a naked singularity with no
event horizon (such a diagram looks similar to Fig. 2b,
see, e.g., [39, 40]). One possible rebuttal, that BHs should
discharge and spin down before evaporating, is not very
convincing, since spacelike-ness of the Schwarzschild singularity is unstable to even continuously small perturbations of the charge and rotation parameters. If nonsingular models are adopted, then charged and (presumably,
see [41]) rotating BHs have the same basic causal structure as the Hayward metric, and, as in Fig. 5, would
exhibit no event horizon in our simple model. General
nonsingular solutions should be expected to have a causal
structure which is stable under perturbations of the rotation and charge, and to alleviate the pathologies of the
interior Kerr-Newman metrics.
In the new definition, some conceivable BHs (which
may or may not actually exist in nature), like the
Schwarzschild BH of Fig. 4a, have an event horizon, while
others do not. In the simplest case with an event horizon, where a Schwarzschild BH forms quickly then slowly
evaporates without disturbance, the null event horizon is
just barely inside the timelike apparent horizon (this fact
can be inferred from Figs. 4–5, and checked numerically);
the horizons nearly coincide. In other cases, for example
if the BH forms, evaporates for some amount of time,
then later accretes more mass, the event horizon and apparent horizon can be widely separated.
In any case, at least in our classical model, energy
conservation by the DTR relation forces Hawking radiation to be emitted from just outside locations where
f (r) = 0 (in the Schwarzschild metric, r = 2m), so that
Hawking radiation emission is directly tied to the boundary of the trapped spheres region. The boundary of the
trapped spheres region is also the apparent horizon (see
appendix), so the radiation can be thought of as emanating from the apparent horizon.
In any classical model like our shell model, therefore,
the Hawking radiation emission points must not be tied

to the event horizon if they are to conserve energy. For
instance, in the second case above, where a Schwarzschild
BH forms, evaporates for some amount of time, then later
accretes more mass, the early Hawking radiation would be
emitted from far inside the event horizon. Such radiation
would not make it to infinity, but could still be observable
to distant observers for an arbitrarily long time before
the second accretion event takes place. This observation
provides further evidence that the apparent horizon is a
more physical candidate than the event horizon to describe the BH boundary, motivating the new definition.
As discussed in the appendix, our trapped spheres region is the spherically symmetric special case of the more
general “trapping nucleus,” which is an essential subset
of the trapped region. It is conjectured that in general
there is a distinguished trapping nucleus whose boundary
is a uniquely defined apparent horizon [16]. It has been
argued from a trapped surfaces perspective that such a
trapping nucleus provides the most reasonable definition
for a BH and its boundary [16]. The above observation
about energy conservation in our shell model acts as an
independent check supporting this hypothesis, making it
likely that in similar but not-spherically-symmetric semiclassical models, Hawking radiation emission would need
to come from just outside a trapping nucleus to conserve
energy. Also, this nucleus is likely easier for an observer
to identify than the full trapped region, since the nucleus consists of relatively trivial trapped surfaces and
its boundary is marginally trapped.
While the nonsingular BH of Fig. 5 does not have an
event horizon or region of no escape, the past domain
of dependence of the core, which might be called the
“doom region,” plays a similar role. Any observer crossing into the doom region will inescapably be crushed into
the ultra dense quantum gravity core before being emitted in the Hawking radiation. Notice that the boundary
of the doom region in Fig. 4b almost exactly coincides
with the event horizon in Fig. 4a, a phenomenon that
holds generally when a Schwarzschild metric is replaced
by Hayward. In this context, the singularity theorems
show that doom regions are generic: matter which collapses through its own apparent horizon will inevitably
continue collapsing until quantum gravitational effects
kick in, forming a core and associated doom region.
By focusing on the properties of a BH as an actual compact object that can form and exist at a finite time, the
new definition allows a broader and more useful class of
objects to be called BHs, like evaporating charged, rotating, and nonsingular metrics, BH-like objects which later
bounce or form a remnant, and collapsed stars whose exact metric and eventual end state is unknown. In turn,
this allows the study of when certain pathologies of BH
metrics, like singularities, event horizons, and Cauchy
horizons, do and do not arise. Defining BHs (which we
fundamentally know to exist only as compact astrophysical objects) by insisting on their worst pathologies is one

14
reason that questions of unitarity and information preservation during evaporation have remained unresolved.

IX.

TOWARDS A SELF-CONSISTENT
EVAPORATION MODEL

A
M
D
m ± ∆m
∆m

Significant attention has been given recently to the
question of self-consistent BH evaporation models (related examples include [42–46]). Typically the idea is to
postulate an evaporating BH spacetime, treat it as a fixed
background for a quantum field theory, and show that a
renormalized stress tensor for the field theory matches
the background curvature — or at least find some evidence that the field theory and background are compatible. It is our hope that the present diagrams, especially
Fig. 5, can help inform this effort.
In particular, for example, the model presented here
suggests an improvement to the recent interesting calculation by Frolov and Zelnikov, who have studied the
quantum radiation from an evaporating modified Hayward metric [45, 46]. They found, in addition to the
Hawking radiation, an unwanted burst of radiation emanating from the inner horizon. Moreover, the burst was
found to be at least partially mitigated by certain changes
to the metric. Our model suggests even further changes
to the metric. Specifically, time-dependence in this study
was included only by virtue of a function m(v) depending
on the time parameter at past null infinity, which was assumed to have the usual thermal-evaporation time dependence. This has two drawbacks. First, it is observers at
future null infinity, receiving the Hawking radiation, who
should measure the correct thermal time dependence —
not those in the past. That is, it is m(u), not m(v),
that should be thermal during evaporation. And second,
using only m(v) implicitly assumes that evaporation occurs by absorption of negative mass shells incident from
infinity, when they should rather be incident from near
the horizon. A more physical metric would include a
more complicated time dependence, depending on both
u and v simultaneously. The proposed change is drastic
enough to hope that, coupled with an expeditious choice
of redshift function, it could help the model approach
self-consistency.
Related to the study of self-consistent models, and to
the unwanted energy outburst discussed above, is the
phenomenon of mass inflation, in which large amounts
of gravitational energy are converted into mass by the
collision of null shell perturbations in a BH [12].
The cause of mass inflation can be understood as follows. Consider the shell collision depicted in Fig. 8. Two
spherical null shells, each of mass ∆m, collide, with initial
and final Schwarzschild masses m and M respectively.
If the collision occurs outside the BH horizon, where
future-directed shells come in a radially-ingoing/radiallyoutgoing pair, then the requirement that all shells have

B
m

C
m ± ∆m
∆m

Figure 8. Two spherical null shells colliding in a spherically
symmetric spacetime. Gray lettering indicates the standard
labelling of each region in DTR calculations (see appendix).
Black lettering describes an example: Two shells, each of
mass ∆m, collide, in an initial Schwarzschild spacetime of
mass mB = m. Assuming A, B, C, D are all Schwarzschild
spacetimes, the masses mC and mD are fixed by shell junction conditions, with signs determined by whether each shell
is radially ingoing (+) or outgoing (−) towards the future.
The final mass mA = M is determined by the DTR relation.
Assuming all shells (both initial and final states) have a positive mass, mass inflation can occur only if both shells are
radially ingoing — for instance, inside the trapped region of
a BH. Otherwise, restricting to positive-mass shells ensures
that |M − m| ≤ ∆m.

positive mass ensures that |M − m| < ∆m. This makes
sense since an ingoing (outgoing) positive-mass shell will
increase (decrease) the mass of a Schwarzschild region to
its future, so that the shell masses roughly cancel out
in the final state. But if the collision occurs inside the
black hole, both incident shells are radially ingoing: they
both contribute positively to the final mass. Working out
the associated constraints shows that in this case, even
when all shell masses are positive, the final mass M can
be arbitrarily large. When both incident shells are ingoing and the collision occurs near f (r) = 0 (i.e. near a
horizon), application of the DTR relation (see appendix)
shows that even very small incident masses will lead to an
unbounded increase in M : this allows the mass inflation.
There is an open question of whether mass inflation
at the inner horizon creates an instability which significantly alters the dynamics or interior metric [47]. Our
model suggests a few more remarks on this topic.
First, the mass inflation instability is often associated
with a part of the inner horizon, the “outgoing” inner
horizon [47], which does not actually exist in evaporating BH spacetimes like ours or Hayward’s. This outgoing horizon, which acts as the Cauchy horizon in simple collapse models, is the part of the inner horizon approached by right-directed (in the standard diagram, see
Fig. 1 of [48]) null rays in an eternal charged or nonsingular BH metric. (These rays are technically ingoing
despite the nomenclature.) This part of the horizon exists in the eternal metric, but is cut off by an incoming
negative-mass shell in our Fig. 2b, and cut off by the
smooth evaporation process in Hayward’s model. The
evaporating models also have no Cauchy horizon for the
same reason. While it is not impossible for a right-going

15
shell in our model to approach the inner horizon, such
shells typically emanate directly from an earlier part of
the same inner horizon, and do not intersect the “outgoing” part of the horizon as usually assumed.
This is not an argument that mass inflation does not
occur. But it does lead to a delicate situation. It is common to study mass inflation within the causal structure of
an eternal BH spacetime where the outgoing inner horizon exists (for a clear example see [49]). But if an evaporating spacetime is assumed, some of the assumptions
underlying these calculations may break down. On the
other hand, it has previously been argued both that mass
inflation does not depend on the long term future [47],
and that evaporation should fail to prevent mass inflation once corrections to the Schwarzschild evaporation
rate are taken into account [49], possibly circumventing
the issue we are raising. However since both still make
the assumption described, the resolution may or may not
be definitive.
Second, if curvature is assumed to be regulated by a
Planck scale density cutoff, then in nonsingular models
with sufficiently low charge and rotation (like the Hayward metric), the entirety of the inner horizon is hidden
far within the quantum-gravity-dominated core. Any calculations based on semiclassical physics near the inner
horizon must therefore be called into question in these
cases. Further, if the result of mass inflation is meant
to be the development of an extreme density at the inner horizon [48], it is not clear that any such higher
density could be reached. This disrupts the interpretation of mass inflation in static nonsingular cases (as in,
e.g. [49]). On the other hand, it is possible that rotating and charged nonsingular BHs have an inner horizon
extending outside the core [41], so the issue still must
be dealt with unless there is a sufficient mechanism for
discharge/spin-down.

X. POSSIBLE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
PHYSICS OF BLACK HOLE EVAPORATION

The questions we feel it natural to ask about BH evaporation can change drastically depending on what spacetime diagrams are used. In the traditional diagram, for
example, it’s natural to ask: Is there a unitary transformation connecting the quantum states at future and past
null infinity? But in the nonsingular evaporation diagrams presented above, which have been constructed to
be globally hyperbolic, it’s almost obvious that such a
transformation ought to exist between any two Cauchy
surfaces not intersecting the ultra-dense quantum gravity region (where it doesn’t seem safe to assume known
physics applies). These new diagrams, on the other hand,
raise a different fundamental question: What is the nature of the negative-mass shells?
A global, phenomenological, and ultimately unfulfilling

answer to the latter question already exists. As shown
most clearly by Davies, Fulling, and Unruh (DFU), quantum field theories yield an ingoing negative energy flux
in a renormalized stress tensor near the horizon when a
BH is present [6]. Clearly, the presence of this ingoing
negative flux (and of our ingoing negative-mass shells) is
a phenomenon of quantum field theory in curved spacetime. But the calculation is global. Can this phenomenon
be understood as a local process? How should the negative flux be interpreted physically?
Suppose we answer these questions with a bold but
simple interpretation: that the negative-mass shells represent normal matter propagating out from the core on
non-future-directed (i.e. past-directed or spacelike) trajectories.9
With a little justification, this seems like a reasonable claim. It is well known that quantum field theories (QFTs) violate, by small amounts, the classical energy conditions, including energy conditions intended to
prevent the non-causal transfer of energy [28]. The fact
that these theories violate the energy conditions is closely
tied to the faster-than-causal spreading of relativistic
wavepackets in the one-particle sector of QFT [50, 51].
In this sense, energy condition violations are related to a
small amplitude for QFT particles to propagate, or in a
probability interpretation “tunnel,” faster than light. For
there to be a non-negligible probability of escape from the
core by this process, wavepackets must spread beyond
the trapping radius, so that escaping field modes have
wavelength on the order of the BH size. As the BH gets
smaller, the amount of non-causal propagation needed to
escape is reduced, and the process becomes more probable, so evaporation speeds up. Normally the non-causal
propagation is overwhelmed by much more likely causal
propagation, but a BH makes escape by causal propagation impossible.10
In case of the DFU stress tensor, energy conditions are
violated due to an ingoing flux of negative mass into the
horizon, which, in this picture, would correspond to a
non-future-directed transfer of energy out from the BH
core. While it’s not unusual for QFTs to violate energy conditions, what’s unusual about BH evaporation,

9

10

A classical connection between negative mass and non-futuredirected propagation is fostered by calculating the energy flux
vector F µ = −T µν tν relative to a timelike observer for a
uniform dust of density ρ with velocity uµ and stress tensor
T µν = ρ uµ uν . Both ρ < 0 and u2 > 0 lead to non-futuredirected energy flux.
It must be noted that using any language of “particles” (or
even “quanta”) is extremely dangerous in this context, due to
the many well-known ambiguities surrounding QFT particles in
curved spacetime [18]. The field picture must be given conceptual
priority. If not taken too literally, however, particle language can
sometimes provide a useful heuristic. When we use the particle
terminology here, it is mainly to make connection with standard
language of the literature.

16
in this picture, is that non-future-directed propagation
dominates the dynamics. (In Fig. 5, this refers to matter
being carried out on the negative mass shells, instead of
emerging through the future boundary of the core.) The
fundamental question, then, is shifted to one that more
directly implicates the paradoxical nature of BH evaporation: Why does matter escape from the core exclusively,
or at least primarily, on non-causal trajectories?
The answer to this question might be more straightforward than it seems. As discussed already, even under
normal circumstances QFTs violate energy conditions
in ways that may allow energy to locally propagate on
non-causal trajectories. If the lightcone of some matter
is blocked by a strong space-and-time-dependent potential barrier, can causal propagation be significantly depressed? If so, could the small energy-condition-violating
flux add up to a significant transfer of mass outside the
lightcone? And does the BH core metric (specifically, the
rapidly changing metric where the extremely dense core
meets the future post-evaporation vacuum, see Fig. 5)
act as such a barrier when coupled to a quantum field?
(Alternately,11 could this process be a phenomenon of
quantum gravity?) These questions have not yet, to the
authors’ knowledge, been addressed; they should be.
This line of reasoning is open to an obvious criticism:
The presence of a Hawking flux depends (in curvedspacetime quantum field theory calculations) only on the
presence of the horizon, and therefore cannot depend on
physics in the core. This is an important observation,
but, although it may seem so at first glance, it is not
especially damning to the interpretation. Actually, the
only details of core physics relevant to this discussion are
two assumptions already implicit in singular BH models: that once an apparent horizon forms, gravitational

11

In the semiclassical model we are suggesting, hTµν i corresponds
to a scenario where matter exits the core on spacelike trajectories,
as opposed to propagating directly through the future boundary
of the core. One way to make sense of this may come from
quantum gravity. Consider, heuristically, a path integral formulation for the complete quantum gravitational system, and consider some tunnelling calculation where a nonsingular BH tunnels
into an evaporated state at a later time. What paths (in some
quantum gravity configuration space) contribute to this process?
There are some paths where matter in the core propagates timelike while the metric remains static — these paths correspond
to a purely classical evolution, but don’t contribute to the tunneling process, because they only contribute to an “eternal BH”
configuration of the metric. That is, paths with timelike matter
propagation in the core correspond to classical scenarios where
matter sits in the core forever, not situations where matter leaves
the core and the BH evaporates. Among paths where the metric looks like an evaporating BH, it’s possible that paths with
spacelike propagation are less suppressed than other off-shell contributions, for example less suppressed than configurations that
drastically violate Einstein’s equation. If this were the case, one
could think of quantum gravity as creating a quantum correlation
between BH evaporation in the metric, and spacelike propagation
in the matter fields.

collapse to a singularity (core) is inevitable; and that
future-directed propagation out of the singularity (core)
is not allowed. Moreover, if BH evaporation is truly unitary, the matter emitted in Hawking radiation should be,
in some sense, “the same” matter that formed the BH in
the first place. This point is almost always neglected in
discussions of particle creation by a horizon.
The key to reconciling the fact that the Hawking flux
depends only on the presence of the horizon, and the fact
that matter emitted in Hawking radiation should come
from the core, is self-consistency between the background
spacetime and the quantum field theoretic stress tensor.
This is closely tied to the question of why BH horizons
supposedly evaporate, while Rindler horizons (for accelerating observers in flat space) do not.
In the Rindler vacuum, the renormalized semiclassical
stress tensor hTµν i bears no resemblance whatsoever to
the Einstein tensor of the flat background metric [18, 52];
it should not, therefore, be regarded as a solution of
the joint matter-gravitational field equations. But in
BH evaporation, the renormalized stress tensor for the
in-vacuum closely resembles the Einstein tensor of our
shell model.12
One can imagine an iterative process, where the background spacetime is perturbed to approach the renormalized QFT stress tensor at each step, converging on a selfconsistent model of an evaporating BH spacetime coupled
to the matter field. Starting such a process from a nonevaporating BH spacetime in the usual in-vacuum, one
obviously expects the horizon to start evaporating during
the iterations due to the ingoing negative flux. But there
is no reason to think that this should be the only effect,
or that an initially vacuum region of spacetime should be
empty when the process converges. (Note that “initially”
here refers to iterations, not to time.) Presumably, assuming some usual in-vacuum state, the presence of the
BH horizon is not only sufficient to predict Hawking-like
radiation, but it is also sufficient to predict the existence
of a core which forms and then evaporates.
How does this observation apply to Rindler horizons in
Minkowski space, and cosmological horizons in de Sitter?
Let’s look closer at the analogy. First of all, from a nontechnical standpoint, it makes no sense for either of those
horizons to generically emit radiation,13 since both of the

12

13

Statements like these are ambiguous when there is ambiguity in
the stress tensor renormalization scheme. For the present qualitative purposes, suppose the field equations aren’t satisfied unless
some reasonable renormalization scheme is shown to produce a
stress tensor equivalent to the metric.
This is separate from, but often confused with, the question of
radiation experienced by an accelerating particle detector. Particle detector calculations (see [18] for review) like the famous
results of Unruh [53] and Gibbons and Hawking [54] do not deal
with objective radiation existing in the spacetime and quantum
state, but rather with the coupling a of a local detector to a

17
spacetimes are homogeneous — every point in de Sitter
spacetime lies on a cosmological horizon. More technically, the emission or not of radiation, and the evaporation or not of the horizon, depends on the quantum
state. This is obvious, but there is a key point missing from standard discussions of this issue. States where
the renormalized stress tensor is highly mismatched from
the background Einstein tensor are probably never realized, since they are not likely to be solutions of the joint
matter-gravity field equations (whatever that means in
quantum gravity). Yes, there are states where Rindler,
cosmological, or other Killing horizons emit radiation.
But they are not solutions of the joint equations of motion unless an iterative process is performed to match
the background metric with the stress tensor. Perhaps
these states converge to BH solutions, perhaps to something else, or perhaps they don’t converge at all. Either
way, in the special case of Rindler, cosmological, etc.
horizons, the first iteration step is likely to drastically
change the qualitative picture and call the horizon interpretation into question. In contrast, iteration towards
self-consistency in the BH case reinforces the qualitative
picture of a BH evaporating while emitting Hawking radiation. The BH case, unlike the other cases, appears to
admit a self-consistent picture of an evaporating horizon.
It seems likely that, starting from an evaporating nonsingular spacetime like Fig. 5, the iterative process described above has at least a pretty good chance to converge to something reasonable, given the qualitative similarity between the DFU stress tensor and the stress tensor for our shell model. It’s not clear that the same can
be said for the more traditional spacetime where shell
collapse results in an eternal Schwarzschild BH. Would
the iteration process ever provide the drastic change in
causal structure needed to account for the BH disappearance at the end of evaporation? If not, then performing QFT calculations in a singular non-evaporating
background, while useful for gaining general intuition, is
useless for obtaining a complete description of the BH
evaporation process. To get legitimate candidates for a
self-consistent description, QFT should be performed in
spacetimes like Fig. 5. Various efforts are making interesting progress in this direction, especially [45, 46], as dis-

quantum field. This conceptual distinction was made very clear,
for example, by Padmanabhan and Singh [55]. The excitations
of such a detector should be attributed to a combination of two
effects: the difference between the global quantum state (perhaps
a global “vacuum”) and an observer’s local inertial vacuum (that
is, some state with no particles in modes defined by an observer’s
local inertial frame); and the observer’s acceleration relative to
that frame. Davies and others have suggested a useful paradigm:
that the detection of particles due to acceleration be thought of
as a form of “vacuum friction” [56, 57]. The relation of particle
detector calculations to thermal emission by a horizon is evident
only in special cases, where constant acceleration or a particular
choice of positive frequency modes creates a useful analogy.

cussed in previous sections. Moreover, a similar criticism
can be applied to some of the firewall arguments: quantum firewall states calculated in a vacuum spacetime are
not self-consistent.
There is one more key point which has not been addressed, relating to the fact that the matter in Hawking
radiation should be “the same” matter that fell in, and,
consequently, relating to self-consistency of the semiclassical BH solutions. In all standard calculations, the matter which falls in to form the BH, and the matter in
which the Hawking radiation is present, are regarded as
separate matter fields. This is implicit when the background metric is assumed, in which case the infalling
matter field is non-dynamical. A more conceptually accurate treatment would treat infalling matter as a true
quantum field, with this being the only matter field in
the problem. Then the true quantum in-state is not an
in-vacuum, but a collapsing-star state. One still expects
to find the Hawking radiation, but its source and backreaction effect would, presumably, be less mysterious. It
may be the case that the standard calculation is appropriately regarded as a perturbation in this scenario. But
the consequences of resolving this oversimplification have
never been adequately settled.
Setting aside the discussion of its validity, assuming
the non-future-directed-trajectory interpretation we have
here espoused would lead to the following narrative of
BH evolution: A star collapses beyond its Schwarzschild
limit, forming a trapped region. Once the trapped region
is formed, continued collapse is inevitable until quantum
gravity takes over the dynamics, at which point a tiny
core of Planck scale density is formed. The future boundary of the core acts, by some currently unknown mechanism associated with the core’s extreme density, as a local
space-and-time-dependent potential barrier, suppressing
causal propagation of matter out of the core, and forcing matter propagation to be dominated by non-causal
paths exiting the core through its spacelike outer surface.
Thus, having effectively no other option, matter from the
core slowly leaks (or “tunnels”) out on these non-causal
paths, gradually depositing the BH mass at infinity in the
form of a Hawking flux. Matter falls in, gets decomposed
in the fires of quantum gravity, and, retaining unitarity,
eventually comes back out. In terms of relativistic causal
structure, in this picture there is no profound difference
between a BH and other objects; black holes are unusual
only in that much of their interior is empty and contains
trapped surfaces, in that their matter is confined to a
tiny volume where quantum gravity dominates, and for
their low luminosity-to-mass ratio. In this picture, black
holes are not that weird.
We are not the first to propose a picture like the one
presented throughout this section. As far back as the
original discovery of the Hawking effect, similar ideas
were invoked in [4], and by various comments of [2, 3]
(though the particulars there are rather hazy, especially

18
regarding different types of energy), as well as many
others. It has not previously, however, been taken seriously as a semi-local physical description in the context
of self-consistent evaporating nonsingular models. These
models have the advantage that matter tunneling out
has somewhere to come from, with an energy-conserving
backreaction.
Whether the above is a useful or accurate story is undecided. It does, at least, seem qualitatively aligned with
both the DFU stress tensor and the tunneling picture
of Parikh and Wilczek [58] (the key step of which is a
tunneling event in which some internal matter crosses
the horizon), as well as with [2–4] as previously noted,
and doesn’t seem to raise any major philosophical issues.
In any case, the most appealing aspect of this description
is surely its simplicity.

XI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Spacetime diagrams invariably have a profound influence on our thinking about relativistic systems, and especially black holes (BHs). The goal of this article is to
disrupt an unfortunate status quo: the use of diagrams
not tied to any particular spacetime model. Ambiguous
hand-drawn diagrams (most perniciously those attempting to depict BH formation and evaporation in a single
picture) too often reflect the biases of the artist, and result in misleading intuitions — for example that Hawking
radiation emanates from (just outside) a null event horizon, or that external observers take an infinite proper
time to see infalling matter fall in. False intuitions like
these can lead to incorrect or circular reasoning about
subtle questions. To clarify these issues, we have argued for the use of well-defined models in which verifiable
claims can be made. Our “shell model,” as it has been
dubbed above, presents an attempt at a simple and minimal concrete model for BH formation and evaporation,
which seems to capture most generic aspects of the problem, and for which Penrose diagrams can be explicitly
obtained. Based on the results, we have argued for an improved definition of the term “black hole,” and proposed
a more straightforward interpretation of the mechanism
of Hawking radiation. While we make no claim of the
absolute veracity of our shell model, we do hope it brings
to light some new questions about the BH evaporation
process, and stimulates a more concrete and physically
grounded discussion.
This research was supported by the Foundational
Questions Institute (FQXi.org), of which AA is Associate
Director, and by the Faggin Presidential Chair Fund.

[1] S. W. Hawking, “Black hole explosions,” Nature 248,
30–31 (1974).
[2] S. W. Hawking, “Particle Creation by Black Holes,” Euclidean quantum gravity, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199–
220 (1975), [,167(1975)].
[3] S. W. Hawking, “Breakdown of Predictability in Gravitational Collapse,” Phys. Rev. D14, 2460–2473 (1976).
[4] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, “Path Integral Derivation of Black Hole Radiance,” Phys. Rev. D13, 2188–
2203 (1976).
[5] J. C. Schindler and A. Aguirre, “Algorithms for the explicit computation of Penrose diagrams,” Class. Quant.
Grav. 35, 105019 (2018), arXiv:1802.02263 [gr-qc].
[6] P. C. W. Davies, S. A. Fulling, and W. G. Unruh,
“Energy Momentum Tensor Near an Evaporating Black
Hole,” Phys. Rev. D13, 2720–2723 (1976).
[7] William A. Hiscock, “Models of Evaporating Black
Holes,” Phys. Rev. D23, 2813 (1981).
[8] W. A. Hiscock, “Models of Evaporating Black Holes. II.
Effects of the Outgoing Created Radiation,” Phys. Rev.
D23, 2823–2827 (1981).
[9] Sean A. Hayward, “Formation and evaporation of regular black holes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 031103 (2006),
arXiv:gr-qc/0506126 [gr-qc].
[10] Carlo Rovelli and Francesca Vidotto, “Planck stars,” Int.
J. Mod. Phys. D23, 1442026 (2014), arXiv:1401.6562 [grqc].
[11] Hal M. Haggard and Carlo Rovelli, “Quantum-gravity
effects outside the horizon spark black to white hole tunneling,” Phys. Rev. D92, 104020 (2015), arXiv:1407.0989
[gr-qc].
[12] Eric Poisson and W. Israel, “Inner-horizon instability and
mass inflation in black holes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1663–
1666 (1989).
[13] Pierre Martin-Dussaud and Carlo Rovelli, “Evaporating
black-to-white hole,” (2019), arXiv:1905.07251 [gr-qc].
[14] Leonard Susskind, Larus Thorlacius, and John Uglum,
“The Stretched horizon and black hole complementarity,” Phys. Rev. D48, 3743–3761 (1993), arXiv:hepth/9306069 [hep-th].
[15] Ahmed Almheiri, Donald Marolf, Joseph Polchinski, and
James Sully, “Black Holes: Complementarity or Firewalls?” JHEP 02, 062 (2013), arXiv:1207.3123 [hep-th].
[16] Ingemar Bengtsson and Jose M. M. Senovilla, “The Region with trapped surfaces in spherical symmetry, its
core, and their boundaries,” Phys. Rev. D83, 044012
(2011), arXiv:1009.0225 [gr-qc].
[17] Robert P. Geroch, “The domain of dependence,” J. Math.
Phys. 11, 437–439 (1970).
[18] N. D. Birrell and P. C. W. Davies, Quantum Fields in
Curved Space, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical
Physics (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1984).
[19] Abhay Ashtekar and Martin Bojowald, “Black hole evaporation: A Paradigm,” Class. Quant. Grav. 22, 3349–
3362 (2005), arXiv:gr-qc/0504029 [gr-qc].
[20] Gary Horowitz, Albion Lawrence, and Eva Silverstein, “Insightful D-branes,” JHEP 07, 057 (2009),
arXiv:0904.3922 [hep-th].
[21] Sabine Hossenfelder and Lee Smolin, “Conservative solutions to the black hole information problem,” Phys. Rev.
D81, 064009 (2010), arXiv:0901.3156 [gr-qc].

19
[22] Sabine Hossenfelder, Leonardo Modesto, and Isabeau
Premont-Schwarz, “A Model for non-singular black hole
collapse and evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D81, 044036
(2010), arXiv:0912.1823 [gr-qc].
[23] Anthony Aguirre, Sean M. Carroll, and Matthew C.
Johnson, “Out of equilibrium: understanding cosmological evolution to lower-entropy states,” JCAP 1202, 024
(2012), arXiv:1108.0417 [hep-th].
[24] Christopher R. Stephens, Gerard ’t Hooft,
and
Bernard F. Whiting, “Black hole evaporation without information loss,” Class. Quant. Grav. 11, 621–648 (1994),
arXiv:gr-qc/9310006 [gr-qc].
[25] Yasunori Nomura, Jaime Varela, and Sean J. Weinberg, “Black Holes, Information, and Hilbert Space for
Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. D87, 084050 (2013),
arXiv:1210.6348 [hep-th].
[26] Daniele Malafarina, “Classical collapse to black holes and
quantum bounces: A review,” Universe 3, 48 (2017),
arXiv:1703.04138 [gr-qc].
[27] S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics (Cambridge University Press, 2011).
[28] Prado Martin-Moruno and Matt Visser, “Classical and
semi-classical energy conditions,” Fundam. Theor. Phys.
189, 193–213 (2017), arXiv:1702.05915 [gr-qc].
[29] Tommaso De Lorenzo, Costantino Pacilio, Carlo Rovelli, and Simone Speziale, “On the Effective Metric of a Planck Star,” Gen. Rel. Grav. 47, 41 (2015),
arXiv:1412.6015 [gr-qc].
[30] Brandon Carter, “Complete Analytic Extension of the
Symmetry Axis of Kerr’s Solution of Einstein’s Equations,” Phys. Rev. 141, 1242–1247 (1966).
[31] B. Carter, “The complete analytic extension of the
reissner-nordström metric in the special case e2 = m2,”
Physics Letters 21, 423 – 424 (1966).
[32] M. D. Kruskal, “Maximal extension of Schwarzschild
metric,” Phys. Rev. 119, 1743–1745 (1960).
[33] R. Penrose, “Conformal treatment of infinity,” Relativité, Groupes et Topologie: Proceedings, Ecole d’été de
Physique Théorique, Session XIII, Les Houches, France,
Jul 1 - Aug 24, 1963, Gen. Rel. Grav. 43, 901–922 (2011),
[,565(1964)].
[34] R. Penrose, “Zero rest mass fields including gravitation:
Asymptotic behavior,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A284, 159
(1965).
[35] Piotr T. Chrusciel, Christa R. Olz, and Sebastian J.
Szybka, “Space-time diagrammatics,” Phys. Rev. D86,
124041 (2012), arXiv:1211.1718 [gr-qc].
[36] Don N. Page, “Particle Emission Rates from a Black
Hole: Massless Particles from an Uncharged, Nonrotating Hole,” Phys. Rev. D13, 198–206 (1976).
[37] S. W. Hawking, “Information Preservation and Weather
Forecasting for Black Holes,” (2014), arXiv:1401.5761
[hep-th].
[38] Raphael Bousso, “A Covariant entropy conjecture,”
JHEP 07, 004 (1999), arXiv:hep-th/9905177 [hep-th].
[39] Yasuhito Kaminaga, “A Dynamical Model of an Evaporating Charged Black Hole and Quantum Instability
of Cauchy Horizons,” Class. Quant. Grav. 7, 1135–1162
(1990).
[40] Maulik K. Parikh and Frank Wilczek, “Global structure
of evaporating black holes,” Phys. Lett. B449, 24–29
(1999), arXiv:gr-qc/9807031 [gr-qc].

[41] Alexander Burinskii, Emilio Elizalde, Sergi R. Hildebrandt, and Giulio Magli, “Regular sources of the
Kerr-Schild class for rotating and nonrotating black hole
solutions,” Phys. Rev. D65, 064039 (2002), arXiv:grqc/0109085 [gr-qc].
[42] Hikaru Kawai, Yoshinori Matsuo, and Yuki Yokokura,
“A Self-consistent Model of the Black Hole Evaporation,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A28, 1350050 (2013), arXiv:1302.4733
[hep-th].
[43] Hikaru Kawai and Yuki Yokokura, “A Model of Black
Hole Evaporation and 4D Weyl Anomaly,” Universe 3,
51 (2017), arXiv:1701.03455 [hep-th].
[44] Pisin Chen, William G. Unruh, Chih-Hung Wu, and
Dong-Han Yeom, “Pre-Hawking radiation cannot prevent
the formation of apparent horizon,” Phys. Rev. D97,
064045 (2018), arXiv:1710.01533 [gr-qc].
[45] Valeri P. Frolov and Andrei Zelnikov, “Quantum radiation from a sandwich black hole,” Phys. Rev. D95,
044042 (2017), arXiv:1612.05319 [hep-th].
[46] Valeri P. Frolov and Andrei Zelnikov, “Quantum radiation from an evaporating nonsingular black hole,” Phys.
Rev. D95, 124028 (2017), arXiv:1704.03043 [hep-th].
[47] Andrew J. S. Hamilton and Pedro P. Avelino, “The
Physics of the relativistic counter-streaming instability
that drives mass inflation inside black holes,” Phys. Rept.
495, 1–32 (2010), arXiv:0811.1926 [gr-qc].
[48] Eric Poisson and W. Israel, “Internal structure of black
holes,” Phys. Rev. D41, 1796–1809 (1990).
[49] Raúl Carballo-Rubio, Francesco Di Filippo, Stefano
Liberati, Costantino Pacilio, and Matt Visser, “On the
viability of regular black holes,” JHEP 07, 023 (2018),
[JHEP18,023(2020)], arXiv:1805.02675 [gr-qc].
[50] B. Rosenstein and M. Usher, “Explicit illustration of
causality violation: Noncausal relativistic wave-packet
evolution,” Phys. Rev. D 36, 2381–2384 (1987).
[51] Ian H. Redmount and Wai-Mo Suen, “Path integration
in relativistic quantum mechanics,” Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A8, 1629–1636 (1993), arXiv:gr-qc/9210019 [gr-qc].
[52] P. Candelas and D. Deutsch, “On the vacuum stress induced by uniform acceleration or supporting the ether,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A354, 79–99 (1977).
[53] W. G. Unruh, “Notes on black hole evaporation,” Phys.
Rev. D14, 870 (1976).
[54] G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, “Cosmological
Event Horizons, Thermodynamics, and Particle Creation,” Phys. Rev. D15, 2738–2751 (1977).
[55] T. Padmanabhan and T. P. Singh, “Response of an Accelerated Detector Coupled to the Stress - Energy Tensor,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 4, 1397–1407 (1987).
[56] P. C. W. Davies, “Quantum vacuum friction,” J. Opt. B
7, S40–S46 (2005).
[57] A. Manjavacas and F. J. Garcı́a de Abajo, “Thermal and
vacuum friction acting on rotating particles,” Phys. Rev.
A 82, 063827 (2010).
[58] Maulik K. Parikh and Frank Wilczek, “Hawking radiation as tunneling,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5042–5045
(2000), arXiv:hep-th/9907001 [hep-th].
[59] Jose M. M. Senovilla, “Trapped surfaces,” Int. J. Mod.
Phys. D20, 2139 (2011), arXiv:1107.1344 [gr-qc].
[60] C. Barrabes and W. Israel, “Thin shells in general relativity and cosmology: The Lightlike limit,” Phys. Rev.
D43, 1129–1142 (1991).

20
APPENDIX
MATTER CONTENT OF SHELL MODELS:
GENERAL CASE

Numerically computing Penrose diagrams allows the
distribution and flow of matter to be quantitatively visualized in the diagram, assuming Einstein’s equation
Gµν = 8πTµν . There are two contributions to the matter
content: matter associated with the shells, and matter
associated with the quasistatic equilibrium solutions.

First we consider the matter associated with the equilibrium solutions. For our purposes, all such solutions
take a metric of the form
(12)

where f (r) is an arbitrary function called the metric function. Metrics of this type can be either singular or nonsingular at the origin. A number of equivalent conditions for
singularity are given by [5, app. E]; here it suffices to say
that the metric is nonsingular whenever f (r) = 1+O(r2 )
as r → 0, a condition which implies finiteness of curvature scalars, geodesic completeness, and existence of a
Cartesian metric, in a neighborhood of the origin [5]. Although classical theorems predict singularity formation
in gravitational collapse [27], nonsingular solutions are
thought to arise in effective semiclassical approximations
if quantum gravitational effects regulate curvature at the
Planck scale. Our method applies to both singular and
nonsingular models; nonsingular models have the advantage that all matter is made explicit in the stress tensor,
whereas singular solutions contain a matter contribution
hidden in the singularity.
Curvature. A detailed anaylsis of the matter content
for metrics of the form (12) was carried out in [5]. The
following is a summary of those results. To expedite the
analysis, it is best to define a mass function m(r) by
f (r) = 1 − 2 m(r)/r,
and define an orthonormal basis
(p
f (r)−1 ∂t
ê0 = p
−f (r) ∂r
(p
−f (r) ∂r
ê1 = p
f (r)−1 ∂t

(13)

êa by
, f (r) > 0,
, f (r) < 0,
, f (r) > 0,
, f (r) < 0,

Ga b = 8π diag(−ρ, −ρ, pΩ , pΩ ),

(15)

where
ρ=

m0 (r)
,
4πr2

pΩ = −

m00 (r)
.
8πr

(16)

Physically, this amounts to a proper density ρ, a transverse pressure pt = −ρ, and an angular pressure pΩ . The
common curvature scalars follow, as

Quasistatic Contribution

ds2 = −f (r) dt2 + f (r)−1 dr2 + r2 dΩ2 ,

f (r) = 0, but the full basis cannot, since the extensions of
ê0 and ê1 would coincide at the horizon. In this êa basis,
the Einstein tensor is diagonalized, with components

(14)

ê2 = r−1 ∂θ ,

ê3 = (r sin θ)−1 ∂φ .
In this basis ê0 is always timelike. Both ê0 and ê1
can be continuously extended across the horizons where

K0 ≡ R = 16π (ρ − pΩ ),

K1 ≡ Rab Rab = 128π 2 (ρ2 + p2Ω ),
K2 ≡ Cabcd C abcd = 12 η 2 /r4 ,

(17)

K3 ≡ Rabcd Rabcd = K2 + 2 K1 − (1/3) K02 ,

with η = 2 m(r)/r−4 m0 (r)/3+r m00 (r)/3. Contributions
to the curvature from a singularity, if one exists, are included in K2 , and f (r) ≡ 1 if and only if K1 = K2 = 0
everywhere. A complete specification of the Riemann
and Weyl curvature components, in addition to Christoffel symbols, may be found in [5].
Energy conditions. Nonsingular black hole solutions
often violate classical energy conditions—this is one way
to evade the singularity theorems [27]. One approach
to this situation is to take both the nonsingular metric
and its energy condition violations seriously, assuming
they provide useful insight about the physical mechanism of evaporation. Although classically unorthodox,
this approach is appealing since quantum field theories
are already well known to predict energy condition violations [28]. Regardless of one’s view on this matter, it
is useful to keep track of where and by how much energy
conditions are violated in a given solution. We concern
ourselves here with the null (NEC), weak (WEC), and
flux (FEC) energy conditions, defined by [28]
(NEC) Gab k a k b ≥ 0 for all null k a ,
(WEC) Gab ta tb ≥ 0 for all timelike ta ,
(FEC) −Ga b tb causal for all timelike ta .

(18)

The WEC ensures timelike observers measure locally positive mass density, with the NEC as its null limit; the
FEC ensures no timelike observer measures a spacelike
energy flux. Given the diagonalized Einstein tensor (15),
these reduce to the simple inequalities [28]
(NEC) ρ + pΩ ≥ 0,
(WEC) NEC plus ρ ≥ 0,
(FEC) ρ2 − p2Ω ≥ 0.

(19)

21
The degree to which these conditions are violated is quantified by the functions
χnec = − min(ρ + pΩ , 0),
χwec = − min(ρ, 0),
χfec = − min(ρ2 − p2Ω , 0),

(20)

called the energy condition violation functions. These
functions are the obvious extensions of the above inequalities, but their physical status as quantifiers requires
some clarification. They are justified as follows. Consider observers associated with a null velocity ka and
a normalized timelike velocity ta , and the flux vector
F a = −Ga b tb relative to tb (note that the FEC is equivalent to −Fa F a ≥ 0). One then finds that
Gab k a k b = ((k2 )2 + (k3 )2 ) (ρ + pΩ ),
Gab ta tb = ((t2 )2 + (t3 )2 ) (ρ + pΩ ) + ρ,
−Fa F a = ((t2 )2 + (t3 )2 ) (ρ2 − p2Ω ) + ρ2 .

(21)

Thus, for a given observer, the functions χnec and χwec
quantify the amount of measured negative mass density,
and the function χfec quantifies the spacelike-ness of the
energy flux. Interestingly, when ρ > 0, only observers
with large angular momentum will observe strong energy condition violations. This quantification scheme is
in line with the standard definitions for semiclassical energy conditions [28], which usually amount to enforcing
a small positive bound on our energy condition violation
functions.
Trapped surfaces, horizons. An important characteristic of black hole spacetimes is the existence of closed
trapped surfaces (see [59] for a useful review); their existence is associated with the trademark “inevitability”
of black hole collapse. Naively, in applying the theory of trapped surfaces to study black holes, one basically wants to identify the region containing trapped
surfaces and determine its boundary. The boundary of
the trapped region in spacetime is sometimes called a
“trapping horizon,” while the boundary of the region of
trapped surfaces contained entirely within a spatial slice
is often called an “apparent horizon.” These naive definitions capture the right essential spirit, but fall somewhat
short at a technical level, mainly due to the possibility
of strangely shaped trapped surfaces and the associated
issue of “clairvoyance” [59]. Fortunately, an illuminating
and thorough discussion of these issues, and their application to black hole spacetimes, has been carried out
by Bengtsson and Senovilla [16]. They have determined
that in spherical symmetry the trapped region, which is
unreasonably global due to clairvoyance, contains an essential and physically relevant spherical subregion called
“the core of the trapped region,” which we refer to here as
the trapping nucleus (to distinguish it from the entirely
unrelated “matter core” in the Hayward metric). The
trapping nucleus is defined as a minimal region which, if

removed from the spacetime, eliminates all trapped surfaces. That is, any trapped surfaces in spacetime can be
blamed on the nucleus, even if they extend outside it.
This definition is vindicated by the fact that the boundary of the trapping nucleus in spherical symmetry is the
unique spherically symmetric marginally trapped tube,
i.e., the apparent horizon at r = 2m. Outside spherical
symmetry there are many non-equivalent trapping nuclei
for a trapped region, but it is conjectured that there is a
unique trapping nucleus whose boundary is a marginally
trapped tube [16]. It is on this special trapping nucleus,
whose boundary we call the apparent horizon, that we
focus our attention in defining the black hole. Bengtsson and Senovilla have argued that the trapping nucleus
and its boundary could provide the best trapped-surfaces
definition of a black hole and horizon.
Trapped spheres. Following [16], an arbitrary spherically symmetric spacetime can be expressed in the
Eddington-Finklestein form
ds2 = −e2β (1 − 2m/r) dv 2 + 2eβ dv dr + r2 dΩ2 , (22)
where m = m(v, r) and β = β(v, r). Expressed this way,
the trapping nucleus (see above) is the set r < 2m and its
boundary is r = 2m. In our shell model, these correspond
to the set f (r) < 0 and its boundary f (r) = 0. This
nucleus is precisely the region in which spheres about the
origin of spherical symmetry are trapped [5, 16]. To avoid
unfamiliar terminology, we refer to this region (which is
both the trapping nucleus and the set of points where the
sphere (t0 , r0 , Ω) is a closed trapped surface) in the main
text as the trapped spheres region.
Trapping and horizons: summary. The trapped region surrounding a spherical black hole has an indispensable interior subset called the trapping nucleus, whose
boundary is the apparent horizon. In our shell model,
the trapping nucleus exactly coincides with the trapped
spheres region f (r) < 0, so that the apparent horizon
is exactly at f (r) = 0. For metrics with a nearlySchwarzschild exterior of mass m0 , this implies the apparent horizon is almost exactly at r = 2m0 .

Shell Contribution

The junction hypersurface connecting two properly
matched piecewise-defined regions of spacetime in general corresponds to a thin shell of matter. This is described technically by a distributional contribution to the
stress tensor of the joint spacetime. For the purposes
of this article, we consider shells arising from the junction of spacetimes of the form (12) along radial null hypersurfaces (excluding the horizon-matching case where
f (r) = 0 everywhere). The stress tensor for this setup
was calculated in [5] by application of the null shell formalism of Barrabes and Israel [60]. The result is most

22
concisely described using local Eddington-Finklestein coordinates in a neighborhood of the junction shell, defined
as follows. Consider a local patch M0 of the joint spacetime, which is separated into a past region M− and future
region M+ by the null junction hypersurface Σ, with metric functions f± (r) in the two regions. As shown in [5], it
is possible to choose a joint coordinate system (w, r, Ω)
on M0 , such that the shell Σ is defined by the level set
w = 0, and such that the metric is
ds2 = −f (r) dw2 − 2 dw dr + r2 dΩ2 ,
where the parameter
(
−1 if ∂r is past-directed,
=
+1 if ∂r is future-directed,

(23)

(24)

is a constant indicating whether the shell Σ is ingoing
( = −1) or outgoing ( = +1) towards the future, and
the metric function
(
f− (r), w < 0,
f (r) =
(25)
f+ (r), w > 0,

(26)

be a future-directed null vector both normal to and tangential to Σ, let the mass functions m± (r) be defined
according to (13), and define the mass jump [m(r)] by
[m(r)] = m+ (r) − m− (r).

(27)

With this setup, the distributional component of the
stress tensor on the shell obtains the simple expression
TΣµν

µ ν

= σ n n δ(w),

(28)

where
[m(r)]
.
(29)
4πr2
The coefficient σ may be thought of as the surface energy
density of the shell, up to an arbitrary normalization factor associated with the null vector na . The sign of σ is
physically meaningful: timelike observers measure a positive energy density at the shell if and only if σ > 0. It is
therefore sensible to say that shells with σ < 0 have negative mass, while shells with σ > 0 have positive mass.
The sign of σ is a local property, and in principle (in
physically unusual cases) a single shell may have positive
and negative mass at different points.
Energy conditions. The shell stress tensor (28) is easily analyzed in terms of the energy conditions (18) above.
For an arbitrary causal vector ua such that ua ua ≤ 0,
σ = (−)

Tµν uµ uν = σ (−nν uν )2 δ(w),

Energy Conservation and DTR

Local energy conservation, of the form ∇µ T µν = 0, is
automatically guaranteed at points where the metric is
smooth, and along properly matched shell junctions [60].
At points where shells collide, for example at Hawking
radiation nucleation points in the above model, energy
conservation must be independently verified by checking
an equality called the DTR (Dray-’t Hooft-Redmount)
relation [60]. In case of two radial null shells colliding
at radius r0 , separating spacetime into four regions (each
of the form (12)) labeled A, C, B, D clockwise from noon
(see Fig. 8), the DTR relation reads [5]
fA (r0 )fB (r0 ) − fC (r0 )fD (r0 ) = 0.

is defined piecewise on M± . Let
nµ =  (∂r )µ

FEC is not particularly meaningful in this context. It
is worth noting, however, that if uµ is future-directed
(implying nµ uµ ≤ 0), then F µ is future-directed if and
only if σ > 0. These considerations support the above
notion that σ > 0 corresponds to normal matter, while
σ < 0 corresponds to exotic matter.

(30)
−T µ ν uν = σ (−nν uν ) nµ δ(w).
Thus the WEC and NEC are violated if and only if σ < 0.
Since the flux vector F µ = −T µ ν uν is always null, the

(31)

To quantify violations of energy conservation, we therefore define the DTR violation function
χdtr = |fA (r0 )fB (r0 ) − fC (r0 )fD (r0 )|,

(32)

so that energy conservation is equivalent to χdtr = 0.
Applied to the Hawking radiation nucleation points, at
which fB (r) = fC (r) = fD (r), this yields
χdtr = |fA (r0 ) − fB (r0 )| |fB (r0 )|.

(33)

Assuming that the shells carry a finite amount of mass,
and that the nucleation radius r0 is a finite radial distance
lev outside the horizon where fB (r) = 0, it follows that
both terms above are finite, so
χdtr > 0,

(34)

and energy conservation is violated at nucleation points.
Although the DTR relation is not satisfied at the
Hawking radiation nucleation points, the violation is arbitrarily small in the physically relevant limits of the
model. In particular, in the limit lev → 0 in which nucleation points approach the horizon radius, the factor
|fB (r0 )| → 0 while the other remains finite, so that
χdtr → 0.

(35)

Physically, it is likely that this limit should be taken only
down to the Planck scale, so that lev ≈ lpl , in which case
one would interpret the violation of energy conservation
to represent a small quantum fluctuation. Since energy
conservation is restored in the physically relevant limits
of the model, the model remains a useful approximation
to physically realistic spacetimes.

