A RETINA-INSPIRED SAMPLING METHOD FOR VISUAL TEXTURE RECONSTRUCTION
Lin Zhu1,† , Siwei Dong1,† , Tiejun Huang1,2,3 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3,∗
1

arXiv:1907.08769v1 [eess.IV] 20 Jul 2019

2

School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
School of ECE, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, P.R. China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, P.R. China
ABSTRACT

Conventional frame-based camera is not able to meet the demand of rapid reaction for real-time applications, while the
emerging dynamic vision sensor (DVS) can realize high speed
capturing for moving objects. However, to achieve visual texture reconstruction, DVS need extra information apart from
the output spikes. This paper introduces a fovea-like sampling
method inspired by the neuron signal processing in retina,
which aims at visual texture reconstruction only taking advantage of the properties of spikes. In the proposed method,
the pixels independently respond to the luminance changes
with temporal asynchronous spikes. Analyzing the arrivals of
spikes makes it possible to restore the luminance information,
enabling reconstructing the natural scene for visualization.
Three decoding methods of spike stream for texture reconstruction are proposed for high-speed motion and stationary
scenes. Compared to conventional frame-based camera and
DVS, our model can achieve better image quality and higher
flexibility, which is capable of changing the way that demanding machine vision applications are built.
Index Terms— Neuron-like sampling, visual texture reconstruction, dynamic vision sensor, high speed motion
1. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous driving, wearable computing, unmanned aerial
vehicles, are typical emerging real-time applications which
require rapid reaction in vision processing [1]. As the starting point for vision processing, such as foreground detection
and object recognition, the step of image sample and texture
reconstruction aims to capture and generate the video with
high dynamic range and high sensitivity to motion. Thus, the
step plays a critical role in practical applications.
Modern cameras use CCD (charge-coupled device) or
CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) to capture light and record the motion, which results in a large number of digital pictures and videos [2]. Conventional motion
† First two authors contributed equally.
∗ Corresponding author (E-mail: yhtian@pku.edu.cn).

This work is partially supported by grants from the National Basic Research Program of China under grant 2015CB351806, the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under contract No. U1611461, No. 61825101, and No. 61425025.

Fig. 1: The workflow of the spike camera.

pictures are expressed as frame-based images and video sequences. However, the cameras cannot record every moment
instantly which leads to discrete simulation as a compromise.
The scenes in the exposure time will be compressed into one
frame, and motion changes in that time will be blurred. Although there are high speed cameras which are capable of
image exposures in excess of 1/1,000 second or frame rates in
excess of 250 frames per second [3], the motion changes of
high-speed objects in microseconds are missing. For the tasks
of high-speed tracking or detection, every moment is important, these consecutive frames have to be compared to recover
temporal changes, which is a computationally expensive and
difficult task.
Another way is to explore a different sampling method in
the direction of biological plausibility. To simulate biological
vision, one of the most famous artificial silicon retinas is the
dynamic vision sensor (DVS) [4]. DVS is capable of detecting and tracking high-speed motion with a high temporal resolution, but it is very difficult to reconstruct the texture, since
it only records the change of luminance intensity. Although
there are some hybrid sensors combing DVS and conventional
image sensor [5] or photo-measurement circuit [6], there exists mismatch since the difference of the sampling rate and
time.
These bio-inspired approaches concentrate more on modelling the peripheral vision. Nevertheless, the visual detail is
acquired through the fovea located in the center of the primate retina, which is responsible for sharp vision (foveal vision) [7], [8]. Inspired from the signal processing of neurons,
we propose a retina-inspired sampling model and visual tex-

ture reconstruction model to address the visual reconstruction
problem which is commonly existed in DVS sensors, and integrate them to a novel prototype camera named spike camera.
The sampling workflow is shown in Fig. 1.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section
2 briefly reviews related work, and Section 3 analyzes the
retina-inspired sampling method. Visual texture reconstruction is presented in Section 4. In Section 5, the experiments
on texture reconstruction are conducted. Finally, the paper is
concluded in Section 6.
2. RELATED WORKS
2.1. Dynamic vision sensors
Dynamic vision sensors (also known as event-based sensors)
[4] encode the local contrast changes in the scene as positive
or negative events at the instant they occur. DVS provides a
power efficient way of converting the motion changes into a
stream of spatially sparse, temporally dense events. However,
the event stream is unsuitable to be directly used as an input
to most frame-based computer vision algorithms. To solve
this problem, Delbruck et al. developed a bio-inspired DVS
camera named DAVIS [4] [5]. DAVIS integrates DVS with a
frame-based active-pixel sensor (APS). This makes it able to
capture frame-based texture. However, the difference of the
sampling rate between APS (60 frames per second) and DVS
(a temporal resolution of 1 µs), the mismatch is quite obvious. Recently, Posch et al. [6] tried a different way by introducing the asynchronous time-based image sensor (ATIS).
ATIS consists of a DVS circuit and a photo-measurement circuit. The photo-measurement is triggered while the DVS circuit fires a spike (i.e. intensity change detected), and the time
of this process is encoding. Since the intensity is inversely
proportional to the integration time, the visual texture can be
reconstructed. ATIS seems to be perfect, but the intensity is
only measured when a DVS spike is generated, and the measurement is posterior to the spike firing, so the mismatch still
exists, especially in flexible motion.
2.2. The integrate-and-fire model
The fovea is responsible for the sharpest vision in primates
eyes. In the fovea centralis of the primate retina, the bipolar
cell connects a single cone cell (photoreceptor) with a single ganglion cell, which provides the sharpest vision [7].
If a photon is captured by the photoreceptor, the optical-toelectrical conversion is triggered. The electrical signal is
transferred to bipolar cell and ganglion cell. With more photons collected, the membrane potential of the ganglion cell
hits the threshold, a spike is generated. Then the membrane
potential decays back to the resting potential [8]. The structure of fovea centralis and the signal processing have stimulated the inspiration of the development of retinomorphic
vision sensors. This procedure is in accordance with the
integrate-and-fire model.

The integrate-and-fire (IF) model [9] is one of the most
commonly used neuron models in neuroscience. In the IF
model, the neuron is considered as a leaky capacitor. When
the stimuli current is conducted, the membrane is charged.
Once the membrane voltage reaches the threshold, a spike is
fired. After that the membrane potential is reset to the resting
potential. Compared to a real spiking neuron, the integrateand-fire model is fairly simple. However, in neuromorphic
engineering, the model has been widely used in building sensory systems. Another representative neuron model is the
spike response model (SRM), which is a generalization of the
leaky integrate-and-fire model [10]. The neuron model is interpreted as a membrane filter and a function describing the
shape of the spike. In contrast to the integrate-and-fire model,
SRM is somewhat simpler on the level of the spike generation
mechanism. But the threshold behavior of the SRM is richer
than integrate-and-fire model, it can account for various aspects of refractoriness and adaptation.
3. RETINA-INSPIRED SAMPLING METHOD
3.1. Retina-inspired sampling method
In fovea, a bipolar cell only contacts one photoreceptor and
one ganglion cell. To a first and rough approximation, neuronal dynamics can be conceived as a summation process
(sometimes also called ‘integration’ process) combined with a
mechanism that triggers action potentials above some critical
voltage. Inspired by the above, we propose a novel sampling
model and integrate it into a prototype camera called spike
camera.
In spike camera, the intensity of light is converted into
voltage by the photoreceptor. Once the analog-to-digital converter (ADC) completes the signal conversion and outputs the
digital luminance intensity, the accumulator at each pixel accumulates the intensity. Different luminance intensities lead
to different accumulate rates. For a pixel, if the accumulated
intensity reaches the dispatch threshold φ, a spike is fired indicates that the luminance here is large enough (as Eq. (1)).
At the same time, the corresponding accumulator is reset in
which all the charges are drained.
Z t
Idt ≥ φ
(1)
0

where I refers to the luminance intensity and t indicates the
integration time.
Typically, we can build a pixel array and in each pixel a
photoreceptor and its corresponding accumulator are set. The
output and the reset are triggered asynchronously. Here at
each sampling moment, if a spike is just fired, a digital signal “1” is outputted, otherwise “0” is generated. Compared to
the conventional camera, the spike camera only cares about
the luminance intensity. Considering that at different pixel,
the accumulating speed of the luminance intensity is quite
different; the patterns of dispatched spike train are as well
different from each other. For brighter pixels, “1” appears

Fig. 3: The texture reconstruction from ISI (TFI).

Fig. 2: The temporal distribution of spike train. (a) The ISI distribution in temporal domain; (b) The temporal distribution corresponding to dark object (the disc); (c) The temporal distribution corresponding to bright object (the patterns of plane and pentagram).

more frequently than that of darker ones. The idea is easy to
explain. The brighter pixel indicates that more photons are
collected at the pixel resulting in larger ADC value which is
easier and faster to exceed the dispatch threshold. According
to this principle, the texture can be reconstructed by analyzing the patterns of spikes. It is quite similar to the processing
of the responses of ganglion cell which illustrates the outline
of the object by decoding the spike latencies [11].
3.2. The temporal correlation of spike train
The spike camera is able to record spike data with
microsecond-level resolution. Theoretically, we can get the
luminance intensity information at arbitrary time from the
spike. This characteristic enables it to be applied to a variety of vision tasks, such as object detection, tracking. Also,
the high temporal correlation between each consecutive spike
makes it is benefit to spike coding and compression.
Assuming that the luminance intensity is a constant in a
short period. Based on the mechanism of spike generation,
¯ ≥ φ, where ∆t is the interEq. (1) can be simplified as I∆t
spike interval (ISI) obtained by calculating the time between
two neighboring spikes. Therefore, the average intensity of
the pixel in this period can be estimated by
φ
I¯ =
(2)
∆t
In order to analyze the spike train intuitively, we give the
distribution of the ISI in the temporal domain. As shown in
Fig. 2, the video depicts a spinning disc with 2000 revolutions per minute (rpm). We select a pixel located in the red
box (as shown in the left picture in Fig. 2). The patterns
on the disc are brighter, thus their corresponding intervals are
smaller than that of the disk. The results show clearly that the
spike train has a high correlation in the temporal domain. We
can easily distinguish patterns and disk by a simple threshold
or other probability-based models.
4. VISUAL TEXTURE RECONSTRUCTION
To restore the captured scene and bridge the gap between
the asynchronous bionic spike data and conventional frame-

Fig. 4: The texture reconstruction from playback with the moving
time window (TFP).

based vision, we propose several visual texture reconstruction strategies aiming at various tasks and applications, such
as high-speed motion and stationary scenarios. The spikes
can be utilized according to two principles: 1) the intensity
is inversely proportional to the ISI; 2) the intensity is directly
proportional to the spike counts or spike frequency. Thus, by
taking advantage of the ISIs or simply counting the spikes
over a period, the scene is able to be fully reconstructed.
4.1. Texture reconstruction for high-speed motion
For high-speed motion applications, the spike firing patterns
are rapidly changing. From the first principle mentioned
above, the texture is reconstructed from the ISIs, shown in
Fig. 3. According to Eq. (2), the reconstructed the pixel
value can be estimated by the mean luminance intensity using
only two spikes (i.e. one ISI).
C
Pt i =
(3)
∆ti
where Pti refers to the pixel value at the moment of ti , C denotes the maximum dynamic range, and ∆ti means the ISI between ti and the last moment when spike appears. Compared
to the original texture, the reconstructed values may not be
perfectly matched. But the variation is in accordance with the
original one. This method (Texture from ISI, TFI) can reconstruct the outline of the texture but not the clear details. When
the object moves very quickly, the picture reconstructed from
luminance intensity performs the motion nearly synchronous.
4.2. Texture reconstruction for stationary scenes
For stationary scenes, the spike firing characteristics are
rarely changed. By taking advantage of the second principle,
if we play back the spikes, the historical pictures are able to
be illustrated. In this method (Texture from Playback, TFP),

there is a moving time window collecting the spikes in a specific period. By counting these spikes, the texture is computed
as:
Nw
·C
(4)
Pt i =
w
As shown in Fig. 4, the size of the time window is w
which refers to the previous w moments before ti . Nw is
the total number of spikes collected in the time window. C
refers to the maximum dynamic range of the reconstruction.
The larger size means the playback period is longer and more
spikes are included. When the time window size is set to
the dispatch threshold φ, the textures are accurately reconstructed. Meanwhile, the TFP method could restore the texture with various dynamic ranges by resizing the time window
to the value of different contrast levels [12] [13].
4.3. Adaptive texture reconstruction in a bio-inspired
way
TFP method reconstructs texture by playing back the spikes in
a historical window, which incurs a trade-off between length
of time-window and latency. If the texture can be reconstructed adaptively according to the influence of historical
spikes, instead of a predefined window, better results will be
achieved. On the other hand, in biological retina, the spikes
are conveyed to the visual cortex for advanced analysis in
which various neurons process the inputs and response with
their own firing characteristics. For simplicity, these neurons
can be abstracted as a typical neuron but with different membrane potential thresholds to adapt to different stimuli. To this
end, an adaptive texture reconstruction method (Texture from
Adaptive threshold, TFA) based on SRM is proposed.
The state of a neuron is described by a single variable u
which we interpret as the membrane potential. In the absence
of input, the variable u is at its resting value (urest = 0 in this
work). A short current pulse will perturb u and it takes some
time before u returns to rest.
If we regard each pixel as a neuron, the output of spike
camera can be considered as the input current I (t) of the
model, which is a unit step function. First, the input current
I (t) is filtered with a filter κ (s) and yields the input potential
h (t).
Z t
κt (s) I (s) ds
(5)
h (t) =

Fig. 5: The workflow of adaptive texture reconstruction (TFA).The
spike train is considered as the input current I (t) of neuron. It is
filtered with κ (s) and yields a potential h (t). Firing occurs if the
accumulated membrane potential u (t) reaches the threshold ϑ (t).
Then the model is adaptively adjusted to fit the input current, by
dynamic threshold and spike-afterpotential. The dynamic threshold
ϑ (t) is a learning process for the feature of input current, thus it is
suitable for describing the texture.

Fig. 6: The adaptive dynamic threshold. Input current It yields the
input potential. At time T a spike occurs because the membrane
potential hits the threshold ϑ (t). The threshold jumps to a higher
value (dashed line) and, at the same time, a decay is added to the
membrane potential. If no further spikes are triggered, the threshold
decays back to its resting value.

where η (·) is the voltage contribution after firing a spike,
which feeds back to the membrane potential. We set η (s) = 1
in experiment. Spike firing is defined by a threshold process. If the membrane potential u reaches the threshold ϑ, an
output spike is triggered. Meanwhile, a dynamic adjusting is
performed for threshold to adaptive the firing rate. The model
of the dynamic threshold is:
ϑ (ti ) = ϑ (ti−1 ) + fti (s)
(8)
where

 R

 exp − T S (t − s) ds if spike f iring at ti
0


fti (s) =
R
− exp −2 ∗ T S (t − s) ds otherwise
0

(9)

0

where κ (s) describes the time course of the voltage response
to a short current pulse at time s. It is also a function describing the shape of the potential, according to SRM model
[9],κ (s) is defined as:


t−s−∆
t−s−∆
exp 1 −
(6)
κt (s) =
τ
τ
where ∆ and τ are the parameters to adjust the shape of the
model. In general, ∆ is set to zero, τ is a constant.
Then, theZevolution of u is given by
∞

η (z) S (t − z) dz + h (t) + urest

u (t) =
0

(7)

where ϑ (t0 ) is the initial threshold, fti (s) is an adaptive
function to adjust the threshold, and T is time range for calculating the number of spikes. The threshold is adjusted by
the amount of firing times in the past T time.
The spike firing threshold reflects the intensity of external
stimuli, it is the adaptation of the neuron model to the environment. Threshold adjustment can be seen as a learning
process of model to the firing rate. At a certain time, if we
put the thresholds of all the pixels together and form a matrix, the visual texture reconstruction is done naturally after
normalization.

Fig. 7: Texture reconstruction via TFI.

Fig. 8: Texture reconstruction via TFP and TFA.

4.4. Motion representation
Dynamic vision sensors care about the intensity changes, thus
they only response with events in the motion regions. In contrast, the spike camera collects the full-time luminance intensity information. As a consequence, the spike data can be
theoretically converted into the events of DVS, which consist
of the timestamp, pixel-location and the polarity of intensity
change (On or Off).
In DVS, an event is triggered once the change in log intensity at a pixel exceeds a preset threshold. If the last event
generated by DVS occurs at luminance intensity Iµ , a new
event is fired at Iν when a change in that log intensity exceeds
threshold θ:
|log (Iµ ) − log (Iν )| ≥ θ
(10)
In spike camera, Iµ and Iν can be estimated by Eq. (2).
Then, we have 



φ
φ
log
− log
≥θ
(11)
∆tµ
∆tν

Thus, Eq. (11) can be simplified as:
|log (∆tµ ) − log (∆tν )| ≥ θ
(12)
where ∆t is the ISI of the spike data. Consequently, the spike
data can be converted into events like that of DVS. This is
one of the advantages of the proposed sampling method. The
corresponding experiments are conducted in Section 5.
5. EXPERIMENTS
5.1. Experimental setup
We test proposed visual texture reconstruction methods on
spike sequences captured by the spike camera. The details
of each spike sequences are shown in Table I.
5.2. Visual texture reconstruction
One of the most important applications of the spike camera
is for visual-friendly viewing. The texture reconstruction experiment is conducted utilizing three methods: TFI, TFP and

Table 1: Information of the spike sequences.
Spike
sequences
rotation
wavehand
rolling
office
led-rpm2000
100km/h-car

Size×length
[400, 250] × 153600
[400, 250] × 153600
[400, 250] × 153600
[400, 250] × 153600
[400, 250] × 200000
[400, 250] × 200000

Sampling rate Description
40000Hz
40000Hz
40000Hz
40000Hz
20000Hz
20000Hz

High-speed
Normal-speed
Normal-speed
Static
High-speed
High-speed

TFA. To obtain visualization images, the gamma correction
(γ = 2.2) is applied to the reconstructed textures of TFI and
TFP, while TFA shows the original results.
The experimental results of TFI are shown in Fig. 7. The
result indicates that the outline of the object is quite clear,
while some detailed textures are missing. Thus, TFI is more
suitable for real-time applications and some detection related
tasks.
For static scenes, TFP and TFA reconstruct texture with
more details and higher dynamic range, as shown in Fig. 8.
For TFP method, the size of time window is a key parameter in texture reconstruction. We select five typical sizes for
comparison which are 32, 64, 128, 256 and 512. From the results, the static region is reconstructed with more details when
higher dynamic range is gained. Smaller time window size
achieves clearer outline for moving objects but lower quality
for static background pixels.
TFA can be considered as an adaptive version of TFP, the
results achieve better performance than TFP. The high-speed
motion of the object is blurred in these two methods, but the
texture details are reconstructed more completely. The threshold adjustment of TFA is shown in Fig. 9. For a static pixel,
the threshold converges to a constant value after about 500
moments. For the sample rate of 40000Hz, it needs about
0.0125s to adjust the model.
The spike train is able to be converted into the events of
DVS according to Eq. (12). The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 10, which shows that the events are implicit
in spike data. Thus, the spike data is suitable to achieve the
motion detection and object tracking tasks.
6. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel bio-inspired spike camera is introduced
which simulates the retinal imaging. Three decoding methods
of spike train for texture reconstruction are proposed which
enables playing back any historical moment. Experimental
results show that TFI is more suitable for real-time applications such as object detection or action recognition related
tasks, TFP is capable of reconstructing visual-friendly picture sequences for viewing, while TFA is adaptive and give
a high-quality texture in static scenes. For future work, more
efficient texture reconstruction methods need to be explored,
especially in complex scenes.

Fig. 9: The dynamic threshold in TFA.

Fig. 10: Convert the spike data to events. White pixels denote “On”
events and black ones denote “Off” events.

7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Hilton T. Moeslund and V. Kruger, “A survey of advances in
vision-based human motion capture and analysis,” Computer
vision and image understanding, 2006.
[2] G. C. Holst and T. S. Lomheim, “Cmos/ccd sensors and aamera
systems,” Bellingham, WA: SPIE, 2007.
[3] A. Hilton T. Moeslund and V. Kruger, “High-speed camera observations of negative ground flashes on a millisecond-scale,”
Geophys. Res. Lett., vol. 32, no. 23, pp. L23802, 2005.
[4] C. Posch P. Lichtsteiner and T. Delbruck, “A 128×128 120db
15µs latency asynchronous temporal contrast vision sensor,”
IEEE J. Solid-st. Circ., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 566–576, 2008.
[5] M. Yang S. Liu C. Brandli, R. Berner and T. Delbruck, “A
240×180 130db 3µs latency global shutter spatiotemporal vision sensor,” IEEE J. Solid-st. Circ., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2333–
2341, 2014.
[6] D. Matolin C. Posch and R. Wohlgenannt, “An asynchronous
time-based image sensor,” IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, pp. 2130–2133, 2000.
[7] A. Kaehler et al. S. Gould, J. Arfvidsson, “Peripheral-foveal
vision for real-time object recognition and tracking in video,”
IJCAI, 2007.
[8] F. Arrebola et al. R. Marfil, E. Antunez, “Merging attention
and segmentation: active foveal image representation,” BrainInspired Computing,Springer International Publishing, 2013.
[9] A. N. Burkitt, “A review of the integrate-and-fire neuron
model: I. homogeneous synaptic input,” Biol. Cybern., vol.
95, pp. 1–19, 2006.
[10] M. Avermann et al. S. Mensi, R. Naud, “Parameter extraction
and classification of three neuron types reveals two different
adaptation mechanisms,” J. Neurophys., vol. 107, pp. 1756–
1775, 2007.
[11] T. Gollisch and M. Markus, “Rapid neural coding in the retina
with relative spike latencies,” Science, pp. 1108–1111, 2008.
[12] W. Heidrich H. Seetzen and et al. W. Stuerzlinger, “High dynamic range display systems,” ACM SIGGRAPH, pp. 760–768,
2004.
[13] S.Winder et al. S.B.Kang, M. Uyttendaele, “High dynamic
range video,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 319–325, 2003.

