arXiv:1907.06976v3 [cond-mat.soft] 4 Jul 2020

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore
embedded in an anionic membrane: tension
propagation coupled to electrostatics
Jalal Sarabadani1 , Sahin Buyukdagli2 , and Tapio
Ala-Nissila3,4
1 School

of Nano Science, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM),
19395-5531, Tehran, Iran
2 Department of Physics, Bilkent University, Ankara 06800, Turkey
3 Department of Applied Physics and QTF Center of Excellence, Aalto
University, P.O. Box 11000, FI-00076 Aalto, Espoo, Finland
4 Interdisciplinary Centre for Mathematical Modelling and Department of
Mathematical Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire
LE11 3TU, United Kingdom
E-mail: jalal@ipm.ir
E-mail: buyukdagli@fen.bilkent.edu.tr
E-mail: Tapio.Ala-Nissila@aalto.fi
Abstract. We consider the influence of electrostatic forces on driven
translocation dynamics of a flexible polyelectrolyte being pulled through a
nanopore by an external force on the head monomer. To this end, we augment
the iso-flux tension propagation (IFTP) theory with electrostatics for a negatively
charged biopolymer pulled through a nanopore embedded in a similarly charged
anionic membrane‡. We show that in the realistic case of a single-stranded
DNA molecule, dilute salt conditions characterized by weak charge screening,
and a negatively charged membrane, the translocation dynamics is unexpectedly
accelerated despite the presence of large repulsive electrostatic interactions
between the polymer coil on the cis side and the charged membrane. This
is due to the rapid release of the electrostatic potential energy of the coil
during translocation, leading to an effectively attractive force that assists enddriven translocation. The speedup results in non-monotonic polymer length and
membrane charge dependence of the exponent α characterizing the translocation
time τ ∝ N0α of the polymer with length N0 . In the regime of long polymers
N0 & 500, the translocation exponent exceeds its upper limit α = 2 previously
observed for the same system without electrostatic interactions.

‡ A technical error in the interpretation of the sign of the charge distribution of the membrane has
been fixed in the second and third updated versions.

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

(a)

~ ~
t< TP

τ

2

cis trans

Figure 1. (a) A schematic of end-pulled polymer translocation through a
nanopore in the tension propagation stage. R̃ and s̃ are the distances of the
tension front from the pore entrance and translocation coordinate, respectively.
N = l̃ + s̃ < N0 is the number of beads that have been already influenced by
the tension, l̃ is the number of beads in the mobile subchain on the cis side, and
N0 in the polymer contour length. The external driving force f˜ acts on the head
monomer of the polymer only. (b) The electric charge inside the polymer coil
(sphere) in panel (a) (highlighted by the red color) is approximated by a point
charge (red dot) including L̃2 (t̃) = N0 − l̃(t̃) − s̃(t̃) monomers. (c) The same
as panel (a) but in the post propagation stage, where the tension has already
reached the chain end and ˜
l + s̃ = N0 . −σm <0 and −λC < 0 are negative surface
and linear charge densities distributed on the membrane and on the polymer,
respectively (not shown in panels a and b).

1. Introduction
Polymer translocation through a nanopore has been subject of numerous studies
during the last two decades [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] following the seminal works by Bezrukov et
al. in 1994 [6] and later by Kasianowicz et al. in 1996 [7]. It has many technological
applications in rapid DNA sequencing [7, 8, 9, 10, 11], drug delivery [12] and gene
therapy. Motivated by these, many experimental [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] as well as
theoretical [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 36, 38,
39, 40] works have been published in this research field during the last twenty years
or so.
From a theoretical point of view, many studies have been devoted to elucidate
the physics of uncharged polymer translocation through a nanopore embedded in an
uncharged membrane when driven by an external force. In 2007 Sakaue came up with
the idea of tension propagation (TP) in the context of driven polymer translocation
[24]. A quantitative theory was developed starting in 2012 when Ikonen et al. showed
that driven translocation processes can be described by using the TP formalism in the
context of Brownian dynamics [27, 30]. Combining the TP formalism and the iso-flux
assumption (IFTP) [25], several different scenarios such as pore-driven translocation of
a flexible and semi-flexible chain through a nanopore [27, 30, 32], pore-driven flexible
polymer translocation under an alternating driving force through a flickering pore [31],
and end-pulled polymer translocation through a nanopore [33], have been investigated.
In the TP formalism for driven translocation, a tension front propagates along the
backbone of the subchain on the cis side. This is called TP stage, where the tension
has not reached the chain end yet. Therefore, the subchain on the cis side is divided
into two parts, namely a mobile part wherein the monomers move with net non-zero
velocities towards the pore, and an equilibrium part where the monomers’ average
velocities in a narrow window of time are close to zero due to the random thermal
fluctuations caused by the solvent. Finally, the tension reaches the chain end and the
post propagation (PP) stage starts. This lasts until the whole mobile subchain on the
cis side is sucked into the pore.

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

3

In the pore-driven case, as the relative dielectric constant of the solvent is typically
high (≈ 80) with respect to that of the membrane (≈ 2−4), it is a good approximation
to assume that an external force acts on the monomers located inside the nanopore
only. However, in many cases of biological and experimental interest it is relevant
to consider polyelectrolytes that are charged, such as DNA. This requires taking
into account both the presence of counterions in the solution and the dielectric
properties of the membrane through which the polyelectrolyte is translocating.
Recently there has been an intense effort to model polyeletrolyte translocation
including the details of the pore electrohydrodynamics and/or electrostatic polymermembrane interactions, however, with the price of neglecting conformational polymer
fluctuations [41, 39, 5]. This simplified modeling has allowed to characterize the
electrohydrodynamic mechanism of experimentally observed DNA mobility reversal
by charge inversion [42] and pressure-voltage traps [43], and also enabled to identify
strategies for faster polymer capture and slower translocation required for accurate
biosequencing.
In this letter, we undertake the ambitious task to develop a unified theory of
polymer translocation accounting for both tension propagation in a flexible chain and
the electrostatic interactions between an anionic polymer and a like-charged membrane
when pulled through the pore by an external force on the head monomer. Within this
electrostatically augmented IFTP formalism, we characterize the interplay between
the electrostatic forces on the polyelectrolyte and the effect of the ubiquitous tension
propagation mechanism.
2. Model
It is a challenge to include both electrostatic interactions and dynamics of tension
propagation in a flexible chain on the same footing. During translocation a flexible
polymer samples complicated time-dependent configurations leading to highly varying
electrostatic interactions. To make this tractable, we will consider here a simplified
model where we take into account the average interaction at any given moment during
end-pulled translocation. Our theoretical model of an anionic polymer translocating
through an anionic membrane nanopore is depicted in Fig. 1. The polymer is
composed of N0 monomers and the external driving force only acts on the head
monomer. Within the framework of the IFTP theory, the charge-free version of
this model has been studied in detail in Ref. [33]. As it has been shown in Refs.
[4, 30], in the pore-driven case, three different regimes exist for the cis side: the
trumpet (TR), stem-flower (SF) and strongly stretching (SS) regimes, corresponding
to weak, moderate and strong external driving force, respectively. It should be also
added that in the limit of very weak driving force, Sakaue has presented additional
scenarios [34]. For the end-pulled case, as both the cis and trans side subchains
contribute to the translocation dynamics, complicated scenarios of multiple regimes
are involved in the theory [33]. Here, as the main goal is to illustrate how the
electrostatic interactions affects the average polymer translocation dynamics, for both
the cis and trans side subchains, we consider only the SS regime characterized by an
external driving force satisfying the inequality f˜ & N0 (see below for the definitions
of dimensionless variables denoted by tilde).
Here we also assume that the linear self-avoiding flexible polymer chain is
negatively charged such as a DNA molecule, with a linear charge density of −λ̃C < 0.
Moreover, we assume that the membrane carries a negative charge with surface density

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

4

−σm <0, which is uniformly distributed on the membrane and constant during the
translocation process. The negative membrane charge is a consequence of a low
degree of protonation occurring in the typical high pH conditions of translocation
experiments [41].
In the SS regime during the TP stage, the fully straightened cis and trans portions
of the mobile subchain have lengths l̃ and s̃, respectively. Then, the immobile part on
the cis side is coiled as highlighted in Fig. 1(a) in light red color. The coil is assumed
to be approximately spherical in shape and will be modelled as a negative point charge
˜
whose position is approximated to be at the end of the tension propagation front R̃(t)
(red dot in Fig. 1(b)). As depicted in Fig. 1(b), the number of monomers inside
the sphere is L̃2 (t̃) = N0 − l̃(t̃) − s̃(t̃). The boundary between the mobile polymer
portion and the inert coil on the cis side is the position of the tension front, located
at distance R̃ from the pore entrance. The SS regime is characterised by the equality
R̃ = l̃. As time passes and tension propagates along the backbone of the chain, the
number of monomers inside the sphere decreases, and therefore its size shrinks. The
TP stage ends when the tension reaches the chain end and the sphere disappears. In
the subsequent PP stage, the whole chain in both cis and trans sides is mobile and
fully straightened.
To mathematically formulate the model presented above, we will first express the
relevant physical parameters in dimensionless units, denoted by a tilde and defined as
Z̃ ≡ Z/Zu [27, 30, 31, 33, 4]. The length, time, friction, force, velocity and monomer
flux are written in units of su ≡ σ, tu ≡ ησ 2 /(kB T ), Γu ≡ η, fu ≡ kB T /σ, and
ϕu ≡ kB T /(ησ 2 ), respectively, where σ is the segment length (or the size of each
bead), kB the Boltzmann constant, and T and η the solvent temperature and friction
per monomer, respectively. The linear polymer charge density is expressed in units
of λC,u ≡ e/σ, with the electron charge e = 1.6 × 10−19 C and the Kuhn length of a
single DNA strand σ = 1.5 nm. Lennard-Jones units are used for quantities without
the tilde, such as the friction, time and force.
In the SS regime, the entropic force due to fluctuations of the coiled subchain
on the cis side and straightened subchains on the cis and trans sides is negligible as
compared to the total driving force on the right hand side of Eq. (1). Therefore, as
already verified and confirmed by extensive MD simulations [32, 33], it is a very good
approximation to consider the translocation process of an end-pulled case by the IFTP
theory without an entropic force here. Within our electrostatically augmented IFTP
formalism, the equation of motion for the translocation coordinate s̃ corresponding to
the number of beads on the trans side reads
ds̃
a
= f˜ + f˜pm
≡ f˜tot ,
(1)
Γ̃(t̃)
dt̃
where Γ̃(t̃) stands for the effective friction coefficient, f˜ is the external driving force
acting on the head monomer of the polymer and oriented from the cis to trans side,
a
f˜pm
is the electrostatic force due to the interaction between the like charges of the
polymer and the membrane, the superscript a = {TP, PP} indicates the translocation
stage, and f˜tot is the total force. The effective friction that contains the essential
physics of the tension propagation theory is defined as Γ̃(t̃) = η̃p + η̃cis (t̃) + η̃TS (t̃),
where η̃p stands for the pore friction. Then, η̃cis (t̃) and η̃TS (t̃) are the solvent friction
coefficients associated with the mobile subchain on the cis and trans sides, respectively.
In the SS regime where the cis and trans mobile portions of the polymer are straight
lines, the hydrodynamic friction coefficient on each side is proportional to the length

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

5

Figure 2. (a) The waiting time w(s̃) as a function of the translocation coordinate
s̃ for various magnitudes of the negative membrane charge density σ̃m with
constant chain length N0 = 100, pore friction ηp = 3.5, external driving force
f = 100, salt concentration ρb = 10−5 M, and the negative polymer line charge
density λC = 1/3.4 e/Å (λ̃C = 4.4) of a single-stranded DNA molecule [39].
Panels (b) and (c) are the same as (a) but for different values of the salt
concentrations ρb = 5 × 10−5 M, and 10−4 M, respectively. In all panels the
translocation coordinate at the TP time is denoted by s̃TP in red color.

of the corresponding polymer portion, i.e. η̃cis (t̃) = l̃(t̃) = R̃(t̃) and η̃TS (t̃) = s̃(t̃).
Therefore, the total effective friction is given by
(2)
a
a
˜
In Eq. (1), the electrostatic force on the polyelectrolyte reads fpm = −∂ Ω̃pm/∂s̃,
where Ω̃apm stands for the electrostatic polymer-membrane interaction energy. The
latter is given in the TP and PP stages by [39],
 2λ̃C 

2λ̃C 
1 − e−κ̃b l̃(t̃) +
1 − e−κ̃b s̃(t̃) − λ̃C L2 (t̃)φ̃m [l̃(t̃)];
Ω̃TP
pm =
2
2
µ̃κ̃b
µ̃κ̃b
 2λ̃C 

2λ̃C 
Ω̃PP
(3)
1 − e−κ̃b l̃(t̃) +
1 − e−κ̃b s̃(t̃) ,
pm =
µ̃κ̃2b
µ̃κ̃2b
Γ̃(t̃) = R̃(t̃) + s̃(t̃) + η̃p .

PP
where the first and the second terms in Ω̃TP
pm and Ω̃pm stand for mobile cis side
subchain-membrane and mobile trans side subchain-membrane interactions including
˜l and s̃ beads, respectively, and the third term in Ω̃TP shows the sphere-membrane
pm
interaction that includes L̃2 (t̃) = N0 − l̃ −√s̃ beads. Moreover, we used the DebyeHückel (DH) screening parameter κb = 8πℓB ρb and the Gouy-Chapman length
µ = e/(2πℓB |σm |), with the Bjerrum length ℓB = e2 /(4πǫ0 ǫw kB T ) ≈ 7 Å at solvent
temperature T = 300 K and permittivity ǫw = 80, and the salt concentration ρb .
In addition, L2 (t̃) = N0 − ˜
l(t̃) − s̃(t̃) is the number of beads in the coiled sphere,
and φ̃m [l̃(t̃)] = −2e−κ̃b l̃(t̃) /(µ̃κ̃b ) stands for the membrane potential derived within
the DH theory, where l̃(t̃) corresponds to the distance of the sphere sub-chain to the
nanopore, as the mobile sub-chain including l̃ beads in the cis side is fully straightened
in the SS regime. Our DH approximation is motivated by the weak membrane charges
considered in the present work. Although this approximation can be relaxed by
introducing a charge renormalization procedure [39], in order to keep the analytical
transparency of our model, we leave this improvement to a future work. Using the
a
above equalities, the contribution from the electrostatic force f˜pm
to the force-balance
equation (1) follows as


−2λ̃C −κ̃b s̃(t̃)
TP
−κ̃b l̃(t̃)
−κ̃b l̃(t̃) ∂ l̃(t̃)
˜
fpm =
,
e
−e
− κ̃b L2 (t̃)e
µ̃κ̃b
∂s̃(t̃)

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane
6


−2λ̃C −κ̃b s̃(t̃)
PP
(4)
f˜pm
=
e
− e−κ̃b l̃(t̃) .
µ̃κ̃b
In the derivation of the second line in Eq. (4), we used the mass conservation equation
N0 = l+s valid in the PP regime (see below) and implying the equality ∂ l̃/∂s̃ = −1. At
this point, we note that a key novelty of our model is the non-trivial time-dependence
of the derivative term ∂ l̃(t̃)/∂s̃(t̃) in Eq. (4) characterizing the TP regime. The
resulting function originating from the presence of the charged sphere accounts for
the coupling between the electrostatic polymer-membrane interactions and the nonuniform tension propagation along the chain backbone. Thus, through this coupling,
the present formalism goes beyond the purely stiff polymer model of Ref. [39] where
the TP regime is absent and the trivial equality ∂ l̃/∂s̃ = −1 holds during the entire
translocation process.
In order to evaluate the derivative ∂ l̃(t̃)/∂s̃(t̃) in Eqs. (4), it should be noted
that R̃ is equivalent to the end-to-end distance of the flexible self-avoiding chain, i.e.
R̃ = Aν N ν , where N = l̃ + s̃ is the number of all monomers that have been already
influenced by the tension force (see Fig. 1(a)), with the proportionality coefficient
Aν = 1.15 (for a coarse-grained bead-spring model as here), and the 3D Flory exponent
ν = 0.588. Therefore, in the TP stage, the change in l̃ = R̃ with respect to the


1/ν
1/ν
translocation coordinate s̃ reads ∂ R̃/∂s̃ = νAν R̃(ν−1)/ν / 1 − νAν R̃(ν−1)/ν . At
this point, we emphasize that in the TP stage, as the tension is propagating along the
backbone of the chain located on the cis side, the length R̃ is growing, i.e. ∂ R̃/∂s̃ > 0.
In contrast, in the PP stage where the straightened mobile subchain on the cis side is
sucked into the pore, R̃ decreases and consequently one has ∂ R̃/∂s̃ = −1 < 0.
Inserting the equalities above for ∂ R̃/∂s̃ together with the mass conservation in
the TP and PP stages into Eqs. (4), the IFTP Eqs. (1) and (2) in the TP and PP
stages can be expressed solely in terms of the coordinate ˜l. The explicit form of the
corresponding equations and asymptotic analytical predictions will be presented in a
future work. Finally, the function l̃(t) obtained from the numerical solution of Eqs. (1)
and (2) should be used in the scaling law ˜l = Aν (l̃ + s̃)ν and N0 = l̃ + s̃ to obtain
the time dependence of the translocation coordinate s̃(t) in the TP and PP stages,
respectively.
3. Results
In order to describe the dynamics of the translocation process at the monomer level, we
first examine the waiting time (WT) defined as the time that each bead spends in the
pore during translocation. We then illustrate the global dynamics of the translocation
process by focusing on the translocation exponent α, which is defined as τ ∝ N0α ,
where τ is the average translocation time and N0 the contour length of the polymer.
3.1. Waiting time
To characterize the effect of polymer-membrane interactions on the translocation
dynamics, the WT is plotted in Figs. 2(a)-(c) as a function of the translocation
coordinate s̃. The plots also display in red the translocation coordinate s̃TP at the
TP time corresponding to the time that takes for the tension front to reach the chain
end. The WT curves are plotted for three different bulk salt concentrations ranging
from ρb = 10−5 M to 10−4 M, and various negative membrane charge density values
with increasing magnitude of σm from top to bottom (see the legends). We consider

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

7

Figure 3. (a) Translocation time exponent α as a function of the polymer contour
length for various values of the membrane charge density. The black horizontal line
is the asymptotic limit α = 2 for the uncharged system. The model parameters
given in the legend are the same as in Fig. 1.

here the dilute salt regime where the electrostatic interactions are weakly screened and
expected to play an important role. It should be noted that this low salt concentration
regime has been previously reached by translocation experiments [42]. The line charge
density of the polymer is set to the value λC = 1/3.4 e/Å corresponding to a singlestranded DNA molecule. The remaining model parameters are given in the caption of
Fig. 2. We finally emphasize that because the electrostatic force in Eq. (4) involves
simply the product of the membrane and polymer charge densities, the results of our
manuscript can be extrapolated to polyelectrolytes of different charge strengths by
rescaling the membrane charge density value.
Figures 2(a)-(c) show that at constant salt concentration, increasing the
magnitude of the membrane charge density decreases the WT, i.e. σm ↑ w(s) ↓.
Consequently, the TP time corresponding to the integral of the WT curve from zero to
s̃TP decreases with the increase of the membrane charge strength. This is a surprising
result as one would naively expect the electrostatic repulsion between the chain and the
membrane to slow down rather than speed up the translocation speed. The physical
mechanism behind this seemingly counterintuitive effect will be discussed below. The
comparison of Figs. 2(a)-(c) also indicates that at constant membrane charge density,
added bulk salt rapidly screens out the electrostatic polymer-membrane repulsion,
as expected. One indeed notes that the increment of the salt concentration leads
to an increase of the WT and reduction of the translocation rate, i.e. ρb ↑ w(s) ↑.
Interestingly, the translocation coordinate s̃TP at the TP time remains unaffected by
the value of the surface charge density and the salt concentration. This indicates that
the electrostatics does not directly affect where the initiation of the post-propagation
occurs in the chain.
3.2. Translocation time exponent
Accurate polymer sequencing by translocation requires the extension of the ionic
current blockade caused by the translocating polymer and thus the prolongation of
the translocation event. Therefore, it is essential to characterize the effect of the
experimentally tunable electrostatic model parameters on the total translocation time
τ for the entire polymer chain to translate from the cis to the trans side.
As seen in Figs. 2(a)-(c), at constant salt concentration, the translocation time
corresponding to the integral of the WT time curve over the translocation coordinate

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

8

Figure 4.
(a) The electrostatic interaction energy Ω̃pm and its components
(denoted by the corresponding superscripts) between the polymer and the likecharged membrane as a function of the translocation coordinate s̃, with the same
values of the parameters as in panel (a) in Fig. 2, but for a fixed value of the surface
charge density σ̃m = 0.05. The blue dashed and the red dash-dotted lines display
the contributions from the mobile cis and trans sides subchains, respectively, while
the contribution from the sphere is shown by the green dash-dotted-dotted line.
The total electrostatic energy is repulsive but monotonically decreases (black solid
line). This stems from a rapid decrease of the sphere contribution. (b) The WT
as a function of s̃ for the uncharged system with an external driving force f = 100
(black solid line) and for a charged system (σ̃m = 0.05) with external driving force
f = 100 (blue dotted line) and f = 0 (red dashed line), respectively. See text for
details.

s drops with the increase of the magnitude of the membrane charge, i.e. σm ↑ τ ↓.
Moreover, the comparison of the panels (a)-(c) at constant surface charge indicates
that due to electrostatic screening, the addition of bulk salt increases the translocation
time and slows down the translocation dynamics, i.e. ρb ↑ τ ↑.
An exact scaling form for the translocation time in the SS regime for an endpulled polymer chain has been derived in Ref. [33]. In the asymptotic limit of very
long chains, the translocation time exponent defined as τ ∝ N0α is α = 2, with large
correction-to-scaling terms arising from the pore friction and the trans side friction
of the chain. In order to understand the effect of electrostatic polymer-membrane
interactions on the dependence of the translocation time on the contour length, we
illustrate in Fig. 3 the effective translocation time exponent α as a function of N0 for
various membrane charge and salt strengths. In agreement with the results above, the
comparison of Figs. 3 (a)-(c) shows that as the increase of the salt concentration
suppresses electrostatic interactions in the system, the trend of the translocation
exponent for different values of the surface charge density becomes similar to that
of an uncharged system (black open circles). As a result, the non-trivial behaviour of
the exponent α originating from electrostatic interactions appears in the highly dilute
salt concentration regime ρb . 10−4 M.
Figures 3(a) and (b) show that due to the same electrostatic polymer-membrane
interactions, as the surface charge density increases, the translocation exponent
becomes a non-monotonic function of the membrane charge σm and the chain length
N0 . More precisely, for short polymers with length N0 . 500, the membrane charge
strength decreases the scaling exponent, i.e. σm ↑ α ↓. For long polymers N0 & 500,
the exponent increases with the membrane charge (σm ↑ α ↑) and exceeds its upper
bound α = 2 observed for the uncharged system. We now focus on the non-monotonic
polymer length dependence of the exponent α. One sees that with the increase

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

9

of the polymer length, the exponent initially rises (N0 ↑ α ↑), reaches a peak at
the characteristic length N0∗ , and subsequently drops in the long polymer regime
(N0 ↑ α ↓). We finally note that the characteristic length for the maximum of the
exponent α is lowered by added salt, i.e. ρb ↑ N0∗ ↓.
3.3. Physical mechanism behind repulsive speedup
To understand the physical mechanism behind the unexpected speedup of the
translocation process with repulsive interactions we need to carefully consider the
various contributions to the total electrostatic energy (EE) in the system. In Fig. 4(a)
the total EE Ω̃pm and its various components have been plotted as a function of the
translocation coordinate s̃ for fixed value of the membrane surface charge density
σ̃m = 0.05. As can be seen the total EE is positive for all values of the translocation
coordinate s̃ as expected (black solid line), but it unexpectedly monotonically decreases
as s̃ increases. This results in a total effective force that is directed towards the trans
side and assists end-driven translocation.
To explicitly show the effect of the effective attractive force in Fig. 4(b) we plot
the WT as a function of s̃ for an uncharged system (black solid line) and for two
systems with surface charge density σ̃m = 0.05. The blue dotted and the red dashed
lines display WT for the charged systems with the values of the external driving force
f = 100 and f = 0, respectively. Quite interestingly, even without an external driving
force, i.e. f = 0, the translocation process is successful and also close to the case
where f = 100 for the uncharged system.
The physical reason behind the speedup can be seen from the EE components
plotted in Fig. 4(a). The main contribution to the total repulsive EE comes from the
charged sphere that comprises most of the monomers at t = 0. When the tension
front starts propagating, the EE components from the cis and trans sides increase at
the expense of the charged sphere, whose energy rapidly drops with the decreasing
number of monomers in it. It is also important to point out that the unfolding of
the coil modeled here as the melting of the corresponding charged sphere is not the
its only degree of freedom; the sphere can also translate away from the membrane.
Figure 4(a) shows that indeed it both melts and translates. The cis EE increases (blue
curve), which means that the cis portion gets longer. This is possible only if the sphere
located at the tension front moves away from the membrane, which would correspond
to its repulsive interaction with the membrane wall (blue curve minimum at s̃ = 0).
However, the melting of the sphere brings a dominant attractive contribution (strongly
decreasing green curve with minimum at s̃ = s̃TP ). Consequently, the sphere’s energy
overall favors translocation towards the pore. This results in an overall reduction of
the EE and an effective attractive force that speeds up the translocation dynamics.
Finally, in the PP stage the EE is governed only by the straightened cis and trans
side subchains. As the straightened cis side subchain is sucked into the pore and its
length rapidly decreases, the repulsive EE due to this part drops faster than that of
the trans side subchain rises. This still leads to an overall attractive force that assists
translocation (see also Fig. 4(b)).
4. Summary and discussion
An electrostatically augmented IFTP theory has been introduced to investigate endpulled polyelectrolyte translocation through a nanopore embedded in a charged

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

10

membrane. In this work, we have considered the case where there is a repulsive
electrostatic interaction between the polyelectrolyte and the charged membrane. The
unexpected finding is that despite strong repulsive interactions at low salt, the total
EE of the polymer decreases as the tension front propagates in the chain, leading to an
effectively attractive force that actually speeds up the translocation dynamics. This is
due to the fact that most of the EE is stored in the coiled part of the chain located at
the end of the tension front, and the EE of this charged sphere decreases much faster
that the EE contributions from the cis and trans parts of the chain increase. The
speedup leads to non-monotonic behavior of the translocation time exponent α. For
short polymers N0 . 500, the increment of the membrane charge strength reduces the
exponent α towards its lower bound α = 1. In the long polymer regime N0 & 500, the
exponent increases with the membrane charge strength and exceeds its upper limit
α = 2 previously observed for the charge-free system [33].
We would like to highlight the main differences between the present formalism
and previous electrostatic models of polymer translocation. Via the inclusion of the
charged coil, the translocation model introduced herein is a direct extension of the
purely electrostatic model of Ref. [39]. In the latter model where the coil part had been
neglected, the translocation process was assumed to be always in the PP regime. Thus,
this important extension allowed us to consider here for the first time the electrostatics
of the TP regime governed by the coil dynamics. We would like to emphasize as
well the main difference between the present model and the electrohydrodynamic
formalism of Ref. [44]. It should be noted that the latter model was developed for
the translocation of short polymer sequences where one can assume a stiff polymer
configuration and thus bypass the presence of the coil portion. However, considering
the comparable length of the polymer and the nanopore, the model of Ref. [44] took
explicitly into account the electrohydrodynamics of the translocation process as well
as the electrostatic interactions between the polymer and the pore wall. In the present
article where we focus on the translocation of polymers much longer than the nanopore,
the electrohydrodynamic forces of relatively short range have been smeared out and
included in terms of the pore friction coefficient η̃p of Eq. (1). Future works can
consider the inclusion of the coil dynamics and pore electrohydrodynamics on the
same footing, but this challenging task is beyond the scope of the present article.
The results of our newly introduced model can be easily tested by current
translocation experiments involving atomic force microscope (AFM) [45] as well as
magnetic or optical tweezers [46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52]. Our predictions may also
contribute to the improvement of our control over the polymer translocation dynamics
in next generation biosensing techniques.
Finally, we would like to comment on the key assumptions made in the model.
The main approximation here has been to assume that the part of the chain unaffected
by the tension front on the cis side can be replaced by a point charge whose position
is always given by R̃(t̃) in the TP regime. Due to the high repulsive force stemming
from the sphere-membrane interaction, it is possible that its center of mass does not
exactly follow R̃(t̃) but acquires an additional drift velocity component that moves it
away from the membrane. If this were the case, the EE component from the sphere
would decrease somewhat faster than our model predicts. Thus, it is possible that our
theory slightly overestimates the total EE and the speedup. We will investigate this
possibility in future work.

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane

11

Acknowledgments
T.A-N. has been supported in part by the Academy of Finland through its PolyDyna
(no. 307806) and QFT Center of Excellence Program grants (no. 312298). We
acknowledge the computational resources provided by the Aalto Science-IT project
and the CSC IT Center for Science, Finland.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]

Muthukumar M 2011 Polymer Translocation (Taylor and Francis)
Milchev A 2011 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 23 103101
Palyulin V V, Ala-Nissila T and Metzler R 2014 Soft Matter 10 9016
Sarabadani J and Ala-Nissila T 2018 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 30 274002
Buyukdagli S, Sarabadani J and Ala-Nissila T 2019 Polymers 11 118
Bezrukov S M, Vodyanoy I and Parsegian A V 1994 Nature 370 279
Kasianowicz J J et al. 1996 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93 13770
Meller A, Nivon L and Branton D. 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 3435
Luo K, Ala-Nissila T, Ying S -C and Bhattacharya A 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 058101
Sigalov G, Comer J, Timp G and Aksimentiev A 2008 Nano Lett. 8 56
Cohen J A, Chaudhuri A and Golestanian R 2012 Phys. Rev. X 2 021002
Meller A 2003 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 15 R581
Sauer-Budge A F et al. 2003 Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 238101
Branton D et al. 2008 Nature Biotech. 26 1146
Storm A J et al. 2005 Nano Lett. 5 1193
Mathe J et al. 2004 Biophys. J. 87 3205
Carson S, Wilson J, Aksimentiev A and Wanunu M 2014 Biophys. J. 107 2381
Keyser U F et al. 2006 Nature Physics 2 473
Sung W and Park P J 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 783
Muthukumar M 1999 J. Chem. Phys. 111 10371
Chuang J, Kantor Y and Kardar M 2001 Phys. Rev. E 65 011802
Metzler R and Klafter J 2003 Biophys. J. 85 2776
Grosberg A Y et al. 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 228105
Sakaue T 2007 Phys. Rev. E 76 021803
Rowghanian P and Grosberg A Y 2011 J. Phys. Chem. B 115 14127
Dubbeldam J L A et al. 2012 Phys. Rev. E 85 041801
Ikonen T et al. 2012 Phys. Rev. E 85 051803
Ikonen T et al. 2012 J. Chem. Phys. 137 085101
Ikonen T et al. 2013 Europhys. Lett 103 38001
Sarabadani J, Ikonen T and Ala-Nissila T 2014 J. Chem. Phys. 141 214907
Sarabadani J, Ikonen T and Ala-Nissila T 2015 J. Chem. Phys. 143 074905
Sarabadani J et al. 2017 Sci. Rep. 7 7423
Sarabadani J et al. 2017 Europhys. Lett. 120 38004
Sakaue T 2016 Polymers 8 424
Menais T, Mossa S and Buhot A 2016 Sci. Rep. 6 38558
de Haan H W and Slater G W 2012 J. Chem. Phys. 136 204902
Gauthier M G and Slater G W 2009 Phys. Rev. E 79 021802
Huopaniemi I et al. 2007 Phys. Rev. E 75 061912
Buyukdagli S, Sarabadani J and Ala-Nissila T 2018 Polymers 10 1242
Malgaretti P and Oshanin G 2019 Polymers 11(2) 251
Buyukdagli S and Ala-Nissila T 2018 Europhys. Lett. 123 38003
Qiu S et al. 2015 Soft Matter 11 4099
Hoogerheide D P, Lu B and Golovchenko J A 2014 ACS Nano 8 738
Buyukdagli S and Ala-Nissila T 2017 J. Chem. Phys. 147 114904
Ritort F 2006 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 18 R531
Smith D E et al. 2001 Nature 413 748
Bulushev R D et al. 2014 Nano Lett. 14 6606
Bulushev R D, Marion S and Radenovic A et al. 2015 Nano Lett. 15 7118
Bulushev R D et al. 2016 Nano Lett. 16 7882
Keyser U F el al. 2006 Nat. Phys. 2 473

Pulling a DNA molecule through a nanopore embedded in an anionic membrane
[51] Keyser U F, Dekker N H, Dekker C and Lemay S G 2009 Nat. Phys. 5 347
[52] Ritort F 2006 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 18 R531

12

