1

Fabrication of p+ contact by Thermally Induced
Solid State Regrowth of Al on p-type Ge Crystal
Manoranjan Ghosh,1,a) Shreyas Pitale,1 S.G. Singh,1 Husain Manasawala,1

Vijay Karki,2 Manish Singh,2 Kulwant Singh,3 G. D. Patra,1 Shashwati Sen1,4


Abstract—Formation of p

contact on Germanium is
important for applications in diode detector and other
electronic devices. In this work, thermally deposited Al on
Ge crystal is annealed at 350ºC followed by slow cooling
for solid-state regrowth of Al-Ge p+ contact on Ge. Depth
profile analysis by secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) is carried out to investigate the occurrence of Al
and Ge along the depth of the regrown Al-Ge layer.
Evidence of regrowth is observed due to inter-diffusion of
both Ge and Al across the layers although Ge diffusion in
Al layer is found to be more prevalent. Thickness of the
evaporated Al layer is varied to understand the diffusion
profile of Al, Ge and estimate the depth of Al
incorporation in Ge crystal underneath. Hall measurement
at different depth of Al-Ge regrown layer reveals that Al
impurity induces p+ doping in p-type Ge and its
concentration gradually reduces towards the Ge crystal.
Top surface of the Al-Ge layer exhibits lowest sheet
resistance that varies with the thickness of the as deposited
Al layer.
+

Index Terms—carrier concentration, depth profile, Ge Crystal,
p-type contact, sheet resistance, solid state regrowth

O

I. INTRODUCTION

wing to its high carrier mobility and efficient absorption
for gamma-rays (Z=32) Germanium diode based
detectors are coveted in gamma ray spectroscopy for their
superior resolution and efficiency [1,2]. Although operation of
these detectors requires cryogenic cooling, the typical
resolution of high purity germanium (HPGe) detectors is about
0.2% at 662 keV, compared with that of NaI scintillators
which is typically ~7% [3]. Suitable electrical contacts are
required for application of Ge as diode detector. Planar
detectors are fabricated by forming electron and hole blocking
contacts on opposite faces of intrinsic Ge crystal [4].
Conventionally, lithium diffusion is used to fabricate the n+
contact [5] and boron implantation for p+ contact [6]. Since
extensive and sophisticated procedure is involved for boron
ion implantation, alternative contacts were explored [7,8].
In order to identify appropriate contact materials, thermally
Technical Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
2
Fuel Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
3
Material Science Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
4
Homi Bhabha National Institute
a)
Email: mghosh@barc.gov.in
1

induced reaction of 20 transition metals with Ge substrates has
been studied. Phase formation of each metal-Ge system has
been determined for the identification of the most promising
candidates—in terms of sheet resistance and surface roughness
[9]. To avoid further addition of impurities, low temperature
reactions have been employed to form thin blocking or ohmic
contacts to semiconductors such as Si and GaAs [10,11]. It is
found that n- and p-type layers can be formed in Ge at
temperatures below 3000C by using solid-solid reactions
between Ge and evaporated metal films [4]. Epitaxial growth
of Ge is claimed from a solid solution of Ge in an A1 film
onto n-type Ge substrates. Hall voltage polarities and hot point
probe measurements indicated p-type conductivity of the
grown layer [12]. In a similar study, solid Al was used as a
medium from which to grow Ge onto a crystalline Ge
substrate and the regrown layer is found to be p –type [13]. Ge
alpha particle detector has been fabricated by employing solidphase epitaxial regrowth technique to grow p-type contacts on
n-type Ge by evaporating 40-100 nm Al layer followed by
annealing and slow cooling [14]. Further, HPGe detector has
been fabricated using thin p+ contacts formed by solid phase
regrowth of evaporated AI layers on Ge at 300°C and lithium
diffused n+ contacts [15].
Al-Ge contacts are epitaxial in nature when grown below its
eutectic temperature (4240C) and exhibits p-type conductivity
as established by all earlier studies. Mainly, channeling effect
and backscattering measurements were performed to
determine the orientation and crystalline nature of regrown Ge
[12]. In this work, Al-Ge solid-state regrown p+ contact is
fabricated on Ge by thermal deposition of Al on Ge followed
by heat treatment at 350ºC. Depth profile analysis by
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is performed to
investigate the presence of Ge and Al along the depth of
regrown layer. Also, sheet resistance, impurity concentration
and type of conductivity have been determined by hall
measurement along the depth of regrown layer for its
applicability as p+ contacts on Ge. Thickness of the deposited
Al layer has been varied systematically and its effect on the
length of regrown layer as well as diffusion profile of both Ge
and Al has been determined which was not studied earlier.
II. METHODS OF SAMPLE PREPARATION AND EXPERIMENTAL
TECHNIQUES

Commercially available Ge crystals (carrier conc. ~1010/cc
at 77K) were cut by diamond wheel to a suitable size and

2
TABLE I
THICKNESS OF DEPOSITED AL FILM FOR VARIOUS AMOUNTS OF
SOURCE MATERIALS (AL)

Mass of Al
5 mg
10 mg
15 mg
20 mg

Film Thickness
~30 nm
~60 nm
~90 nm
~120 nm

Thickness of Al films were determined by TaylorTaylor
based on
Hobson make optical 3D profiler (Model-CCI-MP)
(Model
coherence
scanning
interferometry.
Depth
profile
measurement by SIMS (CAMECA IMS - 7f) is performed to
investigate the presence of Al and Ge along the depth of Al
AlGe regrown layer. Carrier concentrations, hall coefficient,
resistivity and carrier mobility of Al-Ge
samples were
Al
measured by Ecopia make HMS5000 Hall effect measurement
system within a range of temperatures from 77K to 300K.
Four contacts were taken on the corner
corners of square sample
Ga eutectic in Van der Pauw configuration. The
through In-Ga
sheet resistance of the samples was measured by collinear 44
probe method at each step of fabrication to qualify the process.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Fig. 1. Surface profile (a) and thickness (b) of scratched Al film on Ge
after thermal deposition of 5 mg Al without post deposition heat treatment.
The same for 15 mg Al is shown in (c) and (d).

shape. Pieces having flat faces
ces and desired size of 8mm ×
8mm × 1.5 mm were achieved by lapping on SiC abrasives
sheets successively with grit sizes from 220 to 1500. Samples
were cleaned by ultra-sonication
sonication in methanol for 15 minutes.
Further planarization is performed and mirror like
li surfaces are
obtained by polish etching in 3:1 solution of HNO3:HF (by
volume) for 3 minutes. The substrates were then mounted in a
thermal evaporation system equipped with provision of in
in-situ
annealing in argon environment after deposition. Al films of
o
various thicknesses were deposited on Ge using 5-20
5
mg of Al
wire wound around the tungsten filament fastened between the
electrodes. The chamber was pumped down to 2×10-6 mbar
using a turbo-molecular
molecular pump and the current through the
filament was gradually
ly increased up to about 50A to evaporate
Al wire completely.
For the regrowth of Ge in the as deposited Al layer,
annealing of samples was performed immediately after
thermal evaporation in an argon atmosphere. The process
temperature profile was set and controlled by a PID
temperature controller. As deposited Al coated Ge (hence
forth Al/Ge) samples were first heated up to 3500C within 20
minutes and maintained for 40 minutes before slowly cooled
down to 300C in 90 minutes. Evidence of regrowth and Ge
diffusion
ffusion up to the top Al surface can be seen in heat treated
Al/Ge samples (hence forth Al-Ge).
Ge). The easily removable Al
layer converts in to rugged p-type Al--Ge contacts on Ge
crystal.

A. Determination of thickness of Al film on Ge
Knowledge of thickness of Al layer on unannealed Al/Ge
samples is necessary to investigate the regrown Al-Ge
layer.
Al
Also measuring the depth of craters created by the impact of
ion beam during SIMS measurement is required for finding
out the diffusion length of Ge and Al. Thickness measurement
have been performed on both as deposited Al layers and
Ge regrown layer by 3D optical profilometer.
craters on Al-Ge
hickness of as deposited Al layers on Ge for
Measured thickness
different amount of source materials are given in Table 1.
Measured crater depths (not shown here) are used for
converting the sputtering time in to depth. 3D profile of the
Al/Ge surface containing scratches for
fo determining the
thickness of the Al film are shown in Fig. 1(a), (b) for 5 mg
and (c), (d) for 15 mg Al source material. Height difference
between top of the Al film and exposed Ge crystal for 5mg
and 15 mg Al are found to be around 30 nm and 90 nm
respectively.
Film thickness increases by ~30nm for complete deposition
of every 5mg of Al that emerges as an important finding for
repetitive deposition of desired thickness of Al film in the
current apparatus. Assuming uniform spherical distribution of
2
Al vapour, the thickness (t) can be estimated as m/4ᴨρd
m/4
where m is the mass of Al, ρ is the density and d is the sample
distance from the filament. For, 0.005g Al and the sample
being about 82 mm away from the filament (d), the expected
ich agrees well with the measured
thickness is 25 nm which
thickness by 3D profilometer (Table 1).
regrown layers by
B. Depth profile measurement of Al-Ge
Al
SIMS
For making rugged electrical contacts on Ge, Al/Ge samples
were annealed at 350oC and slowly cooled as described
un-annealed Al/Ge surface is
earlier. Thee sheet resistance of un

3

significant. Thus,
us, the length of Al diffusion in Ge is
found to be linked with the as deposited Al film
thickness. It is established further by depth profile
p
analysis of two additional samples having Al
thickness 15 nm and 150 nm [Fig. 3(a) and (b)].
Diffusion of Al can be seen up to 60 nm and 580 nm
inside Ge for Al film thickness around 15 nm and
150 nm respectively. It reaffirms that Al diffusion
th in Ge extends
length
extend up to four times of Al film
thickness after heat treatment at 3500C.

samples
C. Hall measurement of Al-Ge
Al
Temperature dependent Hall measurement is
carried out to investigate the effect of Al
incorporation in Ge along the depth of Al-Ge
layer.
Al
For this purpose, 120 nm Al film is deposited on Ge
and regrown at 3500C to form around 150 nm Al-Ge
layer. Sheet resistance of the top surface of Al-Ge
Al
layer is found to be 1.5 ohm (~0.4 ohm for
unannealed surface) and exhibits metallic electrical
perties. It validates the observed Ge diffusion up
properties.
Fig. 2. (a) SIMS profile of Ge and Al along the depth for unannealed Al/Ge [(a) and (c)]
layer through SIMS
Al
and annealed Al-Ge [(b) and (d)] samples for as deposited Al film thickness 60 nm and 120 to the top surface of Al-Ge
nm as indicated on the graph.
depth profiling. Hall measurement at different depths
Ge layer is performed to probe the existing
of Al-Ge
found to be 0.4 ohm and remain unchanged for different Al
thickness. Whereas the sheet resistance for annealed Al
Al-Ge concentration gradient of Al and its impact on other eelectrical
Ge layers having different depths are created by
layer varies with the thickness of Al layer and found to be 1.5 properties. Al-Ge
mechanical
chemical-mechanical
lapping (CML) in five steps for equal
ohm and 7 ohm for 120 nm and 30 nm Al film. It indicates
duration.
after each CML is characterized by
Top
surface
regrowth of Ge in Al layer because a certain percentage of Ge
d by collinear four probes as well as
sheet
resistance
measured
comes in to super-saturation
saturation when the Al-Ge
Al
solid solution is
er
Pauw
Duration
of the CML and layer depth
Van
der
method.
cooled down due to difference in solid solubility of Ge in Al at
0
measured
sheet
resistance values. It was
is
calibrated
using
350 C (0.7%) and room temperatures (nil),
(nil) as observed by
found
that
approximately
150
Al-Ge layer can be
nm
of Al
prior researcher [16]. SIMS depth profile measurement has
lapped
of
CML
and
sheet
resistance
values can
by
five
steps
been carried out to investigate the occurrence of Al and Ge in
expos layers to rule out any possible
the Al-Ge
Ge regrown layer. Fig. 2(a) and (b) represents the be used to identify the exposed
profile of Al and Ge as a function of depth (converted from
known sputtered depth and sputtering time) in annealed and
un-annealed
annealed sample of 60 nm thick Al layer. The same for 120
nm thick Al layer is shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d). From depth
profile analysis of Al and Ge, it is evident that Ge diffuses
inside the
he Al layer and mixing of Ge and Al is observed all
through the Al layer in heat treated samples. It indicates
reconstruction of Al/Ge interface due to layer exchange and
induced crystallization exhibiting significant presen
presence of Ge at
the top of Al layer [17,18]. The depth profile of Ge shows
preferential growth near the surface (both Ge and Al) because
it acts as a growth
th center for supersaturated Ge [16].
[
In the
contrary, no signature of Ge is found in Al layers in unun
annealed Al/Ge samples.
Evidence of Al diffusion in Ge crystal is also observed in
heat treated samples. For 60 nm and 120 nm thick Al
deposited un-annealed
annealed sample, Al can be found (above 10
counts) up to 60 nm and 120 nm in Ge due to stray Al present
in the chamber since Al diffusion in Ge without heating is
unlikely. On the other hand, Al can be present up to 200 nm
and 480 nm inside Ge in heat treated samples for similar
Al-Ge samples for
Fig. 3. Depth profiles of Ge and Al in annealed Al
thickness of Al. It indicates Al diffusion in Ge after heat
Al film thickness (a) 15 nm and (b) 150 nm.
treatment at 3500C although Ge diffusion in Al layer is more

4
comparison,
net
carrier
concentrations are shown in
logarithmic scale below 150K
avoiding the said extrinsic to
intrinsic transition.
The temperature dependence
of the type of conductivity is
ascertained by hall co-efficient
measurement at various depths
of Al-Ge [Fig. 4(c)]. The
positive hall co-efficient at 80K
is found to be ~108 for impurity
concentration
1011/cc.
It
reduces to almost zero near the
top surface (sheet resistance 15
ohm) due to the presence of
excessive Al and type of
conductivity
cannot
be
ascertained. Hall co-efficient
gradually increases at higher
depth with higher values of
sheet resistance. It is found
that, Al-Ge is p-type in
extrinsic region and changes
the type of conductivity at
Fig. 4. (a) Sheet resistance (SR) of annealed Al--Ge film at different depths from the top surface. (b) Temperature higher temperatures [indicated
dependent net carrier concentration and (c) hall co-efficient
efficient for different sheet resistances along the depth.
in Fig. 4(c)]. This extrinsic to
intrinsic transition appears at
error in estimating the depth. Temperature dependent sheet
for
reduced
higher
temperature
level of Al and can be
resistance of all exposed layers after successive lapping has
terplay
between
explained
as
the
interplay
thermally generated
been plotted in Fig. 4(a) and corresponding estimated depths
carriers
and
impurity
with
the
of
temperature. As the
variation
are also indicated. Top surface of Al-Gee layer without lapping
temperature
concentration
of
thermally
generated
increases,
exhibits metallic character and discussed separately (Fig. 5).
electron
holes
a higher
and
increases.
Since
electrons
have
After first stage of lapping, the sheet resistance at room
mobility
than
holes,
electrical
conduction
is
dominated
by
cond
temperature increases from 1.5 ohm to 15 ohm. It indicates
Ge
exhibits
n-type
conductivity
at
electrons
and
the
Al-Ge
layer
n
that Al-Ge
Ge at this depth contain high level of electrically

active Al impurity which is reflected by reduction in sheet
resistance with decrease in temperature. With successive
lapping of Al-Ge
Ge layer, there is consistent increase
increa in sheet
resistance up to 600 ohm at a depth of around 150 nm. Further
lapping exposed the pure germanium surface. It indicates that
Al concentration gradually reduces as the depth of Al-Ge
Al
layer
increases. Also the Al-Ge
Ge layer beyond 60 nm depth exhibits
semiconductor type behavior and the sheet resistance increases
with the decrease in temperature.
Net carrier concentrations for different sheet resistances
[Fig. 4(b)] substantiate the above observation. For higher sheet
resistance at higher depth, net carrier concentration decreases
as expected. For 15 ohm sheet resistance, corresponding
carrier concentration
ation is found to be ~1019/cm3. It gradually
decreases with the depth of the Al-Ge
Ge layer and go down up to
1011/cm3 for sheet resistance ~600 ohm. At higher
temperature, electrical conduction is dominated by thermally
generated intrinsic carriers and Al doped Ge layer exhibits nn
type conductivity. Nominally doped (conc. below 1014/cc) ptype Ge shows extrinsic to intrinsic
nsic transition near room
temperature (220K-260K)
260K) and the type of conductivity
changes from p-type to n-type
type (discussed below). For clear

Fig. 5. Sheet resistance (a) and net carrier concentration (b) at the top
Ge surface without lapping having different as deposited Al thickness.
Al-Ge

5
higher temperatures. At low temperatures, impurity
conduction plays a dominant role due to reduction in thermally
generated charge carriers. It should be noted that Ge crystal
used for making contacts exhibit p-type conductivity that
changes to n-type one above 170K. Minimum level of Al
doping of around 1011/cc, increases the transition temperature
to 230 K. Further increase in Al concentration reduces the
transition temperature unlike popular p-type dopant boron that
shifts the transition towards higher temperature for its
increased concentration [19].
The sheet resistance at the top surface is low even for
thinner Al-Ge layer although there is a small variation with the
thickness of Al layer used for regrowth. Top surface of Al-Ge
grown from 30 nm and 120 nm thick Al film exhibit room
temperature sheet resistance values around 7 ohm and 1.5 ohm
respectively [Fig. 5(a)]. Whereas sheet resistance of Al-Ge (Al
thickness~120nm), at depths 120 nm and 30 nm are found to
be 290 ohm and 15 ohm respectively. This observation
emphasizes that irrespective of the deposited Al thickness, the
top Al-Ge surface contains high level of Al impurity and
exhibits metallic characteristic which is desired for making
electrical contacts. As shown in Fig. 5 (b), the Al
concentration is as high as 1023/cc and1019/cc on the top
surface of regrown Al-Ge from Al film thickness 120 nm and
30nm respectively. Al concentration >1020/cm3 found near the
surface is comparable to the electrically active impurity
concentration ~1020/cm3 achieved by Al implantation [20].
IV. CONCLUSION

Rugged p electrical contact on p-type Ge crystal has been
fabricated by solid state regrowth of thermally deposited Al on
Ge. Sufficiently large numbers of samples with wide range of
Al film thickness are processed and analyzed by SIMS to find
the diffusion length of Al and Ge across the interface. It is
established that thickness of the regrown Al-Ge contact can be
controlled by varying the thickness of deposited Al film. Al
doped Ge layer exhibits p-type conductivity in the extrinsic
range of temperature. Dopant concentration at the top surface
of Al-Ge on p-type Ge can be as high as 1020/cm3 that
gradually decreases along the depth resulting in p+/p type of
arrangement.
+

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Authors are thankful to Dr. T. V. C. Rao for his constant
encouragement and support. Unconditional help received from
all members of Crystal Technology Section is gratefully
acknowledged.
[1]
[2]
[3]

REFERENCES

R. H. Pehl, “Germanium gamma-ray detectors,” Physics
Today, vol. 30, no. 11, p. 50, 1977.
R. D. Baertsch and R. N. Hall, “Gamma ray detectors made
from high purity germanium,” IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 235-240, 1970.
J. Eberth and J. Simpson, “From Ge(Li) detectors to
gamma-ray tracking arrays–50 years of gamma
spectroscopy with germanium detectors,” Progress in
Particle and Nuclear Physics, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 283-337,
2008.

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

G. Ottaviani, V. Marrello, J. W. Mayer, M-A. Nicolet, and
J. M. Caywood, “Formation of injecting and blocking
contacts on high-resistivity germanium,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 20, pp. 323-325, 1972.
R. H. Pehl and R. C. Cordi, “Lithium-diffused n+ contacts
on high-purity germanium detectors: How thin can they be
made-how stable are they?” IEEE Transaction on Nuclear
Science, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 177-177, 1975.
S. Uppal, A. F. W. Willoughby, J. M. Bonar, N. E. B.
Cowern, T. Grasby, R. J. H. Morris, and M. G. Dowsett,
“Diffusion of boron in germanium at 800-9000C,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 96, pp. 1376-1380, 2004.
Q. Looker, M. Amman and K.Vetter, “Leakage current in
high-purity germanium detectors with amorphous
semiconductor contacts,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods
in Physics Research A, vol. 777, pp. 138-147, 2015.
X.-H. Meng, G.-J. Wang, M.-D. Wagner, H. Mei, W.-Z.
Wei, J. Liu, G. Yang, and D.-M. Mei, “Fabrication and
characterization of high-purity germanium detectors with
amorphous
germanium
contacts,”
Journal
of
Instrumentation, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. P02019, Feb. 2019.
S. Gaudet, C. Detavernier, A. J. Kellock, P. Desjardins, and
C. Lavoie, “Thin film reaction of transition metals with
germanium,” J. of Vac. Sci. & Tech. A, vol. 24, pp. 474485, 2006.
A. Hiraki, M-A. Nicolet, and J. W. Mayer, “Low
temperature migration of silicon in thin layers of gold and
platinum,” Appl. Phys. Letters., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 178-181,
1971.
J. Gyulai, J. W. Mayer, V. Rodriguez, A.Y.C. Yu, and H. J.
Gopen, “Alloying behavior of Au and Au–Ge on GaAs,” J.
Appl. Phys., vol. 42, no. 9, 3578-3585, 1971.
V. Marrelloj, M. Caywood, J. W. Mayer, and M.-A. Nicole,
“Solid-phase epitaxial growth of Ge layers,” phys. stat. sol.
(a), vol. 13, pp. 531-536, 1972.
J. M. Caywood, A. M. Fern, J.O. McCaldin, and G.
Ottaviani, “Solid-phase growth of Ge from evaporated Al
Layer,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 326-327, 1972.
A. Lidow, “Germanium alpha particle detectors with
aluminum regrowth p+ contacts,” Nuclear Instruments and
Methods, vol. 124, pp. 609-610, 1975.
V. Marrello, T. A. McMath, J.W. Mayer and I. L. Fowler,
“High purity germanium gamma-ray spectrometers with
regrowth p+ contacts,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods,
vol. 108, pp. 93-97, 1973.
G. Ottaviani, C. Canali, and G. Majni, “Some aspects of Ge
epitaxial growth by solid solution,” Journal of Applied
Physics, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 627-630, 1976.
S. Hu and P. C. McIntyre, “Nucleation and growth kinetics
during metal-induced layer exchange crystallization of Ge
thin films at low temperatures,” J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 111,
no. 4, p. 044908, 2012.
D. Sigurd, G. Ottaviani, H. J. Arnal, and J. W. Mayer,
Crystallization of Ge and Si in metal films. II,” J. of Appl.
Phys., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1740-1745, 1974.
M. Ghosh, S. Pitale, S. G. Singh, S. Sen, S. C. Gadkari,
“Impurity concentration dependent electrical conduction in
germanium crystal at low temperatures,” Bulletin of
Materials Science (accepted), arXiv:1907.05067 [condmat.mtrl-sci].
G. Impellizzeri, E. Napolitani, S. Boninelli, V. Privitera, T.
Clarysse, W. Vandervorst, and F. Priolo, “Aluminium
implantation in germanium: Uphill diffusion, electrical
activation, and trapping,” Applied Physics Express, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 021301-3, 2012.

