Geometric anomaly detection in data
Bernadette J Stolz1 , Jared Tanner1,2 , Heather A Harrington1,2 & Vidit Nanda1,2
1 Mathematical

arXiv:1908.09397v1 [math.AT] 25 Aug 2019

2 The

Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

This paper describes the systematic application of local topological methods for detecting interfaces and related anomalies in complicated high-dimensional data. By
examining the topology of small regions around each point, one can optimally stratify
a given dataset into clusters, each of which is in turn well-approximable by a suitable
submanifold of the ambient space. Since these approximating submanifolds might
have different dimensions, we are able to detect non-manifold like singular regions
in data even when none of the data points have been sampled from those singularities. We showcase this method by identifying the intersection of two surfaces in
the 24-dimensional space of cyclo-octane conformations, and by locating all the selfintersections of a Henneberg minimal surface immersed in 3-dimensional space. Due
to the local nature of the required topological computations, the algorithmic burden of
performing such data stratification is readily distributable across several processors.
The manifold hypothesis1 forms a cornerstone of modern data science; it asserts that
the points in a naturally-occurring dataset tend to cluster near a manifold of dimension
substantially lower than the ambient dimension of the data. Typical examples of inferential schemes which rely on the manifold hypothesis include (a) classical principal component analysis2 , where data is approximated by an affine subspace, (b) visual perception3 ,
where continuous changes of pose of an object yield smoothly-varying changes along a
curved manifold, (c) subspace clustering4 , where data is clustered into disjoint sets that
are well approximated by affine subspaces, and (d) generative adversarial networks, which
naturally produce data on pairs of manifolds5 . In sharp contrast to this profusion, one
encounters a remarkable dearth of techniques designed for the analysis of data sampled
from non-manifold, or singular, spaces. Among the simplest examples of singular spaces
are unions of two manifolds along a common submanifold (as shown in Figure 1); these
arise organically when more than one class of data are present in the same set of observations. Recent techniques for the analysis of such heterogeneous data, see for instance
capsule networks6 , have focused primarily on coherently fusing together the multiple data
classes.
The present work is motivated by an antipodal philosophy — we believe that singular regions of spaces which underlie modern datasets are inherently interesting, that
they will play an increasingly important role in the future of data analysis, and that it is
therefore of paramount importance to be able to detect these singularities directly from
the data points. Here we describe a new algorithm to accomplish this task — in particular, we use a geometric approach to identify which data points lie near the intersection
of more than one manifold. Our algorithm is based on local cohomology7 and the the1

ory of stratifications8 , which form particularly rich and fruitful enterprises in the study of
singular spaces that arise in algebraic topology9 and geometry10 . Recent computational
advances in these fields11, 12 have made it possible to bring this formidable theory to bear
on the very concrete task of analysing data which lives on, or even near, spaces that are
far more complicated than manifolds.

Figure 1: Annular neighbourhood classes A x of several points x in union of a hemisphere with
a plane along an ellipse. All points lying far from this ellipse and from the boundaries have A x
which look like a thickened circle, as shown in the left-most panel. All points lying in the boundary
have A x which resembles a thickened half-circle, depicted in the middle panel. And all points x
on the singular ellipse itself have neighbourhoods A x which resemble two thickened circles glued
along two edges, as in the rightmost panel. The dimensions of H1 ( A x ) from left to right are 1, 0
and 3 respectively.

Manifolds of dimension n are characterized by the requirement that a small neighbourhood around each point should resemble the n-dimensional Euclidean disk (up to a
standard equivalence relation called homeomorphism). While there can be no algorithmic
procedure to determine whether two n-manifolds are homeomorphic or not13 for n > 4,
algebraic topology offers recourse to several rigorous descriptors for testing weaker forms
of equivalence. Among the best known computable homeomorphism-invariants is cohomology, which assigns a sequence Hi ( X ) of vector spaces to a given topological space X.
Although cohomology does not distinguish between Euclidean disks of different dimensions (all of these have the same cohomology as that of a point), it is an excellent tool
for distinguishing n-dimensional spheres Sn from each other across different choices of n.
Indeed, for all n > 0, we have
(
1 if i = n,
dim Hi (Sn ) =
0 otherwise.
2

Since the boundary of an n-dimensional disk is an (n − 1)-dimensional sphere, our
strategy for detecting singular regions in a dataset P of points in Euclidean space Rn is
as follows: we fix two real parameters 0 < r < s, and around each point x of P we
examine the subset of annular neighbours A x of x — this set consists of those points y in
P whose Euclidean distance to x satisfies r ≤ k x − yk ≤ s, and it forms a discrete proxy
for the boundary of a neighbourhood around x. We then compute the cohomology of A x
at various scales (often called the persistent cohomology of A x ), and use this information to
quantify whether or not A x approximates a single sphere of some fixed dimension. If the
answer is negative, then – provided we have made judicious choices of r and s – the point
x lies near a singular region of X. Points which are singular due to the intersection of
low-dimensional manifolds can alternatively be identified by measuring changes in the
local dimension; for instance, the relative sum-of-squares of the for first n − 1 singular
values of A x is nearly one for x away from an intersection14 .

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Two-dimensional I SO MAP projection15 of points sampled from the 24-dimensional conformation space of cyclooctane. Points x for which dim H1 ( A x ) > 1 have been coloured red, and
these clearly appear to cluster near the two embedded circles where the two surfaces intersect.

Local persistent cohomology successfully identifies all the non-manifold regions in
two completely different data sets whose underlying spaces are known to admit singularities. The first of these is the conformation space of the cyclo-octane molecule C8 H16 . A single
molecule consists of eight carbon atoms arranged in a ring, with each carbon atom being
bound to two other carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms. Under the influence of external chemical and physical forces, cyclo-octane assumes different forms, or conformations,
in 3-dimensional space. The locations of hydrogen atoms are completely determined by
those of the carbon atoms, so each conformation may be represented by a point in R24
(i.e., three spatial coordinates for each of the eight carbon atoms). The space of all such
conformations forms the union of a Klein bottle and a sphere along two circles14, 16 . Having sampled points from this conformation space, we depict (a two-dimensional projection of) the partition of data points by local persistent cohomology in Figure 2 — points
lying near the two singular circles are indeed separated from all other points. Our second dataset is obtained by uniformly sampling points from the non-orientable Henneberg
minimal surface, which is an immersion of 2-dimensional projective space in standard 33

dimensional space. The results are depicted in Figure 3: again, the points which lie near
the four self-intersections are manifestly separated from manifold-like points and boundary points.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Two-dimensional projections of points sampled from Henneberg’s minimal surface embedded in 3-dimensional space. Points x for which dim H1 ( A x ) > 1 are shown in red, and these lie
along the four self-intersections. Similarly, points x for which dim H1 ( A x ) = 0 have been coloured
cyan and appear near the boundary.

Given the enormous quantities of heterogeneous data which are being generated by
modern experimental tools, continued reliance on the manifold hypothesis for geometric
modelling will become far less tenable in the future. The procedure described here takes
the first steps towards relaxing the manifold assumption by enabling us to identify singularities from the local topology of data points. Aside from the data-dependent choice of
radius parameters r and s which determine the sizes of annular neighbourhoods A x , the
method is entirely unsupervised. Moreover, it enjoys three remarkably convenient properties for our purposes. First, it can be iterated to discover more refined singularities of
lower dimension: for instance, had the red points from Figure 2 formed a singular space
of their own (such as a figure-eight rather than disjoint circles), we could have repeated
our cohomological clustering operation on the subset of red points to separate out points
lying near the lower singularities. Second, the local cohomology computations which
form the backbone of this procedure are easily distributed across a host of processors: the
persistent homology of annular neighbourhoods A x and Ay for distinct points x and y in
a dataset can – and should – be computed in parallel. And third, since persistent cohomology is stable with respect to bounded noise17 , the clustering produced by this method
inherits a degree of robustness to perturbations of the original dataset.

4

Methods
Detailed accounts of the first three topics described below may be found in the textbooks
of Hatcher18 , Oudot19 and Kirwan-Woolf8 respectively.
The cohomology of simplicial complexes. A simplicial complex K is a collection of subsets
of a finite set V (usually called the set of vertices) satisfying the following condition: if
σ ⊂ V is in K and τ ⊂ σ then τ is also in K. The dimension of a simplex σ is one less than
its cardinality, and the set of all i-dimensional simplices in K is denoted K (i ). The most
familiar simplicial complexes are graphs, where K (0) and K (1) correspond to vertices
and edges respectively. For each i-dimensional simplex σ, denote by 1σ : K (i ) → R the
characteristic function which evaluates to 1 on σ and 0 on all other simplices. The vector
space obtained by treating all such characteristic functions as an orthonormal basis is
written Ci (K ) and called the space of i-cochains. It is possible to construct a sequence of
coboundary operators δi : Ci (K ) → Ci+1 (K ) with the following matrix representation in our
chosen basis: the entry in 1σ ’s column and 1τ ’s row equals ±1 if σ ⊂ τ and is 0 otherwise.
It is always possible to choose signs of the nonzero entries consistently so that the kernel
of δi contains the image of δi+1 , and the i-th cohomology of K is the quotient vector space
Hi (K ) = ker δi /img δi−1 .
Cohomology is an extremely well-studied18 descriptor of simplicial complexes and
related spaces; it enjoys many wonderful properties, but only two of them are relevant to
our purposes here. First, it is a homeomorphism invariant, meaning that any two different
triangulations of the same space X will produce identical cohomologies even though the
cochain spaces and coboundary operators might be wildly different. For instance, the
cohomology vector spaces of an n-sphere depend neither on geometric intricacies (such
as its radius or its embedding in Euclidean space) nor on the combinatorics of a particular
choice of simplicial decomposition. And second, cohomology is functorial with respect to
the subcomplex relation among simplicial complexes. A subset L of simplices in K is
called a subcomplex if it happens to be a simplicial complex in its own right. Whenever L
is a subcomplex of K, there are well-defined linear maps Hi (K ) → Hi ( L) induced on the
associated cohomology vector spaces.
The persistent cohomology of data. Given a finite dataset P embedded in Euclidean
space Rn and a scale parameter t ≥ 0, the Vietoris-Rips simplicial complex VRt ( P) contains as its i-dimensional simplices all subsets { p0 , . . . , pi } of P whose pairwise Euclidean
distances k p j − pk k are no larger than t. It follows that VRt ( P) is a subcomplex of VRu ( P)
whenever t ≤ u. By the functoriality of cohomology, in each dimension i ≥ 0 we obtain
not only a one-parameter family of cohomology vector spaces

V (t) = Hi VRt ( P) ,
but also a compatible family of induced linear maps V (u) → V (t) for all pairs of real
numbers t ≤ u. Such collections of vector spaces and linear maps indexed by the positive
real numbers are called persistence modules, and their systematic study – which forms the
theoretical core of topological data analysis – has been greatly facilitated by three mirac5

ulous properties.
The first property is algebraic — although persistence modules appear to involve
an infinite amount of information prima facie, any V arising from the Vietoris-Rips cohomology of a finite dataset P ⊂ Rn is completely determined by a finite collection Bar( P)
comprising certain half-open subintervals of R, called the barcode of P. The second property is computational; barcodes can be extracted via elementary matrix algebra, and there
are several software packages dedicated to their efficient computation20 . The third crucial
property of persistence modules is geometric, and takes the form of a stability theorem17 .
Roughly, this result asserts that if the points of P are perturbed by an amount e > 0, then
the intervals in Bar( P) also have their endpoints shifted by no more than e. As a consequence, one can conclude that Vietoris-Rips persistent cohomology barcodes are robust
to the presence of bounded noise in the original dataset.
Stratified Spaces. Singular spaces, such as algebraic varieties and quotients of group actions on manifolds, are often analysed via their stratifications. Each stratification Y• of an
n-dimensional space Y is an ascending sequence of closed subspaces

∅ = Y−1 ⊂ Y0 ⊂ Y1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Yn−1 ⊂ Yn = Y
where the connected components of successive differences Yi − Yi−1 , called the i-strata, are
open i-dimensional submanifolds of Y. Every simplicial complex, for instance, admits a
natural stratification whose i-strata are precisely the i-simplices. It is customary to impose
two additional constraints on the strata in order to render the study of stratified spaces
tractable. The first requirement, called the frontier axiom, ensures that the set of all strata
is partially ordered by the boundary relation σ ≤ τ whenever the closure of τ intersects
σ (this mirrors the ordering on simplices given by the containment relation σ ⊂ τ). The
second requirement, called equisingularity or normal triviality, imposes severe topological
constraints on intersections of small neighbourhoods in Y around various points of a
single i-stratum with the higher strata Yj for j ≥ i.
As a consequence of equisingularity, to each i-stratum σ one can assign a single (n −
i − 1)-dimensional stratified space L• , called the link of σ, so that the following property
holds. For each point y in σ and all choices of small neighbourhoods Uy ⊂ Y of y, the
intersection of Uy with higher strata Yj admits a tangent × normal decomposition of the
form
Uy ∩ Yj = Ri × Cone( L j−i−1 ),
where Cone( L• ) is the quotient of L• × [0, 1) obtained by identifying all pairs of the form
(`, 0) with a single point. When j = i, we have Uy ∩ σ = Ri , thus guaranteeing that σ is an
i-dimensional manifold. And for j = n, we have Uy = Ri × Cone( L), so it follows that the
homeomorphism type – and hence, the cohomology – of the boundary ∂Uy is independent
of the choice of y in σ. This is the key property of stratified spaces which is used in our
algorithm to identify singular regions within datasets. In this discrete setting, we have
no direct access to ∂Uy for a given data point y; however, we are able to approximate its
cohomology via the persistent cohomology of all the data points lying within an annular
neighbourhood Ay of y.
6

Datasets. The cyclo-octane dataset, which was introduced by Martin et al.16 , consists of
6040 points in R24 subsampled from a far larger dataset containing over a million cyclooctane conformations. This data set is publicly available as part of the JAVA P LEX software
package21 . The Henneberg surface dataset was kindly provided by Martin et al.14 ; it consists of 5456 points sampled from the Henneberg surface using the following parametrisation:
2( β2 − 1) cos(φ) 2( β6 − 1) cos(3φ)
−
,
β
3β3
6β2 ( β2 − 1) sin(φ) + 2( β6 − 1) sin(3φ)
,
y=−
3β3
2( β4 + 1) cos(2φ)
z=
,
β2

x=

where β ∈ [0.4, 0.6] and φ ∈ [0, 2π ]. In this range of β-values, the surface does not have
triple-intersections.
Algorithm and Implementation. Procedure 1 discovers intersections of dimension (k −
1) from points sampled on k-dimensional submanifolds of Rn for n > k. It can be suitably
generalised in order to find lower-dimensional singularities7 . The partition produced
by Procedure 1 decomposes the original dataset P into the k-manifold points Pman , the
boundary points Pbnd and the desired intersection points Pint . We have implemented Procedure 1 in M ATLAB for surfaces, i.e., for k = 2, using the inbuilt function rangesearch
to compute the annuli Ay and R IPSER22 for persistent cohomology barcodes. The annulus
parameters (r, s) equal (0.4, 0.25) for the cyclo-octane data and (2, 1.5) for the Henneberg
surface data. The projections of Figure 2 were obtained by initialising I SO MAP15 with
5-nearest neighbours.
Procedure 1 Geometric Anomaly Detection
Input: Finite point set P ⊂ Rn , real parameters 0 < r < s.
Output: A partition of P into three subsets, Pman , Pbnd and Pint
Initialise Pman , Pbnd and Pint to ∅
for all y ∈ P do
Find Ay ⊂ P containing all x in P which satisfy r ≤ k x − yk ≤ s
Compute Bark−1 ( Ay ), the (k − 1)-dim Vietoris-Rips barcode of Ay
Calculate Ny , the number of intervals in Bark−1 ( Ay ) of length > (s − r )
if Ny = 0 then
Add y to Pbnd
else if Ny = 1 then
Add y to Pman
else
Add y to Pint
end if
end for
7

1. Fefferman, C., Mitter, S. & Narayanan, H. Testing the manifold hypothesis. J. Amer.
Math. Soc. 29, 983–1049 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.1090/jams/852.
2. Ringner, M. What is principal component analysis? Nature biotechnology 26, 303–4
(2008).
3. Seung, H. S. & Lee, D. D. The manifold ways of perception. Science 290, 2268–2269
(2000). URL https://science.sciencemag.org/content/290/5500/2268.
4. Vidal, R. Subspace clustering. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 28, 52–68 (2011).
5. Che, T., Li, Y., Jacob, A. P., Bengio, Y. & Li, W. Mode regularized generative adversarial networks. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings (2017). URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJKkY35le.
6. Sabour, S., Frosst, N. & Hinton, G. E. Dynamic routing between capsules. In
Guyon, I. et al. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, 3856–
3866 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2017). URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
6975-dynamic-routing-between-capsules.pdf.
7. Nanda, V. Local cohomology and stratification. Foundations of Computational Mathematics (2019).
8. Kirwan, F. & Woolf, J. An introduction to intersection homology theory (Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 2006).
9. Goresky, M. & MacPherson, R. Intersection homology II. Inventiones Mathematicae 71,
77–129 (1983).
10. Fulton, W. Intersection Theory (Springer-Verlag, 1998).
11. Mischaikow, K. & Nanda, V. Morse theory for filtrations and efficient computation of
persistent homology. Discrete and Computational Geometry 50, 330–353 (2013).
12. Henselman, G. & Ghrist, R. Matroid filtrations and computational persistent homology. arXiv:1606.00199 [math.AT] (2016).
13. Markov, A. A. O konstruktivnykh funkciyakh. Trudy Mat. Instituta im. Steklova 52,
315–348 (1958).
14. Martin, S. & Watson, J.-P.
Non-manifold surface reconstruction from highdimensional point cloud data. Computational Geometry 44, 427–441 (2011).
15. Tenenbaum, J. B., De Silva, V. & Langford, J. C. A global geometric framework for
nonlinear dimensionality reduction. science 290, 2319–2323 (2000).
16. Martin, S., Thompson, A., Coutsias, E. A. & Watson, J.-P. Topology of cyclo-octane
energy landscape. The Journal of Chemical Physics 132, 234115 (2010).

8

17. Cohen-Steiner, D., Edelsbrunner, H. & Harer, J. Stability of persistence diagrams.
Discrete and Computational Geometry 37, 107–120 (2007).
18. Hatcher, A. Algebriac Topology (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
19. Oudot, S. Persistence Theory: from Quiver Representations to Data Analysis (American
Mathematical Society, 2015).
20. Otter, N., Porter, M. A., Tillmann, U., Grindrod, P. & Harrington, H. A. A roadmap
for the computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Science 6 (2017). URL https:
//doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-017-0109-5.
21. Tausz, A., Vejdemo-Johansson, M. & Adams, H. JavaPlex: A research software package for persistent (co)homology. In Hong, H. & Yap, C. (eds.) Proceedings of ICMS
2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8592, 129–136 (2014). Software available at
http://appliedtopology.github.io/javaplex/.
22. Bauer, U. Ripser: a lean C ++ code for the computation of vietoris–rips persistence
barcodes. Software available at https://github.com/Ripser/ripser (software
retrieved in 2017).

Acknowledgements We thank Barbara Mahler for performing the isomap projection of the cyclooctane data to R3 . BJS thanks the EPSRC and MRC (EP/G037280/1) and F. Hoffmann-La Roche
AG for funding her doctoral studies. HAH acknowledges funding from a Royal Society University
Research Fellowship. VNs work was supported by The Alan Turing Institute under the EPSRC
grant number EP/N510129/1.
Correspondence Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Bernadette
J Stolz (email: stolz@maths.ox.ac.uk).

9

