arXiv:1908.02389v1 [math.HO] 6 Aug 2019

From lecture to active learning:
Rewards for all, and is it really so difficult?
David Pengelley
August 8, 2019
In the centuries-honored I-You paradigm, a mathematics instructor provides first contact
with new material via lecture, then expects students to solve problems outside the classroom:
I lecture, then You do homework alone. Twenty-five years ago I began a personal journey
away from this paradigm, leading to a pedagogy that today fits within what is broadly
termed active learning. I will provide an analysis of my evolution to a particular non-lecture
teaching philosophy. My experiences provide encouragement for readers who may worry that
alternatives to lecture are complicated and time consuming. The main message is that it
needn’t be difficult to create active learning for your students, and that there are tremendous
rewards for the instructor as well as for students. My goal is to entice hesitant readers to
take a teaching plunge.
Through the years my experiences convinced me that what can happen in an active
learning classroom can be greatly enhanced by good student preparation before class. I
expect students to prepare via reading, writing, and problem work. Classroom activity
can then build directly on their preparation, with plenty of in-class feedback from fellow
students and the instructor. Together these components—student preparation and active
classroom learning—enable each student post-class to tackle higher-level homework. I call
this integrated approach my “ABC method”, a paradigm that I have refined in sixteen
different courses at all undergraduate and graduate levels. Lots of assignment examples,
detailed guidelines for students and for grading and daily logistics, and a holistic rubric are
available at [19].
In a nutshell, to be described in detail later, my evolved paradigm for student work is:
• A, due well before class: Read, write questions, respond to my questions. Graded for
completion only.
• B, bring to class: Prepare ‘warm-up problems’. Graded for completion in advance
only.
• During class: Directly build active learning on both A and B.
– Lead brief discussion of the questions from A.
– Compare and complete problems from B in groups: I facilitate, students present.

1

• C, after class: Complete a very few harder ‘final problems’ building on B from class.
Marked carefully, these may be individually redone, solely at my request, aiming for
perfection. Holistic letter grade only. Final level of achievement.
• Parts ABC should comprise a very large part of the course grade; this creates harmony
between learning and evaluation, and reduces exams.
I will share my thinking that led to this paradigm, its nuts and bolts, what has and hasn’t
worked in which courses, how issues of time and coverage work out, and student actions and
reactions.
Equally important, since active learning likely seems shaky ground for those primarily
used to lecturing, I will provide some reassurance about how demanding and time-consuming
is the shift I made, and what the pitfalls are. I will also address inertia, challenges, efficacy,
teaching materials, burnout, buy-in, and rewards, not only for students, but at least as
critically important and motivating, for instructors, since rewards for instructors are perhaps
crucial to overcome hesitancy.
In the intervening decades since my own evolution began, an enormous body of research
has developed that concludes there are better alternatives than the I-You pedagogy for
student success, collectively termed active learning. Moreover, active learning confers disproportionate benefits for STEM students from disadvantaged backgrounds and for female
students in male-dominated fields. And these benefits accrue while not disfavoring highachieving or more experienced students, or any demographic group [2, 5, 12, 23]. Recently
the presidents of fourteen professional mathematics societies joined to exhort us to shift from
I-You toward active learning [4]. The question is how, and is that hard to do?
All active learning paradigms1 share two in-classroom features. First, they reduce or
eliminate lecture. Second, they devote substantial classroom time to student involvement
in mathematical work that receives immediate feedback from other students and from the
instructor. These involve more of the ingredients You and We, and considerably less of I.
Concomitantly, students will be more in charge of and responsible for their own learning,
while instructors will have increased responsibility to guide student work. Within these broad
parameters, many variations are possible, so this is an exciting time of great experimentation
by many people who are seeking out and comparing a variety of good active learning teaching
techniques for mathematics. We already have a wonderful resource in [16].
What I can contribute is one independently-developed example, the evolutionary process
of my own questioning, teaching experiences, reflection, and adaptation leading to a philosophy and a longterm implementation within the broad framework of active learning today.
The distinguishing feature of my evolved paradigm is its particular emphasis on tightly integrating pre-class preparation via reading/writing and problem work with in-class active
learning and post-class follow-on homework.
1

E.g., inquiry-based learning [9, 13], interactive engagement [5], total quality management [24], just-intime teaching [8, 17], peer instruction [18], flipped or inverted classroom [1], process oriented guided inquiry
learning [20].

2

Lecture
From my early life as an I-You student, I remember occasional inspiration from lectures, but
there was not much learning there that enabled me to complete anything but rote homework.
After all, lecture usually primarily involves the instructor demonstrating that s/he can do
the mathematics. But my teaching experiences have led me to believe that this rarely helps
a student actually be able to do much mathematics, any more than a swimming instructor
demonstrating an hour of beautiful swimming techniques successfully teaches a beginner how
to swim various strokes. As a student, I survived and prospered despite a lecture setting,
but only by reading text material repeatedly and integrating this with tackling homework
challenges. I now realize this was essentially autodidactical, my instructor’s role chiefly being
to provide a schedule, expectations, homework feedback, and evaluation via exams.
My subsequent decades teaching thousands of students suggests that few students will
very successfully self-teach in this way. The paradox for readers of this article is that we are
probably the most notable group of exceptions; we are among the rare survivors or “thrivers”
of the I-You approach. But I expect we all have frequent conversations with random adults,
and with colleagues from other disciplines, all former I-You students of mathematics, in
which we receive strong unsolicited confirmation that the average I-You experience was a
dramatic failure that left many scars.
During the years I lectured, many students told me “I know the math. I understand
perfectly when you lecture, but then I can’t solve problems at home.” Of course in actuality
this meant they didn’t really “know the math”, but I didn’t know what I could do to help,
other than to lead them through homework problems. In retrospect, for all but possibly
inspiration or rote learning, my lecturing was ineffective, despite all my best efforts, and
notwithstanding my students’ encouraging lauding of my lectures, their desire for them,
and belief in them. And since it wasted precious classroom time, it was inefficient as well.
In fact, classroom lecture may well become largely obsolete, since with modern technology
any recorded lecture can be viewed by anyone, anytime, anywhere. How long will it take
university administrators to conclude that they need not employ professors to add more
lectures to the increasing number already archived? In short, professors had better have
something more to offer students than yet more lectures on settled subjects [3, 10]. Of course
we will all claim that our students really do need much more than a lecture to succeed, and
that we can provide that. So isn’t that what we should home in on? How then do we both
challenge students and guide and support their work as learners in truly productive ways?

First contact with new ideas
In rethinking the I-You paradigm, much revolves around the question of “first contact”2 :
How and when should a student first be exposed to new material? In mathematics especially,
absorbing and making sense of new ideas with any depth is usually a slow, highly individualized, intellectually messy business. Lecture is by nature time-limited, one-size-fits-all,
and totally incompatible with the need to “Stop, wait a minute, let me think that through
and pose a question.” In short, lecture is on its face a poor means for first contact with
2

I was enormously influenced by the ideas of Barbara Walvoord [21, pp. 53–63] on first contact with new
material, as beautifully described to me by Virginia (Ginger) Warfield.

3

demanding new material, despite our natural inclination to the contrary, that as instructor
we can help students get started digesting new ideas by offering them a lecture first.3
So if in-class lecture provides poor first contact, then perhaps first contact, and maybe
even first problem work, might better occur before class, and something entirely different
can happen during class. This could lead to the recently-named “flipped” or “inverted”
classroom. In its original conception, lecture and homework switch venues, with students
watching recorded lectures before class and working together on mathematics during class.
But watching recorded lectures has several drawbacks too. It is in many ways at least as
passive as watching a lecture live. And it suffers the same cognitive drawbacks given above
for in-class lectures, unless a student were to frequently hit pause and replay, all the while
thinking things through deeply and asking questions, which is unlikely to happen without
additional pedagogical structure.
My own conclusion, arrived at twenty-five years ago before recorded lectures were even
practical, was to evict lectures entirely and evolve new paradigms instead. This shift was
catalyzed by my NSF-funded team’s development of student calculus projects [6]. When we
decided to allocate some time for student groups to work in the classroom on their projects,
with instructor help, lecturing had to be reduced, and I began to expect students to read
new material before class instead. It is fascinating to realize that my shift might never have
occurred absent this external force.

Reading and the lecture-textbook trap
How then do I want students to obtain meaningful first contact with new material before
class? My simplest answer in most courses is for students to thoughtfully engage high-quality
reading. And yet, while reflection and thinking stimulated by reading can be extremely
powerful, simply exhorting students to read the book before class rarely works, since they
seldom read as suggested.
There is a gaping trap here, a truly vicious cycle in which students don’t read beforehand
when they know the instructor will lecture, and instructors lecture in large part because
they know students haven’t read. Breaking out of this lecture-textbook trap was the most
difficult teaching problem I ever had to solve, but all else flowed from it. I felt it was my
responsibility to break this cycle by insisting (to self and students) that I will not lecture,
and instead arranging for in-class activity to be built on a foundation of high-quality student
preparation. A guiding motto was born: “Never lecture on something students can read
instead.”

Written response to reading: Part A
Resolving the lecture-textbook trap was the catalyst for my entire journey, enabling me over
a number of years to evolve completely away from lecture.
An obvious resolution to the trap was to somehow convince students to read in advance.
However, seemingly making the trap even worse, reading alone is insufficient, since they
3

For more on the disconnect between the role of lecture for instructors and students, see [22].

4

won’t get much out of merely reading. I realized I wanted students to reflect and think critically about what they read, to make connections, and to respond in writing well before class.
First, the nature of an intellectually challenging writing task should hone their thoughtful
engagement and critical thinking and analysis, thus making the reading worthwhile for learning. Second, I really need their written responses to reading in order to prepare myself for
the next productive non-lecture class session.
I have never asked students to summarize written material. Rather, I have always challenged them to engage deeply by coming up with thoughts of their own. For lower-division
students, I find that written response to a couple of well-crafted reading questions from
me is essential. The questions I pose are designed to stimulate students to read and think
carefully, and to catalyze and help guide class discussion. And sometimes my reading questions aren’t questions at all, but brief tasks based directly on the reading. I also expect
students at every level always to write their own good mathematical questions about their
reading, and additionally to write which new concepts are confusing, what was well explained
and interesting, what they had to reread but eventually understood, and what connections
they see to other ideas. Textbook reading tends to provide polished answers to questions
not even meaningfully asked, and I attempt to get beyond this by expecting regular good
mathematical questions from students.
As examples of reading questions I might pose, in a first calculus course, after reading an
introduction to the derivative: “What are the different mathematical and physical interpretations we know of for the derivative of a function?” and “Explain in your own words what
your understanding is of the idea of the derivative of a function.” Or in a discrete mathematics and introduction to proofs course: “Make up two great examples of your own of multiply
quantified statements, in which the meaning changes dramatically when the order of the
quantifiers is changed as in Examples 2.2.1 and 2.2.2. Explain why this is the case for each.”
and “Make a good example of your own of each of the two types (existential and universal)
of multiply quantified statements discussed, and then write and explain their negations.”
Or for the beginnings of a logic project based on primary historical sources [11]: “What
is logic?”, “What did Boole attempt to create?”, “What is an ‘implication’ ?”, “How are
implications related to modern computers?”, “According to Aristotle, what is the difference
between a sentence and a proposition?”, “What is a syllogism?” More examples of reading
questions are available at [19].
I mark each reading/writing assignment very quickly, holistically, with a single +,X,grade, only for seriousness of effort. I make as many or as few comments as I wish or have
time for, requiring only about five to fifteen seconds per paper, since I am never reading
detailed mathematics. My greatest marking intent is to make sure that each student sees
that I have read and thought about what they wrote. Students become very faithful to this
reading and writing, and although I expect less than half a page of response, some students
become so emphatic about its benefits that they insist on writing more, whether I want it
or not! Some even explicitly credit their success in the course to this activity.
If I receive student written reading responses up to one class period beforehand, on paper
or electronically, I can read them and determine how my students are reacting to the new
material. This best prepares me to guide class without even a nagging impulse to lecture. I
spend no time preparing a lecture, rather I prepare notes on their writing so that I can best
guide their learning in the classroom.
5

Does this require reading material different from a textbook? Not necessarily, provided
the reading is genuinely accessible, interesting, stimulates provocative thinking and questions
about new ideas, and provides good grist for class discussion. So I choose reading materials
for these goals, possibly utilizing multiple materials with different points of view to compare.
This does not mean that I choose material that promises to make the subject “easy” or a
“straight path”, since such features often mean that the challenges, questions, interest, and
depth are missing, which does not serve learning in the longterm.

In-class discussion of reading/writing: Building on Part A
Class can now begin with a discussion directed by me, based on the few notes I made while
reading students’ responses, which I first return with any comments. It is always focused
just on their writing, instead of a shoot-in-the-dark lecture trying to address everything,
without knowing what students are struggling to understand. It can be geared specifically
to meet their needs for understanding the content I asked them to read, and the discussion
leaves no need for me to even consider lecturing. I sometimes have students read out loud
selected questions of theirs, and ask for class reaction. This keeps the discussion focus on
them and their thoughts, not largely on mine. Since students have thoughtfully engaged the
reading, this second-contact in-class discussion never needs to be lengthy, usually 5-15% of
class time, and the vast majority of time is available for something else. What now could
most usefully happen in class?

Warm-up problems beforehand: Part B
Auspiciously, student written response to reading has prepared them for productive initial
mathematical problem work. So why not assign easy-to-medium-difficulty “warm-up” problems, also to be prepared in advance, and brought to class? In class these problems can be
compared, discussed, presented, and completed, using the vast majority of classroom time,
so that by the end of class the level of student mathematical accomplishment, and their
confidence, is high. I imagine a traditional homework assignment, and put all but a few
hardest problems into the warm-up problems to be prepared for class. In terms of amount,
it should be just enough to keep everyone at work for the full class period, but not too much
more, since I want everyone to feel that this assignment is satisfactorily completed by the
end of class, and they are ready for a final homework assignment of the harder problems.
This has been so successful that I have never had a single student express reluctance
about doing this homework as preparation before, rather than after, class. The learning
benefits quickly become obvious to students, since by the end of class time, they are confident
they have solved the easy-to-medium warm-up homework, and feel ready to tackle harder
problems at home.

In-class active learning: Integrating and building on Parts A and
B
The stage has been set for classroom active learning by student preparation, consisting
of both reading/writing and warm-up problems. When I arrive at the appointed hour, I
6

find most students already comparing their prepared work in groups of two to four. We
begin together with a brief discussion based on their reading/writing, as described earlier.
Then much of class time is spent in small group work refining their warm-up solutions, as I
continually circulate.
My aim is to interact personally with every student or group multiple times. My own
classes have ranged from 10 to 50 students, with no lecture/recitation format. Even in a class
of 50, I am usually able to interact personally and substantively with every student at least
once during a 75-minute class period that meets twice per week. I keep on the move, staying
with each student or group just long enough to provide encouragement, a little advice, and
to learn what they are struggling with. If a student or group is stuck, I help on that point,
then let them continue by themselves rather than rely on me for further straightforward
progress. If not stuck, then I may offer encouragement but not stay long, unless a significant
opportunity for enrichment presents itself to be seized. I am always thinking about what
I should do next. Should I select a student to put a certain problem on the blackboard,
or should I initiate a whole-class discussion on a particular problem, or go on to another
student or group?
I spontaneously initiate either whole-class discussions on particular problems, or individual student board presentations and discussion. Often I will ask several students to write
solutions to various problems on the board simultaneously, and then we discuss them all
at once as a class. Sometimes a writer is asked to verbally explain what has been written,
sometimes not. Not every problem gets presented or discussed.
I discovered painfully in one calculus course what happens if I steal students’ in-class
work time by lapsing into lecture. I thought that the material for the day was particularly
tough, and that if I began with a bit of lecture, it would help. After a while I saw frustration
on my students’ faces, and I realized my mistake: They wanted to get to work on what
they had prepared for their valuable in-class time together, not listen to me. I now realize I
should have been very happy; they were in charge of their learning, and they knew it.
I am generally laissez-faire about how groups arrange themselves. Three issues with
student group work are of concern. If the rare individual prefers to work alone, I repeatedly
encourage them to work with others, but I will ultimately not force it. And if a group is not
functioning optimally, I will sometimes ask a member to switch to another group, to see if
the dynamic is better. Finally, I may occasionally reshuffle all the groups.
What are the forces ensuring that students really prepare problems before class? Partly
it is group peer pressure, and subtle pressure by me circulating to observe student prepared
work, and also the certain knowledge that I may ask any student to present a prepared
problem on the board at any time. I make my presentation choices spontaneously, but very
consciously, including to press for better preparation beforehand by individuals if necessary
by putting them on the spot to present. But students’ main motivation to prepare is their
experience that it creates a very effective learning environment, one in which they will end
class well equipped for the final, harder, after-class homework.
The warm-up problems are collected at the end of class, and marked holistically +,X,-,
again strictly for seriousness of effort at preparation in advance, and they are important in
the grade. (I could alternatively have an extra copy due at the beginning or before class, e.g.,
photograph/scan and submit online.) Since the warm-up problems are dissected in class, I
never read them individually. I am interested solely in whether the student prepared them
7

in good faith before class. This literally takes only five seconds per paper. Even though I
am collecting them only at the end of class, it is not hard to train myself to instantly assess
preparation in advance. This is particularly easy if, as often happens, there is a warm-up
problem that we didn’t get to in class discussion; then I can easily see on each student’s
paper whether the problem was prepared beforehand or not.

Final problems after class: Part C, exams, and course grade
With student preparation before class of reading/writing and warm-up problems, all in
support of in-class discussion, group work, and presentation, it remains only to assign a very
few (two or three) harder “final” homework problems for students to complete after class.
These are like the hardest few of traditional homework, but now build on what students
have already achieved before and during class. The final problems are the only daily work
needing detailed marking, representing each student’s highest level of achievement on the
day’s material.
Their papers receive prompt and very careful feedback, a single holistic letter grade4 ,
and possible prompt redoing of individual problems at my initiative to bring to perfection.
They are normally never discussed in class. These higher-level problems are at the core of a
student’s course grade; I consider them the best measure of what each student has learned
and accomplished. The message to students is that their three daily written components
are the fundament of both learning and evaluation, so I find it critical that they form the
vast majority of the course grade. This leads to a reduction in exams, which I believe is
good, because my experience is that timed in-class exams are a poor way for most students
to demonstrate what they can actually do.
I have always made the three ABC components together of student daily work at least 60%
of the holistically-assigned course grade, with the carefully graded final problems (Part C)
dominant in my mind. Since almost all of the reading/writing (A) and problem preparation
(B) assignments earn a +, the harder, after-class, final problems (C) with letter grades tend
to become paramount in each student’s course grade. In some courses I still use some form of
midterm and/or final exam, while in others, especially upper division courses, I sometimes
use no exams, since the daily Part C graded work with high expectations is more than
sufficient for evaluation. Usually I leave open the option for exams, and often decide against
them as the term progresses.
A word of warning based on experience: Once upon a time I didn’t clearly separate the
warm-up from the final problems, but this led to complications, including lesser student
effort on the warm-up problems before class; I find it works far better with the two sets well
separated.
How can one be sure that these final problems completed outside class represent the
work of each individual, especially since I encourage students to work together in class so
much? Truth be told, even on the final problems I make it clear that students may discuss
them together. My ironclad rule, though, is that when they go to write them up, this must
be done alone, so that no two papers should look alike. Since these harder problems are
4

I have long found using points in marking to be a time-wasting, exhausting, distracting, and deceptive
morass that sends the wrong message to students and invites trouble. While I may write a lot on student
papers, I always assign only a single holistic qualitative evaluation to a paper, be it homework or an exam.

8

never just a calculation or formulaic, but always involve explanation of ideas, I can detect
not only the level of understanding, but also easily observe if two papers are too similar.
If so, which occasionally happens at the beginning of the course, I speak with the students
involved to reiterate my expectations as emphatically as necessary. Another issue could be
students finding and copying solutions from elsewhere, e.g., online, to problems for Parts B
or C. Since this completely defeats their purpose, if this is a danger one must create or tweak
problems to avoid it.

Précis of student assignments
To sum up the evolved paradigm, which tightly integrates before-, during-, and after-class
work, students write three homework papers for each daily unit of content (in my case twice
weekly), which I call parts A,B,C, and which replace the I-You paradigm:
• You, Part A: Read/write, received up to one class period early for me to prepare for
leading class discussion. Marked quickly +,X,- for effort only.
• You, Part B: Warm-up problems, prepare and bring to class. Marked quickly and
holistically +,X,- for preparation only. Submit in person, and/or online photo/scan
before class.
• We: In-class discussion, group work, presentations, all built on Parts A,B for the given
unit.
• You, Part C: A very few harder final problems, completed after class and written up
alone. Marked carefully with feedback and holistic letter grade, sometimes specific
problems redone at my request.
• Together Parts A,B,C constitute the majority of the course grade, reducing or eliminating exams.
Note that for a given unit, Parts A,B,C are due at different times, so there is a rolling
nature to the coverage of multiple units. Students easily adapt to this provided I give clear
guidance, and it has integrative benefit.

Inertia
There are many forces binding an instructor to the I-You paradigm, even if she is open to
change. First, we naturally tend to teach as we were taught. Second, a lecture “covering
material” is in the tradition of fulfilling professorial duty. It is hard to let these go, and to
realize that instructor coverage does not necessarily help students do mathematics. Students,
too, are mostly happily complicit, generally very comfortable with passive receipt of a lecture.
Certainly it is much easier than having to do any actual work in the classroom, and they
can believe they must have learned something from lecture.
Third, it takes real effort to change pedagogy, and the change will likely catalyze a
process of further evolution, so it is a major commitment. Fourth, there is an element of
uncertainty, worry, and perhaps fear of classroom disaster. Lecture is well-known, often easy,
9

predictable, and contains essentially no element of risk, since it is totally controlled by the
instructor based on preparation in advance, with little chance of something unexpected or
surprising from students. On the other hand, in a classroom of continual interaction with
students, reacting to, adjusting, and guiding what students initiate may seem scary. Moving
away from lecturing amounts to relinquishing total control, but hopefully without totally
losing control, since one still has overall guiding responsibility. Creating the right balance is
a challenge.
Therefore, since shifting from I-You requires overcoming much inertia, it will most likely
occur only if one sees large benefits and rewards (and not too many scary challenges) for
both student learning and for instructors themselves; here I would like to offer much encouragement from experience. Let’s begin with the students.

Benefits for students and learning
My experience is that students respond well to preparatory work provided they quickly and
consistently experience the advantages, know it is highly valued, i.e., in class and in their
grade, and are fully expected to contribute in class based on their preparation in advance.
They then find their in-class work time valuable, engaging, rewarding, often exciting, and
confidence-building. Completing the warm-up problems with feedback from me and fellow
students in the classroom prepares them well for success with the few final, harder problems
to be completed after class for careful grading, and they know and greatly value that. Many
times my students are so absorbed in group work completing warm-up problems that they
don’t realize when class time has ended. I apologetically interrupt the whole class to tell
them that class ended five minutes ago! When does that ever happen with a lecture?
The reduction of exams along with the predominant emphasis on daily work for both
learning and course grade creates a much steadier workload for students, yielding the cognitive advantages of spaced learning, and relief from the typical cram/exam/forget phenomenon
that doesn’t foster longterm learning. This also places learning and evaluation in harmony,
reducing stress and producing more consistent quality of work. My impression from a manyyears evolution is that, with these approaches, my students work more, and more successfully
learn course material.
Student course evaluation comments are almost uniformly positive about the pedagogy,
and indicate a high level of buy-in. They typically credit preparation in advance for in-class
collaborative work as extremely effective for their learning, and for keeping them on top of the
course with less stress. Students also often remark that the emphasis on student participation
makes the subject come alive. Quite frequently they ask why other mathematics courses are
not taught this way.
I mention here one anecdote that still astonishes me, from an abstract algebra course
intended both for mathematics majors and future secondary mathematics teachers. Although
the entire course was focused on mathematics, at the end of the semester one student came
to my office to tell me that for her, more important than the mathematics had been the
teaching style, and that she had consciously spent the entire term studying the pedagogy,
with the aim of adapting it in her own teaching. Never had I dreamt that while thinking I
was teaching abstract algebra I was actually also teaching pedagogy.

10

Challenges for instructors
Shifting from I-You to something like You-You-We-You has initial challenges for an instructor. As with anything new, more effort will be needed the first time. Experience pays
off handsomely, though, and after once or twice through, my experience is that the overall
workload should be no greater than for I-You.
It is critical that students have confidence from the start. I build this by briefly explaining
to the class the evidence for how an active learning paradigm will enable them to be successful
in the course, that class time will be interesting, productive, and satisfying, that it will
prepare them well for the harder homework, and that this daily work is the great majority
of their course grade. And I assure students that I will be there to give personal help in class
every day. Then I watch and listen to how things are going, especially in the first weeks,
repeat my explanation for active learning as necessary, and take prompt steps to resolve any
confusion and alleviate discomfort.
I have benefited from the fact that I match students’ stereotypes of who is a professor
and an authority in ways that many other instructors will not. Implicit bias affects students’
perceptions of their teachers’ expertise, and thus their willingness to extend the benefit of the
doubt to a class structure that does not conform to their prior notions. So some instructors
will need to be even smarter about strategies for obtaining student confidence and buy-in
and managing resistance. My principal advice is to keep student confidence always in the
forefront of one’s mind.
One must learn, as addressed above under In-class Active Learning, how mindfully to
make decisions that support student learning in a less predictable classroom environment
where control and responsibility is being loosened and partially handed to students. I also
need to keep reminding myself that in a nonlecture classroom, it is students who should be
doing the mathematics, not the instructor, since I already know the mathematics, and they
are the workers and learners. My job really should be that of effective, efficient, encouraging,
and hopefully inspiring, guide and manager.5 Neither should anyone expect their learning to
be easy: I can be helpful in many ways, but the learning is their work, just as when Euclid
is said to have replied to King Ptolemy’s request for an easier way of learning mathematics
that “there is no royal road to geometry”.
Perhaps the greatest danger for an instructor is that with students handing in homework
Parts A,B,C for each class day, it would be all too easy for me to do way more homework
marking than I should, and therefore spend more time teaching this way; I have witnessed
colleagues insistently fall into such a hole when trying this approach. Each of the three parts
is crucial for student learning, but Parts A and B do not need grading or instructor feedback
on the mathematics, since this all happens in class. While Part C is carefully marked, and
perhaps pieces redone, it consists only of two or three harder problems, making grading
manageable.
I am often asked how to start on the first day of a term, since Parts A and B are to be
completed before class. First, I never lecture; instead I model the pedagogy on that first day
by having students work together on meaningful mathematical activity. Then between the
first and second class days, I have students submit their first response to reading, the only
5

Frank Williams was a seminal influence for me, for which I am forever grateful. It was he who helped
me understand the proper role of the instructor to complement the student’s role of worker and learner [24].

11

time anything happens off schedule; thus we are ready for a normal routine on the second
day of class, when the first warm-up problems and the second response to reading are due.
Is my paradigm a one-size-fits-all approach? While I have found the basic components
to be universally successful, the details may best differ between courses at different levels,
or with different meeting schedules, or with large-size classes.
For instance, in a mathematics appreciation general education course at the lowest college
level, I emphasize hands-on activity more than reading, for both work at home and in class;
and after-class work often entails students just writing up what they discovered in class. At
the other extreme, in a Ph.D. level graduate course, I often ask students to contrast multiple
different written approaches, and in class I will ask students to present their own versions of
proofs at the board and lead discussion thereof.
Regarding class meeting schedules, in the past several years I have worked individually
with numerous faculty and graduate teaching assistants who are adapting this pedagogy to
different schedules than mine, which has always consisted of two 75-minute class sessions
weekly. I see that the scheduling of Parts A,B,C may best be adjusted, with some consolidation in a course with three or more meetings per week, e.g., only two Parts A and B weekly,
and/or one Part C. Some adaptations are very innovative and substantial, such as in [7].
For large class sizes, or courses traditionally scheduled in lecture/recitation format intended specifically for lecturing, I see other successful adaptations being made, e.g., with one
or multiple graduate teaching assistants and/or undergraduate learning assistants [14, 15]
present in the classroom with the instructor to work with students.
Amongst instructors adapting this pedagogy, the vast majority have had great success,
while a few have struggled. My perception is that those who struggled had unintentionally
combined old and new pedagogies in incompatible ways. For instance, if daily in-class active
group work is graded for correctness rather than for participation, completion, and effort,
this can undermine the learning process by shifting student attention entirely towards a
correct answer.
Finally, what must I at minimum have within my control in order to teach this way? I
need my students to have access to good reading and problem material that I can assign as
needed, including reading/writing and problem preparation in advance of class. I need the
daily pre- and post-class assignments to be the core of students’ work and grade. And I need
to be able to mold the classroom environment into an active one and gain the confidence of
my students. All else is flexible.

Benefits and rewards for instructors
Perhaps for many instructors, at the end of the day it will also be the personal rewards, not
just those for students, that will seem attractive about alternatives to I-You. I admit I have
reaped tremendous personal rewards.
Class time has higher-quality interactions and is more exciting when one is frequently
discussing interesting mathematical ideas with individuals and groups, and they are coming
up with questions and ideas and points of view that one hadn’t anticipated. The enthusiastic
response from students is extremely gratifying, as is the learning success one sees. In short,
I enjoy interacting with my students much more, a huge benefit!

12

Marking student work is more rewarding in two senses. First, exams are fewer. Second,
marking time is spent primarily on the few harder homework problems, which are more
interesting to mark, not on the easier material that has been dealt with in class. And the
remaining time is spent mostly reading student responses to reading, which stimulates and
prepares one with confidence to lead a class discussion most useful for student learning.
Time, ah time: My experience over many courses is that an alternative to I-You need
not take more instructor time overall, provided one does not fall into the trap of unnecessary
over-marking of student homework prepared for class. A perhaps surprising timesaver is
that students often need less of my time in office hours: By replacing lecture with student
interaction with each other and with me on active work inside the classroom, students get
most of the help they need, and their questions answered, in class. Moreover, the steadier
workload mentioned above applies to instructors as well, so there is very little end-of-term
stress, and no longterm burnout.
With rewards as strong as these, I could never return to I-You. Carpe diem!

Is there really an elephant in the classroom?
Finally, consider the question of coverage, an intimidating and much-feared elephant. When
I talk with I-You instructors about replacing lecture with student work in class, they almost
invariably reply “But then I couldn’t cover all the material in the syllabus”. My primary
answer, of course, is that it is not the instructor who needs to cover the material, but rather
the student.
I have found, in teaching many types and levels of courses, that if high-quality first
contact and initial mathematical work happens before class, thus making lecture irrelevant
and redundant, and if class time is instead used for student work with others and with the
instructor to build on the work prepared in advance, then coverage is always more efficient,
not less so. To me this simply makes logical sense: If lecture is a largely ineffective use of
precious classroom time for student learning, then offering students a guided active-learning
classroom environment, working with each other and with me, seems likely to proceed more
efficiently, especially when first-contact reading and preparatory work happens before class.
Specifically, I have taught this way in first-year calculus courses with multiple sections all
following the same lockstep routine with common exams, where students in my section had
to progress at the same rate that other instructors were lecturing, and this was no problem
at all. In fact it was in exactly that setting, with a class of 45 students and no grader or
teaching assistant, where I first developed and refined the approach described here.
My consistent experiences after transforming I-You into You-You-We-You, in many
courses at all levels and for all college audiences, is that the content is actually less rushed. I
found no fearsome coverage elephant in the classroom as I redesigned it, even with the same
syllabus as other instructors.
Acknowledgements: I am indebted to Sandra Laursen, Barbara Walvoord, Virginia Warfield,
and Frank Williams for critical insights along my journey, and to Pat Penfield and many
others for encouragement and constructive criticism.

13

References
[1] Brame, C. (2013). Flipping the Classroom. Vanderbilt University Center for Teaching.
http://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/flipping-the-classroom/.
[2] Braun,
B.,
Bremser,
P.,
Duval,
A.,
Lockwood,
E.,
White,
D.
(2017).
What
does
active
learning
mean
for
mathematicians?
Notices of the American Mathematical Society. 64:
124–129.
http://www.ams.org/publications/journals/notices/201702/rnoti-p124.pdf.
[3] Bressoud,
D.
(2011).
The
worst
way
to
teach.
Launchings,
July
2011.
Mathematical
Association
of
America.
http://launchings.blogspot.com/2011/07/the-worst-way-to-teach.html.
[4] Conference
Board
of
the
Mathematical
Sciences.
Active
ing
in
Post-Secondary
Mathematics
Education,
July
15,
http://www.cbmsweb.org/Statements/Active_Learning_Statement.pdf.

Learn2016.

[5] Epstein, J. (2013). The calculus concept inventory—Measurement of the effect of teaching methodology in mathematics. Notices of the American Mathematical Society. 60:
1018–1026. http://www.ams.org/notices/201308/rnoti-p1018.pdf.
[6] Cohen, M., Gaughan, E., Knoebel, A., Kurtz, D., Pengelley, D. (1991). Student Research
Projects in Calculus. Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
[7] Dunmyre, J. (2019). A homework system to flip almost any class. PRIMUS (Problems,
Resources, and Issues in Mathematics Undergraduate Studies). 29: 183–203.
[8] Just in Time Teaching (2006). http://jittdl.physics.iupui.edu/jitt/.
[9] Kogan, M., Laursen, S. (2014). Assessing long-term effects of inquiry-based learning: A case study from college mathematics. Innov. High. Educ. 39: 183–199.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10755-013-9269-9.
[10] Lambert, C. (2012). Twilight of the lecture. Harvard Magazine, March-April.
http://harvardmagazine.com/2012/03/twilight-of-the-lecture.
[11] Laubenbacher, R., Pengelley, D. Teaching with Original Historical Sources in Mathematics. A resource website. https://web.nmsu.edu/~ davidp/history/.
[12] Laursen, S. L. (2013). From innovation to implementation: Multi-institution pedagogical reform in undergraduate mathematics. In: King, D., Loch, B., Rylands, L. eds. Proceedings of the 9th DELTA conference on the teaching and learning of undergraduate mathematics and statistics. Kiama, New South Wales, Australia. Sydney: University of Western Sydney, School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, on behalf of the International Delta Steering Committee.
https://www.colorado.edu/eer/publications.

14

[13] Laursen, S., Hassi, M., Kogan, M., Hunter, A., Weston, T. (2011). Evaluation of the
IBL Mathematics Project: Student and Instructor Outcomes of Inquiry-Based Learning
in College Mathematics. https://www.colorado.edu/eer/publications.
[14] Learning Assistant Alliance. https://www.learningassistantalliance.org/.
[15] Learning
Assistant
Program:
University
of
https://www.colorado.edu/program/learningassistant/.

Colorado

Boulder.

[16] Instructional
Practices
Guide:
Guide
to
Evidence-Based
Instructional
Practices
in
Undergraduate
Mathematics
(2017).
Washington
DC:
Mathematical
Association
of
America.
https://www.maa.org/programs-and-communities/curriculum%20resources/instructional-pr
[17] Novak, G., Patterson, E., Gavrin, A., Christian, W. (1999). Just-in-Time Teaching:
Blending Active Learning and Web Technology. Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
[18] Peer Instruction Network. http://www.peerinstruction.net/.
[19] Pengelley, D., Personal web pages. https://web.nmsu.edu/~ davidp/.
[20] POGIL: Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning. https://www.pogil.org/.
[21] Walvoord, B., Anderson, V. (1998). Effective Grading: A Tool for Learning Assessment,
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

[22] Weber,
K. (2015). Mathematics professors and mathematics majors’
expectations of lectures in advanced mathematics. On Teaching and
Learning Mathematics:
AMS Blog.
American
Mathematical
Society.
http://blogs.ams.org/matheducation/2015/02/10/mathematics-professors-and-mathematics
[23] Wieman, C. (2014). Large-scale comparison of science teaching methods sends
clear message. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111: 8319–8320.
http://www.pnas.org/content/111/23/8319.extract.
[24] Williams, F. (1995). Total quality management in the classroom: Applications to
university-level mathematics. Intl. J. of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology 26: 743–747.
David Pengelley is professor emeritus at New Mexico State University, and courtesy professor at Oregon State University. His research is in algebraic topology and history of mathematics. He develops the pedagogies of teaching with student projects and with primary
historical sources, and created a graduate course on the role of history in teaching mathematics. He relies on student reading, writing, and mathematical preparation before class
to enable active student work to replace lecture. He has received the MAA’s Deborah and
Franklin Tepper Haimo teaching award, loves backpacking and wilderness, is active on environmental issues, and has become a fanatical badminton player.
15

Department of Mathematical Sciences, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003
Department of Mathematics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
davidp@nmsu.edu

16

