Thermodynamics of switching in multistable non-equilibrium systems
Jacob Cook1, 2 and Robert G. Endres1, 2, a)
1)

Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom
2)

arXiv:1908.07405v3 [physics.bio-ph] 3 Feb 2020

(Dated: 4 February 2020)

Multistable non-equilibrium systems are abundant outcomes of nonlinear dynamics with feedback but still
relatively little is known about what determines the stability of the steady states and their switching rates in
terms of entropy and entropy production. Here, we will link fluctuation theorems for the entropy production
along trajectories with the action obtainable from the Freidlin–Wentzell theorem to elucidate the thermodynamics of switching between states in the large volume limit of multistable systems. We find that the entropy
production at steady state plays no role, but the entropy production during switching is key. Steady-state
entropy and diffusive noise strength can be neglected in this limit. The relevance to biology, ecological, and
climate models is apparent.
I.

INTRODUCTION

When Niels Bohr and Erwin Schrödinger asked decades
ago whether new physical principles are needed to explain living systems, the answer seemed “no”1,2 . More
recently, however, the field of stochastic thermodynamics with its temporal violations of macroscopic thermodynamic laws at the microscopic scale have provided a
new physical perspective on life. Most remarkable corner
stones of far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics are the
fluctuation theorems and Seifert’s thermodynamic uncertainty relation, stressing the important role of entropy
production3–6 . At equilibrium, detailed balance prohibits
any entropy production on average, but far from equilibrium such entropy production is a characteristic feature7
and reflects the flow of time8 .
The fluctuation theorem by Evans and Searles allows
the exact calculation of the entropy production along
a trajectory from the time-forward and time-reversed
path (corresponding to a movie played backwards), where
paths can be calculated from e.g. Gillespie simulations of
the underlying chemical master equation4 . However, due
to its intrinsic connection with the time-reversed path,
the theorem cannot be used to calculate the probability
of a path simply from its entropy production. The situation is different when using the least-action principle,
which allows the prediction of the most likely path between two points in a stochastic system from minimising
the action (integral over the Lagrangian)9,10 . This is often done with a Langevin approximation of the master
equation, such as using stochastic differential equations
incorporating noise terms11,12 . However, now the link to
thermodynamics is less clear as the role of the entropy
production is obscured by the action functional.
In this paper, we combine the fluctuation theorem and
least-action principle to address the stability of steady
states in non-equilibrium systems. In particular, we will

elucidate the roles of steady-state entropy and fluctuations, as well as steady-state and path entropy production in state switching. For this purpose, we use
two different low-dimensional minimal models shown in
Fig. 1, the Schlögl13–15 and the toggle switch16 models,
with fixed external species concentrations to ensure nonequilibrium behaviour.

II. MERGING TWO APPROACHES FOR STATE
SWITCHING

To investigate the thermodynamics of state switching we shall study non-equilibrium bistable systems with
macrostates denoted A and B, where both macrostates
correspond to sets of microstates in the discrete space of
molecule numbers X, which is a vector for multiple chemical species. The assumption is made that no significant
amount of time is spent outside these macrostates. In
the large volume limit, the process of switching between
states can be assumed to be a Poisson process (with exponentially distributed
R ∞ waiting times, see Fig.−11B inset).
Thus, hτA i = kA→B 0 t exp(−kA→B t)dt = kA→B
where
kA→B is the switching rate from A to B, and similarly
for the B state. These switching rates are coarse-grained
and will in general have contributions from a number of
microscopic paths. The occupation probability of the
A state is then given by pA = hτA i/(hτA i + hτB i) =
1/(1 + kA→B /kB→A ). Hence, such a two-state system is
completely described by the ratio of the switching rates.
How do we calculate these for actual molecular systems?
While switching in equilibrium systems is often determined by Kramer’s formula, where the height of the energy barrier matters, the treatment of non-equilibrium
systems requires entire paths17,18 .

A.

a) E-mail:

r.endres@imperial.ac.uk

Microscopic fluctuation theorems

Using a microscopic description for non-equilibrium
systems, the dynamics can be described by a path Γ,

2

FIG. 1. Overview of models. (a) Example simulation of Schlögl model, displaying switching between high and low X (copy
number) states with A and B reservoir species held constant. (b) Example switching paths between A and B states for toggle
switch model. (Inset) Waiting time distribution for A to B switching, with a clear exponential distribution beyond a small
initial time. (c) Symbolic chemical equations describing the Schlögl model. (d) Schematic illustration of 4 species toggle switch
model, consisting of two mutually repressing chemical species (A,B) in addition to substrate (S) and waste (W) species. As
the mutual repression between the two chemical species occurs via dimer binding the two rates relevant to this (r and f ) are
not included in the schematic. The parameter values used to generate the example paths can be found in the supplementary
material.

e.g. X0 , X1 , X2 ,. . . , XN , obtainable from simulations of
the chemical master equation19 . The master equation
describes the probability evolution of the microscopic
stochastic process and can be formulated as
Nρ

X
d
P (X; t) =
[Wρi (X − ν i |X)P (X − ν i ; t)
dt
i=1

(1)

− Wρi (X|X − ν i )P (X; t)],
where P (X; t) is the probability of being in microstate
X at time t and Nρ is the total number of reactions (including reverse reactions) with ρi the corresponding reverse reaction to reaction ρi . In particular, Wρc (Xa |Xb )
is the transition rate from state a to state b by reaction ρc , and ν i is the change in molecular copy numbers
caused by reaction ρi . For every time-forward path, there
also exists a time-reversed path Γ, XN , XN −1 ,. . . , X0 .
The probability of observing a particular path, e.g. the
above time-forward path, is given by the path probabilQN
ity PΓ = N P (X0 ) i=1 P (τi−1,i )Wρi (Xi−1 |Xi ) assuming a continuous-time memory-less Markov process with
transition rates Wρi+1 (Xi |Xi+1 ). Specifically, ρi is the
reaction that causes step i, P (τi,i+1 ) is the probability
that there is no reaction in the time interval between
τP
i and τi+1 , and N is a normalisation factor, ensuring
Γ PΓ = 1. As we are considering a non-equilibrium
steady state (NESS) probability distribution, the total
entropy production along the path is given by the steady-

state fluctuation theorem (FT)20,21 as
 




PΓ
WΓ
P (X0 )
∆SΓ = ln
= ln
+ ln
,
PΓ
P (XN )
WΓ

(2)

with WΓ = Wρ1 (X0 |X1 ) . . . WρN (XN −1 |XN ) and WΓ =
WρN (XN |XN −1 ) . . . Wρ1 (X1 |X0 ) (for details see supplementary material). The entropy considered here is defined as the Shannon entropy of the probability distribution of states X, i.e.
X
S(t) = −
P (X; t) ln P (X; t)
(3)
X

in units where Boltzmann’s constant kB = 1. For rare
switching, valid for large volume Ω, the steady-state value
of S has contributions from SA with X∈A and SB with
X∈B.
Restricting our consideration to paths that
start within macrostate A and end within B,
we can calculate the ensemble-averaged
total enP
tropy production ∆SA→B =
=
Γ|A→B PΓ ∆SΓ
hln(P (X0 )/P (XN ))iA→B + hln(WΓ /WΓ )iA→B , where
the first term on the right-hand side (RHS) corresponds
to the average change in entropy of the system between
start X0 ∈A and end XN ∈B (note N , X0 and XN can
vary for different paths). Further, the second term on
the RHS corresponds to the flow of entropy from system
to medium (here chemical reservoirs), which is termed
entropy production in the medium5 . In the limit of

3
small fluctuations (large Ω, or small noise approximation), the first term becomes negligibly small and the
entropy produced is given by the second term only,
e.g. ∆SA→B ≈ hln (WΓ /WΓ )iA→B ≈ ln (kA→B /kA→B ).
This expression is of limited use in determining state
switching rates as kA→B is intrinsically linked to kA→B ,
i.e. the switching rate associated with time-reversal of
the paths from A to B. Also note that in general due to
the dissipative dynamics the ensemble of time-reversed
paths does not correspond to the ensemble of reverseswitching paths, and hence kA→B 6= kB→A 18 . In order
to uniquely determine switching rates we need to utilize
a macroscopic formalism.

B.

Macroscopic Langevin coarse-graining

In the macroscopic limit, we can make a continuum
approximation of the master equation with the chemical Fokker-Planck equation (FPE), i.e. Xi = xi Ω for
i = 1, ..., K a K-dimensional chemical system, with concentrations xi and volume Ω. The chemical FokkerPlanck equation can be derived following Gillespie22 as
N
X
∂
∂
P (x; t) = −
[fi (x)P (x; t)]
∂t
∂xi
i=1
N
∂2
1 X
+
[Dij (x)P (x; t)] ,
2 i,j=1 ∂xi ∂xj

(4)

where the deterministic force f (x) is given by
fi (x) =

Nρ
X

νji wρj (x)

(5)

j=1

and the diffusion matrix D(x) is defined as
Dij (x) =

Nρ
X

νki νkj wρk (x).

(6)

k=1

In the above definitions, νji is the change in molecular
copy number of species i that a single occurrence of reaction ρj causes, and wρi (x) is the rate (in concentration units) of reaction ρi for concentration x, which is
the continuum limit of Wρi (X − ν i |X)/Ω. This FokkerPlanck equation is generally a reasonable approximation
for large (but finite) values of Ω 22 , particularly near thermodynamic equilibrium23,24 . However, while the accurate prediction of switching rates is difficult, the characterization of relative stability is easier. The chemical Langevin equation corresponds to this Fokker-Planck
equation and can be expressed as ẋi = fi (x) + gij (x)ξj (t)
with ξj (t) uncorrelated white Gaussian noises of zero
mean and autocorrelation hξi (t)ξj (t0 )i = Ω−1 δij δ(t − t0 ).
The deterministic force in direction i is given by fi , and
gij determines the propagation of noise from direction j

to i. Here, and throughout the paper we adopt the convention that repeated indices (in this case j) are summed
over. For the models considered in this paper gij is always
diagonal, representing multiplicative noise. As Eq. 4 is
an Itô equation, we treat gij via Itô integration25 . It is
worth noting that our definition of entropy is essentially
unchanged as we move to the continuum limit, though it
is now the Shannon entropy of a continuous probability
distribution.
Paths from this Langevin equation can be treated via
path integral methods26 , which can be done more simply in our case. When the probability of escape from
a macrostate is sufficiently low, the stochastic transition
will be expected to concentrate along a single path x∗ ,
with paths significantly diverging having probabilities so
low (for large Ω) as to have negligible impact on overall escape probability27 . The Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin
(WKB) approximation, the classical analogue of the
quantum mechanical WKB9 , can then be used to obtain the conditional probability of this path as PA→B ∼
exp(−ΩA[x∗ ]), where PA→B is the conditional probability of reaching macrostate B from the initial macrostate
A, and A is the action, as derived in28 . The path x∗ will
thus minimize the action A[x∗ ] = min A[x] = AA→B .
This path has a fixed start and end point at the minima
of macrostates A and B, respectively. (These points can
be reached from any point in their respective macrostates
by a zero action path. Thus, the minimum action path
x∗ can represent the general path between macrostates.)
The relevant action for a path with duration τ is the
Freidlin–Wentzell (FW) action28
Z
1 τ
−1
A[x] =
(ẋ − f )i Dij
(ẋ − f )j dt,
(7)
2 0
with the diffusion matrix given by Dij = gik gkj . Any
choice of components gij is acceptable provided that
they result in a diffusion matrix that matches Eq. 6.
As we are considering Itô integration this action possesses one additional term, which can be neglected in
the large Ω limit27 . (If we instead use Stratonovich
calculus, three additional terms would appear, which
also disappear in the large Ω limit10 ). Away from this
limit, switching paths no longer pass through the same
saddle point as their reverse switching paths18 . All of
our results will pertain to the large Ω limit. In this
limit, the mean-first passage time (MFPT) is given by
−1
TA→B ∼ PA→B
= QA→B exp(ΩAA→B ) or ln(TA→B ) =
ln(QA→B ) + ΩAA→B , so that as Ω grows the contribution from the prefactor QA→B becomes less important
and the second term on the RHS describes the MFPT to
logarithmic precision12,29 . This approach is often more
accurate than treatment based on the FPE obtained by
van-Kampen expansion of the master equation9 . While
our expression for the MFPT applies in the large deviations limit, alternative forms can be obtained outside of
it30 .
An expression for the entropy production based
on the time-reversal of Langevin paths can be ob-

4
tained by noting that the probability of the most
probable switching path A→B is given by PA→B =
exp(−ΩAA→B )/QA→B . The probability of the corresponding time-reversed path A→B is then found to be
PA→B = exp(−ΩAA→B )/QA→B , where AA→B is the
action of the time-reversed path. As factor QA→B has
not changed, this probability is not in general equal to
PB→A , which contains factor QB→A . Combining the
above two expressions as in Eq. 2 generates an expression for the entropy production for Langevin paths as
L
∆SA→B
= Ω (AA→B − AA→B )31 . Substituting Eq. 7
into this relation leads to
Z τ
−1
L
∆SA→B = 2Ω
ẋi Dij
fj dt.
(8)
0

Due to our use of a Langevin equation to describe the
paths, the above expression is a coarse-grained (apparent) entropy production32 , which disappears along with
the action at steady steady (ẋi = fi (x) = 0 in the large
Ω limit). This suggests that only entropy production
along the path matters, and that the Langevin formalism within the steady state is equivalent to a quasiequilibrium. In the supplementary material we decompose this coarse-grained entropy production into approximate entropy production (EP) and flow (EF) terms, and
find that our EP term does generally correlate with the
entropy production as calculated from the master equation. Hence, despite the obvious difference between the
entropy productions from the master equation (Eq. 2)
and the Langevin paths (Eq. 8), the latter has predictive
power.
We now want to investigate the special case of onedimensional systems. To do so we shall use a relation
that is valid at every point along an action minimising
path33
X
X
−1
−1
ẋi Dij
ẋj =
fi Dij
fj ,
(9)
ij

ij

which can be interpreted as every point along the minimising path having equal kinetic and potential energy
(defined below). In the one-dimensional case this relation simplifies further to
−1
−1
ẋ1 D11
ẋ1 = f1 D11
f1
|ẋ1 | = |f1 |,

III.

(11)

When considering the broader class of multi-dimensional
systems such simple relations no longer apply and we instead consider numerical approaches to explicit minimal

SCHLÖGL AND TOGGLE SWITCH MODELS

The two models considered are the Schlögl and toggle
switch models (Fig. 1). For both models concentrationconstraints are used to make the models non-equilibrium.
The Schlögl model is a simple one-dimensional model
that exhibits bistability13,14 . It involves three chemical
species A, B and X, which obey the chemical dynamics
shown in Fig. 1C. Holding the concentration of external
species fixed (i.e. constant a and b), this model can be
reexpressed in terms of the dynamics of concentration x
as
dx
= k−2 bx2 − k+2 x3 − k−1 x + k+1 a + gx (x)ξ(t), (12)
dt
where
gx (x) =

p
k−2 bx2 + k+2 x3 + k−1 x + k+1 a

(13)

and (k±1 , k±2 ) are rate constants. See the supplementary
material for further details of this model.
The toggle switch model is a two-dimensional model
that describes the dynamics of a simple bistable genetic
switch16 (see Fig. 1D). We consider the adiabatic limit
where the fraction of genes active is completely determined by the concentration of the corresponding repressing protein (see supplementary material for details). This
means that the model can be expressed in terms of change
of protein concentrations a and b as
da
kr
=
− k− a − Ka + K− + ga (a, b)ξa (t) (14)
dt
r + f b2
qr
db
=
− q− b − Qb + Q− + gb (a, b)ξb (t), (15)
dt
r + f a2
where
s
ga (a, b) =

(10)

where || indicates that the magnitude has been taken.
This means that both paths have the same speeds along
their lengths as they necessarily pass through the same
points (in 1D). Thus, for one dimensional systems the
path B→A is identical to the time-reversed path A→B.
It then follows that for this case kA→B = kB→A , and so
the ratio of switching rates are determined solely by the
entropy production as
L
kA→B /kB→A = exp(∆SA→B
).

models. This will allow us to investigate how the entropy
production varies along the path, and whether diffusion
strength and steady-state entropies matter.

kr
+ k− a + Ka + K− ,
r + f b2

(16)

and
r
gb (a, b) =

qr
+ q− b + Qb + Q− .
r + f a2

(17)

Further, r is the gene activation rate and f is rate constant for gene repression by protein dimers, the other
eight rate constants describe the rates of protein production or degradation. Here, the constant external concentrations s and w have been absorbed into the relevant
rate constants.
In order to study the switching between states for these
models, we need to find paths that minimise the action
(Eq. 7). These paths are usually determined by use of

5

FIG. 2. Dependence of actions on path entropy productions. (a) Minimum action paths for Schlögl model; aside
direction, the only difference between paths is the amount of time spent at the fixed points where there is no contribution
to the action. (b) Minimum action paths for toggle switch model, now showing clear differences. (c) Action (A), entropy
production (∆S L ), kinetic (KE) and potential energy (PE) of Schlögl paths with KE and PE defined in Eq. 18, clearly showing
that the entropy production of one path is the opposite of the other. In this and the remaining panels a solid line corresponds to
the path from A→B and a dashed line to B→A. Magnifications are meant to clarify line styles. (d) Action, differences in action
and entropy production, KE and PE along the toggle switch paths. The difference in action is proportional to the difference
in entropy produced along the path (this linear relationship is further discussed below). (e) Entropy production (EP) and
entropy flow (EF) terms along the Schlögl paths. The difference (EP-EF) is equal to the entropy production of time-reversed
of Langevin paths. (Inset) Plot showing how f and ẋ vary along an exemplar minimum action path. (f) Equivalent plot for
the toggle switch paths. The parameter values used to generate the paths can be found in the supplementary material.

a quasi-Newton method (e.g. the L-BFGS algorithm)
to find the minimising path for a particular duration τ ,
with a gradient descent method used to find the value
of τ that results in the lowest minimum11 . However,
in order to save computational time we made use of the
faster (but more complicated) geometric minimum action
method33–35 . These paths were then be used in Eq. 7 and
Eq. 8 in order to generate the corresponding minimum
actions and path entropy productions.
Figs. 2A,B show exemplar minimum action paths for
switching in the Schlögl and the toggle switch model, respectively. As the Schlögl model is one-dimensional its
time-reversed switching paths correspond to the switching paths for the contrary direction. Fig. 2C shows how
this leads to equal and opposite entropy productions (orange lines) along the paths. For the more complicated
toggle switch model this simple relation between paths
is lost, but Fig. 2D shows a linear relation between the
difference in minimum action (purple line) and the difference in path entropy productions (gold line). Despite
the systems’ quasi-equilibrium behavior, non-equilibrium
processes still occur. In order to illustrate this fact we
derived approximate entropy production and flow terms
(details in supplementary material). Figs. 2E,F show
plots of the derived entropy production (EP, blue lines)
and flow (EF, red lines), demonstrating non-zero contributions at the steady states.

In order to investigate links between occupation probabilities, entropy, and entropy production, 100 random
parameters sets were created for each model. Specifically, the procedure for the construction of the toggle
switch parameter sets was as follows. First, k was randomly drawn from the (continuous) range [1, 100] and K
from the range [0.1, 10]. Then random numbers were
drawn from the range [0.001, 0.1] to obtain the ratios
q/k, k− /k, q− /k, Q/K, K− /K, and Q− /Q. Finally, r
and f were both drawn from the range [0, 104 ]. For the
Schlögl parameter sets, all four parameters (k−1 , k+1 a,
k+2 , k−2 b) were drawn from the range [0.1, 10]. In both
cases the constructed sets were accepted if they resulted
in multiple non-zero steady states. State entropies and
occupation probabilities were obtained by direct Gillespie simulation of the chemical master equation36 . Each
of these simulations was run for the largest computationally feasible value of Ω in order to minimise the effect
of discretization. Steady-state entropy productions were
calculated using the Schnakenberg method (product of
flux and reaction affinity)37 .
Fig. 3A shows a weak correlation between state occupation probability and steady-state entropy production,
which provides some evidence for the maximum entropy
production principle (MaxEPP)31 . This extremal principle proposes that states with higher entropy production are more dynamically stable (subject to other dy-

6

FIG. 3. Comparison of states and switching paths. In all panels, red and blue dots denote specific parameterizations of
Schlögl and toggle switch models, respectively. In each plot the lines and shaded regions indicate best fits and 95% confidence
intervals for the particular data sets, respectively. (a) Comparison of log ratios of occupation probabilities vs difference in
entropy productions at steady states from Gillespie simulations. The Schlögl data has a Pearson correlation of 0.5172 and
the toggle switch has 0.3476. (b) Log ratio of occupation probabilities obtained from Gillespie simulation vs the difference in
minimum action. The dashed line indicates a perfect correspondence. The toggle switch and Schlögl data have correlations of
0.9515 and 0.9738, respectively. The results shown are coarsely discretized due to the low Ω used to save computational time.
The discretization will effect the Schlögl B state disproportionately as it is formed of significantly fewer microstates than A.
This represents a potential explanation for the downwards shift of the Schlögl data. (c) Comparison of difference in entropy of
steady states vs difference in action. Entropies were found by Gillespie simulation with Ω = 1. Both sets of data show weak
correlations of 0.2892 and 0.4622 for the Schlögl and toggle switch models, respectively. (d) Difference in action vs difference
in entropy produced along paths. Both models display a strong linear relationship, with correlations of 0.9445 and 1.0000 for
the toggle switch and Schlögl models, respectively.

namical constraints)38,39 . We then approximate the log
ratio of state occupation probabilities via the Freidlin–
Wentzell theorem as, ln (pA /pB ) ≈ ln (PB→A /PA→B ) =
ln (QB→A /QA→B ) + Ω (AA→B − AB→A ). For large Ω
only the second term would be expected to contribute
but this limit is difficult to simulate. Simulated occupation probabilities match well with this approximation
(see Fig. 3B), demonstrating the validity of our use of the
FW action. Fig. 3C shows a weak correlation between
difference in action and difference in state entropy, as
expected from equilibrium theory where higher entropy
states are more stable. However, state entropy increases
sublinearly with Ω so for large Ω it has no effect on the
stability. Fig. 3D shows a comparison of the difference
in action and the difference in path entropy production,
showing that the linear relation observed in Fig. 2C,D
holds generally across parameter sets surveyed. The effect of diffusion strength was found to be minimal (plots
of this are therefore provided in the supplementary material).
Our results suggest a limited form of MaxEPP, which

applies to the rate of switching between macrostates.
We shall proceed with our derivation by noting that
the action can be split into two parts as ΩAA→B =
L
, where CA→B is the conservative action
CA→B − 21 ∆SA→B
L
along the path A→B and ∆SA→B
is the Langevin path
31
entropy production (Eq. 8) . The conservative action
can be expressed in a similar form to Eq. 8 as
Z

Ω τ
−1
−1
ẋi Dij
ẋj + fi Dij
fj dt,
(18)
CA→B =
2 0
where the two terms resemble kinetic (KE) and potential
energy (PE) contributions, respectively. By substituting
the expanded form of the action into the expression for
switching path probability, a reduced form of MaxEPP
can be obtained

L
exp 12 ∆SA→B
− CA→B
PA→B =
,
(19)
QA→B
where PA→B is the probability of the (most probable)
switching path along A→B, and QA→B is a constant.

7
This equation shows that there is a trade-off between
minimization of the conservative action (i.e. fulfilling the
equation of motion) and maximization of the path entropy production (i.e. being as dissipative as possible).
If the switching path and its contrary path pass
through similar regions of space, then they will have similar kinetic energy contributions along their lengths provided that the deterministic force f does not vary too
rapidly. From Eq. 9 it can been seen that at every point
on a minimizing path the potential energy contribution
is equal to the kinetic energy contribution. The approximation that CA→B ≈ CB→A can thus reasonably be
made. This approximation is exact for the 1D Schlögl
model as A→B = B→A, and holds for 90% of the toggle
switch parameterizations used. In contrast, the dissipative (path entropy production) component Eq. 8 depends
on cross terms of velocity ẋ and deterministic force f , and
as such are not be expected to cancel, leading to

1
L
L
∆SB→A
− ∆SA→B
≈ Ω (AA→B − AB→A )
2

(20)

in line with the relationship seen in Fig. 3D. Significant
divergence from the relation was generally observed in
cases where the saddle point occurred at a low copy number compared to the steady states, due to the substantially faster variation of the force. Further discussion of
the above derivation can be found in the supplementary
material.

IV.

DISCUSSION

Our primary conclusion is that a MaxEPP for switching paths can be obtained within the Langevin approximation (Eq. 19), extending the rule that “exergonic reactions occur spontaneously” to switching in multistable
systems. In a system with a large number of potential macrostates our relation predicts that for sufficiently
large volumes switches that produce more entropy will
be favoured. If regions of state space with greater entropy productions also require greater path entropy productions to reach, then this could form a basis for a more
extensive maximum entropy production principle. Our
secondary conclusion is that there exists a relationship
between the difference in action of minimum action paths
and difference in entropy produced along these paths
(Eq. 20), valid for all paths that do not pass through
regions of rapidly varying force. We additionally found
that steady-state entropies had very little effect on the
stability of steady states (see Fig. 3C). Finally, we found
some evidence to support a broader maximum entropy
production principle (see Fig. 3A).
There has been significant interest in the thermodynamics of the transition between different steady-state
probability distributions when controlled by an external
parameter40,41 . This is fundamentally different to our
work, which is about the thermodynamics of switching
in a bistable system. In our two-state systems, we would

naively expect a net zero entropy production through
switching as the entropy produced by a switch in one direction would be cancelled by the eventual switch back.
Only in cases where the switching path differs from the
converse switching path are there net fluxes of probability
through the system and thus entropy production. Consistently, for the Schlögl model we find no net entropy
L
L
production (i.e. ∆SA→B
= −∆SB→A
). In other recent
42
work , bounds on the ratio of transition rates between
states in a bistable system based on relative entropy ∆H
and path entropy production are found. This ratio is
determined as π(B → A)/π(A → B) ≥ exp [−∆SA→B ],
where π(A → B) is the sum of the rates of switching
A to B over all possible switching channels. With the
expectation that a single most probable path will dominate, consideration of the two contrary switching paths
will be sufficient. Combining the main result of their paper with our analytic relation (Eq. 20) leads to a bound
L
L
on the path entropy produced as ∆SA→B
+ ∆SB→A
≥ 0,
which becomes an equality in the limit of time-reversed
switching paths (e.g. Schlögl). Every parameter set used
in Fig. 3 was found to satisfy this condition.
Beyond the chemical physics literature, related frameworks to ours have been used in evolutionary science43,44
where the cumulative fitness flux is maximized (like entropy production) subject to the trade-off that speed of
allele change and magnitude of selective forces are minimized (like the conservative action). Our results therefore suggest, that states in evolutionary systems that require greater cumulative fitness fluxes to reach should be
expected to be more stable. Exploring the application
of our theory in ecology, and evolutionary science with
systems of multiple stable states will be an interesting
way forward45 .

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

See supplementary material for further details of the
models used, details of how entropy production was calculated from Gillespie simulations, extended derivations
of our relations, details of algorithms used to minimize
actions, extended discussion of our coarse-grained entropy production, a plot showing the limited effect of
diffusion strength, and tables of parameters for Figs. 1
and 2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

J.C. and R.G.E. thankfully acknowledge helpful discussions with Shamil Chandaria, Henrik Jensen, Chiu
Fan Lee, Gunnar Pruessner, David Schnoerr, Philipp
Thomas, and financial support from the NERC CDT in
Quantitative and Modelling Skills in Ecology and Evolution (grant No./ NE/P012345/1), and BBSRC grant
BB/N00065X/1.

8
1 N.

Bohr, Nature 131, 421 (1933).
Schrödinger, What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living
Cell (Cambridge University Press, 1944).
3 D.J. Searles and D.J. Evans, Phys. Rev. E 60, 159 (1999).
4 D.J. Evans and D.J. Searles, Advan. Phys. 51, 1529 (2002).
5 U. Seifert, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 126001 (2012).
6 A.C. Barato and U. Seifert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 158101 (2015).
7 C. Battle, C.P. Broedersz, N. Fakhri, V.F. Geyer, J. Howard,
C.F. Schmidt and F.C. MacKintosh, Science 352, 604 (2016).
8 É. Roldán, I. Neri, M. Dörpinghaus, H. Meyr, and F. Jülicher,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 250602 (2015).
9 M. Assaf and B. Meerson, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 50, 263001
(2017).
10 P. Arnold, Phys. Rev. E 61, 6099 (2000).
11 R. Perez-Carrasco, P. Guerrero, J. Briscoe, and K.M. Page, PLoS
Comput. Biol. 12, e1005154 (2016).
12 R. de la Cruz, R. Perez-Carrasco, P. Guerrero, T. Alarcon, and
K.M. Page, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 128102 (2018).
13 F. Schlögl, Z. Physik. 253, 147 (1972).
14 M. Vellela and H. Qian, J. Roy. Soc. Interface 6, 925 (2009).
15 R.G. Endres, PLoS One 10, e0121681 (2015).
16 J.L. Cherry and F.R. Adler, J. Theor. Biol. 203, 117 (2000).
17 J. Wang, Adv. Phys. 64, 1 (2015).
18 H. Feng, K. Zhang, and J. Wang, Chem. Sci. 5, 3761 (2014).
19 P. Gaspard, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 8898 (2004).
20 U. Seifert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 040602 (2005).
21 M. M. Mansour and F. Baras, Chaos 27, 104609 (2017).
22 D.T. Gillespie, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 297 (2000).
23 R. Grima, P. Thomas, and A.V. Straube, J. Chem. Phys. 135,
084103 (2011).
24 P. Hanggi, H. Grabert, P. Talkner, and H. Thomas, Phys. Rev.
A 29, 371 (1984).
25 R. Mannella and P.V.E. McClintock, Fluct. Noise Lett. 11,
1240010 (2012).
2 E.

26 V.Y.

Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and C. Jarzynski, J. Stat. Mech.:
Theory Exp 2006, P08001 (2006).
27 H. Touchette, Phys. Rep. 478, 1 (2009).
28 A.D. Ventsel and M.I. Freidlin, Russ. Math. Surv. 25, 1 (1970).
29 F. Bouchet and J. Reygner, Ann. Henri Poincaré 17, 3499 (2016).
30 A. Fiasconaro, B. Spagnolo, and S. Boccaletti, Phys. Rev. E 72,
061110 (2005).
31 R.G. Endres, Sci. Rep. 7, 14437 (2017).
32 J. Mehl, B. Lander, C. Bechinger, V. Blickle, and U. Seifert,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 220601 (2012).
33 J.C. Neu, A. Ghanta, and S. Teitsworth, in Coupled Mathematical Models for Physical and Biological Nanoscale Systems
and their Applications, Springer Proceedings in Mathematics &
Statistics, Vol. 232 (Springer International Publishing, 2018) pp.
153–167.
34 M. Heymann and E. Vanden-Eijnden, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100,
140601 (2008).
35 M. Heymann and E. Vanden-Eijnden, Commun. Pure Appl.
Math. 61, 1052 (2008).
36 D.T. Gillespie, J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340 (1977).
37 J. Schnakenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48, 571 (1976).
38 R. Dewar, Entropy 11, 931 (2009).
39 R.D. Lorenz, J.I. Lunine, P.G. Withers, and C.P. McKay, Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 415 (2001).
40 G.B. Bagci, U. Tirnakli, and J. Kurths, Phys. Rev. E 87, 032161
(2013).
41 T. Hatano and S.I. Sasa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3463 (2001).
42 D. Ruelle, J. Stat. Phys. 164, 463 (2016).
43 H.P. de Vladar and N.H. Barton, Trends Ecol. Evol. 26, 424
(2011).
44 V. Mustonen and M. Lässig, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
4248 (2010).
45 M. Scheffer, J. Bascompte, W.A. Brock, V. Brovkin, S.R. Carpenter, V. Dakos, H. Held, E.H. van Nes, M. Rietkerk, and G.
Sugihara, Nature 461, 53 (2009).

