Nanostructure engineering of epitaxial piezoelectric α-quartz
thin films on silicon
Q. Zhang1, 2 γ, D. Sánchez1 γ, R. Desgarceaux1 γ, A. Gomez2, P. Escofet-Majoral1, J. Oró-soler2, J.
Gazquez2, G. Larrieu3, B. Charlot1, M. Gich2, A. Carretero-Genevrier1*
1. Rudy Desgarceaux, Pau Escofet-Majoral, Dr. Benoit Charlot, Dr. Adrian Carretero-Genevrier
Institut d’Electronique et des Systemes (IES), CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 860 Rue de
Saint Priest 34095 Montpellier, France
2. Qianzhe Zhang, Andres Gomez, Dr. Jaume Gazquez, Dr. Marti Gich
Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona ICMAB, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas CSIC, Campus UAB 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain
3. Guilliem Larrieu
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INP, 7 av. Colonel Roche, 31031Toulouse,
France
γ These authors contributed equally to this work
E-mail: carretero@ies.univ-montp2.fr,
Keywords: Quartz, silicon, epitaxial growth, thin films, piezoelectricity, nanostructuration

Abstract
The monolithic integration of sub-micron quartz structures on silicon substrates is a key issue for
the future development of telecommunication to the GHz frequencies. Here we report
unprecedented large-scale fabrication of ordered arrays of piezoelectric epitaxial quartz
nanostructures on silicon substrates by the combination of soft-chemistry and three cost effective
lithographic techniques: (i) laser transfer lithography, (ii) soft nanoimprint lithography on Srdoped SiO2 sol-gel thin films and (iii) self-assembled SrCO3 nanoparticles reactive nanomasks.
Epitaxial α-quartz nanopillars with different diameters (down to 50 nm) and heights (up to 2000
nm) were obtained for the first time. This work proves the control over the shape, micro- and
nano-patterning of quartz thin films while preserving its crystallinity, texture and piezoelectricity.
This work opens up the opportunity to fabricate new high frequency resonators and high
sensitivity sensors relevant in different fields of application.

1. Introduction.
Piezoelectric materials are elements of motion sensors (accelerometers and gyroscopes),
oscillators and resonators present in practically any single electronic circuit. As a result, the

piezoelectric materials solves many technological challenges including high frequency and stable
oscillators, reducing energy consumption of devices and incorporating simple and efficient
inertial sensors for distance, movement and acceleration detection. The integration of high quality
epitaxial piezoelectric films and nanostructures on silicon is a milestone towards the expansion of
novel devices with the traditional Si-based complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
technology1. In addition, advances in micro and nanofabrication technologies, open the
possibility to implement a large scale integration of miniaturized piezoelectric materials into
innovative electromechanical devices with nanosized moving parts with prospective sensor
applications in electronics, biology and medicine2.
In this context, α-quartz is widely used for electronic applications: its piezoelectric properties
allow for an excellent control of the frequency in oscillators and for producing very selective
filters3. Since the eigen frequency of the quartz crystal is very sensitive to changes of its mass or
acceleration, this material is extremely convenient to implemented micro-resonators for sensing
applications (strength, humidity, acceleration, etc.) 4. However, α-quartz and other piezoelectric
sensing materials having extremely large quality factor (Q> 106)5, high temperature stability and
very low phase noise are only available as bulk single crystals. For this reason, all these excellent
sensing materials can only be configured as high performance transducers through direct bulk
micromachining or hybrid integration methods6
Nowadays, the lowest achievable thickness of quartz crystals is about 10 μm and 100 μm in
diameter, which in turn limits the working frequencies of the transducers (the resonance
frequency corresponds to half of the wavelength of the crystal thickness). few works have shown
sub-micron patterned quartz surfaces, such as those prepared by Laser Interference Lithography7
and by Faraday cage angled-etching technique8 or lithium niobiate nanostructures synthetized by
focused ion beam (FIB) technology9, although from bulk single crystals.

We recently developed the direct and bottom-up integration of epitaxial α-quartz thin films on
silicon substrate by chemical solution deposition (CSD)10, which overcomes the aforementioned
limitations. The method relies on the thermal devitrification and crystallization of dip-coated
mesoporous silica films, assisted by strontium alkaline earth cation in amphiphilic molecular
templates10a. This new approach opens the door for developing efficient quartz-based
piezoelectrics devices engineered from widely available and non-toxic compounds using
industrially scalable methods.
In the present work, we have taken advantage of an improved evolution of this chemical route10a
and we have combined it with a set of cost-effective top-down lithography techniques to fabricate
large scale epitaxial nanopatterned quartz thin films on silicon substrates with controllable nano
and microstructures. This work is, to our knowledge, the first example that shows the possibility
of engineering the integration on silicon of patterned quartz thin films, which precedes the
production of nanostructured and microelectromechanical systems, as previously highlighted11.
By engineering nanostructured quartz films on silicon, which are much thinner (200 nm - 1 µm)
than those obtained by top down technologies on bulk crystals, one can expect higher resonance
frequencies. In addition, the control of the porosity, texture, shape, micro- and nano-patterning of
quartz thin films opens up the opportunity to produce more efficient devices. This is supported by
the fact that nanostructured quartz thin films increase the specific area thus, enhancing the
sensing properties of the future device.

2. Results and discussions
To produce nanoscaled 1D (arrays of pillars) on epitaxial α-quartz thin films by silicon
micromachining, we have tested cost efficient lithographic techniques such as laser transfer
lithography technique12, Soft nanoimprint lithography13 and a novel plasma-assisted self-

assembled SrCO3 nanoparticles reactive nanomask etching. Such procedures do not require any
lithographic mask and allow obtaining a large scale and precise control of epitaxial quartz
nanostructures (see Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Schematics that summarizes the key steps that were applied to produce nano
lithographic patterns on epitaxial quartz thin films dependent of the film thickness.

We initially produced micrometric photolithographic patterns on 300 nm thick epitaxial quartz
films on silicon (100) to evaluate the crystal stability of quartz under an anisotropic plasma
etching process (see Fig.SI1). In this case, 5 µm wide lines of epitaxial quartz were achieved,
which did not undergo amorphization during the lithographic process. This feature was confirmed
by 2D X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Piezo-response Force Microscopy (PFM) on micro-

photolithographed samples (see Fig. SI1). The XRD analysis revealed the same (100) α-quartz
out of plane texture that the films had before the etching process (see Fig. SI1). PFM
measurements showed that the piezoelectricity of micro patterned quartz films was preserved (see
Fig.SI1 d and e), with the piezoelectric coefficient (d33) being comparable to that of the quartz
bulk material (i.e. 1.5 and 3.5 pm/V)14.

2.1.Direct patterning of epitaxial piezoelectric quartz thin films by Laser Interference
Lithography.
Next, we used Laser Interference Lithography (LIL, also known as holographic lithography) to
obtain direct sub-micro patterned epitaxial quartz films. LIL process is a top-down fabrication
technique that is currently used to selectively pattern single crystals into dense vertical
nanocolumn arrays7. This technique allows generating arrays of lines or dots in a photoresist film
from an interference pattern generated by a UV laser over cm2 surfaces and with pitches ranging
between 400 nm up to 2400 nm (see Fig. 1). The mask-less exposure of the photoresist layer
together with two or more coherent light beams offers a simple, low-cost, large-area
nanolithography technique12.
Figure 2a shows a first nano lithographic pattern on epitaxial quartz thin films on (100) silicon
substrate using LIL lithography. Low resolution Scanning Electron Microscopy image (SEM)
displays an ultra-dense network of quartz nanocolumns with a precise control over their diameter,
height and position. The Transmission Electron Microscopy image of the α-quartz/Si interface in
a 600 nm height nanopillar and the its corresponding Electron Diffraction pattern confirm that the
crystalline quality of epitaxial α-quartz has been preserved during the LIL and RIE etching
process (see Fig.2b).

Piezoelectric coefficient d33 estimated by PFM on quartz nanocolumns were compared with those
values obtained in dense quartz films before the lithographic process using an alternative method,
direct piezoelectric force microscopy (DPFM), recently developed by the A. Gomez et al.15 (see
Fig. SI2 and Fig. 2c). We employed DPFM measurements to obtain the piezoelectric
characterization of dense quartz film and compared the results with the case of nanocolumns. The
piezoelectric properties of nanopatterned epitaxial quartz films were measured by using PFM
technique in 800 nm thick nanocolumns (see Fig. 2c). Both piezoelectric coefficient (d33) are
similar and comparable to that of the quartz bulk material14 (i.e. d33(PFM) = 2±0.5 pm/V and
d33(DPFM) = 4±2 pC/N) confirming that the piezoelectric functionality of nanocolumns is preserved
(see Fig. 2d and S2, respectively). Notice that all DPFM measurements were compared with a
reference based in a commercial ferroelectric Periodically Poled Lithium Niobate (PPLN) sample
(see for more details Fig. SI3).
Graphical representation in Figure 2d shows the control of quartz nanocolumns height (up to 800
nm) as a function of the number of deposition of SiO2 layers. The followed multilayer film
synthesis consists on the sequential deposition and consolidation of several gel layers before a
final annealing treatment aiming to induce the epitaxial α-quartz growth (see more details in
experimental section). Fig. S4a presents a series of FEGSEM images corresponding to the cross
sections of dense quartz films before the lithographic process consisting of 1 up to 5 layers.
Notice that the thicknesses of the different multilayers films correspond to the final quartz
columnar heights plot in figure 2d. From the XRD measurements of Fig. S4b we can see that all
the films present the usual α-quartz (100) out of plane texture and thus, the intensity of the
reflections is proportional to the number of layers of the film. This demonstrates that the multilayer approach allows controlling the nanocolumn height produced by LIL lithography while
maintaining the crystallinity and crystal orientation. Moreover, the long range θ-2θ XRD pattern

and pole figure of a 5-layer lithographed film confirms the texture of the (100) α-quartz
crystallographic phase after the lithographic process. Nanocolumns conserve the (100) αquartz║(100) Si epitaxial relationship previously observed in dense films10a. Besides, no
supplementary peaks from other reflections or polycrystallinity signals appear in the θ-2θ.
With the combination of our multi-layer deposition approach with LIL lithography, we have
produced high aspect ratio epitaxial quartz columns with micrometric heights from dip-coated
films. This was possible because the multi-layer deposition approach circumvented the maximum
achievable thickness imposed by lateral tensile stresses that appeared during the densification of
the layers16. A key step to overcome this obstacle has been to perform a temperature treatment to
consolidate the gel layer (450ºC for 10 min in air atmosphere) after each deposition (See more
details in the experimental section).

Fig. 2. 1D Lithographic patterning of epitaxial quartz thin films using LIL process. (a) SEM image
of ultra-dense network of 600 nm thick epitaxial quartz nanocolumns. The inset image shows a low
resolution optical image of the sample. (b) Transmission Electron Microscopy image and electron
diffraction measurement (inset image) of the α-quartz/Si interface of a single nanocolumn. (c) DPFM
spectroscopic measurements on a 800 nm height quartz film obtaining with a loading rate of 95000 µN/s.
(d) Graphic that shows the control of quartz nanocolumns height with the number of multideposited silica
solgel layers before crystallization. (e) Long range θ-2θ XRD pattern with a perfect texture of the (100) αquartz crystallographic phase after lithographic process. The inset image shows a pole figure of a 5-layer
lithographed quartz film with (100) α-quartz║(100) Si epitaxial relationship.

2.2. Soft nanoimprint lithography on Sr-doped SiO2 sol-gel to nanostructurate epitaxial
quartz films.
As an alternative route to LIL lithographic process, we applied soft Nano-Imprint Lithography
(NIL), which combines top-down and bottom-up (sol-gel) approaches in order to produce
epitaxial quartz nanopillar arrays with a precise control of pillar diameters and heights and interpillar distances on silicon. We want to emphasize that with this methodology we have reached
unprecedented heights of 2 µm (see Figs. 3a and S5). The experimental procedure consisted in
the combination of dip-coating process to synthetize Sr-doped xerogel silica films of controlled
thicknesses on (100) silicon substrates with LIL and Nano-Imprint (NIL) lithographic techniques.
In a first top-down fabrication step, large scale Si (100) masters made of nanopillars arrays were
obtained by using LIL lithography and transferred by reactive ion etching at low pressure. Then,
a second step involved the preparation of high quality PolyDiMethylSiloxane (PDMS) molds
from Si(100) masters (see Fig. 3a) that produce perfectly imprinted Sr-doped silica nano-pillars
with controlled diameter and height on silicon, as illustrated in figure 3b (See more details in
experimental section).

Fig. 3. Optical images of Si (100) masters used along this work obtained by using LIL lithography
(a) FEG-SEM image of printed Sr-doped silica nano-pillars with controlled diameter (down to 350 nm)
and height (up to 2 µm) on silicon. The inset pictures shows FEG-SEM images at higher magnification of
pillars. (b) 3D AFM images showing silica nanostructured films prepared by NIL lithography in b. Below
you can distinguish the profile analysis of the AFM image in c, revealing a perfect transfer of the different
motives.

Finally, imprinted epitaxial (100) α-quartz nano-pillars arrays on silicon were obtained applying a
thermal treatment at 1000ºC for 5 hours (see Fig. 4). Both optical microscope and SEM images
shows Sr-doped silica xerogel nanopattern composed of 600 nm height columns before
crystallization process, see Fig. 4a. The crystallized sample is shown in Fig. 4b, which exhibits
the characteristic quartz grain boundaries at the nanostructured surface film (see optical image in
figure 4b). Atomic resolution HAADF image of a single quartz nanocolumn/silicon interface
reveals the epitaxial growth of quartz layer with an atomically sharp interface with the silicon
substrate as shown in Fig. 4d (see also Figs. S6 in S.I.). In order to attain both a continuous

nanostructured crystalline quartz film and a perfect nano-imprinted pattern, the dip coater
deposition conditions have to be optimized. Likewise, a first mesoporous silica xerogel adhesion
layer was needed to obtain an optimal print of PDMS molds on the Si(100) substrate (see Fig.
4c). This adhesion layer is consolidated at 450 °C during 5 min, before the deposition of the final
printable silica layer. Both layers have the same thickness (200 nm) and are deposited under the
same conditions i.e. at 25°C, 45% of humidity after applying a withdrawal speed of 300 mm
min−1 with the dip-coater. It is worth noting that the withdrawal speed of 300 mm min−1
determines the thickness of the film17 which, is indeed a critical factor to produce continuous
nanostructured quartz layers. Below this critical withdrawal speed, the nucleation and
crystallization of quartz layers was partial. As a result, fully crystallized films with a 100%
surface coverage cannot be obtained for film thicknesses below 200 nm (see Fig. S7a). This trend
is also reflected by the XRD patterns of the films which display higher intensities of the α-quartz
(00L) reflections for increasing withdrawal speeds (see Fig. S7b)

Fig. 4. Crystallization of Sr-doped silica xerogel nanopattern. (a) Optical image of Sr-doped silica
xerogel nanopattern composed of 500 nm height columns performed by NIL lithographic process before
crystallization process. The inset figure shows a higher magnification FEG-SEM image illustrating the
morphology of the Sr-doped silica xerogel nanopattern. (b) Optical image the Sr-doped silica xerogel
nanopattern sample after crystallization. Notice that is possible to observe the formation of typical quartz
grain boundaries. The inset images shows a higher magnification FEG-SEM image of the quartz
nanopattern (left side) and an optical images that exhibit the light diffraction after interaction with the
quartz nanocolumn patter (right side). (c) Low magnification high angle annular dark field (HAADF) Zcontrast image of a quartz nanocolumn grown on the Si substrate assisted by the Sr2+ catalyst at 1000 °C, 5
hours. (d) Atomic resolution Z-contrast image of a single (100)-oriented quartz nanocolumn viewed along
the [100]-crystallographic direction. Inset figures show the corresponding FFT of both the quartz film and
the silicon substrate. (d) θ-2θ XRD pattern with a perfect texture of the (100) α-quartz crystallographic
phase after lithographic process. The inset shows a rocking curve showing a mosaicity value of quartz of
1.7° (e)

To evaluate the piezoelectricity of the nanoimprinted quartz columns we employed PFM. The
obtained d33 value was of the same order as the dense quartz films before lithographic process
and the bulk material (see Fig. 5). The PFM amplitude image is represented in Figure 5a and the
inset shows the topographic AFM image of crystallized nanocolumns. Notice that the areas
surrounding the nanocolumns show a slight change in the PFM amplitude, the signal remains
constant both at the top of the columnar structures at the quartz film surrounding the base of these
pillars. The change of the PFM amplitude signal in the perimeter of the nanocolumns is attributed
to a topographic crosstalk artifact which is well known and reported by the community18. We
were able to corroborate the electromechanical behavior of our films by performing point-out
spectroscopy measurements, see Fig. 5b. The electromechanical behavior of the structures was
studied using frequency-sweeps to display

the PFM contact resonant circuit. The

electromechanical behavior is studied outside and inside of the nanocolumns by placing the AFM
tip in each respective position. The data shows an increase of resonant amplitude with an increase
of the applied AC bias, in a similar way as depicted in Fig. 2c, confirming that the
nanostructuration has not been detrimental to the electromechanical properties.
Likewise, this nanostructuration methodology of epitaxial quartz thin films on silicon by NIL
lithography is general for several kinds of patterns including lines as those shown in Fig. S8.

Fig 5. Piezoelectric response of epitaxial nanostructured quartz films using NIL lithographic
process. (a) PFM amplitude and topography (inset) recorded simultaneously while applying a tipsubstrate AC voltage of 10 V, showing area similar tip vibration level at the background film and top
nanostructures. Point-out spectroscopy measurements recorded on top of the structures and bottom film,
for different applied AC bias. (b) The data shows an increase of the PFM resonant frequency amplitude
with an increase of the applied AC bias, confirming our expectation that piezoelectric functionality is
preserved.

2.3.Self-assembled SrCO3 nanoparticles as nanomasks for lithographic patterning of
dense epitaxial quartz thin films on silicon.

Films with a Sr/SiO2 molar ratio of 0.05 exhibit an outcropping of SrCO3 nanoparticles at the
surface,

driven by a chemical reaction between SrO, CO2 and H2O, have been shown

elsewhere19. These observations revealed the assembly of sintered SrCO3 nanoparticles during
the annealing treatment at 1000°C, whereas now, as illustrated in Fig. 6, we exploit these SrCO3
nanoparticles as nanomasks to produce an array of quartz nanopillars from dense films. Indeed,
solid SrCO3 nanoparticles are extremely stabile under the reacting ion etching conditions. By this
simple approach, illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 6, one can produce arrays of quartz vertical
nanopillars having diameters down to 60 nm and a maximum height of 400 nm, depending on the
original quartz film thickness. This type of behavior has been reported for CaF2 nanoparticles
formed after a chemical reaction with the plasma etching20. In this case, the chemical

transformation of the CaxTi(1-x)O(2-x) present within the amorphous silica layer into the
homogeneous dispersions of CaF2 nanoparticles, was used as a particulate nanostencil system to
produce an array of silicon nanopillars20. In our case, the SrCO3 nanoparticles are formed during
quartz crystallization and remained extremely stable during the RIE etching process, acting as an
efficient nanomask that protects quartz from the plasma etching. This feature can be observed in
Figure 6 that shows SrCO3 nanoparticles before and after RIE process. Figure 6a and S9 show the
typical morphology and size of the SrCO3 nanoparticles on top of the epitaxial quartz thin film.
The efficacy of the process was investigated by electron microscopy and electron diffraction
characterization was used to assess the crystalline structure of the quartz nanopillars (see figure
6). The etching has been applied in 100W RF and 200W LF of an inductively coupled plasma
reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) reactor using CHF3/O2 gas mixture (see more details in
experimental section). The electron diffraction pattern of a single quartz nanopillar presented in
Fig. 6b reveals perfect quartz crystallinity similar to that of the initial dense quartz film.
The morphology of the motifs is conical rather than needle-like as a result of an isotropic etching
of CHF3/O2 flux. With the aim of producing networks of needle-like quartz nanostructures, we
used ionized gases and gas mixtures such as Ar, CHF3, SF6 in order to control the anisotropy of
the etching21. Unfortunately, under this etching conditions, quartz thin film and SrCO3
nanoparticles were totally destroyed after 4 min (see figure SI 10).

Fig. 6. SrCO3 nanoparticles as nanomasks to produce an array of quartz nanopillars. (a) FEG-SEM
image illustrating the morphology of sintered SrCO3 nanoparticles at 1000°C. The inset image shows a
small zone of picture a with a higher magnification. (b) FEG-SEM image illustrating the morphology of
quartz single crystal conical-like nanopillars after RIE etching of a dense film. The inset image shows a
small zone of picture b with a higher magnification. General schematic of RIE etching to produce first
nano lithographic patterns on epitaxial quartz thin films. (c) Electron diffraction pattern of a conical-like
nanopillar in c shows a perfect crystallinity after the nanomask lithographic process.

3. Conclusion

The combination of top-down and bottom-up methodologies enabled the nanostructuration of
piezoelectric quartz films, epitaxially grown on (100)-silicon substrates. We have used scalable
lithographic methodologies that do not require masks to generate highly ordered 1D quartz
patterns consisting of vertical quartz nanocolumns with diameters and heights ranging from 50
nm to 800 nm and 200 nm to 2 µm, respectively. The nanostructuration engineering of epitaxial
quartz films on silicon presented here is general for several kind of patterns, being produced

using exclusively low cost lithographic methodologies. LIL lithographic process allowed
preparing quartz nanocolumns with diameters between 400 nm and 800 nm and heights in the
range of 200 nm to 1000 nm, thanks to a novel multilayer film process that consists in the
sequential deposition and consolidation of several gel layers. With this combination of
methodologies, epitaxial 1D-quartz nanostructures maintain the crystallinity and epitaxial
orientation of (100) α-quartz║(100) Si. On the other hand, we have established the conditions to
shown that NIL lithography combined with sol gel process is a versatile method to replicate
several dimensions of Sr doped silica pillars depending on the characteristics of PDMS mould.
Specifically, a withdrawal speed of 300 mm min−1 at 25°C and 45% of humidity and the
deposition of adhesion layer are required to obtain a perfect nano-imprinted crystalline
continuous quartz pattern. Thus, the interplay between temperature, humidity, dip-coating
conditions, and epitaxial growth plays a key role for the fabrication epitaxial quartz nanopillars
on silicon substrates by NIL lithography. Finally, the controlled outcropping of SrCO3
nanoparticles on top of epitaxial quartz thin films allows producing quartz vertical nanopillars
having diameters down to 60 nm and a maximum height of 400 nm under the reacting ion etching
conditions. In all cases, the nanostructuring of quartz films by no means detrimental to the
piezoelectric properties of the film, which are preserved. We used two techniques,. DPFM and
PFM, to quantify the piezoelectric coefficient d33 of nanostructured and dense quartz films using
in all cases a reference based in a commercial ferroelectric Periodically Poled Lithium Niobate
(PPLN) sample.
This work demonstrates the integration on silicon of lithographic patterning of epitaxial quartz
thin films, which precedes the production of microelectromechanical systems. The control at the
nanoscale over the shape, micro- and nano-patterning of quartz thin films opens up the

opportunity to fabricate new high frequency resonators and highly sensitive sensors relevant in
different fields of application.

4. Experimental Section
4.1.Synthesis
Solution preparation: All the chemicals were from Sigma-Aldrich and without any further
purification. In a typical process, we first prepared Solution A by adding 0.7 g Brij-58 into 23.26
g absolute ethanol, then 1.5 g HCl (37%), 4.22 g tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and stirring the
solution for at least 4 h and not more than 18 h. After that, an aqueous solution of Sr2+ was
prepared with SrCl2x6H20 (Solution B). The solution used to prepare Sr-doped mesoporous silica
films by dip-coating (Solution C) was obtained by adding 275 μL Solution B into 10 mL of asprepared Solution A and stirring it for 10 min. The films were always obtained not later than 40
min after preparing solution C, as Sr2+ is not stable in the latter. To obtain perfect and continuous
crystallize quartz layers, we set the molarity of Solution B to 1M, which corresponds to a Sr/SiO2
molar ratio of 0.05 resulting in a final molar composition of Solution C of TEOS:Brij58:HCl:EtOH:SrCl2=1:0.3:0.7:25:0.05.
Gel films by dip-coating: layer gel films on Si (100) substrates were prepared with a ND-DC300
dip-coater (Nadetech Innovations) equipped with an EBC10 Miniclima Device to control the
surrounding temperature and relative humidity. During the dip-coating, we fixed the ambient
temperature and relative humidity as 25ºC and 40% and the thickness of film was controlled by
the withdrawal rate. In this study, all the films were made at withdrawal rate of 300 mm/min to
ensure the perfect crystallization and nanoimprint process. After dip-coating, as-prepared gel
films were consolidated with a thermal treatment of 5 min at 450 ºC under air atmosphere. In

order to reach thicker films, and therefore taller nanocolumns, multi-layer gel films were obtained
by repeating the required number of times the process of mono-layer preparation on the same
substrate.
Crystallization: As-prepared gel films were introduced into a furnace already at 1000ºC in air
atmosphere and held at this temperature for 300 min. The crystallized films were recovered after
natural cooling of the furnace to room temperature.
4.2.Structural Characterization and Piezoelectric Measurements
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD): The crystalline textures and rocking curve measurements of films
were performed on a Bruker D8 diffractometer (3 s acquisition every 0.02º in Bragg-Brentano
geometry, with a radiation wavelength of 0.154056 nm). Epitaxial relationship was analyzed
through X-ray diffraction measurements by using a Bruker AXS GADDS equipped with a 2D Xray detector. Optical Microscope: The optical images of films were obtained in an Olympus
BX51M optical microscope equipped with a Nikon DS-Fi3 camera. Field Emission Gun
Scanning Electron Microscopy (FEG-SEM): The microstructures of the films were investigated
with a FEG-SEM model Su-70 Hitachi, equipped with an EDX detector X-max 50 mm2 from
Oxford instruments. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM): Cross-sectional studies of films
were performed by using a FEI Titan3 operated at 80 kV and equipped with a superTwin®
objective lens and a CETCOR Cs-objective corrector from CEOS Company. Electron diffraction
studies were performed in a JEOL 1210 operated at 120 kV. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM):
The topography of nanostructured and dense quartz films was studied by AFM in a Park Systems
NX-Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) unit. Piezoelectric characterization through the direct
piezoelectric effect was made by Direct Piezoelectric Force Microscopy15 in an Agilent 5500LS
instrument using a low leakage amplifier (Analog Devices ADA4530) with Platinum solid tips
(Rockymountain Nanotechnology RMN-25 PtIr200H). PFM measurements were performed in an

Agilent 5500LS using a long-tip shank length tip22 to diminish electrostatic interaction (RMN
25PtIr300b) while working in the resonant frequency (∼ 80 kHz). A Periodically Poled Lithium
Niobate from Bruker AFM was used as a reference testing platform.
4.3.Quartz thin films nanostructuration
Optical lithography. First set of samples has been fabricated by top-down approach using
conventional optical photolithography following by anisotropic plasma etching. First, linear
micrometer scale patterns have been insolated in 1.1 µm thick photoresist layer (ECI from
MicroChemicals) using a conventional mask aligner (SUSS Mask Aligner MA 6). The patterns
where transferred on epitaxial quartz thin films (see figure S1) by performing plasma etching
using fluoroform chemistry, low pressure (5 mTorr), and 100 W bias power in pure capacitive
coupling plasma (CCP). Finally, the remaining ECI resist was stripped in acetone and rinsed in
isopropanol.
Laser interferential lithography (LIL)
In order to produce an epitaxial quartz nanocolumn pattern from dense films, we used a positive
photoresist, AZ MIR 701, which was exposed using the interferential lithography technique to
obtain a network of dots after the using a developer, AZ726. This procedure allows to rapidly
obtain periodic design over a large surface (∼cm2) without the need of a lithographic mask7. For
the quartz pattern in Figure 2, a 405 nm wavelength laser with a divergent beam was reflected by
two mirrors shifted with an angle of 10° which resulted in an interferometric pattern with a pitch
of 1 µm. To obtain the dot pattern two exposures were needed, a first exposure created periodic
lines and a second exposure shifted by 90° with respect to the first exposure generated
perpendicular periodic lines. The result of these two exposures, after development, generates the
dots. Finally, the samples were anisotropically etched by inductively coupled plasma reactive ion
etching (ICP-RIE) (model corial 200 IL) using CHF3/O2 gas mixture. RIE conditions for etching

of the sample and then produce a periodic pattern of quartz pillars of 1 µm depth were the
following: power:120W RF, 400 W LF, gas: CHF3 100 sccm-O2 20 sccm (standard cubic
centimeter per minutes), pressure: 10 mTorr and time: 10 min. ICP-RIE produces a dry and
directional etching induced by a mixture of CHF3 and O2 plasma.
Soft nano-imprint lithography (NIL) Preparation
Moulds preparation: Si masters were elaborated with different structures and heights using LIL
lithography. PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) reactants (90 w% RTV141A; 10 w% RTV141B from
BLUESIL) were transferred onto the master and dried at 70 °C for 1 h before unmoulding.
Then, a first silica layer seed was deposited at a constant relative humidity of 45% with
controlled withdrawal speeds of 300 mm min−1 in order to adjust the final thickness to 200 nm,
and was consolidated at 450ºC for 10 min. Importantly, this layer has two different
functionalities: (i) as a seed layer to produce a continuous and homogeneous epitaxial quartz thin
film on silicon and (ii) as an adhesion layer to faultlessly replicate the columnar shape from the
PDMS mould. Then, a new layer of the same solution was deposited under the same conditions
for printing. Surfactant Brij-58 included in the final sol-gel Solution C did not change the wetting
properties of the sol.
After the last dip-coating, the substrates were quickly introduced during 1 min into a customdesigned chamber under a controlled temperature of 25 °C using and a constant humidity of 45%.
Imprinting of sol–gel films with a PDMS mould involves the following steps. First, moulds were
degassed under vacuum (10 mbar) for 20 min before direct application on the as-prepared xerogel
films kept in a controlled environment, without additional pressure. After 1 min, the samples
were transferred to a 70 °C stove for 2 min and then to a 120 °C stove for 2 min to consolidate
the xerogel films before peeling off the PDMS mould. Next, the sol–gel replicas were annealed at

450 °C for 10 min for consolidation. Finally, sample was crystallized at 1000ºC for 5h in air
atmosphere.
Nanomasks lithography
Quartz samples covered by SrCO3 nanomasks were anisotropically etched by inductively coupled
plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) (model corial 200L) using CHF3/O2 gas mixture. The RIE
conditions to engrave the sample and then produce quartz nanopillars pattern of 400 nm depth
were the following: power:120W RF, 400 W LF, gas: CHF3 100 sccm-O2 20 sccm , flux:,
pressure: 10 mTorr and time: 10 min.
Isotropic etching conditions used in samples of Fig. S10 were the following: power: 100W RF,
200 W LF, gas: CHF3 80 sccm-O2 10 sccm , SF6 20 sccm, pressure: 10 mtorr and time: 4 min
( for a 300 nm thick quartz layer).
Notice that if requested the SrCO3 nanoparticles can be dissolved by dipping the sample into a
nitric acid solution (3 M) for 2 hours after quartz crystallization19.

Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (No.803004); the French
Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR), project Q-NOSS ANR ANR-16-CE09-0006-01; the
Spanish Ministry of Science Innovation and Universities in co-funding with European Social
funds through the Severo Ochoa Program for Centers of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0496)
and the Ramón y Cajal program (J.G., RyC-2012-11709); the Generalitat de Catalunya
(2017SGR00765). Q.Z. was financially supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC) with
No.201506060170. Q.Z.’s work was done as a part of the Ph.D program in Materials Science at
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. The authors thank the “Laboratorio de Microscopías
Avanzadas-Instituto de Nanociencia de Aragón” for offering their expertise in the preparation of
TEM cross-sections. A. Crespi from XRD diffraction service is acknowledged for pole figure
measurements. FEGSEM instrumentation was facilitated by the Institut des Matériaux de Paris
Centre (IMPC FR2482) and was funded by Sorbonne Université, CNRS and by the C’Nano
projects of the Région Ile-de-France. We thank David Montero for performing the FEGSEM
images.

1.
Vila-Fungueiriño, J. M.; Bachelet, R.; Saint-Girons, G.; Gendry, M.; Gich, M.; Gazquez, J.; Ferain,
E.; Rivadulla, F.; Rodriguez-Carvajal, J.; Mestres, N.; Carretero-Genevrier, A., Integration of functional
complex oxide nanomaterials on silicon. Frontiers in Physics 2015, 3.
2.
(a) Craighead, H. G., Nanoelectromechanical Systems. Science 2000, 290 (5496), 1532-1535; (b)
Ramesh, R.; Schlom, D. G., Orienting Ferroelectric Films. Science 2002, 296 (5575), 1975-1976; (c)
Warusawithana, M. P.; Cen, C.; Sleasman, C. R.; Woicik, J. C.; Li, Y.; Kourkoutis, L. F.; Klug, J. A.; Li, H.;
Ryan, P.; Wang, L.-P.; Bedzyk, M.; Muller, D. A.; Chen, L.-Q.; Levy, J.; Schlom, D. G., A Ferroelectric Oxide
Made Directly on Silicon. Science 2009, 324 (5925), 367-370.
3.
Bottom, V. E., Introduction to quartz crystal unit design (Van Nostrand Reinhold
electrical/computer science and engineering series). Van Nostrand Reinhold: New York, 1982.
4.
(a) Benes, E.; Gröschl, M.; Burger, W.; Schmid, M., Sensors based on piezoelectric resonators.
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 1995, 48 (1), 1-21; (b) Sauerbrey, G., Verwendung Von Schwingquarzen
Zur Wagung Dunner Schichten Und Zur Mikrowagung. 1959; Vol. 155, p 206-222.
5.
Galliou, S.; Goryachev, M.; Abbe, P.; Vacheret, X.; Tobar, M.; Bourquin, R., Quality Factor
Measurements of Various Types of Quartz Crystal Resonators Operating Near 4 K. 2015; Vol. 63, p 1-1.
6.
Danel, J. S.; Delapierre, G., Quartz: a material for microdevices. Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering 1991, 1 (4), 187.
7.
Santybayeva, Z.; Meghit, A.; Desgarceaux, R.; Teissier, R.; Pichot, F.; Marin, C. d.; Charlot, B.;
Pedaci, F. In Fabrication of quartz microcylinders by laser interference lithography for angular optical
tweezers, SPIE: 2016; p 5.
8.
Young-Ik Sohn, R. M., Vivek Venkataraman, Marko Lončar, Mechanical and optical nanodevices
in single-crystal quartz. arXiv.org > cond-mat > 2017.
9.
Lu, H.; Sadani, B.; Courjal, N.; Ulliac, G.; Smith, N.; Stenger, V.; Collet, M.; Baida, F. I.; Bernal, M.
P., Enhanced electro-optical lithium niobate photonic crystal wire waveguide on a smart-cut thin film.
Opt. Express 2012, 20 (3), 2974-2981.
10.
(a) Carretero-Genevrier, A.; Gich, M.; Picas, L.; Gazquez, J.; Drisko, G. L.; Boissiere, C.; Grosso, D.;
Rodriguez-Carvajal, J.; Sanchez, C., Soft-Chemistry-Based Routes to Epitaxial alpha-Quartz Thin Films with
Tunable Textures. Science 2013, 340 (6134), 827-831; (b) Au - Carretero-Genevrier, A.; Au - Gich, M.,
Preparation of Macroporous Epitaxial Quartz Films on Silicon by Chemical Solution Deposition. JoVE
2015, (106), e53543.
11.
Brinker, C. J.; Clem, P. G., Quartz on Silicon. Science 2013, 340 (6134), 818-819.
12.
Seo, J.-H.; Park, J.; Kim, S.-I.; Ju Park, B.; Ma, Z.; Choi, J.; Ju, B.-K., Nanopatterning by Laser
Interference Lithography: Applications to Optical Devices. 2015.
13.
Hamouda, F.; Bryche, J.-F.; Aassime, A.; Maillart, E.; Gâté, V.; Zanettini, S.; Ruscica, J.; Turover, D.;
Bartenlian, B., Soft nanoimprint lithography on SiO2 sol-gel to elaborate sensitive substrates for SERS
detection. AIP Advances 2017, 7 (12), 125125.
14.
Newnham, R. E., in Properties of materials: Anisotropy, Symmetry, Structure (Oxford University
Press. 2005.
15.
Gomez, A.; Gich, M.; Carretero-Genevrier, A.; Puig, T.; Obradors, X., Piezo-generated charge
mapping revealed through direct piezoelectric force microscopy. Nature Communications 2017, 8 (1),
1113.
16.
Landau, L.; Levich, B., Dragging of a Liquid by a Moving Plate. In Dynamics of Curved Fronts,
Pelcé, P., Ed. Academic Press: San Diego, 1988; pp 141-153.

17.
Faustini, M.; Louis, B.; Albouy, P. A.; Kuemmel, M.; Grosso, D., Preparation of Sol−Gel Films by
Dip-Coating in Extreme Conditions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2010, 114 (17), 7637-7645.
18.
Seol, D.; Kim, B.; Kim, Y., Non-piezoelectric effects in piezoresponse force microscopy. Current
Applied Physics 2017, 17 (5), 661-674.
19.
Drisko, G. L.; Carretero-Genevrier, A.; Gich, M.; Gazquez, J.; Ferrah, D.; Grosso, D.; Boissiere, C.;
Rodriguez-Carvajal, J.; Sanchez, C., Water-Induced Phase Separation Forming Macrostructured Epitaxial
Quartz Films on Silicon. Advanced Functional Materials 2014, 24 (35), 5494-5502.
20.
Faustini, M.; Drisko, G.; Letailleur, A.; Salas Montiel, R.; Boissiere, C.; Cattoni, A.; Haghiri-Gosnet,
A.-M.; Lerondel, G.; Grosso, D., Self-assembled Titanium Calcium Oxide Nanopatterns as versatile
Reactive Nanomasks for Dry Etching Lithographic Transfer with High Selectivity. 2012; Vol. 5.
21.
Li, L.; Abe, T.; Esashi, M., Smooth surface glass etching by deep reactive ion etching with SF6 and
Xe gases. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2003, 21 (6), 2545-2549.
22.
Gomez, A.; Puig, T.; Obradors, X., Diminish electrostatic in piezoresponse force microscopy
through longer or ultra-stiff tips. Applied Surface Science 2018, 439, 577-582.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Nanostructure engineering of epitaxial piezoelectric α-quartz
thin films on silicon
Q. Zhang1, 2 γ, D. Sánchez1 γ, R. Desgarceaux1 γ, A. Gomez2, P. Escofet-Majoral1, J. Oró-soler2, J.
Gazquez2, G. Larrieu3, B. Charlot1, M. Gich2, A. Carretero-Genevrier1*
1. Rudy Desgarceaux, Pau Escofet-Majoral, Dr. Benoit Charlot, Dr. Adrian Carretero-Genevrier
Institut d’Electronique et des Systemes (IES), CNRS, Universite Montpellier 2 860 Rue de Saint
Priest 34095 Montpellier, France
2. Qianzhe Zhang, Andres Gomez, Dr. Jaume Gazquez, Dr. Marti Gich
Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona ICMAB, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas CSIC, Campus UAB 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain
3. Guilliem Larrieu
LAAS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INP, Toulouse, France
γ These authors contributed equally to this work
E-mail: carretero@ies.univ-montp2.fr,
Keywords: Quartz, silicon, epitaxial growth, thin films, piezoelectricity, nanostructuration

Fig. S1. Photo-lithographic patterning of piezoelectric quartz thin films on silicon substrates.
(a and b) Lithographic patterning of epitaxial textured quartz thin films using anisotropic plasma etching.
(c) 2D diffraction pattern lithographed quartz sample. (d and e) PFM measurements of patterned epitaxial
quartz films.

Fig. S2. DPFM measurements on quartz dense films. (a) Force and Piezoelectric current vs Time (s)

for different applied forces on a 800 nm thick quartz film before lithographic process. Notice that
the force profile starts with a constant value, while at 1s the force is increased to a value of 380
µN in a 5 ms time step. Following this step, a constant force is re-settled for an additional 1s,
while at 2s, an unloading ramp is performed, reducing the applied force. While force is varied,
the current channel is recorded simultaneously; current is depicted in red squares. Scheme of the
spectroscopy experiments carried out in which the AFM tip applies a suitable force, within a
given time, collecting the charges generated by the direct piezoelectric effect. (b) Notice that a
constant force builds up a constant charge, hence the recorded current remains zero. However,
when the force is varied, through a loading or unloading event, there is an increase or decrease of
the charge build up, whereas a constant current can be seen at a constant force rate applied.
Curves performed in α-quartz dense film showing its piezoelectric response. The graphs were
obtained by averaging 4x4 matrix volume spectroscopy experiments in an area of 10 microns, in
order to depict the homogeneity of the sample. From these measurements we obtained a d33 of 4
± 2 pC/N in agreement with the piezoelectric coefficient of α-quartz. Notice that DPFM
methodology cannot be applied to nanostructured quartz films because the applied force breaks

quartz nanocolumns, making impossible this kind of measurement. However, we recently
combined PFM and DPFM methodology to quantify the piezoelectric coefficient d33 at the
nanoscale in BiFeO3 ferroelectric epitaxial oxide thin films1, therefore validating this approach.

Fig. S3. DPFM on PPLN tests sample. (a) Ferroelectric Periodically Poled Lithium Niobate

(PPLN) sample was used as a reference. For obtaining the location of ferroelectric domains,
DPFM-Si (Signal Input) and DPFM-So (Signal Output) scans were recorded, revealing the
expected antiparallel domain configuration for a ferroelectric known sample2. (b) Results of the
spectroscopy experiments, obtained under similar conditions to those used for quartz thin films,
in four different locations on the PPLN tests sample indicated in the an upwards polarization (PUP)
and downwards polarization (PDW) .

Fig. S4. FEG-SEM images of the cross section of the films with different number of layers. (a)

Note that the thickness of the different multilayers films corresponds to the final height of the
quartz columns plotted in figure 2e of the main manuscript. (b) XRD θ - 2θ scan showing the
linear increase of the intensity of the α-quartz (100) reflections as the number of layers increases.
(c) Pole figure for 5-layer film to show that the epitaxial growth is maintained.

Figure S5. (a) SEM cross-sectional images of 2 µm height Sr doped silica nanopillars before

crystallization. (b) SEM image of 2 µm height α-quartz nanopillars grown at 1000 °C for 5 hours
in air atmosphere.

Figure S6. Advanced Structural Characterization of nanostructured quartz films. (a) Low
magnification high angle annular dark field (HAADF) Z-contrast image of epitaxial quartz
nanocolumns grown on the Si substrate assisted by the Sr2+ catalyst at 1000 °C, 5 hours. (b)
Atomic resolution Z-contrast image of Quartz/silicon interface viewed along the [100]crystallographic direction. (c) Atomic resolution Z-contrast image of a single (100)-oriented
quartz nanocolumn viewed along the [100]-crystallographic direction. (d) FFT of both the quartz
film (green dashed line) and the silicon substrate (blue dashed line).

Figure S7. (a) Optical images of films prepared with different withdrawal speeds (indicated in the

axis below the images); (b) The areal coverages of α-quartz crystals is indicated next to the
images. The corresponding XRD θ-2θ measurements are shown in (c). Those films were prepared
in a relative humidity of 40% at 25ºC using Brij-58 as surfactant. The annealing treatment was at
1000ºC for 300 minutes in air atmosphere.

Fig S8. Piezoelectric response of epitaxial quartz lines using NIL lithographic process. (a)
AFM image of the topography and PFM amplitude recorded simultaneously under a tip-substrate
AC voltage of 10 V, showing the relationship between applied voltage and tip deflection on
epitaxial quartz nanostructure and surrender area. Notice that the PFM response preserves the
features of the topographic image, namely the quartz crystals surrounding the nanoline and the
top of the nanoline. (b) We found no significant differences between PFM response within and
outside the nanostripes. Thus, the piezoelectric functionality of the material is completely
preserved.

Fig. S9. (a) FEG-SEM image illustrating the morphology of nanocolumns obtained by nanomask

lithography. (b) TEM image illustrating the morphology of quartz single crystal conical-like
nanopillars after RIE etching of a dense film. The inset image shows the Sr M-edge EEL
spectrum acquired from the SrCO3 nanoparticle placed on top of the quartz nanocolumn.

Fig. S10. (a and b) FEG-SEM image illustrating how quartz surface is destroyed after using Gas
mixtures: CHF3, SF6. The failed objective of this experiment was to control the anisotropy of the etching.

1.
2.

J. M. Vila-Fungueiriño, A. Gómez, J. Antoja-Lleonart, J. Gázquez, C. Magén, B. Noheda and A.
Carretero-Genevrier, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20155-20161.
A. Gomez, M. Gich, A. Carretero-Genevrier, T. Puig and X. Obradors, Nature Communications,
2017, 8, 1113.

