The Particle and Energy Cost of Entanglement of Hawking
Radiation with the Final Vacuum State
Robert M. Wald∗
Enrico Fermi Institute and Department of Physics

arXiv:1908.06363v2 [gr-qc] 27 Sep 2019

The University of Chicago
5640 South Ellis Avenue,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Abstract
A semiclassical analysis shows that in the process of black hole formation and evaporation, an
initial pure state will evolve to a mixed state, i.e., information will be lost. One way of avoiding this
conclusion without invoking drastic modifications of the local laws of physics in a low curvature
regime would be for the information to be restored at the very end of the evaporation process.
It is normally envisioned that this would require a final burst of particles entangled with the
early time Hawking radiation. This would imply the emission of an extremely large number of
particles from an object of Planck size and mass and would appear to be blatantly ruled out by
energy considerations. However, Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh have analyzed a (1+1)-dimensional
moving mirror analog of the Hawking process and have found that, in this model, information is
restored via entanglement of the early time Hawking radiation with vacuum fluctuations in the
spacetime region to the future of the event where the mirror returns to inertial motion. We analyze
their model here and give a precise formulation of this entanglement by introducing the notion of
“Milne particles.” We then analyze the inertial particle and energy cost of such an entanglement of
Hawking radiation with vacuum fluctuations. We show that, in fact, the entanglement of early time
Hawking radiation with vacuum fluctuations requires the emission of at least as many late time
inertial particles as Hawking particles. Although the energy cost can be made small in the (1 + 1)dimensional mirror system, this should not be the case for the (3 + 1)-dimensional evaporating
black hole system. Thus, vacuum entanglement has the same difficulties as the more usual burst
scenarios for attempting to avoid information loss.

∗

rmwa@uchicago.edu

1

Contents

I. Introduction

2

II. The Definition of “Particles” in Quantum Field Theory
III. Rindler and Milne Particles in (1 + 1)-Dimensional Minkowski Spacetime
IV. The Moving Mirror Spacetime of Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh
V. Vacuum Entanglement of Hawking Radiation in the Moving Mirror Spacetime
VI. The Inertial Particle and Energy Cost of Vacuum Entanglement
VII. Vacuum Entanglement in Black Hole Evaporation
References

I.

5
7
12
15
18
24
27

Introduction

The complete gravitational collapse of a body in classical general relativity is believed
to always result in the formation of a black hole. As discovered by Hawking [1], particle
creation will occur in the vicinity of the black hole and result in a thermal flux of particles
to infinity. In a semiclassical analysis, this particle flux is described by an exactly thermal
density matrix due to the entanglement of the Hawking particles reaching infinity with
“particles” inside the black hole [2]. The fact that the Hawking radiation is in a mixed state
before the black hole has evaporated is not generally considered to be problematic, since the
full quantum state (including the degrees of freedom inside the black hole) is pure. However,
the loss of energy of the black hole due to Hawking radiation should result in its complete
evaporation within a finite time. In a semiclassical analysis, all that remains after black hole
evaporation is the mixed state of the Hawking radiation. Thus, semiclassically, an initial
pure state will evolve to a mixed state. For reasons I have not been able to understand
during the course of the past 40 years, this is widely viewed as being highly problematic.
The conflict between this view and the semiclassical analysis is referred to as the black hole
information loss paradox.
2

If in order to avoid the conclusion of information loss, the semiclassical picture that
gives rise to this conclusion must be modified. As reviewed in [3], there are four basic
logical possibilities for doing so: (I) No black hole actually forms in collapse, e.g., there is
tunneling to a “fuzzball” [4]. (II) Major departures from semiclassical theory occur during
the evaporation process, e.g., the event horizon is converted to a “firewall” [5]. (III) The
semiclassical analysis remains valid until the black hole reaches the Planck scale, but then
the black hole stops evaporating, leaving behind a “remnant” that keeps the total state pure.
(IV) The semiclassical analysis remains valid until the black hole reaches the Planck scale,
and all of the “information” stored within the black hole then comes out in a “final burst.”
Possibilities (I) and (II) require general relativity and/or quantum field theory to fail
catastrophically in a low curvature regime, where, a priori, one would expect these descriptions to be valid. If the “remnants” of possibility (III) do not interact with the outside
world, it is not clear what good is done by having “information” present that is inaccessible;
if they do, then they should be thermodynamically favored over all other types of matter and
presumably should be spontaneously produced at a high rate. Finally, if the “final burst” of
possibility (IV) consists of emission of particles that are entangled in an ordinary way with
the Hawking radiation particles, then an object of Planck mass and Planck size would have
to emit as many particles—each, presumably, of Planck frequency—in the burst as there
were particles in the Hawking radiation. This is not energetically possible.
However, several years ago, an analysis by Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh [6] suggested
that there may be a different way of implementing possibility (IV). These authors considered
the model of a mirror in (1+1)-dimensions that starts in inertial motion and then accelerates
in such a manner as to emit exactly thermal Hawking-like radiation for a long period of time.
The mirror then becomes inertial again. This is an entirely “unitary” process—no black hole
or singularity is present— so the full state of the quantum field must be pure at all times.
The purity of the state during the emission process while the mirror is accelerating can
be understood as a consequence of entanglement of the Hawking radiation with “partner
particles” that are present outside of the mirror. These partner particles eventually enter
the region to the future of the event at which the mirror becomes inertial again; they then
“bounce off” the mirror and go back out to infinity at late times. However, the state of the
quantum field in the region to the future of the event at which the mirror becomes inertial
is indistinguishable from the ordinary vacuum state for that inertial mirror. In a sense
3

that will be made more precise in this paper, these “partner particles” are, in fact, merely
vacuum fluctuations in this region. Thus, in this model, the Hawking radiation is “purified”
by its entanglement with vacuum fluctuations in the future region! There is no obvious
energy cost to doing this. In the review [3], we considered such vacuum entanglement to be
a “potentially viable” way of avoiding information loss in black hole evaporation.
The main purpose of this paper is to analyze the inertial particle and energy cost of the
sort of vacuum entanglement with Hawking radiation that occurs in the model of Hotta,
Schutzhold, and Unruh [6]. Although there is no “direct cost” of this entanglement in
that all of the “information” about the Hawking radiation is stored in late time vacuum
fluctuations, there is an “indirect cost” in that these vacuum fluctuations can no longer be
correlated with other vacuum fluctuations that they would have been correlated with in the
global vacuum state. We will show that this implies that the number of inertial particles
emitted at late times must be at least as large as the number of Hawking radiation particles
emitted at early times. In the (1 + 1)-dimensional mirror model, the energy of these late
time particles can be made very small by “turning off” only the acceleration of the mirror
(i.e., keeping its velocity unchanged rather than returning it to rest) in the final inertial era.
However, if a similar vacuum entanglement occurs in the (3 + 1)-dimensional evaporating
black hole case, causality requires that these particles emerge from a Planck scale region
near the evaporation event. It follows that for evaporating black holes, the particle and
energy cost of information restoration via vacuum entanglement is the same as for the usual
burst scenario. Thus, we conclude that vacuum entanglement does not provide a viable way
of avoiding information loss for evaporating black holes.
In section II, we briefly review the notion of “particles” in quantum field theory and
the freedom in their definition. In section III, we consider (1 + 1)-dimensional Minkowski
spacetime and show how the Minkowski vacuum can be alternatively described in terms
of both Rindler particles and Milne particles. In section IV, we describe the key features
of the moving mirror model of Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh [6]. In section V, we give a
precise description of the final “out” state in this model, using an unconventional notion of
“particles.” In section VI, we then consider the ordinary inertial particle content of the “out”
state and show that there must be at least as many inertial particles at late times as there
were Hawking particles at early times. If the mirror is brought to rest at late times, we show
that the late time inertial particles must carry much more energy than the energy emitted
4

in Hawking radiation. However, we show that if the acceleration is merely turned off at late
times without changing the velocity of the mirror, then these particles will carry very little
energy. Finally, in section VII we consider an analogous vacuum entanglement of Hawking
radiation particles for an evaporating black hole in (3+1)-dimensions. The analogous vacuum
entanglement also requires the emission of at least as many inertial particles at late times as
there were Hawking particles at early times, but in this case the inertial particles must be
of Planck scale energy. Thus, the purification of Hawking radiation by entanglement with
vacuum fluctuations in the final Minkowski region suffers from exactly the same problems
as the usual “final burst” scenarios for avoiding information loss.
We restrict consideration in this paper to the theory of a free, real, massless Klein-Gordon
scalar field. The scale invariance of this theory will play an essential role in our analysis.

II.

The Definition of “Particles” in Quantum Field Theory

Quantum field theory is—as its name suggests—the quantum theory of fields. “Particles”
do not play any fundamental role in the formulation of quantum field theory. This fact
becomes particularly evident in the study of quantum field theory in a general, nonstationary,
curved spacetime, where there are many inequivalent ways to define a notion of “particles,”
and no way appears “preferred.” Well defined physical predictions can be made by directly
considering the field observables and their coupling to other systems, without introducing a
notion of “particles.”
Nevertheless, a natural and very useful notion of “particles” can be defined in stationary,
globally hyperbolic spacetimes. In essence, for a massless Klein-Gordon field, one defines
defines a “one-particle Hilbert space” H as the positive frequency solutions to the KleinGordon equation
∇a ∇a φ = 0

(1)

Z

(2)

with finite Klein-Gordon norm
||ψ||2KG

= 2 Im

Σ

ψ̄na ∇a ψ dΣ

where the bar denotes complex conjugation and the integral is taken over a Cauchy surface
Σ with unit normal na . One can then define a Fock space F (H) associated with this
one-particle Hilbert space. Finally, one defines the quantum scalar field operator φ on
5

F (H) in terms of annihilation and creation operators on this Fock space. Details of this
construction can be found, e.g., in section 4.3 of [7]. States in F (H) have a natural particle
interpretation, which corresponds to the effects on a quantum mechanical system (“particle
detector”) resulting from interaction with the quantum scalar field.
The requirement that the spacetime be stationary (with a globally timelike Killing field)
was needed in the above construction in order to define the notion of “positive frequency
solutions” and to ensure positivity of the Klein-Gordon norm, eq. (2). However, the above
construction will work mathematically if one can define any subspace, P, of smooth, complex
solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation satisfying the following properties: (i) The KleinGordon product eq. (2) is positive-definite on P. (ii) The complex conjugate subspace P̄ is
orthogonal to P in the Klein-Gordon product, i.e., for any ψ1 , ψ2 ∈ P we have
Z
Im ψ1 na ∇a ψ2 dΣ = 0 .

(3)

Σ

(iii) P and P̄ are suitably “complete” in the sense that any smooth solution, χ, to eq. (1)
with initial data of compact support can be written as χ = ψ1 + ψ̄2 with ψ1 , ψ2 ∈ P. Given
a subspace P satisfying (i)-(iii), one can define H to be the completion of P in the KleinGordon norm eq. (2). One can then define F (H) and the field operator φ on F (H) as in
the previous paragraph. States in F (H) are, of course, automatically labeled by “particle
content,” but “particles” defined in this manner do not correspond to how a physical “particle
detector” system would behave under interactions with the quantum field—except in the
case of a stationary spacetime with P chosen to be the positive frequency solutions.
If one makes two different allowed choices of subspace, P1 , P2 , one will obtain two different
constructions (F (H1 ), φ1), (F (H2 ), φ2 ) of Hilbert spaces and quantum field operators defined
on these Hilbert spaces. One may ask whether these constructions are unitarily equivalent,
i.e., whether there exists a unitary map U : F (H1 ) → F (H2 ) such that φ2 = Uφ1 U −1 . If such
a U exists, then the constructions differ only by a labeling of states in terms of “particles.”
If there were only finitely many linearly independent solutions of the Klein-Gordon equation
(1)—i.e., if φ had only a finite number of “modes”—then unitary equivalence would always
hold. However, since there are infinitely many modes of φ—and thus P and H are always
infinite dimensional—unitary equivalence of different constructions need not hold.
If (F (H1 ), φ1 ) and (F (H2 ), φ2) are unitarily equivalent, it is not difficult to explicitly
solve for the unitary map U : F (H1 ) → F (H2 ) (see, e.g., section 4.4 of [7]). However, even
6

when (F (H1 ), φ1 ) and (F (H2 ), φ2) are not unitarily equivalent, one can write down a formal
expression for UΨ1 for any Ψ1 ∈ F (H1 ). This formal expression will involve a divergent sum
over infinitely many particle modes in F (H2 ). The divergence of this expression reflects the
fact that no state in F (H2 ) corresponds exactly to Ψ1 with respect to all field observables.
An interpretation of the formal, divergent expression for UΨ1 for the case of unitarily
inequivalent constructions, (F (H1 ), φ1 ) and (F (H2 ), φ2 ), can be given as follows. Although
no state in F (H2 ) corresponds exactly to Ψ1 for all field observables, if one is interested only
in a finite number of field observables, one can suitably truncate the divergent expression for
UΨ1 to obtain a normalizable state in F (H2 ) that provides an arbitrarily good approxima-

tion1 to Ψ1 . In the following sections, we will give formulas for a state in one representation

written as a formal expression for a state in a unitarily inequivalent representation. These
formulas should be interpreted in the above manner.
The fact that there are (infinitely many) inequivalent Hilbert space constructions of the
theory—and, in general spacetimes, no construction appears to be “preferred”—provides
the main motivation for formulating the theory via the algebraic approach. In the algebraic
approach, one starts with an algebra of field observables and defines states as positive linear
functionals on this algebra. The GNS construction then shows that every state in the
algebraic sense can, if fact, be realized as a Hilbert space vector in some representation of the
field algebra. Thus, the algebraic approach allows all states in all Hilbert space constructions
of the theory. It enables one to formulate the theory without the awkwardness of effectively
being forced to arbitrarily choose a particular Hilbert space construction from the outset.
In the algebraic approach, one can see clearly that divergent expressions for states such as
we will encounter below are not a difficulty of the theory but rather an artifact of trying to
write a state as a vector in a Hilbert space representation to which it does not belong.

III.

Rindler and Milne Particles in (1 + 1)-Dimensional Minkowski Spacetime

Consider a massless Klein-Gordon scalar field in (1+1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime,
(R2 , ηab ). Minkowski spacetime possesses a globally timelike translational symmetry, which
can be used to define a notion of “positive frequency solutions,” which, in turn, can be
1

For the case where the field observables are bounded operators with the structure of a C ∗ -algebra, this
statement can be formulated in a precise manner via Fell’s theorem [8].

7

used to define a notion of “particles” and a corresponding Fock space construction of the
quantum field theory. In fact, however, infrared divergences arise in this construction: For
R
test functions f : R2 → R for which d2 xf 6= 0, the positive frequency part of the advanced

minus retarded solution with source f has infinite Klein-Gordon norm, eq. (2). We will deal

with this issue, in the Fock space construction, by defining the smeared field operator, φ(f ),
R
only for test functions f for which d2 xf = 0. This restriction will be of no consequence

for our considerations below.

Minkowski spacetime also possesses Lorentz boost symmetry. The Lorentz boost Killing
field is given in terms of global inertial coordinates (t, x) by
ba = κ[x(∂/∂t)a + t(∂/∂x)a ]

(4)

where we have chosen to normalize ba so that ba ba = −1 on the worldline with acceleration
a = κ. In terms of the null coordinates
u = t − x,

v =t+x

(5)

we have
ba = κ[−u(∂/∂u)a + v(∂/∂v)a ]

(6)

The boost Killing field is null on the two “Rindler horizons,” i.e., the two null straight lines
u = 0, v = 0 passing through the origin. The Rindler horizons divide Minkowski spacetime
into 4 wedges, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The orbits of the boost Killing field ba are futuredirected timelike in “Rindler wedge I” and are past-directed timelike in “Rindler wedge II.”
We can treat each of wedge I and wedge II as a stationary, globally hyperbolic spacetime in
its own right. We can thereby perform the stationary quantization construction described
in the previous section in wedges I and II, using ba and −ba , respectively, to define a notion
of “time translation symmetry.” The notion of “particles” thereby obtained in wedges I and
II corresponds to the response of a “particle detector” following an orbit of ba , i.e., to the
particle content “seen” by a uniformly accelerating observer.
Let HI denote the one-particle Hilbert space obtained in Rindler wedge I using the boost

Killing field, ba , to define “positive frequency” there. Similarly, let HII denote the oneparticle Hilbert space obtained in Rindler wedge II using −ba (which is future directed in
wedge II) to define “positive frequency” there. The key fact that underlies the Unruh effect
is as follows: Let fIω be a wave packet in region I that is positive frequency with respect
8

ka
III Milne
ba

II Rindler

I Rindler

IV Milne

FIG. 1. (1 + 1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime, divided into the wedges I, II, III, and IV.

to ba , with frequency peaked sharply about ω. Let fIIω be the wave packet in region II
obtained by wedge reflection of fIω followed by complex conjugation, i.e., in wedge II (i.e.,
for u > 0 and v < 0) we define
fIIω (u, v) = f¯Iω (−u, −v)

(7)

Then fIIω is positive frequency with respect to −ba in wedge II. It follows that
F1ω = fIω + e−πω/κ f¯IIω

(8)

F2ω = fIIω + e−πω/κ f¯Iω

(9)

and

are purely positive frequency with respect to inertial time (see, e.g., section 5.1 of [7]). This
implies that the Minkowski vacuum |0iM is given in terms of Rindler particles by2 [7]
!
X
|0iM = Πi
e−nπωi /κ |niiI |niiII
(10)
n

Here the product Πi is taken over a basis {fiI } of HI , |niiI denotes the state of n Rindler
particles in the mode fiI , and |niiII denotes the state of n Rindler particles in the mode
fiII . Thus, |0iM consists is an entangled state of Rindler particles in wedges I and II.
When restricted to a single Rindler wedge |0iM is precisely a thermal state at temperature
T = κ/2π. This latter fact holds much more generally (i.e., not just for a free field), as
implied by the Bisognano-Wichmann theorem [9].
2

The right side of eq. (10) does not define a normalizable state in F (HI ) ⊗ F (HII ). This formula should
be interpreted in the manner described near the end of section II.

9

From the point of view of an inertial observer, the Rindler particles that are present in
the Minkowski vacuum state |0iM can be interpreted as a manifestation of the presence of
vacuum fluctuations. The excitation of a particle detector carried by an accelerating observer
would be viewed by an inertial observer as having been caused by a vacuum fluctuation. The
entanglement between Rindler particles in wedges I and II seen in eq. (10) is a manifestation
of the fact that vacuum fluctuations in wedges I and II are correlated.
The above result expressing the Minkowski vacuum in terms of Rindler particles is very
well known. It is much less well known—but, nevertheless, not unknown (see, e.g., section
IV of [10])—that for scale invariant fields, such as the massless Klein-Gordon field, a similar
quantization can be performed in wedges III and IV of fig. 1. Here we use the dilation
conformal Killing field
k a = κ[t(∂/∂t)a + x(∂/∂x)a ] = κ[u(∂/∂u)a + v(∂/∂v)a ]

(11)

to define a notion of time translation symmetry in wedge III, and we use −k a in wedge IV.

In this case, it is essential that the quantum field be scale invariant, since otherwise k a would

not define a symmetry. We have chosen the (arbitrary) normalization of k a to correspond
with our (arbitrary) normalization of ba . Note that wedges III and IV are (1+1)-dimensional
Milne universes [11], i.e. they are FLRW models, with the orbits of k a defining the FLRW
observers and with the hyperbolas orthogonal to k a defining the FLRW time slicing. The
time coordinate associated with k a is the usual FLRW conformal time coordinate.
We can define the one-particle Hilbert space HIII for wedge III as the solutions in that

wedge that are positive frequency with respect to k a . We can similarly define HIV for wedge

IV as the solutions in that wedge that are positive frequency with respect to −k a . We

will refer to this quantum field construction in wedges III and IV as “Milne quantization”
and will refer to the elements of HIII and HIV as “Milne particles.” Although “Rindler
particles” in wedge I could be detected in a straightforward manner using a rigid particle
detector carried by an accelerating observer, a particle detector of “Milne particles” in wedge
III would need to expand with the Milne observers and be coupled to the field in a scale
invariant manner.
In fact, the Milne positive frequency solutions in wedges III and IV coincide precisely
with the Rindler positive frequency solutions in wedges I and II. Specifically, a left-moving
Rindler particle mode in wedge I will cross the horizon at x = t with x > 0 and become a
10

Milne particle mode in wedge III. Similarly, a right-moving Milne particle mode in wedge
IV becomes a Rindler particle mode in wedge I, a left-moving Milne particle mode in wedge
IV becomes a Rindler particle mode in wedge II, and a right-moving Rindler particle mode
in wedge II becomes a Milne particle mode in wedge III. These results follow immediately
from the fact that, by inspection, ba = k a when x = t, whereas ba = −k a when x = −t. By
definition, a Rindler particle mode in wedge I is a solution in wedge I that positive frequency
with respect to ba . A left moving Rindler particle mode in wedge I will propagate through
the horizon x = t, x > 0 that forms the boundary between wedges I and III. On the horizon,
the mode will be positive frequency with respect to ba . But since k a = ba on the horizon, it
is also positive frequency with respect to k a on the horizon. It then follows immediately that
the solution will be positive frequency with respect to k a throughout wedge III, as claimed.
The other claims follow similarly. Thus, if we decompose the one-particle Hilbert spaces HI ,
HII , HIII , and HIV into their left and right moving parts, we have
HIL ≡ HIIIL ,

HIR ≡ HIV R ,

HIIL ≡ HIV L ,

HIIR ≡ HIIIR .

(12)

It follows immediately from eq. (12) that the relationship between inertial positive frequency solutions and positive frequency solutions with respect to “Milne time” in wedges
III and IV is exactly the same as the relationship between inertial positive frequency solutions and positive frequency solutions with respect to Rindler time in wedges I and II.
Consequently, using eq. (10), we can immediately write down the following expression for
the Milne particle content of the Minkowski vacuum
|0iM = Πi

X
n

e−nπωi /κ |niiIII |niiIV

!

(13)

Here |niiIII is a state of n Milne particles in wedge III in mode fiIII that is sharply peaked
near frequency ωi , whereas |niiIV is the corresponding state of n Milne particles in wedge
IV in the mode, fiIV , obtained by reflection of fiIII through the origin followed by complex
conjugation. Again, the product over a basis of such modes is taken. Thus, |0iM is an
entangled state of Milne particles in wedges III and IV. When restricted to a single Milne
wedge, |0iM is precisely a thermal state of Milne particles at temperature T = κ/2π. This
result also is a consequence of the Hislop-Longo theorem [12]. As in the Rindler case,
from the point of view of an inertial observer, the Milne particles that are present in the
Minkowski vacuum state |0iM would be interpreted as a manifestation of the presence of
11

vacuum fluctuations. The entanglement of the Milne particles in wedges III and IV seen in
eq. (13) would be interpreted as a manifestation of the correlations in vacuum fluctuations
in wedges III and IV.
Using eq. (12), we may also write eq. (10) in terms of right and left moving particles as
!
!
X
X
−nπωi /κ
−mπωj /κ
|0iM = Πi,j
e
|niiIIIR|niiIR
e
|mijIIIL |mijIIL
(14)
n

m

This shows that in the Minkowski vacuum, the right moving Milne particles in region III are
entangled with corresponding right moving Rindler particles in region I (across the horizon
x = t), whereas left moving Milne particles in region III are entangled with left moving
Rindler particles in region II (across the horizon x = −t).
Finally, we comment that for Minkowski spacetime of dimension d > 2, the boost Killing
field ba is timelike in the wedges I and II defined by the null planes t = ±x. Rindler
quantization can again be carried out in these wedges, and the Minkowski vacuum again
can be expressed in terms of Rindler particles by eq. (10). On the other hand, the dilation
conformal Killing field k a is timelike in the future and past null cones t = ±r. For a massless
scalar field, Milne quantization can again be carried out in these future and past light cones,
and the Minkowski vacuum can again be expressed in terms of Milne particles by eq. (13).
However, it is only in 1 + 1 dimensions that the null planes and null cones coincide, so that
the Rindler and Milne particles can be identified. Thus, although eqs. (10) and (13) hold in
Minkowski spacetime of any dimension, eqs. (12) and (14) hold only in (1 + 1)-dimensions.

IV.

The Moving Mirror Spacetime of Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh

We turn now to consideration of the moving mirror spacetime considered by Hotta,
Schutzhold, and Unruh [6]. The set-up is illustrated in fig. 2. The thick black line represents the trajectory of a mirror in (1 + 1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime. The motion
of the mirror can be divided into the following 3 eras:
1. At early times, t < −C (with C > κ, with κ being the constant appearing in eq. (15)
below), the mirror is at rest at x = 0.
2. At u = −C, the mirror begins to accelerate to the left. After a transition period (shown
as a sharp corner in the figure, but the actual transition is assumed to be smooth),
12

the mirror follows a trajectory given in terms of the null coordinates v = t + x and
u = t − x by

1
v = − e−κu .
κ

(15)

It follows this trajectory starting at retarded time u = 0 and continuing until u = u1 ,
where κu1 ≫ 1. Note that this trajectory asymptotes to the null line v = 0.
3. Beginning at u = u1 , the mirror begins transitioning back to inertial motion, and it
is assumed to have become inertial by the retarded time u = u0 at which the mirror
trajectory intersects the null line v = 0. (The line v = 0 is shown in fig. 2 as the black
dashed line with slope −1; the line u = u0 is shown as the black dashed line with
slope +1.) In fig. 2 the mirror is shown as returning to rest at late times, but all that
is necessary is that the mirror be inertial for v > 0. Indeed, a case of interest in our
analysis will be one where the velocity of the mirror remains very large at late times.
The return to inertial motion is assumed to be smooth, even though it is depicted as
a sharp transition in fig. 2.
A massless quantum scalar field is assumed to be present in the spacetime to the right of
the mirror and to satisfy Dirichlet boundary conditions at the mirror. In the initial period,
where the mirror is at rest, the scalar field is assumed to be in its ground/vacuum state for
the Minkowski half-space with a static mirror. Our analysis of the behavior of the scalar
field in this spacetime will be based upon the following two key observations:
• By assumption, the mirror is in inertial motion for u ≥ u0 . Consider the spacetime
region u > u0 , i.e., the region lying above the black dashed line with slope +1 shown
in fig. 2. We claim that the state of the quantum field in this region is identical to
that of the ground/vacuum state for the given inertial motion of the mirror in this
region. To see this, we note that the backwards in time propagation of the field starting
from any event in the region u > u0 is determined by the past-directed null geodesics
starting in this region. The null geodesics that move towards the right (going backward
in time) go directly to past null infinity. The null geodesics that move towards the
left (going backwards in time) bounce off the mirror when it is in its final inertial
state and then go to past null infinity. Thus, none of the null geodesics starting in
the region u > u0 “see” the non-inertial motion of the mirror. If follows that the
13

f¯1
u0
f2

h
I+

I−

¯1
f˜
h̃

mirror
FIG. 2. The moving mirror spacetime of Hotta, Schutzhold, and Unruh (see text).

quantum field φ also does not “see” the non-inertial motion, i.e., all of the correlation
functions hφ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn )i of the quantum field in the region u > u0 are identical to
the correlation functions that would occur if the mirror was in its final inertial motion
at all times.
• Consider a wavepacket h(u) at future null infinity of (inertial) positive frequency
peaked near ω that emerges at a retarded time corresponding to the era when the mir-

14

ror undergoes the motion eq. (15), as illustrated in fig. 2. Propagate this wavepacket
backwards in time. This wavepacket will “bounce off” of the mirror and become a
wavepacket with time dependence at past null infinity that goes as
h̃(v) ∼ exp(−iωu(v)) ∼ exp[i

ω
ln(−κv)] .
κ

(16)

Thus, the blueshift of the wavepacket resulting from its reflection by the mirror is the
same as would occur if the wavepacket propagated near the horizon of a black hole of
surface gravity κ in the Hawking effect—which is why the mirror motion eq. (15) was
chosen. Thus, by the same analysis as originally given for the Hawking effect [1], [2],
the mirror will emit Hawking radiation to I + during the era 0 < u < u1 where its
motion is given by eq. (15). Note that if we identify the region v < 0 of I − in fig. 2
with the portion v < 0 of I − of fig. 1 corresponding to the Milne wedge IV, then for
the normalization of k a given by eq. (11), h̃(v) has frequency ω with respect to Milne
time −κ−1 ln(−v).
V.

Vacuum Entanglement of Hawking Radiation in the Moving Mirror Spacetime

We now consider particle creation in the spacetime of fig. 2. To do so, we need definitions
of “ingoing particles” at past null infinity, I − , and “outgoing particles” at future null
infinity, I + . We have a natural notion of (inertial) time translation symmetry at both
I − and I + and, of course, it would be completely standard to use the positive frequency
solutions with respect to inertial time at I − and I + to define ingoing and outgoing particle
states. We will indeed use the standard definition of ingoing particles at I − , i.e., we define
Pin (see section II) to be the subspace of solutions that are positive frequency with respect

to v at I − , and we define Hin to be the corresponding one-particle Hilbert space. In the
next section, we will be concerned with the inertial particle content of the outgoing state,
and in that section we will define Pout and Hout in the usual manner in terms of the solutions

that are positive frequency with respect to u at I + . However, in this section, it will be very
useful for analyzing the entanglement of the Hawking radiation emitted by the mirror to use
′
a non-standard definition, Hout
, of outgoing particles at I + . Basically, we wish to define

′
Hout
by (i) using the usual inertial notion of particles—i.e., positive frequency solutions

with respect to u—at early and intermediate times with u ≪ u0 ; (ii) using the Rindler
15

notion of particles—i.e., positive frequency with respect to −κ−1 ln |u − u0 |—for u < u0 with
u ∼ u0 ; and (iii) using the Milne notion of particles—i.e., positive frequency with respect

to κ−1 ln(u − u0 )—at late times, u > u0 . We cannot do this literally/exactly because any
solution that is positive frequency with respect to u cannot vanish in any open region in u
and thus cannot vanish identically in the region where we wish to use the Rindler and Milne
′
′
notion of particles. Nevertheless, we can define Hout
to be given by the subspace, Pout
,

of solutions (see section II) spanned by: (a) Wavepackets that are positive frequency with
respect to inertial time, u, that reach I + at u ≪ u0 and have negligible “tails” extending
to u & u0 . (We may then slightly modify these wavepackets to make them strictly vanish
for u & u0 .) (b) Wavepackets that reach I + at times near u0 with u < u0 and are purely
positive frequency with respect to Rindler time, −κ−1 ln |u − u0 |. (c) Wavepackets that
reach I + at times u > u0 and are purely positive frequency with respect to Milne time,

κ−1 ln(u − u0 ). (d) An arbitrary choice of additional solutions needed to “complete” P ′ so

′
that it satisfies conditions (i)-(iii) of section II. Thus, as desired, elements of Hout
correspond

to ordinary inertial particles for u ≪ u0 , correspond to Rindler particles for u ∼ u0 with
u < u0 , and correspond to Milne particles for u > u0 . Note that since we may take u0 to
be arbitrarily large, the regime u ≪ u0 may be assumed to include an arbitrarily long era
where the mirror undergoes acceleration given by eq. (15).
We now calculate the particle creation occurring in the spacetime of fig. 2. Nontrivial
particle creation with respect to our notion of “in” and “out” particles starting from |0iin

′
occurs if a solution in Pin does not lie entirely in Pout
, i.e., if, after evolution to I + , it has a

′
part lying in P̄out
. We are primarily concerned with the properties of the Hawking radiation

emitted at 0 < u ≪ u0 while the mirror undergoes the motion eq. (15). To analyze this,
we proceed in the same manner as used to analyze particle creation by black holes [1], [2]:
We start with a normalized (i.e., unit Klein-Gordon norm) positive frequency wavepacket,
h(u), at I + that is composed of frequencies near ω and that is localized in time during the
“intermediate era” where eq. (15) holds, but with u ≪ u0 . We propagate this wavepacket
backwards into the past, where it reflects off of the mirror and evolves to the wavepacket h̃(v)
at I − , as illustrated in fig. 2. As already noted above, the wavepacket h̃(v) will have time
dependence given by eq. (16), and thus will be purely positive frequency (with frequencies
peaked near ω) with respect to Milne time in the region v < 0. The wavepacket h̃(v) will
not be positive frequency with respect to v. However, define the wavepacket f˜1 (v) on I −
16

by reflecting h̃(v) about v = 0 and then taking its complex conjugate
¯
f˜1 (v) = h̃(−v)

(17)

Then f˜1 is purely positive frequency with respect to Rindler time for v > 0, and will have
unit Klein-Gordon norm. By exactly the same calculation as led to eqs (8) and (9) above,
we find that the quantities
¯
F̃1 (v) = f˜1 (v) + e−πω/κ h̃(v)

(18)

F̃2 (v) = h̃(v) + e−πω/κ f¯˜1 (v)

(19)

and

are purely positive frequency with respect to inertial time v.
If we propagate the solution given by the data h̃(v) at I − forward in time, we will, of
′
course, get back the original wavepacket h(u) at I + . This outgoing solution lies in Pout
. If
we propagate the solution given by f˜1 (v) at I − forward in time, it will reflect off the mirror

while the mirror is in inertial motion, given by
v = α(u − u0 )

(20)

where α = (1 + V )/(1 − V ), where V is the final velocity of the mirror. The resulting

wavepacket f1 (u), at I + will therefore have time dependence of the form
¯
f1 (u) = −h̃(−v(u)) ∼ exp[−iω/κ ln(κα(u − u0 ))] .

(21)

Thus, f1 is purely positive frequency—with frequencies peaked at ω—with respect to Milne
′
time κ−1 ln(u−u0) in the region u > u0 . Thus, f1 also lies in Pout
. Note that by conservation

of the Klein-Gordon inner product, the wavepacket f1 will have unit Klein-Gordon norm.
Let us now evolve the initial positive frequency solutions F̃1 and F̃2 from I − to I + . The
solution F̃1 evolves to f1 (v) + e−πω/κ h̄(v). These two terms give, respectively, its decompo′
′
sition into Pout
and P̄out
. Similarly, F̃2 , evolves to h(v) + e−πω/κ f¯1 (v), which also provides

′
′
its decomposition into Pout
and P̄out
. It follows immediately by the same type of analysis as

used to calculate particle creation by black holes [2] that the “out” state Ψ ∈ F (Hout ) takes
the form
Ψ=

X

−nπω/κ

e

n

17

|nih |nif1

!

⊗ Ψ′

(22)

Here |nih is a outgoing state of n inertial particles in the Hawking mode h(u), |nif1 is an

outgoing state of n Milne particles in the mode f1 (u), and Ψ′ describes the state of the

system with respect to the modes that are orthogonal to both h and f1 in our one-particle
“out” Hilbert space Hout . Equation (22) shows that the Hawking particles that are emitted
at u ≪ u0 are entangled with outgoing Milne particles in the region u > u0 . These Milne
particles are the “partner particles” of the Hawking radiation particles in the sense of [6]
(see also [13]). Tracing eq. (22) over the Milne particle degrees of freedom, we see that the
Hawking particles are described by a precisely thermal density matrix at T = κ/2π. Tracing
eq. (22) over the Hawking particle degrees of freedom, we see that the Milne particles also
are in precisely a thermal state at T = κ/2π. As we saw in section III, this fact is compatible
with the fact that the state of the scalar field for u > u0 is the ground/vacuum state for the
final inertial motion of the mirror.
In the moving mirror spacetime of fig. 2, there is no black hole or singularity of any kind
present, so there can be no “information loss.” As in the black hole case, the Hawking
radiation is emitted in a mixed thermal state. As seen from eq. (22), the “information”
needed to purify the Hawking radiation emerges to infinity in the form of Milne particles at
late times (u > u0 ), i.e., after the mirror has returned to inertial motion. As discussed in
section III, from the inertial point of view, a thermal distribution of Milne particles corresponds to vacuum fluctuations. Thus, eq. (22) can be interpreted as saying in a precise sense
that the Hawking radiation is entangled with vacuum fluctuations, i.e. in the moving mirror
spacetime of fig. 2, the information needed to purify the Hawking radiation is contained in
the vacuum fluctuations of the quantum field that are present in the late time region u > u0 .

VI.

The Inertial Particle and Energy Cost of Vacuum Entanglement

The discussion at the end of the previous section may suggest that the purification of
the Hawking radiation in the moving mirror spacetime fig. 2 is “cost-free” with regard to
(inertial) particles and energy. The vacuum fluctuations in the region u > u0 provide an
infinite reservoir of “information” to entangle with the Hawking radiation. Yet, this vacuum
region contains no energy and no apparent inertial particle content! Thus, it might appear
that the Hawking radiation can be purified without requiring a “final burst” of inertial
particles and without requiring the emission of energy.
18

However, we will now show that, in fact, there is a large cost in inertial particle emission.
Specifically, the number inertial particles that must be emitted near u ∼ u0 is at least as
great as the total number of Hawking particles that were emitted during the phase where
the mirror motion was given by eq. (15). The basic reason why this is so can be understood
as follows: In the outgoing state |Ψi of eq. (22), the Milne particles in mode f1 are entangled
with the Hawking particles in mode h. However, according to eq. (14), in the vacuum state,
the Milne particles in mode f1 would be entangled with corresponding Rindler particles in
mode f2 —where f2 is obtained by reflecting f1 on I + about u = u0 and then taking its
complex conjugate, i.e.,
f2 (u − u0 ) = f¯1 (u0 − u) .

(23)

But the Rindler particles in mode f2 cannot be entangled with the Milne f1 -particles since
the f1 -particles are already entangled with Hawking particles. Thus, the Rindler particles in
mode f2 cannot be in a state where they can be interpreted as vacuum fluctuations. Inertial
particles must be present!
The considerations of the previous paragraph can be made precise as follows. We are
interested in the inertial particle content of the outgoing state |Ψi of eq. (22). Thus, we
wish to express |Ψi as a state in F (Hout ), where Hout is the usual one-particle Hilbert
space of solutions that are positive frequency with respect to inertial time u at I + . The

′
relationship between F (Hout ) and F (Hout
) is given by a Bogoliubov transformation. A key

observation concerning this Bogoliubov transformation is that—by the same calculation as
in eqs. (8)-(9) and eqs. (18)-(19)—the “late time” outgoing solution3
f1 (u) + e−πω/κ f¯2 (u)
√
(24)
F1 (u) =
1 − e−2πω/κ
is purely positive frequency with respect to inertial time. Let a, a† denote the annihilation
and creation operators on F (Hout ) and let b, b† denote the annihilation and creation operators

′
on F (Hout
). Equation (24) implies that

b(f1 ) − e−πω/κ b† (f2 )
√
(25)
1 − e−2πω/κ
Consequently, the expected number of outgoing inertial particles in mode F1 is given by

1
hΨ|b† (f1 )b(f1 ) − e−πω/κ b† (f1 )b† (f2 )
hN(F1 )i = hΨ|a† (F1 )a(F1 )|Ψi =
−2πω/κ
1−e

− e−πω/κ b(f1 )b(f2 ) + e−2πω/κ b(f2 )b† (f2 )|Ψi
(26)
a(F1 ) =

3

We have inserted the factor of [1 − exp(−2πω/κ)]−1/2 in eq. (24) so that F1 will have unit Klein-Gordon

norm.

19

From the form of Ψ, eq. (22), it follows immediately that hΨ|b† (f1 )b† (f2 )|Ψi = hΨ|b(f1 )b(f2 )|Ψi =
0, i.e., the middle two terms on the right side of eq. (26) vanish. The last term on the right
side of eq. (26) is manifestly positive. Thus, we obtain
hN(F1 )i >

1
hΨ|b† (f1 )b(f1 )|Ψi > hN(f1 )i = hN(h)i
1 − e−2πω/κ

(27)

Here hN(f1 )i is the expected number of Milne particles in mode f1 in the outgoing state Ψ
of eq. (22), and the last equality reflects the fact that this is equal to the expected number
of Hawking particles in mode h. Thus, the expected number of inertial particles emitted in
mode F1 always is larger than the expected number of Hawking particles emitted in mode
h. Since this is true for all Hawking particles—or, at least, those emitted at u ≪ u0 —the
total number of non-Hawking inertial particles emitted at late times must be greater than the
total number of Hawking particles emitted.
We now consider the energy cost of the emission of these late time inertial particles. Since
the mode Fi1 associated with the Hawking mode hi is not an eigenstate of inertial energy
and since the different Fi1 modes may overlap at I + , we do not know of a simple way to
obtain a rigorous lower bound on the total energy EB associated with late time emission.
Nevertheless, if we let e(Fi1 ) denote the classical energy of the mode Fi1 and we let N(Fi1 )
denote the expected number of particles emitted in mode Fi1 , then the formula
X
EB ∼
N(Fi1 )e(Fi1 )

(28)

i

should provide a reasonable estimate of the non-Hawking emitted energy. Since we already
know that there are at least as many Fi1 -particles as Hawking particles in mode hi , the key
issue is how large e(Fi1 ) is. This can be estimated as follows:
Consider a Hawking mode hi (u) that is localized near retarded time ui at I + , where
0 < ui < u1 , so the mirror motion is given by eq. (15) at this retarded time. When
propagated backwards into the past, this Hawking mode will bounce off the mirror near
advanced time vi = −1/κ exp(−κui ). The (forward in time) velocity of the mirror at this
time is

1 − e−κui
(29)
1 + e−κui
After it bounces off the mirror in its backward in time evolution, the frequency of the
Vi = −

wavepacket with respect to inertial time will be blueshifted by the factor
1 − Vi
= exp(κui )
1 + Vi
20

(30)

Thus, the wavepacket h̃i (v) at I − will be composed of inertial frequencies peaked around
ω̃i = ωi exp(κui )

(31)

where ωi is the peak frequency of the original Hawking wavepacket hi (u) at I + . The
wavepacket f˜i1 (v) at I − will therefore also have inertial frequencies peaked about ω̃i .
Now, suppose that the mirror returns to rest at u = u0 . Then when the wavepacket f˜1 (v)
is propagated forward and bounces off the mirror at u > u0 , there will be no change in the
inertial frequencies of this wavepacket. Consequently, the Milne particle wavepacket fi1 (u)
at I + will also have inertial frequencies peaked about ω̃i , eq. (31). The Rindler particle
wavepacket fi2 (u) will also have inertial frequencies peaked about ω̃i . Thus, the inertial
mode Fi1 will have energy
e(Fi1 ) ∼ ω̃i = ωi exp(κui )

(32)

For κui ≫ 1, this is enormously greater than the energy, ωi , of the original Hawking mode
hi (u). Thus, if the mirror returns to rest at u = u0 , there will be an enormous burst of
energy emitted at u near u0 associated with the purification of the Hawking radiation. This
burst of energy is much greater than the total energy emitted in Hawking radiation during
the entire era where the mirror undergoes the motion eq. (15).
However, suppose that instead we simply turn off the acceleration at some time u1 with
u1 < u0 (but with κu1 ≫ 1 as we have been assuming), e.g., suppose that for 0 < u < u1
the mirror motion is given by eq. (15), but for u > u1 the mirror motion is given by
1
v = − e−κu1 + e−κu1 (u − u1 )
κ

(33)

Then the final velocity, Vf of the mirror will be
Vf = −

1 − e−κu1
1 + e−κu1

(34)

Consequently, when the wavepacket f˜i1 (v) is propagated forward in time and bounces off the
mirror at u > u0 , its inertial frequencies will be redshifted by the factor exp(−κu1 ). Thus,
the Milne particle wavepacket fi1 (u) at I + will have inertial frequencies peaked about
ωi exp[−κ(u1 − ui )]. In this case, the inertial particle mode Fi1 will have energy
e(Fi1 ) ∼ ωi exp[−κ(u1 − ui )]
21

(35)

Consequently, the energy required to purify the Hawking radiation in this case is much less
than total energy emitted in the Hawking radiation, i.e., it should be possible to purify the
Hawking radiation at a negligible energy cost.
It should be noted that the above redshifts and blueshifts also have a corresponding
effect on the time spread of the wavepackets. If the Hawking wavepacket hi (u) has time
spread ∆ui & 1/ωi about ui at I + , then the corresponding wavepacket h̃i at I − will
have spread of order ∆ui exp(−κui ) about vi = −κ−1 exp(−κui ). In the case where the
mirror returns to rest for u > u0 , it follows that the mode Fi1 at I + will be peaked near

u−u0 = ±κ−1 exp(−κui ) with spread of order ∆ui exp(−κui ). Thus, assuming that κui ≫ 1,
the purification of the Hawking radiation occurs in a “final burst” that is highly localized
near u = u0 . However, in the case where the mirror follows the trajectory eq. (33) for
u > u0 , the mode Fi1 at I + will have a time spread of order ∆ui exp[κ(u1 − ui )], so the
purification of the Hawking radiation will occur over a very long period of time. It also
should be noted that in this case the modes Fi1 (u) will be sufficiently spread out in time
that they will significantly overlap with each other4 , so interference effects may be important
and the estimate eq. (28) may not be reliable.
The above conclusions on the energy cost of purifying the Hawking radiation can be
confirmed from the formula for energy emission associated with moving mirror motion. For
a mirror moving on the general trajectory
v = p(u)

(36)

the energy flux to I + is given by [14]
Tuu

1
=
16π

"

p′′
p′

2

2 p′′′
−
3 p′

#

(37)

where the primes denote derivatives with respect to u. During the era where the mirror
trajectory is given by eq. (15), the energy flux is given by
Tuu =

1 2
κ
48π

(38)

which corresponds to a thermal energy flux of Hawking radiation at temperature T = κ/2π.
Since the mirror follows the trajectory eq. (15) for 0 < u < u1 , the total energy radiated in
4

Indeed, they may even overlap with the early time Hawking emission, resulting in possible inconsistencies
′
in our definition of Hout

22

Hawking radiation is
1 2
κ u1
(39)
48π
We can return the mirror to rest at u = u0 , v = 0 by having it follow the trajectory5


1
1
1
p(u) = −
e−κu1 + e−κu1 eα(u−u1 )
+
(40)
κ α
α
EH =

for u1 < u < u0 , where α is a constant and the coefficients in eq. (40) were chosen so as to
match the mirror position and velocity of eq. (15) at u = u1 . In order that v = 0 at u = u0
we must have p(u0 ) = 0, so we require
 1
1 α(u0 −u1 )
e
−1 = .
α
κ

(41)

In order that the mirror be at rest when v = 0, u = u0 , we must have p′ (u0 ) = 1, so we also
require
eα(u0 −u1 ) = eκu1 .

(42)

α = κ (eκu1 − 1) ≈ κeκu1

(43)

These relations imply that

where we have used κu1 ≫ 1. We also have
u0 ≈ u1 (1 + e−κu1 ) .

(44)

The mirror is then assumed to follow the inertial trajectory p(u) = u − u0 for u > u0 .
For the motion eq. (15) followed by eq. (40), and then followed by inertial motion, p(u) and
p′ (u) are continuous, but p′′ (u) is discontinuous at u = u1 and u = u0 . These discontinuities
yield δ-function contributions to Tuu , eq. (37). Taking these contributions into account, we
have for u1 ≤ u ≤ u0 ,
Tuu =

1 2
1
1
α −
(α + κ)δ(u − u1 ) +
αδ(u − u0 )
48π
24π
24π

Thus, the total energy radiated in the “burst” between u1 and u0 is
Z u0
1
1 2 κu1
1 2
α (u0 − u1 ) −
κ≈
κ u1 e
EB =
Tuu du =
48π
24π
48π
u1
5

(45)

(46)

We chose the form of p(u) in eq. (40) because extremization of eq. (37) suggests that the motion that
minimizes the total energy emission should be such that p′ (u) depends exponentially on u. We believe
that eq. (46) below should provide a good estimate of the minimum energy emission needed to return the
mirror to rest at v = 0, but we have not attempted to prove this.

23

Thus, we have EB /EH ≈ exp(κu1 ) ≫ 1. This is in accord with the estimate that would be
obtained from our particle analysis (see eq. (32)).
On the other hand, we can return the mirror to inertial motion by simply setting the
acceleration of the mirror to zero at u = u1 , without changing its velocity, i.e., by having
the mirror follow the trajectory eq. (33) for u > u1 . In that case, the only contribution to
the energy flux for u ≥ u1 arises from the discontinuity in p′′ at u = u1 , which yields
Tuu = −

κ
δ(u − u1 )
24π

(47)

Consequently, the magnitude of the resulting (negative!) integrated energy flux is ∼ κ,
which is far less than the total Hawking energy flux eq. (39).
In summary, the purification of the Hawking radiation in the moving mirror spacetime
of fig. 2 always requires the emission of at least as many late time inertial particles as the
total number of Hawking particles emitted. In the case where the mirror returns to rest by
v = 0, this requires a late time burst of energy far larger than the total energy contained
in the Hawking radiation. However, in the case where the mirror transitions to inertial
motion without changing its velocity, the purification of the Hawking radiation can occur
with negligible energy cost.

VII.

Vacuum Entanglement in Black Hole Evaporation

As discussed in the Introduction, if the semiclassical description is valid until the final
(Planck scale) stage of black hole evaporation and if information is not lost in the process
of black hole formation and evaporation, then the information stored within the black hole
during the evaporation process must emerge at the final Planckian stage. The moving mirror
example that we have analyzed in the previous sections suggests an interesting possibility
as to how this might occur.
Figure 3 is a conformal diagram of a black hole that forms by gravitational collapse
and subsequently evaporates by emission of Hawking radiation, leaving behind empty, flat
spacetime. (Note that there is considerable distortion of distances and times in fig. 3.)
Figure 3 differs from the usual depiction of black hole evaporation in that the thick line
we have labeled as “high curvature” normally would be shown as a singularity, and the
final moment of evaporation normally would be depicted as a point rather than a sphere of
24

f¯1

Minkowski

h

I+

high curvature
r ∼ lP
r=0

black hole
horizon

FIG. 3. A spacetime diagram of a black hole that forms by gravitational collapse and evaporates
with no information loss (see text).

order Planck radius lP . (A new “origin of coordinates” would then normally be depicted
as emerging from the evaporation event.) In such a usual spacetime depiction of black
hole evaporation, information would necessarily be lost into the singularity. In order to
avoid information loss without modifying the semiclassical description until Planck scale
curvatures are reached, we must replace the singularity by a high curvature regime through
which the quantum fields—or whatever describes matter and gravity in this regime—can
propagate, as we have done in fig. 3.
The spacetime path of a Hawking mode h(u) of inertial frequency ω is depicted in blue
25

in fig. 3. Just as in fig. 2, the backward in time propagation of h(u) yields the mode h̃(v)
at I − (not shown in fig. 3), although now the change in inertial frequency from h(u) to
h̃(v) is produced by the gravitational blueshift associated with the collapse rather than
produced by a Doppler blueshift from reflection by a mirror. The reflection of h̃(v) about
v = 0 at I − (where v = 0 is the advanced time at which the horizon forms) yields a
“partner mode,” whose spacetime path is shown in red in fig. 3. In a semiclassical analysis,
the Hawking particle will be entangled with this partner mode. As in the mirror case, the
Hawking radiation is in a mixed, thermal state. If the partner mode were to propagate into
a singularity, then the final state of the quantum field would be mixed, i.e., information
would be lost. However, if, instead, the partner mode were to propagate through a high
curvature regime and out to infinity as illustrated in fig. 3, then information loss could be
avoided.
We do not know the physics that would apply in the high curvature regime of fig. 3, so we
do not know the fate of the partner mode if/when it propagates through the high curvature
region. But an interesting possibility is that—just as in the mirror spacetime of fig. 2—it
becomes a Milne mode of Milne frequency ω in the final Minkowski region. (Note that the
future of the evaporation “event” at r ∼ lP depicted in fig. 3 is essentially a future light
cone of Minkowski spacetime—with a Planck radius sphere instead of a point at the vertex
of the cone.) In that case, in analogy with eq. (22), for any Hawking mode h(u), the final
“out” state would be of the form
Ψ=

X

−nπω/κ

e

n

|nih |nif1

!

⊗ Ψ′

(48)

where f1 denotes the Milne particle mode entangled with the Hawking mode h. In other
words, if eq. (48) holds, then the information stored within the black hole during its evaporation would emerge at the end of the evaporation process as vacuum fluctuations in the
Minkowski region that are entangled with the Hawking radiation.
In our review [3], Unruh and I considered this possibility to be a potentially viable way
of restoring information in black hole evaporation. However, the analysis of the particle
and energy cost of vacuum entanglement in the moving mirror spacetime with final state
of the form eq. (22) can be taken over directly to the black hole spacetime with final state
of the form eq. (48). By the same analysis as given in section VI, the final state eq. (48)
must contain as many late-time inertial particles as the total number of Hawking particles
26

emitted during the evaporation process. In the mirror case, we could make the total energy
associated with these late time particles very small compared with the energy emitted in
Hawking radiation by turning off the acceleration of the mirror at the end of the Hawking
process without changing its velocity, so that the late time particles have extremely low
inertial frequencies. However, there is no plausible analog of this in the black hole case.
By causality, the Milne modes f1 depicted in fig. 3 must emerge from a Planck scale region
of the final Minkowski portion of the spacetime. The inertial frequencies of these modes
therefore must be of essentially Planck scale, and the corresponding inertial particles must
be of essentially Planck energy. Unlike the moving mirror case, there is no “external agent”
who can supply this energy. Thus, the final state eq. (48) is not energetically possible.
In summary, the purification of Hawking radiation via entanglement with vacuum fluctuations in the final Minkowski region provides an interesting possibility for avoiding information loss. However, our analysis shows that—just as in other previously considered
scenarios where the information emerges in a “final burst”—it requires the emission of as
many Planck scale inertial particles as Hawking particles and it is not energetically possible.
Acknowledgements I wish to thank Bill Unruh and Stefan Hollands for many extremely
valuable discussions during the course of this work. This research was supported in part by
NSF grants PHY 15-05124 and PHY18-04216 to the University of Chicago.

[1] S.W. Hawking, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (195).
[2] R.M. Wald, Commun. Math. Phys. 45, 9 (1975).
[3] W.G. Unruh and R.M. Wald, Rep.Prog.Phys. 80, 092002 (2017); arXiv:1703.02140
[4] S. D. Mathur, Fortsch. Phys. 53, 793 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0502050].
[5] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski and J. Sully, JHEP 02, 062 (2013) [arXiv:1207.3123].
[6] M. Hotta, R. Schutzhold, and W.G. Unruh, Phys. Rev. D.91124060 (2015) [arXiv:1503.06109].
[7] R. M. Wald, Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime and Black Hole Thermodynamics,
University of Chicago Press, (Chicago, 1994).
[8] J.M. Fell, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 94, 365 (1960).
[9] J.J. Bisognano and E.H. Wichmann, J. Math. Phys. 17, 303 (1976).

27

[10] A. Higuchi, S. Iso, K. Ueda, and K. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D96, 083531 (2017)
[arXiv:1709.05757].
[11] G.F.R. Ellis and R.M. Williams, Flat and Curved Spacetimes (second edition), Oxford University Press (Oxford, 2000).
[12] P.D. Hislop and R. Longo, Commun. Math. Phys. 84, 71 (1982).
[13] T. Tomitsuka, K. Yamaguchi, and M. Hotta, arXiv:1906.05009.
[14] S.A. Fulling and P.C.W. Davies, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 348, 393 (1976).

28

