S. Ju, O. Kanhere, Y. Xing and T. S. Rappaport, “A Millimeter-Wave Channel Simulator NYUSIM with Spatial Consistency
and Human Blockage,” 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Hawaii, USA, Dec. 2019, pp. 1-6.

A Millimeter-Wave Channel Simulator NYUSIM
with Spatial Consistency and Human Blockage
Shihao Ju, Ojas Kanhere, Yunchou Xing and Theodore S. Rappaport

arXiv:1908.09762v1 [cs.IT] 26 Aug 2019

NYU Tandon School of Engineering, NYU WIRELESS, Brooklyn, NY, 11201
{shao, ojask, ychou, tsr}@nyu.edu

Abstract—Accurate channel modeling and simulation are indispensable for millimeter-wave wideband communication systems that employ electrically-steerable and narrow beam antenna
arrays. Three important channel modeling components, spatial
consistency, human blockage, and outdoor-to-indoor penetration
loss, were proposed in the 3rd Generation Partnership Project
Release 14 for mmWave communication system design. This
paper presents NYUSIM 2.0, an improved channel simulator
which can simulate spatially consistent channel realizations based
on the existing drop-based channel simulator NYUSIM 1.6.1.
A geometry-based approach using multiple reflection surfaces
is proposed to generate spatially correlated and time-variant
channel coefficients. Using results from 73 GHz pedestrian
measurements for human blockage, a four-state Markov model
has been implemented in NYUSIM to simulate dynamic human
blockage shadowing loss. To model the excess path loss due
to penetration into buildings, a parabolic model for outdoorto-indoor penetration loss has been adopted from the 5G
Channel Modeling special interest group and implemented in
NYUSIM 2.0. This paper demonstrates how these new modeling capabilities reproduce realistic data when implemented in
Monte Carlo fashion using NYUSIM 2.0, making it a valuable
measurement-based channel simulator for fifth-generation and
beyond mmWave communication system design and evaluation.
Index Terms—5G; mmWave; NYUSIM; channel modeling; channel simulator; spatial consistency; human blockage;
outdoor-to-indoor loss; building penetration

I. I NTRODUCTION
The millimeter-wave (mmWave) spectrum is regarded as
a promising band to support the unprecedented capacity
demand due to the massive available bandwidth [1]. The
directional mmWave channel has vastly different channel
statistics as compared to the semi-omnidirectional and sectored microwave channels [2]. Accurate channel modeling for
mmWaves is essential for the fifth-generation (5G) and beyond
wireless communication system design and evaluation [2].
Many promising applications will be enabled using mmWave
and sub-Terahertz technologies such as wireless cognition,
imaging, and precising positioning [3].
The scattering environment is similar when a user terminal
(UT) moves in a local area or when multiple UTs are closely
spaced in a local area (e.g. within 10-15 m) [4], [5]. Further,
the channel impulse responses (CIRs) of these locations in
close proximity to each other should be highly correlated. A
channel model with spatial consistency can generate correlated
This work is supported in part by the NYU WIRELESS Industrial Affiliates, and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants: 1702967
and 1731290.

and time-variant channel coefficients along the UT trajectory
[4]–[7]. A channel simulator with spatial consistency can
simulate consecutive angular power spectrums and power
delay profiles (PDPs) in a continuous and realistic manner
based on the UT trajectory within a local area.
Human blockage becomes an important factor in radio
signal strength for mmWave communication systems, but did
not attract much attention in the microwave (sub-6 GHz)
communications era [8]. Owing to very short wavelengths
(a few millimeters) and the use of directional antennas,
mmWaves are easily blocked by humans and do not effectively
diffract around human bodies or vehicles. It is important to
take shadowing loss caused by humans and vehicles in account
for accurate link budget analysis [9].
Outdoor-to-indoor (O2I) penetration loss becomes more
prominent at mmWave frequencies as shown in measurements
and models [1], [10], [11]. Many modern buildings are constructed by concrete and have infrared reflecting (IRR) glass,
which induce a large penetration loss when a mmWave signal
is transmitted from outdoor to indoor or vice versa [11]. Thus,
accurate O2I penetration loss prediction is also critical for the
design and deployment of future outdoor and indoor mmWave
communication systems [12].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews the channel model and simulator of the previous NYUSIM 1.6.1 [13]. Section III explains the extended
NYUSIM channel model with spatial consistency, human
blockage, and O2I penetration. Numerical results for model
validation are also presented in Section III. Section IV introduces the user interface, editable parameters, and sample
output figures and data files of NYUSIM 2.0. Concluding
remarks are provided in Section V.
II. D ROP - BASED NYUSIM CHANNEL SIMULATOR
NYUSIM is an open-source mmWave channel simulator
[13], which can produce accurate omnidirectional and directional CIRs, PDPs, and 3-dimensional (3-D) angular power
spectrum. NYUSIM is developed based on extensive field
measurements from 28 GHz to 140 GHz [1], [14]. A 3-D
spatial statistical channel model forms the basis for, and is
implemented in NYUSIM [15], which characterizes temporal
and angular properties of multipath components (MPCs).
NYUSIM can operate over a wide range of carrier frequencies
from 500 MHz to 100 GHz and support wide RF bandwidth
up to 800 MHz. Different types of antenna arrays are also
supported such as uniform linear array (ULA) and uniform

rectangular array (URA). Some key features of the drop-based
NYUSIM is summarized as follows.
a) Drop-based: In a drop, the drop-based channel model
generates a static and independent CIR at a particular
transmitter-receiver (T-R) separation distance. However, there
is no correlation among different drops. A set of identical and
independent distributed (i.i.d) large-scale parameters (LSPs)
and small-scale parameters (SSPs) is generated for each channel drop. The shortcoming of a drop-based channel model is
that it generates independent channel coefficients for different
distances, even if these distances are close together.
b) Large-scale Path Loss Model : The close-in free
space reference distance (CI) path loss model with a 1 m
reference distance [14], [16], [17], and an extra attenuation
term due to various atmospheric conditions, is employed in
NYUSIM, which is given by [14], [16]:
PLCI (f, d)[dB] =FSPL(f, 1m)[dB] + 10n log10 (d)
+ AT[dB] + χσ ,

(1)

where d is the 3-D T-R separation distance in meter, and n
is the path loss exponent (n = 2 for free space). χσ is the
shadow fading (SF) modeled as a log-normal random variable
with zero mean and σ standard deviation in dB. AT is a total
atmospheric absorption term [18]. FSPL(f, 1m) is the free
space path loss in dB at a T-R separation distance of 1 m at
the carrier frequency f in GHz [13]:
4πf × 109
)
c
= 32.4[dB] + 20 log10 (f ),

FSPL(f, 1m)[dB] = 20 log10 (

several channel snapshots. The distance between two channel
snapshots is the update distance (e.g. 1 m), which means the
channel coefficients are updated for every 1 m increment along
a traveled path.

Fig. 1: A map of spatially correlated SF with the BS and UT
locations. The map of spatially correlated SF is generated by filtering
a map of independent SF using an exponential function in (3). SF
[dB]∼N(0,4) in a UMi LOS scenario. T-R separation distance is 100
m.

(2)

where c is the speed of light.
c) Wideband Temporal/Spatial Clustering Algorithm: A
time-cluster spatial-lobe (TCSL) approach is adopted in the
NYUSIM channel model to characterize the temporal and
spatial properties [15], which is motivated from the field
measurements [1], [14]. A time cluster is defined as a group of
MPCs traveling close in time, but may arrive from different
angular directions. A spatial lobe is defined as a group of
MPCs coming from a similar direction, but may arrive in a
long time window of several hundreds of nanoseconds. In
other words, the temporal and spatial properties of MPCs are
separately generated, different from joint time-angle distributions adopted in current 3GPP model [19].
III. N EW F EATURES I MPLMENTED IN NYUSIM 2.0
A. Spatial Consistency Procedure
Spatial consistency indicates continuous and realistic channel evolution along the UT trajectory in a local area. To realize
spatial consistency, spatially correlated large-scale parameters
such as SF, line-of-sight (LOS)/non-LOS (NLOS) condition
are generated, and time-variant small-scale parameters such
as angles, power, delay, phase of each MPC are generated
[4], [5]. The correlation distance of LSPs precisely characterizes the concept of “a local area”, which also confines
the length of a channel segment (where a channel segment
is 10-15 m long) [5]. In a channel segment, the channels
are considered highly correlated and updated using spatial
consistency procedure. A channel segment can be divided into

Fig. 2: The UT moves in a partial hexagon track in a clockwise
manner as shown in Fig. 1. The track distance is 40 m, the side
length of the hexagon is 10 m.

1) Spatially Correlated Large-scale Parameters: LSPs defined in the 3GPP 38.901 model are delay spread, angular
spread, Rician K factor, SF, and LOS/NLOS condition [19].
The two LSPs explicitly used in the channel generation procedure in NYUSIM is SF and LOS/NLOS condition. Spatially
correlated SF and LOS/NLOS condition values are generated
in the same way. For SF, a 2-dimensional (2-D) grid map
is generated to contain values of spatially correlated SF in
a simulated area. The granularity of the map is set to be 1
m, which means the distance between two neighboring grid
points is 1 m. SF is modeled as a log-normal random variable
with zero mean and σ dB standard deviation as shown in
(1). The map of SF is initialized by assigning an i.i.d normal
distributed random variable at each grid. A 2-D exponential
filter is applied to the map, which is given by [4]:
p
p2 + q 2
),
(3)
h(p, q) = exp(−
dco
where p and
p q are coordinates with respect to the center of
the filter. (p2 + q 2 ) represents the distance to the center of
the filter. dco is the correlation distance of SF. L is the length

of the filter, which is set as 8-fold dco since the correlation is
negligible beyond 4-fold dco . Applying this 2-D filtering, the
correlated values in the map is calculated by:
XX
Mc (i, j) =
h(p, q)M (i − p + 1, j − q + 1)
(4)
p

q

where Mc is the correlated map and M is the initialized
independent map. i and j are the coordinates of grid points
in the map.
A map of spatially correlated SF over a 200 m x 200 m area
is shown in Fig. 1. The correlation distance of SF in a UMi
LOS scenario is set to be 10 m [5]. The UT moved 40 m in
a partial hexagon track, which is also illustrated in Fig. 1. SF
varies from -10 dB to 10 dB in a continuous manner. Similar
SF values are observed at closely spaced locations whereas
independent values for close locations are always used in the
drop-based model. The time-variant path loss is shown in Fig.
2. It can be seen that the path loss varies rapidly about 16 dB
with independent SF values. However, the path loss varies
smoothly with spatially correlated SF, which corresponds to
the UT trajectory. The path loss increases first and then drops

as the UT first moves away from the base station and then
comes back. Spatially correlated SF supports a more realistic
link budget analysis and cellular coverage prediction. The map
of spatially correlated LOS/NLOS condition is also created by
applying a 2-D exponential filter.
2) Time-variant Small-scale Parameters: Small-scale parameters include angles, delay, phase, power of each MPC,
which need to be realistically updated based on the UT
trajectory every channel snapshot. A geometry-based approach
is adopted in NYUSIM to update small-scale parameters:
a) Update of angles: Each MPC has four angles, azimuth angle of departure (AOD), zenith angle of departure
(ZOD), azimuth angle of arrival (AOA), and zenith angle of
arrival (ZOA). A LOS component can be simply updated using
geometry based on the BS and UT locations and UT moving
speed and direction. A simple linear update is given by [4],
[6], [19]:
φangle (tk ) = φangle (tk−1 ) + Sangle · ∆t,

(5)

where “angle” can be AOD, ZOD, AOA, and
ZOA. ∆t = tk − tk−1 . The update part Sangle
for a LOS component can be given by [20]:

vy cos(φAOA ) − vx sin(φAOA )
vy cos(φAOD ) − vx sin(φAOD )
, SAOA =
,
r sin(θZOD )
r sin(θZOA )
vx cos(φAOD ) cos(θZOD ) + vy cos(θZOD ) sin(φAOD ) − vz sin(θZOD )
=
,
r
vx cos(φAOA ) cos(θZOA ) + vy cos(θZOA ) sin(φAOA ) − vz sin(θZOA )
=
,
r

SAOD =

(6)

SZOD

(7)

SZOA

where φAOD , θZOD , φAOA , θZOA are AOD, ZOD, AOA, and
ZOA, respectively. vx , vy , vz are the projections of the
velocity vector v in x, y, z-axis, respectively.

(8)

φvr are the mirror images of U T and the moving direction
φv . The relations in one reflection case are given as:
φAOA = 2φRS + π − φAOD
φvr = 2φRS − φv

(9)
(10)

Similarly, a NLOS component that experienced two reflections is shown in Fig. 3, and the angle relations in two
reflections case are given as:
φAOA = 2φRS2 − 2φRS + φAOD = ∆RS + φAOD
φvr = 2φRS2 − 2φRS + φv = ∆RS + φv

(11)
(12)

Further for a NLOS component that experienced M reflections, the relations can be derived by iteration:
φAOA = (−1)M φAOD + 2

M
X
(−1)i φRSi + M π
i=1

Fig. 3: UT movement and change of AOD in the azimuth plane in
NLOS scenarios for a multiple reflection case.

For NLOS components, motivated by a simple case illustrated in [6], a multiple reflection surfaces (MRS) method
is proposed to transform the U T location in the NLOS
scenario to the U T 0 location in the LOS scenario from the
BS. Then, NLOS components can be considered as virtual
LOS components and updated using the same equations as
LOS components. An illustration of a NLOS component that
experienced one reflection can be found in [6], [21]. U T 0 and

(13)

M

= ∆RS + (−1) φAOD + M π
φvr = ∆RS + (−1)M φv

(14)

As a conclusion, there are two cases depending on that
a NLOS component experienced odd or even number of
reflection surfaces. A random binary number B can be used
to represent two cases, when B = −1 represents even number
of reflection surfaces, and B = 1 represents odd number of
reflection surfaces.

b) Update of delays and phases: The delay and phase of
each MPC is updated simply based on the path length change
using Law of cosines. For a LOS component, the path length is
the T-R separation distance. For NLOS components, the path
lengths are obtained by multiplying the initialized absolute
time delay with the speed of light.
c) Update of powers: The power of each MPC is
updated by redistributing cluster powers and MPC powers
in each cluster following the same way that these powers
were initialized using the cluster time excess delay and intracluster time excess delay, explained in [15]. Cluster powers
are modeled as an exponentially decaying function of cluster
time excess delays, and powers of MPCs in each time cluster
are modeled as an exponentially decaying function of intracluster time excess delays. Note that the total received power
is updated based on the time-variant large-scale path loss
described in Section III-A1.
3) Smooth transitions: LSPs and SSPs have been continuously updated in each channel segment, while the initial
channel coefficients of channel segments are independently
generated. Therefore, a smooth transition procedure is applied
to “connect” channel segment by cluster birth and death. The
power of one old cluster ramps down and one new cluster
ramps up [22]. Since the number of time clusters in two
channel segments may be different, the power of one cluster
can ramp up or down individually. Note that cluster birth and
death only happen to one time cluster in a channel snapshot.
B. Human Blockage Model
A human blockage event usually causes a temporal shadowing loss, which may last about several hundreds of milliseconds. A typical blockage event can be divided into four
stages, unshadowed, decay, shadowed, rising shown in Fig. 4
in [8], and a four-state Markov model corresponding to four
stages was proposed to characterize blockage events [8], [9].
It is found from field human blockage measurements using
three sets of antennas (7°, 15°, and 60° half power beamwidth
(HPBW)) [8] that the transition rates in the Markov model and
the mean attenuation of blockage events depend on antenna
HPBW. More blockages and deeper blockages will occur if a
narrower antenna is equipped at the receiver. Note that aforementioned human blockage measurements are on peer-to-peer
level, and are not representative of a BS-UT setting. However,
T-R separation distances are usually greater than 40 m, BSs
are on the horizon and thus are at similar heights relative
to the UT. Thus, blockage statistics abstracted from peer-topeer measurements are reasonable to be extended to the BSUT setting. A linear approximation for four transition rates
with respect to the antenna HPBW is given as λdecay = 0.2,
λshadow = 0.065×HPBW+7.425, λrise = 0.05×HPBW+7.35,
and λunshadow = 6.7.
However, for omnidirectional channels generated from
NYUSIM, antenna HPBW is not applicable, spatial lobe
width, instead, is used to calculate transition rates and mean
attenuation. Spatial lobes represent main directions of arrival
(or departure) there energy may arrive over several hundreds
of nanoseconds. A spatial lobe is modeled as a Gaussian
distribution, where the variance is lobe angular spread that

(a) CDFs of simulated human blockage shadowing loss using the
four-state Markov model for omnidirectional channels in UMi LOS
and NLOS scenarios.

(b) CDFs of simulated human blockage shadowing loss using the
four-state Markov model for directional channels with RX antenna
azimuth HPBWs (7°, 15°, 30°, and 60°)

Fig. 4: CDFs of human blockage shadowing loss for omnidirectional
and directional channels

varies according to scenario and environment. The azimuth
lobe angular spread obtained from measurements is 10.5° in
a LOS scenario [15]. Based on three-sigma rule of thumb,
a typical width of a spatial lobe is less than 10.5°×6 =
63° with 99.7% probability, which is comparable to the
60° HPBW antenna used in the measurements [8]. Thus, it
is valid to assume that all MPCs in the same spatial lobe
will experience approximately the same amount of shadowing
loss by a blockage event. In addition, a directional channel
realization output from NYUSIM is generated by applying
antenna patterns of both transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) to
the omnidirectional channel realization. The applied antenna
pattern emulates the horn antenna pattern used in the mmWave
field measurements [1], and can be calculated by the userspecified antenna azimuth and elevation HPBW. For directional channels generated from NYUSIM, all MPCs within the
antenna HPBW are assumed to experience the same blockage
event and be attenuated by approximately the same amount.
3GPP 38.901 proposed 5 potential independent blockers
for each path [19]. NYUSIM assumes that m independent
blockage events (uniformly distributed between 1 and 5)
may occur for each spatial lobe. m independent blockage
events are represented by m independent Markov traces.
m Markov traces are superimposed to obtain a total loss
trace. The actual shadowing loss is attained by randomly
selecting a time instance t0 on the total loss trace. Note
that the aforementioned human blockage procedure is done

TABLE I: Simulated and measured CDF of user SNR values (in
dB) with and without human blockage events at 73 GHz. 1000
simulations of directional channels were run in Monte Carlo fashion.
Simulations

Measurements [9]

Blockage?

-5 dB SNR
Thresh. %

5% SNR

-5 dB SNR
Thresh. %

5% SNR

No blockage

14.7%

-7.2 dB

16.5%

-10.8 dB

Blockage

25.5%

-15.5 dB

24.7%

-17.7 dB

independently for omnidirectional channel and directional
channel in one simulation run, since the transition rates
and average mean attenuation for two kinds of channels are
different. A comparison of cumulative distribution functions
(CDFs) of shadowing loss for omnidirectional channels in
UMi LOS and NLOS scenarios is shown in Fig. 4(a). The
T-R separation distance range was from 100 m to 500 m.
1000 UT locations were simulated. The shadowing loss in the
NLOS scenario is slightly larger than in the LOS scenario
since the spatial lobe angular spread is smaller in the NLOS
scenario, which means the average spatial lobe width is
smaller in the NLOS scenario. In the NLOS scenario, the UT
may experience more than 10 dB and 15 dB shadowing loss
with 55% and 12% probabilities, respectively. A comparison
of CDFs of shadowing loss for directional channels in the
UMi NLOS scenario using four sets of antennas with HPBW
7°, 15°, 30°, and 60° is shown in Fig. 4(b). UTs equipped
with narrower HPBW antennas are more likely to experience
severe blockage shadowing loss. 31% of UTs equipped with
7° HPBW antenna experience more than 15 dB shadowing
loss. To verify the simulated channel coefficients such as
large-scale path loss and human blockage shadowing loss,
the outage probability of generated directional channels is
compared with the outage probability of measured directional
channels. -5 dB SNR is considered as the outage threshold.
SNR is given as SNR = Pr [dBm] − (N0 + NF), where Pr is
the total received power in dBm, which is equivalent to the
sum of all MPCs’ powers generated from NYUSIM. N0 is the
average thermal noise power with 800 MHz RF bandwidth,
which is -84.97 dBm, and noise figure (NF) is 10 dB [9].
The comparison between simulations from NYUSIM and field
measurements [9] is given in Table. I. It is seen that the
simulated outage probability and 5% SNR level are close to
the measured outage probability and 5% SNR level, which
indicates that the NYUSIM can accurately recreate realistic
directional channels with human blockage shadowing loss.
C. O2I Penetration Loss Model
A parabolic model for building penetration loss from [11],
[23] is implemented in NYUSIM, which has either a low loss
or a high loss form, depending on the type of building surface.
The low loss model works for external building materials like
standard glass and wood while the high loss model works for
external building materials like IRR glass and concrete [11].
The parabolic model for building O2I penetration loss (BPL)
is given as [11], [23]:
BPL[dB] = 10 log10 (A + B · fc2 ) + N (0, σP2 )

(15)

where fc is the carrier frequency. A = 5, B = 0.03, and
σP = 4.0 for the low loss model. A = 10, B = 5, and
σP = 6.0 for the high loss model.
IV. NYUSIM 2.0
NYUSIM 2.0 with additional features such as spatial consistency, human blockage, and O2I penetration can generate
continuous time-variant CIRs and simulate the power loss
caused by random human blockage events and external building penetration. The screenshot in Fig. 5 shows the graphical
user interface (GUI) of NYUSIM 2.0. Two running modes,
drop-based mode and spatial consistency mode are made
available in NYUSIM 2.0. When the spatial consistency button
is “on”, NYUSIM runs spatial consistency procedure and generates successive and correlated CIRs along the UT trajectory.
When the spatial consistency button is “off”, NYUSIM runs
the drop-based model which is the same as older versions
of NYUSIM and generates independent CIRs for different
distances. Note that human blockage module works for both
drop-based mode and spatial consistency mode.
A. Input parameters
In addition to the existing 16 input “Channel Parameters”
that define the propagation channel and 12 input “Antenna
Properties” that specify the TX and RX antenna arrays, 10
new input “Spatial Consistency” parameters, five new input
“Human Blockage” parameters, and two new input “O2I
penetration” parameters are provided. Two types of user track,
linear and hexagon, are provided for spatial consistency modeling. A “Default Settings for Human blockage” is provided.
If the user chooses “Yes”, the transition rates and average
mean attenuation are implemented based on a linear fit to
the data given in [8], and changes to fit the work in [8] as
the RX antenna azimuth HPBW changes. If the user chooses
“No”, the transition rates and mean attenuation are free to edit
for user-specified preferences, in case other Markov model
parameters are preferred or discovered in the future.
B. Sample Output Figures and Output Data
The default output figures for the drop-based mode are
same as the figures generated in older versions of NYUSIM
(e.g. 1.6.1 and earlier), as shown in [13]. Some default output
figures for the spatial consistency mode are listed below. A
map of spatially correlated SF with the UT and BS locations
and UT track is output as shown in Fig. 1. A map for spatially
correlated LOS/NLOS condition using scenario-specific LOS
probability is output and indicates that all locations in a
local area experience the same propagation condition (LOS
or NLOS). Consecutive omnidirectional and directional PDPs
along the user trajectory are displayed to show the power
variation and delay drifting of MPCs. Directional PDPs are
obtained by applying antenna pattern in the strongest received
MPC direction to the omnidirectional PDP. 3D AOA and
AOD angular power spectrum is also provided to record
the time-variant angles. All spatially correlated and timevariant channel parameters along the UT trajectory are stored
in an output folder for further use such as beam steering
algorithm test, dynamic channel condition, and MIMO system
performance evaluation.

Fig. 5: NYUSIM 2.0 GUI shows the three new dialogue boxes for spatial consistency, human blockage, and O2I penetration loss.

Fig. 6: A typical output consecutive omnidirectional PDPs from
NYUSIM 2.0. For each channel snapshot, a PDP with absolute time
delay is stored and displayed.

V. C ONCLUSION
An extended NYUSIM channel model with spatial consistency, human blockage and O2I penetration loss was developed. The multiple reflection surfaces method was adopted to
update small-scale parameters in the spatial consistency procedure. A four-state Markov model was implemented to simulate human blockage events. Antenna HPBW for directional
channels and spatial lobe width for omnidirectional channels
were used to calculate transition rates and mean attenuation of
blockage events. A parabolic model was implemented for O2I
penetration loss, which will be useful for the future extended
NYUSIM channel model for indoor scenarios. NYUSIM 2.0
can generate consecutive and correlated omnidirectional and
directional PDPs based on the user-specified UT trajectory.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Millimeter wave mobile communications for 5G
cellular: It will work!” IEEE Access, vol. 1, pp. 335–349, May 2013.
[2] S. Sun et al., “Propagation models and performance evaluation for 5G
millimeter-wave bands,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 67, no. 9, Sep. 2018.
[3] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Wireless communications and applications above
100 GHz: Opportunities and challenges for 6G and beyond,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 78 729–78 757, Jun. 2019.
[4] S. Ju and T. S. Rappaport, “Simulating motion - incorporating spatial
consistency into the NYUSIM channel model,” 2018 IEEE 88th Vehicular Technology Conference Workshops, pp. 1–6, Aug. 2018.
[5] ——, “Millimeter-wave extended NYUSIM channel model for spatial
consistency,” 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6, Dec. 2018.

[6] Y. Wang et al., “A millimeter wave channel model with variant angles
under 3GPP SCM framework,” in IEEE 26th Annu. Inte. Symp. on
Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Comm., Aug 2015, pp. 2249–2254.
[7] F. Ademaj, M. K. Mueller, S. Schwarz, and M. Rupp, “Modeling of
spatially correlated geometry-based stochastic channels,” in 2017 IEEE
86th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Sept 2017, pp. 1–6.
[8] G. R. MacCartney et al., “Rapid fading due to human blockage in
pedestrian crowds at 5G millimeter-wave frequencies,” in 2017 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, Dec 2017, pp. 1–7.
[9] G. R. MacCartney et al., “Millimeter-wave base station diversity for
5G coordinated multipoint (CoMP) applications,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, May 2019.
[10] Y. Xing et al., “Indoor wireless channel properties at millimeter wave
and sub-Terahertz frequencies: Reflection, scattering, and path loss,” in
Proc. 2019 Global Communications Conferences, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[11] K. Haneda et al., “5G 3GPP-Like channel models for outdoor urban
microcellular and macrocellular environments,” in 2016 IEEE 83rd
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May 2016, pp. 1–7.
[12] J. G. Andrews et al., “Modeling and analyzing millimeter wave cellular
systems,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 403–430, Jan 2017.
[13] S. Sun et al., “A novel millimeter-wave channel simulator and applications for 5G wireless communications,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Communications, May 2017, pp. 1–7.
[14] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Wideband millimeter-wave propagation measurements and channel models for future wireless communication
system design (Invited Paper),” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3029–3056, Sept. 2015.
[15] M. K. Samimi and T. S. Rappaport, “3-D millimeter-wave statistical
channel model for 5G wireless system design,” IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Tech., vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2207–2225, July 2016.
[16] S. Sun et al., “Investigation of prediction accuracy, sensitivity, and
parameter stability of large-scale propagation path loss models for 5G
wireless communications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2843–2860, May 2016.
[17] G. R. Maccartney et al., “Indoor office wideband mmwave propagation
measurements and channel models at 28 and 73 GHz for ultra-dense
5G wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2388–2424, 2015.
[18] H. Liebe et al., “Propagation modeling of moist air and suspended
water/ice particles at frequencies below 1000 GHz,” in Atmospheric
Propagation Effects Through Natural and Man-Made Obscurants for
Visible to MM-Wave Radiation, 1993.
[19] 3GPP, “Technical specification group radio access network; study on
channel model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100 GHz (Release 15),” TR
38.901 V15.0.0, June 2018.
[20] 3GPP, “Discussion on procedure A for spatially-consistency UT mobility modeling,” ZTE, TDOC R1-1707267, May 2017.
[21] S. Ju, “Channel modeling and channel simulation for fifth-generation
and beyond millimeter-wave wireless communications,” New York University Library, Master of Science, May 2019.
[22] P. Kyösti et al., “WINNER II channel models,” European Commission,
IST-WINNER, D1.1.2 V1.2, Feb. 2008.
[23] 5GCM, “5G channel model for bands up to 100 GHz,” Oct. 21, 2016.

