Lorentz Breaking and SU (2)L × U (1)Y Gauge Invariance for Neutrinos
U. D. Jentschuraa,b, I. Nándorib,c,d, G. Somogyib
a

Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri 65409, USA

b

MTA–DE Particle Physics Research Group, P.O. Box 51, H–4001 Debrecen, Hungary

c

MTA Atomki, P.O. Box 51, H–4001 Debrecen, Hungary

d

University of Debrecen, P.O. Box 105, H–4010 Debrecen, Hungary

arXiv:1908.01389v2 [hep-ph] 3 Oct 2019

Abstract
Conceivable Lorentz-violating effects in the neutrino sector remain a research area of
great general interest, as they touch upon the very foundations on which the Standard
Model and our general understanding of fundamental interactions is laid. Here, we investigate the relation of Lorentz violation in the neutrino sector in light of the fact that
neutrinos and corresponding left-handed charged leptons form SU (2)L doublets under
the electroweak gauge group. Lorentz-violating effects thus cannot be fully separated
from questions related to gauge invariance. The model dependence of the effective interaction Lagrangians used in various recent investigations is investigated, with a special
emphasis on neutrino splitting, otherwise known as neutrino-pair Cerenkov radiation,
NPCR, and vacuum pair emission (electron-positron-pair Cerenkov radiation, LPCR).
We investigate two scenarios in which Lorentz violating effects do not necessarily also
break electroweak gauge invariance. The first of these involves a restricted set of gauge
transformation, a subgroup of SU (2)L ×U (1)Y , while in the second, differential Lorentz
violation is exclusively introduced by the mixing of the neutrino flavor and mass eigenstates. Our study culminates in a model which fully preserves SU (2)L × U (1)Y gauge
invariance, involves flavor-dependent Lorentz-breaking parameters, and still allows for
NPCR and LPCR decays to proceed.

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 Relation to Modified Dirac Algebra

3

3 Lorentz Violation and Gauge Coupling

5

3.1

Lorentz Violation and Gauge (Non–)Invariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

3.2

Lorentz–Violation and Gauge Coupling: One–Flavor Model . . . . . . . . . .

6

3.3

Lorentz–Violation and Gauge Coupling: Three–Flavor Model . . . . . . . . .

8

4 Gauge Invariance and Neutrino Decay

11

5 Conclusions

14

A Spontaneous Lorentz–Symmetry Breaking: Models and Implications

15

1

1

Introduction

Recently, tight bounds on Lorentz-violating parameters for neutrinos have been derived from
astrophysical observations,1–3 based on on the notion that neutrino decay into electronpositron pairs (called “lepton-pair Cerenkov radiation”, LPCR, or “vacuum pair emission”)
becomes kinematically allowed under a Lorentz noninvariance of the neutrino dispersion
relation. One observes that even a slight violation of Lorentz invariance at high energy
would lead to a large deviation of the dispersion relation from the light cone (“virtuality”)
E 2 − p~ 2 = p~ 2 (v 2 − 1), where v > 1 is the velocity parameter, because of the multiplicative
prefactor p~ 2 ≈ E 2 (in front of v 2 − 1) which grows without bound at high energy. For high
energy, the quantity q 2 = E 2 − ~
p 2 exceeds the electron-positron pair production threshold.

Very recently, these calculations have been supplemented by an analysis of the neutrino
splitting process3 (ν → ν ν̄ν, neutrino-pair Cerenkov radiation, NPCR), which in contrast
to charged-lepton-pair Cerenkov radiation4, 5 (ν → ν e e+ ) has negligible threshold and can
serve to set even tighter bounds on the Lorentz-violating parameters.
On the theoretical side, corresponding calculations are mainly based on the notion that
Lorentz noninvariance is restricted to the neutrino sector, while the Lorentz-violating parameter δe = ve2 −1 is set equal to zero for electrons and positrons. I.e., one assumes that the
maximum attainable velocity for electrons is exactly equal to ve = c, where c is the speed of
light.1, 2, 4–6 One might argue, though, that electrons and neutrinos enter an SU (2)L doublet, so that in addition to Lorentz violation, also gauge symmetry is violated if one assumes
a different propagation velocity for charged leptons and neutrinos in the high-energy limit.
We should point out that Lorentz violation for charged particles can often be studied more
easily using other kinds of processes (involving electrons, positrons, and photons, for example). The fact that the Lorentz violation coefficients for charged leptons and neutrinos
are not independent, due to the existence of SU (2)L × U (!1)Y gauge symmetry, has already
been used in the literature.7, 8 However, for a number of reasons, it has been of prime interest to infer bounds for Lorentz-violating parameters in the neutrino sector, even if the
models involved might be considered as “kinematics-only” approaches and lead to a slight,
perturbative breaking of gauge invariance, to the extent to be discussed below.
Two models have been investigated in this context by Bezrukov and Lee5 in order to analyze
the decay of superluminal neutrinos by electron-positron pair emission, one (“model I”), in
which the normal Lorentz metric enters the interaction Lagrangian, and another one (“model
II”), in which the same Lorentz-violating “metric”
geµν (v) = e
gµν (v) = diag(1, −v, −v, −v) ,

v > 1,

(1)

enters as in the dispersion relation of the decaying neutrino. (The “metric” is noncovariant,
hence there is no distinction between upper and lower indices.) Potentially, this “metric”
(or, “pseudo-metric”) also enters the effective interaction Lagrangian describing the decay
process, where v ≥ 1 is a Lorentz-violating parameter, which can be different for the maximum velocities of the initial (v = vi ) and final (v = vf ) particles in the decay process. (In
this paper, we have ~ = c = ǫ0 = 1.)
In Ref. 3, an even more general approach is taken, and the metric entering the interaction
Lagrangian is taken in the form
geµν (vint ) = diag(1, −vint , −vint , −vint ) .

(2)

where vint is not necessarily equal to vi or vf .

Here, we show in detail how the parameters of the models used by Cohen and Glashow,4
by Bezrukov and Lee,5 and by us in Ref. 3, are related to the gauge invariance under the
SU (2)L group, and how the formulation of the gauge sector relates to the individual Lorentzviolating parameters of the neutrino flavor and mass eigenstates, and those of the charged
leptons.
2

In particular, we can anticipate that the model used by Bezrukov and Lee5 for vacuum pair
emission turns out to be gauge invariant only with respect to a restricted subgroup of the
set of SU (2)L gauge transformations; we will investigate the respective subgroup.
This is important for a general understanding of the relation of potential Lorentz symmetry breaking in the neutrino sector, to fundamental symmetries and to other conceivable
non-standard interactions.9 (Note that corresponding questions do not occur in Lorentzsymmetry conserving models.10 ) The underlying question is the following: Is the existence
of the LPCR process compatible with electroweak gauge invariance, or, do the tight bounds
derived in1–3 (and the theoretical calculations reported in3–5 ) additionally depend on the
possibly problematic assumption of a breaking of SU (2)L symmetry, in addition to Lorentz
symmetry? These considerations are quite crucial for the clarification of the status of the
derived astrophysical bounds on the Lorentz-violating parameters.1–3
We can likewise anticipate that our discussion will lead to a fully SU (2)L × U (1)Y gauge
invariant model, with differential Lorentz-symmetry breaking across generations, that can
still accomodate for the possibility of neutrino decay, via both NPCR and LPCR processes,
in the high-energy limit (see Sec. 3.3).
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce a modified Dirac algebra, adapted
to the description of Lorentz-symmetry breaking spin-1/2 particles. Our investigations continue in Sec. 3.1 with the discussion of a manifestly Lorentz- and gauge-symmetry breaking
model for the interaction of (conceivable) superluminal neutrinos with electroweak gauge
bosons; this model has recently been used in Refs. 4, 5. In Sec. 3.2, we continue with the
investigation of a model which breaks Lorentz symmetry and (partially) restores electroweak
gauge symmetry, within a restricted electroweak symmetry group. We continue in Sec. 3.3
with the discussion of a Lorentz-breaking model which fully restores the electroweak symmetry group. Neutrino decay in a fully gauge-invariant model is discussed in Sec. 4. Conclusions
are reserved for Sec. 5, and some additional general remarks on the relation of (spontaneous)
Lorentz-symmetry breaking and gauge invariance are relegated to A.

2

Relation to Modified Dirac Algebra

We would like to briefly discuss a connection of the common Lagrangian used in the description of superluminal, Lorentz-violating neutrinos, to a generalized Dirac algebra. According
to Eq. (16) of Ref. 3, one may use the following Lagrangian, for a Lorentz-violating, massless,
left-handed Dirac particle,
L = iψ̄ γµ e
g µν (v) ∂ν ψ ,
(3)
(m)

where we assume that ψ = νℓ
is a left-handed neutrino mass eigenstate, i.e., [(1 −
γ 5 )/2] ψ = ψ. (In the course of the current investigations, we attempt to keep the notation as concise as possible and avoid any superfluous superscripts, or subscripts.) We can
write the Lagrangian for the massless case as

where the γ
eµ are given as

L = ψ̄ i γ
eµ ∂µ ψ ,
γ
e0 = 1,

γ
ei = v γ i .

These fulfill the anti-commutator relation

{e
γ µ, γ
eν } = 2e
g µν (v 2 ) = 2diag(1, −v 2 , −v 2 , −v 2 ) ,

(4)
(5)

(6)

where we note the square of the velocity. Note that the given pseudo-metric implies a
spatially isotropic breaking of Lorentz invariance. For bounds on coefficients with directional
dependence, we refer to the data compilation presented in Ref. 11.

3

One can in fact relate this formalism to so-called vierbein coefficients (cf. Refs. 12–17).
Namely, in a more general context, one can define the generalized Dirac matrices
eµ = eµA γ A ,
γ

(7)

where the Einstein summation convention is used, and γ A with A = 0, 1, 2, 3 are the ordinary
Dirac γ matrices, while the eµA take the role of the so-called “vierbein” in general relativity,
with the property
B
A
geµν (v 2 ) = eA
(8)
µ gAB eν = eµ eνA .

This implies that the “vierbein” takes the role of the square root of the metric.13 Capital
Latin indices can be raised with the flat-space metric g AB . One can then easily show that
{e
γ µ, e
γ ν } = eµA eνB {γ A , γ B } = eµA eνB (2g AB ) = 2 e
g µν (v 2 ) .

(9)

The analogy to the formalism of general relativity implies that e
g µν (v 2 ) takes the role of a
modified Lorentz “metric”, but without curvature (because we assume that the coefficients
are constant). The word “metric” should be understood with a grain of salt (hence the
apostrophes), because it does not constitute a space-time metric in the sense of general
relativity, that is used to measure space-time intervals, but rather, a mathematical object
used to parameterize the dispersion relation of a Lorentz-violating particle. One might thus
call it a “pseudo-metric”. Because of the lack of curvature, the pseudo-metric geµν (v 2 ) is
still characterizing a flat “space-time”. For a truly curved space, the notation g µν has been
proposed in Refs. 12–17 in order to distinguish the curved-space quantities from the flat-space
ones. [As a remark, we here note that the superluminal, Lorentz-violating neutrino model
is different from Lorentz-conserving, γ 5 -Hermitian (“pseudo–Hermitian”) models discussed
in the literature.18 ]
For a modified “metric” of the form (6), one can choose the vierbein coefficients as
e00 = 1 ,

e0i = ei0 = 0 ,

eij = v δji ,

i, j = 1, 2, 3 .

(10)

The modified Dirac equation describing the Lorentz violation, now with a mass term, can
be written as
(i e
γ µ ∂µ − m) ψ = 0 .
(11)

We now assume that ψ stands for a Majorana neutrino field. One can multiply from the left
by the operator (i γ
eν ∂ν + m), and use the operator identity
(i e
γ ν ∂ν + m) (i γ
eµ ∂µ − m) = −e
g µν (v 2 ) ∂µ ∂ν − m2 .

(12)

−e
g µν (v 2 ) ∂µ ∂ν − m2 = E 2 − v 2 ~p 2 − m2 ,

(13)

For the metric (6), one can use the identity

where E is the energy and p~ is the momentum operator. This leads to the dispersion relation,
p
(14)
E = ± p~ 2 v 2 + m2 .
The Lagrangian (11) is then seen to describe a Lorentz-violating particle with the dispersion
relation (14).

In order to draw a connection to the basis of the fermions of the Standard Model Extension
(SME), we refer to the classification of operators given in Eq. (9) of Ref. 19. Our isotropic
Lorentz-violating model corresponds, in the notation of Eq. (9) of Ref. 19, to the case
µν
,
ĉµν
F ′ F ” = δF ′ F ′′ c

cµν = (v − 1) (g µν − tµ tν ) ,

(15)

where the diagonality in the fermion flavor indices F ′ and F ′′ simply means that our Lorentzviolating model does not involve additional flavor mixing. The time-like unit vector tµ =
4

(1, 0, 0, 0) is used throughout this article.) Note, incidentally, that the Γ̂µAB matrices defined
in Eq. (9) of Ref. 19 correspond to our γ
e matrices, in the sense that
Γ̂µF ′ F ′′ = Γµ δF ′ F ′′ ,

Γµ = cµν γν = e
γµ .

(16)

Note also that, as pointed out in the text following Eq. (9) of Ref. 19, the Lorentz breaking
implied by the parameters cµν is CPT even and thus leaves the CPT symmetry intact. (It
is still interesting to discuss possible connections of Lorentz symmetry breaking and CPT
violation; a few remarks on this point will be given in the following.) Also, Sec. II of Ref. 19
addresses the problem of defining Majorana fermions in a Lorentz-violating extension of the
Standard Model. Further considerations on this point can be found in Ref. 20.

3
3.1

Lorentz Violation and Gauge Coupling
Lorentz Violation and Gauge (Non–)Invariance

In this section, we discuss how the coupling to the electroweak gauge sector has to be
modified in order to obtain the effective interaction Lagrangian used by Cohen and Glashow,4
which is equivalent to “model I” used by Bezrukov and Lee.5
Let us keep the notation as simple as possible, and start from the standard generalized Dirac
Lagrangian (11), which we recall for convenience,
L = ψ̄(ie
γ µ ∂µ − m)ψ ,

(17)

and assume that ψ stands for a (Majorana) neutrino field. (Questions related to the SU (2)L
doublet will be answered below.) We can write this Lagrangian as
L = ψ̄[iγ µ ∂µ − m + i(e
γ µ − γ µ )∂µ ]ψ ,
{z
}
|

(18)

≡Q

where Q is the Lorentz-violating perturbation and constitutes a special case of Eqs. (3), (8)
and (9) of Ref. 19.
In Refs. 21,22, the Q term is advocated to be the sub-Planck limit of a nonlocal theory with
spontaneous Lorentz and CPT violations,21 or in more general terms, as the low-energy limit
of new physics originating from the Planck scale. Indeed, as we investigate possible violations
of Lorentz invariance, we explore the limits of validity of our current understanding of
fundamental quantum field theory. E.g., it is well known that Lorentz invariance is one of the
assumptions underlying the proof of the CPT theorem.23 A violation of Lorentz invariance
therefore allows for violations of CPT, and indeed, some of the operators in the full ansatz for
Q, as discussed in Ref. 19, are CPT odd. For a long time, one has held the belief that CPT
violation automatically implies a violation of Lorentz invariance,24 while conversely, broken
Lorentz invariance allows for, but does not require, broken CPT invariance.24 Recently,25, 26
invoking additional concepts like nonlocal interactions, the conclusions of Ref. 24 have been
questioned, and it has been claimed that scenarios exist where CPT invariance is broken,
but Lorentz invariance still holds. In general, the questions regarding the ultimate limits of
the validity of our current understanding of fundamental physical laws must include bounds
on Lorentz-violating terms, and terms that allow for other broken fundamental symmetries,
like CPT.
Furthermore, the Lorentz-violating operators are assumed to be the sub-Planck limit of
new physics originating at the Planck scale, where the fundamental interactions will be
completely different from “low-”energy physics [where “low-”energy could even extend to
thepPeV scale, which is still twelve orders of magnitude below the (reduced) Planck scale
of 1/(8πG) = 2.4 × 1018 GeV]. At “low” energy, the coupling to the electroweak gauge
bosons proceeds by the substitution
∂µ → Dµ
(19)
5

where the operator Dµ constitutes the SU (2)L covariant derivative, applied to an SU (2)L
doublet, as discussed below. It is therefore permissible, or, suggested, to experiment with
the idea, that the substitution (19) applies only to the unperturbed Lagrangian in Eq. (18),
but leaves the perturbative Q term unchanged. In this case, the perturbative term does
not participate in the electroweak interaction [SU (2)L doublet], while modifying the free
propagation of the neutrino [once the Q operator is written so that it applies only to the
upper component of the SU (2)L doublet, i.e., only to the neutrino].
To be specific, let us start from the doublet
Le =



νe
eL



(20)

[see Eq. (12.227) of Ref. 27], where νe is the electron neutrino field, and eL is the lefthanded electron-positron field, and consider the coupling to the electroweak sector, as in
Eq. (12.232) of,27 concentrating on the terms that couple to the electroweak gauge fields [in
the Lorentz-covariant theory]
LG = L̄e (iγ µ Dµ )Le



g′
τi
= L̄e iγ µ ∂µ − Bµ − g Ai,µ Le ,
2
2

(21)

where the B and the Ai (i = 1, 2, 3) fields transform into the photon, the Z0 and the W ±
gauge bosons under electroweak unification (for details, see the discussion below). The
Pauli matrices are the τi , and they act within the SU (2)L doublet. The charge e, and the
electroweak couplings including the Weinberg angle are related to g and g ′ [see Eq. (33)
below]. If we add to LG the mass term
LM = − L̄e · M · Le


−mν + Q
ν̄e
=
0
ψ̄e

0
−me



νe
ψe



,

(22)

then the metric to be used for the effective interaction (Fermi interaction) at the electroweak
vertex remains the unperturbed Lorentz metric gµν , while the propagation of free neutrinos
acquires a Lorentz-breaking term Q, as specified in Eq. (18). In writing Eq. (22), we use
an oscillation-free neutrino model, and assume, furthermore, that the neutrino mass term
(C)
is of the Majorana type, i.e., νe = νe where C denotes the charge conjugate. We also
supplement the right-handed component of the electron field, ψe = eL + eR , for the Dirac
mass term of the electron. An inspection shows that the Lagrangian
L = LG + LM

(23)

directly leads to the interaction Lagrangian used by Cohen and Glashow4 and in “model I”
of Bezrukov and Lee.5 Strictly speaking, the Lagrangian LG + LM breaks electroweak gauge
invariance due to the presence of partial (not covariant) derivative operators in Q, but the
gauge and Lorentz-breaking terms enter at the same perturbative level, namely, at first order
in Q (see also A).

3.2

Lorentz–Violation and Gauge Coupling: One–Flavor Model

In this section, we investigate which Lagrangian should be used in the calculation of vacuum
pair emission and neutrino splitting if we intend to preserve electroweak gauge invariance
to the extent possible. We intend to show that it is possible to preserve SU (2)L gauge
invariance under a restricted set of gauge transformations in the electroweak sector, specifically, the sector related to the Z0 exchange, and still break Lorentz invariance differentially,
6

i.e., with different values for the Lorentz-breaking parameters, for neutrinos compared to
charged fermions. We first calculate this in an “oscillation-free” environment (using only
one particle generation), where we neglect the mixing of neutrino mass eigenstates and weak
interaction eigenstates, due to the off-diagonal entries of the Pontecorvo–Maki–Nakagawa–
Sakata (PMNS) matrix.
We again emphasize that τi matrices in Eq. (21) act in the SU (2)L doublet, while the γ
eµ
matrices act on the electrons and neutrinos separately. The first observation is that one can
choose the free Lagrangian as follows (we ignore the mass terms which are irrelevant for the
considerations that follow),



 µ
νe
0
ν̄e
ie
γνe ∂µ
(24)
LF ∼
0
ie
γeµ ∂µ
eL
ēL
for the SU (2)L doublet. In this case, it is immediately clear that free neutrinos and free
electrons obtain different maximal velocities, according to the anti-commutation relations
g µν (vν2e ) = 2 diag(1, −vν2e , −vν2e , −vν2e } ,
eνρe } = 2 e
{e
γνµe , γ
{e
γeµ , γ
eeρ }

µν

= 2e
g

(ve2 )

=

2 diag(1, −ve2 , −ve2 , −ve2 } .

(25a)
(25b)

pνe | vνe for
As discussed in Sec. 2, these lead to dispersion relations Ee = |~
pe | ve and Eνe = |~
the electron and electron neutrino, respectively.
The second observation is that one can replace the partial derivatives in Eq. (24) by covariant
derivatives, according to Eq. (21). The covariant derivation, under the SU (2)L gauge group,
is matrix-valued and the substitution ∂µ → Dµ will lead to off-diagonal entries in Eq. (24),
coupling the electron to the neutrino by what is later identified as the W boson. Furthermore,
the diagonal matrix (diagonal with regard to the SU (2)L doublet) with entries
 µ

γνe 0
e
(26)
0 γ
eeµ

does not necessarily commute with the W interaction Lagrangian, which is proportional
to the terms involving the τ1 and τ2 matrices in Eq. (21). However, one can formulate a
restricted set of gauge transformations, which pertain only to the


1 0
τ3 =
(27)
0 −1
matrix in Eq. (21), and restrict the covariant derivative to
i∂µ → iDµ = i∂µ −

g′
g
Bµ + τ3 A3,µ ,
2
2

(28)

The gauge coupling Lagrangian LZ,A which is to be added to LF under the restricted set of
gauge transformations, reads as follows,
LZ,A =L̄e · G · Le ,
 1 µ

0
γνe (gA3,µ − g ′ Bµ )
2e
G=
.
0
− 21 γ
eeµ (gA3,µ + g ′ Bµ )

(29a)
(29b)

Defining, as in Eq. (12.238) of Ref. 27, the Z0 and Aµ fields as

1
(−g A3,µ + g ′ Bµ ) ,
Zµ = p
2
g + g ′2
1
Aµ = p
(gBµ + g ′ A3,µ ) ,
g 2 + g ′2
7

(30)
(31)

one obtains the following couplings,
e
eeµ eL )
tan θW (ν̄e γ
eνµe νe + ēL γ
2

− cot θW (ēL γ
eeµ eL − ν̄e γ
eνµe νe ) Zµ

LZ,A = −

where

−ee
γeµ ēL Aµ eL ,
gg ′
,
e= p
g 2 + g ′2

tan θW =

(32)

g′
,
g

e = g ′ cos θW = g sin θW ,

(33)

and θW is the Weinberg angle, and e is the electron charge. (Adding the right-handed
component of the charged fermion field restores the full QED Lagrangian for the coupling of
the electron-positron field.) The result (32) is exactly equivalent to the corresponding terms
in Eq. (12.240) of Ref. 27, with the replacement γ µ → γ
eνµe for the neutrino couplings to the
µ
µ
Z0 boson, and γ → γ
ee for the electron couplings to the Z0 boson. The resulting modified
effective Fermi Lagrangian describing the coupling of electrons and neutrino is thus exactly
the one of “model II” used by Bezrukov and Lee, and by us in Ref. 3. (We recall that the
dominant contributions to both neutrino as well as lepton-pair Cerenkov radiation proceed
by Z0 exchange.)
For the calculation of neutrino splitting,3 it means that, e.g., if the γ
eνµµ for muon neutrinos
µ
are different from those of electrons neutrinos, e
γνe , because of a different maximum velocity
for the two species, then the neutrino splitting process becomes kinematically allowed (for
vνµ = vf > vνe = vi ). Furthermore, the effective interaction Lagrangian describing the fourfermion vertex receives a correction from the two Z0 vertices, leading to the appropriate
replacement
vint = vi vf
(34)
for the pseudo-metric to be used in the effective Lagrangian in Eq. (18) of Ref. 3, within
a gauge-invariant formulation. The same is done in “model II” of Ref. 5. Here, vi is the
Lorentz-violating velocity parameter for the initial (oncoming) particle, while vf is that of
the emitted (final) particle.
In the context of Lorentz-breaking, one often finds that symmetry groups are broken down to
smaller subgroups (see also the discussion in A). Here, we observe that the Lorentz-breaking
terms change the gauge group from SU (2)L × U (1)Y to U (1)L × U (1)Y .

3.3

Lorentz–Violation and Gauge Coupling: Three–Flavor Model

In the above considerations, we have shown that it is possible to formulate differential
Lorentz violation in the same SU (2)L doublet, to obtain different Lorentz-breaking parameters for electron neutrinos as compared to (left-handed) electrons, while preserving gauge
invariance with respect to a restricted subset of SU (2)L gauge transformations. This consideration required the use of different γ
eµ matrices for the upper and lower components of the
same SU (2)L doublet. One might ask the question if different Lorentz-breaking parameters
could be obtained for different neutrino species, as compared to electrons, and among the
neutrino mass eigenstates, even if one uses the same γ
eµ matrices for the upper and lower
components of the same SU (2)L doublet, and only assumes a dependence of the γ
eµ matrices
on the fermion generations. In contrast to the model discussed in Sec. 2, we here preserve
full SU (2)L gauge invariance.
We thus start from the Lagrangian (ignoring the free mass terms)



 µ
νe
0
ν̄e
ie
γνe Dµ
+ (e ↔ µ) + (e ↔ τ ) ,
L3G =
eL
0
ie
γνµe Dµ
ēL
8

(35)

p3

νi

p3

p4

−p2

νi

e, µ, τ

e, µ, τ

p4

−p2

νf

νf
Z0

Z0

νi

νi

p1

p1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Feynman diagrams for the LPCR [Fig. (a)] and NPCR [Fig. (b)] processes;
these proceed via exchange of a virtual Z0 boson. The diagrams are especially relevant in the high-energy region of our gauge-invariant, but Lorentz-breaking model,
where threshold conditions for LPCR are met. The “faster” generation of particles,
of which we assume that νi is a member, decays into charged fermions [Fig. (a)]
or neutal fermions [Fig. (b)] of a “slower” flavor (see the text of Sec. 4 for further
explanations).

where “3G” refers to the three generations, and we assume a uniform Lorentz violation
within the first generation, and uniform within the second generation, but with different
overall parameters,
eτρ .
(36)
eµρ 6= γ
eνρτ = γ
eeρ 6= e
γνρµ = γ
γ
eνρe = γ
eeµ .) As the matrix
(Note that, in the sense of Sec. 3.2, we now have e
γνµe = γ

 µ
0
γ
eνe
0 γ
eνµe

(37)

is proportional to the unit matrix [from within the SU (2)L doublet], full gauge invariance
is preserved.
Invoking neutrino oscillations, we can write the mass term as
(m)

M = ν̄k

(m)

m k νk

,

(38)

(m)

where the νk are the neutrino mass eigenstates (k = 1, 2, 3 is summed over). In the free
theory, we end up with a Lagrangian
(m)

LF = iν̄k

(m),µ

γkj
e

(m)

∂µ νj

(m)

− ν̄k

(m)

m k νk

,

(39)

where repeated indices are summed over the generations (k, j = 1, 2, 3), and the mass
(m)
(f)
eigenstates νk and the flavor eigenstates νj are related by the PMNS matrix with entries
Ukj ,
(m)
(f)
(40)
νk = Ukj νj .
The emergence of the PMNS matrix for both Dirac as well as Majorana neutrinos is discussed
in detail in Ref. 28. Again, neutrino mass (m) and flavor (f) eigenstates are distinguished
based on their superscript. Of course, the mass-basis matrices
(m),µ

γ
ekj

(f),µ

= Ukℓ γ
eℓ

−1
Uℓj

(41)

are effective, Lorentz-violating, modified Dirac matrices describing the (possibly off-diagonal,
k 6= j) Lorentz violation in the neutrino mass eigenstate basis (the subscript ℓ is being
9

summed over in the above equation). [For absolute clarity, we should reemphasize that the
γ
e matrices used up to this point in our analysis, such as in Eq. (35), constitute flavor-basis
matrices which would otherwise carry a superscript (f) once we distinguish between the mass
and the flavor basis.]
Two limiting cases are of interest: (i) In the low-energy limit, the Lorentz-violating parameters play a subordinate role as compared to the mass terms, and the energy splitting for
equal momenta, among the neutrinos, is given in the mass eigenstate basis. In that limit, an
inspection shows that the dominant terms in the free Lagrangian (39) are just the diagonal
ones in the mass basis,
(m)

LF ≈ iν̄k

(m),µ

γ
ek

(m)

∂µ νk

(m)

− ν̄k

(m)

m k νk

,

(42)

where of course, the subscript k is being summed over k = 1, 2, 3. However, the matrices
(m),µ
(m),µ
(m),µ
γ
eℓ
are being defined as in γ
eℓ
=γ
eℓℓ , without a summation over ℓ. Under these
(m)
assumptions, The maximal attainable velocities vk of the mass eigenstates are thus related
of the flavor eigenstates, by the relation
3
X

(f)

(m)

−1
Ukℓ vℓ Uℓk
= vk

(no summation over k).

(43)

ℓ=1

For the Lorentz-breaking but gauge-invariant formulation of the neutrino splitting process,
the appropriate choice [for the low-energy region, as measured by Eq. (52)] for the Lorentzviolating parameter in the effective interaction Lagrangian is [see Eq. (18) of Ref. 3]
(m)

vint = vi

(m)

vf

(44)
(m)

where the velocities of the initial and final mass eigenstates are denoted as vi

(m)

and vf ,

(m)

respectively. Furthermore, it is clear that the effective velocities vk for the neutrino mass
eigenstates, under the given assumptions, will be different from those of the electrons, which
(f )
are given (due to the absence of mass mixing among the charged leptons) by vj , thus
kinematically allowing the vacuum-pair emission process [again, for the low-energy region,
as measured by Eq. (52)].
(ii) In the high-energy limit, one can neglect the mass term in Eq. (39), and observes that in
this limit, the flavor eigenstates approximate the mass eigenstates. Furthermore, the PMNS
matrix approaches the unit matrix,
Ukℓ → δkℓ

(high-energy limit with ve 6= vµ 6= vτ ).

Here, we refer to Eq. (36) for the definition of the
 ρ σ
 ρ σ
eνe = γ
γ
eνe , γ
ee , γ
ee
 ρ σ
 ρ σ
eνµ = γ
γ
eνµ , γ
eµ , e
γµ
 ρ σ
 ρ σ
eντ = γ
γ
eντ , γ
eτ , γ
eτ

corresponding e
γ matrices, with

(45)

= 2e
g ρσ (ve2 ) ,

(46)

(vµ2 ) ,

(47)

= 2e
g ρσ (vτ2 ) ,

(48)

ρσ

= 2e
g

where the subscript e, µ and τ refer to the different fermion flavors (generations). For
absolute clarity, we reiterate that, according to the discussion above, the velocities ve , vµ
and vτ are defined, first and foremost, in the flavor eigenstate basis, with the charged
fermions and neutrinos within the same generation attaining the same velocity.
The Lagrangian, in the high-energy limit, can be written as
(f)

(f),µ

LF ≈ iν̄k e
γk
(m),µ
γk

→

(f ),µ
γk
,

(f)

(m)

∂µ νk ≈ iν̄k
(m)
νk

→

(m),µ

γ
ek

(f )
νk

,

(m)

∂µ νk

,

(high-energy limit with ve 6= vµ 6= vτ ) ,
10

(49)

(f),µ

where we remember that we started from the γ
ek
matrices which were diagonal in the
flavor basis [see Eq. (35), with k = e, µ τ ]. Under this assumption, both vacuum pair
emission (Refs. 4, 5) as well as neutrino splitting are kinematically allowed across (but not
within!) generations (flavors), provided we have
vf < vi

(f, i = e, µ, τ ) .

(50)

That is to say, the “faster generation” decays into the “slower generation”. We recall once
more that, within the gauge-invariant model, the charged fermions offer the same Lorentz(f)
violating parameters as the corresponding neutrino flavors, and hence, vf ≡ vk . Neutrino
splitting as well as vacuum pair emission are both kinematically allowed, because of the
differences among the Lorentz-violating parameters for the different neutrino flavors, which
happen to approximate the mass (energy) eigenstates under the given assumptions.
The coincidence of the mass and flavor eigenstates in the high-energy limit makes the theoretical analysis easier; the appropriate choice for the parameter vint (see Ref. 3) entering
the interaction Lagrangian (see also Sec. 4 below) is
(f)

(f)

vint = vi vf = vi vf

(high-energy limit with ve 6= vµ 6= vτ ) ,

(51)

and it fully preserves preserves gauge invariance.
The transition among the two regimes characterized by the Lagrangians (49) and (42) occurs
at a momentum scale of the order of
q
(52)
|~
p| = δm2 /δf1 f2 ,
where δm2 is a typical neutrino mass square difference, and of course, δf1 f2 is a typical
delta-parameter difference among the Lorentz-violating parameters for the different neutrino
flavors (We set v 2 = 1 + δ, in accordance with Refs. 3–5.) For a parameter estimates of two
different neutrino flavors of δf1 f2 ∼ 10−20 and δm2 ∼ 10−3 eV2 , the transition should occur
at momenta on the order of 108 . . . 109 eV. (We here refer to bounds on Lorentz-violating
parameters from laboratory-based experiments,29, 30 which are less strict than those derived
from astrophysical observations;31, 32 the latter, though, are under less stringent external
control.)

4

Gauge Invariance and Neutrino Decay

The observations made above, especially those reported in Sec. 3.3 for the high-energy limit
of differential Lorentz violation across generations (flavors), but with the same Lorentzviolating parameters ascribed to charged and neutral fermions, allow us to discuss a fully
gauge-symmetry conserving model, which still allows for NPCR and LPCR decays to proceed. Compared with other models studied in the literature (see Refs. 3–5), the model
discussed here is most restricted in parameter space (it requires flavor-dependent Lorentzbreaking parameters), but perhaps, most stringent in its theoretical formulation, in the sense
that it can be fully embedded into the Lorentz-violating Standard Model Extension (SME).
Because of full gauge invariance, we are also able to address, in passing, the gauge dependence not within the SU (2)L × U (1)Y gauge group, but within additional terms induced
by the Rξ gauge for the Z 0 boson propagator, mapped onto the effective Fermi interaction.
Another question to address is whether the SU (2)L gauge symmetry protects potentially superluminal neutrinos from the NPCR and LPCR decay processes discussed in Refs. 3–5. Or,
one might ask if, conversely, bounds on Lorentz-violating parameters for charged fermions
could universally be applied to neutrinos, if we postulate the full retention of SU (2)L ×U (1)Y
gauge invariance.
Under the assumption of flavor-dependent Lorentz breaking, if, say, electrons and electron
neutrinos propagate faster than muons and muon neutrinos, the decay processes νe →
11

νe νµ ν̄µ , and νe → νe µ− µ+ , will be kinematically allowed [see Eq. (50)]. Let us give a
brief account of the calculations. We define the pseudo-metric corresponding to the velocity
vj > 1, in full accordance with Eq. (6), as follows,
geµν (vj ) = vj g µν + (1 − vj )tµ tν = diag(1, −vj , −vj , −vj ) .

(53)

The massive Feynman propagator for the gauge vector boson in Rξ gauge is given as follows,
DFµν = −

g µν + (ξ − 1)k µ k ν /(k 2 − ξMZ2 )
,
k 2 − MZ2 + iǫ

(54)

where ǫ > 0 denotes the infinitesimal imaginary part, and MZ is the Z0 boson mass. The
modified Dirac matrices e
γjµ , which are alternatively denoted as Γµj [see Eq. (16)], read as
follows,
Γµj = γ
ejµ = [vj g µν + (1 − vj ) tµ tν ] = geµν (vj ) γν ,
(55)

where we note that there is no distinction any more between the flavor and the mass eigenstate basis. The effective Lagrangian for the decay ν → νΨΨ is given as follows,
GF
L2ν2Ψ
= √
int
2 2
GF
= √
2 2
For NPCR, we have





νj γ
ejµ (1 − γ5 ) νj gµν Ψk γ
ejν (cV − cA γ5 ) Ψj





νj γ
ejµ (1 − γ5 ) νj geµν (vj vk ) Ψk e
γjν (cV − cA γ5 ) Ψj .
Ψ k = νk

⇒

cV = cA = 1 ,

(56)

(57)

whereas if ℓk is a charged lepton (electron–positron pair), then
Ψk = ℓk

⇒

cV = 0 ,

cA = −1/2 ,

(58)

approximately. The invariant matrix element in the full gauge theory is
M=



i
g2
ui (p3 ) γ
eiµ (1 − γ 5 )ui (p1 )
16 cos2 θW
(p2 + p4 )2 − MZ2 + iǫ



(p2 + p4 )µ (p2 + p4 )ν 
uf (p4 ) γ
efν (cV − cA γ 5 )uf (p2 ) ,
× gµν + (ξ − 1)
2
2
(p2 + p4 ) − ξMZ

(59)

where, just like in Ref. 3, p1 is the four-momentum of the oncoming particle, p3 is the
neutrino momentum after the decay, and p2 and p4 are the four-momenta of the created
fermion–anti-fermion pair (see Fig. 1). The squared matrix element computed in this way is
gauge invariant (with respect to the electroweak gauge group), and an explicit calculation
shows that terms involving the gauge parameter ξ of the Rξ gauge do not appear in the final
result. In order to arrive at this result, it is crucial though that (i) the Z0 boson–fermion–
anti-fermion vertices are proportional to γ
ejµ , (ii) the correct prescription for the spin sums
[see Eq. (32) of Ref. 3] is used,
X
(60)
gµν (vj ) γ µ pν = vi p
νj,s ⊗ ν j,s = e
/ + (1 − vi )(p · t)/t ,
s

(iii) and that the dispersion relation in Eq. (22) is taken into account for external superluminal particles, most conveniently in the form vj p2 + (1 − vj )2 (t · p)2 = 0.

We note that in a spontaneously broken gauge theory, the gauge invariance of the squared
matrix element computed in Rξ gauge is usually only recovered once diagrams involving
both vector and scalar boson exchanges are summed up. (This may involve exchanges of
gauge bosons of the weak interaction as well as Higgs particle exchanges.) Indeed, in the
Standard Model, the left-handed lepton current ψγµ (cV − cA γ 5 )ψ is not conserved, with the
12

non-conservation being proportional to the fermion mass. (Note that this non-conservation
already occurs at tree level and can be derived on the basis of the axial component of the
current.) However, the mass itself is proportional to the Yukawa coupling of the fermion
(to the Higgs particle). Since we are working in the massless approximation for leptons,
the Yukawa couplings in our model are set to zero, and the single diagram with only Z0
boson exchange is gauge invariant by itself. In particular, we have explicitly checked that
terms coming from contractions involving the part of the Z0 boson propagator proportional
to (ξ − 1) sum to zero upon using the superluminal dispersion relation.
For a general decay process in our gauge-invariant model, we obtain the following formula
for the decay rate,

2
g2
E15 c2V + c2A
Γνi →νi ψf ψf =
2
2
16 MZ cos θW
24π 3 420 ns


(61)
× (δi − δf ) 17(δi − δf )2 + 7 (δi + δf )2 .

Here, ns counts the allowed spin states of the neutrino (ns = 2 in Ref. 4 but ns = 1 in
Ref. 5). Note that the factor fe used in the notation of Ref. 3 is absorbed in the prefactor
c2V + c2A . The energy loss rate is obtained, in the fully gauge-invariant model, as
dEνi →νi ψf ψ
dx

f

=

2
E16 c2V + c2A
g2
2
2
16 MZ cos θW
24π 3 672ns


× (δi − δf ) 22(δi − δf )2 + 8 (δi + δf )2 .



(62)

For LPCR decay, in our gauge-invariant (GI) model, we find
G2F 5
k ,
192π 3 1
G2F 6
k ,
= −a′GI
192π 3 1

Γνi →νi e− e+ = aGI
dEνi →νi e− e+
dx

(63a)
(63b)

with the following results,
aGI
a′GI


17(c2V + c2A )
=
(δi − δf ) (δi − δf )2 +
420ns

11(c2V + c2A )
=
(δi − δf ) (δi − δf )2 +
336ns


7
2
(δi + δf ) ,
17

4
2
(δi + δf ) .
11

(64a)
(64b)

For NPCR decay, in our gauge-invariant model, we find
G2F 5
k ,
192π 3 1
G2F 6
k ,
= −b′GI
192π 3 1

Γνi →νi νf ν f = bGI
dEνi →νi νf ν f
dx

(65a)
(65b)

where the coefficients bGI and b′GI can be obtained from Eq. (61) by setting cV = cA = 1,


17
7
2
2
(66a)
bGI =
(δi − δf ) (δi − δf ) +
(δi + δf ) ,
210ns
17


4
11
(66b)
(δi − δf ) (δi − δf )2 +
(δi + δf )2 .
b′GI =
168ns
11
The change in the prefactors as compared to the kinematics-only approach pursued in
Refs. 3–5 does not significantly change the conclusions drawn in Ref. 3 on astrophysically
derived bounds for the Lorentz-violating parameters. We can establish that SU (2)L×U (1)Y
gauge invariance does not protect superluminal neutrinos from decay and energy loss processes (NPCR and LPCR).
13

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we have investigated the assumptions underlying the model dependent interaction Lagrangians used in3–5 for the formulation of the lepton-pair (LPCR) and neutrino-pair
Cerenkov radiation (NPCR, see Sec. 4) processes, which have led to very tight bounds on the
Lorentz-violating parameters in the neutrino sector.1–3 The main results can be summarized
as follows.
Conclusion (i). The model used by Cohen and Glashow,4 and “model I” of Bezrukov and
Lee5 can be traced to an interaction Lagrangian which breaks electroweak gauge invariance,
in addition to Lorentz invariance (see Sec. 3.1). However, this breaking proceeds on the
same perturbative level on which the Lorentz-breaking terms themselves are formulated [see
Eq. (22)]. A discussion on the implications with respect to fundamental symmetries is given
in Sec. 3.1 of this article.
Conclusion (ii). “Model II” of Bezrukov and Lee, used in the formulation of the LPCR
process in Ref. 5, and also used by us in Ref. 3, is gauge invariant under a restricted set of
gauge transformations, within the SU (2)L gauge group. The use of non-uniform modified
Dirac matrices, within the same SU (2)L doublet, is crucial to this observation [see Eq. (24)].
The derivation goes through even in an “oscillation-free” environment where one neglects
the off-diagonal entries of the PMNS matrix, in the neutrino sector. The result given in
Eq. (34) clarifies the “gauge-invariant” Lagrangian used in “model II” [see Eq. (4) of Ref. 5].
Conclusion (iii). If one invokes neutrino oscillations, then the situation is even more favorable for the gauge-invariant models (see Sec. 3.3). One can use uniform modified Dirac
matrices within the same SU (2)L doublet, but assumes different Lorentz-violating parameters between generations [see Eq. (35)]. By assuming only a generation dependence, one
obtains differential Lorentz violation among the neutrino mass eigenstates, and between
neutrinos and charged leptons, without breaking SU (2)L × U (1)Y gauge invariance. Under
these assumptions [see Eq. (44)], it is useful to keep the Lorentz-violating parameters vint
that enters the interaction Lagrangian, separate from the ones of the initial and final states,
as is done in Ref. 3. Inspired by the considerations reported in Sec. 3.3, one may devise a
fully SU (2)L × U (1)Y gauge-symmetry conserving model, which still allows for the NPCR
and LPCR decays to proceed (see Sec. 4). In the course of the calculations reported in
Sec. 4, we also address the question regarding the dependence of the results on the gauge
used for the massive vector boson propagator (Rξ gauge).
We have thus clarified the cryptic remark of the “gauge invariance” of “model II” of Bezrukov
and Lee [see Eq. (4) of Ref. 5], and provided additional motivation for the functional form
of the various model-dependent interaction Lagrangians used in Refs. 3–5.
The very stringent bounds on the Lorentz-violating parameters in the neutrino sector, based
on astrophysical observations,1–3 thus do not require models in which electroweak gauge
invariance is broken. This observation is quite crucial because it implies that one cannot
“argue away” the tight bounds derived in Refs. 1–3 for the Lorentz-breaking parameters in
the neutrino sector, based on the notion that the preservation of electroweak gauge invariance
would otherwise preclude the existence of the decay processes on which the bounds are based.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation (Grant
PHY–1710856). This work was also supported by the ÚNKP-17-3 New National Excellence
Program of the Ministry of Human Capacities of Hungary and by grant K 125105 of the
National Research, Development and Innovation Fund in Hungary.

14

A

Spontaneous Lorentz–Symmetry Breaking: Models and Implications

Although the ansatz of the current paper is completely phenomenological, and we do not
discuss the possible mechanism behind Lorentz violation in any greater detail, it is still
instructive to mention a specific model of spontaneous Lorentz invariance violation, which
has been discussed in rather great detail in the literature.
Namely, according to Refs. 33–35, the photon could potentially be formulated as the NambuGoldstone boson linked to spontaneous Lorentz invariance violation. (This ansatz was originally formulated before electroweak unification.) Interest in this approach has recently been
revived, and the theory has been worked out in greater detail.33–44 Both Abelian as well
as a non-Abelian gauge theories have been discussed.37 In the case of an Abelian gauge
theory, one assumes that the gauge field Aµ obtains a non-vanishing vacuum expectation
value according to [see text after Eq. (1) of Ref. 43],
hAµ i = nµ M ,

(67)

where M is a (possibly large) energy scale at which the breaking of Lorentz symmetry
occurs. The Lorentz group restricts itself to SO(1, 2) if nµ is space-like (nµ nµ = −1), and
into SO(3) if nµ is timelike (nµ nµ = 1).
The dynamical constraint [see Eq. (1) of Ref. 43]
Aµ Aµ = n2 M 2 ,

(68)

is imposed on the Aµ field. One then parameterizes the Aµ field as [see Eq. (3) of Ref. 43]
Aµ = aµ +

nµ
(n · A) ,
n2

(69)

where the aµ takes the role of the photon field. The following Lagrangian is eventually
obtained after an expansion in leading order in 1/M [see Eq. (3) of Ref. 43],
1
1
fµν f µν − δ(n · a)2
4
2
+ ψ̄(iγ µ ∂µ − m)ψ − eaµ ψ̄ γ µ ψ

L(a, ψ) = −

−

n2 aρ aρ
en2 aρ aρ
1
ψ̄(γ · n)ψ .
fµν hµν
+
4
M
2M

(70)

Here, aµ takes the role of the (quantized) electromagnetic field, while fµν = ∂µ aν − ∂ν aµ is
the field strength tensor. Also, hµν = nµ ∂ ν − nν ∂ µ is an oriented Lorentz-violating tensor.
The orthogonality condition n · a = 0 is explicitly introduced in the Lagrangian through
a gauge-fixing term with parameter δ. Note that the Lagrangian (70) is obtained after a
suitable redefinition of the fermion field, as given explicitly in Eq. (6) of Ref. 43.
We note that the sum of the terms
ψ̄(iγ µ ∂µ − m)ψ − eaµ ψ̄ γ µ ψ

(71)

in Eq. (70) add up to the gauge-invariant quantum electrodynamic interaction (e is the
electron charge).
In the limit M → ∞, the entire Lagrangian (70) approximates the ordinary QED Lagrangian. However, for finite M , the fifth and the sixth term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (70), which are initially generated by spontaneous Lorentz breaking in the electromagnetic sector, explicitly break electromagnetic gauge invariance, in addition to breaking
Lorentz invariance. The fifth term generates a three-photon vertex, while the sixth term
generates a two-fermion, two-photon interaction (see, e.g., Ref. 40).
In Eq. (22) of Ref. 40, it is shown that the contribution of both of the Lorentz-breaking
terms to the electron-photon scattering amplitude vanishes (due to mutual cancelations) if
15

we take the matrix element between on-shell spinors. Around Eq. (32) of Ref. 40, it is
argued that the same cancelation occurs for the one-loop amplitude, if the specific photon
propagator integral given in Eq. (32) of Ref. 40 is evaluated in dimensional regularization.
These considerations show that the Lorentz-violating terms in Eq. (70) do not necessarily
lead to observable effects at low-energy.
The generalization to spontaneous Lorentz-symmetry breaking in non-Abelian gauge fields
involves the assumption [see Eq. (9) of Ref. 37]
hAiµ i = niµ M

(72)

where the upper index i describes the component within the non-Abelian gauge group,
e.g., SU (N ), in which case i = 1, . . . , N . For the Lorentz-breaking terms to vanish in the
low-energy limit, one then has to make additional assumptions regarding the masses of the
particles in a given SU (N ) multiplet; e.g., according to Eq. (19) of Ref. 37, one needs to
assume these masses to be equal.
For the context of the current paper, two observations are relevant:
(i) The approach taken in Refs. 37–44 starts from a spontaneous Lorentz symmetry breaking
at some high-energy scale M , involving a gauge boson field. This assumption is quite natural,
because symmetry breaking for a vector field automatically singles out a specific direction in
space-time (it would not necessarily do so for a spinor). However, as a comparison to Eq. (70)
shows, for the case of spontaneous symmetry breaking in the gauge boson sector, the fermion
sector is largely unaffected by the Lorentz-symmetry breaking, which initially occurs only
in the gauge boson sector. [We observe that the third and fourth term in Eq. (70) add up to
the fully Lorentz-covariant Lagrangian for the electromagnetically coupled electron.] Hence,
the ansatz discussed in Refs. 33–44 is not directly applicable to the models constrained by
our calculations, which pertain to Lorentz violation in the fermion (neutrino) sector.
(ii) A very important observation can be made. Namely, Lorentz violation and gauge invariance violation are intimately intertwined. The term
en2 aρ aρ
ψ̄(γ · n)ψ
2M

(73)

in Eq. (70) manifestly breaks the electromagnetic U (1)EM gauge symmetry. We remember
that a gauge transformation in quantum electrodynamics works as aµ → aµ − ∂µ Λ and
ψ → ψ exp(ieΛ), where Λ = Λ(x) is the gauge function, and e is the electron charge. Under
this gauge transformation, the term (73) is manifestly non-invariant. Lorentz violation has
thus created a term that violates gauge invariance, on the perturbative level (in first order in
the 1/M expansion). Analogously, the model used by Cohen and Glashow in Ref. 4 assumes
a breaking of gauge invariance on the perturbative level, in the latter case, of the electroweak
gauge symmetry. Based on our comparison with the approach taken in Refs. 33–44, this is
a perfectly permissible assumption.

References
[1] F. W. Stecker and S. T. Scully, Propagation of superluminal PeV IceCube neutrinos:
A high energy spectral cutoff of new constraints on Lorentz invariance violation, Phys.
Rev. D 90, 043012 (2014).
[2] F. W. Stecker, S. T. Scully, S. Liberati, and D. Mattingly, Searching for traces of
Planck-scale physics with high energy neutrinos, Phys. Rev. D 91, 045009 (2015).
[3] G. Somogyi, I. Nándori, and U. D. Jentschura, Neutrino Splitting for Lorentz–Violating
Neutrinos: Detailed Analysis, Phys. Rev. D 100, 035036 (2019).

16

[4] A. G. Cohen and S. L. Glashow, Pair Creation Constrains Superluminal Neutrino Propagation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 181803 (2011).
[5] F. Bezrukov and H. M. Lee, Model dependence of the bremsstrahlung effects from the
superluminal neutrino at OPERA, Phys. Rev. D 85, 031901(R) (2012).
[6] F. W. Stecker, Limiting superluminal electron and neutrino velocities using the 2010
Crab Nebula flare and the IceCube PeV neutrino events, Astropart. Phys. 56, 16–18
(2014).
[7] J. P. Noordmans and K. K. Vos, Limits on Lorentz violation from charged pion decay,
Phys. Rev. D 89, 101702(R) (2014).
[8] M. S. Berger, V. A. Kostelecky, and Z. Liu, Contributions to pion decay from Lorentz
violation in the weak sector, Phys. Rev. D 93, 036005 (2016).
[9] G. Barenboim, C. A. Ternes, and M. Tórtoia, New physics vs new paradigms: distinguishing CPT violation from NSI, Eur. Phys. J. C 79, 390 (2019).
[10] U. D. Jentschura, D. Horváth, S. Nagy, I. Nándori, Z. Trócsányi, and B. Ujvári, Weighing the Neutrino, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 23, 1450004 (2014).
[11] V. A. Kostelecky and N. Russell, Data tables for Lorentz and CP T violation, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 83, 11–29 (2011).
[12] U. D. Jentschura, Gravitationally Coupled Dirac Equation for Antimatter, Phys. Rev.
A 87, 032101 (2013), [Erratum Phys. Rev. A 87, 069903(E) (2013)].
[13] U. D. Jentschura and J. H. Noble, Nonrelativistic Limit of the Dirac–Schwarzschild
Hamiltonian: Gravitational Zitterbewegung and Gravitational Spin–Orbit Coupling,
Phys. Rev. A 88, 022121 (2013).
[14] U. D. Jentschura and J. H. Noble, Foldy–Wouthuysen transformation, scalar potentials
and gravity, J. Phys. A 47, 045402 (2014).
[15] J. H. Noble and U. D. Jentschura, Ultrarelativistic Decoupling Transformation for Generalized Dirac Equations, Phys. Rev. A 92, 012101 (2015).
[16] J. H. Noble and U. D. Jentschura, Dirac Hamiltonian and Reissner–Nordström Metric:
Coulomb Interaction in Curved Space–Time, Phys. Rev. A 93, 032108 (2016).
[17] U. D. Jentschura, Gravitational Effects in g Factor Measurements and High–Precision
Spectroscopy: Limits of Einstein’s Equivalence Principle, Phys. Rev. A 98, 032508
(2018).
[18] U. D. Jentschura and B. J. Wundt, Localizability of Tachyonic Particles and Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay, Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 1894 (2012) [13 pages].
[19] V. A. Kostelecky and M. Mewes, Neutrinos with Lorentz-violating operators of arbitrary
dimension, Phys. Rev. D 85, 096005 (2012).
[20] K. Fujiwara and A. Tureanu, Neutrino-antineutrino mass splitting in the Standard
Model and baryogenesis, Phys. Lett. B 743, 39–45 (2015).
[21] V. A. Kostelecky and R. Lehnert, Stability, causality, and Lorentz and CPT violation,
Phys. Rev. D 63, 065008 (2001).
[22] V. A. Kostelecky and M. Mewes, Electrodynamics with Lorentz-violating operators of
arbitrary dimension, Phys. Rev. D 80, 015020 (2009).
[23] R. Jost, Eine Bemerkung zum CPT, Helv. Phys. Acta 30, 409–416 (1957).
17

[24] O. W. Greenberg, CPT Violation Implies Violation of Lorentz Invariance, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 231602 (2002).
[25] M. Chaichian, A. D. Dolgov, V. A. Novikov, and A. Turaenu, CPT violation does not
lead to a violation of Lorentz invariance and vice versa, Phys. Lett. B 699, 177–180
(2011).
[26] M. Chaichian, K. Fujikawa, and A. Turaenu, Lorentz invariant CPT violation: Particle
and antiparticle mass splitting, Phys. Lett. B 712, 115–118 (2012).
[27] C. Itzykson and J. B. Zuber, Quantum Field Theory (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980).
[28] S. M. Bilenky, Neutrino in Standard Model and beyond, arXiv:1501.00232 [hep-th].
[29] S. Coleman and S. L. Glashow, High-energy tests of Lorentz invariance, Phys. Rev. D
59, 116008 (1999).
[30] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. [MiniBooNE Collaboration], Test of Lorentz and CPT
violation with Short Baseline Neutrino Oscillation Excesses, Phys. Lett. B 718, 1303–
1308 (2013).
[31] R. Abbasi et al. [IceCube Collaboration], Search for a Lorentz-violating sidereal signal
with atmospheric neutrinos in IceCube, Phys. Rev. D 82, 112003 (2010).
[32] M. G. Aartsen et al. [IceCube Collaboration], Neutrino interferometry for high-precision
tests of Lorentz symmetry with IceCube, Nat. Phys. 14, 961–966 (2018).
[33] W. Heisenberg, Quantum Theory of Fields and Elementary Particles, Rev. Mod. Phys.
29, 269–278 (1957).
[34] J. D. Bjorken, A Dynamical Origin for the Electromagnetic Field, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)
24, 174–187 (1963).
[35] T. Eguchi, New approach to collective phenomena in superconductivity models, Phys.
Rev. D 14, 2755–2763 (1976).
[36] I. Bialynicki-Birula, Quantum Electrodyanmics without Electromagnetic Field, Phys.
Rev. 130, 465–468 (1963).
[37] J. L. Chkareuli, C. D. Froggatt, and H. B. Nielsen, Lorentz Invariance and Origin of
Symmetries, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 091601 (2001).
[38] J. L. Chkareuli, C. D. Froggatt, and H. B. Nielsen, Spontaneously generated gauge
invariance, Nucl. Phys. B 609, 46–60 (2001).
[39] J. D. Bjorken, Emergent Gauge Bosons, hep-th/0111196.
[40] A. T. Azatov and J. L. Chkareuli, Nonlinear QED and physical Lorentz invariance,
Phys. Rev. D 73, 065026 (2006).
[41] J. L. Chkareuli and Z. R. Kepuladze, Nonlinear massive QED and physical Lorentz
invariance, Phys. Lett. B 644, 212–217 (2007).
[42] J. L. Chkareuli, C. D. Froggatt, J. G. Jejeleva, and H. B. Nielsen, Constrained gauge
fields from spontaneous Lorentz violation, Nucl. Phys. B 796, 211–223 (2008).
[43] J. L. Chkareuli and J. G. Jejeleva, Spontaneous Lorentz violation: Non-Abelian gauge
fields as pseudo–Goldstone vector bosons, Phys. Lett. B 659, 754–760 (2008).
[44] J. L. Chkareuli, C. D. Froggatt, and H. B. Nielsen, Deriving Gauge Symmetry and
Spontaneous Lorentz Violation, Nucl. Phys. B 821, 65–73 (2009).

18

