Prediction magnetocrystalline anisotripy Fe-Rh thin films via machine leaning
Eun Sung Jekal 1,*, Hyunwoo Park1,
1 Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland
* Correspondence: everjekal@gamil.com, Tel.: +41 76 510 63 96

Abstract
Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) was originally formulated for least
squares models and this simple case reveals a substantial amount about the behavior of the
estimator. It also shows that the coefficient estimates need not be unique if covariates are
collinear. Using this Lasso technique, we analyze a magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy which is
a long-standing issue in transition-metal thin films, expectially for Fe-Rh thin film systems on a
MgO substrate. Our LASSO regression took advantage of the data obtained from first principles
calculations for single slabs with seven atomic-layers of binary Fe-Rh films on MgO(001). In the
case of Fe-Rh thin films, we have successfully found a linear behavior between the MCA energy
and the anisotropy of orbital moments.
Keywords: machine learning, magnetism, magnetocrystalline anisotropy

1. Introduction
1.1. Magnetocystalline anisotropy
After Moore’s Law broke few years ago, researchers have started to look for alternatives
materials[1-5]. One of a promising candidate way is magnetic random access memory (MRAM)
due its advantages such as the non-volatility, high speed process as well as low power
consumption[6-16]. Beside, in another perspective, it is necessary to develop themagnetic tunnel
junction element which consists of insulating and magnetic metal thin films with strongly
preferred perpendicular magnetization with respect to the film plane as Fig. 1.
In this respect, materials containing strong spin orbit coupling (SOC), for example 4d and 5d
elements can be expected to have perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA)[17-19]. This
has been confirmed by calculations, for instance, in some Fe-Rh binary systems[20-22]. In such

systems, while the magnetic moments are carried out by the Fe atoms or other 3d transition
metal (TM) elements, the strong SOC is introduced by the non-magnetic such as Rh which is 5d
TM elements[20]. However, it was shown theoretically that the MCA of thin films depends strongly
not only on the choice of atomic elements, but also on the detail of the atomic layer alignment.
Designing novel magnetic metal multilayer films with a strong perpendicular MCA is, therefore, a
very demanding task. The difficulty is in part related to the fact that MCA is related to many
non-trivial but competing factors such as the SOC strength and crystal field, in a way that the full
understanding of the origin of MCA has been one of the greatest issues in the field of magnetism.

Figure 1. Calculation model and notation for atomic layer configurations of Fe-Rh/MgO. The
perpendicular and in-plane directions are [001] and [100], respectively. All atomic layer patterns
(27 = 128) expressed by binary configurations are considered as illustrated in the right side of the figure

1.2. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso)
Lasso was introduced in order to improve the prediction accuracy and interpretability of
regression models by altering the model fitting process to select only a subset of the provided
covariates for use in the final model rather than using all of them[23,24]. It was developed
independently in geophysics, based on prior work that used the L1 penalty for both fitting and

penalization of the coefficients, and by the statistician, Robert Tibshirani based on Breiman’s
non-negative garrote. Prior to lasso, themost widely usedmethod for choosing which covariates to
include was stepwise selection, which only improves prediction accuracy in certain cases, such as
when only a few covariates have a strong relationship with the outcome. However, in other cases,
it can make prediction error worse. Also, at the time, ridge regression was the most popular
technique for improving prediction accuracy. Ridge regression improves prediction error by
shrinking large regression coefficients in order to reduce overfitting, but it does not perform
covariate selection and therefore does not help to make the model more interpretable.
Lasso is able to achieve both of these goals by forcing the sum of the absolute value of the
regression coefficients to be less than a fixed value, which forces certain coefficients to be set to
zero, effectively choosing a simpler model that does not include those coefficients. This idea is
similar to ridge regression, in which the sum of the squares of the coefficients is forced to be less
than a fixed value, though in the case of ridge regression, this only shrinks the size of the
coefficients, it does not set any of them to zero.

1.3. Link between MCA and Lasso
In an effort to understand the MCA of Fe-Rh films on a MgO substrate, using the LASSO
technique, we examine the MCA and the anisotropy of orbital moments obtained from first
principles calculations of Fe and Rh atoms to analyze the Bruno relation. Our analysis indeed
confirms that the relation is applicable for systems.

2. crystal structure and method
Self-consistent Density Functional Theory calculations were performed based on the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) without SOC, by using the Full-potential Linearized Augmented
Plane-Wave (FLAPW) method and Quantum Espresso. In all calculations, two-dimensional film
geometries with additional vacuum regions have been considered. We model single slabs with
seven-atomic layers of binary Rh-Fe film on top of three layers of MgO (001) substrates. All
atomic-layer configurations, which include as many as 27=128 possibilities for binary system, were
considered in the calculations (see Fig. 1). A planewave cut-off |k + G| of 3.9 a.u. has been chosen,
and we choose suitable muffin-tin radii of 2.4 bohr for Rh and 2.2 bohr for Fe. The MCA energy,
EMCA, is defined in our calculations as the energy eigenvalue difference between the
magnetizations oriented along the in-plane [100] and perpendicular [001] directions with respect
to the film plane. To determine the EMCA, the second variational method for treating SOC by using
the calculated eigenvectors in the SRA has been employed, and then the MCA energy has been
calculated by using the force theorem.

The number of special k-points in the two-dimensional Brillouin zone (BZ) was 3600, and it is
found that such k-point mesh was large enough to suppress numerical fluctuations in the MCA
energy by less than 0.01 meV, which is a sufficient accuracy for the purpose of the present work.
In regression analysis, we consider the linear regression model in which the MCA energy is
expressed by using the orbital magnetic moment,

Here, the EMCA has been expanded by using the descriptors, which for the present work, we
choose the anisotropies and averages of orbital moments. The orbital moment anisotropy

is

defined as the difference between the orbital moments of the perpendicular and in-plane
magnetizations for Fe or Rh species at the ith layer. Likewise, the orbital moment average

is

defined as the average of the perpendicular and inplane orbital moments of the respective atomic
species. To eliminate the bias of choosing the descriptor, we consider that is not only the
anisotropy, but also the average included. A leave-oneout cross validation, where the data is
separated to 63 training data and one test data, was applied. Coefficients A, B, C and D in the Eq.
1 show how the descriptors are correlated to the parameters. For example, a large AAu,1 indicates
that the anisotropy of orbital moment of the Au atomic layer placed at the top layer, i.e., layer 1,
strongly affects the prediction of EMCA. The A, B, C, and D coefficients are determined by using the
training data, and then used to predict EMCA of the test data.

3. Results
The calculated results of MCA energy and anisotropy of orbital moments as functions of the
atomic composition for each binary system are shown in Fig. 2.

Figure 1. Results of anisotropy of orbital moments, Manis, (a) and MCA energies, EMCA, (b) as

functions of the composition for Fe-Rh thin film systems. Atomic layer configurations are
represented, e.g., by FRFRRFFR for FeRhFeRhRhFeFeRh/MgO, where F and R indicate Fe and Rh

atomic layers, respectively.

3. Results
The calculated results of MCA energy and anisotropy of orbital moments as functions of the
atomic composition for each binary system are shown in Fig. 2. Both the computed values diverge
largely even within the same atomic composition. For a specific atomic composition, e.g., for a
Fe2Rh6 in the Fe-Rh binary system, the MCA energy varies largely from in-plane anisotropy with
an EMCA of about 4.0 meV/unit-area, to a perpendicular one with an EMCA of about 1.5
meV/unit-area. Figure 3a shows a scatter plot between EMCA and Manis which suggest a linear
relationship, as visualized with the red line. Hence, large values, implying the significance of all
anisotropy of orbital moments. Figure 3c further shows the comparison between the calculated
EMCA from first principles and the estimated ones using LASSO. These results show that the EMCA
values predicted using LASSO agree well those obtained exlicitly by using first principles
calculations. In the Fe-Rh binary systems, the EMCA varies largely from 4.2 meV/unit-area with a
perpendicular anisotropy to -3.0 meV/unit-area with an inplane one. Fig. 2b plots between MCA
energy, EMCA, and anisotropy of orbital moments, Manis, for Fe-Rh binary system. (b) calculated
coefficients for anisotropy and average values of orbital moments in Eq. 1, where Mani and Mave
indicate, respectively, the anisotropies and averages of the orbital moment. The numbers in the
horizontal axis denote the atomic layer positions in the film from the surface to the interface.
Comparison of the MCA energies calculated by the first principle calculations and estimated by
using the LASSO coefficients. Red and blue solid circles show the data of training and test. Then I
calculated by first principle calculations and those predicted using the LASSO coefficients are not
satisfying. Indeed, the induced magnetic moments in Rh due to Fe. Combined with a strong SOC,
such small splitting will lead to important spin-flip term to the SOC energy, resulting 111 in a
breakdown of the Bruno relation. Additionally, in the present analysis, we considered only the
orbital moment anisotropy and averages as the data descriptors for the MCA energy. The
discrepancy between the first-principles calculated and the predicted EMCAs reveals that such
descriptors might not be sufficient to predict the MCA energy of systems with strong SOC.

4. Conclusions
We found calculation results which are combined first-principles calculations (density functional
theory) and LASSO which is machine learning analysis. Finally we show that the EMCA of the Fe-Rh
thin films is strongly correlated to the anisotropy of orbital moments. Furthermore, the estimated
EMCA shows a reasonable agreement with the calculated one.

5. References
[1] B. Kish, Laszlo, Physics Letters A, 305.3-4 144 (2002).
[2] Roberts, G. Lawrence,. Computer , 33, 117 (2000): 117.
[3] N. Theis, Thomas, and H-S. Philip Wong, Computing in Science & Engineering, 19, 41
(2017).
[4] Wu, Jerry, et al, Applied Computational Intelligence and Soft Computing, 2013, 2 (2013).

[5] Li, Yingfeng, and B. Kish, Laszlo, Fluctuation and Noise Letters, 6, L127 (2006).

[6] Pey, Kin Leong, et al, 2019 Electron Devices Technology and Manufacturing Conference (EDTM).
IEEE, (2019).
[7] Cubukcu, Murat, et al., IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 54, 1 (2018).
[8] Thomas, L., et al., 2017 IEEE International Magnetics Conference (INTERMAG). IEEE, (2017).
[9] Huai, Yiming, et al., Applied Physics Letters, 112, 092402 (2018).
[10] S. Jekal, et al., Physical Review B,

92, 064410 (2015).

[11] S. Jekal, et al., Recent Advances in Novel Materials for Future Spintronics, 25 (2019).
[12] S. Jekal, et al.,

Applied Sciences, 9.4, 630 (2019).

[13 S. Jekal, et al., Journal of Applied Physics, 117, 17E105 (2015).
[14 S. Jekal, et al., Journal of nanoscience and nanotechnology, 15, 2356 (2015).
[15] Jeong, Tae Sung, et al. J. Kor. Mag. Soc., 27, 41 (2017).
[16] S. Jekal, J. F. Loeffler, and M. Charilaou, arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.09257 (2018).
[17] Mokrousov, Yuriy, et al. Physical review letters, 96, 147201 (2016).
[18] Kikuchi, Nobuaki, et al., Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 11, L485 (1999).
[19] Ležaić, Marjana, and Nicola A. Spaldin. Physical Review B, 83, 024410 (2011).
[20] Ibarra, M. R., and P. A. Algarabel. "Giant volume magnetostriction in the FeRh alloy." Physical
Review B 50.6 (1994): 4196.
[21] Moriyama, Takahiro, et al., Applied Physics Letters, 107, 122403 (2015).
[22] Loving, M., et al. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 46, 162002 (2013).
[23] Tibshirani, Rober, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58, 267
(1996).
[24] Bickel, Peter J., Ya’acov Ritov, and Alexandre B. Tsybakov, The Annals of Statistics, 37, 1705
(2009).

