Two-branch fiber link for international clock
networks
Dan Xu∗ , Etienne Cantin∗† , Florian Frank∗ , Nicolas Quintin† , Frédéric Meynadier∗ ,
Philip Tuckey∗ , Anne Amy-Klein† Olivier Lopez† , and Paul-Eric Pottie∗

arXiv:1909.01653v1 [quant-ph] 4 Sep 2019

∗ LNE-SYRTE

Observatoire de Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université,
61, avenue de l’Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France
Email: paul-eric.pottie@obspm.fr
† Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers,
Université Paris 13, CNRS,
99 avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément, Villetaneuse, France
Abstract—We present our work on realizing two-branch fiber
links enabling multiple-partner clock comparisons in Europe. We
report in detail on the setup connecting two long-haul links, and
report for the relative frequency stability and accuracy. We report
on a combined uptime of 90% for our dual-branch link during
almost one month. We finally discuss the combined uncertainty
contribution of the ensemble of the link architecture to a clock
comparison. We show that the frequency transfer uncertainty is
2 × 10−19 .

I. I NTRODUCTION
Comparisons of clocks through fiber links at the continental
scale have become a reality in Europe [1], [2], [3]. One
challenge is now to combine several coherent fiber links to
build a clock network, with the means of comparison making
a negligible contribution to the uncertainty compared to the
resolution of the clocks. These prospects rely on the ability
to realize a multi-branch fiber network. A second challenge
is to make the fiber links highly available for on demand
optical clocks comparison and for long-period of comparison
of fountain cold atoms clocks, over campaign duration of
several weeks and months.
For one aiming at effective optical frequency dissemination
service to multi-users, the ability to build optical network and
a high signal availability are the key features that are needed.
Indeed the comparison arises from the multiplication of the
uptime of all the elements constituting the metrology chain.
For instance, a two-partite comparison based on 2 clocks, 2
combs and 2 links with uptime of 50% for each of them leads
to a total uptime of only 1.6%. This means that 10 days of
operation are needed to obtain 4 hours of non-continuous data.
The more partners join the network, the lower the uptime will
be, and it makes the use of the dissemination network almost
impractical. This calculation illustrates the strong motivation
and need to achieve optical link uptime as close as possible
to 100%. This requires a high level of automation, remote
control, and technical readiness level, but also a delicate
control of many experimental aspects when connecting two
links together. With that respect, the work presented here is a
key step towards a new definition of the SI second based on

optical frequency standards and towards novel opportunities
for stringent tests of fundamental physics [4], [5].
Another issue that arises with long-duration comparison
campaign is the limitation due to the accuracy and the stability
of the frequency and time references available for counting the
optical beat notes. Fortunately the best performances are not
needed everywhere, but at least some level of performances
are needed not to loose the benefit of the optical frequency
dissemination. Nowadays commercial products based on ultrastable radio-frequency (RF) oscillator disciplined on Global
Positioning System (GPS) are available, and some of them
may comply with the needed accuracy in time and frequency.
However Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) based
solutions are not always available. So alternative solutions
need to be considered.
In this paper, we report on the first implementation of a twobranch fiber link, as part of a wider concatenation of links
between National Metrological Institutes (NMIs) in Europe
enabling multiple clock comparison [6]. We discuss then the
results and the limitations due to the RF stability and accuracy.
II. E XPERIMENTAL SET- UP
The sketch of the experiment is depicted on Fig. 1. We
start our experiment with an ultra-stable laser operated at
194.4 THz, continuous wave [7]. A slave laser is phase-locked
to the ultra-stable laser, and actively de-drifted using an optical
frequency comb to measure the drift versus an H-Maser [8].
The light is then injected into an actively stabilized singlemode fiber of 30-m long and transferred to another experimental room of our laboratory where the links are operated
[9]. Then, we have two repeater laser stations, that are the
starting point for two long-haul fiber links [10], [11]. Each
of these links make use of two fibers, one to transfer the
optical frequency from our laboratory to the remote point, and
the second fiber to evaluate the performance of the frequency
transfer.
The upper link on the right of Fig. 1 is a 4-span cascaded
link of 2×705 km from SYRTE to University of Strasbourg
and back [1], [10]. The fiber pair is used for parallel data

PLL

Offset (t)
PD1

Laser lock

Ultrastable
laser

Reference
Laser

Laser 1

short link ~ 30 m
FM0

PLL

OC0
AOM

OC

RF

AOM

OC1

AOM

OC2
FM3
FM1

FM5

PLL

AOM

Link N+3

short link
~5m

PD3

OC4
PD5

Link N

FM2
OC3

OC5

Cavity drift suppression

PD2

Repeater Laser Station #1

End-to-end
measurement

Filtering and tracking
PLL

PLL

PD1

PD2
OC0
OC1

Laser 2
OC2
FM3

FM1

AOM

FM2

Link M

Link M+1

OC3
OC4

Repeater Laser Station #2

PD3

Two-way
measurement

Fig. 1. Sketch of the experiment. Upper right link is a four-span link with the first span labelled as N and the 4th span labelled as N + 3. The lower link
on the right is a two-span links with the two spans labelled as M and M + 1. OC: optical couplers. AOM: Acousto-Optic Modulator. FM: Faraday Miror.
PLL: Phase Lock Loop. PD: Photodiode. The light red boxes are thermally controlled boxes.

traffic using the French academic network of RENATER.
Therefore the link is equipped with 40 optical add-drop
multiplexers (OADMs). 16 bi-directional Erbium-doped fiber
amplifiers (EDFAs) compensate partially for the losses, that
are about 410 dB, i.e., about 0.29 dB/km. At University of
Strasbourg, the signal transferred with this link is compared
with the output signal from another long-haul link from PTB in
Braunschweig [1]. For that purpose, repeater laser stations are
operated at the remote end of these two long haul links and
the optical frequency comparisons between the international
links are done using two-way method between the userend outputs [12], which is useful for the clock comparison
campaign [1], [2], [3].
The lower link on the right of Fig. 1 uses a pair of 43-km
dedicated fibers from SYRTE to LPL in Villetaneuse. It is
a hybrid fiber link, combining active compensation on one
fiber and passive compensation on the second fiber, using
a two-way beatnote between the local laser and the laser
transferred at LPL. Many details of the implementation are
reported in [11]. The link is equipped with four OADMs, so
that other time and frequency services can be operated in
parallel. We are using three bi-directional EDFAs. The losses
are about 32 dB in total, i.e., about 0.37 dB/km. At LPL,
the transferred frequency signal is compared with the signal
transferred from NPL through a 769-km noise-compensated
optical link, using two-way frequency comparison [3].
For both upper and lower links on Fig. 1, the residual
instability is estimated from the end-to-end measurements
which are made with the integrated multi-branch Michelson
interferometer available in the repeater laser stations [10], [13].
With this first generation of interferometers built couple of

years ago, the length difference between the references arms
were not well minimized [14]. The length imbalance of the
reference arms of the Michelson interferometer of the second
repeater laser station is about 15 cm [11]. The remote stations
are engineered in such a way that the unaccuracy or instability
of their RF reference is not degrading the transferred signal
frequency and the end-to-end signal frequency [13].
For the specific purpose of a multipartite clock comparison,
the frequency of the infra-red (IR) laser sent to the two links
has to be precisely chosen so that the beat note frequencies
recorded with the remote IR lasers are within the available
bandpass filters and the capabilities of the frequency counters.
Once the frequencies of the offset phase locks and acoustooptic modulators (AOMs) depicted at the upper part of the
sketch Fig. 1 are chosen, the frequency offset of the lower
repeater laser station can be used to tune the beat frequency
with the remote IR lasers at the far end of the second link. The
issue is to control the optical phase between the two repeater
laser stations, that is the frequency fluctuations induced in the
short 5-m link between these stations.
We implemented the preliminary solution depicted in Fig. 1
for compensating these frequency fluctuations. An end-user
output of the upper repeater laser station is used to feed
the input port of the lower station. The offset frequency of
the second repeater laser station is shifted to a well chosen
frequency by an AOM. Its RF frequency is 37 MHz. We use
the Faraday mirror at the input of the second repeater laser
station to reflect back the laser light to the photodiode at the
output of the first repeater laser station. On this photodiode,
we measure the round-trip delay fluctuations at the carrier RF
frequency of 74 MHz. This signal is tracked and divided by 74,

Fig. 2. Histogram of the frequency fluctuations df occurring in the 5-m long
fiber link, after 12 days of operation, for 1 s averaging time, in Hz. A slight
asymmetry is observed. The red line is the mean m = 7.9 × 10−19 . The
green light is the median n = 1.7 × 10−17 . Bins width = 45 mHz.

amplified and counted with a dead-time free phase-frequency
counter (K-K Messtechnik FXE) with 1-s gate time. It is then
subtracted from the clock comparison data performed at the
remote end of the link. This solution is a variant of a two-way
technique, with one laser light, one AOM and one Faraday
mirror. This experimental arrangement is very easy and fast to
implement and enables us to connect the two stations without
using any servo loops.
III. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We now present the data acquired within the frame of the
2017 campaign of comparisons between NPL, SYRTE and
PTB, for which we used only one laser source as a seed
for two links. We focus on the 5-m short link connecting
the two stations. The acquired data represent the free-running
round-trip frequency noise of the link to be compensated in
post-processing. Figure 2 shows the histogram for 12 days of
continuous data set and a slight asymmetry is observed. One
can denote that the tail of the distribution is longer towards
smaller frequencies. For a more quantitative analysis, the mean
value is 7.9 × 10−19 and the median is 1.7 × 10−17 . By
calculating the rolling mean with a time window of 3600 s,
we found that the mean of the relative frequency fluctuation
over 3600 s samples varies typically from ±2 × 10−17 with a
daily period, and at worse from −4 × 10−17 to +6 × 10−17 .
These fluctuations are two orders of magnitude higher than
the residual noise of the long-haul link. These free running
fluctuations are fortunately removed in postprocessing.
We also present the Allan deviation and Modified Allan
deviation of the same 12-days long continuous data sample
on Fig. 3. We observe that both deviations start at about
2.3 × 10−16 , and reach a maximum of 4 × 10−16 at 10 s
integration time. A clear signature of periodic daily perturbation is to be seen with a local maximum of 8 × 10−18 at
20 000 s integration time. The periodic perturbation is due to
the temperature of the room that fluctuates daily with a typical
amplitude of 1.6 K during this campaign. The signature seen

Fig. 3. Frequency instability of the 5 m link connecting the two repeater laser
stations. Allan standard deviation and modified Allan deviation of the relative
frequency fluctuations recorded with 1 s gate time, reporting in Λ-mode.

on the Allan deviation is in agreement with the expectation,
knowing the temperature fluctuation and the length of the
fiber patch-cord. The residual instability after post-processing
can be estimated using the link model derived in [15], under
the assumption that the fiber noise is reciprocal. It results in
a post-processed stability of a few 10−23 at 1 s integration
time and around 10−30 at long-term, which is well below
the noise floor of our system. Thus we expect to reach the
noise floor of around 10−17 at 1 s and 10−21 at long-term. An
upper value of this residual noise could also be evaluated from
the residual noise of the international frequency comparisons
at LPL or University of Strasbourg after post-processing.
Uncompensated fiber paths between the Faraday mirror and
the coupler in the short 5-m link are also limiting the stability,
since this part is only roughly protected against temperature
fluctuations. Considering an uncompensated length of 1 m,
and estimating residual daily temperature variations of 0.5 K
or below, we estimate this limitation to be 4.3 × 10−19 at half
a day averaging time and around 10−19 at 1 day.
The end-to-end data and their analysis for the two long haul
links can be found elsewhere [10], [11]. For the four-spans link
to Strasbourg, the modified Allan deviation is below 10−15 at 1
s integration time and the long-term stability is typically 10−19
or below. For the link to LPL, the modified Allan deviation is
6 × 10−17 at 1 s integration time and the long-term stability is
typically 10−20 at one day integration time. According to [10],
[11], the frequency bias introduced by the cascaded links and
hybrid links are respectively −4.8×10−20 with an uncertainty
of 9×10−20 and 4.2×10−21 with an uncertainty of 8×10−22 .
The combined uncertainty is therefore conservatively set to
1 × 10−19 . Finally the combined uncertainty of the short and
long links and the repeater stations is conservatively set to
2 × 10−19 .
We now discuss the uptime of the multi-branch and composite fiber link, for a duration of 27 continuous days. The various
servo loops of the links can indeed unlock or experience
some cycle slips due to some short excess noise or during
the polarisation optimization in the repeater stations [10]. The
data are summarized in Table I. The uptime of the 30-m

TABLE I
U PTIME OF ALL THE ELEMENTS OF THE TWO - BRANCH FIBER LINK .

5
98.5

43 000
95

cascaded
1 410 000
96.3

active compensation link connecting the two rooms in our
laboratory is 100%. The uptime of the post-processing for
the 5-m short link connecting the two stations is assessed by
applying a data filtering with a bandwidth of 1 Hz, i.e., about
10 times the standard deviation for integration time ranging
from 1 s to 10 s. Since it was installed in a quite noisy
environment and not enough protected, it could experience
some excess environmental noise which unlocks the tracking
used to count the beatnote, leading to an uptime of 98.5%.
This shows the need for an operational room with minimum
human intervention.
For the two long-haul links, we assess the uptime from the
end-to-end measurements. The hybrid fiber link is assessed
from a simple data selection within a 1 Hz bandwidth and
removal of outliers for one of the two-way beatnote signals
recorded at SYRTE (the TWB3 observable, see details reported in [11]). In the case of our hybrid setup, this is a robust
strategy as the short-term noise is about 4 × 10−17 , compared
to the hop in frequency of 5×10−15 induced by a single cycle
slip. Thus each single cycle slip can be well removed with this
procedure and we end up with a conservative estimate of 95%.
Regarding the four-span cascaded link, we developed a more
subtle strategy for selecting the data to be kept for a clock
comparison. We follow a three-step procedure to select the
data. We first apply a very large data filtering with a bandwidth
of 10 Hz and produce a boolean quality factor that is set
to zero if a point has been removed. Then we process the
data and look at the time evolution of three observables, as
displayed on Fig. 4. The rolling mean of the relative frequency
fluctuation y is performed on a short time of 9 s and allows
for detection of outliers. The rolling standard deviation of
y is calculated with a longer period of 2750 s in order to
detect anomalous noise and reject the period during which the
link is not optimally working, and finally the rolling standard
deviation of the previously defined quality factor allows for
rejection of segment of data where the link is not stable and
there is a lot of outliers. This method of data selection was
introduced for the purpose of clock comparison and applied on
6 months of data. It seems to be robust as similar performances
of the link is found without specific adjustment of the selection
procedure parameters. An example of the time evolution of
these three observables are displayed on Fig. 4 and shows
outliers and period of anomalous noise, which are filtered from
the data set.
IV. D ISCUSSION
We have shown an easy way to link two repeater laser
stations together, with a variant of two-way method, that

(a)

1.0
0.0
-1.0
-2.0

Rolling standard
deviation (Hz)

30
100

hybrid

2.0

(b)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Rolling st. deviation
of quality factor

length (m)
uptime (%)

passive

Rolling mean (Hz)

2.0

stabilized link

1.0

(c)

0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2
0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

Time (MJD-57903)

Fig. 4. Time evolution of the three observables used for selecting data in
the 4-span cascaded link (a) rolling mean of the frequency fluctuations (b)
rolling standard deviation of the frequency fluctuations and (c) rolling standard
deviation of the quality factor (see text). Red lines indicates the filtering limits.
Anomalous noise and outliers are clearly seen.

allows us to match technical requirements of a specific clock
comparison campaign. The passive listening of the frequency
noise on the short link that connects the two stations reveals
asymmetry. These fluctuations are removed from the clock
comparison in post processing. It shows that, at the level
of exquisite frequency control that optical frequency combs
and links are able to achieve, every single detail matters
to keep the same level of accuracy. In the specific case of
achieving star-liked networks, more complex multi-branches
Michelson interferometers were achieved in our groups for
the REFIMEVE+ (REseau FIbré MEtrologique à Vocation
Européenne+) network, so-called ’super-station’, or multibranches eavesdropping setups as reported in [16]. These are
clearly better and more robust solutions. However we observe
that, if the short link between the two stations would not
been monitored, it would be the dominant source of noise and
inaccuracy of our set-up. So we believe that this work shines
light on the high level of preparation that is needed at the enduser level for a full benefit of the quality of service of optical
frequency dissemination network such as REFIMEVE+.
The combined uptime of the two-branch link is 90%. If the
uptime may be compared, this is quite interesting to note that
the 1410 km link is now extremely stable and robust, thanks

to our efforts for automation and remote monitoring abilities.
The uptime of the end-to-end is now probably limited by the
uptime of servo loops and set-ups in the clocks and combs
in our laboratory that is not fully equipped with automated
loops and supervision tools. As compared to previous clock
comparisons campaign, for which the uptime of the ParisStrasbourg link was roughly 90% but the uptime of the whole
Paris-Strasbourg-Pars link was less than 25%, the uptime of
our link was considerably improved, and it is comparable to
the uptime of atomic fountains as operated at SYRTE and
PTB. So now, the strongest limit on the combined uptime of
an optical clock comparison is likely to be the uptime of the
neutral atom optical clocks themselves.
Further study on the procedure to validate data need to be
carried out. A more precise analysis is especially needed to
assess carefully the impact on frequency stability and accuracy
of the holes made in the raw data set. With the procedure
described in this paper, we report a combined accuracy level
for the two long-haul links of 1×10−19 . This can be compared
to the level of accuracy available at remote end points, as in
Strasbourg for instance.
Given that the frequency of the beat note can be up to
55 MHz with the currently used K+K FXE counters, and that
the long term stability of commercially available solutions as
provided by GPS receiver as the Oscilloquartz OSA 5201 are
about 3 × 10−13 after one day integration time as recorded
versus UTC(OP), one obtain a similar contribution to the
uncertainty budget of 8.3 × 10−20 . As the performances of
the optical clock will improve, that the comparison campaign
will last longer, and due to the lack of reliability of some of
these commercial GPS receiver, timing solutions provided inband through the fiber will be needed at some crucial point
of the network. White-rabbit solution for instance, considering
its excellent level of performance at the level of 1 × 10−14 at
100 s integration time after 500 km fiber link, and considering
its excellent performance-to-cost ratio, seems to us a very
promising solution [17].
By contrast the requirement on time synchronisation of the
measurements over such an optical frequency dissemination
network could relax with the time. Basically the inaccuracy
imprint on the measurement scales as the ultra-stable laser drift
times the de-synchronisation of the measurement, and can be
rapidly a dominating source [1]. It is quite interesting to notice
that the drift of the laser improved by several orders of magnitude over the last five years, from typically a few Hz/s down
to sub-mHz/s for the state-of-the-art silicon cavity [18]. With
active de-drift system, 1∼2 mHz/s are achievable nowadays,
and it makes the need of accuracy for the synchronisation of
the measurement up to the 50 ms level for the same level of
accuracy of 1 × 10−19 .
V. C ONCLUSION
We have shown a two-branch long-haul fiber link that
enables the comparison of multiple optical clocks at their
best level of performances to date. We have shown that the
two-branch fiber link is not limiting the uptime of the clock

comparison. This work represents a decisive step towards the
realization of a robust fiber network for clock comparisons,
contributing to progress along the roadmap towards the redefinition of the SI second. It also impacts the future use of the
REFIMEVE+ network, since the benefit of ultra-stable signal
also need good experimental control at the end-user side. We
have also presented discussions on the requirements for RF
reference signal and time reference signal, and show that the
most stringent need are for the RF accuracy. Solutions based
on White-Rabbit and/or other in-band techniques, far from
being a burden, may open new opportunities for time and RF
standard dissemination.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Rodolphe Le Targat and Hector Alvarez-Martinez
for the operation of the ultra-stable laser and the comb at start
of our experiment. We thank Michel Abgrall and Baptiste
Chupin for allowing us to measure GPS receiver versus
UTC(OP). We would like to thank E. Camisard, T. Bono and
L. Gydé for their support and for facilitating the access to
the RENATER network and facilities, P. Gris and B. Moya
of Uni. Strasbourg. We acknowledge funding support from
the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (Labex First-TF ANR10-LABX-48-01, Equipex REFIMEVE ANR-11-EQPX-0039,
Idex PSL ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02), the European Metrology
Programme for Innovation and Research (EMPIR) under SIB02 OFTEN. EMPIR is jointly funded by the EMPIR participating countries within EURAMET and the European Union.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Lisdat, G. Grosche, N. Quintin, C. Shi, S. M. F. Raupach, C.
Grebing, D. Nicolodi, F. Stefani, A. Al-Masoudi, S. Dörscher, S.
Häfner, J. -L. Robyr, N. Chiodo, S. Bilicki, E. Bookjans, A. Koczwara,
S. Koke, A. Kuh, F. Wiotte, F. Meynadier, E. Camisard, M. Abgrall,
M. Lours, T. Legero, H. Schnatz, U. Sterr, H. Denker, C. Chardonnet,
Y. Le Coq, G. Santarelli, A. Amy-Klein, R. Le Targat, J. Lodewyck, O.
Lopez, and P. -E. Pottie, "A clock network for geodesy and fundamental
science," Nat. Commun., vol. 7, pp. 12443, Aug. 2016.
[2] J. Guéna, S. Weyers, M. Abgrall, C. Grebing, V. Gerginov, P. Rosenbusch, S. Bize, B. Lipphardt, H. Denker, N. Quintin, S. M. F. Raupach,
D. Nicolodi, F. Stefani, N. Chiodo, S. Koke, A. Kuhl, F. Wiotte, F.
Meynadier, E. Camisard, C. Chardonnet, Y. Le Coq, M. Lours, G.
Santarelli, A. Amy-Klein, R. Le Targat, O. Lopez, P. -E. Pottie and G.
Grosche, "First international comparison of fountain primary frequency
standards via a long distance optical fiber link," Metrologia, vol. 54,
no. 3, pp. 348-354, Jun. 2017.
[3] P. Delva, J. Lodewyck, S. Bilicki, E. Bookjans, G. Vallet, R. L. Targat,
P. -E. Pottie, C. Guerlin, F. Meynadier, C. L. Poncin-Lafitte, O. Lopez,
A. Amy-Klein, W. -K. Lee, N. Quintin, C. Lisdat, A. Al-Masoudi, S.
Dörscher, C. Grebing, G. Grosche, A. Kuhl, S. Raupach, U. Sterr, I.
R. Hill, R. Hobson, W. Bowden, J. Kronjäger, G. Marra, A. Rolland,
F. N. Baynes, H. S. Margolis, and P. Gill, "Test of special relativity
using a fiber network of optical clocks," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 118, no.
22, pp. 221102, Jun. 2017.
[4] F. Riehle, "Towards a redefinition of the second based on optical atomic
clocks," Comptes Rendus Physique, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 506-515, Jun.
2015.
[5] A. Hees, J. Guéna, M. Abgrall, S. Bize, and P. Wolf, "Searching for
an Oscillating Massive Scalar Field as a Dark Matter Candidate Using
Atomic Hyperfine Frequency Comparisons," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 117,
no. 6, pp. 061301, Aug. 2016.
[6] OFTEN, "Optical Frequency Transfer in a European Network,"
https://www.ptb.de/emrp/often_home.html.

[7] B. Argence, E. Prevost, T. Lévèque, , R. Le Goff, S. Bize, P. Lemonde,
and G. Santarelli, "Prototype of an ultra-stable optical cavity for space
applications," Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 23, pp. 25409-25420, Nov.
2012.
[8] R. Le Targat, L. Lorini, Y. Le Coq, M. Zawada, J. Guéna, M. Abgrall,
M. Gurov, P. Rosenbusch, D. G. Rovera, B. Nagórny, R. Gartman, P. G.
Westergaard, M. E. Tobar, M. Lours, G. Santarelli, A. Clairon, S. Bize,
P. Laurent, P. Lemonde, and J. Lodewyck, "Experimental realization of
an optical second with strontium lattice clocks," Nat. Commun., vol.
4, no. 1, pp. 3109, Jun. 2013.
[9] L. S. Ma, P. Jungner, J. Ye, and J. L. Hall, "Delivering the same optical
frequency at two places: accurate cancellation of phase noise introduced
by an optical fiber or other time-varying path," Opt. Lett., vol. 19, no.
21, pp. 1777-1779, Nov. 1994.
[10] N. Chiodo, N. Quintin, F. Stefani, F. Wiotte, E. Camisard, C. Chardonnet, G. Santarelli, A. Amy-Klein, P. -E. Pottie, and O. Lopez, "Cascaded optical fiber link using the internet network for remote clocks
comparison," Opt. Express, vol. 23, no. 26, pp. 33927-33937, Dec.
2015.
[11] D. Xu, W. -K. Lee, F. Stefani, O. Lopez, A. Amy-Klein, and P. -E.
Pottie, "Studying the fundamental limit of optical fiber links to the
10−21 level," Opt. Express, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 9515-9527, Apr. 2018.
[12] E. Cantin, N. Quintin, F. Wiotte, C. Chardonnet, A. Amy-Klein, O.
Lopez, P. -E. Pottie, G. Santarelli, and E. Camisard, "Progress on the
REFIMEVE+ Project for Optical Frequency Standard Dissemination,"
in Proc. EFTF/IFCS, Besançon, France, 2017, pp. 378-380.
[13] O. Lopez, A. Haboucha, F. Kéfélian, H. Jiang, B. Chanteau, V.
Roncin, C. Chardonnet, A. Amy-Klein, and G. Santarelli, "Cascaded
multiplexed optical link on a telecommunication network for frequency
dissemination," Opt. Express, vol. 18, no. 16, pp. 16849-16857, Aug.
2010.
[14] F. Stefani, O. Lopez, A. Bercy, W. -K. Lee, C. Chardonnet, G.
Santarelli, P. -E. Pottie, and A. Amy-Klein, "Tackling the limits of
optical fiber links," J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 787-797,
May 2015.
[15] N. R. Newbury, P. A .Williams, and W. C. Swann, "Coherent transfer
of an optical carrier over 251km," Opt. Lett., vol. 32, no. 21, pp. 30563058, Dec. 2007.
[16] A. Bercy, O. Lopez, P. -E. Pottie, and A. Amy-Klein, "Ultra-stable
optical frequency dissemination on a multi-access fibre network," Appl.
Phys. B, vol. 122, no. 7, pp. 189, Jun. 2016.
[17] N. Kaur, F. Frank, P. E. Pottie, and P. Tuckey, "Time and frequency
transfer over a 500 km cascaded White Rabbit network," in Proc.
EFTF/IFCS, Besançon, France, 2017, pp. 86-90.
[18] W. Zhang, J. M. Robinson, L. Sonderhouse, E. Oelker, C. Benko, J. L.
Hall, T. Legero, D. G. Matei, F. Riehle, U. Sterr, and J. Ye, "Ultrastable
Silicon Cavity in a Continuously Operating Closed-Cycle Cryostat at
4 K," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 119, no. 24, pp. 243601, Dec. 2017.

