Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. art64_v3
September 10, 2019

c ESO 2019

Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg observed with linear
spectropolarimetry?
A. López Ariste1 , B. Tessore2 , E.S. Carlín,3, 5, 6 Ph.Mathias1 , A. Lèbre4 , J. Morin4 , P. Petit1 , M. Aurière1 , D.
Gillet7 , F. Herpin8 .
1
2
3
4

arXiv:1909.03720v1 [astro-ph.SR] 9 Sep 2019

5
6
7
8

IRAP, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, CNES, UPS. 14, Av. E. Belin. 31400 Toulouse, France
Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France
Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias, E-38205, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
LUPM, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France
Universidad de La Laguna, Dpto. Astrofisica, E-38206, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Istituto Ricerche Solari Locarno, 6600, Locarno, Switzerland
Observatoire de Haute-Provence – CNRS/PYTHEAS/Université d’Aix-Marseille, 04870 Saint-Michel l’Observatoire, France
Laboratoire d’astrophysique de Bordeaux, Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, B18N, allée Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, 33615 Pessac, France.

Received ...; accepted ...
ABSTRACT
Aims. From a coherent interpretation of the linear polarisation detected in the spectral lines of the Mira star χ Cyg, we derive
information about the dynamics of the stellar photosphere, including pulsation.
Methods. From spectropolarimetric observations of χ Cyg, we perform careful analysis of the polarisation signals observed in atomic
and molecular lines, both in absorption and emission, using the radiative transfer in the polarisation context, through two mechanisms:
intrinsic polarisation and continuum depolarisation. We also explain the observed line doubling phenomenon in terms of an expanding
shell in spherical geometry, which allows us to pinpoint the coordinates over the stellar disk with enhanced polarisation.
Results. We find that the polarised spectrum of χ Cyg is dominated by intrinsic polarisation, with a negligible continuum depolarisation. The observed polarised signals can only be explained by assuming that this polarisation is locally enhanced by velocity fields.
During the pulsation, radial velocities are not homogeneous over the disk. We map these regions of enhanced velocities.
Conclusions. We have set an algorithm to distinguish in any stellar spectra of linear polarisation the origin of this polarisation and
the way to increase signal by coherently adding many lines with an appropriated weight. Applied to the Mira star χ Cyg, we reached
the unexpected result that during the pulsation, velocities are radial but not homogeneous over the disk. The reason for these local
velocity enhancements are probably related to the interplay between the atmospheric pulsation dynamics and the underlying stellar
convection.
Key words. Stars: imaging, variable; Tecniques: polarimetry;Stars: individual, HD 187796

1. Introduction
The recent discovery of strong linear polarisation signals in
atomic lines of cool and evolved stars has spurred an interest in
interpreting these signatures and exploit them to learn about photospheric conditions of these stars using new diagnostics. Betelgeuse provided the first case of study of this kind: Aurière et al.
(2016) described those signals, and interpreted them as due to
the depolarisation of the continuum. The fact that some signal
remains after integration over the stellar disk, implies that photospheric (brightness) inhomogeneities are present. From this interpretation, López Ariste et al. (2018) were able to map this
brightness distribution over the stellar disk, and to relate this
distribution to the supergranulation of Betelgeuse. The reconstructed images obtained with this new technique applied to
spectropolarimetric observations were corroborated by comparison with interferometric observations. Over 4 years, the granulation of Betelgeuse has been imaged, its spatial and temporal
scales measured, and the velocities associated to this plasma es?

Based on observations obtained at the Télescope Bernard Lyot
(TBL) at Observatoire du Pic du Midi, CNRS/INSU and Université de
Toulouse, France.

timated, altogether confirming that it is convection, granulation,
that is at the origin of these signals (Mathias et al. 2018). The
technique has been extended by now to 2 more red supergiants:
CE Tau and µ Cep ( Tessore et. al., 2019, in preparation).
In an attempt to generalise this sucessful result, other types
of cool and evolved stars have been considered for similar linear
polarisation signals associated to spectral lines. One of them is
the Mira star χ Cyg. Clear linear polarisation signals had indeed
already been detected in the Balmer lines of Mira stars (e.g. in
the prototypical Mira star o Ceti; see Fabas et al. 2011) , but,
more important for the present work, polarisation signals were
also detected in many other atomic and molecular lines over the
spectrum of χ Cyg (Lèbre et al. 2015)
The interpretation of these linear polarimetric signals associated to spectral lines is the purpose of this work. In Section 2,
we present the Mira star χ Cyg and all the observational material involved in this work. In Section 3, we investigate the origin
of the linear polarisation associated to spectral lines. Starting
from the signatures within the line profiles that suggest intrinsic polarisation, we have developed several tests to confirm this
hypothesis. This kind of approach, with tests confirming initial
hypothesis, is also used to interpret the nature of the surface inArticle number, page 1 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

homogeneities, necessary for the polarisation signal to survive
its integration over the stellar disk, pointing in particular to local velocity increases. Our main result is that the pulsation of
the Mira star χ Cyg, while being radial in direction, presents different velocities at different places over the disk. In Section 5,
we exploit the data from the spectropolarimetric survey we have
performed on χ Cyg along 2015 and 2016, to map, with great
caution, the places where these velocity enhancements appear to
be. We speculate, in Section 6, that these velocity enhancements
may be the result of the interaction of the pulsation mechanism
with either the general convective patterns or the returning material from previous cycles.

2. Spectropolarimetry of the Mira star χ Cyg
2.1. Mira star χ Cyg

Mira variables are low- to intermediate-mass asymptotic giant
branch (AGB) stars that pulsate with a period of about one year.
χ Cyg is an S-type Mira star of spectral type S6-9/1-2e and with
a pulsation period of about 408 d. High-resolution spectroscopic
studies of Mira stars (Gillet et al. 1983; Alvarez et al. 2000,
2001) have reported strong emissions of the hydrogen lines lasting up to 80 % of the luminosity period. Those works have established that radiative and hypersonic shock waves, which are
triggered by the pulsation mechanism, were periodically propagating throughout the stellar atmosphere, generating emission
lines formation process and favoring the doubling of metallic
lines. Well beyond the region the atmospheric regions probed
with our data, the stellar neighbourhood of Mira stars has also
been thoroughly studied through obser- vations of SiO masers or
CN emissions (e.g. Herpin et al. 2006; Duthu et al. 2017) which
allowed to estimate the magnetic field strength in the circumstellar envelope, i.e. up to 8.8 Gauss in χ Cyg at a few stellar
radii. Vlemmings et al. (2017) observed magnetically aligned
dust and SiO maser polarisation in the envelope of the red supergiant VY Canis Majoris. All these observations are consistent
with a toroidal field configuration in these objects.
From full Stokes spectropolarimetric observations, Fabas
et al. (2011) characterized the shock wave propagation throughout the stellar atmosphere of the prototypical oxygen-rich Mira
star: o Ceti. They reported signatures in Stokes Q & U but also
in Stokes V parameters (tracing linear and circular polarisation,
respectively), associated to the strong Balmer hydrogen emissions known to be formed in the radiative wake of the shock
wave (Fadeyev & Gillet 2004). The origin of these spectropolarimetric signatures reveals a global asymmetry (at least partly
photospheric) perhaps due to the passage of the shock’s front
throughout photospheric giant convective cells. Few years later,
Lèbre et al. (2014) reported the first detection of a faint magnetic field at the surface of the S-type Mira χ Cyg, that is still
to date the unique detection of a surface magnetic field for Mira
stars. Lèbre et al. (2015) also reported for χ Cyg strong signatures in Stokes Q and U profiles, associated to metallic lines.
These features are strong, since they are detected from single observing sequences, and they are also variable along the pulsating
phase. The positions of these striking Stokes Q and U profiles,
was found well connected to the shock front position. Moreover,
Lèbre et al. (2015) have also reported, from the Stokes U and
Stokes Q spectra of χ Cyg, clear signatures associated to individual lines (e.g. SrI@460.7 nm, Na D2@588.9 nm). In the solar case, these peculiar lines are known to be easily polarizable
in the presence of asymmetries at the photospheric level (for a
theoretical introduction and extensive bibliography of the solar
Article number, page 2 of 16

Fig. 1. Visual magnitude of χ Cyg as measured by AAVSO. The vertical dashed lines mark the dates for which spectropolarimetric data are
available.

case, the reader may refer for exemple to Landi Degl’Innocenti
& Landolfi 2004).
2.2. Spectropolarimetric observations of χ Cyg

Table 1 shows the series of observations of χ Cyg, at our disposal for the present work. Except for the first observation (date
of 4 September 2007) performed during a previous observing
campaign, all 2015-2016 observations have been obtained in the
same Large Program conducted with the Narval spectropolarimetric instrument mounted at the Telescope Bernard Lyot (TBL,
Pic du Midi, France).
Figure 1 shows the time series of the visual magnitude
of χ Cyg as measured by the AAVSO. The vertical dashed
lines indicate our available 2015-2016 observations, considering that some observations collected at close dates (or consecutive nights) have been combined into one observational phase (cf
Table 1). All these observations appear to have been collected
around a maximum light (φ from 0.8 to 1.3), when the atmospheric shock wave is known to have always an upward motion
while propagating throughout the stellar atmosphere (Gillet et al.
1985). The Stokes U and Stokes Q observations of September
4th, 2007 (also collected with Narval at TBL) show clear signatures in individual lines. Since they were also the first data to be
scrutinised, these 2007 observations will be further used to illustrate the origin of the linear polarisation associated to atomic and
molecular lines (see Section 3). The 2015-2016 observations, resulting from a regular spectropolarimetric monitoring of χ Cyg
(on a monthly basis when the star was observable from Pic du
Midi), will be used in Section 4 to map photospheric conditions.

3. On the origin of the linear polarisation
associated to the spectral lines of χ Cyg
polarisation signals in stellar atomic lines are weak, often below 0.1% of the continuum intensity. It is customary, in stellar
spectropolarimetry, to add the signals over many lines throughout the spectrum with the goal of increasing the S/N ratio. Such
algorithms (e.g. Least Squares Deconvolution – LSD –,Donati

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry
Table 1. Linear polarisation observations of χ Cyg (Stokes U and/or Stokes Q), from September 2007 to December 2016. For each observation the
first column gives the observed Stokes parameter(s). The second and third columns give the date of observation in the Gregorian and Julian calendars, respectively. The fourth column gives the phase of the star (φ), considering an ephemeris giving φ = 0 at maximum light for JD=2457234.4
(30 July 2015) and a period of 408.7 days. All the observations have been replaced on a single pseudo cycle (from φ = 0.00 to φ =1.00). The
last columns give respectively, the exposure time (in seconds), the number of spectra for each parameter and the maximum signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N) in each spectrum. a observations that have been pushed together. b One Stokes parameter is missing for this date. Therefore it has not been
considered in our study.

Stokes
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q&U
Q
U
Q&U
Q&U

Obs. date
(dd/mm/yyyy)
04/09/2007
28/05/2015
01/06/2015
26/06/2015a
28/06/2015a
19/07/2015
10/08/2015
20/08/2015
10/09/2015a
11/09/2015a
09/10/2015
16/10/2015
15/11/2015a
16/11/2015a
07/08/2016a
08/08/2016a
24/08/2016
24/09/2016
21/10/2016
26/10/2016b
27/10/2016b
07/12/2016
20/12/2016

Julian date (JD)
(+2 450 000)
4347.86
7171.11
7175.12
7200.05
7202.02
7222.98
7245.01
7254.91
7275.96
7276.82
7304.93
7311.80
7341.86
7342.74
7607.88
7608.89
7625.00
7655.90
7682.83
7687.86
7687.86
7729.73
7742.75

et al. (1997); Kochukhov et al. (2010), SLA, Paletou (2012) and
others) depend on the self-similarity assumption, according to
which all lines to be co-added are formed at similar heights and
carry a signal with a similar spectral shape up to a scale factor.
This has been traditionally the case of circular polarisation, related to the Zeeman effect and used to detect surface magnetic
fields.
The situation faced here with χ Cyg is that the S/N ratios
are barely enough to be reliable only through LSD technique.
But trusting LSD implies that the signatures in individual lines
are similar, though the S/N in those lines is in general too low to
check this assumption. In order to justify the use of LSD to study
linear polarisation of χ Cyg, we started by an in-depth analysis
of the signals detected in key individual lines.
Among the observations of χ Cyg (presented in Table 1), several observations stand out because of the large amplitude of the
linear polarisation signals over most of the visible spectrum. The
largest amplitudes seen ( September 4th, 2007 or August 8th and
16th, 2007) coincide with the dates around the maximum light
(phases 0.91, 0.94 and 0.95). We pick one of such singular observations, the one on September 4th, 2007, close to the occurence
of a maximum light (φ = 0.94). According to the shock propagation scenario from Gillet et al. (1985) this observation corresponds to the following pulsation state for a Mira star : a strong
shock wave has already emerged from the photosphere (just before the maximum light, at around φ = 0.8) and it is propagating
throughout the stellar atmosphere, until its final fading around φ
= 1.4. It is at this stage that the observation of September 4th,
2007 produced strong signals, sufficient to examine individual

phase
(φ)
0.94
0.84
0.85
0.91
0.92
0.97
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.17
0.19
0.26
0.26
0.91
0.92
0.95
0.03
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.21
0.24

exposure
(in s)
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400
400

N
(Q & U)
1&1
2&2
2&2
1&1
1&1
3&4
4&4
4&4
2&2
2&2
2&2
2&2
2&2
2&2
4&4
4&4
4&4
3&3
3&3
3
3
4&4
4&4

S/N
(/2.6 km.s−1 )
1527
1464
1488
1369
1479
1391
990
1270
1470
1260
1568
904
882
1048
1349
1347
1556
1096
1183
909
682
1548
1224

lines and reveal the physical mechanisms at work in the production of linearly polarised light.
3.1. Radiative transfer equation

Roughly speaking, linear polarisation in atomic lines of a stellar spectrum can have two origins: Zeeman effect or scattering.
For χ Cyg, Lèbre et al. (2014) detected a very weak circular polarisation signature around its maximum light of March 2012,
revealing the presence of a faint surface magnetic field (2 − 3 G).
However, its effect on the linear polarisation is expected to be
one order of magnitude smaller. Therefore, in the case of χ Cyg,
a Zeeman contamination of the linear polarisation can be excluded. And thus we retain in the following only scattering processes.
In this context, within the stellar atmosphere, an atom has
three different ways of creating a spectral polarisation signature:
continuum depolarisation through lines, intrinsic line polarisation and finally Rayleigh and/or Thomson scattering. We follow
Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi (2004) to write, in the absence
of magnetic fields, a radiative transfer equation for the Stokes
parameter Q defined as positive when the polarisation plane is
perpendicular to the scattering plane1 of a particular point in the
stellar atmosphere, taking advantage that this polarisation is al-

1
This plane is defined by the scattering point, the centre of the star and
the observer.

Article number, page 3 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

ways small:

3.1.2. Continuum depolarisation

A spectral line that forms above a continuum polarised by
h
i
d
Rayleigh scattering absorbs linearly polarised photons and rec
A
Q(ν, Ω) = − kν + kL φ(ν0 − ν) Q(ν, Ω) +
emits a priori unpolarised photons. Spectral lines therefore tend
ds
i
to de-polarize the continuum. This process is described by the
3 A 2 h (2) 2
(2)
√ kL sin θ w Ju Jl σ0 (Ju )S L − w Jl Ju σ20 (Jl )I(ν, Ω) φ(ν0 − ν) +
first term of Eq. (1) where this de-polarisation of the incoming
2 2
polarisation Q(ν, Ω) is described proportional to the combined
"
!#
Z
3
absorption coefficients of the continuum and the line, kνc + kLA ,
3 c 2 X
v
·
Ω
i
βi d3 vi f (vi ) J02 ν − ν
(1)times the spectral profile of the line. It depends on the details of
√ kv sin θ
c
2 2
vi
i=1
the stellar atmosphere with respect to the formation regions of
the continuum and every individual lines, to estimate the impact
where the 3 considered processes quoted above correspond to of this depolarisation mechanism on the second stellar spectrum.
In the case of the Sun, well over 90 % of the spectral lines deeach line on the right-hand side, respectively.
polarize the continuum. In particular, with few exceptions, all
The equation describes the evolution of the Stokes Q param- the numerous Fe i lines depolarize the continuum. Aurière et al.
eter along a path s as a function of frequency ν and in the di- (2016) found that, in the case of Betelgeuse, all atomic lines did
rection Ω. An atomic line is assumed to be at ν0 in the proxim- depolarize the continuum and since the spectral shape of a line
ity of the frequency ν with a characteristic line profile described φ(ν − ν) can be considered similar enough to that of any other
0
by φ(ν0 − ν). In spite of being a first order approximation, this line, this allowed those authors to use LSD on the linearly poequation is quite complex at first sight. It unveils the richness larised spectrum of Betelgeuse and to map the presence of bright
of the scattering polarisation spectra of a star, even in the ab- spots on its photosphere.
sence of magnetic fields. It is this richness that led Stenflo &
Keller (1997) to coin the name second solar spectrum to refer
to this scattering polarisation spectrum in the case of the Sun. 3.1.3. Intrinsic line polarisation
Any hope in using LSD techniques requires the identification of
a large enough number of atomic lines that are sensitive to just Competing with depolarisation, one finds the second, and most
what we refer to as the
one of those three processes explicited in the right-hand side of complex, term of Eq.(1). It describes
2
intrinsic
polarisation
of
a
line
.
Anisotropic
illumination can
this equation.
introduce both population imbalances or coherences among otherwise degenerated atomic sublevels. They are quantum in nature and in the present case reduce to the σ20 (J) spherical tensor
3.1.1. Rayleigh and/or Thompson scattering
of the atomic density matrix corresponding to the level with toIn the absence of lines sensitive to the first 2 mechanisms in Eq.1, tal angular momentum J , an imbalance of populations between
the only non-zero term in the equation would be the last one, sublevels that we call atomic alignment. Atomic alignment in the
which describes Rayleigh and/or Thompson scattering of pho- upper level results in polarisation in the emitted light, and this is
tons over electrons (i = 1), H atoms (i = 2) and He atoms (i = 3). why we multiply it by the source function S L . Atomic alignment
Scattering over heavier atoms can be safely neglected. Rayleigh in the lower level can be seen as absorbed incoming photons,
scattering linearly polarizes light proportionally to sin2 θ, the and this is why we multiply it by the incoming intensity I(ν, Ω).
scattering angle. The amount of light is obviously proportional to Not all transitions between atomic levels are equally efficient in
the absorption coefficient of the continuum at that frequency kνc , producing polarisation in the presence of atomic alignment: the
(2)
but also to the fractional contribution βi of electrons, H and He w Ju Jl quantum coefficient expresses this efficiency as a function
atoms to that opacity. For a scatterer to emit net polarisation, it of the upper and lower total angular momenta. Its explicit defishould be illuminated by an anisotropic radiation field described nition can be found for instance in Landi Degl’Innocenti & Lanby the non-zero 2nd-rank spherical tensor of the radiation field dolfi (2004). Particular values of the upper and lower angular
J02 (which in the first approximation can be written as 3K − J momenta cancel this coefficient. For example transitions from
with K and J, the 2nd and 0th order momenta of the angular dis- (Jl =) 21 to (Ju =) 12 , or from 1 to 0, or from 23 to 12 , have all
tribution of the specific intensity) which depends on frequency w(2) = 0. All those atomic lines in the stellar spectra with those
Ju Jl
in the rest-frame of the scatterer. An integral over the velocity values
of the total angular momentum for their lower and upper
distribution f (vi ) is necessary to convert this dependency to the levels will be unable to produce intrinsic polarisation in conseobserver’s frame. If the continuum forms over a large enough at- quence, any polarisation signal in such selected lines may only
mospheric layer for anisotropy to be non-negligible, one expects be attributed to depolarisation. In the presence of noise, these
the continuum to be polarised. In the Sun this continuum polari- conclusions can be extended to other case with small absolute
sation amounts to 0.1 % (Leroy 1972; Stenflo 2005), In cool stars values of w(2) .
Ju Jl
like Betelgeuse (α Ori) it grows to 1 % of the continuum intenThis provides one possible way to distinguish the origin of
sity (Clarke & Schwarz 1984; Doherty 1986). In the Mira star
χ Cyg, Boyle et al. (1986) reported (from polarimetric observa- observed linear polarisation in a stellar spectrum. Following Autions collected around a maximum light) that the polarisation of
the continuum varies from 1% in the blue part down to 0.25%
in the red part of the spectrum. They also reported striking enhancements in the linear polarisation level associated to Balmer
emission lines (+ ∼ 0.5%), to molecular bands (+∼ 0.5%), and
to the Ca i line at 422.6 nm (+∼ 2%) pointing to a polarisation
likely arising from the stellar atmosphere, in the region of formation of the spectral lines.
Article number, page 4 of 16

2
In contrast to previous uses by other authors of the adjective intrinsic and at the risk of some confusion, we call intrinsic any signal with
origin in this term which does not explicitly depend on the incoming
light or its polarisation as the two other terms. Evidently, the atomic polarisation appearing in this 2nd term may have its origin in anisotropic
radiation, but as explained, there is a clear difference in the type of signals expected from one and the other terms in Eq. (1) hence justifying
our use of intrinsic.

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

rière et al. (2016) we consider the Na D doublet. Neglecting hyperfine structure, the D1 line arises from a 21 − 12 transition with
w(2)
1 1 = 0. This means that the D1 line cannot produce intrinsic
2,2
polarisation. Note that the hyperfine structure modifies the past
assertion: among the several hyperfine transitions that form the
D1 line, some can indeed carry intrinsic polarisation. This can
be seen in the second solar spectrum, where the D1 line indeed
shows a signal (Casini et al. 2002; Stenflo & Keller 1997; Trujillo Bueno et al. 2002) . But this is a signal at least one order
of magnitude smaller than that present in D2 . Indeed, D2 has
w(2)
3 1 = 0.6 and it is prone to show large intrinsic signals. Both
2,2
D1 and D2 components are, on the other hand, equally efficient
in depolarizing the continuum, with almost identical conditions
of formation and frequency.
By looking into the second spectrum of Na D lines, one can
therefore identify two extremes: if D1 shows a polarisation signal with a similar amplitude than that of D2 , then the lines are
depolarizing the continuum. On the other hand, if the D1 linear
polarisation is much smaller than that of D2 , then the signals are
dominated by intrinsic polarisation.
The first scenario was found by Aurière et al. (2016) on
Betelgeuse: both D1 and D2 components did show similar amplitudes, and the interpretation was that the atmospheric structure
in that star leads to a depolarisation of the continuum (first term
of Eq.(1)). Indeed, if D2 , a line so prone to show strong intrinsic
signals, is depolarizing continuum, one can safely assume that
so do all the lines in the spectrum. The Sun itself shows a mixed
scenario: while most of the lines just depolarize the continuum,
a few lines form in conditions adequate to show intrinsic polarisation, D2 prime among them.

A trend appears here: selected lines show a polarisation signature which happens to be positive in both Q and U for the date
of September 4th, 2007 and, in the case of the Na D lines, this
has to be interpreted as intrinsic polarisation. The set of lines
showing analogous signatures is much larger but it quickly gets
messed with the many molecular lines and bands in the spectrum of this cool star. This is the reason for having selected, for
the plot, this otherwise unremarkable Ti i line around 736 nm: it
is located in a region where molecules appear to not overwhelm
the spectrum.
Molecular scattering polarisation is a much richer world
than what we have explored until now (Asensio Ramos &
Trujillo Bueno 2005, 2006; Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi
2004). But in general, molecules do present alignment and
intrinsic line polarisation in an analogous manner to atoms
(Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi 2004). Are the Q and U signals common to both Na D2 and Ti i lines presented in Fig. 2 also
present in molecular lines? Fig. 3 shows three different molecular bandheads along the visible spectrum of χ Cyg. Molecular
transitions cluster around the bandhead and concentrate the signal: the intensity goes down and linear polarisation shows also a
drastic positive jump both in Q and U.
Further examination of other molecular band heads and individual molecular lines confirm that a net linear polarisation
signal positive both in Q and U is ubiquitous in molecular as
well as in atomic lines. However, this signal is present in the
Na D2 line, but not in the Na D1 line. Hence, we make the hypothesis that all these atomic and molecular lines are showing
intrinsic line polarisation through scattering in an aligned atom
or molecule. Taking this hypothesis to its extreme, we cancel in
Eq.(1) the continuum polarisation (3rd) and the line depolarisation (1st) terms. Consequently, Eq. (1) becomes:

3.2. Dominating process for χ Cyg

Q=

We now consider the Na D doublet in the spectrum of χ Cyg obtained on September 4th, 2007 (Fig. 2). Note that even considering a night with one of the largest linear polarimetric signals,
the amplitude of the polarisation signature is weak. This is partly
due to a low S/N ratio in individual lines, but also for the ubiquitous presence of molecular lines (see below). In spite of those
problems, one can identify a double peak around D2 , positive in
both Q and U, whereas nothing is present in the same wavelength
range around D1 . Small peaks with opposite amplitude are seen
right beyond the red wing of D1 in Q and beyond the blue wing
in U. The coherence of polarisation signs in all absorption lines
that we are going to uncover in the text below, and the absence
of any spectral feature at this wavelength, led us to ignore these
signals (the 2nd solar spectrum shows a small signal in D1 , one
order of magnitude smaller than the signal in D2 , but it remains
difficult to relate it to these peaks seen in our data). With this
caveat in mind, we find in this absence of signal in D1 a first indication that intrinsic polarisation dominates the Na D lines for
χ Cyg.
Also, Fig. 2 (right) shows, for the line Ti i at 734.4 nm, signals in both Q and U signals that are of the same positive sign as
those present in the Na D2 component. It is not the only signature with identical sign in that region, and around 736 nm another
line (probably Ti i at 735.774nm) also shows this similar signature. Let us recall that while most lines present a single gaussianlike polarisation profile, the Na D2 line presents a characteristic
multi-peak profile due to its rich fine atomic structure. The comparison between this and lines like the Ti i in this figure must be
limited to the signs of the Q and U profiles.

h (2)
i
3
(2)
√ kLA sin2 θ w Ju Jl σ20 (Ju )S L − w Jl Ju σ20 (Jl )I(ν, Ω) φ(ν0 − ν)
2 2
(2)

The first remark about this equation is that all the spectral shape
dependence around a given spectral line is in the generalised profile φ(ν0 −ν). This points toward the possibility of adding up lines
through LSD (Donati et al. 1997) after appropriate rescaling of
the frequency. Of course, in this case, the weighting of the individual lines cannot be the Landé factor (the usual weighting
in Zeeman Doppler Imaging; see Donati et al. 1997). Inspection
of Eq. (2) allows further simplification by noticing that, more
often than not, we can assume that the lower level of most transitions, because of its stability, will probably be depolarised by
collisions and therefore σ20 (Jl ) = 0. We also notice that, in a
two-level atom, the alignment of the upper level will be given by
σ20 (Ju ) = w(2)
Ju Jl

J02
J00

(3)

and therefore the emitted polarisation can be approximated by:
Q=

J02
3
(2)
√ kLA sin2 θ(w Ju Jl )2 0 φ(ν0 − ν)
J0
2 2

(4)

From this latter expression, we realise that the appropriate
2
weighting factor for LSD is the coefficient (w(2)
Ju Jl ) which depends exclusively on the atomic numbers of the upper and lower
levels.
If the other 2 processes were also present, it can be noticed
that, independently of the sign of w(2)
Ju Jl (which can be either
Article number, page 5 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Fig. 2. Spectra of χ Cyg on September 4th, 2007. Left: around the region of the Na D doublet; Right: around a Ti i line in the near infrared spectrum.
The thin black line shows the intensity (ordinate axis on the right) in normalized units, whereas the thick coloured lines (blue for U, red for Q)
show the linear polarisation spectra. The rest wavelength of both Na D1 and D2 in the left plot, and of the Ti i line in the right one, are represented
with a vertical dashed line.

Fig. 3. Spectra of χ Cyg on September 4th, 2007 in three spectral regions where molecular bandheads of TiO and VO are found. As in Fig. 2, the
black thin line represents intensity (ordinates at right) and Stokes Q and U are shown in red and blue respectively. Q has been shifted 0.01 units
for clarity.

positive or negative depending on the quantum numbers of the
involved levels), the emitted polarisation will always have the
same sign: perpendicular to the scattering plane. On the other
hand, continuum polarisation is also perpendicular to this plane.
Depolarisation will cancel this signal, and it will appear in our
polarimeters as a signal of the opposite sign: parallel to the scattering plane. Thus, intrinsic line polarisation and depolarisation
processes will have a similar spectral shapes but opposite signs.
If, contrary to our extreme assumption of all lines showing intrinsic line polarisation, a subset of lines shows a depolarisation
signal (as it is the case in the second solar spectrum) the polarisation signal would cancel out when summing up lines, and the
LSD profile would end up with an amplitude much smaller than
that seen in individual lines as the ones shown in Fig. 2. This proArticle number, page 6 of 16

vides us with an a posteriori test upon our hypothesis (Section
4).
3.3. polarisation signal and asymmetry

Polarised stellar spectra are the result of the integration of the
signal over the stellar disk. We have found a source of local linear polarisation in the intrinsic polarisation of the lines formed
by scattering. But since the scattering plane rotates with the position angle of the scattering point over the stellar disk, the signs of
Q and U change around the stellar disk and, if the star is homogeneously polarizing its spectrum, the result is a zero net signal.
Since for χ Cyg a net polarisation is observed, we must conclude
that the stellar disk is not centrally symmetric with respect to

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

polarisation. We must conclude that there is one region of the
stellar disk with a larger emission of polarised light.
There are two manners in which one particular region over
the stellar disk can dominate the integral which computes the
net polarisation over the star: either this region is brighter than
the rest, or its light is more polarised. This second case of polarisation excess can also be split into two phenomena: either
light is emitted from a higher region in the atmosphere (which
translates into an increased anisotropy J02 of the radiation field
illuminating the atoms), or the emitting region is moving with
respect to the photosphere, the presence of a velocity gradient
amplifying the radiation anisotropy (de Kertanguy 1998). As a
matter of fact, these three phenomena are not exclusive and one
could, as an example, call for a convection cell bringing up hot
plasma, hence brighter, in a strong upflow (hence an anisotropy
amplifying velocity gradient) that brings this plasma high in the
atmosphere (hence increasing the anisotropy on its own).
When considering these non-exclusive alternatives we must
keep in mind the pulsation of χ Cyg that may amplify any
anisotropy present in the lower layers of the star. And this leads
us to consider that the origin of this anisotropy may be found in
the non-homogeneity of the pulsation itself. The net observed
polarisation would arise from the differential amplification of
anisotropy by the larger velocity gradients of those regions expanding faster than all others, a hypothesis already hinted by
Fabas et al. (2011) and proposed by Carlin et al. (2013) for the
prototypical Mira star, o Cet. In what follows we will be led,
step by step, to conclude that this scenario is the one at work in
χ Cyg.
3.4. Asymmetry from inhomogeneous velocity fields

Carlin et al. (2012) have studied the amplification of the
anisotropy by velocity gradients along the vertical direction. A
remarkable result of those studies is that emission and absorption lines produce opposite effects in the anisotropy: for otherwise identical lines, an amplification of the anisotropy happens
if the line is in absorption but a reduction in anisotropy happens
if it is in emission. Explicitly, a solution for the intensity around
a spectral line of width w, with continuum at I (0) , at a certain
distance of disk centre µ, and in the presence of a linear limb
darkening with coefficient u can be written as:
"
#
−(ν−ν0 )2
I(ν, µ) = I (0) (1 − u + uµ) 1 − ae w2
(5)
Assuming that this spectrum illuminates the upper atmosphere
where the line presents an absorption profile of width ∆νD moving at a velocity vz along the vertical direction respect to the
lower layers, the anisotropy in the low velocity limit can be written as in Carlin et al. (2012)
J02
J00

=

√

u

4 2(2 − u)

+a

64 − 56u + 7u2
ξ2
√
2
2
2
120(2 − u) (1 + α )( 1 + α − a)

(6)

where α = ∆νwD and where the velocity gradient vz is adimensionalized as ξ = vcz νw0 . In the absence of both limb darkening and
velocity gradients, the anisotropy is 0. In the absence of a velocity gradient, the anisotropy is due to limb darkening only. More
surprisingly, in the absence of limb darkening one can still have
an anisotropic radiation field if the upper atmosphere is moving
with respect to the static background, and this anisotropy is independent on whether the movement is upward or downward.
Of more immediate impact in our present discussion, the sign of

the anisotropy modification by velocity gradients is determined
by the sign of a. That is, for an absorption line (a > 0), velocity
gradients amplify any anisotropy due to limb darkening, while
for an emission line (a < 0) the effect is the opposite.
Among the different scenarios sketched above to produce net
linear polarisation over the stellar disk of χ Cyg, we can ascertain the impact of velocity gradient amplification by comparing
emission and absorption lines in the linearly polarised spectrum.
If in a certain region of the expanding stellar atmosphere there is
a gradient of velocity larger than elsewhere, it will amplify the
anisotropy of absorption lines that will increase its polarisation
and dominate the net polarisation over the disk. But this larger
gradient will diminish the anisotropy of emission lines which
will be less polarised than elsewhere over the disk. The net polarisation in emission lines will be dominated by the regions where
local polarisation is the opposite one of the region with larger
gradients. Summing up, emission and absorption lines, after integration over the disk, will present opposite polarisations.
Fig. (4) shows the interesting case of the triplet of Ca ii
lines in the near infrared. The three components show emission
in intensity and, a small redshifted absorption, most visible at
866.2nm and difficult to ascertain in intensity in the two other
lines. Such profiles are very common in Mira stars (e.g. Gillet
1988), and are interpreted in the framework of shockwave propagation. The emission component, blueshifted, originates at the
shock front zone, propagating outward, while the red component, in absorption, comes from the unperturbed medium above
the shock front. Recalling the pulsation phase of this observation
(ϕ ∼ 0.94), the spectrum has actually been obtained very close to
a maximum light i.e., during the maximum outward acceleration
of the shock. Following our argument comparing emission and
absorption lines, in agreement with Eq.6, and given the observed
polarisation signs of the other lines in absorption the emission
component of these lines is expected to show a negative Q signal, while the one in absorption would present a positive Q signal, identical to the Na D, Ti i or molecular lines explored above.
This can be verified in Fig. 4,. The signals are clear in the
Ca ii 866.2 nm and in Ca ii 854.2 nm but absent in Ca ii 849.8 nm.
This is not unexpected, in view of the particularities of the intrinsic polarisation of these lines with a strong impact of lower level
atomic polarisation in their statistical equilibrium and emission
terms (Trujillo Bueno 2003; Carlin et al. 2012; Carlin & Asensio Ramos 2015).
The effect can be cautiously confirmed by considering the
Hα, and Hβ lines (Fig. 5). Interpreting the polarisation of Hydrogen lines (of the Balmer series or any other) is extremely
complex due to the sensitivity of this atom to all possible polarizing effects, and the large regions and conditions on which these
lines can form (López Ariste et al. 2005; Casini & Manso Sainz
2006b,a; Derouich 2007; Štěpán & Sahal-Bréchot 2008), especially in a NLTE context. But once one accepts all our working hypothesis, that is that most lines are showing intrinsic
polarisation, and that the net polarisation is apparently due to
anisotropies in the radial velocity of the pulsating atmosphere
(amplifying the radiation anisotropy), and with the comfort that
with these hypothesis we have been able to predict the signs on
the combined emission/absorption profiles of the Ca ii lines, then
it is acceptable to peek into the H lines for a further confirmation. In the available data, Hα does not show clear signals in intensity, perhaps because the molecular bands strongly absorb the
flux originating in the corresponding line forming region. Conversely, the emission profile is clear in the intensity profiles of
Hβ and Hγ, where the molecular absorption is strongly reduced.
The polarisation signals, on the other hand, are strong and unamArticle number, page 7 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Fig. 4. Spectra of χ Cyg on September 4th, 2007 around the three lines of Ca ii triplet in the near IR. As in Fig. 2, the black thin line represents
intensity (ordinates at right) and Stokes Q and U are shown in red and blue respectively. Q has been shifted 0.01 units for clarity. The lines are
split into a blue-shifted emission, and a red-shifted absorption. The polarisation changes sign accordingly as if dominated by the amplification of
anisotropy in the presence of velocity gradients.

biguous for the three Balmer lines. And, in broad agreement with
the signs observed in the emission part of the Ca ii lines (Fig. 4),
the emission presents a negative polarisation signal in Q, though
we also see, particularly in U, a redshifted positive signal that
could signal a redshifted absorption profile not visible in the intensity profiles. The complexity of formation of these lines prevents us from interpreting these signal beyond these simple facts
and comparisons for these lines.
We have thus a scenario that explains the main features of the
linearly polarised spectrum of χ Cyg. The particular conditions
of the atmosphere of this star around its maximum brightness
are such that most lines show intrinsic line polarisation. This
explains the signal in Na i D2 and its absence in D1 . The same
signal can be expected in all lines, atomic or molecular, with an

2
amplitude scaled by the quantum coefficient w(2)
Ju Jl . We have
illustrated the case with a Ti i line and with 3 molecular bandheads. The exercise could be continued with other lines, both
atomic and molecular, that present the same trends of signs and
relative amplitudes in Q and U signals. Following this scenario,
the pulsating atmosphere during a maximum light has not the
same radial velocity all over the star. Particular locations are expanding faster than others. Since velocity gradients can amplify
the radiation anisotropy of the expanding layers, the light from
these locations is more polarised than elsewhere. Consequently,
a net linear polarisation appears after integration over the stellar
disk. But this amplification of the anisotropy and of the polarisation by these velocity gradients only happens for absorption
lines. Emission lines actually recover a smaller anisotropy in the
same conditions. For emission lines, the polarisation is reduced
by these velocity gradients, and the net polarisation is dominated by the opposite signal coming from elsewhere in the star.
What we expect is a change of the polarisation sign for emission lines. This is actually what is observed in two of the lines
of the Ca ii triplet for which there is a I-blueshifted emission
Article number, page 8 of 16

and a redshifted absorption, corresponding to a change of sign
in the polarisation as one moves from one side to the other of
the line profile. This explains also why the Balmer lines, which
are mostly in emission, do show different and predominantly
opposite polarisation signs to the other atomic and molecular
lines in absorption. This change in the sign of polarisation in
emission and absorption lines cannot be easily explained in the
two other scenarios for symmetry breaking. If velocity gradients
were identical all over the star, everywhere the local polarisation
of absorption lines would be larger than that of emission lines.
In that case, if one particular region was either brighter or higher
than other regions, the total amount of photons, or the polarisation rate, would be larger than elsewhere. And it would be so
for both emission and absorption lines. But the polarisation of
emission lines in that brighter region would still be larger than
the polarisation of emission lines elsewhere, so that the net polarisation of emission lines would be the one of that brighter region. The net polarisation of both emission and absorption lines
would show the sign corresponding to that brighter region, and
both emission and absorption lines would show the same sign
even though the polarisation amplitude in emission lines would
be smaller. Not only the change of sign would not be explained,
but neither do we see this smaller amplitude of polarisation in
emission lines.

4. Time series of LSD profiles
Our scenario of anisotropic velocity gradients implies that all
absorption lines will present the same sign of polarisation, and,
excluding deep lines for which second order effects (lower level
polarisation, hyperfine structure, ...) may be important, the spectral shape of that polarisation signature is the same. As already
claimed above, this justifies the use of LSD techniques applied

2
to absorption lines and weighted with the coefficient w(2)
Ju Jl .

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

Fig. 5. Spectra of χ Cyg on September 4th, 2007 around Hα (left), Hβ (centre) and Hγ (right). As in Fig. 2, the black thin line represents intensity
(ordinates at right) and Stokes Q and U are shown in red and blue respectively. Q has been shifted 0.01 units for clarity.

Fig. 6. LSD Spectra of χ Cyg on September 4th, 2007, with lines
2
weighted by (w(2)
Ju Jl ) . Q is in red, U in blue. Three different masks are
used from left to right: all lines deeper than 1 %, all lines deeper than
40 %, and a selection of lines deeper than 40 % (see text).

The observations of September 4th, 2007 are remarkable in
that they show clear signatures in individual lines. For this date
we can compare the LSD profile (Fig. 6) to the signals in individual lines. We recover the expected signature, proving that LSD
really extracts the same signals that we have interpreted. The
LSD profile also shows a high S/N ratio, its fundamental purpose, and this demonstrates that continuum depolarisation, even
if present in some lines, must be really a minor effect: the LSD
signal is dominated by intrinsic polarisation. From the point of
view of the Second Spectrum we find that Betelgeuse (dominated by depolarisation) and χ Cyg (dominated by intrinsic line
polarisation) place themselves at the two extremes afforded by
Eq.(1), while the Sun is to be found somewhere in between with
most of the lines depolarizing the continuum and a few remarkable lines showing intrinsic line polarisation. These differences
must come from the actual atmospheric structure and the formation regions of the continuum and the spectral lines.
Signals will often be much lower at other observation dates
and we are therefore interested in using the right mask of lines

for LSD, right in the sense that the S/N ratio is still large enough
but pollution from molecular lines is as small as possible, given
the lack of sufficient information to include molecular lines in
the masks. Educated guesses led us to try and add all atomic
lines deeper than 1 % (left plot of Fig. 6), all atomic lines deeper
than 40 % (central plot) and, right plot, those lines deeper than
40 % that belong to the following series of atomic species: Ti i,
Ti ii, Sr i, Sr ii, Fe i, Fe ii, Cr i, Cr ii, Co i, Co ii, V i, V ii, Ni i, Ni ii,
K i, K ii, Zr i, and Zr ii. This last LSD mask , with over 19000
lines and which results in the most clear and unpolluted signal
from molecular lines without loosing much in S/N, is retained
and applied in the following.
Figure 7 shows the LSD profiles for all the available dates.
Signals are not always visible, as for example on June 28th, and
July 19th, 2015. A first point to notice is that the LSD signals
change from cycle to cycle but they are coherent inside each cycle and an evolution in time can be ascertained. We also see that,
in general, the polarisation signal appears centred or blueshifted
compared to the line profile minimum. However, for the observation of December 20th, 2016, two signals with different signs
appear in apparent relation with the double line in the intensity
profile. On the other hand, the peaks in Q and U appear at the
same wavelength, up to the precision allowed by the S/N ratio.
These observed wavelength dependences of the signal are to be
understood in the basic scenario which also explains the doubling of the intensity profile, clearly visible in our data. A brief
description was given above when explaining the emission profile of the Ca ii triplet. The observed line doubling in intensity
is explained in the framework of the pulsation shock wave: the
shockwave physically separates the line forming regions in two
with two different velocities. The atmosphere above the shock
follows a ballistic motion (induced by a former shock propagation), and produces the redshifted feature, while the region just
crossed by the shock is rising, leading to the blue-shifted component. This simple description of a 1D Schwarzschild mechanism
(Schwarzshild 1952) needs to be understood in the context of the
integration over the stellar disk. Clearly, it is only around disk
Article number, page 9 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Fig. 7. LSD Spectra of χ Cyg for each one of the dates for which Stokes Q and U data is available. The vertical dashed line in each plot marks the
heliocentric zero wavelength. The inset text contains the phase at each observation.

centre that the two velocities result in a maximum Doppler shift
visible as a double line. As one approaches the stellar limb the
projection onto the line of sight of the velocities drops to zero,
cancelling any Doppler shift and eliminating the double line. If a
double line is to be seen after integration over the stellar disk, the
simplistic 1-D picture of the Schwarzschild mechanism must be
completed. To address this issue, we follow Bertout & Magnan
(1987) and Wagenblast et al. (1983) and we redraw their scenario for the formation of spectral lines in a moving spherical
shell. This is explicitly done in the Appendix. The bottom line
of their, and our, reasoning is to assume that the bulk expansion
velocity is larger than the intrinsic width of the line. But, from
the point of view of the observer, this is only true for a region
around the disk centre, while near the limb the projected velocity is smaller than the line width. As shown in the Appendix and
by Bertout & Magnan (1987) and Wagenblast et al. (1983), the
integral over the stellar disk of the emergent intensity profiles
carries a geometrical factor that, under these stated relations between bulk velocity and line width, translates into a wavelength
modulation. Independently of any other radiative transfer effect,
this disk integration will produce doubled profiles, shifted profiles, asymmetric profiles or flat-bottom profiles for the intensity
depending on the actual value of the expansion velocity of the
shell and in the presence or absence of a contracting shell on top
of the expanding shell.
In this very same scenario, polarisation can be computed easily by introducing the factor sin2 θ = 1 − µ2 into the integration
over the stellar disk. As shown in the Appendix, this dependence
Article number, page 10 of 16

must be added to the integrals in a similar way to the geometric
factor described by Bertout & Magnan (1987). It modifies the
result in that polarisation comes preferentially from somewhere
midway between the centre and the limb. At this position, the
Doppler separation is not so large and we expect polarisation to
be roughly centred in wavelength when compared with the doubled intensity profiles. On top of this median signal we have to
consider the actual details of the position of the anisotropy in
velocities which will favour the polarisation signals of certain
places of the disk.
The interesting point in the previous description of the line
formation in χ Cyg is that wavelength can be soundly related to
a distance to the disk centre while, as usual, the ratio of Q to
U provides information about polar angle. This conclusion leads
us, as it did in the work by Aurière et al. (2016) and López Ariste
et al. (2018), to the possibility of actually mapping the velocity
field modulation of the pulsation over the disk of χ Cyg.
Even if its origin is not really known (see next section),
the anisotropy of the radial velocity field is required to explain the net observed linear polarisation. In the scenario developed above, this velocity field modulation appears at all observed phases, that are mainly centred on light maxima that correspond to the outward propagation of the shock wave. In the
Schwarzschild framework, this is well established by the gradual development of a blue shifted component that generates line
doubling or asymmetric profiles in the I spectra.
However, once the shock wave has crossed the atmosphere,
the accelerated matter follows a classical ballistic motion, reach-

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

ing, around light minimum, its maximum extension. It would
be interesting to measure the linear polarisation at this phase,
since we do not expect strong inhomogeneities within the velocity field in the line forming region at this phase of maximum
extension. Trials to do so have unfortunately been hindered by
the even more ubiquitous molecular bands that prevent the computation of any meaningful LSD profile using masks of atomic
lines exclusively.

5. Asymmetries in the shock wave
The main conclusion of this work has by now been reached: the
shock wave in χ Cyg should present asymmetries in the form of
an inhomogenous radial velocity field. In order to quantify those
asymmetries, we can attempt to map them onto the stellar disk
using the conclusions from the analysis presented in the previous section on the formation of the polarised line. This cannot be
done, however, without assuming a long list of hypotheses and
approximations that we try now to make explicit. Seen together,
all those hypothesis and approximations imply that the produced
maps cannot be seen at this point as the actual representation,
point by point, of the actual velocity field in the pulsation wave
of χ Cyg. But these maps can be a source of information on spatial and temporal scales of the inhomogeneities, as well as their
relative importance with respect to the average velocity of the
shock.
With this caution in mind, we start by recalling that the ratio Q/U provides the polar angle χ of regions over the disk that
contribute with a larger polarisation because of a larger velocity
field. But they do so through the expression
tan 2χ =

U
,
Q

so that a 180 degrees ambiguity pops up: the emitting region
of the polarisation excess may be at one side or the other of a
given diameter across the stellar disk. In our maps we will select
arbitrarily just one of the two possibilities.
In our model to explain the observed linear polarisation profiles, we have assumed that the only source of linear polarisation is scattering and that no phenomena other than velocity gradients modifies this polarisation. But it is well known
that magnetic fields, through the Hanle effect, can both diminish this scattering polarisation and rotate the polarisation plane
(Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi 2004, e.g.) Less known is that
non-vertical velocity fields can produce the same effect as the
Hanle effect: that is, it can depolarize and rotate the polarisation plane (de Kertanguy 1998; Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi
2004). This rotation of the local polarisation plane can mask the
dependence of the Q/U ratio on the polar angle. So we are making the hypothesis here that the velocity field is strictly radial
and that no magnetic fields are present, this last approximation
made in spite of the measurement of such fields through the observation of the Zeeman effect in the circular polarisation of the
lines (Fabas et al. 2011; Lèbre et al. 2014). While imposing a
radial velocity field in a scenario of a radially pulsating star may
appear as a natural hypothesis, overlooking the impact of actually measured magnetic fields may be judged inappropriate. It
can be argued however that Zeeman effect is sensitive to fields
much larger than the Hanle effect, so that those fields measured
through the Zeeman effect are most probably relatively strong
fields (above 100G) which do not influence scattering linear polarisation. If the measured circular polarisation amplitudes are
small (1-2 G) it is just because of polarity mixing or dilution in a

Fig. 8. Map of the velocity field on χ Cyg on Sept, 4th, 2007. A uniform
radial velocity is assumed except for those places where polarisation
indicates larger velocities. Both the arrow length and the colour code
indicate redundantly the magnitude of the velocity in terms of the background velocity field for those places where this velocity is different.
The white arrow represents the line of sight.

non-magnetic atmosphere, and not because of intrinsically weak
fields.
We are also assuming that at any time the star is spherical.
If it were an ellipsoid (as huge rotational speeds in other stars
appear to do) there would be a natural source of net polarisation
due to this shape. χ Cyg is not a rapid rotator and if, nevertheless,
this was the origin of the observed net polarisation we would
have failed in interpreting the different signs of the polarisation
in absorption and emission lines, as we have done. So this must
be at most a second order contribution.
Another approximation comes when inferring the distance µ
to the disk centre. Our approach has been that of the simplified
model used for the imaging of Betelgeuse made by Aurière et al.
(2016): each wavelength in the profile corresponds to a unique
point on the stellar disk of χ Cyg. Thus, the recovered information concerns just as many points as there are in the spectral binning of our profiles, about 30. This is obviously a very rough approximation. In the case of Betelgeuse, it has been demonstrated
(López Ariste et al. 2018) that such simple modelling can provide, at best, only basic information of the brightest points (or
the larger velocity points in our case). But it can also be the
source of strange unphysical distributions. For example Fig. 8,
in which the velocity has been represented as arrows over the
visible hemisphere of the star, shows strange filaments of high
velocities over the disk that look similar in shape to the examples shown by López Ariste et al. (2018) and which have their
origin in the drastic identification of one wavelength, one point.
The right approach would have been to propose a model for the
velocity distribution over the stellar disk in terms of spherical
harmonics or others. However at this point we miss the broader
view of what such distribution may look like so we have preferred the basic approximation of one wavelength one point from
which at least we can retrieve some information on the largest
velocity inhomogeneities present.
With these caveats in mind, Fig. 9 shows the inferred maps of
the pulsation velocity through the sequence of observation dates
with the same representation as Fig. 8. To build each of them
we have gone over the Q and U profiles of each date and assign a distance to disk centre µ to every wavelength assuming a
Article number, page 11 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Fig. 9. Maps of the velocity field on χ Cyg. A uniform radial velocity is assumed except for those places where polarisation indicates larger
velocities. Both the arrow length and the colour code indicate redundantly the magnitude of the velocity in terms of the background velocity field
for those places where this velocity is different. The white arrow represents the line of sight, and the inset text gives the pulsation phase

constant velocity projected onto the line of sight over the whole
disk. This is simplistic and oversees our conclusion about velocity gradients but, once again, our goal here is to get a first picture
of the spatial and temporal scales of those gradients. We next assign an azimuthal angle χ determined from the ratio of Q to U
amplitudes at that wavelength. At that point (µ, χ) over the stellar
disk we
p draw an arrow proportional to the amplitude of polarisation (Q2 + U 2 ) and representing a qualitative measurement of
the gradients of the velocity at that point. Since the 3D projection
may make it difficult to ascertain the actual length of every arrow,
we have also coded this information in colour. As expected from
the coherency of the signals, the direction of larger velocities is
approximately constant around each maximum. The maxima of
2015 and 2016 also appear to share a common direction, but this
direction is orthogonal to the one seen in the maximum of 2007.
This would exclude a permanent preference of direction related,
for example, to the rotation axis of the star. There is also no particular correlation between the date of the maximum brightness
and the date of maximum polarisation.

6. Conclusion
The observation of net linear polarisation in the spectral lines
of χ Cyg around three different pulsation maxima has led us to
conclude that the velocity of the pulsation, while still radial, is
Article number, page 12 of 16

not homogeneous in velocity over the stellar disk. The source
of these inhomogeneities is not known but since they change in
shape and position from one maximum to the next it must be
concluded that the source is not a permanent feature of the star. It
is nevertheless a recurrent feature, cycle after cycle, so we must
also conclude that it is somehow related to the shock associated
to the pulsation.
We can speculate on the interaction between the convective
motions and this pulsation shock as a possible culprit: strong
localized convective upflows would add up velocities with the
shock, resulting in localized higher velocities of pulsation. Another hypothetical source of asymmetries in the velocities would
be the interaction of the shock with returning material from
a previous pulsation cycle. These are the questions that future
work will have to explore.
Inferring that an inhomogeneous velocity field is the cause
of the observed linear polarisation signal has required the interpretation of this signal as due to the intrinsic polarisation of each
individual spectral line. Disentangling intrinsic polarisation from
depolarisation of the continuum, the two terms appearing in the
equation for the transfer of linear polarisation in the presence of
scattering, has been done through the inspection of individual
lines. But we have also demonstrated that line addition, through
techniques like LSD or others, can help to disentangle the two
processes as well by comparing the net signal recovered when

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

different weights for each individual line are used. Line depolarisation signatures are enhanced when the line depression is
used as weight, while intrinsic polarisation is brought up by using the quantum w(2)
Ju Jl coefficient of the line. This protocol allows
to conclude on the origin of observed linear polarisation even in
the case where the polarisation signal on individual lines is too
weak.

References
Alvarez, R., Jorissen, A., Plez, B., Gillet, D., & Fokin, A. 2000, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 362, 655
Alvarez, R., Jorissen, A., Plez, B., et al. 2001, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 379,
305
Asensio Ramos, A. & Trujillo Bueno, J. 2005, The Astrophysical Journal, 635,
L109
Asensio Ramos, A. & Trujillo Bueno, J. 2006, The Astrophysical Journal, 636,
548
Aurière, M., López Ariste, A., Mathias, P., et al. 2016, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 591, A119
Bertout, C. & Magnan, C. 1987, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 183, 319
Boyle, R. P., Aspin, C., Coyne, G. V., & McLean, I. S. 1986, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 164, 310
Carlin, E. S. & Asensio Ramos, A. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 801, 16
Carlin, E. S., Asensio Ramos, A., & Trujillo Bueno, J. 2013, The Astrophysical
Journal, 764, 40
Carlin, E. S., Manso Sainz, R., Asensio Ramos, A., & Trujillo Bueno, J. 2012,
The Astrophysical Journal, 751, 5
Casini, R., Landi Degl’Innocenti, E., Landolfi, M., & Trujillo Bueno, J. 2002,
The Astrophysical Journal, 573, 864
Casini, R. & Manso Sainz, R. 2006a, Solar Polarization 4, 358, 429
Casini, R. & Manso Sainz, R. 2006b, Journal of Physics B Atomic Molecular
Physics, 39, 3241
Clarke, D. & Schwarz, H. E. 1984, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 132, 375
de Kertanguy, A. 1998, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 333, 1130
Derouich, M. 2007, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 466, 683
Doherty, L. R. 1986, The Astrophysical Journal, 307, 261
Donati, J.-F., Semel, M., Carter, B. D., Rees, D. E., & Collier Cameron, A. 1997,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 291, 658
Duthu, A., Herpin, F., Wiesemeyer, H., et al. 2017, Astronomy and Astrophysics,
604, A12
Fabas, N., Lèbre, A., & Gillet, D. 2011, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 535, A12
Fadeyev, Y. A. & Gillet, D. 2004, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 420, 423
Fokin, A. B. 1991, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 250, 258
Gillet, D. 1988, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 192, 206
Gillet, D., Ferlet, R., Maurice, E., & Bouchet, P. 1985, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 150, 89
Gillet, D., Maurice, E., & Baade, D. 1983, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 128,
384
Herpin, F., Baudry, A., Thum, C., Morris, D., & Wiesemeyer, H. 2006, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 450, 667
Kochukhov, O., Makaganiuk, V., & Piskunov, N. 2010, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 524, A5
Landi Degl’Innocenti, E. & Landolfi, M. 2004, Polarization in Spectral Lines,
Vol. 307 (Kluwer Academic Publishers)
Lèbre, A., Aurière, M., Fabas, N., et al. 2014, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 561,
A85
Lèbre, A., Aurière, M., Fabas, N., et al. 2015, in IAUS 305, ed. K. Nagendra,
S. Bagnulo, R. Centeno, & M. Martinez Gonzalez, Vol. 305, 47
Leroy, J. L. 1972, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 19, 287
López Ariste, A., Casini, R., Paletou, F., et al. 2005, The Astrophysical Journal,
621, L145
López Ariste, A., Mathias, P., Tessore, B., et al. 2018, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 620, A199
Mathias, P., Aurière, M., López Ariste, A., et al. 2018, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 615, A116
Paletou, F. 2012, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 544, A4
Schwarzshild, M. 1952, in Transactions of the IAU, ed. P. Oosterhoff, Vol. VIII
(Cambridge University Press), 811
Stenflo, J. O. 2005, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 429, 713
Stenflo, J. O. & Keller, C. U. 1997, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 321, 927
Štěpán, J. & Sahal-Bréchot, S. 2008, SF2A-2008, 573
Trujillo Bueno, J. 2003, Solar Polarization, 307, 407
Trujillo Bueno, J., Casini, R., Landolfi, M., & Landi Degl’Innocenti, E. 2002,
The Astrophysical Journal, 566, L53
Vlemmings, W. H. T., Khouri, T., Martí-Vidal, I., et al. 2017, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 603, A92
Wagenblast, R., Bertout, C., & Bastian, U. 1983, Astronomy and Astrophysics,
120, 6
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the "Programme National de
Physique Stellaire" (PNPS) of CNRS/INSU co-funded by CEA and CNES.

Article number, page 13 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Appendix A: Integration over the disk of intensity
and polarisation line profiles from moving
spherical shells
The doubling of the intensity profiles and, by extension, the polarisation profiles observed in χ Cyg is attributed to the presence
of one or more spherical shells in movement. The Schwarzschild
mechanism (Schwarzshild 1952) is then usually recalled (Alvarez et al. 2000) to explain that, at disk centre, each moving
layer will produce an individual line Doppler shifted by its velocity: if one layer is moving outward and another layer is falling
back, two lines will be produced. Cartoons of this mechanism are
given by Alvarez et al. (2000). None of those cited works however puts any attention to the fact that, as said above, this justifies
only the profile that would be observed at disk centre. Assuming
that the velocities of the moving shells are radial and equal to
+v and −v, the two lines will be Doppler shifted at disk centre
by 2v, but at the limb, the null projection over the line of sight
will produce the addition of the two lines without any frequency
shift. By integration over the disk, all cases of line doubling from
0 at the limb to 2v at disk centre will appear at different proportions and produce bottom flattened profiles (see as examples the
left profiles in Figs. A.2 and A.3 later). Since these are not the
observed profiles, we must conclude that the integration over the
disk is a critical aspect of the line doubling and it is confounding
that so many works ignore it.
polarisation is produced preferentially at high scattering angles. Thus, it is close to the limb that one expects most of the polarisation to come from. Following the previous scheme, at the
limb the projected velocities of the moving shells onto the line
of sight are zero, and the largest amount of polarisation must
be emitted at an unshifted wavelength. If such a statement were
true, one would expect no line doubling in the polarisation profile, but rather a well centred linear polarisation at the zero rest
velocity of the star. This is not what is observed either.
In order to understand the polarisation line profiles we need
to understand how to correctly integrate over the stellar disk and,
as a particular case, how the intensity line profiles result in a doubled profile after disk integration. The best explanation of how
this integration is done is found in the work of Bertout & Magnan (1987) and Wagenblast et al. (1983). Those authors already
claim in their respective introductions that their purpose is, indeed, to explain the line doubling observed in Mira stars. Since
later literature on the spectra of Mira stars has plainly ignored
those works, and since they are a critical part to explain how the
1D Schwarzschild mechanism can still be seen as a cartoon explanation of what happens even after disk integration, and since
we needed to reproduce those computations while introducing a
sin2 µ factor in the integrals to explain the line doubling in linear
polarisation, for all these reasons we have found interesting to
reproduce in this Appendix the arguments and cases of Bertout
& Magnan (1987).
The star is assumed to produce a continuum spectrum which
is then absorbed by an optically thick spherical layer. Bertout &
Magnan (1987) also explore the cases of optically thin layers,
but we go straight into the case of interest to us and illustrate exclusively the optically thick case. The spherical layer is assumed
to move with a velocity v(r) which depends on the distance r to
the centre of the star (see Fig. A.1 for the graphical definition of r
and other parameters of interest). The layer itself has a thickness
given by the difference between the inner and outer radii r1 and
r2 . We observe the star along a given direction z. The transverse
distance µ has been defined in the main text as the distance to
the centre of the disk in the plane perpendicular to z. A point in
Article number, page 14 of 16

Fig. A.1. Geometry of the expanding spherical shell.

a given line of sight at µ is defined by coordinates µ and z, but
also by a radius r and an angle α. Obviously we have that
r2 = µ2 + z2

(A.1)

and
cos α =

z
z
.
= p
2
r
µ + z2

(A.2)

Along a given line of sight µ, radiative transfer requires the solution of an integral for the specific intensity at a given frequency
ν:
Z
Iν (p) =
S [r]e−τν (p,z) dτν .
(A.3)
where S is the source function and τv is the optical opacity at
frequency ν, which we can write as


v
dτν = −kφ ν − ν0 cos α − ν0 dz.
(A.4)
c
Symbols in this expression have their usual meanings: k is an
absorption coefficient and φ is the line profile centred at ν0 except
for Doppler shifts.
One of the main arguments of Bertout & Magnan (1987) is
that the line doubling is a purely geometrical effect, and this cannot be better demonstrated than by simplifying radiative transfer
to its bare fundamentals. Therefore, and because of our assumption of an optically thick layer, we can just impose that, independently of µ, the specific intensity is just an appropriately defined average < S > of the source function, Doppler shifted to
the frequency ν0 vc cos α. Correct radiative transfer calculations,
as done by Fokin (1991) will introduce an improved line profile
shape and correct line depressions. But the basic line doubling in
the presence of a moving spherical shell can be retrieved in this
bare scenario. With an infinitely thin line profile, for a given µ,
the frequency ν at which < S > is non-zero is given just by
v
ν − ν0 − ν0 cos α = 0.
c

(A.5)

We can rewrite this condition in terms of µ by developing cos α:


!2


c
µ2 = r2 1 −
(ν − ν0 )2 
(A.6)
ν0 v

A. López Ariste, B. Tessore, et al.: Asymmetric shocks in χ Cyg from linear spectropolarimetry

From it, the contribution of a differential element dµ over
the disk can be obtained by differentiation. Recalling that v is a
function of r and making use of the fact that
r dv d log v
=
=a
v dr
d log r

(A.7)

we can write this differential contribution as


!2
!2


c
c
2
µdµ = 2rdr 1 − (1 − a)
(ν − ν0 )  + r2
(ν − ν0 )dν.
ν0 v
ν0 v
(A.8)
Our calculations up to this point have transformed the original integration over opacity dτ into an integration over the disk
which reduces to an integration over the radial coordinate dµ
and then, because of the relationship between the position over
the disk and the Doppler velocity of the expanding or contracting shells, into the sum of an integration over spectral frequency
dν and a second one through the thickness of the shell dr with a
strong weight favouring profiles emerging from disk centre over
those from the limb as we shall now see.
Two different cases can be considered in view of these two
terms at the right side of this equation: either the velocity of
the spherical shell is such that macroscopic Doppler shifts are
much larger than the width of the spectral line, and in such case
we can neglect the term in dν, or the line is broader than the
Doppler shifts due to the moving shell and it is the first term in
dr that we can neglect. This second case produce what Bertout
& Magnan (1987) referred to as sawtooth profiles which they
considered as the probable description of the line doubled lines
in Mira stars. However, posterior works proved that the shocks of
χ Cyg and other Mira stars present velocities with Doppler shifts
much larger than the line thermal width. These works force us to
be in the first case above, where we can approximate


!2


c
2

(ν − ν0 )  .
µdµ = 2rdr 1 − (1 − a)
ν0 v
This expression allows us to easily write and compute the
disk integration of the emergent profiles. The observed flux at
frequency ν will be given by the integral
Z 2π Z r
Fν =
dχ
Iν (p)pd p =
(A.9)
0
0


!
Z r
2


c
(ν − ν0 )2 
(A.10)
2π < S >
rdr 1 − (1 − a)
ν0 v
0
Let us finally assume that the shock layer is thin enough so
that we can make v constant through the layer. This allows us to
write the final and simple expression:


!2


c
2
Fν = π < S > 1 − (1 − a)
(ν − ν0 )  (r22 − r12 ).
(A.11)
ν0 v
The frequency dependence of Fν comes exclusively from the
equations that describe dr in terms of dµ. That is, the observed
flux presents a shape in frequency which is determined not by
radiative transfer but by a geometric factor alone. Depending on
the value of a, the logarithmic gradient of the velocity, we can
find two interesting results. If a = 1, that is, if the layer does not
move or if it moves with a velocity proportional to r, then
F = π < S > (r22 − r12 )

(A.12)

Fig. A.2. Examples of line formation following Bertout & Magnan
(1987). At left, a basic Schwarzschild mechanism produces a flat bottom profile captured by setting a = 1. At right, two accelerating spherical shells with acceleration a = 1.2, one expanding the second falling,
producing the line doubling. The maximum contribution comes from
the centre of the disk, the limbs being weighed down by the geometry of the problem, so the profile roughly behaves as if coming from
one-dimensional radiative transfer at disk centre. The red profiles correspond to the linear polarisation one.

independently of frequency. This a bottom-flat square profile
where no line doubling can be seen. This is the case illustrated in
the left plots of figures A.2 and A.3, and shows what a straightforward disk integration of the 1D Schwarzschild mechanism
would produce. On the other hand, if a > 1 (the layer is expanding in an accelerated motion), then Fν has a parabolic shape
where the disk centre contributes to the blue edge of the line with
weight one, and points further and further from disk centre contribute at frequencies nearer and nearer to the central frequency
ν0 but with a diminishing factor (ν − ν0 )2 multiplying those contributions. The result is a line which grows towards its blue edge
and leaves the line centre with less photons. A second layer,
falling into the star from a previous pulsation, produces the same
profile red-shifted. This is the line doubling observed in χ Cyg
explained exclusively by a geometric effect. Since the maximum
depth of the line is attained at the maximum of (ν − ν0 )2 , that
is from the contributions from the disk centre where the expansion velocity coincides with the Doppler shift, we recover a scenario where the 1D Schwarzschild mechanism correctly guesses
where the doubled lines will be found, even if it misses completely the meaning of those doubled profiles.
In our observations the doubled line is not always apparent,
but the intensity profile appears to be displaced from the line
centre. It is sufficient to eliminate the falling layer from the computations and assume that only the expanding layer is emitting
light. We illustrate this case in Fig. A.3. The line appears here
both displaced and asymmetric.
These simple calculations confirm one of the most important
assumptions in our work, that every frequency of the double line
corresponds to a Doppler shift coming from the projection of the
velocity v onto the line of sight vc cos µ. This justifies our assignment of every frequency to one distance to the disk centre µ,
opening the path to mapping the velocity inhomegeneities over
the disk.
Article number, page 15 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. art64_v3

Fig. A.3. As in Fig. A.2, examples of line formation following Bertout
& Magnan (1987). At left, a basic Schwarzschild mechanism produces
a flat bottom profile captured by setting a = 1. At right, two accelerating spherical shells with acceleration a = 1.2, one expanding the second falling, producing line doubling. The maximum contribution comes
from the centre of the disk, the limbs being weighed down by the geometry of the problem, so the profile roughly behaves as if coming from
one-dimensional radiative transfer at disk centre. The red profiles correspond to the linear polarisation one.

The same computations can be now repeated for the polarisation by just introducing the sin2 µ factor into (A.3):
Z
Qν (p) =
S [r] sin2 µe−τν (p,z) dτν .
(A.13)
In the intensity case, geometry alone enhanced light coming
from disk centre. We expect that the sin2 µ factor will take the
geometrical effect of the expanding layer into account by enhancing light coming from the limb. After rewriting this new
factor in terms of the line frequencies and the coordinate r using
exactly the same conditions, approximations and developments
of the intensity case, we find that (A.11) becomes:


!2


c
Q
2

Fν = π < S > 1 −
(ν − ν0 )  ×
ν0 v


!2


c
2

(ν − ν0 )  (r22 − r12 ).
(A.14)
× 1 − (1 − a)
ν0 v
The new factor in that expression is identical except for the absence of the (1−a) factor. The red lines in Figs. A.2 and A.3 show
that the expected polarisations in the two cases of accelerated expansion and in the presence or absence of a falling shell. What
we see is that the polarisation profile is always better centred
than the intensity profile. In the case of the presence of both the
expanding and falling shells, the polarisation profile is symmetric and centred, not presenting the double line that the intensity
profile shows. When just the expanding shell is present, the maximum polarisation emission is expected very close to the central
frequency, unlike the intensity profile which is shifted. In both
cases, there is a clear correspondence between wavelength and
distance to disk centre.

Article number, page 16 of 16

