FERMILAB-PUB-19-457-T
IFIC/19-37

Sterile Neutrinos, Black Hole Vacuum
and Holographic Principle
Gabriela Barenboim1 and Christopher T. Hill2
1

arXiv:1909.01956v4 [hep-th] 22 Apr 2020

Departament de Fı́sica Teòrica and IFIC,
Universitat de València-CSIC, E-46100, Burjassot, Spain.
2
Theoretical Physics Department,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,
P. O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
We construct an effective field theory (EFT) model that describes matter field interactions with
Schwarzschild mini-black-holes (SBH’s), treated as a scalar field, B0 (x). Fermion interactions with
SBH’s require a complex spurion field, θij , which we interpret as the EFT description of “holographic
information,” which is correlated with the SBH as a composite system. We consider Hawking’s
virtual black hole vacuum (VBH) as a Higgs phase, hB0 i = V . Integrating sterile neutrino loops, the
information field θij is promoted to a dynamical field, necessarily developing a tachyonic instability
and acquiring a VEV of order the Planck scale. For N sterile neutrinos this breaks the vacuum
to SU (N ) × U (1)/SO(N ) with N degenerate Majorana masses, and 21 N (N + 1) Nambu-Goldstone
neutrino-Majorons. The model suggests many scalars fields, corresponding to all fermion bilinears,
may exist bound nonperturbatively by gravity.
PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the present paper we will discuss the issue of the
“black hole information paradox” in the context of an
effective quantum field theory (EFT). Classical EFT is
a powerful tool for summarizing low energy processes
where the detailed short-distance behavior of a system
is integrated out. Examples of its application to black
holes can be found in [1] and references therein, where
effective field theories are world-line actions and carry
local operators that represent known cases of the breakdown of classical no hair theorems. We also implicitly
rely on the intuition of Dvali and Gomez in their picture
of threshold quantum black holes [2].
We assume there is a quantum limit for black holes,
near the threshold of production or collisions in scattering processes, or in coherent processes such as BoseEinstein condensation. These processes can exist in field
theoretic descriptions even through the underlying objects are complicated many body states, e.g., Rubidium
atoms with Z = 37 can be described as pointlike objects,
yet form a quantum condensate which can be described
as the vacuum value of a field. Hadronic boundstate production can be described by pointlike interactions despite
the short distance complexity of a hadron.
Presently we will decribe a black hole by a field, B(x),
which can create or destroy a black hole of mass M at
the event x and satisfies a free field equation of motion.
We ignore the warped external geometry at large distances compared to the black hole Schwarzschild radius
of B(x) (following [1]). Fundamental problems must then
be faced in constructing the interactions of B(x) with
matter.
We consider the simplest case of a pair of scalars which
possess a global SO(2) = U (1) symmetry. How do we
write down a pointlike interaction of a pair of scalars φi

and φj with a real Schwarzschild black hole B(x)? By
“no-hair” reasoning any interaction, such as φ1 + φ1 →
B must have the same physical rate, or same quantum
amplitude, as any other interaction such as φ1 + φ2 →
B. A naive “no-hair” theorem would say these must be
indistinguishable processes.
However, it is not possible to mathematically write
down interactions that would have this universality.
Once we commit to a certain amplitude for φi + φj → B
then we will generally not have an equivalent amplitude
for some other process φ0i + φ0j → B where (φ0i , φ0j ) is a
general linear superposition of the (φi , φj ). This is only
possible in special cases, such as if we maintain the symmetry U (1) and restrict ourselves to U (1) transformations of the fields, in which case the process φ1 + φ1 → B
is forbidden.
Stemming from this it is conventional wisdom that the
global symmetry is broken by quantum gravity. Then
different configurations of the two scalars may have different amplitudes to interact with B(x). However, given
that both processes φ1 + φ2 → B and φ1 + φ1 → B must
exist, since gravity is “flavor blind,” what rule dictates
their amplitudes? The breaking of a symmetry is actually expressed by the form of the interaction. Breaking
a symmetry actually requires that we supply more information, not less.
One might argue that the quantum effective field theory does not exist, and the S-matrix does not exist, at
Planckian high energies. However, given a mini black
hole, we can consider an idealized low energy experiment
where the resolvable distance scales are large. We make
an arbitrary initial combination of the two φi ’s and allow
them to collide with the mini Schwarzschild black hole,
B, resulting in a final state black hole B 0 . We take pains
to observe the exclusive process where no other particles
appear in the initial or final states. Our question is, what

2
is the effective interaction gθij φi φj BB 0 ? What then dictates the couplings θij ? Theoretically or experimentally
determining θij may be problematic, but we cannot deny
its existence.
Quantum mechanics conflicts with no-hair theorems.
If we believe in Dirac’s formulation of the Hilbert space
of superpositionable states, an S-matrix and Wilsonian
effective field theory (which we do) then we must allow
for the possibility that B(x) carries information. To us
the resolution is that the information contained in the
θij φi φj initial state is transfered to the B 0 state, and
resides on it’s horizon. Essentially the black hole B 0 has
acquired “information hair” and is now defined by a field
B 0 = θij B(x) . This acquired information supplements
any other information that was already present on B,
though not probed in the experiment.
In Section II we will reiterate these issues in more detail
for a pair of scalar fields φi , i = (1, 2).
To connect to real-world fields and make these issues
more concrete we consider, in addition to scalars, sterile
neutrinos, possessing an SU (N ) × U (1) global symmetry, and consider how they interact with a Schwarzschild
mini-black hole (SBH) of mass MP lanck . In an effective field theory, we describe the SBH by a real quantum
field, B0 (x), whose excitations are minimal mass, tiny
black holes. We can follow the intuition of [2], who view
the spectroscopy of mini-blackholes as a tower of states
labelled by a quantum number N where N is effectively
the number of self gravitating gravitons in the core of the
BH.
We know that an s−wave pair of sterile neutrinos can
fall into the SBH, or scatter close to it. We can write
couplings of the neutrinos to B0 that preserves or violates
the global symmetry. This then raises the question of
how the neutrino number current is carried (or destroyed)
by the black hole?
A conserved global-charge current cannot be carried
by a real scalar field alone. To engineer a coupling of a
Weyl neutrino pair, ∼ αβ ναi (x)νβj (x), to B0 (x) we need
a complex “information” that is either intrinsic to the
black hole or is a field that can be attached to the SBH.
We will designate this as θij (x). Physically, the neutrino
pair falls into the SBH, but never appears to cross the
horizon. However, at some point we can no longer distinguish the neutrino pair and black hole from a pure black
hole, though there may be some information record in
the EFT black hole that is absorbing them.
In the effective field theory we describe the information
by a “spurion,” a complex field that transforms under
SU (N ) identically to the neutrino pair and allows us to
tie all indices together in the interaction vertex. This
is co-localized with the SBH and the neutrinos at the
interaction vertex. The spurion represents information
on the horizon of the SBH. The EFT is describing a miniblack hole and the region immediately surrounding it,
external to the horizon, which includes anything orbiting
or in the process of infall as seen by the Schwarzschild
observers and this includes θij (x).

We distinguish three possible logical cases for a dynamical θij . (I) Information is explicitly lost; (II) Information
is conserved but does not propagate; (III) Information is
conserved and is carried by the black hole.
Case (I) evidently implies an explicit, arbitrary fixed
value of the spurion permeating all of space with a fixed
orientation in the group space, hence it breaks SU (N ) ×
U (1) transformation, and the associated Noether current
is violated. It seems that this case makes no sense fundamentally, since there is no procedure to specify θij (x),
even as a random variable, however it may arise spontaneoeuly through the formation of a condensate of underlying black holes. Note that just naively summing indices, Σij αβ ναi νβj B0 (x), implies a particular basis choice
and therefore a particular choice of θij (x) ∼ Σnm δin δjm ,
a matrix with all elements = 1. This is logically equivalent to case I and seems unreasonable unless it arises by
spontaneous symmetry breaking.
Case (II) implies that we introduce a random field variable θij (x), that has no correlation with the black hole
itself and, minimally, has no derivatives. This implies
that there is no current associated with θij (x), and information is not carried by the SBH, yet the neutrino
global current is conserved. We can treat θij (x) as a random field, and average over θij (x) configurations through
which the black hole and the neutrinos propagate. This
is somewhat akin to a “spin-glass” in condensed matter
physics [3]. It simply ends up promoting θij (x) to being
a propagating dynamical field.
Case (III) implies that the information is attached to
the effective SBH and is dynamically transported by it.
This requires a“conjoined kinetic term” where the θij (x)
moves with B0 (x) as a composite field, ∼ θij (x)B0 (x).
Here θij (x) is positionally correlated with B0 (x). Case
(III) is the most sensible to us, and we interpret it tentatively as an effective field theory description of the holographic principle [4]. Once we engineer the interaction
described in Case (III) above, we find that there are potential dynamical consequences.
As an application, we consider the effect of this on the
neutrino vacuum. The vacuum of the underlying B0 (x)
field may be nontrivial. Indeed, we know of three classical and important (effective) scalar fields in nature, the
Higgs field of the standard model (SM), the σ-meson of
QCD chiral dynamics, and the Ginzburg-Landau field of
a superconductor (an effective description of a Cooper
pair). In each of these examples the vacuum is a “Higgs
phase.” In our present scenario we consider the possibility that B0 (x) → V + B where V is a nontrivial vacuum
expectation value (VEV).
A black hole Higgs phase will, in our model, have implications for the dynamical behavior of information encoded in θij : owing to the effects of neutrino loops external to the horizon (in the EFT) global information
becomes a propagating massless field in a Higgs phase of
B0 (x). Moreover, this back reaction of the neutrino fields
induces an instability, causing a tachyonic potential for
θij (x) to develop, and in turn, θij (x) acquires a VEV.

3
This happens in both cases (II) and (III) (though there
are slight differences) and we obtain an effective potential that leads to a VEV for θij , and sterile neutrinos
develop Planck scale masses. The SU (N ) × U (1) global
symmetry is broken to SO(N ).

II.

QUANTUM INCONSISTENCY WITH THE
“NO-HAIR” THEOREM

Consider the “no-hair” theorem of classical black holes.
This allows for a black-hole, B, to have gauge charges,
or quantum numbers. For example, black holes with the
quantum numbers of the standard model Higgs boson
could in principle be produced in collisions, such as a pair
of electrons eL + ēR → B. However we could equally well
consider a collison cL + t̄R → B of a lefthanded-charm
quark with an anti-righthanded-top quark. These initial
states have the same gauge charges, but involve different
combinations of flavors of initial state fermions. Gravity,
being flavor blind, supposedly cannot make a flavored
black hole. Hence, B must be universally coupled to any
and all fermion bilinears.
However, a universal coupling to any and all fermion
bilinears cannot exist in quantum mechanics. In the
above example if we allow the latter process then there
will be some mixed state collision, such as a Cabibbo rotated charm-strange combination, (cL cos θ + sL sin θ) +
t̄R → B, where we did not Cabibbo rotate the top quark.
This process will have a θ-dependent rate and thus does
not respect the flavor-blind universality of gravity.
To simplify, consider the production of a black hole in
a collision of two scalar particles φi , with two global
flavors, i = 1, 2. We want to describe the process
φi + φj → B in an effective field theory. We could
describe this process directly by an S-matrix element,
hij|Bi where B can be a Schwarzschild black hole if the
collision of the scalars is s-wave. The existence of the
S-matrix implicitly assumes that |Bi is a quantum state.
Since gravity is flavor blind, a no-hair theorem would
evidently imply that the S-matrix element, hij|Bi = S,
must be a constant independent of the choice of normalized in-states for the φi particles, for arbitrary i and j.
(A weaker statement might be that the probability is
the same for each such initial state). In a quantum field
theory description the S-matrix must exist and we can
introduce a field for the black hole which we designate as
B(x), and we also have the two fields φi (x). Our equivalent field theory problem is then, how do we write the
local interaction vertex for the process hij|Bi?
√
Let us introduce a complex field Φ = (φ1 + iφ2 )/ 2
Consider the interaction:
g|Φ|2 B =

1
gΣi φ2i B
2

(1)

This would forbid φ1 +φ2 → B i.e.,, i 6= j. It equivalently
forces the S-matrix to be diagonal in flavor, hij|Bi = δij S
hence h1, 2|Bi = 0. Therefore a U (1) = SO(2) singlet

cannot decribe the process since we certainly expect that
φ1 + φ2 can collide to make a Schwarzschild black hole
and should have the same S-matrix.
However, consider the interaction vertex,
ig(Φ2 − Φ∗2 )B = −2gφ1 φ2 B

(2)

This breaks the U (1) symmetry and indeed now describes
the process h1, 2|Bi = 2g. However, suppose we consider
the collision h10 , 20 |Bi = 2g where:
|10 i = cos(θ)|1i + sin(θ)|2i
|20 i = − sin(θ)|1i + cos(θ)|2i

(3)

These are simple superimposed states and can readily be
produced in a laboratory, such as with neutral K-mesons,
or oscillating neutrinos. However, we now see that the
amplitude is theta dependent:
h10 , 20 |Bi = 2g cos(2θ)

(4)

Hence we cannot write a local field description of φi +
φj → B that yields an S-matrix, hij|Bi = S that is
constant and independent of i and j. The flavor blindness
or “no-hair” theorem, in this sense, is incompatible with
quantum theory.
The only sensible resolution is that the black hole does
have memory of the initial state, with global quantum
numbers. The black hole field is then ∼ B ij which is a
BH that has quantum flavor information, hence ”hair”.
The vertex takes the form
gΣij φi φj B ij

(5)

B ij remembers the initial states that made it and the
resulting interaction is SO(2) invariant. Equivalenly, the
black hole must be a complex field in the interaction
Φ2 B + hc and the phase transformation Φ → eiθ Φ together with B → e−2iθ B must be a symmetry. This
implies the BH carries a global U (1) charge.
By insisting on the classical no-hair theorem we would
conclude that global charges cannot exist. However, it
has been recently understood that classically time dependent hair exists. For example, reference [1] nicely treats
and reviews the situation. A BH immersed in a time
dependent scalar field will absorb and reemit this field
producing a time dependent, coulombic “halo.” If, for
example, the time dependent field is a Nambu-Goldstone
boson (eg, axion) then the associated charge is given by
the chiral current f ∂t φ so indeed, the BH has acquired a
global chiral charge density.
Moreover, by claiming that the U (1) symmetry is broken by gravity, by itself, in no way resolves this issue.
Even if global symmetries do not exist at short distances,
but quantum mechanics applies at all distances, then we
face these issues. The Dirac superposition of Hilbert
space states is the underling conflict here. In this regard, we should mention that ‘t Hooft has reformulated
quantum mechanics with an underlying “digital,” cellular automata structure [5] where the Dirac superposition

4
of states is only effective, but not fundamental. Presumably Dirac superposition arises by rapidly fluctuating discrete alternatives (on Planckian time scales). Here
it is argued that there is no conflict with quantum mechanics at larger distances and time scales. Perhaps this
is alternative path to resolving these issues, but reveals
the radical revision required to achieve consistency. The
Dvali-Gomez theory of quantum black holes is more conservative [2], preserving the familar features of quantum
mechanics and argues that no UV completion of revision of quantum theory is necessary. In the Dvali-Gomez
theory the no-hair theorem, Hawking radiation, etc, are
emergent only for large N (quanta) black holes that approach a classical limit.

III.

EFFECTIVE FIELD THEORY

We introduce a real scalar field B0 (x) to decribe
Schwarzschild mini-black holes as pointlike “particles” of
the minimal mass MP , which become the excitations of
B0 (x). In what follows we will neglect Hawking radiation. We choose the Lagrangian of B0 (x) to be

they interact with the B + V field. Our main objective
presently is to provide a field theory description of physical processes that involve matter interactions with the
SBH’s. This is immediately related to the issue of information loss as described in the introduction.
In the original view of Hawking, global charges would
simply be swallowed by mini-black holes which subsequently evaporate, and large violations of global charge
conservation would be expected. This has been implemented to conjecture, e.g., gravitationally induced violation of B + L in the standard model [16] (see also an
exception, [17]). In the modern prevailing view global
charges are conserved, with the global charge “information” holographically painted onto the horizon of the
black hole, to be recovered upon evaporation [4].2
For N Weyl fermions we have the global SU (N )×U (1)
µ
kinetic term ψ̄iα̇ i∂µ σα̇β
ψ iβ . For the Weyl fermion pair,
αβ ψαi ψβj ∼ [ψ i ψ j ], we require a complex spurion, θij (x),
to tie indices of fermions onto B(x), as
[ψ i (x)ψ j (x)]θij (x)

B02 (x)
+ h.c.
MP2

(8)

We can always choose the source term to cancel an antideSitter cosmological constant Λ = J 2 /2M . When particles of the standard model propagate through a VBH

For the case of ψ representing neutrinos this is depicted
in Fig.(3). Note, we include here B02 (x) since the fermion
pair is colliding with an existing black hole in the initial
state and producing one in the final state.3 In order to
make an SU (N ) invariant interaction we require that θ
lies in the symmetric representation of SU (N ) of dimension 12 N (N + 1).
Naturally, θij (x) refers to the associated horizon information of B0 (x). However, in the context of field theory
we must face the issue of how to treat the spurion dynamically. In the following we consider two possibilities.
In case (II) we argue that the spurion is simply a random complex valued variable at the point of interaction.
We therefore average path integrals over θij (x). In this
sense, the theory is analogous to a “spin-glass” in which
spins propagate through a random potential, and the partition function is averaged over the potentials [3]. This
promotes θij (x) to a physical field. Since gravity loses
all memory of the information, there is no further autocorrelation between θij (x) and itself, e.g., no mass or
kinetic terms, such as ∼ θij (x)θ†ij (x). Since there is no
current associated with θij (x). we interpret this as “lost
information.”
In case (III), following [4] we implement conservation of
information, i.e., the holographic principle which implies
a conserved global current that involves the information.

1

2

1
1
L = ∂B0 ∂B0 − M 2 B02 + JB0 + Λ
2
2

(6)

Hawking proposed a virtual black hole vacuum (VBH)
[6], in which the vacuum is viewed as consisting of Euclidean (instanton-like) loops of tiny black holes, appearing and disappearing on time scales of order MP−1 (for
a review, see [7]).1 This is connected in the literature
to various ideas in AdS hologaphy, gravitational instantons and string theory [8][9][10][11]. The consequences
of topological instanton fluctuations at the Plank scale,
associated with anomalous neutrino currents, have also
been considered recently [12]. Other authors have discussed possible gravitational effects in neutrino physics
[13, 14].
For a simple model of a VBH, we have added a source
term, J. The vacuum value of B0 is therefore shifted and
we obtain the field B0 = B + V where V = J/M 2 in a
Higgs phase:
L→

1
1
J2
∂B∂B − M 2 B 2 −
+Λ
2
2
2M 2

(7)

Hawking’s rationale behind considering Euclidean spacetime may
in part have been that the black hole loops are simply finite
action instantonic field configurations, and Hawking radiation
does not arise in Euclidean space. Given the source J there is no
decay of the static VEV, V in our Higgs phase. In any case, the
decay width Γ can be significantly less than MP of a physical
Planckian SBH of mass MP [15].

3

We are not considering anomalies, as in [12], which more definitively break the global symmetries by violating the conservation
of the global current and with an instanton allows a mechanism
to exchange visible charge with the vacuum.
One could extend this to a model of production with vertex ∼
g[ψψ]θB0 but this is complicated by a large energy dependence
in a form factor which suppresses g(µ) for µ << MP [18].

5
To do this we must view the SBH as analogous to a very
heavy atom, H(x) (such as Uranium) that is bound to
a light particle φ(x) (such as a neutron in its nucleus)
to make a composite system, φ(x)H(x). The physical
properties of the composite state are similar to those of
the unbound H(x), but the location in space-time of the
light field φ(x) must be correlated with the heavy H(x).
However, the heavy particle carries the bulk mass of the
system. This imples both a conventional kinetic term for
H(x), e.g., 21 ∂H∂H, and a conjoined kinetic term for the
composite system,
1
∂µ (φ(x)H(x))∂ µ (φ(x)H(x)).
2MP2

(9)

However, the mass term involves only H(x), as
M 2 H(x)2 .
In our case H(x) ∼ B0 (x) and φ(x) ∼ θij (x). The conjoined kinetic term ∂(θ† B0 )∂(θB0 ), and no stand-alone
∂(θ† )∂(θ) term implies that θ(x) can never escape B0 (x)
unless the system decays through a fermion pair. This
leads to the following Lagrangian:
L =

1
1
∂B0 ∂B0 − M 2 B02 + JB0 + Λ
2
2
1
∗ij
+ 2 ∂(θ B0 )∂(θij B0 )
MP

IV.
A.

ναi (x)νβj (x)αβ θij (x)

(11)

Remarkably, in the VBH vacuum upon replacing B0 →
V constant, the information field θ freely propagates
through the medium. We can then absorb a factor of
V /MP into θ to write (V 2 /M 2 )∂µ (θ† )∂ µ (θ) → ∂µ θ† ∂ µ θ
and θ is then canonical. Mainly, there is now a conserved
global current that involves both the fermions and the
field θ.
The interaction vertex with the fermions then becomes,
again, that of eq.(8), in the VBH and suitably renormalized
[ψ i (x)ψ j (x)]θij (x) + h.c.

B02 (x)
+ h.c.
MP2

(13)

where θij (x) is a constant dimensionless spurion (note
we given θ dimensions of a mass). This is case(I) alluded
to in the Intoduction and will break the conservation of
the global currents of the neutrinos explicitly. There is
nothing intrinsic to gravity that can dictate the flavor
structure or phase of θij in SU (N ) × U (1) and we conclude that this is not a sensible theory.

(10)

The fact that θ is always accompanied by a factor of
B0 (x) implies that it cannot escape the SBH, other than
by a neutrino interaction. In the limit B0 → V the kinetic term becomes:
V2
T r(∂µ θ† ∂ µ θ)
MP2

If Information is Lost

Assume we have N sterile neutrino flavors. This will
imply an SU (N )×U (1) invariant kinetic term, and we assume this is a valid global symmetry at the Planck scale.
Consider an s-wave pair of massless right-handed neutrinos scattering off of an SBH. Here we have a unique situation in the SM that an s-wave combination of two massless right-handed fermions, of flavors i and j can have
zero local gauge coupling constant but nonzero global
flavor.
We assume the neutrinos interact with the SBH B0
field as in Fig.(1):

B.

hB0 θ|L|B0 θi ∼ L0 +

STERILE NEUTRINOS

(12)

The interaction annihilates an information-less SBH B0
from the vacuum, and creates a composite SBH in the
vacuum with information, θij (x)B0 (x). θ is thus created
(annihilated) by absorbing (producing) a fermion pair,
always in coincidence with B0 through its VEV. We now
apply this to sterile neutrinos.

Random Field as a Spin-Glass

A more reasonable possibility is (II) that θij (x) is a
complex random variable. We have the interaction of
eq.(13), but θij (x) can have no autocorrelation due to
gravity, since the SBH has lost all knowledge of the ij
∗ ij
indices, hence no term like µ2 θij
θ is induced. This is
the “information lost” scenario.
A given choice of θij (x) describes a particular subprocess. However we then have to average over this field.
The system is analogous to “spin-glasses” which have
Hamiltonians that involve random variables (such as the
Edwards-Anderson model [3]).
For spin-glasses the averaging is done over the partition
functions and not in the action itself. In our case, we
average over the path integrals, and this has the effect of
promoting θij to a random quantum field:
 Z

Z
4
i j αβ
2
2
→ Dθ exp i d x θij να νβ  (B0 /MP ) + h.c. (14)
While with a fixed θij (x) the neutrino flavor current conservation would be violated, it isn’t hard to see that upon
averaging over θ matrix elements yield a conserved global
current h∂ µ ν̄T A σµ νi = 0.
The theory is singular, however, since the equation of
motion of θ would enforce the vanishing of the vertex.
To see this, we pass to the VBH vacuum upon
√ replacing
B0 → V constant, and absorb the factor of Z = V /MP
into θ to canonically normalize θ. If we then introduce a

6
∗ ij
θ term in the action, the fermion current is
small µ2 θij
manifestly conserved upon use of the equation of motion
of the neutrinos and θ. In the VBH vacuum we have

ναi νβj αβ θij + h.c. − µ2 θij θ†ij

^,

(15)
^,

where Z = V 2 /MP2 . The corresponding 4-fermion interaction of eq.(15) is
[ν i ν j ][ν̄i ν̄j ]
µ2

νi

(16)

and is singular as µ → 0. Likewise, as µ2 → 0 the equation of motion of θ enforces ναi νβj αβ B0 (x) → 0.
The key feature is the absence of the mass term for
θij (x) in the Planck scale effective Lagrangian. There are
no derivatives of θij (x) at this stage and no current built
of θij (x) and the theory is singular at MP . This would be
in our opinion, a realization of Hawkings information-lost
hypothesis.
We will see below, however, that this situation is unstable and effects of the back-reaction of the neutrinos
will lead to a nonsingular dynamics for θij (x), on scales
µ < MP and a spontaneous breaking of SU (N ). The
singularity at MP share features with a Landau pole.

νj

FIG. 1: Low 4-momentum sterile neutrino pair of global flavors (i, j) disappears into Schwarzschild BH (or the neutrino
exchanges global charge with the SBH in a t-channel). This
is described by a complex spurion field θij , and absence of an
M 2 T r(θ∗ θ).

and there can be no T r(θ† θ) term. The effective theory for the neutrino pair interaction in the VBH
condensate becomes:
1
2 2
2 MP B 0 ,

ναi νβj αβ θij
C.

B02
+ h.c. → Zναi νβj αβ θij + h.c.
MP2

(18)

Information is Carried by Black Hole

However, we can locally conserve the information
(case III). We introduce a new effective field, Bij =
θij (x)B0 (x), that is composite and may represent a SBH
with the information of a neutrino pair encoded on its
horizon holographically. The effective theory for the neutrino pair interaction with the BH’s becomes:
ναi (x)νβj (x)αβ

B0 (x)B ij† (x)
+ h.c.
MP

where in the second term we have replaced B0 by the condensate and Z = V 2 /M 2 . Moreover, in the condensate
the kinetic term becomes,
†
∂Bij
∂Bij → ZT r(∂µ θ† ∂ µ θ)

Therefore, if we canonically renormalize θ we can adjust
Z = 1 and our theory in the condensate becomes:
ναi νβj αβ θij + h.c. + ηT r(∂µ θ† ∂ µ θ)

(17)

How do we view B ij ? An analogy was given in Section
III to the isotopes of Uranium. We can freely add or remove neutrons from the Uranium nucleus, and the mass
is not dramatically changed, nor are the chemical properties. Therefore we can view a Uranium atom as a groundstate nucleus, U0 , which with an additional neutron n(x)
becomes the effective field U0 (x)n(x). Chemically (electromagnetically) we cannot easily discern which isotope
we are dealing with. Yet another analogy might be bugs
that end up flattened on the windshield of a car, that
have little effect on the properties of the car, but become
part of a conjoined kinetic term with it.
Similarly, the effective field B ij (x) is essentially a SBH,
B0 (x) with the information θij (x) on it’s horizon, but
there is no experiment we can do to detect θij (x), other
than observing neutrinos emitted in Hawking radiation
as the BH decays. The mass of a θij (x) spurion field is
zero.
The kinetic term becomes the “conjoined kinetic term”
of eq.(10). The mass term is given by that of B0 alone,

(19)

(20)

This provides an insight into what is meant by conservation or loss of information, at least in the EFT: If we conserve information then η = 1; If information is (weakly)
lost then η = 0. Note that with η = 1 there is now a
formal conserved information current
↔

jµA = ν̄T A σµ ν + iT r(θ† T A ∂ µ θ)

(21)

Information is now dynamically transferred from neutrinos to θ and can propagate freely through the condensate.

D.

Back-Reaction of Neutrinos and Spontaneous
Symmetry Breaking

We can compute the action for the system at an energy scale µ by using the renormalization group. This
follows the procedure known as the “block-spin renormalization group” for treating the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio
model [19], developed in Bardeen-Hill-Lindner [20]. For

7
This is most conveniently rewritten in terms of the physical neutrino mass:
  2

N
MP
N m4ν
2 2
V =−
M m +
ln
+2
(29)
16π 2 P ν
32π 2
m2ν

FIG. 2: The infrared theory is controlled by the neutrino
loops.

a fixed choice of θij we integrate out the fermions, descending from a scale MP to a scale µ. This is obtained
from the fermions loops in Fig.(2) with loop-integrals,
Z MP 4
d k
.
(22)
4
(2π)
µ
We start with eq.(20) as the defining action at MP .
The result of integrating neutrino loops is an induced
action for θij of the form:
∗ µ
∗
Z∂µ θij
∂ θij − Mµ2 θij
θij −

λ ∗
∗
(θ θjk θkl
θli )
2 ij

(23)

Using the results for Weyl spinors in Hill, Luty and
Paschos, [21], we immediately obtain:
 2
 2
1
MP
MP
1
Z = η + 2 ln
ln
λ
=
2
2
8π
µ
π
µ2
1
Mµ2 = − 2 (MP2 − µ2 )
(24)
4π
Anticipating spontaneous symmetry breaking, we denote
the field VEV, θij = δij θ. Then
∗
θij
θij = N θ2

∗
∗
θij
θjk θkl
θli = N θ4

(25)

Here have substituted mν for the field θ and we have
a renormalization invariant potential as a function of a
dynamical mν .
We now extremalize the potential with respect to mν ,
equivalent to extremalizing in θ̂. We obtain:
  2

3
16π 2 ∂
MP
2
2
V = −MP + mν ln
+
(30)
0=
N ∂m2ν
m2ν
2
The physical solution for the neutrino mass is
m2ν = 0.424 MP2

mν = 0.651 MP

(31)

The potential has a runaway for large values of mν >>
MP , but this is unphysical since we insist upon the cutoff
MP .
We remark that this result is sensitive to the subleading log behavior of the loops (constants), which differs
from [20]. In that case a large hierarchy is tuned by demanding a precisely tuned cancellation between a bare
mass term and the loop. Here we have no bare mass
term but we find a solution in a small log limit. Hence,
the boundstate field θ necessarily develop a vacuum expectation value (VEV) due to the VBH vacuum.
We note that we have neglected the production vertex, ∼ ννθB0 /MP , since we are mainly interested in
neutrino momenta below MP . However, our loop calculation informs us that the neutrinos, in the SBH Higgs
phase, form a nonzero VEV, hννi ∼ mν MP2 together with
hθi ∼ MP which may be bootstrapped back to be the
source term J for the BH condensate itself.

The unrenormalized potential is:
Vun = −

N θ4
N
(MP2 − µ2 )θ2 +
ln
2
4π
2π 2



MP2
µ2

E.



Phenomenology

(26)

Note that the infrared cut-off on our loops is determined
by the neutrino mass. The unrenormalized neutrino mass
is µ = mν = 2θ, and therefore the potential becomes
  2

N
N θ4
MP
Vun = − 2 MP2 θ2 +
ln
+
2
(27)
4π
2π 2
4θ2
To renormalize we want the kinetic term to be brought
to canonical normalization.
The renormalized field VEV is therefore√θ̂2 = Zθ2 .
The neutrino mass
becomes µ = mν = 2θ̂/ Z = 2gr θ̂,
√
where gr = 1/ Z is the renormalized Yukawa coupling.
Note that if η = 0 we see that gr displays the characteristic Landau pole at µ → MP which is the compositeness
condition of the field θ [20]. Thus we have the renormalized potential:
!
!
gr2 N
gr4 N θ̂4
MP2
2 2
Vren = − 2 (MP )θ̂ +
ln
+ 2 (28)
4π
2π 2
4gr2 θ̂2

The sterile neutrinos thus obtain a large common Majorana mass, ∼ MP . The N sterile neutrinos, coupled
to gravity, have a global SU (N ) × U (1) symmetry which
is now broken to SO(N ) θ contains N (N + 1) real degrees of freedom. The SU (N )/SO(N ) breaking implies
there is one phase and there remain 21 N (N + 1) massless
Nambu-Goldstone bosons.
We consider the SM with 3 families including 3 sterile
neutrinos. The SU (3) symmetry of the νiR is essentially
an accidental symmetry given only the gravitational couplings of the neutrinos. The left-handed lepton doublets,
ψLi couple via the Higgs boson to the right-handed neutrinos through the Higgs field H as:
yij ψ̄Li HνjR

(32)

Generally the yij will break the SU (3). Integrating out
the heavy R-neutrinos yields the Weinberg operator,
1
yij y kj (ψ̄Li H)(ψ̄Lk H)T + h.c.
MP

(33)

8
If we now assume a typical (large) value for the y kj ∼ 1
in eq.(33) we see that the scale of the induced Majorana
mass terms of the observable L-neutrinos, with vweak ∼
2
(175 GeV), is ∼ vweak
/(1019 GeV) ∼ 3 × 10−6 eV, which
is rather small. According to [22], the best fit to neutrino
data implies we require ∆m212 ∼ m2ν ∼ 7×10−5 eV2 which
implies mν ∼ 0.8 × 10−2 eV. Our results suggest a scale
of observable neutrino masses that is small by roughly a
factor of ∼ 3 × 10−3 .
Our result for the Majorana mass scale depends only
upon MP and is rather immutable. However this is the
Planck mass at extremely high energies (of order MP ).
It should be noted that a number of authors have argued
for significant renormalization effects of the Planck scale,
and that MP ∼ 1016 GeV may be reality in D = 4 [23].
Of course, with extra dimensions MP can be significantly
modified, but our set up requires D = 4 and would otherwise have to be re-explored if D 6= 4. However, neutrinos
with the Type I seesaw may be uniquely probing gravity at MP and offer credence to a signficantly reduced
Planck mass at high energies.
The 12 N (N + 1) = 6 Nambu-Goldstone bosons (Majorons) will have decay constant f ∼ MP but potentials governed by the explicit SU (3) symmetry breaking
Weinberg operator. Schematically ∼ m4 cos((φ/f ) + χ),
where χ is a CP phase and may range from m ∼ mν to
m ∼ vweak depending upon the details of eq.(33). This
potentially offers a number of cosmological possibilities,
from late time phase transitions, dark energy, to providing an inflaton [24]. Discussion of these is beyond the
scope of the present paper.

V.

that the dynamics is more subtle. Owing to the local
gauge field, the Bij field essentially describes a ReissnerNordstrom (RN) black hole. This acquires a slight mass
enhancement of order αMP above the mass of the SBH
MP . This mass enhancement is associated with the information field θij , i.e., in the VBH the field θ freely
propagates, but carries the charge of the RN hole and
acquires the small RN mass term αMP2 T r(θ† θ). This
means that the tachyonic instability is blocked for small
V /MP . However, if an effective coupling g 2 = V 2 /MP2
exceeds a critical value gc2 the field θ acquires a VEV and
the gauge symmetry is then spontaneously broken.
A general picture that is emerging here, upon including local gauging, offers a new non-perturbative binding mechanism for fermions to produce scalar fields. In
turn, this suggests a large system of composite Higgs
bosons. Moreover, a near critical value of the coupling,
g ∼ V /M implies deep scalar boundstates with (nearly)
vanishing masses. Perhaps a more refined theory might
lead to a conformal window with a low mass scale for the
di-electron boundstate, θ. In our crude approximations
this would be a coupling tuned arbitrarily near criticality g ≈ gc . Since there are 1176 Weyl bilinears in the
standard model [25], there may exist a large number of
composite scalars in nature that are marginally subcritical boundstates of elementary fermions due to gravity,
with masses that extend down to the Higgs mass scale 125
GeV. In this picture, “scalar democracy,” the standard
model Higgs is composed of t̄t, and its nearest neighbor b̄b would be expected at a mass scale ∼ 5.5 TeV
and accessible to an upgraded LHC [25]. In this scheme,
the Higgs boson(s) of the standard model are essentually
mini-black holes [26]

CONCLUSIONS

We have given an effective field theory treatment of
information loss or conservation in the dynamics of a
mini-black hole interacting with fermions. In particular, we have focused upon sterile neutrinos with a global
SU (N ) × U (1) symmetry.
Our present model illustrates how “information” might
be described in analogy to an induced effective random
field θ. The weak information loss of global charge would
forbid gravitationally induced auto-correlation of θ, i.e.,
no kinetic, mass or interaction terms. However, consistency with the holographic view promotes θij to a local
field and θ “piggy-backs” on a Schwarzshild black hole.
θ becomes dynamical in the black hole condensate.
The absence of the θ mass term for sterile neutrinos
has an immediate and dramatic physical consequence.
This implies that an instability driven by sterile fermion
loops will always lead to a condensate of θ ∼ MP . In
our case the instability is provided by the neutrino loops
external to the black holes, and θ becomes a sterile νν
boundstate.
Our present paper is introductory, but let us mention a future application. In a subsequent paper we extend these results to locally charged fermions. We find

Acknowledgments

We thank participants of Simplicity-III at the
Perimeter Institute, Waterloo, Canada, for discussions. GB acknowledges support from the MEC and
FEDER (EC) Grants SEV-2014-0398, FIS2015-72245EXP, and FPA2017-845438 and the Generalitat Valenciana under grant PROMETEOII/2017/033. She
also acknowledges partial support from the European
Union FP10ITN ELUSIVES (H2020-MSCAITN-2015674896) and INVISIBLES-PLUS (H2020-MSCA-RISE2015-690575). CTH acknowledges the Fermi Research
Alliance, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11359
with the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,
Office of High Energy Physics.

9

[1] L. K. Wong, A. Davis and R. Gregory, Phys. Rev. D 100,
no.2, 024010 (2019) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.100.024010
[arXiv:1903.07080 [hep-th]].
[2] G. Dvali and C. Gomez, Fortsch. Phys. 61, 742 (2013);
Phys. Lett. B 719, 419 (2013); JCAP 1401, 023 (2014).
[3] S. F. Edwards, P. W. Anderson, ”Theory of spin glasses”,
Journal of Physics F, (5): 965974 (1975);
D. Sherrington, S. Kirkpatrick, Phys. Rev, Letters, 35
(26): 17921796, (1975).
[4] G. ’t Hooft, Conf. Proc. C 930308, 284 (1993);
L. Susskind, J. Math. Phys. 36, 6377 (1995); R. Bousso,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 825 (2002).
[5] G. ’t Hooft, “The Cellular Automaton Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics. A View on the Quantum Nature of our Universe, Compulsory or Impossible?,”
[arXiv:1405.1548 [quant-ph]]; Found. Phys. 43, 597-614
(2013) doi:10.1007/s10701-013-9702-z [arXiv:1205.4107
[quant-ph]].
[6] S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D 53, 3099 (1996).
[7] G. Amelino-Camelia, Living Rev. Rel. 16, 5 (2013).
[8] A. Chamblin, R. Emparan, C. V. Johnson and R. C. Myers, Phys. Rev. D 59, 064010 (1999).
[9] L. J. Garay, Phys. Rev. D 58, 124015 (1998); Phys. Rev.
Lett. 80, 2508 (1998).
[10] G. W. Gibbons, M. B. Green and M. J. Perry, Phys. Lett.
B 370, 37 (1996).
[11] C. J. Isham, gr-qc/9510063.
[12] G. Dvali and L. Funcke, Phys. Rev. D 93, no. 11, 113002
(2016).
[13] G. Barenboim, JHEP 0903 (2009) 102;
Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 093014.
[14] F. Benatti and R. Floreanini, Phys. Rev. D 64, 085015
(2001); JHEP 0002, 032 (2000).
[15] D. N. Page, Phys. Rev. D 13, 198 (1976) and Phys. Rev.
D 14, 3260 (1976).
[16] F. C. Adams, G. L. Kane, M. Mbonye and M. J. Perry,

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16, 2399 (2001).
[17] D. Stojkovic, F. C. Adams and G. D. Starkman, Int. J.
Mod. Phys. D 14, 2293 (2005).
[18] T. Banks and W. Fischler, “A Model for high-energy
scattering in quantum gravity,” hep-th/9906038.
D. M. Eardley and S. B. Giddings, Phys. Rev. D 66,
044011 (2002)
[19] Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, Phys. Rev. 122, 345
(1961).
[20] W. A. Bardeen, C. T. Hill and M. Lindner, Phys. Rev.
D 41 (1990) 1647;
W. A. Bardeen and C. T. Hill, Adv. Ser. Direct. High
Energy Phys. 10, 649 (1992);
For references to Higgs as t̄t see: C. T. Hill and E. H. Simmons, Phys. Rept. 381, 235 (2003); Erratum: [Phys.
Rept. 390, 553 (2004)].
[21] C. T. Hill, M. A. Luty and E. A. Paschos, Phys. Rev. D
43, 3011 (1991).
[22] M. Tanabashi, et al.,(Particle Data Group), Phys. Rev.
D98, 030001 (2018).
[23] D. F. Litim, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 369, 2759
(2011);
D. F. Litim, R. Percacci and L. Rachwal, Phys. Lett. B
710, 472 (2012);
I. Antoniadis and S. P. Patil, Eur. Phys. J. C 75, 182
(2015).
[24] C. T. Hill, D. N. Schramm and J. N. Fry, Comments
Nucl. Part. Phys. 19, no. 1, 25 (1989);
J. A. Frieman, C. T. Hill, A. Stebbins and I. Waga, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75, 2077 (1995).
[25] C. T. Hill, P. A. N. Machado, A. E. Thomsen and
J. Turner, Phys. Rev. D 100, no. 1, 015015 (2019); Phys.
Rev. D 100, no. 1, 015051 (2019).
[26] C. T. Hill, “Composite Higgs Bosons and Mini Black
Holes,” [arXiv:2002.11547 [hep-ph]].

