Baryon String-Junction Torus Exchange: an Appearance in High Energy
Proton Collisions

arXiv:1909.08536v1 [hep-ph] 17 Sep 2019

Olga I. Piskounova
P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of Rusiian Academy of Sciences, Leninski prosp. 53, 119991
Moscow, Russia
Abstract
The topological presentation of pomeron exchange at the proton-proton collision
of high energy is cylinder that is covered with the net of quark-gluon exchanges. I
suggest that the process of double diffraction dissociation (DD) can be presented
as one pomeron exchange with the central loop of two uncut pomeron cylinders.
Taking into account that the junction of three gluon strings (SJ) has the positive
baryon number, as well as the antijunction is of negative baryon charge, our neutral
pomeron construction can be covered with only a certain number of hexagons that
are built of 3 junction and 3 antijunction each. This image is similar somehow to
graphene tube. It is reasonable to expect that the dynamics of rapidity gaps in
DD should be determined by the number of hexagons on the surface of pomeron
torus. Therefore, the gap distribution in DD events has the discrete structure in
the region of large gaps. Moreover, the SJ torus can be released in pp interactions
as metastable particle and is getting suspected as Dark Matter candidate. The
possibility of production of multi-quark states with few string junctions has been
discussed recently by G.C. Rossi and G. Veneziano.
1
1.1

Introduction
Measurements of Rapidity Gaps at the Double Diffraction Dissociation

The recent measurement of diffraction gaps in ATLAS 1 has shown that the behavior of their distribution has different character in the different gap ranges. The
histogram at the large values of gap indicates some discrete states of gaps. In this
area only the process of double diffraction dissociation (DD) gives the contribution.
Of course, the discrete pattern can be initiated by poor statistics. Nevertheless, we
have to learn here the diagrams that lead to discrete levels of DD gap.
1.2

Topological Expansion and Pomeron Exchange

Pomeron exchange is presented with the topological QCD diagram that is responsible for multi particle production in p-p collisions at LHC energies. The quark-gluon
content was drawn in the topological expansion 2 as the the cylindrical net of gluon
exchanges with the random amount of quark-antiquark loops inserted. The topological expansion gives the chance to classify the contributions from general diagrams of
multi-particle production in the hadron interactions. This expansion has practically
allowed us to develope the Quark-Gluon String Model (QGSM) 3,4,5 . Few orders
in topological expansion are graphically presented in the figure from my PhD thesis
figure 1, where the third order is named pomeron with handle. Double diffraction
dissociation in this presentation looks like the cylinder of one pomeron exchange
with the toroidal handle that left uncut, so no particles have been produced in the
central rapidity region.

Figure 1: The fragment of graphical presentation of pomeron exchange in the topological expansion,
where b is the number of boundaries and h is the number of handles.

2

Double Diffractive Dissociation as an Exchange with Pomeron Torus

Double diffraction dissociation (DD) is a next order in the topological expansion
after the pomeron exchange and should be presented as one pomeron diagram with
two-pomeron loop in the center, see figure 2. Actually, the DD configuration is
similar to cylinder with a handle that takes (1/9)2 from the single pomeron exchange
cross section (1.2 percents of σprod ) at high energies. If the central pomeron loop

Figure 2: Pomeron loop in the center of one-pomeron exchange.

was not cut, we are having the DD spectra of produced hadrons: two intervals at
the ends of rapidity range, which are populated with multi particle production, and
the valuable gap in the center of rapidity. Looking at two-pomeron loop in this
diagram, we are realizing that it is torus in 3D topology. This interesting object
should be considered separately in order to reveal some remarkable features for the
experimental detection.
3 Baryon Junction-Antijunction Hexagon Net and Discrete Dynamics
of DD Gaps
As we remember the pomeron cylinder is built by gluon exchange net, let us consider
only three-gluon-connections on the surface of torus (or pomeron loop). This StringJunction type of gluon vertices has been studied in our early researches 5,11 and
plays the important role in multiple production of baryons. Since this object brings
the baryon charge, the anti-SJ also exists and brings the charge of antibaryon. The
only charge-neutral way to construct the net from string-junctions and anti-stringjunctions is hexagon where antibaryon charge is following the baryon one as it is
shown in the figure 3.
The closed net of six hexagons on the torus is shown in the figure 4.

Figure 3: One cell of hexagon net with the SJ and antiSJ.

Figure 4: Closed net on the surface of torus: a) six hexagon construction and b) torus covered with six
hexagon net.

If people are trying to match the eligible number of hexagons, it becomes clear
that there is a discrete row: Hexnumb=4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64 etc, see figure 4.
It means that the pomeron torus has certain levels of energy. It leads to discrete gap
states at DD 7 and to some other signatures in multi-particle production spectra 8 .
The similar construction was presended in 9 as a complicate fullerene sphere that is
build with SJ’s.

4

More Suggestions on the Pomeron Torus

It is time to imagine, where to the pomeron torus could contribute. What we have, if
our gluon-junction construction that looks like a ”compactificated” pomeron string
would be released as metastable particle? It is charge neutral QCD cluster with the
certain potential energy, which is determined by number of hexagons, Hexnumb.
If such cluster would be stable, this is appropriate candidate for the dark matter
(DM)12 . The masses of these states are suspected similar to the very mass sequence
of heavy neutral hadron states invented in 10 . The reason, why this object is hardly
dissipated in the collisions with matter, is following: the atomic numbers of elements
in the space are too small in comparison with the number of SJ-antiSJ vertices in
our toroidal constructions (let us name them ”baryoniums”), therefore compact
torus leaves intact after the collision with the less dense light atoms. Since each
high energy proton collision in the space, wherever it takes place, contributes 1.2
percents of energy into DM, the valuable DM mass has been accumulated in the
Universe, even though some amount of low mass baryoniums dissipates back into
baryons and mesons at the collisions with the interstellar light atoms. It seems
12 , nevertheless, that stable baryonium DM should be mostly concentrated near
Supermassive Black Holes due to the huge gravitation pressure. Such a way, DM
particles mostly appear in space as the result of the giant jets radiation and the
partial distruction of BHs. This idea has to be verified with more observation of
SMBH.

5

Conclusion

The topological presentation of pomeron exchange at the proton-proton collision of
high energy is cylinder that is covered with quark-gluon net 2 . I suggest that the
process of double diffraction (DD) can be presented as one pomeron exchange with
the central loop of two uncut pomeron cylinder loop or torus 4,6 . Taking into account that the junction of three gluons (SJ) has the positive baryon number, as well
as the antijunction is of negative baryon charge, our neutral pomeron construction
can be covered by only a certain number of hexagons with 3 string junction and 3
antijunction vertices each 8 . It is reasonable to expect that the dynamics of rapidity
gaps in DD should be determined by the number of hexagons on the surface of
pomeron torus. Therefore, the gap distribution in DD events has the discrete structure in the region of large gaps 1 . The positive baryon production asymmetries that
have been measured at LHC are the demonstration of string junction participation
in proton-proton interactions of high energy 11 . Moreover, the string-junction torus
can be released in the course of pp interaction as metastable particle (baryonium)
and is getting suspected as ”baryonium” Dark Matter candidate 12 . The possibility
of production of the states with many string junctions has been discussed recently
by G.C. Rossi and G. Veneziano 13 .
6

Acknowledgments

Author would like to express her gratitude to Oleg Kancheli for numerous discussions
and to Vladimir Tskhay for designing the figure with torus.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

ATLAS collab., Eur.Phys.J. C72(2013)1926, e-print - arXiv:1201.2808.
G.C.Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys.Lett. B70(1977)255.
A.B. Kaidalov, Phys.Lett. B116 (1982)459.
Quark-Gluon String Model, A.B. Kaidalov and K.A. Ter-Martirosyan,
Sov.J.Nucl.Phys.39 (1984)1545, ibid 40 (1984)211.
A.B.Kaidalov and O.I.Piskunova , Z.Phys.C 30 (1986) 145.
O.I. Piskunova, PhD thesis 1988, in Russian.
O.I.Piskounova, the talk at ATLAS Diffraction Working Group meeting,
CERN, 20 April 2015.
O.I.Piskounova, book of abstracts to Physics Beyond Colliders, CERN,
September 2016, e-print - arXiv:1702.02769.
T.Csorgo, M.Gyulassy and D.Kharzeev, in the Proceedings of ”International
Symposium on Multiparticle Dynamics 2000” WSCI (2001) 616, e-print arXiv:hep-ph/0102282.
O.I.Piskounova, in the Proceedings of ”38th International Conference of
High Energy” PoS(ICHEP2016)711, Chicago, USA, August 2016, e-print arXiv:1602.08003.
O.I. Piskounova , Phys.Atom.Nucl. 70(2007) 1107, M.A. Erofeeva and
O.I. Piskounova, Nonlin.Phenom.Complex Syst. 12 (2009) 425, e-print arXiv:hep-ph/0604157.
O.I.Piskounova, the talk at ICPPA, Moscow, October 2018, e-print arXiv:1812.02691.
G.C.Rossi and G. Veneziano, JHEP 1606 (2016) 041.

