BAAA, Vol. 61A, 2019
R. Gamen, N. Padilla, C. Parisi, F. Iglesias & M. Sgró, eds.

Asociación Argentina de Astronomı́a
Boletı́n de artı́culos cientı́ficos

Stirring up an embedded star cluster with a moving gas
filament
D. Matus Carrillo1 , M. Fellhauer1 , & A. Stutz1,2
1

arXiv:1909.04540v1 [astro-ph.GA] 10 Sep 2019

2

Departmento de Astronomı́a, Facultad de Ciencias Fı́sicas y Matemáticas, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile
Max-Planck-Institute for Astronomy, Königstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
Contact

/ dimatus@udec.cl

Resumen / Realizamos simulaciones para probar los efectos de un filamento de gas en movimiento sobre un
cúmulo estelar joven (i.e. el modelo slignshot). Modelamos un Orion Nebula Cluster como una esfera de Plummer,
y el Filamento con Forma de Integral como un potencial cilı́ndrico, donde su posición viene dada por una función
sinusoidal. Observamos que en un filamento estático, un cúmulo inicialmente esférico evoluciona de forma natural
hacia una distribución elongada de estrellas. Para un filamento en movimiento, observamos distintos remanentes
y los clasificamos en 4 categorı́as. Cúmulos “saludables”, donde casi todas las estrellas permanecen dentro del
filamento y del cúmulo; cúmulos “destruidos” son el caso opuesto, casi sin estrellas en el filamento o cerca del
centro de densidad del cúmulo; cúmulos “ejectados”, donde una fracción mayor de estrellas permanecen unidas al
cúmulo, pero casi ninguna se mantiene dentro del filamento; y cúmulos de “transición”, donde aproximadamente
el mismo número de partı́culas es eyectado del cúmulo y del filamento. Un cúmulo con las caracterı́sticas de Orion
Nebula Cluster podrı́a permanecer dentro del filamento o ser eyectado, pero no será destruido.

Abstract / We perform simulations to test the effects of a moving gas filament on a young star cluster (i.e. the
“Slingshot” Model). We model Orion Nebula Cluster-like clusters as Plummer spheres and the Integral Shaped
Filament gas as a cylindrical potential. We observe that in a static filament, an initially spherical cluster evolves
naturally into an elongated distribution of stars. For sinusoidal moving filaments, we observe different remnants,
and classify them into 4 categories.”Healthy” clusters, where almost all the stars stay inside the filament and the
cluster; ”destroyed” clusters are the opposite case, with almost no particles in the filament or near the centre of
density of the clusters; ”ejected” clusters, where a large fraction of stars are close to the centre of density of the
stars , but almost none of them in the filament; and ”transition” clusters, where roughly the same number of
particles is ejected from the cluster and from the filament. An Orion Nebula Cluster-like cluster might stay inside
the filament or be ejected, but it will not be destroyed.
Keywords / methods: numerical, Galaxy: open clusters and associations: individual (ONC)

1.

Introduction

The Orion nebula is the nearest site of massive star formation. One of its predominant features is the Integral
Shaped Filament (ISF, Bally et al., 1987), a filament of
gas in where the Orion Nebula Cluster (ONC, Hillenbrand & Hartmann, 1998) is forming.
Observations of the protostars on the ONC show
that they are distributed in different ways in space: protostars are located right on top of the ridgeline of the filament, meanwhile pre-main-sequence stars are symmetrically distributed around the filament (Stutz & Gould,
2016; Kainulainen et al., 2017; Stutz, 2018). A similar
behaviour is observed for the radial velocity of the stars,
where protostars have radial velocities close to the velocity of the gas, with a low velocity dispersion, and the
pre-main-sequence stars have a larger velocity dispersion of the order or larger than the velocity of the gas
(Stutz & Gould, 2016).
To explain these observations, Stutz & Gould (2016)
proposed a scenario where the gas of the ISF oscillates.
The protostars are formed from this gas and move with
Oral contribution

the oscillating filament. Once they accrete enough mass,
they are ejected from their birthplace and start moving
with the transverse velocity of the oscillation at the moment of decoupling. Stutz & Gould (2016) named this
scenario “the Slingshot”.

To test this hypothesis, Boekholt et al. (2017)
showed that an initially narrow distribution of stars can
be dynamically heated to produce a broad distribution
with a net relative velocity when the filament oscillates
with a certain amplitude and period. Moreover, Gaia
data of the protostars plus the radial velocities of the
gas confirm that the gas of the ISF moves like a standing wave (Stutz et al., 2018).

In this work we continue the exploration of the Slingshot via simulations, this time replacing the string of
stars with spherical star clusters of different masses.
1

Stirring a cluster with moving filament

Figure 1: Fraction of particles inside the filament (top) and inside the cluster (bottom) after one oscillation for a cluster
with Rpl = 0.1 pc, Mpl = 250 M (left) and Rpl = 0.1 pc, Mpl = 1000 M (right). The contours indicate 75%, 50% and
25% of the initial number of particles. Notice that the number of particles inside the filament drops drastically after it
reaches ∼ 50% for the more massive cluster, but decreases smoothly for the less massive cluster.

2.
2.1.

Method
The gas filament

To study the effect of the ISF on a young star cluster,
we build a cylindrical potential as in Boekholt et al.
(2017), using the observed line density of the gas at
the position of the ONC (Stutz, 2018) as a constrain
to obtain the relevant parameters of the model in the
region of interest.
The ISF likely moves due to the interplay of gravitational and magnetic forces (Stutz & Gould, 2016; Schleicher & Stutz, 2018), but for this work we assume that
the gas potential is moving along the x-axis like a harmonic oscillator:


2π
t
(1)
x(t) = A sin
P
where A is the amplitude of the oscillation and P is the
period.
2.2.

The star cluster

We use a cluster of equal mass point particles to represent the ONC. These particles are distributed following
a Plummer profile (Plummer, 1911) and located inside
the cylindrical potential.
The presence of an external potential means that
there is an extra component to the net force that the
particles feel, but due to the symmetry of the filament,
that extra acceleration can be non-zero only in the x-y
plane. A standard Plummer sphere will, then, collapse due to the extra mass of the filament along those
axes. We avoid that initial contraction by increasing the
x-y velocity of the particles so that the cylindrical Lagrangian radii of the cluster inside the filament remains
2

roughly constant.
2.3.

The code

The system of particles is evolved using the ph4 N-body
code (McMillan et al., 2012). To account for the gas
filament, we implement the background potential using
amuse (Pelupessy et al., 2013). We couple this potential
with the N-body solver using the bridge (Fujii et al.,
2007) method, in which the velocities of the stars are
periodically updated using the acceleration due to the
filament.

3.

Results

Due to the cylindrical symmetry of the potential used
to represent the filament, the embedded clusters tend
to elongate along the z axis. Particles moving throughout the length of the gas filament will do so following
corkscrew orbits around the center of the potential.
We determine the state of the cluster by counting
the stars inside the filament, measured as the number of
stars that never move beyond 5 × Rpl from the centre of
the filament. Inside the cluste we define the evolution
in a similar fashion using the centre of density of the
particle system instead.
If the filament moves slowly, a large fraction of particles stays inside the filament and the cluster. As the
amplitude of the oscillation increases, or the period decreases, a larger fraction of stars are ejected from the
system, up to the moment where no stars are inside the
filament (Fig. 1, top left) or close to the centre of density of the stars (Fig. 1, bottom left). If the filament
moves too quickly, it will not spend enough time inside
the cluster to perturb the particles and a large fraction
BAAA, 60, 2018

Matus Carrillo et al.

Fraction in cluster

1.0

stay inside the filament or it can ejected after losing
less than half of its mass, but it is not destroyed by the
filament.

0.8
0.6

4.

0.4

We present results of the first simulations of the effects
of an oscillating cylindrical potential in the early evolution of a young star cluster. We explore the space
of oscillation parameters with star clusters of different
densities and masses.
We see 3 possible evolution trends:
• Small, low-mass clusters stay bound and move with
the filament, if the filament is moving slowly.
• Fast-moving filaments can eject and destroy star
clusters
• Large, high-mass clusters stay bound and the filament just moves through, pumping energy into the
cluster.
The fate of the cluster in an oscillating potential is
decided quickly. By the time the filament reaches its
maximum amplitude, any star that manages to stay inside the cluster or the gas filament will likely stay there
for the rest of the simulation time. A cluster like the
ONC might be ejected or stay inside the filament, but
these simulations suggest that it will endure the stirring
by the filament and it will not be destroyed.
The physics behind the origin of the sharp transition, shown in Figure 1 (top right panel) is still under
investigation, but we believe that it might be related to
the mass ratio between the cluster and the gas filament.

M = 250 M
M = 500 M
M = 1000 M

0.2
0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4 0.6 0.8
Fraction in filament

1.0

Figure 2: Fractions of particles inside cluster and filament
for models with R = 0.1 pc after one full oscillation. The
blue line is a reference for a 1:1 ratio.

of stars (but not all of them, so we can still identify an
overdensity of particles) will be ejected from the cluster.
A more massive cluster will have a similar behaviour.
However, being more tightly bound, it will not be destroyed (Fig. 1, bottom right). The fraction of particles
in the filament will have a sharper transition from the
high values characteristic for the slow filaments to the
empty filament state (Fig. 1, top right).
Fig. 2 shows the fraction of stars inside the filament,
versus the fraction of stars inside the cluster, for the
clusters with Rpl = 0.1 pc. This shows us a sequence of
remnants after one full oscillation of the filament that
can be catalogued into 4 groups:
• Slow filaments (i.e. large period and/or small amplitudes) will keep a large number of particles inside
the cluster and the filament, and in this case, it behaves like a cluster inside a static filament. Some
stars are ejected from these ”healthy” clusters, since
the filament is still injecting energy into the cluster.
• Some combinations of period and amplitude will produce remnants that are completely destroyed, where
only a small (< 20 %) fraction of stars will stay inside the filament and move with it.
• A high fraction of stars in the cluster, but almost
none in the filament is observed when the cluster is
ejected from the filament. There is negligible mass
loss when the cluster is outside the filament
• The last kind of objects are those where the same
number of particles are ejected from the filament
and from the cluster. Most of the mass loss happens between the beginning of the simulation and
by the time the filament reaches its maximum amplitude. After that, there are small losses each time
the filament reaches the maximum distance from the
origin.
Not all the models will produce remnants in every
category. As can be seen in Fig. 2, none of the clusters
with Mpl = 1000 M are destroyed. Moreover there is a
gap where none of the cluster remnants end with < 40%
of the particles inside the filament, with the exception
of the ejected clusters. This means that the cluster can
BAAA, 60, 2018

Conclusions

Acknowledgements: DM gratefully acknowledges support from
the Chilean BASAL Centro de Excelencia en Astrofisica y Tecnologias Afines (CATA) grant AFB-170002 and Fondecyt regular
No. 1180291. MF acknowledges support through Fondecyt regular 1180291, Basal AFB-170002 and PII20150171. AS acknowledges funding through Fondecyt Regular (project code 1180350),
”Concurso Proyectos Internacionales de Investigación” (project
code PII20150171), and Chilean Centro de Excelencia en Astrofı́sica y Tecnologı́as Afines (CATA) BASAL grant AFB-170002.

References
Bally J., et al., 1987, ApJL, 312, L45
Boekholt T. C. N., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 3590
Fujii M., et al., 2007, PASJ, 59, 1095
Hillenbrand L. A., Hartmann L. W., 1998, ApJ, 492, 540
Kainulainen J., et al., 2017, A&A, 600, A141
McMillan S., et al., 2012, in Capuzzo-Dolcetta R., Limongi
M., Tornambè A., eds., Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Conference Series Vol. 453, Advances in Computational
Astrophysics: Methods, Tools, and Outcome. p. 129
Pelupessy F. I., et al., 2013, A&A, 557, A84
Plummer H. C., 1911, MNRAS, 71, 460
Schleicher D. R. G., Stutz A., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 121
Stutz A. M., Gould A., 2016, A&A, 590, A2
Stutz A. M., Gonzalez-Lobos V. I., Gould A., 2018, ArXiv
e-prints
Stutz A. M., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4890

3

