arXiv:1909.04027v1 [math-ph] 7 Sep 2019

Manfred Liebmann, Horst Rühaak, Bernd Henschenmacher

Non-Associative Algebras and Quantum
Physics
A Historical Perspective
September 11, 2019

Contents

1

Pascual Jordan’s attempts to generalize Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

2

The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a
“fundamental length” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

3

The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

4

The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about
measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

5

Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions . . . . . . . . . . . 41

6

The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

7

Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics . . . . . . . 57

8

Recent developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

9

Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

10 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

Contents

1

Summary. We review attempts by Pascual Jordan and other researchers, most notably Lawrence
Biedenharn to generalize quantum mechanics by passing from associative matrix or operator algebras to
non-associative algebras. We start with Jordan’s work from the early 1930ies leading to Jordan algebras
and the first attempt to incorporate the alternative ring of octonions into physics. Jordan’s work on the
octonions from 1932 till 1952 will be covered, discussing aspects of the exceptional Jordan algebra and
how to express probabilities when working with the octonions and the exceptional Jordan algebra. From
the 1950ies onwards Jordan and others also considered one-sided distributive systems like near-fields,
near-rings, quasi-fields and exceptional Segal systems (the last two examples also being not necessarily
associative). As the set of non-linear operators forms a near-ring and even a near-algebra, this may of
be of interest for attempts to pass from a linear to a non-linear setting in the study of quantum mechanics. Moreover, ideas introduced in the late 1960ies to use non-power-associative algebras to formulate a
theory of a minimal length will be covered. Lawrence Biedenharn’s and Jordan’s ideas related to nonpower-associative octonionic matrix algebras will be briefly mentioned, a long section is devoted to a
summary of Horst Rühaak’s PhD thesis from 1968 on matrix algebras over the octonions. Finally, recent
attempts to use non-associative algebras in physics will be described.

1
Pascual Jordan’s attempts to generalize Quantum
Mechanics

This article is a historical survey of attempts to generalize quantum mechanics by the theoretical physicists Pascual Jordan and Lawrence Biedenharn. Pascual Jordan’s work on this topic extend over a period
of 40 years starting in 1932 with an article on non-associative algebras and ending with a book contribution about the same topic from 1972. Lawrence Biedenharn’ work about this topic spanned a period
of 13 years, starting in 1976 and finishing in 1989. The main part of this article deals with Jordan’ ideas
and speculations, as he had quite a few during his career. Biedenharn in contrast focused on possible
applications of the octonions in physics, even though in different manifestations.
We will start with Pascual Jordan’s ideas about applying non-associativity in quantum mechanics,
beginning by his well-known ideas from the early 1930ies. A few words of caution at the beginning are
necessary: Much of Jordan’s later ideas remained on the level of mathematical speculations, and it is
far from certain, whether his ideas even work on a mathematical level, or can be applied to physics.
Nevertheless, we hope that some of them may still be of interest to the reader. On can also view the
difficulties one faces, when one tries to move beyond the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics
as developed between 1925 and 1934, as an indication that quantum mechanics is already the most
general theory for the description of nature that is possible. Jordan’s long research on mathematical
generalizations of quantum mechanics was based on his belief that quantum field theory and especially
a possible theory incorporating a minimal length would needd new mathematics that still has to be
developed (Jordan 1952 a, Jordan 1963 & Jordan 1968 b).
The Estonian approach to non-associativity in physics as well as the contributions of Romanian
scholars and many other researchers will not be covered here. First of all, these approaches haven been
presented in detail elsewhere (Lõhmus et al. 1998, Iordănescu 2009)
and secondly this paper would become too long. Here we will focus on the post-war ideas of Jordan
and his students, because this has not been covered so far in the literature. One should note that Jordan’s
work on non-associative algebras and possible applications did not stop after his 1932-1934 papers, even
though his contributions from the 1930ies are widely known. Even though most of his later ideas were
not developed to full maturity, his later ideas may contain some hidden treasures and may inspire some
readers to pursue research on similar ideas.
Having said this, there is a common theme in Jordan’s and the Tartu school interpretation about
the physical role of non-associativity:
Non-associativity is related to the quantization of space and the introduction of a new constant of
nature: “the fundamental length” , the smallest length that can be resolved by measurements.
The original scale for this was thought to be the classical electron radius by Jordan, nowadays one
would consider the Planck length to be the appropriate scale for a fundamental length, even though there
are some suggestions in the literature that the confinement of quarks may be due to non-associativity,
in this case the confinement length may have a non-associative origin (Lõhmus et al. 1998).
In a 1937 paper dealing with nuclear forces (Jordan 1937) proposed to quantize space itself and this
was the starting point for his search for a new theory of a fundamental length.

2
The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations
concerning a “fundamental length”

Summary. Early attempts first by Pascual Jordan and then by Jordan, John von Neumann and Eugene Wigner to generalize the formalism of quantum mechanics by passing from associative to powerassociative algebras now termed Jordan algebras are discussed. Jordan’s original motivation was related
to problems in quantum electrodynamics such as the appearance of divergent terms. Furthermore, open
questions of nuclear physics (beta-decay) inspired Jordan to look for a generalized setting for quantum
mechanics. Commutative Jordan algebras proved to be useful to describe the observables of ordinary
quantum mechanics and inspired early ideas to develop quantum mechanics over the skew-field of quaternions. Ultimately, the initial hope of Pascual Jordan to generalize quantum mechanics by using Jordan
algebras was dashed, as only a few examples (if one includes non-commutative Jordan algebras) not
coming from associative algebras could be found. Apart from this, Jordan’s work on the alternative ring
of octonions, which forms a non-commutative Jordan algebra will be covered, as well as his work on
the exceptional commutative Jordan algebra of 3x3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions and a way
to transfer the probability interpretation of traditional quantum mechanics to the exceptional Jordan
algebra.
Problems concerning beta decay (later solved by introducing neutrinos by Wolfgang Pauli) and with
quantum electrodynamics and with quantum electrodynamics i.e. the singular self-energy of the electron
and other divergences (later dealt with by the renormalization program) led Pascual Jordan (Jordan 1933
a & b) to look for an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism. Quantum Mechanics
differs from classical physics by the introduction of non-commutative variables for the observables of a
physical system. In a paper together with the Soviet theoretical physicist Vladimir Fock, Jordan proposed
new uncertainty relations for the electromagnetic field (Jordan & Fock 1930). Unlike in ordinary quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory where uncertainty relations between pairs of conjugate observables
are introduced, Jordan and Fock proposed uncertainty relations between triple of observables. In 1931
the Soviet theoretical physicist Igor E. Tamm spent time in Rostock to work together with Jordan on
open questions in relativistic quantum theory (Kojevnikov 1993). Tamm supported Jordan in an attempt
to find a non-associative generalization of quantum theory, as Tamm mentions in a letter to Paul Dirac.
Tamm explains;
“The physical problem is to o arrive at a real, not just formal, synthesis of the theories of quanta and
relativity. Our mathematical work consisted in constructing a non-associative algebra (more precisely,
algebra with weakened associativity), which from our point of view will be necessary for solving the above
physical problem. (Kojevnikov 1993 pp. 56-57).
The algebras with a weakened form of associativity Tamm refers to were later named Jordan-algebras,
see below. Later Tamm explained Jordan’s motivation for working on a possible non-associative generalization of quantum mechanics;;

6

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

“ I have had a nice time in Rostock. Jordan and his wife were very kind to me and I took part in
Jordan’s investigations about “ein Algebra mit abgeschwachten Associativgesetz,(AB)C 6= A(BC). It is
an idea of Jordan that this new kind of Algebra will be the adequate form of mathematics to tackle the
problem of relativistic quantum mechanics, since it corresponds to a definite uncertainty of measurement
of a separate dynamical variable (the conjugate one being left out of consideration.) (Kojevnikov 1993
p.58).
In the early 1930ies Jordan and Fock as well as Landau and Peierls proposed that a proper formulation
of relativistic quantum field theory required stronger limitations on the possibility of measurements of
observables than found in non-relativistic quantum mechanics (Jordan & Fock 1930 & Landau & Peierls
1931). The notion of having to restrict the accuracy of measurement of a separate observable in a fully
developed quantum field theory or a theory of a minimal length was a decisive step in Jordan’s thought
about the possibility of measurements in generalized quantum mechanics. In the case of non-associative
algebras this would lead to uncertainty relations for position and momentum observables independent
from each other (not” just” an uncertainty relation between conjugated observables (like position and
momentum). Later, Jordan (inspired by the paper written by Landau and Peierls (Jordan 1934) ))
envisioned an even greater uncertainty, limiting the accuracy of measurement for a single observable i.e.
for the position operator in the one-dimensional case (Jordan 1952 b & Jordan 1968 b).
Although Tamm was not sure that non-associative algebras will solve the problems of relativisitc
quantum theories, he found them pleasing from a mathematical point of view (Kojevnikov 1993 p. 58).
Jordan wrote a postcard to Tamm expressiing his doubts that the non-associative algebras he worked on
with Tamm will be useful for physics (Kojevnikov 1993 p.59). Nevertheless, in 1932 Jordan introduced a
new class of algebras with a weakened form of associativity. Originally, the proposed algebras were also
permitted to be non-commutative (Jordan 1932).
The first starting point for Jordan was to introduce a new multiplication he termed “quasimultiplication” for the multiplication of quantum mechanical observables (Jordan 1933 a),
a × b = λab + µba

(2.1)

depending on two real number parameters λ and µ . Quasi-multiplication is distributive with respect
to addition, but not necessarily commutative or associative. The case λ = −µ gives rise to Lie-algebras
the case λ = µ leads to a symmetricand non-associative multiplication, then later with the choice
λ = µ = 21 gave rise to the Jordan product and to Jordan-algebras. For the Jordan product, quasimultiplication need not be associative, if ordinary multiplication is non-commutative. Then, with the
aim of formulating the laws of the quasi-multiplication without mediating 2.1, Jordan introduced a class
of algebras he termed k-number-algebras starting with definition of the notions of a commutator and
associator,
{a, b} = a × b − b × a

{a, b, c} = (a × b) × c − a × (b × c)

(2.2)

and postulating the following axioms for the associator (Jordan1932),
{a, b, c} + {b, c, a} + {c, a, b} = 0

[a, d, b × c] + [b, d, c × a] + [c, d, a × b] = 0

(2.3)

[a, b × c, d] = b × [a, c, d] + [a, b, d] × c

From now on, the product of two elements a, b of any algebra A will be denoted by ab , and, for a in
A , we define the nth -power of a by an+1 = an a; a1 = a. In any k-number algebra we have,
an am = an+m
So, k-number-algebras are power-associative and fulfil the relations,

(2.4)

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”
n

7

m

[a , b, a ] = 0
[b, am , an ] + [am , an , b] = 0

(2.5)

where [a, b, c] = (ab) c − a (bc) denotes the associator in any algebra and additionally, the Jacobi identity,
[a, [b, c]] + [b, [c, a]] + [c, [a, b]] = 0

(2.6)

is also valid in k-number algebras, where [a, b] = ab − ba means the commutator in any algebra. A
certain identity valid in all k-number- algebras can be derived from 2.5 namely,



a, b, a2 = 0

(2.7)

(Jordan 1932 & Jordan 1933 a & b).
One class of algebras closed under commutative quasi-multiplication (i.e. λ = µ = 21 ) is that of
Hermitian matrices. Every k-number-algebra generates another k-number-algebra, if one introduces a
quasi-multiplication a × b = λab + µba in it (Jordan 1932). This can be verified by matching the
associators in the original k-number- algebra and the k-number algebra with quasi-multiplication,
{a, b, c} = (λ + µ)2 [a, b, c] + λµ [b, [a, c]] ;

(2.8)

Commutative k-number-algebras can be characterized by one axiom



a, b, a2 = 0

(2.9)

This identity is known as the Jordan identity and is the defining axiom for Jordan-algebras (McCrimmon 2004 pp. 44-45).
Let us start with a commutative algebra and faithfully represent its elements in a linear way by
matrices T (a) , T (b) . . . , and with T (a + b) = T (a) + T (b) .
Jordan uses T × S as an abbreviation for 21 (T S + ST ) and introduces another abbreviation δ for,
δ (a, b) = δ (b, a) = T (ab) − T (a) × T (b)

And postulates

(2.10)

δ (ab, c) = T (a) × δ (b, c) + T (b) × δ (a, c)

and



[T (a) , δ (a, a)] = T (a) , T a2 = 0

According to Jordan an algebra satisfying these axioms is a k-number-algebra. One can verify this
(Jordan 1932) by
T



a, b, a2







= T (ab) × T a2 + δ ab, a2 − T (a) × T ba2 − δ a, ba2




1
= T (a) , T (b) , T a2 =
T (b) , T (a) , T a2
4

(2.11)

The third part of relation 2.10 can also be written as,

[T (a) , T (bc)] + [T (b) , T (ca)] + [T (c) , T (ab)] = 0

(2.12)

Jordan now investigates algebras, which do not need to be k-number algebras but have the property
that they yield a commutative k-number-algebra if one replaces the ordinary multiplication by the
symmetric λ = µ quasi-multiplication. With λ = µ = 21 the relation,



4 a, b, a2 = (ab + ba) a2 + a2 (ab + ba) − a2 b + ba2 a − a a2 b + ba2 = 0

(2.13)

Or equivalently,


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a, b, a2 − a2 , b, a + b, a, a2 − a2 , a, b + a, a2 , b − b, a2 , a = a, a2 , b

(2.14)

8

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

must hold . For these relations to be valid it is obviously sufficient that the algebra fulfills the following
axioms,


 

b, a, a2 + a, a2 , b = 0


a, b, a2 = 0

(2.15)

Algebras satisfying the last identities for the associator [a, b, c] were termed r-number-algebras by
Jordan. Apart from k-number and r-number algebras, Jordan introduced another class of non-associative
algebras, which are known as quasi-associative-algebras (McCrimmon 1966) in the literature. Quasiassociative-algebras are non-associative algebras which always can be derived from associative algebras
by introducing a new product A × B = λAB + (1 − λ) BA (Jordan 1933 b), here AB and BA denotes
the usual multiplication in the original associative algebra and λ 6= 1 is a real (deformation) parameter
(Jordan 1933 b).
Jordan explained that quasi-associative-algebras will probably be not useful in generalizing quantum
mechanics (Jordan 1933 b). All Quasi-associative-algebras are power-associative (Jordan 1952 a).
The commutative quasi-multiplication has a clear physical meaning: In quantum mechanics, complex
Hermitian matrices (or operators) represent observables (physical quantities that can be measured) of a
quantum mechanical system (Jordan 1933 a).
Yet, the ordinary non-commutative matrix product between two Hermitian matrices does not give a
Hermitian matrix, only for the special case that two Hermitian matrices A and B commute, one obtains
another Hermitian matrix C , by multiplying both matrices (Jordan 1933 a). By using the commutative
but non-associative Jordan product the product of two Hermitian matrices always produces a Hermitian
matrix. So, for the product,

With the choice λ = µ =

1
2

one has,

A × B = λAB + µBA

(2.16)


1
1
(2.17)
(A + B)2 − (A − B)2 = (AB + BA)
4
2
This product leads to the algebra of Hermitian matrices or observables in quantum mechanics (
Jordan 1933 a & b, Jordan 1934 b & Jordan 1971).
Jordan then introduces another putative class of algebras termed r-number-algebras, which again,
originally were not required to be commutative. Like k-number-algebras, r-number- algebras are powerassociative, but these algebras do not need to fulfil the Jacobi identity, unlike k-number-algebras (Jordan
1932). r-number-algebras were defined by Jordan to be algebras that become k-number-algebras under
the Jordan product 2.17.
Jordan gives the following axioms for r-number-algebras,
A◦B =

[b, an , am ] + [an , am , b] = 0
[an , b, am ] = 0

(2.18)

(Jordan 1932 ). The relation in the second line of 2.18 is required to hold for arbitrary integers n
and m .
Every k-number-algebra is a r-number-algebra. The reverse is true in the commutative, but not in the
non-commutative case. The non-commutative and non-associative algebra of octonions or Cayley-Graves
numbers is a r-number-, but not a k-number-algebra.
In principle, there may be idempotents e1 = e21 and e2 = e22 with e1 e2 = e2 e1 = 0 in r-numberalgebras satisfying the relations,
[b, e1 , e2 ] + [e1 , e2 , b] = 0
[e1 , b, e2 ] = 0

(2.19)

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

9

and one can in principle decompose an element a in a r-number-algebra into,
ek el = δkl ek
X ′
ak ek
a=

(2.20)

k

This is possible due to the power-associativity of r-number-algebras. The real numbers a′k are termed
eigenvalues of a (Jordan 1933 a & b).
Throughout his career, Jordan required any algebra describing a generalized quantum theory to
possess either one of the following two important properties: semi-simplicity or formal-complexity (Jordan
1933 a, Jordan 1933 b) as a weaker requirement, that may be more suitable for non-commutative algebras
(Jordan, von Neumann & Wigner, 1934) and a less tolerant requirement of formal-reality that was
introduced for the commutative Jordan- algebras (Jordan, Von Neumann, Wigner 1934 & Jordan 1934).
A formally-complex algebra or ring is also semi-simple (Jordan 1952 a). An algebra is formally-complex if
for a hypercomplex variable a there is a conjugated hypercomplex variable a+ and the following relations
are valid:
a++ = a, (a + b)+ = a+ + b+ , (ab)+ = b+ a+ , (λa)+ = λ∗ · a+

aa+ + bb+ + cc+ + · · · = 0 iff a = b = c = · · · = 0

(2.21)

(Jordan 1933 b & Jordan 1952 a). Here λ is a complex number and λ∗ its complex conjugate.
In every semi-simple r-number-system a main unit exits, a variable e with ex = xe = x for every x . One can define a characteristic equation (Jordan 1933 b) for every element a of a r-numbersystem by forming powers of a . If n denotes the smallest exponent, so an is linearly dependent upon
e, a, a2 , . . . , an−1 , one is provided with a polynomial f (·) satisfying,
f (a) = an + λn−1 an−1 + . . . + λ1 a + λ0 e = 0

(2.22)

The roots of f (·) are denoted α1 , α2 , . . . , αn by Jordan. In case of semi-simple r-number-systems
for an element a = a+ , all λn in 1.22 are real (Jordan 1933 b), and the αn correspond to real numbers
and are the eigenvalues of an r-number a (Jordan 1933 b). One can also associate another real number
to every r-number a , in a semi-simple r-number-system, the trace of a . The following relations hold for
the trace in a semi-simple r-number-algebra (Jordan 1933 b),
trace (a + b) = trace (a) + trace (b)
trace (λa) = λtrace (a)
trace (ab) = trace (ba)

(2.23)

trace (e) = γ
e2 = e = e+
Here γ is a multiple of the unit e . The fact that one can in principle define eigenvalues and a trace in
a semi-simple r-number-algebra shows that these non-associative algebras are still close to the formalism
of associative matrix-algebras and would in principle allow for a minimal generalization of the quantum
mechanical formalism (Jordan 1933 a).
The formalism of r-number algebras is still close to the quantum mechanical formalism, because
Jordan derived the axioms for r-number algebras by introducing a non-associative quasi-multiplication
in the associative matrix or operator algebras of ordinary quantum mechanics (Jordan 1933 a & b).
Especially, r-number-algebras are distributive and power-associative and hence are a mild generalization of the associative algebras used in ordinary quantum mechanics (Jordan 1933 a). As mentioned

10

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

above, one can go beyond semi-simplicity and introduce a more restrictive requirement (Jordan, Von
Neumann & Wigner 1934, Jordan 1934).
An algebra is formally-real, iff,
X
ϕ

a2ϕ = 0 → aϕ = 0

(2.24)

(Jordan 1934, Jordan 1952 b, Jordan & Matsushita 1967, Jordan 1969 a & d, Jordan 1972).
Concerning the axiomatics of quantum mechanics one may consider the meaning of the operations
of adding observables, multiplying observables and forming powers of an observable (Jordan 1933 a
& Jordan 1934). The sum of two observables has a direct physical meaning, yet the ordinary matrix
multiplication does not have a direct physical meaning, only the anti-commutator,
F = AB + BA

(2.25)

has a direct physical meaning (Jordan 1933 a), as the anti-commutator can be derived from the
operation of forming squares and sums of observables F = (A + B)2 − A2 − B 2
In quantum mechanics two observables A and B can be decomposed into “single variables” ,
A=

X

a′k ek , ek el = δkl ek

k

B=

X

(2.26)
b′k ek , ek el = δkl ek

k

′

′

Here ak and bk are the eigenvalues of the observables A and B and the ek are idempotents of the
algebra of quantum mechanical observables.
As the observables (Hermitian matrices) are closed under the anticommutator product, one may
wonder about the physical meaning of the commutator product.
One obvious answer is that the commutator product gives rise to Lie-algebras, which encode the
(continuous) symmetries of the system (Jordan 1932), this is a very important point, but Jordan noticed
another aspect of the commutator product (Jordan 1933 a). Jordan gives the following example to
illustrate the role of quasi-multiplication and multiplication in quantum mechanics (Jordan 1933 pp.
228-290).
One considers a silver atom which is in a ground state and translatory at rest, the remaining variable
observables are the components of the angular momentum, which are proportional to a vector s . A
′
physical system Σ is represented by an algebra with basic elements a, b, c . . . and another system Σ is
represented by an algebra with basic elements α, β, γ . . . if one merges both systems, by forming the tensor
product of both systems (even though Jordan uses the pharase ”direct product” in his publication),
Σ×Σ

′

(2.27)

one obtains the algebra of the composite system with basic elements aα and multiplication
(aα) (bβ) = (ab) (αβ)

(2.28)

The quasi-multiplication of the composite system is not fully determined by the quasi-multiplication
′
in Σ and Σ (Jordan 1933 a). Whereas the sum (aα)·(bβ)+(aβ)·(bα) = 2 (a · b) (α · β) can be expressed
by only using the quasi-multiplication in both systems, The difference,
1
[a, b] [α, β]
(2.29)
2
can only be deduced from the full multiplication in a, b, c . . . and α, β, γ . . . . Here [a, b] = ab − ba
denotes the commutator (Jordan 1933 a).
′
In the interaction between two quantum mechanical systems Σ and Σ new properties appear, which
are not visible in the interaction with a “classical” system, because the commutator [α, β] vanishes, if
′
Σ is a macroscopic or classical system .
(aα) · (bβ) − (aβ) · (bα) =

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

11

For a silver atom at rest, one has,
(psx + qsy )2 − (psy + qsx )2 = (pq − qp) (sx sy − sy sx )
h
2πi
sx sy − sy sx = 2isz
pq − qp =

(2.30)

Here h is Planck’s constant and the sx , sy , sz denote the components of the angular momentum in
the x , y , and z direction respectively. Here [x, y] gives rise to the physically meaningful relation,
h
sz
(2.31)
π
This example shows the importance of the anti-symmetric or Lie (bracket) product part of the matrix
or operator product (Jordan 1933 a).
Yet, for the interaction of a quantum mechanical system with a measurement device, or for the
statistics of measurement, the symmetric quasi-multiplication is sufficient (Jordan 1933 a). Concerning
the characterization of ordinary multiplication by quasi-multiplication Jordan notes that if,
(psx + qsy )2 − (psy + qsx )2 =



a, b, a2 = 0

(2.32)

is valid for quasi-multiplication, it also holds for ordinary multiplication. Jordan noticed later (Jordan
1933 b) than one may also require the relation,
{a, b, a} = 0

(2.33)

(ε1 , ε2 , ε4 ) ; (ε2 , ε3 , ε5 ) ; (ε3 , ε4 , ε6 ) ; (ε4 , ε5 , ε7 ) ; (ε5 , ε6 , ε1 ) ; (ε6 , ε7 , ε2 ) ; (ε7 , ε1 , ε3 )

(2.34)

to hold in r-number algebras, leading to flexible algebras (McCrimmon 2006). This is an important
relation for non-commutative r-number algebras, as commutative algebras are always flexible.
To sum up, one can split the ordinary non-commutative matrix or operator product into two
parts, one symmetric commutative, non-associative part, the Jordan product or (one half of the) anticommutator: A ◦ B = (A · B + B · A) and the anti-symmetric non-commutative (anti-commutative),
non-associative commutator or Lie (bracket) product: A ∗ B = (A · B − B · A) = [A, B] (Jordan 1933 a
& Jordan 1952 a).
All the outcomes of measurements can be described by quasi-multiplication (Jordan 1934 a). That
is why, Jordan beginning with his collaboration with John von Neumann and Eugene Wigner made use
only of the commutative quasi-multiplication or Jordan product (Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner
1934 and Jordan 1934).
Returning to possible non-commutative r-number-systems, a special example of a non-trivial rnumber-system, (where non-trivial means that it cannot be derived from an associative algebra by
deforming its multiplication) is the algebra of Cayley(-Graves) numbers, or octonions (Jordan 1933 a).
The octonions possess eight linear independent basic elements 1; ε1 ; ε2 ; ε3 ; ε4 ; ε5 ; ε6 ; ε7 , which can be
grouped into seven triples,

The basis units of Cayley numbers in the parenthesises are associative and multiply like quaternion
units j, k, l with j 2 = k2 = l2 = jkl = −1 (Jordan 1933 a).
Jordan collaborated with John von Neumann and Eugene Wigner in 1934 to classify all commutative
r-number-systems. In their seminal paper “On an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism” (Jordan, Von Neumann & Wigner 1934), Jordan, von Neumann and Wigner classified
all finite-dimensional (for simplicity), simple and formally-real, commutative r-number-systems. Or in
modern language, all finite-dimensional, simple, and formally-real Jordan-algebras.
The defining axioms for Jordan-algebras (apart from finite-dimensionality, which was used to simply
the mathematical investigation, not as a necessity) chosen by Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner are,

12

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”
a·b=b·a

Commutativity

a · (a · b) = a · a · b
Jordan Identity
2

r

s

a ·a =a

r+s

2

(2.35)

Power-Associativity

And additionally,
a · (b + c) = a · b + a · c;

(b + c) · a = b · a + c · a

Distributivity

was postulated (Jordan, Von Neumann & Wigner 1934 p. 301).
The Jordan identity does not require the algebra to be associative, yet power-associativity can be
deduced from the Jordan identity (Jordan 1972), so an algebra must be power-associative to be a Jordanalgebra, but not all power-associative algebras are Jordan-algebras (Jordan 1967 p.57).
Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner found three classes of examples for commutative, formally-real,
r-number-systems or Jordan-algebras: All conjugated-symmetric n × n matrices over the reals, complex
numbers and quaternions equipped with the Jordan product, give rise to Jordan algebras. These Jordanalgebras are termed special, as they are isomorphic to sub-algebras of ordinary matrix algebras equipped
with a new multiplication, namely the Jordan product (Jordan, Von Neumann & Wigner 1934). Another
class are the so-called spin factors, which can also be embedded in ordinary matrix algebras (McCrimmon
2006). And finally, there is one exceptional example, which is not isomorphic to a subalgebra of an
ordinary matrix algebra.
For the case n = 3 (and only for this case) the algebra of Hermitian matrices over the octonions is
an exceptional Jordan-algebra. For the case n = 2 one gets an algebra that can be embedded into a spin
factor and is therefore special, the case n = 1 is just the real numbers (McCrimmon 2004 p.4). That the
algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions M38 is an exceptional Jordan-algebra was later
verified by the American mathematician Abraham Adrian Albert (Albert 1934), thereby the algebra M38
is also termed Albert algebra.
The fact that there is only one exceptional Jordan-algebra dashed Jordan’s original hopes to generalize quantum mechanics by using commutative and power-associative algebras. In the non-commutative
case, the algebra of octonions provided the only example for an alternative and semi-simple (division)
algebra and Jordan expressed some sense of disappointment that there is only one irreducible nonassociative alternative ring (the octonions) in 1952 (Jordan 1952 a). The German-American mathematician Max Zorn showed that the octonions form the only irreducible non-associative alternative ring in
1930 (Zorn 1931), Zorn also showed how to represent the octonions by a special class of vector-matrices
( 2 × 2 matrices with vectors and scalars as entries) and introduced a special multiplication for these
vector-matrices, which reproduces the non-associative multiplication of the octonions (Zorn 1933).
Furthermore, Zorn started to investigate the automorphism group of the octonions, the exceptional
Lie group G2 (Zorn 1935). The algebra of octonions is (at least apparently) too small to replace the
matrix or operator algebras of quantum mechanics, as all elements of the algebra of octonions with the
property a = a+ (hermiticity) lie in the nucleus (associative part) of this algebra and are real scalars
(McCrimmon 2004 p. 155).
The exceptional Jordan algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions or Albert-algebra is
also too small (27-dimensional), to replace the infinite-dimensional non-commutative matrix and operator
algebras represented on infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces that are used in quantum mechanics for
continuum variables such as the position observable (Biedenharn & Truini 1983).
After his work on power-associative algebras, Jordan wrote a follow-up paper (Jordan 1934 b) summarizing the results obtained thus far. Apart from complex matrices, used in quantum mechanics one
could also use quaternionic matrix algebras. Jordan suggested that quaternionic matrix algebras may be
used to formulate relativistic quantum mechanics and noted one peculiarity about quaternionic matrices.
One does not have a unique tensor product, and this introduces some intricacies, when one works with
composite systems, i.e., if one merges two quantum systems, to form a new larger quantum system.
Jordan speculated that this may be a feature characteristic of relativistic quantum mechanics (Jordan
1934), so Jordan’s publication from 1934 may be regarded as an early suggestion to develop quaternionic
quantum mechanics. However, this line of research was never pursued in any detail by Jordan. Jordan
sometimes mentioned the quaternions as an example for a semi-simple skew ring in his works after

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

13

1934 (e.g. Jordan 1952 a& Jordan 1968 a), but he never developed concrete models incorporating the
quaternions.
The problem with defining tensor products is also another obstacle, which limits the use of the
exceptional Jordan algebra. One cannot merge another system (by forming the tensor product) with the
exceptional Jordan algebra M38 , without violating power-associativity: an · am = an+m in the composite
(merged) system (Jordan 1934 b). Hence a tensor product of two Jordan-algebras is not a Jordan algebra,
if one includes the algebra M38 .
As relaxing the axiom of associativity did not lead to sufficient new mathematical possibilities for
generalizing quantum mechanics, Jordan looked for new possibilities.
One idea was to relax associativity even further, by dropping the axiom of power-associativity (Jordan
1934 b), this, however would lead to a theory quite different from ordinary quantum mechanics, as
power-associativity is a requirement for the possibility of reproducibility of measurements of quantum
mechanical observables (Jordan 1934 b). Jordan’s speculations on a possible future theory going beyond
quantum mechanics, which may restrict measurements of physical quantities even more than ordinary
quantum mechanics, thus not requiring power-associativity, were based on ideas put forward by Lev
Landau and Rudolf Peierls on the limitations of measuring the observables of the electromagnetic field
in quantum field theory (Landau & Peierls 1931).
Another possibility was to drop the axiom of distributivity, i.e. quasi-multiplication (see above) is
distributive with respect to addition, and Von Neumann noted that the distributive postulate cannot
be deduced from the postulates Wigner, Jordan and Von Neumann used for the axiomatics of quantum
mechanics (Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner 1934 and Jordan 1934 b). From 1934 till 1949 Jordan’s
work on generalizing quantum mechanics were interrupted due to his involvement with national socialism
and the second world war.
One important aspect of Jordan’s post-war activities on generalizing quantum mechanics was a
continuation of his work on the octonions and the algebra M38 .
In 1949, he published a little (only three pages long) paper (Jordan 1949) on the relation of the
algebra M38 to certain foundational aspects of projective geometry.
As a finite power-associative algebra, the algebra M38 has a n − 1 -dimensional projective geometry
associated to it (Jordan 1952 a), in this case n=3, and thereby the associated geometry is 2-dimensional
and forms a plane. Jordan could link this geometry to the Moufang plane, discovered in the early 1930ies
by the German mathematician Ruth Moufang (Moufang 1933). In the Moufang plane, a certain axiom
of plane geometry, Desargues’ relation is violated, so the algebra M38 gives rise to a non-Desarguesian
projective geometry. Jordan noted (Jordan 1952 a) that this fact may give a nice explanation, why one
cannot extend the Jordan-algebra approach to n × n Hermitian matrices over the octonions for n larger
than 3 . The axiom of Desargues is only an axiom for plane geometries, for higher dimensions it can be
derived from other axioms, thereby higher dimensional projective geometries cannot violate the axiom of
Desargues, and hence 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions cannot give rise to a Jordan-algebra,
and in fact, the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions is not power-associative (Jordan,
Von Neumann and Wigner 1934 and Jordan 1968 b) and cannot fulfil the axioms of a Jordan-algebra.
This was proven by Eugene Wigner in 1934 (Jordan, Von Neumann & Wigner 1934, Jordan 1968 b).
Nevertheless, Jordan studied some aspects of quantum mechanics for the algebra M38 . He could show
that one can transfer the probabilistic interpretation of ordinary quantum mechanics to the exceptional
quantum mechanics defined by M38 . One basic feature of quantum mechanics is the interference of probabilities, unlike classical probability theory where for probabilities Pij the following equation (Biedenharn
& Horwitz 1979) is valid,
Pij =

X

Pik Pkj

X

Aik Akj

(2.36)

k

In quantum mechanics, one has the “interference of probabilities” (Jordan 1952 a) and one works
with amplitudes Aij (Biedenharn & Horwitz 1979) for which the following equation is valid,
Aij =

k

(2.37)

14

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

With Pij = |Aij |2 .
Jordan, in a series of papers (Jordan 1949, Jordan 1950 a and Jordan 1952) showed how to generalize this relation for the octonionic quantum mechanics over M38 . This required again a study of
the alternative ring of octonions. The following relations are all taken form the paper “Zur Theorie
der Cayley-Größen” , “On the Theory of Cayley Numbers” (Jordan 1950 a). A general element of the
alternative ring of the octonions can be written as,
x = ξ0 + ξ1 i1 + ξ2 i2 + ξ3 i3 + ξ4 i4 + ξ5 i5 + ξ6 i6 + ξ7 i7

(2.38)

Here ξ0 , ξ1 , ξ2 , ξ3 , ξ4 , ξ5 , ξ6 , ξ7 are real number coefficients and the iν , iν+1 , iν+3 form an imaginary
quaternion-system ( ν = 1, 2, 3, 4 ), see above (Jordan 1933 a & Jordan 1950 a). A conjugated element
of the alternative ring of octonions is defined by,
x∗ = 2ξ0 − x.

(2.39)

The following relations are valid for two octonions x and y ,
(x + y)∗ = x∗ + y ∗
(xy)∗ = y ∗ x∗
x

∗∗

(2.40)

=x

Jordan defines a quadratic form N on the octonion algebra by,
N (x) = x∗ x = ξ02 + ξ12 + ξ22 + ξ32 + ξ42 + ξ52 + ξ62 + ξ72

(2.41)

In view of the alternativity of the octonion algebra, the above quadratic form N admits composition,
i.e.,
N (xy) = N (x) N (y)
N (xy) = y ∗ x∗ · xy = y ∗ · x∗ x · y = N (x) N (y)

(2.42)

A non-associative algebra is termed alternative, if the associator [x, y, z] = (xy) z − x (yz) is antisymmetric in x, y, z (Jordan (1950 a) or equivalently [x, x, y] = [x, y, x] = [y, x, x] = 0 (Zorn 1931). The
sub-algebra generated by two elements of an alternative algebra is associative, this is also necessary for
the second part of relation 2.40 to hold (Jordan 1950 a).
One now forms two-component r = (x1 , x2 ) , n = (y1 , y2 ) vectors with octonionic entries. Jordan
then defines a semi-definite quadrilinear form of degree four,
2Q (r, n) =

2
X


µ,ν=1

With the properties,




x∗µ xν (yν∗ yµ ) + yµ∗ yν (x∗ν xµ )

0 ≤ Q (r, n) ≤ N (r) N (n) with N (r) = N (x1 ) + N (x2 )

This symmetric form can also be defined for the algebra
works with a three-component vector r = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ) by,
Q=

M38

(2.43)

(2.44)

(Jordan 1949 & Jordan 1952 a), if one

3


1 X  ∗  ∗
xµ xν (yν yµ ) + yµ∗ yν (x∗ν xµ ) ≥ 0
2 µ,ν=1

(2.45)

(x1 , x2 , x3 ) and (y1 , y2 , y3 ) are associative elements of the algebra of octonions and ∗ denotes a
conjugated element.
The semi-definite form of degree 4 (Jordan 1951 a) Q is the equivalent of the quantum mechanical
formula 2.36 (Jordan 1952 a). This formula can be formulated alternatively and independently from the

2 The 1930ies: Jordan algebras and some early speculations concerning a “fundamental length”

15

algebra M38 , and then it is a general feature of the algebra of octonions, which was found by the German
mathematician Helmut Hasse and Jordan (Jordan 1952 a),
N [N (x1 ) y1∗ y2 + x∗1 x3 · y3∗ y2 + x∗1 x2 N (y2 )]
≥0
(2.46)
N (x1 y2 )
For the validity of this formula one needs two important relations valid for the commutator and
associator of the octonions,
Q=

[x, y]∗ = − [x, y]

[x, y, z]∗ = − [x, y, z]

(2.47)

One should note that all multiplications in Q need to be performed within the associative subskew field of the quaternions. Associativity of (x1 , x2 , x3 ) and (y1 , y2 , y3 ) is required to avoid negative
probabilities (Jordan 1950 a), as a non-vanishing associator of octonions may give rise to Q < 0 . To be
more precise, elements forming Q may lie in an arbitrary associative sub- skew field or sub-field of the
octonions (Jordan 1950 a).
Coming back to Jordan’s aspirations to generalize quantum mechanics, the Non-Desarguesian property of the Moufang plane associated to the Albert-algebra inspired Jordan to look for generalized
projective geometries (Jordan 1952 a). For this, Jordan turned to the theory of lattices. Jordan proposed
to relax the axiom of commutativity for the operations of “meet” and “join” in the theory of lattices and
construct geometries where the operations of spanning and carving are non-commutative. This gives rise
to non-commutative or skew lattices and Jordan is credited as one of the pioneers of the study of skew
lattices (Leech 1989). Jordan’s hope was to construct generalized Non-Desarguesian higher-dimensional
projective geometries using skew lattices (Jordan 1952 a & Jordan 1953).
This line of research will not be covered here, even though there seems to be a connection between
skew lattices and non-distributive algebraic systems (see Sherman 1956 and André 1974).
Concerning Non-Desarguesian geometries, whereas projective spaces are Desarguesian for dimension
n ≥ 3 , affine spaces can be Non-Desarguesian for arbitrary dimensions and one can construct such
geometries using near-rings or quasifields (see Timm 1970).
Apart from skew lattices, Jordan spent a considerable amount of time on finding suitable algebraic
generalizations of quantum mechanics, as we will be shown below.
Once again, there is a certain caveat with these ideas: Jordan’s later ideas are all mathematical
speculations. It is not clear, whether any kind of generalization of quantum mechanics along the lines
Jordan envisioned is possible at all.
Apart from this, Jordan mostly considered commutative algebras with a finite basis, whereas the
algebras commonly used in quantum mechanics are infinite-dimensional.
In a sense, the following is a long list of negative results which may support the view, that the
quantum mechanical formalism is already the most general formalism that can be used in physics.

3
The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

Summary. After the first attempts to generalize quantum mechanics by using Jordan algebras failed,
Jordan investigated non-associative quasifields, where only one of the distributive laws holds, in the
early 1950ies. Apart from non-associative one-sided distributive quasifields Jordan focussed his work on
associative but one-sided distributive near-fields and near-rings. Near-rings formed by endomorphisms
of a non-abelian group with a non-commutative addition were also examined by Jordan. Whereas Jordan abandoned this particular line of research after just a few years, attempts to use non-distributive
algebraic structures to generalize quantum mechanics were pursued by other researchers. The set of
non-linear operators forms a near-ring and so non-linear extensions of quantum mechanics may require
the study of near-rings and near-algebras. The work of the German mathematician Johannes André’s on
near-fields, near-rings and near-vector spaces as well as his suggestion to use the topological Kalscheuer
near-field(s) of twisted quaternions to define a generalized Hilbert space and Ilya Prigogine’s work on
non-distributive super-operators as well as works by other researchers on near-algebras are covered.
Finally, quasi-fields the non-associative generalization of near-fields will be described and certain quasifields having the groups G2 orSU3 C as their automorphism groups are discussed. Problems related to
using one-sided distributive structures such as lack of differentiability and violations of Tsirelson bound
in quantum entanglement are mentioned.
As relaxing the associative law does not immediately lead to a generalized version of quantum mechanics, Jordan proposed already in 1934 (Jordan 1934) to either relax power-associativity or distributivity
of the quantum mechanical multiplication. Jordan was inspired by Heisenberg’s idea of a fundamental
or minimal length in nature (Heisenberg 1938).
This is different from the situation in quantum mechanics, here two observables (or a canonical pair
of observables) e.g. position and momentum, that do not commute cannot be measured simultaneously
with arbitrary precision, by allowing for an arbitrary imprecision of one observable (e.g. momentum) the
measurement of the conjugated observable (e.g. position) can in principle be made arbitrarily accurate
(Jordan 1952 b, Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1969 a) ( more precicesly the uncertainty of measuring the
position of a particle can become arbitrarily close to zero, but not exactly zero like in classical mechanics).
If one supposes that a single variable, such as position in a theory of fundamental length, cannot
be measured with arbitrary precision one may need to go beyond non-commutativity and “simple”
non-associativity (Jordan 1934 & Jordan 1952 b).
In the early 1950ies starting from an observation by John von Neumann quoted at the very end
of his last paper from 1934 about this topic (Jordan 1934) John von Neumann pointed out to Jordan
that his derivation of the distributive law for the multiplication of quantum mechanical observables was
based on two ”hidden” postulates, namely that for three observables a, b and c the relations b(−c)= −bc
and a(2b)= 2(ab) are valid (Jordan 1934). Whereas the last relation may be dispensed with, the first
relation seemed to be an additional axiom (Jordan 1934). In the early 1950ies, Jordan speculated that
non-distributivity between addition and multiplication (sometimes together with non-associativity) in
an algebra of observables may allow for a theory which limits the measurement of a single observable.

18

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

This remained on the level of speculation, unlike his later ideas on non-power-associative algebras, he
did not construct a concrete mathematical model implementing this idea. This period of research starts
with a publication from 1950 “Zur Axiomatik der Quanten-Algebra (On the Axiomatics of the Quantum
Algebra)” appearing in the Publications of the Science and Mathematics Division of the Academy (Jordan
1950 b). The content of this publication will be presented below.
Renewing his analysis of the axiomatic foundations of quantum mechanics, hoping to generalize it by
relaxing some of the axioms, Jordan recalled the main axioms of quantum mechanics: If a measurement
of an observable a gives an eigenvalue ak , a repeated (immediate) measurement of the observable a gives
ak again. If a measurement of an observable b after measuring a (with eigenvalue ak ) always results
in an eigenvalue βk = f (αk ) with f being an arbitrary function of a , one can simply write b = f (a)
. All functions of a form an algebra. In classical physics, the algebra of functions of an observable is
commutative, associative and distributive. In this case, all observables can be measured simultaneously.
Even when this is not possible (like in quantum mechanics) one can still form the sum a + b of two
observables a and b. Quantum mechanical observables are additive (Jordan 1933 b& Jordan 1934). The
expectation value of the sum is equal (in all cases) to the sum of the single expectation values of a and
b,
a + b = ā + b̄

(3.1)

One can derive the commutativity and associativity of addition of quantum mechanical observables
from this requirement (Jordan 1934, Jordan 1950 b & Jordan 1952 b ). For some time, Wolfgang Pauli
doubted the necessity of this axiom, (Jordan 1934 b and see Pauli 1980 pp. 90-91). The addition postulate
3.1 also leads to power-associativity for the multiplication of quantum mechanical observables (Jordan
1934, Jordan 1950 b & Jordan 1968 b).
For a multiplication with a number factor µ one has,
µ (a + b) = µa + µb

(3.2)

Finally, from these axioms one can define a commutative and non-associative multiplication of quantum mechanical observables by,
4ab = (a + b)2 − (a − b)2

(3.3)

(−a) b = −ab

(3.4)

(a + b) c = ac + bc

(3.5)

Which gives rise to the Jordan product 2.9.
Furthermore, (λa)2 = λ2 a2 and (−a)2 = a2 . From these relations and relation 3.2 one can deduce,

The new point in Jordan’s paper from 1950 is to investigate the distributive postulate of quantum
mechanics,

This postulate cannot be derived from the other postulates, one has (Jordan, Von Neumann, and
Wigner 1934) to add another postulate in the formalism of quantum mechanics,
(a + b)2 + (a − b)2 = 2a2 + 2b2

(3.6)

2ab = (a + b)2 − a2 − b2

(3.7)

(a + b + c)2 + a2 + b2 + c2 = (a + b)2 + (b + c)2 + (c + a)2

(3.8)

Instead of using relation 3.3, one can also deduce the commutative, non-associative product of
observables from,

(Jordan, Von Neumann, Wigner 1934) From 3.6 and 3.7one can then deduce the relation,

Which is equivalent to the distributive relation 3.5.

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

19

After summarizing the results from the seminal 1934 paper, Jordan now looks what can be derived
from his and Von Neumann’s and Wigner’s postulates without an additional distributive postulate. One
can still derive a weakened form of distributivity,
(a − b) c + (b − c) a + (c − a) b = 0

(3.9)

(x + y) (x − y) = x2 − y 2

(3.10)

u (v − u) + u (v + u) = v (2n)

(3.11)

Now relation 3.3 can be derived from relation 3.9, as it is equal to,

With a = x; b = y; c = x + y
An additional relation that can be derived from 3.9 and 3.3 is,

Here u and v are arbitrary elements of an algebra of observables and n is an integer.
Again, Jordan required the algebra describing quantum mechanical systems to be formally-real (relation 2.24).
This ensures that the square of the expectation value a is equal to or larger than zero and zero only,
if a equals zero,
a2 ≥ 0
a2 = 0, iff ā = 0

(3.12)

The weakened form of distributivity 3.9 can be linked with the requirement of continuity of multiplication for quantum mechanical quantities (Jordan 1950 b) to derive certain properties for the multiplication of quantum mechanical obervables.
One proposes that the limits,
(λa) b
(3.13)
λ
exists, which would be equal to ab in the distributive case, then addition and multiplication are
linked by the following multiplication deduced from 3.13,


(c − λa) (λb)
(c − λb) (λa)
−
= a×c−b×c
(3.14)
(a − b) × c = lim
λ→0
λ
λ
a × b = lim

λ→0

This multiplication must in general be assumed to be non-commutative (Jordan 1950 b). (Which,
however contradicts 4ab = (a + b)2 − (a − b)2 , as 4ab = a2 + ab + ba + b2 − a2 + ab + ba − b2 =
ab + ba + ab + ba = 4ab .
This only works with a commutative multiplication ab = ba with a non-commutative multiplication
one has (a + b)2 − (a − b)2 = 2 (ab + ba) instead.)
All the examples of one-sided distributive power-algebras Jordan constructs in his paper from 1950
are also non-commutative and can therefore not fulfil the axiom 4ab = (a + b)2 −(a − b)2 . Already in two
follow-up papers about non-distributive generalizations of quantum mechanics, Jordan (Jordan 1952 a &
b) notes that the requirement 4ab = (a + b)2 − (a − b)2 leads to a commutative multiplication. Nevertheless, the above defined multiplication is apart from being non-commutative only one-sided distributive
like the multiplication in a near-ring and instead of being associative, it is only power-associative, as one
can define powers either by an = a × an−1 or an = a · an−1 , where · denotes the usual dot multiplication
(Jordan 1950 b). It is possible that Jordan was looking for non-commutative, non-associative one-sided
distributive algebras that become commutative algebras satisfying the axioms 3.3, 3.9 and 3.13 when
equipped with the symmetric product 2.17.
Jordan then defined a new class of algebras: One-sided distributive power-algebras. In these algebras,
only one of the two distributive laws is valid, multiplication is non-commutative and power-associative,
but not associative in general, furthermore the additive group of observables is abelian. Finally, Jordan
was looking for formally-real, one-sided distributive power-algebras (Jordan 1950 b).

20

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

Jordan lists examples of known mathematical structures in his 1950 paper, that exhibit some of
the properties, he was looking for. For example, Lie-algebras are non-associative and non-commutative,
but two-sided distributive and not formally real. Near-rings on the other hand are associative, but nondistributive. Jordan-algebras are non-associative, yet commutative (Distributivity must be introduced
axiomatically by postulating relation 2.7). Jordan notes that the possibilities for two-sided distributive
power-algebras, or distributive non-commutative and non-associative (power-associative) algebras appear
to be limited, as by equipping any of these algebras with the Jordan product A ◦ B = 21 (A · B + B · A)
one obtains commutative algebras, that fall under the classification of Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner
from 1934 (Jordan, von Neumann & Wigner 1934).
To find new classes of one-sided distributive power-algebras, Jordan took inspiration from a work
published by the German mathematician Franz Kalscheuer in 1940 (Kalscheuer 1940) about finitedimensional topological near-fields.
A near-field is a special near-ring, where the elements form an abelian group under addition and
a group (without the zero element) under multiplication (Kalscheuer 1940 & André 1975 p. 5). Hence
there is an inverse operation to addition and multiplication in near-fields.
Commutativity of addition can be deduced from the axioms of a near-field (Neumann 1940).
Kalscheuer in turn, investigated one-sided distributive near-fields, as he was inspired by Jordan’s early
papers about non-associative quantum mechanics from the early 1930ies (Kalscheuer 1940). Near-fields
were introduced by the American mathematician Leonard Dickson in 1905 (Dickson 1905), Dickson
obtained examples fof near-fields by deforming the multiplication in a skew field by using an automorphism of the skew field to define a new multiplication (André 1975 p. 5). Near-fields obtained by Dickson’s
method from skew-fields are termed Dickson near-fields (André 1975 p. 5). The near-fields Kalscheuer
investigated are Dickson near-fields and apart form Jordan’s ideas on generalizing quantum mechanics,
Kalscheuer citied Dickson’s works as inspiring his work from an mathematical-axiomatical point of view
(Kalscheuer 1940).
A (non-trivial i.e. not equal to a field or a skew field) Kalscheuer near-field (Kalscheuer 1940, Jordan
1950 b) is obtained by defining for two quaternions ξ and η the multiplication law,

with

ξ × η = ξ · Pξ · η · Pξ−1

(3.15)

Pξ = cos [w log N (ξ)] + i sin [w log N (ξ)] = eiw log N(ξ)

(3.16)

Equivalently one can write,
Pξ = [N (ξ)]iw

(3.17)

where w is a (fixed) real number, i is a fixed quaternion with i2 = −1, and N (ξ) is the norm
of ξ (Jordan 1950 b). One should also remark that Kalscheuer used w−1 instead of w in his original
publication for the case w 6= 0 (Kalscheuer 1940) .
Additionally, one must supplement the multiplication law 3.15 by requiring, 0 × η = η × 0 = 0 , if
ξ=0.
This is necessary to ensure continuity of multiplication (Kalscheuer 1940, Jordan 1950 b). The
multiplication 3.15 is one-sided distributive, as this multiplication is linear in η (Jordan 1950 b), so
c × (a + b) = (c × a) + (c × b) but (a + b) × c 6= (a × c) + (b × c) (Kalscheuer 1940).
Additional important relations in Kalscheuer’s near-fields are,
N (Pξ ) = 1
N (ξ × η) = N (ξη) = N (ξ) · N (η)
Pξ×η = Pξ · Pη

(3.18)

ξ × η × ζ = ξ · Pξ · η · Pη · ζ · Pη−1 · Pξ−1
The last relation in 3.18 is equivalent to associativity and is ensured by requiring the second relation
in equation (3.18) (Kalscheuer 1940, Jordan 1950 b).The first relation in 3.18 is a requirement for the

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

21

multiplication in a topological proper near-field over the real numbers, Kalscheuer foud, when studying
the represenation theory of such near-fields, for an element ηthey contain the automorphism group of
unit quaternions (quaternions with norm 1) as a sub-group of their automorphism group (Kalscheuer
1940 p. 430 & p.433). For quaternions with norm 1 the multiplication in a proper, topological near-field
over the reals must coincide with the ordianry multiplication of the skew-field of quaternions (Kalscheuer
1940). The three relations in equation (3.18) together with the postulate; 0 × η = η × 0 = 0 , if ξ = 0,
can be used to deduce the multiplication rule for the Kalscheuer near-field (Kalscheuer 1940 p. 433).
One can form powers of an element of a Kalscheuer near-field. The nth power of the element ξ of
the near-field is equal to (ξPξ )n Pξ−n ,which for n = −1 gives the reciprocal of ξ (Jordan 1950 b).
Jordan transferred Kalscheuer’s construction to the octonions to obtain a one-sided distributive, noncommutative as well as non-associative algebra, which besides formal-reality fulfills all of Jordan’s axioms
for quantum mechanics.
For two octonions ξ and η , Jordan defines,
ξ × η = ξ · Pξ · η · Pξ−1



(3.19)

In this case parentheses, (which according to Jordan can be set arbitrarily) must be introduced
because of the non-associativity of the octonions (Jordan 1950 b). This algebra is power-associative, as
only two octonion units ξ and i are needed, if one forms powers of ξ by using the multiplication 3.19.
As the octonions are alternative, a sub-algebra formed by two elements is associative.
An additional class of one-sided distributive power-algebras was obtained by Jordan by the following
procedure. One starts with a matrix skew ring (with a finite basis) and defines for two matrices ξ and η
the product,

with,

ξ × η = ξ · Pξ · η · Pξ−1

(3.20)

Pξ = eµw log|D(ξ)| for D (ξ) 6= 0 and Pξ = 1 for D (ξ) = 0

(3.21)

D (Pξ ) = 1 and D (ξ × η) = D (ξη) = D (ξ) · D (η)

(3.22)

ξ × η = ξ · eξ · η · e−ξ

(3.23)

D (ξ) being the determinant of ξ , w is a (fixed) real number and µ is a matrix which only possesses
imaginary eigenvalues which equal the eigenvalues of −µ .
This means: D (ewµ ) = 1
Thereby,

But the relation Pξ×η = Pξ · Pη is true only if the determinants D (ξ) and D (η) either vanish or do
not vanish simultaneously. Therefore, the associative law of multiplication is not valid in general in this
algebra (Jordan 1950 b).
This example can be generalized to,

As the relations 3.22 are only required to hold, if ξ and η are generated from the same element by
using the multiplication 3.20. ξ as well as −ξ can in principle be replaced by f (ξ) and −f (ξ) , functions
of the matrix ξ . Again, ξ and η are matrices of a (finite) matrix algebra.
The example 3.23 gives rise to a class of formally-real algebras: Now ξ and η are symmetric matrices
and ξ ◦ η is defined as the symmetric part of the product ξ × η = ξeξ ηe−ξ i.e.
1
(ξ + η)2 − ξ 2 − η 2
2
(see Emch 1972 p.45 for the structure of the symmetric product if the distributive law is not assumed).
This algebra is power-associative, in case ξη = ηξ , ξ × η becomes equal to ξη , therefore one can form
powers in the usual sense.
These last examples based on matrices served only illustrative purposes as multiplication cannot be
derived from the operation of forming squares of elements in the above constructed one-sided distributive
ξ◦η =

22

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

matrix algebras and in the other examples constructed above for one-sided distributive power-algebras.
Also, relation 3.13 is not satisfied, in any of the one-sided distributive power-algebras Jordan constructed
(Jordan 1950 b). Therefore, Jordan considered all known examples of one-sided distributive poweralgebras known to him at that time as unsuitable for physical applications. Jordan then explained that
a future study of one-sided distributive power-algebras may give non-trivial examples that also satisfy
relations 3.3 and especially 3.13, or not.
In the first case, such examples could be used to generalize quantum mechanics, otherwise the general
axioms proposed in his 1934 and 1950 works must be relaxed, this in fact became his line of research
especially in the 1960ies, which will be described below.
While in the 1960ies power-associativity was relaxed by Jordan, in the early 1950ies inspired by
near-rings, Jordan questioned the axiom of commutativity of addition instead, so besides axiom 3.3,
axiom 3.1 was also lessened (Jordan 1951 & Jordan 1952 a). For more recent approaches to quantum
space-time, where a non-commutative addition (for momenta) is proposed in some models, see the work
by the Italian theoretical physicist Daniele Oriti (e.g. Oriti 2010).
Jordan studied Zassenhaus’ “right-near-rings” or right-distributive near-rings defined by mappings
of a group to itself. Jordan’s interest in structures formed from mappings of a (possibly non-abelian)
group was due the requirement of finding a mathematical structure that transforms according to the
Lorentz group (Jordan 1952 a). Near-rings are different from skew rings, as also the additive group of
elements may be non-commutative, and the elements of a near-ring form a (generally non-commutative)
semi-group under multiplication and only one distributive law is valid for all elements of a near-ring
(Jordan 1951).
Additional examples of near-rings are defined by the composition of polynomial functions of a variable x with coefficients from any ring, or by the composition or rational functions different from zero of a
variable x with coefficients from any field. If one defines composition as multiplication and ordinary addition of functions (for polynomial functions) or ordinary multiplication of functions (for rational functions
different from zero) as addition, one obtains abelian near-rings (near-rings with commutative addition)
(Jordan 1951, Pilz 1976). An associative near-ring with a main-unit, which is two-sided distributive (so
both distributive laws are valid) necessarily possess a commutative addition and reduces to a skew ring
(Jordan 1951). Yet, one can find near-rings satisfying both distributive laws with a non-commutative
addition, but these near-rings do not have a unit element (see Taussky 1936 & Heatherly 1973, but
Heatherly uses the the non-associative Lie product as multiplication, Jordan explicitly considered only
near-rings with associative multiplication (Jordan 1951 & Jordan 1952 a)).
Jordan constructed a special class of near-rings, termed by him polynomial near rings in his publication “Über polynomiale Fastringe” , “On polynomial near-rings” (Jordan 1951 b).
As already mentioned, Near-rings are algebraic structures where only one distributive law may be
valid such as,
(a + b) c = ac + bc

(3.24)

a·0=0

(3.25)

f (Y ) = S m1 Y n1 S m2 Y n2 . . . . . . S mk Y nk S mk+1

(3.26)

And therefore, the relation,

may in general not be valid in near-rings. A near-ring where this relation is valid, is termed a normal
near-ring or a zero-symmetric near-ring (Jordan 1951 Berman & Silverman 1959).
Jordan constructed a near-ring (Jordan 1951 & 1952 a) from a (non-abelian) group, freely generated
by two elements S and Y with,

Here f is a function of a variable Y . Here all mj with 2 ≤ j ≤ k and all nj are positive or negative
non-vanishing integers: m1 and mk+1 may vanish, one requires these exponents to fulfil the following
relations,

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

23

m1 ≥ 0

m1 + m2 ≥ 0

m1 + m2 +··· +mk ≥ 0

(3.27)

m1 + m2 +··· +mk + mk+1 = 0

These functions do form a normal near-ring with multiplication defined by composition (of group
elements),
f · g = f (g [Y ])

(3.28)

And addition is defined by ordinary multiplication of group elements: f + g = f (Y ) g (Y )
The relation f · 0 = 0 is valid because of relations 3.27 and 3.28 (Jordan 1951).
The unit element 0 of the additive group of the near-ring is the special function g (Y ) = E = unit
element of the group (Jordan 1951). The unit element of the multiplicative semi-group of the near-ring
is the special function, x0 (Y ) = Y (Jordan 1951).
The near-ring is generated by the functions,
x0 (Y ) = Y

(3.29)

x (Y ) = SY S −1
A general element f (Y ) of the near-ring can be written as,
f = n1 xm1 + n2 xm1 +m2 + n3 xm1 +m2 +m3 +··· +nk xm1 +··· +mk

(3.30)

One must take care of the order of summands, as addition is non-commutative in this near-ring, as
seen by,
−f =

N
X
j=0

−nN−j xkN −

(3.31)

(Jordan 1952 a). Here the exponent kN− is a non-vanishing rational integer. (Jordan 1952).
All elements of the near-ring are represented by polynomials of the form,
g = n1 xh1 + n2 xh2 +··· +nk xhk
hj ≥ 0; nj 6= 0

(3.32)

In 3.32 neighbouring elements hj and hj+1 must be unequal (Jordan 1951 & Jordan 1952 a). That
polynomials form the elements of this near-ring is due the fact that the special (generating!) element x
respects the other distributive law,
x (f + g) = xf + xg

(3.33)

x is an endomorphism (from which (left-)distributivity of x follows) of the group G i.e. a mapping f
of the group which satisfies the relation f (y1 y2 ) = f (y1 )f (y2 ) (Jordan 1952 a) . The polynomial near-ring
Jordan studied is generated by endomorphisms of the group G (Jordan 1952 a). The additive group of
these polynomials is the free group of infinitely many generators xk with k = 0, 1, 2... (Jordan 1952 a).
For two polynomials in this near-ring, one can define a multiplication by,
!
!
!
X
X
X
X
kj +hl
kj
hl
(3.34)
=
nl x
mj x
mj
nl x
j

l

j

l

Here the order of summands is important (Jordan 1951). Now one can generalize this polynomial
near-ring. The coefficients mj , nl are now not required to be integers but can be elements from an

24

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

arbitrary non-commutative ring. This gives the associative law of multiplication for the multiplication
of polynomials,
#!
!
"
!
!
X
X
X
X
X
X
kj +hl +gi
gi
hl
kj
nl
mj
qi x
(3.35)
qi x
=
nl x
·
mj x
·
j

l

i

j

l

i

Additionally, the distributive law 3.24 is valid for this multiplication.
Another generalization of the near-ring is obtained by introducing, instead of one element, multiple
elements xn . Starting from a free group generated by S1 , S2 , . . . , X one forms a normal near-ring by,
x0r (Y ) = Y ; (r = 1, 2, . . .)
x1 (Y ) = S1 Y S1−1
x2 (Y ) = S2 Y S2−1

(3.36)

xn (Y ) = Sn Y Sn−1
The elements of this polynomial near-ring differ from the elements of the previous near-ring by the
substitution of powers of x by products of the form xn xn−1 ,where the order of factors matters as
not only addition but also multiplication is non-commutative in Jordan’s polynomial near-rings (Jordan
1951).
The special distributive law,
xr (f + g) = xr f + xr g

(3.37)

is again valid for the generating elements of the near ring, which are endomorphisms of the underlying
group (Jordan 1951 & Jordan 1952 b).
Jordan studied polynomial near-rings only were briefly. Already, in his first publication from 1952
(Jordan 1952 a), Jordan explained that one faces serious difficulties when trying to use near-rings in
physics. One does not know how to perform calculations in a near ring, or how to develop a calculus
for near-rings. To a limited extend, this obstacle was overcome by Jordan, by constructing polynomial
near-rings. Yet, already in a follow up-publication (Jordan 1952 b) Jordan became sceptical about using
near-rings in physics.
As relation 3.3 leads to a commutative multiplication for quantum mechanical observables, Jordan
now proposed to look for “algebras” with commutative, but non-associative (power-associative) multiplication, but with associative and commutative addition (so keeping axiom 3.1) (Jordan 1952 b).
Multiplication and addition should be connected by only one distributive law, so the algebras were
expected to only one-sided distributive. Furthermore, formal-reality was required (coefficients in this
proposed algebra should be real numbers).
For the first time, Jordan expressed doubts that is even possible to generalize the formalism of
quantum mechanics, as the required algebras may not even exist mathematically. Still drawing inspiration from Heisenberg’s idea of a fundamental length in nature, Jordan speculated about some possible
consequences of introducing non-distributivity into physics. Apart from limiting the accuracy of the measurement of a single observable (instead of pairs of observables), Jordan considered it still to be possible
to obtain sharply defined values of an observable (one still has eigenvalues). Besides power-associativity,
one must also postulate that a single element of the (non-distributive) “algebra” generates a distributive
sub-algebra of the total “algebra” , to ensure the possibility of obtaining sharply define measurement
results (Jordan 1952 b). But one may still have to give up the principle of reproducibility of measurement
in a theory of fundamental length. Though one may still obtain a certain eigenvalue of an observable a,
subsequent (immediate) measurements of the same observable a may give with a certain probability set
by the fundamental length parameter, another different eigenvalue of a. Jordan’s second publication from
1952 (“On the axiomatics of quantum mechanics” ) marked the end of Jordan’s research on one-sided
distributive power-algebras.
In a parallel development, the American mathematician Irwin Segal introduced axioms for general
quantum mechanics in 1947 and did not require postulate either associativity nor distributivity in his

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

25

axioms (Segal 1947). Concerning associativity, power-associativity was still required by Segal (Segal
1947).
Segal introduced Jordan-Banach-algebras and transferred Jordan-algebras to the infinite-dimensional
setting.
Interestingly, Jordan was looking for formally-real, non-commutative, power-associative and nondistributive algebras fulfilling the axioms he, Von Neumann and Wigner used in their famous 1934
paper, Segal’s works can be regarded as continuation of the foundational work of the above-mentioned
authors. An algebraic system satisfying Segal’s axioms is termed a Segal system (Primas 1983 p.165).
The American mathematician Seymour Sherman constructed examples of Segal systems, that are
not distributive.
Starting from the algebra of continuous functions on a compact Hausdorff space, Sherman (Sherman 1956, see also Lowdenslager 1957) constructed an algebra of observables and defined a multiplication
by using the formal (related to the Jordan product) symmetrized Segal product: x ◦ y =

2
1
(x
+
y)
− (x − y)2 (Primas 1981 p.166). The examples Sherman introduced are non-distributive for
4
the formal product and the lattice of propositions generated by these “algebras” is not commutative, so
they give rise to skew lattices.
Sherman’s examples are so-called exceptional Segal-systems, as they are not isomorphic to the set of
self-adjoint elements of a C* -algebra (Primas 1981 p.166).
It is tempting to speculate, what might have happened, if Jordan, Segal and Sherman would have
taken notice of each other’s work in the late 1940ies and throughout the 1950ies.
The distributivity of the symmetrized Segal product can be deduced from its commutativity and the
fact that it is homogeneous in both of its factors (Emch 1972 pp. 44-45) i.e.,
λ (A ◦ B) = (λA) ◦ B = A ◦ (λB)

(3.38)

Here λ is a scalar. For the proof that from homogeneity, distributivity can be derived see (Emch
1972 p. 45). By assuming homogeneity, one can deduce the commutative, but in general non-associative
Jordan product for the observables of a quantum mechanical system,
1
(A + B)2 − A2 − B 2
(3.39)
2
(Emch 1972 p. 45). Concerning the foundations of quantum mechanics special Segal systems (those
Segal systems isomorphic to the set of self-adjoint elements of a C*-algebra) are distinguished by possessing this non-associative but distributive product. It is associative only for compatible observables
(Emch 1972 p.45).
Moreover, non-linear operators are linked to non-distributivity (see e.g. Schneider 1967 p. 11).
Schneider uses the operator
of forming
a square root as an example for a non-linear and nonp
√
√
distributive operator, i.e. (x + y) 6= x + y .
The set of non-linear operators forms an associative and abelian near-ring with a (non-commutative)
multiplicative semi-group (see e.g. Berg 1972, Berman & Silverman 1959, Irish 1975, Pilz 1977) and even
a near-algebra (Pilz personal communication).
The linear operators used in quantum mechanics are distributive (and homogeneous) and associative
(see e.g. Jordan 1936 p. 158). As described above the Hermitian operators used in quantum mechanics
are closed under a commutative, distributive but non-associative product, the Jordan product 2.17.
The idea that one may have to extend the formalism of quantum mechanics to allow for a nonlinear version of quantum mechanics was put forward by Eugene Wigner in 1962 in connection with
the measurement problem of quantum mechanics (Eugene Wigner 1962). Wigner’s article is part of
an anthology of unusual ideas in science (”The Scientist speculates” edited by Irving John Good)). In
the same volume another contribution by the British physicist Ernst H. Hutten on ”Nonlinear Quantum Mechanics” (Hutten 1962) is contained. Hutten cites a remark by Max Born, as his motivation
for introducing non-linearity (apart from a general comment that interactions usually require the introduction of non-linearities) into quantum theory, the introduction of a minimal length by quantizing
space and time may lead to non-linear dynamical equations in quantum mechanics (Born 1949). At
the end of his article (Hutten also explained that he tried to develop a non-linear version of the Dirac
A◦B =

26

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

equation), Hutten remarks that one may have to look for a non-commutative and non-linear algebra
to properly formulate a non-linear extension of quantum theory (Hutten 1962). It is conceivable that
(non-commutative) near-algebras could be the algebraic structure Hutten was looking for. But the reader
should also see chapter 6 for ideas to introduce non-linearities into the formalism of quantum mechanics
by using two-sided distributive, but non-power-associative algebras. Concerning Jordan’s speculations on
measurements in a generalized quantum theory the class of non-homogeneous nonlinear operators (linear operators are distributive and homogeneous) would lead restrict the possiblities of measring physical
quantities. As noted by the Polish theoretical physicist Bugajski a non-homogeneous operator would
distinguish between different normalizations of the wave function Ψ (Bugajski 1991). The expectation
value of a non-homogeneous observable would be perturbed by ether increasing the numbers of samples
for measuring it, or subsequently repeating the measurement of the observable (Bugajski 1991)). Hence
the accuracy of measurement for such an observable would be limited. This would support Jordan’s view
from the early 1930ies and 1950ies that a generalized qunatum theory would lead restrict the possibility
of measuring observables (Jordan 1952 b).
The German mathematician Johannes André considered affine geometries over near-fields (André
1974 a & 1975) and later also over near-rings (André 1987) in the 1970ies and 1980ies. He constructed
affine geometries, where the joining of two points x and y by a line is a non-commutative operation i.e.
x ⊔ y is not equal to y ⊔ x (André 1974 a & 1975).
André termed these geometries “non-commutative geometries” , not to be confused with the noncommutative geometries constructed by Alain Connes and his collaborators.
André showed how to construct such geometries over near-fields and noticed a possible application.
One can construct “generalized” Hilbert spaces from near-fields and this may (together with applications in functional analysis) allow for “a suitable and physically meaningful generalization of quantum
mechanics” (André 1975 p. 4).
To illustrate this, consider a Kalscheuer near-field F over the quaternions with a parameter tǫR and
multiplication law for two quaternions a and b defined by,
a ◦ b = a · (aā)it · b · (aā)−it

(3.40)

(André 1975 p. 4).
One should note that Kalscheuer modified the multiplication of the quaternions to preserve it for
quaternions with norm 1 (Kalscheuer 1940 p.433).
A generalized Hilbert space X , according to André is formed by the set of all countable sequences
with elements of a Kalscheuer near-field F and with a convergent series of the squares of their absolute
values (André 1974 a pp. 65-66 & p. 105 & André 1975 pp. 3-5),
X := {(εi )iεN |εi ∈ F,

∞
X
i=1

|εi |2 < ∞}

(3.41)

André’s contribution from 1974 is fascinating: He refers to Jordan’s paper from 1952 (Jordan 1952 a)
about near-rings and Jordan’s work on skew lattices as a possible application for his non-commutative
spaces as well as generalized Hilbert spaces. In addition, André points out possible links to a geometric
formulation of quantum mechanics as well (André 1974 a). Furthermore, he quotes the seminal 1934 paper
by Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner about the classification of Jordan-algebras. Andre’ devoted much
of his work to associative near-fields (and near-rings) It is unknown to the authors, whether André also
considered possible non-associative generalizations of quantum mechanics, or whether the fact that the
Jordan, Von Neumann and Wigner paper showed that distributivity must be introduced axiomatically,
was of greater interest to André.
Concerning non-distributive genneralizations of the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics
the notion of a near-vector space may be of interest. André constructed near-vector spaces over nearfields, which are a non-linear generalization of vector spaces (André 1974 b). For the definition of a
near-vector space André introduced the notion of aF -group. A F -group is a triple V, +; F where V, +
is an additive group with the neutral element 0 and F is a (non-abelian) multiplicative group formed
by the endomorphisms ofV, +. The group F contains the endomorphisms 0, -1 and 1 (André 1975 p.8),
as -1 is an endomorphism of (V,+) the groupV, + is abelian and hence addition is commutative in

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

27

aF -group (André 1975 p.9 & Howell & Sanon 2018 ), even though André hinted at the possibility of
constructing generalized F-groups with non-commutative addition (André 1974 b), he never pursued this
line of research. In any F -group elements of V, + are termed vectors and elements of the group F are
denoted scalars by André and the group F ∗ = F \ (0) is a subgroup of the automophism group of V, +
(André 1975 p.8 & Howell & Sanon 2018 ). If x · α = x · β with x ∈ V and α, β ∈ F then either α = β
or x= 0 so F acts fixed-point free on V (André 1975 p.9 & Howell & Sanon 2018). For the definition of
a near-vector space the concept of a quasi-kernel is important (the notion of a kernel in near-fields and
quasi-fields is defined below).The quasi-kernel Q of aF -group is defined by:
Q(V ) := { x ∈ V | ∀α, β ∈ F, ∃ γ ∈ F, → xα + xβ = xγ}

(3.42)

(André 1975 p.9 & Howell & Sanon 2018).
A F-group is termed linear if either V = (0) or the quasi-kernel Q(V, F ) does not contain only the
zero element 0 . Let u ∈ Q \ (0) and c is uniquely determined by a, b and u, so one can set: c = a + b
u

(André 1975 p. 10). The set (F, +, ·) is a near-field , here + means that addition in the near-field depends
u

u

on u (André 1975 p. 10 & p.12). A linearF -group is a near-vector space if its quasi-kernel Q generates V
as a group. A regular near-vector space is a near-vector space where every pair of vectors u, v ∈ Q(V )\(0)
is compatible (André 1975 p.10) Compatible means that for the pair of vectors u, v ∈ Q \ (0), there is a
c ∈ F \ (0) with u + c · v ∈ Q. A near-vector space is temed semi-regular, if for every vector u ∈ Q \ (0)
there is a vector v ∈ Q \ F u which is compatible with u (André 1975 p.10). André could show that every
near-vector space is a sum of maximally regular near-vector spaces. Additionally, André could derive a
fundamental structural theorem for regular near-vector spaces (André 1974 b & André 1975 pp. 11-12):
For a near-field F and an index set I, a (linear) F-group X is a regular near-vector space iff it is isomorphic
to the set F I of all families (xi )i∈I with xi ∈ F and xi 6= 0 only for finite many i ∈ I. Addition and
multiplication are defined component-wise and F and I are up to isomorphism uniquely determined by
X. A similar structural theorem for general (semi-regular) near-vector spaces was deduced by the German
mathematician Helga Tecklenburg in 1987 (Tecklenburg 1987). It is also possible to construct infinitedimensional near-vector spaces (André 1974, Techelnburg 1987 & Tecklenburg personal communication)
and one may in principle also construct vector spaces over quasi-fields (non-associative generalizations
of near-fields see below, Tecklenburg personal communication).
The proposal by André to examine generalized Hilbert spaces defined by using Kalscheuer’s near-fields
is notable, Kalscheuer’s near-fields were also a starting point for Jordan in his early 1950ies investigations
(see above) and Jordan transferred Kalscheuer’s construction to the non-associative algebra of octonions.
Additionally, one should also mention, that André already in 1954 (André 1954) investigated quasi-fields
and developed a general method for the construction of quasi-fields. Quasi-fields are structures with
non-associative multiplication, where only one distributive law is required to be satisfied, so they are
a non-associative generalization of near-fields. Quasi-fields which are obtained by André’s method are
termed André quasi-fields in the literature (see e.g. Moorhouse & Williford 2009).
The authors are not aware of any applications of André quasi-fields along the lines Jordan envisioned
for non-associative and one-sided distributive algebraic structures (see Plaumann & Strambach 1970 for
four-dimensional quasi-fields, where the centre of the quasi-field is formed by the real numbers).
Jordan’s construction of twisted octonions (Jordan 1950 a), based on Kalscheuer’s method of generating near-fields was independently found (rediscovered) and generalized by Buchanan and Hähl in 1977
(Buchanan & Hähl 1977). For the construction of general topological quasi-fields over the octonions
see the works of Hähl (e.g. Hähl 1976 & Hähl 1982), who also classified the automorphism groups of
8-dimensional topological quasifields (Hähl 1976), which are isomorphic to G2 , SU3 C, SO4 R or have a
dimension ≤ 4 (Hähl 1976). The quasi-fields obtained by Jordan in 1950 and their generalizations studied
later by Hähl and Buchanan in 1977, are locally-compact (Buchanan & Hähl 1977) and do not have G2 as
an automorphism group, unless one uses the ordinary distributive multiplication of the octonion algebra
(Hähl personal communication and Hähl 1976). Instead, these quasi-fields have the group SU3 C as their
automorphism group (Hähl 1976 & Hähl personal communication). However, Hähl (Hähl 1976 & Weigland 1987) constructed topological quasi-fields over the octonions with non-distributive multiplication
which have G2 as their automorphism group.

28

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

The 8-dimensional topological quasi-fields with the automorphism group G2 are defined by the following modiification of the octonion algebra (Hähl 1982 & Weigand 1987);
On R8 one uses the ordinary vector addition of the vector group R8 and defines a multiplication ◦
by (Weigland 1987 pp.65-66),
  

x1
a1 −αa2 −αa3 −αa4 −αa5 −αa6 −αa7 −αa8
 x2 
a2 ρ (a1 ) −a4 a3
−a
a
a
−a
6
5
8
7
  

 
 a3 a4 ρ (a1 ) −a2 −a7 −a8
a5 a6 
 x3 


 a4 −a3 a2 ρ (a1 ) −a8 a7
x4 
−a6 a5  

(3.43)
·
a◦x=



 a5 a6 a7 a8
ρ
(a
)
−a
−a
−a
1
2
3
4  x5 




 a6 −a5 a8 −a7
a2 ρ (a1 ) a4 −a3  x6 

 a7 −a8 −a5 a6
a3 −a4 ρ (a1 ) a2  x7 
x8
a8 a7 −a6 −a5
a4 a3
−a2 ρ (a1 )

With (a = (a1 , . . . , a8 )) ∈ R8 and (x = (x1 , . . . , x8 )) ∈ R8 and a fixed homomorphism ρ : R → R with
ρ (0) = 0 and ρ (1) = 1 and a fixed real parameter α > 0 (Weigland 1987 p. 66). For α = 1 and ρ = id
one gets the multiplication of the alternative ring of octonions . For ρ = id (in this case ρ is additive and
hence linear (Weigland 1987 p.67)) the multiplication ◦ is two-sided distributive. The alternative laws
x ◦ (x ◦ y) = (x ◦ x) ◦ y and (x ◦ y) ◦ y = x ◦ (y ◦ y) are satisfied for α = 1 (Weigland 1987 p. 67).
For different values of ρ and α the multiplication ◦ is neither two-sided distributive (but one-sided
distributive) nor alternative, but this topological quasi-field does have the automorphism group of the
octonions G2 as its automorphism group. Because of the non-associativity of the multiplication in a
quasi-field and any general non-associative algebra, one has Ra◦b 6= Ra ◦ Rb and La◦b 6= La ◦ Lb for the
right and left representation operators R and L of a non-associative algebra and the two elements a and
b of the corresponding algebra (Kalscheuer 1940 & Lõhmus et al. 1998).The lack of right-distributivity
leads to Ra+b 6= Ra + Rb for (left-distributive) near-fields and quasi-fields (Kalscheuer 1940). As the
left-distributive law is still valid the relation La+b = La + Lb is satisfied by the left representation
operators of a left-distributive near-field. One can transform a left-distributive near- or quasi-field F
into a right-distributive one (and vice versa) by passing to the dual or opposite multiplication i.e.
a ∗ b = b ◦ a ∀(a, b) ∈ F (Wähling 1974). In this case the right representation operators are additive
and the left representation operators are not additive. For the finite-dimensional Kalscheuer near-fields
the representation operators are matrices (Kalscheuer 1940). Withut the zero element the matrices of
the regular right representation of finite near-field form a multiplicative group. If one assumes that
multiplication in a near-field is continuous, this multiplicative group is continuous as well and there is
a Lie-Algebra associated to this group (Kalscheuer 1940). In fact, Kalscheuer used the representation
theory of Lie-algebras and groups to find all finite-dimensional near-fields over the real numbers with
continuous multiplication (Kalscheuer 1940). Moreover, it is possible to define a commutator group for
a near-field. The commutator group of the proper Kalscheuer near-field of twisted quaternions is equal
to the automorphism group of unit quaternions, the group SU2 C (Kalscheuer 1940).
When working with general non-commutative and non-associative algebras, such as non-commutative
Jordan-algebras the notions of nucleus and center of an algebra U are important (Braun & Koecher 1965
p.24). The nucleus of a non-associative (and possibly non-commutative) algebra U is the subset of
elements that associate with all other elements of U and hence is an associative sub-algebra of U (Braun
& Koecher 1965 p.24). The center of a non-commutative algebra is the subset of elements that commute
with all other elements of the algebra. The center of an algebra U is a commutative and associative
sub-algebra of U (Braun & Koecher 1965 p.24). For near-fields and quasi-fields the additional concept
of a kernel has to be considered. In a (left-distributive) quasi-field the kernel is formed by the subset
of elements that distribute and associate from the right with all the other elements of the quasi-field.
Like for non-associative and non-commutative algebras one can define certain sub-sets of elements that
commute and associate with all elements of a quasi-field, the center and the nucleus of a quasi-field.
Actually, there are two notions of a nucleus for a quasi-field, the left and right nucleus, depending on
whether elements of the nucleus associate from the left or right with all elements of the quasi-field
(Buchanan & Hähl 1977). For associative near-fields and near-rings, one can define subsets of elements
which distribute with all the elements of a near-field or near-ring (from the right or left, depending on

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

29

which distributive law is violated in a near-field or near-ring). The kernel K of a near-filed F is defined
by

or

K(F ) := { c ∈ F | (x + y) ◦ c = x ◦ c + y ◦ c ∀x, y ∈ F }

(3.44)

K(F ) := { c ∈ F | c ◦ (x + y) = c ◦ x + c ◦ y ∀x, y ∈ F }

(3.45)

CF = xe−it log |x|

(3.46)

depending on whether the near-field or near-ring is left- or right-distributive (Buchanan & Hähl
1977 & André 1987). For near-fields one can define the rank of a near-field over its kernel, which is
the dimension of a near-field F over its kernel K. The 4-dimensional Kalscheuer near-field is a special
class of a rank-2-near-field termed a Biliotti-near-field having the field of complex numbers as its kernel
(André 1987). A rank-2-near-field F is a Biliotti-near-field iff F =K+eK for e ∈ F \ K (André 1987).
A rank-2-near-field F is Biliotti (Biliotti 1979), if F is either finite (as the four-dimensional Kalscheuer
near-field) or the center (for non-commutative near-fields) and kernel of F coincide (André 1987). One
of the most important findings of Kalscheuer’s seminal paper from 1940 is the non-existence of (finitedimensional) proper (non-distributive) near-fields over the real numbers with continuous multiplication
containing the real numbers in their center (Kalscheuer 1940). The center C of a Kalschuer near-field F
is given by functions of the form,

With x ∈ R \ 0 (Wähling 1974). Even the rational numbers Q do not lie in the center of the Kalscheuer
near-field (Wähling 1974) e.g. 2 ◦ a 6= a ◦ 2 with a ∈ F .
The near-fileds and quasi-fields constructed by the method Kalscheuer used, however do have commutative and distributive (and associative) sub-algebras: The fields of real and complex numbers are
sub-algebras of the Kalscheuer near-fields and of the 8-dimensional locally-compact quasi-fields constructed by Jordan and Buchanan and Hähl (Buchanan & Hähl 1977 & André 1987) .
One can also define a kernel (and a center and different concepts of a nucleus, see Buchanan & Hähl
1977) for quasi-fields. The kernel of a quasi-field is defined by;
K(Q) := { c ∈ Q | (x + y) ◦ c = x ◦ c + y ◦ c and x ◦ (y ◦ c) = (x ◦ y) ◦ c ∀x, y ∈ F }

(3.47)

So the kernel is the subset of elements of a quasi-field that distribute and associate with all other
elements of the quasi-field (Buchanan & Hähl 1977). The locally-compact topological quasi-fields studied
by Jordan and Buchanan & Hähl with the group SU3 C as their group of automorphisms have the field
of real numbers R as their kernel (Buchanan & Hähl 1977). As with the Kalscheuer near-fields the
quasi-fields obtained by using Kalscheuer’s method have algebraically strange centers (Hähl personal
communication).
Whereas Johannes André continued his work on non-commutative spaces over near-fields and nearrings, the authors could not find additional works on generalized Hilbert spaces or generalizations of
quantum mechanics based on near-fields or near-rings by either André or other authors.
It seems likely that the problem stated above, linking squares to the multiplication operation likely
persists in André’s construction.
One should remember that Kalscheuer’s construction involves quaternions, one already encounters
some obstacles when trying to formulate Hilbert spaces over the “ordinary” quaternions i.e. there is no
natural tensor product of quaternionic Hilbert spaces (see above and e.g. Primas 1983 p. 212. For a
general discussion of Hilbert spaces over the quaternions and octonions consult Horwitz 1996, where he
shows that one can construct a time operator for a quaternionic Hilbert space).
This becomes worse if one tries to define a Hilbert space over the ordinary octonions i.e. completeness
and unitarity are lost (see Kosinski & Rembielinski 1978 and Adler 1995 pp. 49-53). neq
These problems would persist and perhaps even worsen, if one tried to construct a generalized Hilbert
space from Jordan’s twisted octonions, which apart from being non-associative are also non-distributive.
To summarize, even when trying to use ordinary quaternions and octonions to define generalized Hilbert

30

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

spaces one encounters severe obstacles. Concerning a link between non-commutative and non-associative
structures a paper from Girelli (Girelli, 2010) about the non-commutative Snyder space-time is of importance:
Girelli showed that the Snyder space-time can be obtained from a Lie-Triple system (not to be
confused with Lie-Triple-algebras, see below) and that the non-associative generalization of an abelian
group, a K-loop describes its generalized Poincaré symmetries.
The quantum space-time introduced by the American physicist Hartland S. Snyder in 1947 to cure
the divergence problems of quantum electrodynamics (Snyder 1947 a & b) seems to have some peculiar features. Apart from non-commutativity introduced already by Snyder in his original papers, nonassociativity and non-linearities appear in the studies of field theories on Snyder’s quantum space-time
(see e.g. Štrajn 2017). The addition of momenta is not only non-commutative but also non-associative
for some models of Snyder’s quantum space-time (see again Štrajn 2017).
One should also mention an attempt by the Physical Chemist Ilya Prigogine to introduce irreversibility into quantum mechanics by making use of non-distributive and non-commutative “super-operators”
, which however are non-unitary, instead a generalized “star- unitarity” holds for them, for details see
Prigogine’s papers about the topic (e.g. Prigogine & Petrosky 1988). The relation f (y1 y2 ) = f (y1 )f (y2 )
is not valid, even for the case (y1 = y2 ) for the super-operators introduced by Prigogine and Petrosky
(Prigogine & Petrosky 1988 p. 464).
In these models, non-distributivity was considered with respect to multiplication and induced an uncertainty for a single observable. Furthermore, Prigogine and his co-workers introduced non-distributive
super-operators, among other things, to describe non-integrable systems in quantum mechanics (Prigogine & Petrosky 1988).
The multiplication of unbounded operators is not necessarily distributive with respect to addition
(Pedersen 1989 p.192). One should note that a lack of distributivity seems to be severely constrained,
as this would lead to a violation of the Tsirelson’s bound in EPR-experiments e.g. see Landau (1992).
Additionally, Landau proved that Sherman’s algebras cannot be used to describe local physical systems,
as they lack enough compatible observables, so this example of a non-distributive near-algebra is not
useful for applications in physics. The violation of the Tsirelson bound is one aspect of a more fundamental problem with non-linear or non-distributive extensions of quantum mechanics: the issue of how
to describe composite systems. In ordinary linear quantum mechanics composite systems are described
by a tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the respective sub-systems, and this is tied to the linearity
of the formalism of quantum mechanics (Kus 2014). For near-fields and near-rings (and hence for nearalgebras) there is no notion of tensor product (Pilz personal communication, see Mahmood & Mansouri
1997 for an attempt to formulate a tensor-product for near-ring modules). It is therefore, difficult to see
how composite systems can be described in a non-distributive generalization of quantum mechanics.
Non-distributive algebras, termed near-algebras were briefly investigated by Harold Brown (Brown
1966) in the late 1960ies. Brown was a PhD-student of the German mathematician Hans Julius Zassenhaus, who investigated near-fields and near-rings already in the 1930ies.
Brown made use of the notion of a distributor, measuring the non-distributivity of an element c with
respect to two elements a, b in a near-algebra,
[a, b; c] = (a + b) c − ac − bc

(3.48)

and investigated some of its properties (Brown 1966, 1968 a & b). be
Brown notes that the multiplication of sub-near-algebras is in general non-associative due to the
non-distributivity of multiplication in near-algebras (Brown 1968 a).
Furthermore, Brown could show that there are normed near-algebras analogous to Banach-algebras,
one prime example is provided by the twisted quaternions Kalscheuer constructed and Jordan studied
briefly, they can be turned into a normed near-algebra.
The most important point, however is that Brown could demonstrate (Brown 1966 & 1968 a) that a
(left-distributive) semi-simple near-algebra with identity and with a linear Banach space and possessing
a right multiplication operator that is differentiable at the origin, is a (two-sided) distributive semisimple algebra. This supports Jordan’s later suspicions that near-rings are not suitable for applications
in physics and thereby distributivity cannot be relaxed in a generalized quantum theory. For near-modules

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

31

and near-algebras associated to general near-rings, especially to near-rings generated by endomorphisms
of non-abelian groups (so near-rings with non-abelian addition), the reader is referred to the work of the
mathematician Momme Johs Thomsen (Thomsen 1983).
Brown’s and Landau’s findings make it appear unlikely that near-rings, near-fields or near-algebras
will be useful for a generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism.
In his PhD thesis, discussing finite-dimensional near-algebras, Joel W. Irish (Irish 1975) proved that
semi-simple near-algebras with a nilpotent distributor reduce to semi-simple algebras. Imposing some
weakened distributivity ensures full distributivity for semi-simple near-algebras. This is important as
the axioms introduced for finite-dimensional quantum systems introduced by Jordan, von Neumann and
Wigner imply a weakened form of distributivity (see equation 3.9), this may explain why the algebras
in quantum mechanics are distributive.
Normed near-algebras have a regular left representation on the space of left multiplication operators,
which in general are not linear (Irish 1975 pp. 41-43). Additionally, Irish could show that a near-algebra
N the norm of which fulfils a weakened form of distributivity, so-called D-normed near-algebras, can be
regularly left-represented on the space of Lipschitz functions or Lipschitz left multiplication operators
on N (Irish 1975 pp. 43-45). Such d-normed near-algebras have a continuous multiplication separately
and simultaneously in both variables x and y (Irish 1975 p. 4). In some cases, but not in all cases, the
near-algebra of Lipschitz operators generates commutative sub-near-algebras (Irish 1975 p. 12).
Furthermore, the near-algebra of Lipschitz operators contains the non-commutative algebra of
bounded linear operators as a sub-algebra and the center of this algebra is a commutative sub-algebra
of the near-algebra of Lipschitz operators (Irish 1975 pp. 11-12).
Irish could show that near-algebras of real functions do not properly contain the algebras of bounded
linear operators on R, if they three- or higher-dimensional (Irish 1975 p. 40) and Irish could construct
of near-algebras with non-associative multiplication where the non-associativity follows from non-leftdistributivity in a near-algebra (Irish 1975 p. 39). Again, it is tempting to speculate what might have
resulted from a transfer of knowledge between André, who initiated the study of “linear” algebra over
near-fields and proposed to construct a generalized Hilbert space over the near-field of Kalscheuer’s
twisted quaternions (see equation 3.41), and Irish who worked on some aspects of analysis over finitedimensional near-algebras. One may get more insight into André’s proposal by examining if the generalized Hilbert space over a Kalscheuer near-field can be linked to (quaternionic?) Lipschitz multiplication
operators.
There have been some attempts to generalize the notion of derivative and derivations (as derivatives
are linear mappings), to a non-linear setting and to near-rings, in the form of “K-quasi-derivations” ,
(see Müller 1979 and Emmons et al. 2012), which are mappings satisfying both the chain and product
rule known from usual derivatives.
Yet, there are no K-quasi-derivations besides the zero derivation in near-rings formed by mappings
from a group to itself (Emmons et al. 2012).
Müller showed that for a near-ring f , defined by mappings of a group to itself, there is only one
kind of mapping of the additive group of the near-ring to itself, which satisfies the chain rule and is also
a homomorphism of the additive group of the near-ring, the trivial mapping D (f ) = e (Müller 1979),
where e is the neutral element of the near-ring which is a constant of the near-ring (Müller 1979),
whereas there can be more mappings of the whole near-ring to itself that satisfy only the chain rule
without being a homomorphism (Müller 1979).
To summarize, it is difficult to define a differential operator in the usual sense in a near-ring. However, near-rings or one-sided distributive algebraic structures may play a role in non-linear functional
analysis and the study of non-linear operator (see e.g. Magill 1996). There are some near-rings admiitting derivations i.e. group endomorphisms of the additive group of a near-rings satisfying the Leibniz or
product rule.
The Japanese mathematician Sadayuki Yamamuro constructed near-algebras from Fréchet-differentiable
mappings of a Banach space to itself (Yamamuro 1965 & 1966).
Near-Rings of differentiable mappings were studied earlier by D.W. Blackett (Blackett 1956). A
formal calculus for a special class of near-algebras, termed Riordan near-algebras, was developed by
the two French mathematicians Laurent Poinsot and Gérard Duchamp (Poinsot & Duchamp 2010).

32

3 The 1950ies: Non-distributive “algebras”

Concerning near-rings with non-commutative addition and multiplication, the German mathematician
Yvonne Raden constructed a near-ring from the Campbell-Hausdorff group (Raden 2009 & 2013) that
gives rise to a ultrametric space. Perhaps the tools of non-Archimedean analysis (see e.g. Natarajan
2014) might be useful for the study of some near-rings with non-commutative addition.
Finally, for discrete systems differential operators are replaced by difference operators and a notion
of difference operator can be introduced in (finite) near-rings by using the N -group associated to a nearring (Binder & Mayr 2001, see this work for the definition of a N -group and of a difference operator in
near-rings). To conclude this chapter, it is far from clear whether near-rings or near-algebras can be used
for physical models, as they seem to induce rather peculiar physical effects and require an extension of
the concepts of analysis or may not give rise to any calculus at all.

4
The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new
idea about measurements

Summary. Until the late 1960ies Jordan predominantly worked on skew lattices. Inspired by Helge
Petersson’ s and J.M. Osborn’s work on non-power-associative generalizations of commutative Jordan
algebras, Jordan investigated the possible application of non-power-associative algebras in physics. Early
in the 1960ies following a paper from 1949 Jordan investigated the interplay of thermodynamics and
quantum mechanics and the measurement problem, this was apart from the search for a theory of a
minimal length another motivation to generalize quantum mechanics. In the late 1960ies Jordan tried to
find algebraic identities for commutative non-power-associative algebras to find a new algebraic setting
for quantum mechanics. A theory based on non-power-associative algebras would restrict measurements
of observables. Only expectation values but not eigenvalues are well defined for non-power-associative
algebras and the sum postulate of ordinary quantum mechanical observables is not satisfied. Jordan also
investigated non-trivial sub-algebras of general Hermitian matrix algebras.
While Jordan proposed in the early 1950ies that the failure of the law or reproducibility of measurement may be due to a weakened form of distributivity, his lack of success of finding examples of
non-distributive algebras, that additionally may be non-commutative and/or non-associative, but without breaking the remaining axioms of quantum mechanics, led to the abolishment of this special research
program rather quickly. Until the late 1960ies apart from his work on the scalar-tensor theory of gravity
and questions in geophysics related to it, Jordan concentrated his efforts of generalizing the mathematics of quantum mechanics by working on skew lattices. Yet, according to Jordan this also led to
no applications in physics (Jordan 1975 p. 215). A paper from 1963, “Über die Gültigkeitsgrenzen der
Quantenmechanik” (On the limits of quantum mechanics, Jordan 1963) discusses the measurement problem in quantum mechanics. Following an earlier suggestion made by Jordan in 1949 (On the process of
measurement in quantum mechanics, Jordan 1949) and drawing on the work of the German physicist
Günther Ludwig, who already worked with Jordan on Jordan’s version of a scalar-tensor theory of gravitation in from the late 1940ies to the middle of the 1950ies, Jordan took a realistic view of the reduction
of state vector or wave function collapse as an irreversible, ultimately thermodynamic effect.
As ordinary quantum mechanics cannot describe this process properly, Jordan saw a need for a
generalization of quantum mechanics apart from the supposed existence of a fundamental length. This
paper briefly mentions the exceptional Jordan algebra and summarizes the results of his work on skew
lattices.
Jordan describes work by American mathematicians, showing there are more examples of non-trivial
Jordan-algebras, if one does not demand that the real numbers are contained in this algebra. This is
necessary according to Jordan, as the continuum is crucial for mathematical physics. Yet, if one dispenses
with the continuum and uses general number theoretic systems, one finds a rich source of “exceptional”
Jordan algebras (Jordan 1963). Apart from this, Jordan compares the Jordan-algebra approach to the
usual operator or matrix algebra approach to quantum mechanics.

34

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements

The usual matrix product a·b is non-commutative, for the analysis of the rule of the associative law in
quantum mechanics one can use the commutative Jordan product, which as Jordan explains is sufficient,
if the product a · b (in a possible generalization of associative matrix algebras) is non-associative as well.
Jordan concludes that one can (at first) restore the commutative law for the analysis of nonassociative algebras that may go beyond quantum mechanics (Jordan 1963). In an interview Jordan
gave to Thomas S.Kuhn in 1963, Jordan discusses (apart from long discusssions on the origin of quantum mechanics and quantum field theory) briefly his ideas on generalizing quantum mechanics. Jordan
was inspired by his work Eugene Wigner on non-relativistic quantum mechanics (Jordan & Kuhn 1963).
In this work Jordan and Wigner could eliminate the infinite self-energy of the Columb interaction by
using the non-commutativity of multiplication of quantum mechanical operators. This success could
not be transfered to the realtivisitc setting of quantum electrodynamics, here divergences occur that
could not be eliminated. Jordan now suspected at extending the mathematical formalism of quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory my allow to formulate version of quantum electrodynamics that
does not contain infinities. As passing from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics led to the use
of a non-commutative algebra for observables, Jordan suspected that a new formulation of quantum
electrodynamics and quantum field theory may require the use of non-associative algebras. Jordant hen
recalls his introduction of power-associative Jordan algebras, which could be used for physics, at least not
appearrantly. Concerning his ideas after the introduction of Jordan algebras, Jordan mentioned that he
engaged in several mathematical speculations, which did not result in much (Jordan & Kuhn 1963). This
seems to imply that his musing on near-rings, near-fields and quasi-rings form the 1950ies were viewed
sceptically by Jordan himself, though he briefly mused about the possibility of using near-rings in physics
in 1968 (Jordan 1968 b). There is a question by some authors discussing Jordan’ds contribution to early
quantum field theory (see e.g. Schroer 2011) why Jordan remained silent on the development of quantum electrodynamics and quantum field theory after World War II, especially the development of the
renormalization program by Schwinger, Feynman and Tomonaga. In this interview with Kuhn, Jordan
responds to Kuhn’s question about why he stopped working on quantum field theory in the 1930ies and
did not resume working on this topic after World War II, by explaining that in the 1930ies he did not
see any direct way to tackle the problems of quantum field theory and after the war ”Schwinger and the
other younger researchers were so successful at working in quantum electrodynamics” (Jordan & Kuhn
1963), that Jordan did see no reason to work again in this field. Jordan explained that he was more
interesed in the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics and field theory and showed Kuhn a
paper on skew lattices the main topic (apart from questions of geophysics and his scalar-tensor theory
of gravity) of his research activities in the early 1960ies (Jordan & Kuhn 1963).
Finally, Jordan recalls that Jordan-algebras are power-associative, and this is precisely the property
Jordan finally questioned in his last works on generalized quantum theories.
Related to this, in the late 1960ies Jordan suspected that a future theory of fundamental length may
require a new concept of measurement (Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1971 & Jordan 1972).
Whereas the axiom of power-associativity in an algebra of observables was dropped, commutativity
(of multiplication and addition) and especially distributivity were restored.
Instead of thinking that “just” the reproducibility of measurement may have to abandoned in a future
theory of fundamental length, Jordan envisioned an even more restricted possibility of measurement
(Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1971 & Jordan 1972).
Instead of each observable (with a point-spectrum) having its eigenvalues (the immediate measurment
of which may not be reproducible see chapter 3)) that are accessible to measurements, only the mean
value and the mean quadratic deviation in a statistical ensemble (of a finite number of individually
indistinguishable observables) may be measurable. The relations 2.20 and 2.24 cannot be implemented
with non-power-associative algebras (Jordan 1934).
Or more precisely: Instead of being able to perform measurements with individual objects (i.e. one
particle) only expectation values (again in an ensemble) and the mean standard deviation around this
expectation value

may be measurable.

(ā − a)2 = a2 − ā2

(4.1)

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements

35

Another important consequence of relaxing power-associativity would be that the sum of two observables a and b, as defined by,
a + b = ā + b̄ with ā = E (a, ϕ) ; b̄ = E (b, ϕ) ;

(4.2)

may not always exist after a scale transformation (Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1972). Here φ is the state
of the physical system (Jordan 1972). The validity of equation 4.2 in quantum theory leads to states φ
which are linear functionals on the algebra of observables (Emch 1972 p. 35). The fact that equation 4.2
holds for observables in quantum mechanics, the additivity of expectation values of observables- despite
the non-commutativity of multiplication of observables- is a special and characteristic feature of the
quantum mechanical formlism, a fact which was emphasized by Jordan throughout his career (Jordan
1933 b, Jordan 1934, Jordan 1952 b, Jordan 1968 b, Jordan 1971 & Jordan 1972). This feature makes
it possible to uniquely define an observable c as the sum of two observables a and b for every pair of
observables (Jordan 1934, Jordan 1952 b, Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1972). Another special feature of
quantum mechanics is the additivity of expectation values for functions of observabels. Starting with an
observable a it is possible to change the scale of a measurement device to obtain a new measurement
device, which now can be used to measure a function f (a) of the original observable a (Jordan 1934
& Jordan 1968 b). This function f (a), which is also an observable, can also be added to any other
observable (Jordan 1968 b) accoriding to the definition given by equation 4.2. But if a is a non-powerassociative observable, functions of a can no longer be added to other observables in this sense (Jordan
1968 b & Jordan 1972). One would not be able to arbitrarily re-gauge the scale of measurement in a
system described by a non-power-associative algebra without endangering the existence of the sum of
two arbitrary observables.
So, additivity for two functions f (a) and f (b) , generated by two observables a and b , is in general
not valid in a non-power-associative algebra of observables (Jordan 1968 b & Jordan 1972). an Holger
Petersson, who wrote his PhD thesis about Lie-Triple-algebras (Petersson 1967) and especially the USAmerican mathematician James Marshall Osborn, who in a series of three papers in 1965 (Osborn 1965
a, b & c), found axioms characterizing certain commutative and non-associative (in general non-powerassociative) algebras, which Jordan himself liked to term Osborn-algebras, but which nowadays, in an
ironic twist of terminology, are called “Almost-Jordan-algebras” (Hentzel 2007). Lie-Triple algebras are
non-power-associative generalizations of Jordan-algebras, which belong to the class of “Almost-Jordan”
algebras, the term Lie-Triple-algebras was coined by the German mathematician Max Koecher (Jordan
1969 b).
Lie-Triple-algebras provided the starting point for Jordan’s investigations on non-power-associative
algebras, as they are still close to Jordan algebras, in a sense too close, as we will see below. Apart from
this, the algebra of n × n Hermitian matrices over the octonions for n > 3 were briefly investigated by
Jordan himself and intensively by the German mathematician Horst Rühaak in his PhD-thesis (Rühaak
1968). Rühaak’s contribution proved crucial for Jordan’s later work on non-associative algebras, Rühaak
learned about one seminal paper by the American mathematician J.M. Osborn (Osborn 1965 b), in
which Osborn characterized possible axioms for commutative and non-associative algebras, especially
including algebras which are not power-associative (Rühaak personal communication).
Osborn later found possible axioms for non-commutative, not necessarily power-associative algebras
(Osborn 1972), but this line of research was not directly pursued by Jordan and his collaborators, though
Jordan finally considered also non-commutative and non-power-associative algebras (Jordan 1972, see
below).
Together with Jordan and the Japanese Mathematician Matsushita, Rühaak contributed also to a
few works Jordan published at the Academy of Sciences and Literature in Mainz in the late 1960ies. The
Japanese mathematician and musician Shin-ichi Matsushita spent one year in Hamburg from 1966 till
1967 working with Jordan on skew lattices and non-associative algebras (Jordan 1967).
In his work consisting of a series of papers appearing in the late 1960ies till the early 1970ies Jordan
proposed in some case, not in all cases, another modification of his earlier axioms (Jordan & Matsushita
1967), apart from power-associativity, he softened the requirement of formal-reality, he introduced the
notion of semi-formal-reality, which permits an algebra to have nilpotent elements.

36

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements
Semi-formally real means,
X

x2ϕ = 0 iff x2ϕ = 0

(4.3)

x2ϕ = 0 iff xϕ = 0

(4.4)

ϕ

and formally real means (see also above),
X
ϕ

So, at least in some cases, strict formal-reality was not required by Jordan.
To understand Jordan’s approach to non-power-associative generalizations of Jordan-algebras, we
will start by summarizing some aspects of the theory of Lie-Triple-algebras.
In Jordan-algebras, the following relation holds,



x, y 2 , z = 2y [x, y, z]

(4.5)

However, the reverse is not true, an algebra fulfilling 4.5. need not fulfil the defining axioms of a
Jordan-algebra, commutative algebras defined by axiom 4.5 are denoted Lie-Triple- algebras (Petersson
1967, Jordan & Matsushita 1967).
The identity defining Lie-triple-algebras was first found by Osborn (Osborn 1965 a) and a little later
independently by Petersson (Petersson 1967). The left multiplication operators of a Lie-Triple-algebra
give rise to a Lie-Triple-system in the sense of Jacobson (see Jacobson 1949), from this the denotation
Lie-Triple-algebra derives (Petersson 1967). Whereas, Lie-Triple-algebras are not power-associative in
general, all formally-real and semi-simple Lie-Triple-algebras reduce to Jordan-algebras (Petersson 1967,
Jordan & Matsushita 1967) and are therefore power-associative.
This was the reason for Jordan to go beyond Lie-Triple-algebras, yet they posed some interesting mathematical questions and were used as a starting point to investigate commutative, non-powerassociative algebras.
Relation 4.5 in Lie-Triple-algebras is equal to,
[x, uv, z] = u [x, v, z] + v [x, u, z]

(4.6)

if the multiplication in Lie-Triple-algebras is distributive with respect to addition (Jordan 1969 b).
Additionally, as mentioned above, multiplication was assumed to be commutative in Lie-Triple-algebras
and in all other examples Jordan investigated, such as Elementary-algebras and Osborn-algebras (see
below).
Using the same method Petersson used to obtain Lie-Triple-algebras from Jordan-algebras, by looking
at certain identities to define new algebras, Jordan defined possible candidates for generalized Lie-Triplealgebras from identities found in Lie-Triple-algebras (Jordan 1968 a).
Jordan found the following relation valid in all Lie-Triple-algebras,
L (u, v, w) (x) + L (v, w, u) (x) + L (w, u, v) (x) = 0

(4.7)

L (u, v, w) (x) = [x, [u, x, v] , w] + [u, [x, x, v] , w] − [u, x, [v, x, w]]

(4.8)

− [[u, v, x] , z, y] + [[u, y, x] , z, v] + [u, [v, z, y] , x] + [y, [u, z, x] , v] = 0

(4.9)

With,

Jordan first proposed this relation as an identity for a new class of (formally-real) non-powerassociative algebras (Jordan 1968 a) generalizing quantum mechanics. Jordan found another relation
valid in all Lie-Triple-algebras (Jordan 1968 b),

and showed that this relation is more fundamental, the other relations (4.7 and 4.8) are a consequence
of this relation.
This relation can (as well as relations 4.7 and 4.8) be satisfied by certain formally-real, non-powerassociative algebras.

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements

37

He then played with the idea to use this relation to define a generalization of Lie-Triple-algebras,
denoted as “Elementary-algebras” (Jordan 1968 a & 1969 b).
Jordan succeeded in constructing two non-trivial examples of “Elementary-algebras” , these examples
are not power-associative, yet they are formally-real.
These examples were given in (Jordan 1968 a & b and Jordan, Matsushita, Rühaak 1969).
One defines an algebra with four basic elements E, F, A, S , where E is the main unit and the following
multiplication table,
A2 = F 2 = F,
F A = A,

S 2 = 2 (E + A)
1
F S = AS = S
2

(4.10)

The algebra U4 does fulfill the relations 4.7 to 4.9 and hence is an “Elementary-algebra” (Jordan
1968 a & b).
The algebra U4 is formally-real and not (fourth-order) power-associative as e.g. S 2 · S 2 6= S 4 . The
algebra U4 is a subalgebra of the formally-real algebra U5 .
U5 possesses five basic elements E, F, A, B, C , where E is the main unit and with multiplication
table,
B 2 = C 2 = E, A2 = F 2 = F
1
1
F B = B, F C = C, F A = A
2
2
1
1
AB = C, AC = B, BC = A
2
2

(4.11)

The element S in U4 can be generated from the elements B and C in U5 by S = B + C .
The algebra U4 contains a subalgebra U3 with 3 basic elements E1 , E2 , S and the following multiplication table,
E1 = E − F,

E2 =

1
(F + A) ,
2

S

(4.12)

Here E1 and E2 are two orthogonal idempotents.
The algebra U3 is also an elementary algebra the second example found by Jordan, (Jordan 1968 a).
The algebra U5 does not fulfil the relations 4.7 and 4.9.
The subalgebras of U5 with the basic elements E, F, B and E, F, C are (formally-real) Jordan algebras
and the formally-real subalgebra with basic elements E, F, A is associative and reducible, as a direct sum
of three algebras of degree one (Jordan 1968 a).
Jordan could show that the algebra U5 possesses two idempotents (Jordan 1968 a), which give rise
to a projective line (Niestegge, personal communication).
The algebra U5 and the algebra U4 are subalgebras (Jordan 1968 a) of the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions, which was investigated by Rühaak (Rühaak 1968). One constructs matrices with elements from the alternative ring of Cayley-Graves numbers (octonions) aϕσ with
aϕσ = aσϕ . For two matrices A = (aϕσ ) andB = (bµν ) , one forms the two products AB, BA using the
ordinary (non-commutative) matrix multiplication. One then defines the, commutative Jordan product
2.17 ( A ◦ B = 12 (AB + BA) ) as the multiplication law for the algebra of Hermitian octonionic matrices
(Jordan 1968 a).
Jordan (Jordan 1968 a) suspected that appropriate subalgebras of Hermitian matrix algebras over
the octonions may provide additional examples of generalized Lie-Triple- or Elementary-algebras but left
this as an open question.
Most of Jordan’s papers from the year 1968, especially (Jordan, Matsushita, Rühaak 1969) is devoted
to the study of a set of possible axioms for non-associative algebras found by J.M. Osborn which are
reproduced here (Jordan, Matsushita, Rühaak 1969).
There are Osborn axioms of degree 5, one axiom of this kind is,

38

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements
δ1 F1 + δ2 F2 = 0,

ε1 G1 + ε2 G2 = 0

F1 = [y, [x, x, z] , x] − [z, [x, x, y] , x]

F2 = [[y, x, z] , x, x] + [[x, x, y] , x, z] − [[x, x, z] , x, y]

G1 = [x, x, [y, y, z]] + [y, y, [x, x, z]] + [y, x, [z, y, x]] + [x, y, [z, x, y]] + [z, x, [x, y, y]] + [z, y, [y, x, x]]
G2 = [x, [x, z, y] , y] + [z, [x, y, y] , x] + [z, [y, x, x] , y]
(4.13)

ε1
ε2

These axioms are fulfilled (because of the relation 4.9) in every Lie-Triple-algebra for
= − 12 .
Another Osborn axiom of degree 5 is,
γ1 K1 + γ2 K2 + γ3 K3 = 0

δ1
δ2 =2

and

(4.14)

with K1 = [x, [x, x, y] , y] ; and K2 = − [[x, x, y] , x, y] − [[y, y, x] , x, x] .
K3 cannot be expressed by using an associator (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1968).
For γ1 = γ3 = 0 this axiom is satisfied in all Lie-Triple-algebras because of 4.9, if one sets v = z = x
and u = y (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969).
There is an additional Osborn Axiom IV,
β1 H1 + β2 H2 + β3 H3 = 0


H1 = x4 y − 4x x3 y + 6x x x2 y − 3L (x)4 y





H2 = − x2 x2 y + 5x x3 y − 9x x x2 y + 4L (x)4 y + x x2 (xy) + x2 x2 y − x3 (xy)


H3 = x x x2 y + x2 (x (xy)) − x2 x2 y − L (x)4 y

(4.15)

For β1 = β2 = β3 the axiom is fulfilled in any Lie-Triple-algebra (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak
1969) due to the defining identity 4.5 of Lie-Triple-algebras (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969).
In power-associative Lie-Triple-algebras or Jordan-algebras and general Lie-Triple-algebras the following relations hold,
H1 + H3 = 0 and H2 = 0

(4.16)

For some non-power-associative algebras relations 4.16 may be replaced by,
H = H1 + H2 + H3 = 0
(4.17)





 


3
2
2
3
Which is equal to x, x, x y + x, y, x = 2x x, y, x + x, xy, x with x, y, x = 3x x, y, x2 .
There are also Osborn axioms of degree 4,


2









2 x, x, y 2 + 2 y, y, x2 − 2 [x, y, xy] − 2 [y, x, xy] = 3x2 y 2 − 3 (xy)2

which can be generalized to an axiom of degree 6. Replace in 4.18 y by x
2x x x2 x2



+ x2

3

2


+ x3 x3 − 2x x2 x3 − 2x2 x4 = 0

(4.18)

then one gets,
(4.19)

Jordan proposed (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969, Jordan 1969 b & Jordan 1971) to denote
commutative, non-associative algebras satisfying relation 4.18 Osborn-algebras.
The most general axiom of degree 6 according to Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak (Jordan, Matsuhita
& Rühaak 1969) is,
ζ1 M1 + ζ2 M2 + ζ3 M3 = 0
M1 = x6 − 3x2 x4 + 2x3 x3
3

M2 = 3 x2 − 3x x x2 x2 + 4x6 − 6x2 x4 + 2x3 x3

3
M3 = 9 x2 − 6x x2 x3 + 8x6 − 18x2 x4 + 7x3 x3

(4.20)

4 The late 1960ies: Giving up power-associativity and a new idea about measurements

39

Every Mµ has the property DMµ = 0 (where D is the differential operator).
Algebras whose defining axiom is 4.20 include Lie-Triple- and Osborn-algebras. For ζ1 = 0 the
relation is fulfilled in all Lie-Triple-algebras,
as M2 = M3 = 0 can be derived from two basic relations

3
in Lie-Triple-algebras: 3x x2 xν = x3 xν + 2xν+3 and 9 x2 = −4x6 + 18x2 x4 − 5x3 x3 (which is a
consequence of the former relation) (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969).


The first relation is a direct consequence of the defining relation for Lie-Triple algebras, x, y 2 , z =
2y [x, y, z] . Furthermore, for ζ1 = 0 and ζζ32 = −2 relation 4.20 is valid in all Osborn-algebras.
2

If one sets y = x in for the algebra U (x) , (the elementary length algebra defined in chapter 6 below)
the above relation is a Quasi-Axiom for the generating element x , as M1 = 0 is equal to the relation
x6 − 3x2 x4 + 2x3 x3 = 0 , which is valid in U (x) , and the relations in Lie-Triple-algebras leading to
M2 = M3 = 0 also apply in U (x) , as a quasi-axiom for the generating element x (Jordan, Matsushita
& Rühaak 1969).

5
Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the
octonions

Summary. We summarize the results of Horst Rühaak’s PhD thesis on matrix algebras over the octonions, especially Hermitian matrix algebras over the octonions. The main part of Rühaak’s thesis is
devoted to the study of the algebra of 4x4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions. This algebra is not
power-associative and hence not a Jordan algebra, but contains an interesting Jordan sub-algebra which
can be used to define idempotent elements of this algebra. The algebra of 4x4 Hermitian matrices over
the octonions is a weakly-associative algebra in the sense of the mathematician Höhnke i.e. it possesses
a symmetric and associative bilinear form. The definition of derivations for general octonionic matrix
algebras and further results on octonionic matrix algebras are discussed.
In 1968, Horst Rühaak, a PhD-student in Hamburg of Hel Braun and collaborating with Pascual
Jordan handed in his PhD-thesis “Matrix-Algebren über einer nicht-ausgearteten Cayley-Algebra” ,
“Matrix algebras over a non-degenerate Cayley-Algebra” .
In this thesis, Rühaak investigated n × n matrix algebras over the octonions going beyond the
famous case of the exceptional Jordan-algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions. Whereas
this algebra, and the special Jordan-algebra of 2 × 2 Hermitian matrices over the octonions (a special
Jordan algebra) are also investigated in his thesis, Rühaak’s work is concentrated on the case = 4 , which
is not a Jordan-algebra, as it is not power-associative (see Jordan, Von Neumann, Wigner 1934).
Rühaak based much of his work on the notion of weakly-associative algebras, as introduced by the
East-German Mathematician H. J. Höhnke in two papers in 1962 (Höhnke 1962 a & b).
A weakly-associative algebra in the sense of Höhnke is in general, neither commutative nor powerassociative, but it possesses an associative symmetric bilinear form and contains a unit.
Additionally, the subspace, of a given weakly-associative algebra, generated by all associators; consists
of elements which are orthogonal to the unit element 1 with respect to the associative and symmetric
bilinear form (Rühaak 1968 p. 5).
If additionally, the subspace generated by all commutators is orthogonal to 1 , and if the associative
bilinear form is symmetric, the algebra is called weakly-commutative-associative (Rühaak 1968 p. 6).
Höhnke only considered finite-dimensional algebras and his more detailed investigations of weaklyassociative algebras were done with algebras, in which multiplication was defined to be the commutative
Jordan product: A◦B = 12 (A · B + B · A) . Here · denotes the ordinary non-commutative matrix product.
To the best knowledge of the authors, Höhnke did never consider the case of a weakly-associative
algebra with non-commutative multiplication and apart from his two 1962 papers and a very brief book
contribution did not investigate his weakly-associative algebras any further.
Höhnke introduced the notion of trace-compatible algebra (not to be confused with the notion of
trace-admissible algebras introduced by Adrian Albert) as a special class of weakly-associative algebras.
The examples Höhnke constructed, have a canonically associated subalgebra isomorphic to the set K ⊥
, the set of elements orthogonal to 1 , where K is the field over which the weakly-associative algebra is
defined.

42

5 Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions

Höhnke investigated the structure of his weakly-associative algebras and their subalgebras by making some special assumptions about these algebras (related to the choice of quadratic forms on these
algebras), this leads to a special Jordan sub-algebra for Höhnke’s examples, which is strictly nilpotent,
the third power of each element of this Jordan algebra vanishes.
Rühaak showed in his PhD-thesis that the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions is
a weakly-associative algebra in the sense of Höhnke, i.e. it possesses a symmetric and associative bilinear
form (Rühaak 1968 p. 25 & p.49). The definition of weakly-associative algebras in Rühaak’s PhD-thesis
and some of the results of his PhD-thesis will be presented below.
Let A be a finite-dimensional algebra over the field K with identity
L 1 . The algebra possesses a
basis b1 = 1, b2 , . . . , bn . The algebra A can be decomposed into A = K
L (Rühaak 1968 p.5). With
L = Kb2 + · · · + Kbn . Rühaak (Rühaak 1968 p.5) defines according to Höhnke,
xy = g (x, y) + x · y

(5.1)

g (ξ + x, η + y) = ξη + g (x, y)

(5.2)

With g (x, y) ∈ K and x, y ∈ L .
With (·) as multiplication L becomes an algebra over K , g is a bilinear form of L with values in
K . g is in general neither associative nor symmetric (Höhnke 1962 a & b & Rühaak 1968 p. 5). If one
continues the bilinear form g overall on A with,

ξ, η ∈ K and x, y ∈ L .
g (1, 1) becomes 1 and L can be characterized as the set of elements, which are orthogonal to 1 with
respect to the bilinear form g .
A simple calculation gives,
((ξ + x) (η + y)) (ζ + z) − (ξ + x) ((η + y) (ζ + z)) = [x, y, z]

(5.3)

a) [x, y, z] ∈ K for all x, y, z ∈ A

(5.4)

with x, y, z ∈ L and ξ, η, ζ ∈ K and [x, y, z] = (xy) z − x (yz) is the associator of the three elements
x, y, z ∈ A (Rühaak 1968 p.5).
Rühaak considers two possibilities for the associator [x, y, z] (Rühaak 1968 p.5),

b) [x, y, z] ∈ L for all x, y, z ∈ A

Conditions a and b are fulfilled in associative algebras, condition b is fulfilled in Höhnke’s weaklyassociative algebras. Condition b implies g (xy, z) = g (x, yz) for all x, y, z ∈ A .
Powers of an element x of a commutative (Rühaak 1968 p. 6) algebra A are defined as,
x0 = 1,

xr = xr−1 ◦ x = x ◦ xr−1

(5.5)

(Rühaak 1968 p. 6). Every weakly-commutative, weakly-associative algebra can be turned into a
commutative weakly-associative algebra by equipping it with the Jordan product 2.17 (Rühaak 1968
p.6).
Now one forms with n variables ξ1 , ξ2 . . . , ξn a generic element x = ξ1 + ξ2 b2 + . . . + ξn bn with
1, b2 , . . . , bn basis of A fulfilling the following equation,
g0 (x) xr − g1 (x) xr−1 + . . . + (−1)r gr (x) = 0,

(g0 (x) 6= 0)

(5.6)

here gi (x) is a form from K [ξ1 , . . . , ξn ] of degree m + 1 with m ≥ 0 an arbitrary integer (Höhnke
1962 a) and i ≥ 0 (Rühaak 1968 p. 7).
If a generic element of A does not satisfy any equation of lower degree, r is called the degree of A .
If the characteristic of K is not a divisor of r , one denotes an algebra satisfying this and relation 5.6
a trace-compatible algebra (Höhnke 1962 a & b). Theses algebras are weakly-associative (Höhnke 1962
a & b). One applies the following constraints for a weakly-associative, trace-compatible algebra (Höhnke
1962 a, Rühaak 1968 p. 7);

5 Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions

43

(a) m = 0 . Then g0 (x) ∈ K and because of g0 (x) 6= 0 , one can assume g0 (x) = 1. g1 (x) := 2λ (x)
is a linear form of A , the trace of x .
(b) 2 αr λ (xy) = (x, y) , α 6= 0 and α ∈ K .
(·, ·) is a symmetric and associative bilinear form on A , so λisa symmetric and
linear

 associative
r
r
(Rühaak 1968
and g1 (1) =
form on A and one can deduce from relation 5.6 that gj (1) =
1
j
2α
α
p.7). This combined with relation b gives (1, 1) = r · λ (1) = r · g1 (1) = α 6= 0 and 2λ (1) = r (Rühaak
1968 p. 7).
Rühaak provides some examples of trace-compatible, weakly-associative algebras of degree 2 and 3
(Rühaak 1968 pp. 8-10 & pp. 13-15).
Every element x of a trace-compatible algebra A of degree 2 fulfils the following equation: g0 (x) x2 −
g1 (x) x + g2 (x) = 0 .
If the algebra A is trace-compatible, then g0 (x) = 1 and g1 (x) = 2λ (x) is a linear form on this
algebra, the trace of the element x and the mapping (x, y) → 2λ (xy) is an associative and symmetric
bilinear form with values in K (Rühaak 1968 p. 8). The special Jordan-algebra of 2 × 2 Hermitian
matrices over the octonions is a trace-compatible algebra of degree 2 (Rühaak 1968 p. 37).
Furthermore, let µ (x) = 21 (x, x) denote a quadratic form on a trace-compatible algebra A (Rühaak
1968 p.8). If one has a trace-compatible algebra of degree 2, which is not degenerate with respect to the
linear form λ and the quadratic form of which satisfies µ (xy) = µ (x) µ (y) , then A is an alternative
algebra (Rühaak 1968 p. 10). For the definition of an alternative algebra see chapter 2, the algebra of
octonions is an alternative algebra.
A generic element x of an algebra A satisfies x3 − 2λ (x) x2 + g2 (x) x − g3 (x) = 0 , if A is a tracecompatible algebra of degree 3 over a commutative field K whose characteristic is not 2 or 3 (Rühaak
1968 p. 8). λ is a symmetric and associative linear form and 2λ (1) = 3 .
L
The algebra A can be decomposed with respect to the linear form λ by A = K
L with L =
2
{x ∈ A; 2λ (x) = 0} . One sets −g2 (x) = λ x := ν (x) (Rühaak 1968 p. 14).
For one x ∈ L , one has x3 − ν (x) x − g3 (x) = 0 , one multiplies this expression with x and thereby
calculates the trace:


2λ x4 − 2ν (x) λ x2 = 0 (Rühaak 1968 p. 14). Because of −g2 (x) = λ x2 := ν (x) one has,

λ x4 = ν (x)2

(5.7)



As λ is commutative and associative, one can conclude λ x4 = λ x2 x2 , thereby λ x2 x2 =



2
λ x2 x2 = λ x2 or equivalently ν x2 = ν (x)2 for all x ∈ L (Rühaak 1968 p. 15).
The exceptional Jordan algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions is a trace-compatible,
weakly-associative algebra of degree 3 (Rühaak 1968 p. 47).
(·)
Rühaak then focused on the general algebras l8,n of n × n matrices over the octonions. Rühaak
(·)
defines an involutive permutation-automorphism of the algebra l8,n as an automorphism Φ , that apart
(·)

from the transition aij → a∗ij only permutes elements of the matrices A = aij from l8,n . He finds the
(·)
following involutive permutation automorphisms of l8,n ,
Φ1 = aij Eij → aij Ei+ n2 ,j+ n2

Φ2 = aij Eij → a∗ij Ej+ n , i+n
2

Φ3 = aij Eij → a∗ij Eji

Φ4 = aij Eij → aij Eij ,

2

(5.8)

Φ4 = Id

(Rühaak 1968 pp. 22-23). Eij is the matrix with 1 at the position (i, j) and 0 at all other positions.
The automorphisms Φ1 and Φ2 are only defined for an even n number (Rühaak 1968 p. 22). These
automorphisms form a group: G = {Id, Φ1 , Φ2 , Φ3 } with subgroup U = {Id, Φ3 } (Rühaak 1968 p. 23).
(·)
Φ3 has only the eigenvalues 1 and −1 , so for an odd n number the algebra l8,n can only be decomposed
(·)

into the subalgebra of elements invariant under Φ3 . So l8,n can be decomposed into the subspace of

44

5 Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions

elements which are invariant under the action of Φ3 , denoted by ln+ = ln+ (L8 ) and the subspace of
elements, which are mapped to their negatives, denoted by ln− = ln− (L8 ) (Rühakk 1968 p. 23). Here L8
stands for the algebra of octonions. This is of course also possible for an even n number, but in this case,
this is not the only possibility, as the larger group G exists in this case (Rühaak 1968 p. 22).
(·)
The elements of n × n matrix algebras over the octonions: l8,n , which are invariant under the action
of the group U form the algebras of n × n Hermitian matrices over the octonions: ln+ (L8 ) (Rühaak 1968
pp. 24-25).
(·)
Elements of the algebra l8,4 , the algebra of 4 × 4 matrices over the octonions which are invariant
under the action of the group U are matrices of the form (Rühaak 1968 pp. 33-34 & p. 49),


R11 O12 O13 O14
∗
O12
O23 O24 
 ∗ R22

(5.9)
∗
O13 O23
R33 O34 
∗
∗
∗
O14 O24 O34 R44

∗
Rij denotes a real number, Oij denotes an octonion and Oij
denotes the conjugated element of Oij .
+
+
They form the algebra l8,4
of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions. l8,4
is a 52-dimensional central
simple, weakly-associative algebra (Rühaak 1968 p. 49).
+
of n × n Hermitian matrices over the octonions are weaklyRühaak could show that the algebras l8,n
associative algebras in the sense of Höhnke for finite n. They all possess associative, symmetric, and
non-degenerate bilinear forms (Rühaak 1968 pp. 24-25) and are central-simple algebras.
For n ≥ 4, the algebras of Hermitian matrices over the octonions are not power-associative (Rühaak
1968 p. 33 & Jordan, Von Neumann & Wigner 1934).
The multiplication rule in these algebras was defined by Rühaak as the commutative Jordan product
(Rühaak 1968 p. 17). Rühaak requires the characteristic of the commutative field K to be not 2 or 3 .
The involutive permutation automorphism groups U and G are equal for an odd n -number, in the
case of n = 3 the invariant elements form the exceptional Jordan-algebra (Rühaak 1968 p. 32 & p. 42).
(·)
Elements of l8,4 which are invariant under the action of the group G are matrices of the form,


′
R1 O12 R1 O14
′ 
O∗ R2 ∗
O14 R2 
 12
(5.10)

 ′
 R1 O14 R1 O12 
′
∗
∗
O14 R2 O12 R2
++
+
++
(Rühhak 1968 p. 33). The algebra l8,4
a subalgebra of the algebra l8,4
They form the algebra l8,4
is power-associative, as its matrices contain only two octonions and their conjugates. And a subalgebra
++
generated by two octonions is associative (see chapter 2). l8,4
is a Jordan-algebra (Rühaak 1968 p. 34),
as apart from being power-associative, it possesses a commutative multiplication and an associative and
++
is special in this regard, already for n = 6 ,
non-degenerate bilinear form. It is important to note that l8,4
++
the algebra l8,6 is no longer power-associative and hence not a Jordan-algebra (Rühaak 1968 pp. 34-35).
++
are matrices of the form (Rühaak 1968 p. 35),
Elements of the algebra l8,6



R1
∗
O12
 ∗
O13

 ′
 R1
 ∗
O15
∗
O16

′

O12 O13 R1
∗
R2 O23 O15
∗
O23 R3 O16
O15 O16 R1
′
∗
R2 O26 O12
′
∗
O
O26 R3 13

O15
′
R2
O26
O12
R2
O23


O16
O26 

′ 
R3 

O13 

O23 
R3

++
can also be written as
An element X of the algebra l8,6


′
′
′
X = R1 , R2 , R3 , R1 , R2 , R3 , O12 , O13 , O15 , O16 , O23 , O26

++
with A = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, i3 , i6 , i4 , 0, 0, i7 ) , (Rühaak 1968 p.
Rühaak considered an element A ∈ l8,4
35). The i1 , . . . .., i7 are octonion units (Ruhaak 1968 p. 34).

5 Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions

45

Using the Jordan product ◦ one calculates for the element d12 of the matrix:
2
∗
D = (dij ) = A2 ◦ A
 , that d12 ∗= 2i3 . Moreover, one calculates for the element d12 of the matrix:
∗
∗
2
D = dij = A ◦ A ◦ A , thatd12 = i3 (For both results see Rühaak 1968 p. 35).
++
is not power-associative
Therefore, A2 ◦ A2 6= A2 ◦ A ◦ A which demonstrates that the algebra l8,6
and hence not a Jordan-algebra (Rühaak 1968 pp. 34-35). Rühaak therefore devoted the rest of his PhD
++
+
(Rühaak 1968 pp. 35-72).
using also the Jordan-algebra l8,4
thesis to the study of the algebra l8,4
(·)
+
The algebra l8,4 can be decomposed like l8,4 into two subalgebras (Rühaak 1968 p. 50): The 20+−
++
of elements which are mapped to their negatives.
and an algebra l8,4
dimensional Jordan-algebra l8,4
(·)
Once again K is supposed to be commutative and not being of characteristic 2 or 3 . l8,4 itself consists
+
−
+−
of l8,4 and l8,4 (Rühaak 1968 pp. 23- 24). Elements of the algebra l8,4 are of the form (Rühaak 1968 p.
50),


′
b1 O14
β1 O12
′

 O12 † β2
−O14 † b2 

(5.11)

 ′
′
 −b1 −O14 −β1 −O12 
′
O14 † −b2 −O12 † −β2
L ⊥
′
′
K , which follows from the construction
With β1 , β2 ∈ K and b1 , b2 ∈ K ⊥ and O12 , O14 ∈ L8 = K
of the alternative algebra of octonions given by Rühaak (Rühaak 1968 pp. 11-12), making use of the fact
that L
one can define non-degenerate bilinear forms in alternative rings (Rühaak 1968 p. 12). The direct
+−
++
is again the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions.
and l8,4
sum
of the algebras l8,4
The algebra of n × n matrices over the octonions can be decomposed into the algebra of n × n
Hermitian matrices over the octonions and an algebra consisting of elements mapped to their negatives
(Rühaak 1968 p. 24),
M −
+
l8,n = l8,n
(5.12)
l8,n
+
+
(Rühaak 1968 p. 23), can be
, and in general the algebras l8,n
As shown above, the algebra l8,4
+−
++
decomposed into the algebra l8,n and the algebra l8,n consisting of elements mapped to their negatives,
M +−
+
++
l8,n
= l8,n
l8,n
(5.13)

++
+−
. If one multiplies an element from
, one gets an element of l8,4
If one multiplies two elements of l8,4
++
+−
with an element from l8,4 one gets an element of l8,4 (Rühaak 1968 p. 50) This is also valid for
general n . Henceforth, we will deal only with the case n = 4 .
+
can be decomposed with respect to a complete system of orthogThe weakly-associative algebra l8,4
++
, if all octonions in the
onal idempotents according to Peirce, with respect to its Jordan-sub-algebra l8,4
idempotents Ei lie in the sub-algebra generated by one octonion K[d] of l8 . (Rühaak 1968 p. 70). One
+
one of us (Rühaak) described, does not satisfy any
should note that the weakly-associative algebra l8,4
of the axioms J.M. Osborn introduced (Rühaak communicated this to Jordan in the late 1960ies).
Bremner and Hentzel later (Bremner & Hentzel 2004) investigated identities for matrix algebras over
the octonions and looked at the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions with the Jordan
product as multiplication. They could show that this algebra does not possess any identities in degree
equal to/or smaller than six, that do not follow from the commutative law.
Apart from this, Bremner and Hentzel notice some numerical similarities between the algebra of
4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions and the exceptional Lie group F4 and view this algebra as
a commutative version of F4 .
Furthermore, the authors propose to look for identities defined by the involution to find new identities
for general matrix algebras over the octonions.
The algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions has attracted some recent attention in
the context of M-Theory, (see Lukierski & Toppan 2003 and Anastasiou et al. 2014).
+−
l8,4

46

5 Horst Rühaak’s PhD-thesis: Matrix algebras over the octonions

One can define derivations for non-associative matrix algebras, such as matrix algebras over the
octonions (Benkart & Osborn 1981). Benkart and Osborn start with a non-associative algebra A, (like
the alternative algebra of octonions) with N the nucleus of A defined by
N = {a ∈ A| (a, b, c) = (b, a, c) = (b, c, a) = 0, ∀b, c ∈ A}

(5.14)

ada (b) = [a, b] = ab − ba

(5.15)

Here (a, b, c) is the associator.
For a ∈ N the mapping ada : A → A defined by,

is a derivation of the algebra A.
One can also identify the nucleus of the matrix algebra Mn (A) of matrices with entries in A with
Mn (N ) , consisting of matrices with entries in the nucleus N of A . For x ∈ Mn (N ) and y ∈ Mn (A)
the mapping adx (y) = [x, y] = xy − yx defines a derivation of the algebra Mn (A) .
There is another way to define derivations for the algebra Mn (A) , by applying the derivations of
the algebra A to each entry of the matrices in the algebra Mn (A) . These derivations form a sub-algebra
Der (A)# of the algebra Der (Mn (A)).
Octonionic matrix algebras were also investigated by Tian (Tian 2000). Tian describes how these
matrices can be represented by real matrices by making use of the right- and left actions in a nonassociative algebra.
The same procedure has already been used for the octonion algebra, to construct two matrix representations for the octonions, one for the right and one for the left action (Eilenberg 1948). These leftand right multiplication operators in an octonion algebra can be represented by 8 × 8 real matrices
respectively.
These matrices do not commute, and the non-commutativity of left- and right multiplication operators is a measure of the non-associativity of the octonion algebra (Lõhmus et al. 1998, Tian 2000).
Another way to represent the algebra of octonions is (see chapter 2) by using Zorn’s vector-matrices
(Zorn 1933).
One should also remark that one can give the structure of a H∗ -algebra to the algebra of real and
complex octonions (Cabrera & Rodrı́guez 2018).
A H∗ -algebra is a not necessarily associative algebra, that is compatible with a Hilbert space structure
(Cabrera & Rodrı́guez 2014). H∗ -algebras do not need to be power-associative, the full matrix algebra
of 2x2 matrices overN
the complex octonions is a structurable H∗ -algebra, the same also holds for the
octooctonions i.e. O
O (Cabrera et al. 1992), and one can construct H∗ -algebras from general n × n
matrix algebras over the octonions (Miguel Cabrera and Ángel Rodrı́guez, personal communication).

6
The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

Summary. In 1968 Jordan, the Japanese mathematician Matsushita and Horst Rühaak constructed a
commutative, non-power-associative algebra of functions of a spatial coordinate. Such an algebra limits the measurement of a single observable and gives a non-vanishing minimum size to wave packets.
Jordan and co-workers could construct an example of an orthogonal-invariant two-dimensional nonpower-associative algebra of coordinate functions. Attempts to construct three and four-dimensional
orthogonal or Lorentz-invariant algebras with the same properties remained incomplete. No algebraic
identities could be found, that were satisfied by these algebras. In his last work on the foundations of
quantum mechanics Jordan suggested to use non-commutative, non-power-associative algebras giving
rise to Malcev-algebras for the commutator product. Additionally, so-called Osborn-algebras were studied by the authors. Finally, we review works on Malcev algebras, non-power-associative algebras and
quasifields and possible applications in physics by other investigators. In Weinberg’s attempt to formulate a non-linear extension of quantum mechanics a non-commutative and non-power-associative product
for observables appears, this will be briefly discussed.
Apart from Lie-Triple-algebras, a certain type of algebras closely related to Lie-Triple-algebras, the
Osborn-algebras mentioned at the end of chapter 4, became an intense focus of research for Jordan and his
co-workers in the late 1960ies. Once again, he and his co-workers considered commutative, distributive,
and non-power-associative algebras. Let us recall relation 4.18, which can also be written as,
2u [v, v, u] + 2v [u, u, v] = u2 v 2 − (uv)2

(6.1)

x [v, v, y] + y [v, v, x] + v [x, y, v] + v [y, x, v] = v 2 (xy) − (vx) (vy)

(6.2)

Axiom 6.1 can be linearized (see also relation 4.19, (Jordan 1971)),

and if one sets x = v 2 one obtains,








y v, v, v 2 + v 2 [v, v, y] + v y, v 2 , v + v v 2 , y, v = v 2 v 2 y − v 3 (vy)
µ

ν

ν

µ

(6.3)

Relation 6.3 is also satisfied in Jordan-algebras as the relation v (v y) = v (v y) applies in Jordanalgebras (Jordan 1971).
This might allow to define (generalized) Osborn-algebras as generalizations of Jordan-algebras, Osborn algebras would serve then as a mathematical tool for the description of a fundamental length theory,
whereas Jordan-algebras would describe usual quantum mechanics (Jordan 1971).
In a series of papers from 1967 to 1969 (starting with Jordan & Matsushita 1967), Jordan, Matsushita
and Rühaak introduced a special Lie-triple algebra U (x) , elements of which are generated by one variable
x.
This algebra is also an Osborn-algebra (Jordan & Rühaak 1969 a & b, Osborn 1969)) and was shown
to be semi-formally-real for homogeneous elements and real coefficients (Jordan & Rühaak 1969 a & b,
these works were done in collaboration with the mathematician Inge Neumann). U (x) does only possess

48

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

the idempotents, c = 0 and c = e (Jordan & Rühaak 1969 a & b). The algebra U (x) possesses an ideal
I consisting of linear forms of elements of the form xµ xν − xµ+ν (Jordan 1969 b).
This ideal has the property I 2 = 0 , the product of two elements of this ideal vanishes (Jordan &
Rühaak 1969 a & b, Jordan 1969 b). The elements of I are the zero divisors of the Lie-Triple-algebra
is the commutative-associative algebra of powers xν of an element x
U (x) . The quotient algebra U (x)
I
(Jordan & Rühaak 1969 b). Furthermore, Jordan and his co-workers introduced a special “fundamental
length” -algebra Û (x) , which is neither a Lie-Triple- nor an Osborn-algebra but is related to both
algebras.
If [a, b, c] = (ab) c − a (bc) denotes the associator Jordan, Rühaak and Matsushita now give the
following quasi-axiom for a “fundamental length-algebra” Û (x) generated by one element x,


[x, xµ , xν ] = xµ−1 [x, x, xν ] + x x, xµ−1 , xν

(6.4)

with the convention x0 := e, x now is the coordinate of an elementary particle normed by the fundamental
length, hence x is dimensionless. The basis of the algebra are powers of x .
This algebra is like a Lie-Triple-algebra, but it is neither a Lie-Triple-algebra nor an “Elementaryalgebra” , only partial relations of the relation defining “Elementary-algebras” are imposed by 6.4.
Moreover, the axiom 6.4 is required to hold only for the generating element x of the algebra Û (x)
but not for all elements of this algebra.
Therefore, it was termed a Quasi-Axiom by Jordan and his co-workers (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak
1969).
Furthermore, the relations,


And


xµ , x2 , xν = 2x [xµ , x, xν ]


(6.5)


x, x, x2 = 2e

(6.6)

where e denotes the main unit of the algebra (Jordan 1969 a).
From 6.4,
[x, xu, v] = u [x, x, v] + x [x, u, v]

(6.7)

follows. This relation is satisfied by all elements u and v of the algebra Û (x) , but x must be the
generating element of Û (x) (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969). This algebra is not power-associative,
for example,
x2 x2 = x4 + 2e

(6.8)

From the relations 6.5 and 6.7, one can derive a product formula for powers of the element x, if one
uses a formula found in Lie-Triple-algebras (Jordan & Matsushita 1967) for the relation between powers,
associators and the multiplication operator L (x) ,
µ−1 ν−1

xµ xν − xµ+ν =

XX

α=1 β=1





αβLα−1 (x) L xµ−α−1 Lβ−1 (x) L xν−1−β x, x, x2

(6.9)

As a consequence of taking ν = 2 we obtain
µ−1

xµ x2 − xµ+2 =

X

α=1

βLα−1 (x) L xµ−1−α




x, x, x2 ;

Using 6.9, the product rule for fundamental length-algebra is given by,
xµ xν =

∞
X
ρ=0

µ!ν!xµ+ν−4ρ
(2ρ)! (µ − 2ρ)! (ν − 2ρ)!

(6.10)

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

49

Or alternatively,
xµ xν =

∞
X

(2ρ)!

ρ=0



µ
2ρ


ν
xµ+ν−4ρ
2ρ



(6.11)

The sum 6.10 or 6.11 is finite for every pair of exponents µ and ν as all components with 2ρ > µ
and 2ρ > ν vanish (Jordan 1969 a p. 294).
One can also use the multiplication operator of an element x , L (x) to define the multiplication in
Jordan’s “fundamental length” -algebra,
L (xµ ) =


∞ 
X
µ
ρ=0

2ρ

L (x)µ−2ρ D2ρ

(6.12)

(Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969 & Jordan 1969 a). This leads to a commutation relation between
the (left) multiplication operator L of an element x and the differential operator D ,
[D, L (x)] = 1

(6.13)

(Jordan 1969 a). This is the Heisenberg uncertainty relation from quantum mechanics, expressed by
using operators.
One should expect, however, that the Heisenberg uncertainty relation is modified, if one postulates
a fundamental length in nature, but it is also possible, that Jordan wanted to show by this, that one can
derive ordinary quantum mechanics from a more fundamental theory as a limiting case.
Functions of x can be defined by powers series (though Jordan did not consider questions of convergence) (Jordan 1969 a), one implication of the multiplication formula 6.10 is,
eiαx eiβx = ei(α+β)x cosh (αβ)

(6.14)

This formula limits the measurement of a spatial coordinate. If waves with a wave length smaller
than the “fundamental length” significantly contribute to a wave packet, the width of this wave packet,
as measured by the squared wave amplitude, increases instead of becoming smaller (for wave packets
formed from waves with wave lengths larger that the fundamental length, wave packets show the known
classical behavior) (Jordan 1969 a and Jordan 1971). This would set a fundamental limit for localizing
an object. Furthermore, one can view the algebra Û (x) as the algebra of functions of a spatial coordinate
′
′
x (normed by the fundamental length i.e. x =
 x /l , where x is the usual spatial coordinate and l is the
2
fundamental length). The sub-algebra Û x of Û (x) is weakly-associative in the sense of Hoehnke, i.e.

one can define an associative bilinear form on Û x2 (Jordan & Rühaak 1969 a). In Jordan, Matsushita
b
b (x) generated by two variables x and y with
& Rühaak 1969, the authors introduced another algebra U
0
0
x = y = e and having Û (x) as a sub-algebra. In the case of using two basic elements x and y , to
describe a two-dimensional system, i.e. a particle confined to move within a plane, Jordan, Matsushita
and Rühaak used complex variables for convenience of showing how to implement orthogonal-invariance,
b
b (x) are,
elements of U
w = w′ eiϕ

2w = x + iy, 2w′ = x′ + iy ′
1
1
w = (x + iy) , w̄ = (x − iy)
2
2

(6.15)

The last equation if from (Jordan 1969 a).
b
b (x) were set by Jordan and co-authors to be (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak
The quasi-axioms for U
1969),
[w, w, w̄] = 0 or using real variables [x, x, y] = [y, y, x] = 0

(6.16)

50

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas
and
[w, wu, v] = w [w, u, v] + u [w, w, v]
[w, wu, v] = w [w, u, v] + u [w, w, v]

(6.17)

Additional relations for the associator are,





w, w, w2 = 0 and w, w, w2 = 1

(6.18)

For the real variables x and y Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak define the following associator relations,

The associator is defined by,




x, x, x2 = − x, x, y 2 = [x, y, xy] = 2

 

[x, x, xy] = x, y, x2 = y, x, x2 = 0

[w, wσ , w̄ν ] =

X

ϕ≥1

With C1 =

1
2

Cϕ

σ! ν!wσ+1−2ϕ w̄ν−2ϕ
(σ + 1 − 2ϕ)! (ν − 2ϕ)!

(6.19)

(6.20)

and
ϕ−1

Cϕ (2ϕ − 1) = −

X

Cµ Cϕ−µ

(6.21)

µ=1

b
b (x) ,
For ϕ ≥ 2. There exists a derivation in the algebra U

Dw (uv) = uDw v + vDw u

(6.22)

b
b (x)
here u and v are arbitrary elements of the algebra U


and Dw w = e; Dw w̄ = 0; which applied to the associator gives Dw w̄, w̄, w2 = 0 which leads to
[w̄, w̄, w] = 0 in accordance with the defining quasi-axiom of the algebra.
One can otherwise write the associator by,
 
ν
w̄ν−2
(6.23)
[w, w, w̄ν ] =
2

If no powers of w higher than 1 appear in the associator.
Additionally, besides orthogonal invariance, one requires a shift of the point of origin and a shift of
b
b (x) ,
prefix to be automorphisms of the algebra U
x = x′ + ξe and x = −x′′

(6.24)

[xh , xj , xk xl ] = 2 (δjk δhl + δjl δhk − δjh δkl )

(6.25)

[xj , xk , xl ] = 0

(6.26)

(Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1968). Jordan and his co-authors also reformulated the axioms of
b
b (x) with two generating elements x and y by using tensors.
Û (x) and the algebra U
Relation 6.5 can be changed to,
and,

Here the xk denote the “coordinates” (represented by tensors) of position space (Jordan, Matsushita
& Rühaak 1969 & Jordan 1969 a). The last relation is trivial in the one-dimensional case.
One can generalize relation 6.25 to,

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas
[xh , xj , xk xl ] = A (δjk δhl + δjl δhk ) + B (δjh δkl )

51
(6.27)

With two pre-factors A and B .
A different choice of A and B allows to link the “fundamental length” algebra with the defining
axiom of degree 4 for Osborn-algebras, as will be shown below.
b
b (x) one has (Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969),
In the algebra U



x, x, y 2 − [x, y, xy] = x2 y 2 − (xy)2 − x [y, y, x]

(6.28)

Because of relation 5.16 i.e. [y, y, x] = 0 relation 5.28 reduces to:



x, x, y 2 − [x, y, xy] = x2 y 2 − (xy)2

If one now, instead of A = −B chooses B = A and thereby = 32 , then the relation 6.28 defining
Osborn-algebras is valid as a quasi-axion in the “fundamental length” for the generating element x and
an arbitrary element y , so one can change 6.27 to,
2
(δjk δhl + δjl δhk + δjh δkl )
(6.29)
3
(Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969). The tensor formulation was used to show that it is possible, to
extend the algebra Û (x) to three or four “coordinates” and maintain Orthogonal- and Lorentz-invariance:
This can be seen by noting that the relation,
[xh , xj , xk xl ] =

[xk , xl u, v] = xl [xk , u, v] + u [xk , xl , v]

(6.30)

(Jordan, Matsushita & Rühaak 1969 & Jordan 1969 a) is valid for the generating element x and
arbitrary elements u and v of the algebra Û (x) .
b
b (x) is fully determined by the relations
One should note that it was not known to Jordan, whether U
6.7, 6.8 and 6.9 or their generalizations 6.26, 6.29 and 6.30 (Jordan 1969 a). So, it is not certain
b
b (x) maintain Lorentz-invariance. Also, the fulfilment of the Osborn
whether all elements of the algebra U
b
b (x) or for the algebra Û (x) .
axiom 6.28 cannot be guaranteed for all elements of the algebra U
Already in 1971 (Jordan 1971), Jordan only presented the algebra Û (x) as an algebra, which is”
unfortunately not an Osborn-algebra at all ” (Jordan 1971 p.108) and left it as an open question to turn
this algebra into an Osborn-algebra, he suggested to do this, by replacing 6.10 with,
xµ xν =

∞
X
ρ=0

where h (ρ) is a function of ρ defined by,

h (ρ) µ!ν!xµ+ν−4ρ
(2ρ)! (µ − 2ρ)! (ν − 2ρ)!



1
h (ρ) = 2 −
h (ρ − 1)
ρ

(6.31)

(6.32)

For the fundamental length algebra with multiplication 6.10 to become an Osborn-algebra relation
6.32 must be valid, as a necessary condition, but relation 6.32 is not a sufficient condition for Û (x) to
be an Osborn-algebra. Therefore, Jordan left it as an open question, whether an Osborn-algebra with
properties like his “fundamental length” algebra exists.
Just one year later in 1972 (Jordan 1972), Jordan described Osborn’s work as an example of giving
axioms for commutative and non-associative algebras, but now the algebra Û (x) was presented as “an
independently constructed example with interesting properties” (Jordan 1972 pp. 145-146).
This could indicate that Jordan’s above examples could not be turned into an Osborn-algebra (at
least by Jordan and his co-workers).
b
b (x) was “tailor-made” to be orthogonal-invariant at least for the generating elements,
The algebra U
but served illustrative a purpose only, demonstrating that is possible to define general non-associative
algebras, which might allow to construct models of physical interest.

52

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

More recently, the Japanese researcher Naoki Sasakura considered a Poincaré -invariant nonassociative, commutative multiplication for a non-associative space-time in his works (see e.g. Sasai
& Sasakura 2007, see also de Medeiros & Ramgolaam 2004, both works are based on a modification of
the star product).
Sasai & Sasakura note that their model does not exhibit UV/IR mixing and does not seem to violate
unitarity, unlike some models based on associative but non-commutative space-times (Sasai & Sasakura
2007). The model of Ramgolaam is interesting, as it leads to an infinite-dimensional Jordan algebra in
a limiting case, yet his commutative, non-associative algebras is in general not a Jordan algebra (Ho &
Ramgoolam 2002).
The “fundamental length” -algebra was briefly mentioned in Gerard Emch’s book “Algebraic Methods
in Quantum Mechanics and Statistical Physics” (Emch 1972).
Emch highlighted the importance of non-power-associativity for introducing a limit to the accuracy
of measurement of a single coordinate,




x, x, x2 = (x · x) · x2 − x · x · x2 = x2 · x2 − x4 = 2eI

(6.33)

where x is again the position coordinate, and e is the “elementary length” and I is the main unit of
the “fundamental length” algebra (Emch 1972, p. 42).
Ali and Emch (Ali & Emch 1974) paid some attention to Jordan’s model of a fundamental length
algebra in their investigation of fuzzy observables.
They remarked:
“First in the usual formulation of quantum mechanics-linked as it is to the notion of a mathematical
continuum, rather than a physical continuum, one cannot even formulate an unbiased test of whether
there exists an elementary length in nature.” (Ali & Emch, 1974 p.176).
This was one reason for Emch and Ali (the other being problems in defining a position operator for
photons) to introduce the notion of a fuzzy observable, meaning an observable with an intrinsic residual
imprecision.
They refer to Jordan’s idea to relax power-associativity,
(A · A) · (A · A) 6= A · (A · (A · A))

(6.34)

if there was an elementary length in nature as a possible source for an intrinsic fuzziness of observables
(Ali & Emch 1974, p. 176).
One should remind the reader mind that Jordan was aware that his later ideas were first, of a purely
speculative, mathematical nature, and he was not certain, whether there was any application in physics
for it, or whether one could or should go beyond quantum theory in its current form. In 1968 (Jordan 1968
b) he quoted J. Gunson’s view (Gunson 1967) that quantum theory is conceptually and mathematically
closed and there may be no mathematical possibility to formulate a physical theory, which differs from
classical physics even more than quantum mechanics.
Rühaak (personal communication) became “an expert” in disproving possible axioms (replacing
the associative and alternative law) introduced by Jordan for commutative non-associative algebras,
especially for the algebra of 4 × 4 Hermitian matrices over the octonions. One of us (Rühaak) informed
Jordan that, “Practically all axioms for (commutative) non-associative algebras break down, if one works
with n=4 for Hermitian matrix algebras over the octonions.”
The results from the papers published in the late 1960ies at the Academy of Literature and Sciences
in Mainz have therefore, to be taken with a grain of salt, they express putative ideas and hopes for
possible algebraic structures. Additionally, Jordan also thought about the possibility of including the
spin of a particle in the coordinate-algebra of an elementary particle (Jordan 1969 a), especially as his
fundamental length algebra does not satisfy the identities of “elementary algebras” . At that time point,
Jordan was unsure, which of the non-power-associative algebras he introduced may be a suitable tool
for generalizing quantum mechanics.
In 1968 (Jordan 1968 b), he mentioned “Elementary-algebras” as a possible candidate for a generalized quantum mechanics, in a follow up-publication (Jordan 1969 b), he proposed this again, even though
he stated that these algebras may not fully solve the problem of generalizing quantum mechanics.
Nevertheless, he recommended to investigate these algebras mathematically (Jordan 1969 b).

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

53

This work contains also a summary of his work on Lie-Triple-algebras and presents the algebra U (x)
as an example of a Lie-Triple-algebra which is also an Osborn-algebra.
Yet, in 1971 Jordan stated in a book contribution (Jordan 1971) that he considered his suggestions
to generalize quantum mechanics by using non-power-associative algebras apart from Osborn-algebras
and his fundamental-length-algebra(s) U (x) or U (x) as obsolete, more precisely he tried to construct
an Osborn-algebra with similar properties to his elementary length algebra (see above), this time all
elements of the algebra should satisfy Osborn’s axiom, not only the generating elements.
This fact and the statements of Rühaak make it likely, that no additional examples of “Elementaryalgebras” apart from the two sub-algebras of 4 × 4 Hermitian octonionic matrices could be found, and
especially there are likely no additional examples derivable from other Hermitian matrix algebras over
the octonions.
However, this was never stated explicitly by either Jordan or Rühaak. Another possibility is that
“Elementary-algebras” proved to be useless for physical applications.
One must note that Osborn’s works seem to imply that algebras satisfying the axioms of degree 5
Osborn found, may be of no higher degree than degree 3, otherwise they are power-associative, at least
unless a certain limited set of relations on the coefficients, appearing in Osborn’s axioms, are imposed
(Losey 1967).
In his work from 1971 (Jordan 1971), Jordan recommended to look for non-trivial examples of
formally-real Osborn algebras. His basic idea was to reformulate quantum electrodynamics, to dispense
with the procedure of renormalization.
As usually the electromagnetic field was to be represented by quantum mechanical observables, which
are functions of space-time “coordinates” x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , which now are elements of an Osborn-algebra
(or a suitable generalization of Osborn-algebras) (Jordan 1971).
Jordan also mentioned that the starting point (already in the 1930ies) for his attempt to formulate
non-associative quantum mechanics were indeed the difficulties encountered with infinities in quantum
field theory. But the success of the renormalization program may indicate that a further generalization
is not necessary, or at least that a generalization of quantum field theory should give the same results
as ordinary quantum field theory with renormalization does (Jordan 1971 p. 109).
Already in one of his papers from 1952 (Jordan 1952 b) Jordan expressed the view that the relation
between a future theory of “fundamental length” and renormalization, may be reminiscent of the early
days of quantum mechanics.
Back then, Bohr introduced a correspondence principle, where a semi-classical approach was used to
obtain (correct) results, which later were reproduced and extended by quantum theory.
Finally, in 1972 Jordan contributed a little paper to a collection celebrating John A. Wheeler’s 60th
birthday (Jordan 1972). In it he laid out a research program. In this final contribution by Jordan about
non-associative algebras in physics, Jordan asked again the question which kind of non-associative algebra
may be used for this generalization of quantum mechanics. This time he left this: “as a still unanswered
question, needing earnest discussion.” (Jordan 1972 p. 145).
He speculated that these algebras may lead to Malcev-algebras for the anti-symmetric part [x, y] of
the quantum mechanical matrix or operator product. So, this time also non-commutative, non-(power)associative algebras were considered.
To describe continuous symmetries, Lie groups are used in physics, therefore Lie-algebras play an
important in theoretical physics.
Lie-algebras are non-associative algebras arising from using the anti-commutative multiplication [x, y]
in an associative algebra (Jordan 1972).
In the full quantum mechanical algebras, the commutator [x, y] does not vanish and can be used as
new product for the antisymmetric elements of the algebra. If one writes xy instead of [x, y] , one can
characterize Lie-algebras axiomatically by,
x2 = 0 and (xy) z + (yz) x + (zx) y = 0

(6.35)

The left-hand side of the last equality is in general written as J (x, y, z) so one can write,
x2 = 0,

J (x, y, z) = 0

(6.36)

54

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

Now Lie-algebras can be generalized by Malcev-algebras (every Lie algebra is a Malcev- algebra)
which are defined by,
x2 = 0 and J (x, y, xz) = J (x, y, z) x

(6.37)

2

The last part of 6.37 because of x = 0 is equivalent to,
(xy) (xz) = ((xy) z) x + ((yz) x) x + ((zx) x) y

(6.38)

Jordan discussed situations in nuclear physics where a symmetry in first approximation is lost in a
second approximation, his speculation was that the second approximation was described by a Malcevalgebra, and only the first approximation was linked to a Lie-algebra.
For a generalization of the symmetric and commutative part of the matrix or operator product:
a ◦ b = 21 (ab + ba) giving rise to Jordan-algebras,
Jordan mentions the seminal paper of Osborn about (the limited number of) possible axioms for
commutative and non-associative algebras. He mentioned briefly the class of Lie-Triple-algebras and the
research done on these algebras by Petersson, Osborn and Jordan himself together with Matsushita and
Rühaak. As mentioned above, the fundamental length-algebra was given as an independent example.
There is a relation between Lie-Triple Systems and Malcev-algebras found by Ottmar Loos, one can
associate a Lie-Triple System to every finite-dimensional Malcev-algebra (see Loos 1966).
Additionally, (in the finite-dimensional case) every simple non-Lie Malcev-algebra is isomorphic to
a simple Malcev-algebra derived from the Cayley-algebra (the octonions), by using the commutator or
cross product x ∗ y = (x · y − y · x) as the multiplication for the imaginary octonions, consisting of all
linear combinations of the imaginary basic elements of the octonions (see Sagle 1961, Loos 1966 and
Günaydin & Minic 2013), this dashes Jordan’s hopes from 1972 to use Malcev-algebras as a new class
of algebras generalizing Lie algebras.
For a non-commutative Jordan-algebra U of characteristic not two the algebra U + (with the Jordan
product) is a commutative Jordan-algebra (Jacobson 1968 p. 33).
For any alternative algebra (alternative algebras are non-commutative Jordan algebras (Jacobson
1968)), U of characteristic not two, the algebra U − with the cross product (see above) as the multiplication rule is a Malcev-algebra.
So, alternative algebras not of characteristic two give rise to commutative Jordan- and anticommutative Malcev -algebras (Jacobson 1968 p. 33).
As Malcev algebras generalize Lie-algebras, they can also be used to describe symmetries (see Jordan’s
remark above).
As Lie-algebras give rise to Lie groups, every Malcev-algebra can be associated to a Lie-Moufang
loop, a loop is a non-associative generalization of a group (a quasigroup with a unit) (Strambach 1977).
More specifically, the tangent algebra of the identity element of a Lie-Moufang loop is a Malcev-algebra
(Strambach 1977).
Lie-Moufang loops are a special class of loops where the relation,
(xy) (zx) = [x (yz)] x

(6.39)

is valid (Strambach 1977), General Moufang loops were introduced in 1935 by Ruth Moufang (Moufang
1935).
The German mathematician Karl Strambach investigated Lie-Moufang transformation loops, which
generalize transformation groups (Strambach 1977).
In Strambach’s setting a Lie-Moufang transformation loop is a Lie-Moufang loop (that can act
sharply and multiply transitively on a locally compact (non-discrete) space. One can define an addition
and multiplication on a (locally-compact) space on which a Lie-Moufang transformation loop acts, by
which this space becomes equal to the algebra of octonions (Strambach 1977).
Malcev algebras were also considered by Günaydin and Minic in relation to a generalized uncertainty
principle found in string theory, incorporating a minimal length (Günaydin & Minic 2013).
Günaydin and Minic based their work on older contribution from the Swiss mathematician and
physicist Ernst Stückelberg (Stückelberg 1960). Whereas, Günaydin’s and Minic’s model introduces

6 The Fundamental length algebra and Jordan’s final ideas

55

non-associativity in connection with the non-Lie Malcev algebra related to the octonions, Stückelberg’s
contribution goes even further, as apart from (intrinsic) non-associativity (violation of the Jacobi identity), he also considered non-linear operators, hence also the (left-) distributive law between multiplication and addition would not be valid in his model and/or the operators would not be homogeneous (see
chapter 3).
Something akin to Jordan’s speculations from 1972 was tried in 1989 by Steven Weinberg (Weinberg
1989 a). Weinberg proposed to develop a non-linear extension of quantum mechanics and introduced
a distributive, but non-commutative and non-power-associative product for observables, which however
still satisfies the Jacobi identity (Weinberg 1989 a), so it does not give rise to a non-Lie-Malcev- algebra.
Weinberg’s model and non-linear extensions of quantum mechanics are tightly constrained by experiments (Weinberg 1989 b). Weinberg notes (Weinberg 1989 a) that non-power-associative observables are
not integrable, as these observables do not commute with their own powers (recall from chapter 3, that
Prigogine introduced his non-distributive super-operators to describe non-integrable systems).
The situation with Weinberg’s possible non-power-associative extension of quantum mechanics may
be similar to non-distributive extensions (see the end of chapter 4):
There are mathematical problems with these models and they may led to unacceptable physical
consequences (see e.g. Gisin 1990 concerning non-linear versions of quantum mechanics and Helou &
Chen 2017 for a more recent work discussing how to generalize Born’s rule to a non-linear setting and
how to avoid superluminal communication), and empirically there is no hint that these extensions are
required or even possible (see e.g. Hensinger et al. 2003).
Jordan concludes his final contribution (Jordan 1972) on non-associative quantum mechanics with
the following comment about the prospects of using non-associative algebras in physics: “Although the
chances of progress in this direction remain quite uncertain, it might be worthwhile to think more about
this topic.” (Jordan 1972 p. 146).
Concerning Jordan’s final musings about non-power-associative algebras, a lack of power-associativity
may be problematic as one needs power-associativity to define the exponential function without ambiguity (Hoffmann and Strambach 1986) and especially for defining the exponential of a spin matrix
(Chul-Myung 1986). One would at least require some higher-order power-associativity. One should take
note of a recent paper by Martin Bojowald and collaborators (Bojowald et al. 2017) about the occurrence
of non-power-associativity in the Weyl quantization of a magnetic monopole.
The further study of Osborn-algebras or Almost-Jordan algebras proved also to be somewhat disappointing, in general they are either Jordan-algebras or nilpotent (personal communication by Irvin R.
Hentzel). Osborn proved a theorem, showing that all finite-dimensional simple algebras with unit element
over a field of characteristic 0, satisfying an identity of degree ≤ 4 , irreducible to the commutative law
and containing idempotents, are either Jordan-algebras, or are two-dimensional over an appropriate field
(Osborn 1972, p. 204).
Non-associative algebras satisfying an axiom of degree ≤ 4 not implied by commutativity include
Lie-Triple- and Osborn-algebras (Osborn 1965 a & b). More precisely, Osborn’s theorem can be expressed
in the following way: Let A be a simple commutative algebra over a field of characteristic 0, containing
′
an idempotent and let A be the algebra obtained from A by adjoining a unity element e . If the algebra
′
A satisfies an identity of degree ≤ 4 , then A is either a Jordan-algebra or two-dimensional over an
appropriate field (Osborn 1972, p. 204).
The German mathematician Max Koecher also worked on generalizations of Jordan algebras (Koecher
1980) his work describes the today so-called Jordan-admissible algebras, i.e. those algebras which become
Jordan-algebras after, symmetrisation of their product.
In general, however, the theory of non-power-associative algebras generalizing Jordan-algebras met
with obstacles, one could not find may applications within either mathematics or physics and there is in
general also no structure theory available for non-power-associative generalizations of Jordan-algebras
(Sebastian Walcher personal communication).

7
Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum
mechanics

Summary. The work of the American theoretical physicist Lawrence Biedenharn to incorporate the octonions into quantum mechanics is presented. Biedenharn’s wok started with hadronic string models for
which he constructed a non-power-associative octonionic Hamiltonian. Biedenharn linked the properties
of relativistic strings to increase their size above a certain energy scale to the appearance of non-powerassociativity in the algebraic description of these strings. Biedenharn later examined Hilbert spaces over
the octonions and associated Clifford algebras. Finally, Biedenharn together with his collaborator Pierro
Turini studied the quantum mechanics over the exceptional Jordan algebra. They noted a problem in
defining time reversal symmetry if one tries to build quantum mechanics over the real quaternions and
real octonions. In the case of the exceptional Jordan algebra no non-negative Hamiltonian can be defined, if one works over the real octonions. These problems can be overcome by working over the complex
quaternions and complex octonions. Finally, Biedenharn and Truini speculated on a possible role for the
octonions in defining a minimal length in nature. Other ideas to use the octonions, non-power-associative
octonionic operators and general non-associative algebras are summarized.
The American theoretical physicist Lawrence Biedenharn investigated possible non-associative versions of quantum mechanics in the 1970ies and 1980ies, to gain a better understanding of hadrons and
their constituents, quarks.
He was inspired by the relation between the gauge group of quantum chromodynamics SU3 C and the
automorphism group of the octonions G2 . The octonions provided the starting point and the connecting
line of Biedenharn’s investigations of non-associative quantum physics.
Apart from this, he followed a kind of reverse order in building models of non-associative quantum
mechanics.
He started with a non-power-associative model (Biedenharn 1977) then moved to an octonionic
Hilbert space setting (Biedenharn & Horowitz 1979) to finally settle on the exceptional Jordan algebra
or Albert algebra (Biedenharn & Truini 1981, see also Biedenharn & Truini 1983).
In 1977, (Biedenharn 1977) he presented a Poincaré -covariant model describing hadrons (in an idealized sense) as linear Regge Trajectories, which is closely linked to idea of viewing hadrons as excitations
of relativistic strings (Biedenharn 1977 p. 208).
The original string models where formulated to account for the structure of hadrons. Biedenharn
defined a quadratic form A2 in 8 variables (Biedenharn 1977 pp. 209-211),
A2 = P02 − P12 − P22 − P32 − π12 − π22 − ξ12 − ξ22

(7.1)

A2 Ψ = 0

(7.2)

with πi and ξi denoting two boson oscillator momentum and position coordinates. Additionally, a constraint equation of the form,

is imposed by Biedenharn, which can only be factorized over the octonions (Biedenharn 1977 p. 210)

58

7 Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics

Biedenharn them makes use of the Zorn vector matrix notation to write the factorization as A2 =
A+ A− = A− A+ with,


P3
a1 1̂ + ā2 2̂ + (P1 − iP2 ) 3̂
A± = P0 ±
(7.3)
−P3
ā1 1̂ + a2 2̂ + (P1 + iP2 ) 3̂
(Biedenharn 1977 p. 211). This is a 2 × 2 factorization.
Now a peculiar feature of Biedenharn’s toy model appears, after defining a Hamiltonian for his model,


P3
a1 1̂ + ā2 2̂ + P− 3̂
(7.4)
H=
−P3
ā1 1̂ + a2 2̂ + P+ 3̂

This “Hamiltonian” is not power-associative, as H 3 = H · (H · H) 6= (H · H) · H (Biedenharn 1977
p.211). Unlike most of Jordan’s examples, Biedenharn’s Hamiltonian is non-commutative and therefore
not even third-power-associative.
This may be one of the fist works showing, that full matrix algebras over the octonions are not
power-associative even for the case of 2 × 2 matrices (see Bremner & Hentzel 2004).
Noting that his particular model could not be embedded in the known settings for non-associative
quantum mechanics, namely Jordan algebras (as it is not power-associative), or a matrix Hilbert space (as
Biedenharn’s octonionic Hamiltonian is not a totally linear operator), he quotes Jordan’s works on nonpower-associative algebras and especially Jordan’s work on the Lorentz-covariant “elementary length”
-algebra and observes an interesting connection between Jordan’s later musings about a fundamental
length and his string-model based scheme:
“Jordan recently has urged the consideration of non-power-associative algebras as a step toward generalizing quantum mechanics. He has constructed an ingenious example of a Lorentz-covariant structure,
which is not power-associative in the position operator xµ .
This example has the remarkable property that position measurements cannot in principle possess
unlimited accuracy;
for wave packets with momenta significantly larger than some fixed inverse length, the accuracy ceases
to improve.
If we recall the scaling behaviour of our construction (chapter 3), this peculiar behaviour of pointed
out by Jordan may not amiss, for there, as one increases the available energy, the hadron “size” does
seem to get larger.” (Biedenharn 1976 p. 211).
Biedenharn’s ideas from 1976 about hadrons may not be of relevance for quantum chromodynamics.
However, in a different context they might be of value: String models moved away from particular
models of hadrons to a general model of particles and interactions, including gravity. In the more recent
incarnations of string theory there is a universal length scale corresponding to the size of a string, the
string length, usually identified with the Planck length.
In string theories, the length of a string becomes larger, if one increases the energy (at a certain energy
scale set by the length of the string, (see Gross & Mende 1988)), just like in Biedenharn’s hadron model,
so Biedenharn’s and Jordan’s speculations about non-power-associative structures might of interest in
the context of string models.
The fact that Biedenharn’s non-power-associative octonionic Hamitonian is not a totally linear operator is another intance where non-power-associativity is linked to a restriction on linearity (see above
Weinberg’s non-power-associative product for observables in his attempt to formulate a non-linear extension of quantum mechanics). The definition totally linear operator in the sense of Horwitz and Biedenharn
is based on their work on general Hilbert spaces that are defined over an arbitrary algebra. Originally,
they focused on Hilbert spaces over the fields of real and complex numbers, overt the skew field of
quaternions and the alternative ring of octonions (Horwitz & Biedenharn 1965). Now for a Hilbert space
one has vectors representing wave functions and operators acting on these vectors. If an operator can
act on a wave function before and after it is multiplied by any element of the algebra (over which the
Hilbert space is defined) without chaning the result, then the operator is a totally linear operator (Horwitz & Biedenharn 1965 & Horwitz 1966). Hencee, total-linearity is a generalization of the concept of

7 Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics

59

homogeneity (see equation 3.38). Horwitz and Biedenharn note that the requirement of (only) having
totally linear operators does not work for a Hilbert space over the Cayley numbers (octonios) due to
the non-associativity of the octonios. To overcome this remedy, Horwitz and Biedenharn constructed an
associative closure of the octonion algebra i.e. an associative Clifford algebra reflecting the structure of
the octonion algebra (Horwitz & Biedenharn 1965). Horwitz and Biedenharn worked with totally linear
operators as observables, because operators which are not totally linear would contradict the gauge principle, multiplying a wave function with a phase factor would have measurable consequences i.e. a wave
function multiplied by a phase factor would describe a different physical state than the original wave
function (Horwitz 1966).
Biedenharn’s original model from 1977 cannot work with the relation 7.2, Ψ represents the wave
function in relation 7.2, but the concept of wave function is difficult to implement if one works with
matrix algebras over the octonions (Biedenharn 1984). Algebraically, wave functions correspond to left
ideals of the algebra of operators (Biedenharn & Truini 1983, Biedenharn 1984).
But matrix algebras over the octonions have no ideals, and hence no wave functions in the usual
sense, only density matrices can be defined for these algebras (Biedenharn 1984).
Besides Jordan and Biedenharn works, there were other speculations about non-power-associative
algebras in physics.
Feynman graphs (used to study interactions of particles) give rise to evolution algebras (Tian 2007 pp.
13-14.). Evolution-algebras originate from mathematical biology, more precisely mathematical models of
biological evolution and genetics, they are interesting as they are commutative, but non-power-associative
Banach algebras (so normed algebras) (Tian 2007 pp. 36-39) and the direct and the Kronecker product of
two evolution algebras is again an evolution algebra (Tian 2007 p. 21). Tian proposes to use Evolutionalgebras for the study of particle interactions (Tian 2007 pp. 115-116).
Moreover, the Japanese mathematical physicist Susomo Okubo constructed a non-associative DiracClifford algebra, which is also not power-associative (Okubo 1986). Commutative, two-sided distributive
but non-power-associative algebras, termed were also considered in relation to renormalization group
transformations, hence these algebras were termed renormalization group algebras (Pordt & Wieczerkowski 1994 & Pordt 1995).
The Turkish-American physicist Feza Gürsey investigated possible applications of the octonions
in physics, especially in modelling quarks. Apart from working on octonionic Hilbert spaces and the
exceptional Jordan algebra, Gürsey also briefly investigated non-power-associative algebras related to
the octonions (Gürsey 1981, see also Gürsey 1974 for ideas on quarks, octonions and possible non-powerassociative octonionic operators).
He mentioned an idea suggested to him by Murray-Gell-Mann: The non-observability of colour degrees of freedom might be due the fact, that they form a non-power-associative algebra of observables.
Gürsey then developed a model, involving non-power-associative operators over the octonions, which
is related to super-gravity and octonionic Grassmann algebras (Gürsey 1981).
Yet, as was mentioned above, Biedenharn himself later spent most of his research on power-associative
algebras, namely Jordan-algebras and more recent developments in the theory of Jordan-algebras, such
as Quadratic Jordan-algebras and Jordan-pairs. In 1978 he worked together with the Israeli theoretical
physicist Larry Horwitz on an octonionic Hilbert spaces, where the scalars of the Hilbert space are
non-associative octonions (Biedenharn & Horwitz 1978). Drawing on an earlier work by by Horwitz and
Goldstine (Goldstine & Horwitz 1962), Biedenharn and Horwitz show how to construct a Clifford algebra
capturing the non-associative multiplication of the octonions (Biedenharn & Horwitz 1978) and how to
embedd an octonionic Hilbert space in a larger complex Hilbert space. Finally, Biedenahrn and Horwitz
speculate how to generalize the path integral formalism of quantum field theory developed by Richard
P. Feynman by using the octonions and mention formula 2.45 discovered by Jordan in 1950 (Biedenharn
& Horwitz 1978). This was an attempt to use the non-associativity of the octonions directly, without
passing over to Clifford algebras or the ordinary Hilbert spaces over the complex numbers. In the early
1980ies Biedenharn collaborated with the Italian researcher Piero Truini on models incorporating the
exceptional Jordan-algebra.
Biedenharn and Truini pointed out that the axiom of power-associativity in Jordan-algebras
ensures the existence of an integration process, as they state;

60

7 Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics

“The axioms for a Jordan algebra
(an algebra of observables) were taken to be: (1) x · y = y · x

(commutativity), and (2) x2 · y · x = x2 · (y · x) (non-associativity) ∗∗
This second axiom (introduced to ensure power-associativity, an+1 = an · a ) plays exactly the same
role as the Jacobi axiom in Lie algebras; it ensures that one has an integration process (the Jordan analog
to the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff identity)” . (Biedenharn & Truini 1983 p. 136).
Instead of dropping the axiom of power-associativity, Biedenharn and Truini relaxed the requirement
of formal-reality. They introduced a complex version of the exceptional Jordan-algebra of 3×3 Hermitian
matrices over the real octonions.
More specifically, Biedenharn and Truini made use of quadratic Jordan-algebras with complex octonion entries.
Furthermore, Biedenharn and Truini investigated what the lack of associativity could mean for our
understanding of the concept of space. Biedenharn and Truini started their investigation of the role nonassociativity plays in geometry, by trying to overcome a problem in using the exceptional Jordan-algebra
of 3 × 3 Hermitian octonionic matrices as a model for grand unified theories. One cannot use the fibre
bundle method of gauge theories, where fibres lie over points of Minkowski space-time due to the lack
of associativity (Biedenharn & Truini 1983).
But instead of using just the automorphism group of the exceptional Jordan-algebras as the gauge
group of an ordinary gauge theory, Biedenharn and Truini tried to find the reason behind this obstacle
of using octonions in physical theories.
The fact that octonions give rise to a Jordan-matrix-algebra only in the cases n = 2 and n = 3 and
that the largest associated projective geometry is thus only two-dimensional, is based on the failure of
de Sargues theorem in the non-associative projective geometry, derived from the exceptional Jordanalgebra. But as Hilbert showed, the de Sargues theorem is a requirement for a geometry to be extendible
to higher dimensions (Biedenharn & Truini 1983).
Biedenharn and Truini now combine this fact with Jordan’s idea of introducing a fundamental or
quantized length. They make use of a spin model where the quantum angular momentum variable
represents lengths (Biedenharn & Truini 1983).
Especially a special function, the Racah function plays an important role in their reasoning. They
show that in a quantized geometry (inspired by Jordan’s idea of a fundamental length) where Desargues’s
theorem fails, the concept of dimensionality is lost.
Biedenharn writes: “Thus, we see: the lack of a de Sargues theorem means (at least for the present
model) that the spatial dimensionality of a configuration of many points becomes uncertain, and only
“becomes three-dimensional in the limit of large distances” (italics in the original text) (Biedenharn 1984
p. 210).
Their ideas may give some hope for using non-associative algebras without having to generalize
further, by giving up power-associativity, or one of the distributive laws. In Biedenharn’s and Truini’s
model the non-associativity is averaged out on large length scales, and one obtains ordinary quantum
mechanics in three-dimensional position space.
This resonates quite well with the conclusions of the seminal paper by Günaydin, Piron and Ruegg
on octonionic quantum mechanics:
“Since a non-Desarguian projective plane cannot be embedded in an irreducible projective geometry
of higher dimensions, this would mean that quarks have no space properties, these latter requiring an
infinite-dimensional geometry” (Günaydin et al. 1978 p. 84).
From the 1930ies onwards, there was an ongoing search for an infinite-dimensional exceptional
Jordan-algebra, the discovery that the Albert algebra is the only exceptional Jordan-algebra by the
Russian mathematician Zelmanov in 1979 (Zelmanov 1979) put an end to this search.
One should note that among other things, Jordan’s reason for generalizing quantum mechanics was
his suspicion that the concept of space must be changed on small scales, just like Riemannian geometry
and Einstein’s general theory of gravity showed that Euclidean geometry does not necessarily hold on
large scales.
In 1937, Jordan wrote:

7 Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics

61

“Are we allowed to consider space as being continuous down to the smallest scales? Or may there be
certain physical limitations for finer spatial measurements? ” (Jordan 1937 p. 79).
Yet, this statement was related to Fermi’s theory of weak interactions, which was later supplemented
by the theory of electroweak interactions.
Instead of a fundamental length, new massive gauge bosons solved the problems linked to Fermi’s
original theory.
So, the fact that a non-Desarguesian projective geometry associated to the Albert algebra cannot be embedded in a higher (infinite-)dimensional projective geometry and that there are no infinitedimensional exceptional Jordan-algebras, may be regarded as a sign that the usual concepts of space do
not hold on very small scales, the problems encountered with exceptional Jordan-algebras may actual
point to a new understanding of geometry and the concept of space.
Also, the concept of time might need to be changed if one switches to a non-associative setting.
Biedenharn and Truini investigated the dynamics of quantum mechanics based on the exceptional Jordanalgebra (Biedenharn & Truini 1981).
They found that it is not possible to implement time reversal and that generator of the time displacement is not an observable, if one uses the formally-real, exceptional Jordan-algebra. The problem
of time reversal is already based on the structure of the automorphism group of the octonion algebra,
G2 (Biedenharn & Truini 1981).
(One should note that time reversal cannot be implemented already, if one works with Hermitian
matrices over the real quaternions, (Biedenharn & Truini 1981)).
Furthermore, they showed that is not possible to use the Hamiltonian formulation, to describe dynamics in the exceptional Jordan-algebra setting, for the most general case of non-associative, real octonionic
Hermitian matrices, one cannot define a Hamiltonian, that is bounded from below, even worse the most
general Hamiltonian (in the non-associative setting) is not even positive defined (Biedenharn & Truini
1981).
In the case of the exceptional Jordan-algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian octonionic matrices, Biedenharn
and Truini define the dynamics of an observable O by,
dO
= (H1 , O, H2 ) = (H1 ◦ O) ◦ H2 − H1 ◦ (O ◦ H2 )
(7.5)
dt
Here O is an 3 × 3 Hermitian octonionic matrix and H1 and H2 are two trace-less 3 × 3 Hermitian
octonionic matrices, the associator (H1 , O, H2 ) is taken with respect to the Jordan product ◦ (Biedenharn
& Truini 1981). Biedenharn & Truini compare this with classical mechanics, where the dynamics is given
by the Poisson bracket of an observable with the Hamiltonian and the Heisenberg picture of quantum
mechanics, where the dynamics is given by the commutator of an observable with the Hamiltonian
(Biedenharn & Truini 1981).
To overcome the issues with time reversal and the status of the generator of dynamics, Biedenharn
and Truini replaced the Albert algebra over the real numbers by its complex counterpart (Biedenharn &
Truini 1981). They proposed to introduce an imaginary unit i commuting with all the imaginary units
(i1 , i2 , i3 , i4 , i5 , i6 , i7 ) , of the octonion algebra (Biedenharn & Truini 1981).
As the problems encountered with the real Albert-algebra are also linked to the non-associativity
of octonions, the idea to complexify the octonions may also be useful if one opts to work only with
the octonion algebra. Concerning an algebraic generalization of quantum mechanics, one should note
(see below, chapter 8) that the complex octonions form a C* -alternative algebra, a non-associative
generalization of C*-algebras.
For more ideas related to complex octonions, their applications in physics and a concept related to
this, termed complex geometry, (see De Leo & Abdel-Khalek 1996).
This paper also provides additional important arguments in favour of working with complex instead
of real octonions when trying to extend quantum mechanics.
The complexified Albert-algebra was the starting point for Biedenharn’s and Truini’s model of a
grand unified theory with automorphism group (and thus gauge group in their model) E6 ∗ U1 . Another
difficulty associated with octonions is, that it seems that one must sacrifice the concept of wave function,

62

7 Lawrence Biedenharn’s work on non-associative quantum mechanics

as matrix algebras over the octonions have no left ideals (Biedenharn & Truini 1983 and Biedenharn
1984).
Using the concept of Jordan-pairs, one arrives at inner ideals, which play the same role as one-sided
ideals in the associative case. Moreover, these inner ideals have a clear geometric meaning (Biedenharn
& Truini 1983).

8
Recent developments

Summary. In this last chapter we summarize recent works on using thee octonions and Jordan algebras in physics. The study of Jordan Banach-algebras and C*-alternative algebras will be covered.
C*-alternative algebras are a non-associative variant of the C*-algebras used in the algebraic formulation of quantum field theory. The only example of a simple non-associative C*-alternative algebra is
given by the algebra of complex octonions. Jordan algebra also appear in the study of symmetric space
in differential geometry as well as Moufang loops. Some recent ideas to generalize Alain Conne’s noncommutative geometry to a non-associative geometry are covered.
Jordan-algebras were intensively studied by American mathematicians from the 1940ies. As mentioned above, Irving Ezra Segal (Segal 1947) introduced Segal systems and JB-algebras. There are
analogs to C* - and W* -algebras in the Jordan-algebra setting, namely JB- and JBW-algebras (H.
Hanche-Olsen & E. Størmer, 1984). A real Jordan- algebra A , which is also a real Banach space and
whose norm fulfills kak2 = ka2 k ≤ ka2 + b2 k for each a, b ∈ A is termed a JB-algebra. All JB-algebras
are formally real (Primas 1981 pp. 164-166).
JB-algebras which are isomorphic to self-adjoint operators in a real Hilbert space are termed JCalgebras (Primas 1981 pp. 164-166). The exceptional Jordan-algebra of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over
the Cayley numbers (octonions) is a JB-algebra, which is not a JC-algebra.
Alfsen and collaborators (Alfsen et al. 1979) showed how to construct all JB-algebras from JCalgebras and the exceptional Jordan-algebra or Albert-algebra, although this does not mean that every
JB-algebra can decomposed into the direct sum of a JC-algebra and the exceptional Jordan-algebra
(Primas 1981 pp. 164-166).
A stronger statement can be obtained for the Jordan analog of W* -algebras. A JB-algebra which
is the dual space of a Banach space is called a JBW-algebra. Schultz could show in 1979 (Schulz 1979)
that a JBW-algebra can be uniquely formed as the product of a weakly closed Jordan-operator-algebra
(a JW- algebra) and the algebra of all continuous functions of a hyperstonean space with values in the
exceptional JB-algebra M38 . In the complex case, there exist JB* -algebras, which can be built from
self-adjoint Jordan subalgebras of the C*-algebra of bounded operators on a complex Hilbert space and
the complex Albert algebra (McCrimmon 2004 pp. 21-22).
There is also a non-associative generalization of C* -algebras, termed C* -alternative- algebras. Apart
from associative C* -algebras, the algebra of complex octonions (bioctonions) is the only non-trivial (nonassociative) simple C* -alternative-algebra, which is also termed C* -Cayley-algebra, (see A. Kaidi, J.
Martı́nez, and A. Rodrı́guez 1981 and Braun 1984).
Like for JB-algebras there is a generalization of the Gelfand-Naimark theorem:
Every unital C* -alternative-algebra can be represented on the product of the associative C* -algebra
of bounded operators on a complex Hilbert space with the algebra of complex-octonion valued continuous
functions on a compact topological space (see Payá et al. 1982 and Braun 1984).
See also the works of Payá and collaborators and an earlier work by Braun on non-commutative JB*
-algebras (Payá et al. 1982 & Braun 1983).

64

8 Recent developments

The mathematician Wolfgang Bertram (Bertram 2008 a) discussed a Jordan algebraic approach to
quantum mechanics and the relation of Jordan-algebras to generalized projective geometries and the
prospect of transferring quantum mechanics from a linear setting to a geometric and non-linear setting.
Furthermore, there seems to be a tentative link to general relativity:
There are Lie- and Jordan-Triple systems, which correspond to curvature tensors of symmetric spaces
associated to Jordan-algebras.
In fact, Bertram considers the Jordan product to be a curvature feature (Bertram 2008 a).
Some early work in a similar direction was started in the 1970ies and 1980ies by Hans Tilgner (Tilgner
1979, Tilgner 1985) based on the foundational work of Ottmar Loos (Loos 1967) i.e. there are Jordan
algebraic models of Minkowski-, de Sitter and Anti-De Sitter space-time.
This lends support to the notion, advocated by the Tartu school, that the quantization of gravity
may require the introduction of a non-associative quantization scheme (Lõhmus et al. 1998).
Related to this, the German mathematician Ottmar Loos (Loos 1967) showed that the set of invertible
elements of a Jordan algebra can be turned into a reflection space by equipping it with a suitable
multiplication, the same can be done with Moufang loops (Loos 1967).
A refection space has the structure of a fibre bundle over a Riemannian symmetric space (see also
Helwig 1970 for the relation between Jordan-algebras and symmetric spaces). And fibre bundles play a
crucial role in the mathematical formulation of gauge theories.
Recently, Boyle and Farnsworth (Boyle & Farnsworth 2014) have started to generalize Alain Connes’
ideas of non-commutative geometry to non-associative geometry. The Gelfand-Naimark theorem establishing a categorical equivalence between commutative C* -algebras and continuous complex functions
vanishing at infinity on locally compact Hausdorff spaces, was the starting point for the development
of non-commutative geometry, one views a non-commutative C* -algebra as describing some (topological) non-commutative space (see e.g. Khalkhali 2009 for a general introduction to non-commutative
geometry).
One may consider extending this from the theory of associative C* -algebras to non-associative
generalizations of C* -algebras such as C* -alternative-algebras or general JB* -algebras and develop a
” non-associative geometry.”
To extend non-commutative geometry by allowing for non-associative structures is proposed for
example by Latham Boyle and Shane Farnsworth (Boyle & Farnsworth 2014 & Farnsworth & Boyle
2015).
To be precise, the approach of Alain Connes and co-workers to the standard model and gravity is to
use a tensor product of the algebra of smooth functions on a (spin) manifold and certain (finite) matrix
algebras, this is termed an almost-commutative geometry (Connes & Lott 1991).
Boyle and Farnsworth use the same procedure but replace the matrix algebra by a non-associative
algebra (e.g. octonions, alternative or Jordan algebras) and construct almost-associative geometries.
Farnsworth mentions the exceptional Jordan algebra at the end of his PhD-thesis (Farnsworth 2015),
work on building an almost-associative geometry with this algebra is ongoing.
Apart from the exceptional Jordan-algebra, also special Jordan algebras and other types of nonassociative algebras (e.g. Lie algebras) are mentioned in Farnsworth’s PhD thesis, of particular interest
is the use of octonions and an octonionic Hilbert space in Farnsworth’s thesis (Farnsworth 2015).
In a different approach to non-commutative geometry, Michel Dubois-Violette, John Madore and
Richard Kerner
N (Dubois-Violette et al. 1989) used the algebra of complex matrix-valued smooth functions
( C ∞ (M ) Mn ) as a starting point for a derivation-based approach to non-commutative geometry.
Maybe something similar might be done in a non-associative setting with the exceptional Jordan
algebra replacing the algebra of complex matrices in the non-commutative geometry approach. Research
in this direction has been started recently:
Michel Dubois-Violette published a paper “Exceptional Quantum Geometry and Particle Physics”
(Dubois-Violette 2016), where he introduced “Almost classical quantum geometries” , understood as the
tensor product of the algebra of smooth functions on (Minkowski) space-time with a formally real or
Euclidean (finite-dimensional) Jordan algebra.

8 Recent developments

65

Much of his work is devoted to the finite exceptional, almost classical quantum geometry: the tensor
product of the algebra of smooth functions on Minkowski space-time with the exceptional Jordan algebra
of 3 × 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions.
This tensor product is then understood as the algebra of smooth functions on an almost-classical
quantum space-time (Dubois-Violette 2016).
The term non-associative geometry was first proposed by the German researcher Raimar Wulkenhaar
in the late 1990ies (Wulkenhaar 1997) and by two Russian researchers Alexander I. Nesterov and Lev
V. Sabinin at the beginning of the 21st century (Nesterov & Sabinin 2000).
Bertram’s ideas are likely to be important for this, he used the term non-associative geometry in
2008 (Bertram 2008 a & b). There is a huge obstacle in using Jordan algebras for physical models, if
one includes the exceptional Jordan algebra, the tensor product of two Jordan algebras is not a Jordanalgebra (see chapter 2). Tensor products are used for the definition of multiple-particle states in quantum
mechanics and quantum field theories, the existence of proper tensor products is required for locality
(Stormer 1976, p.12).
Bertram proposed to use generalized vector bundles to replace tensor products (Bertram 2008 a)
or to pass to the so-called Lie-Jordan-algebras (Bertram 2008 b) i.e. algebras with a Lie- and Jordanalgebra structure and carrying two products, the Lie- and the Jordan-product, for theses algebras tensor
products exist (Bertram 2008 b).
Apart from his work on non-associative geometry and Jordan-algebras, Bertram also worked on nondistributive near-rings in connection with the projective geometry of a group (Bertram 2012). Bertram
also worked on the relation between not necessarily associative (Jordan-triple systems) or distributive
structures and general differential geometry (Bertram 2011 & Bertram & Souvay 2014).
Bertram and Arnaud Souvay constructed a graded Weil- algebra (Bertram & Souvay 2014), which
has the structure of a near-ring.
The recent developments linked with non-commutative geometry which may lead to some models of
non-associative geometry, may give some new applications for at least the octonions and the exceptional
Jordan-algebra.
Whether further research will lead to the need to go even beyond Lie- and Jordan-algebras and the
algebra of octonions, to algebraic systems which are non-distributive or not power-associative, or whether
distributivity and power-associativity are crucial for quantum theories remains an open question.
The authors hope that some of the ideas presented here, might be helpful for further investigations
of non-associative algebras in mathematics and physics.

9
Acknowledgements

The authors would like to express their gratitude towards Olaf Meding from the Academy of Science and
Literature in Mainz for providing access to the works of Pascual Jordan published by the Academy. The
authors also want to thank the Academy of Sciences Literature in Mainz for the Permission to translate
much of Jordan’s work into English for this paper.
The authors also express their gratitude towards Gerd Niestegge, Helga Tecklenburg, Markus Maute,
Martin Bojowald, Richard J. Szabo, Roy Irvin Hentzel and Shane Farnsworth and especially towards
James Marshall Osborn and Wolfgang Bertram and Miguel Cabrera and Ángel Rodrı́guez for answering
numerous questions concerning non-associaitve algebras, to Günther Pilz for answering virtually every
possible question on near-fields and near-rings and especially to Piero Truini for explaining Professor
Truini’s and Lawrence Biedenharn’s works. Miguel Cabrera and Ángel Rodrı́guez provided invaluable
assistance with an earlier draft version of this, for which the authors are very grateful.
Last but not least, the authors want to express their gratitude for many informing discussions with
Sebastian Walcher, Alicia Labra, Hermann Hähl, Werner Müller, Larry Horwitz and Murray Bremner.

10
References

a. Jordan, P., 1933. Über die Multiplikation quantenmechanischer Größen. Zeitschrift für Physik A
Hadrons and Nuclei, 80 (5), pp. 285-291.
b. Jordan, P., 1933. Über Verallgemeinerungsmöglichkeiten des Formalismus der Quantenmechanik.
Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Mathematisch-Physikalische Klasse,
1933, pp. 209-217.
Moufang, R., 1933. Alternativkörper und der Satz vom vollständigen Vierseit (D 9). In Abhandlungen
aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg,Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 207-222.
Jordan, P., Neumann, J. and Wigner, E.P., 1934. On an algebraic generalization of the quantum
mechanical formalism. Ann. Math., 35, pp. 29-64.
Albert, A.A., 1934. On a certain algebra of quantum mechanics. Annals of Mathematics, pp .65-73.
Jordan, P., 1934. Über die Multiplikation quantenmechanischer Größen. II. Zeitschrift für Physik A
Hadrons and Nuclei, 87 (7), pp. 505-512.
Moufang, R., 1935. Zur Struktur von Alternativkörpern. Mathematische Annalen, 110 (1), pp. 416430.
Zorn, M., 1935. The automorphisms of Cayley’s non-associative algebra. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 21 (6), pp. 355-358.
Taussky, Olga., 1936. Rings with non-commutative addition. Bulletin Calcutta Mathematical Society,28, pp. 245-246.
Jordan, P., 1936. Operatoren und Matrizen in Anschauliche Quantentheorie (pp.157-162). Springer
Berlin 1936.
Jordan, P., 1937. Kernkräfte. Naturwissenschaften, 25 (18), pp. 273-279.
Heisenberg, W., 1938. Über die in der Theorie der Elementarteilchen auftretende universelle Länge.
Annalen der Physik, 424 (1-2), pp. 20-33.
Neumann, B.H., 1940. On the commutativity of addition. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 1 (3), pp.203-208.
Kalscheuer, F., 1940. Die Bestimmung aller stetigen Fastkörper über dem Körper der reellen Zahlen
als Grundkörper. In Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg (Vol.
13, No. 1, pp. 413-435). Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.
Segal, I.E., 1947. Postulates for general quantum mechanics. Annals of Mathematics, Vol. 48, No.4,
pp. 930-948.
Jacobson, N., 1947. Lie and Jordan triple systems. American Journal of Mathematics, 71, pp.149170.Eilenberg, S., 1948. Extension of general algebras. Annals of the Polish Mathematical Society 21, pp.
125-134.
a. Snyder, H.S., 1947. Quantized Space-Time. Physical Review, 71, pp.38-41.
b. Snyder, H.S., 1947. The Electromagnetic Field in Quantized Space-Time. Physical Review, 72,
pp.68-71.
Jordan, P., 1949. On the process of measurement in quantum mechanics. Philosophy of Science,
16 (4), pp. 269-278.

70

10 References

Jordan, P., 1949. Über eine nicht-desarguessche ebene projektive Geometrie. In Abhandlungen aus
dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg (Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 74-76). Springer-Verlag.
a. Jordan, P., 1950. Zur Theorie der Cayley-Größen. Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur;
in Kommission bei F. Steiner Verlag.
b. Jordan, P., 1950. Zur Axiomatik der Quanten-Algebra. Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaften
und der Literatur in Mainz, in Komm. F. Steiner Verlag.
Jordan, P., 1951. Über polynomiale Fastringe. Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der
Literatur, in Kommission bei F. Steiner Verlag.
a. Jordan, P., 1952, Algebraische Betrachtungen zur Theorie des Wirkungsquantums und der Elementarlänge. In Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg (Vol. 18,
No. 1, pp. 99-119). Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.
b. Jordan, P., 1952. Zur axiomatischen Begründung der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift für Physik A
Hadrons and nuclei, 133 (1-2), pp. 21-29.
Jordan, P., 1953. Zur Theorie der nichtkommutativen Verbände. Akademie der Wissenschaften und
der Literatur in Mainz, in Komm. F. Steiner Verlag.
André, J., 1954. Über nicht-desarguessche Ebenen mit transitiver Translationsgruppe. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 60 (1), pp.156-186.
Sherman, S., 1956. On Segal’s postulates for general quantum mechanics. Annals of Mathematics,
pp. 593-601.
Blackett, D.W., 1956. Simple near-rings of differentiable transformations. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, 7 (4), pp.599-606.
Lowdenslager, D.B., 1957. On postulates for general quantum mechanics. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, 8 (1), pp.88-91.
Berman, G. and Silverman, R.J., 1959. Near-rings. The American Mathematical Monthly, 66 (1),
pp.23-34.
Stueckelberg, E.C., 1960. Quantum theory in real Hilbert space. Helv. Phys. Acta, 33, pp. 727-752.
Sagle, A.A., 1961. Malcev algebras. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 101 (3), pp.
426-458.
a.Höhnke, H.J., 1962. Über spurenverträgliche Algebren. Publ. Math., Debrecen, 9, pp. 122-134.
b.Höhnke, H.J., 1962. Über nichtassoziative Algebren mit assoziativ-symmetrischer Bilinearform.
Monatsberichte der Deutschen. Akademie der Wissenschaften. Vol 4, pp. 173-178. Berlin.
Goldstine, H.H. and Horwitz, L.P., 1962. On a Hilbert Space with Nonassociative Scalars. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 48 (7), pp.1134-1142.
Wigner, E. (1962). Remarks on the Mind-Body Problem. The Scientist Speculates I. J. Good. London,
Heinemannpp. 284-302.
Hutten, E. H. 1962. Non-linear Quantum Mechanics. The Scientist Speculates. I. J. Good. London,
Heinemannpp.321-325.
Jordan, P. and T. S. Kuhn 1963. Oral history interview with Ernst Pascual Jordan.
Jordan, P., 1963. Zur Frage der Gültigkeitsgrenzen der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift für Physik A
Hadrons and Nuclei, 171 (1), pp.19-33.
Yamamuro, S., 1965. On near-algebras of mappings on Banach spaces. Proceedings of the Japan
Academy, 41(10), pp. 889-892.
a. Osborn, J.M., 1965. Commutative algebras satisfying an identity of degree four. Proceedings of
the American Mathematical Society, 16, pp. 1114-1120.
b. Osborn, J.M., 1965. Identities of non-associative algebras. Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 17,
pp. 78-92.
c. Osborn, J.M., 1965. On Commutative Nonassociative Algebras. Journal of Algebra, 2, pp. 48-79.
Braun, H., and M. Koecher (1965). Jordan-Algebren.Springer Heidelberg.
Horwitz, L. and Biedenharn, L.C., (1965). Intrinsic superselection rules of algebraic Hilbert space.
Helvetica Physica Acta38, pp. 385-408.
Horwitz, L.. (1966). ”Gauge Fields of an Algebraic Hilbert Space.” Helvetica Physica Acta 39, pp.
144-154.

10 References

71

Loos, O., 1966. Über eine Beziehung zwischen Malcev-Algebren und Lietripelsysteme. Pacific Journal
of Mathematics, 18 (3), pp. 553-562.
Brown, H.D., 1966. Near algebras (Doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University). https://etd.ohiolink.edu/!etd.send file?acce
disposition=inline (retrieved on April 17, 2018)
Yamamuro, S., 1966. Ideals and homomorphisms in some near-algebras. Proceedings of the Japan
Academy, 42(5), pp. 427-432.
Loos, O., 1967. Spiegelungsräume und homogene symmetrische Räume. Mathematische Zeitschrift,
99 (2), pp. 141-170.
Gunson, J., 1967. On the algebraic structure of quantum mechanics. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 6 (4), pp. 262-285.
Schneider, F., 1967. Die Grundpostulate der Quantentheorie. In Einführung in die Quantentheorie
(pp. 9-18). Springer Vienna.
Losey, N., 1967. Useful theorems on commutative non-associative algebras. Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society, 15 (3), pp. 203-208.
Petersson, H., 1967. Zur Theorie der Lie-Tripel-Algebren. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 97 (1), pp. 1-15.
Jordan, P., 1967. Problems of abstract algebra Chapter III. pp. 54-59 in Earth Expansion, General
Relativity, Problems of Abstract Algebra, Final report to the Office of Aerospace Research, European
Section.
Jordan, P. and Matsushita, S., 1967. Zur Theorie der Lie-Tripel-Algebren. Verlag der Akademie der
Wissenschaften und der Literatur in Mainz; in Kommission bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden.
a. Brown, H., 1968. Near Algebras. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 12, pp. 215-227
b. Brown, H., 1968. Distributor theory in near algebras. Communications on Pure and Applied
Mathematics, 21 (6), pp. 535-544.
Jacobson, N., 1968. Basic Jordan Identities, Jordan Triple Products (pp. 33-37). In Structure and
representations of Jordan algebras (Vol. 39). American Mathematical Society.
Ruhaak, H., 1968. Matrix-Algebren über einer nichtausgearteten Cayley-Algebra (Doctoral dissertation, Universitat Hamburg).
a. Jordan, P., 1968. Zur Theorie nicht-assoziativer Algebren. Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaftten und der Literatur, in Kommission bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden.
b. Jordan, P., 1968. ”Über das Verhältnis der Theorie der Elementarlänge zur Quantentheorie.”
Communications in Mathematical Physics 9.4 pp. 279-292.
Jordan, P., Matsushita, S. and Rühaak,H., 1969. Über nichtassoziative Algebren. Verlag der Akademie
der Wissenschaften und der Literatur; in Kommission bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden.
a. Jordan, P., 1969. Über das Verhältnis der Theorie der Elementarlänge zur Quantentheorie. II.
Communications in Mathematical Physics, 11 (4), pp. 293-296.
a. Jordan, P. and Rühaak, H., 1969. Neue Beträge zur Theorie der Lie-Tripel-Algebren und der
Osborn-Algebren (No. 1). Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaftten und der Literatur, in Kommission
bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden.
b. Jordan, P. and Rühaak, H., 1969. Über einen Zusammenhang der Lie-Tripel-Algebren mit den
Osborn-Algebren (Vol. 1969, No. 3). Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaftten und der Literatur, in
Kommission bei F. Steiner, Wiesbaden.
b. Jordan, P., 1969. Zur Frage einer physikalischen Verwendbarkeit nichtassoziativer Algebren.
Zeitschrift für Physik A Hadrons and nuclei, 229 (3), pp.193-198.
Osborn, J.M., 1969. Lie triple algebras with one generator. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 110 (1), pp.
52-74.
Helwig, K.H., 1970. Jordan-Algebren und symmetrische Räume. I. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 115 (5),
pp. 315-349.
Timm, J., 1970. Zur Theorie der (nicht notwendig assoziativen) Fastringe. In Abhandlungen aus dem
Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg (Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 14-31).
Plaumann, P. and Strambach, K., 1970. Zusammenhängende Quasikörper mit Zentrum. Archiv der
Mathematik, 21 (1), pp. 455-465.
Jordan, P., 1971. Naturgesetz und Mathematik. In Quanten und Felder (pp. 101-109). Vieweg+
Teubner Verlag.

72

10 References

Jordan, P., 1972. Possibilities of Generalizations of the Quantum Mechanical Formalism. Magic
Without Magic: John Archibald Wheeler, pp.141-146.
Berg, L., 1972. Nichtlineare Operatorenrechnung. Beiträge zur Analysis Volume IV, Klötzke; Tutschke,
Wiener, Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin, pp.129-134.
Emch, G.E., 1972. The Emergence of the Algebraic Approach. In Algebraic Methods in Statistical
Mechanics and Quantum Field Theory (pp. 33-77). Wiley-Interscience New York.
Osborn, J.M., 1972. Varieties of algebras. Advances in Mathematics, 8 (2), pp.163-369.
Heatherly, H.E., 1973. Distributive near-rings. The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics, 24 (1), pp.6370.
Wähling, H. 1974. ”Bericht über Fastkörper.” Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung,76
pp.41-103.
a. André, J., 1974, April. On Finite Non-Commutative Affine Spaces. In Combinatorics: Proceedings
of the NATO Advanced Study Institute, Held at Nijenrode Castle, Breukelen, The Netherlands, 8-20 July
1974 (Vol. 16, pp. 65-114). Taylor & Francis.
b. André, J., 1974. Lineare algebra über Fastkörpern. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 136 (4), pp.295-313.
Ali, S.T., Emch, G.E., 1974. Fuzzy observables in quantum mechanics. Journal of Mathematical
Physics, 15, pp. 176-182.
Tilgner, H., 1974. Symmetric spaces in relativity and quantum theories. In Group Theory in NonLinear Problems (pp. 143-184). Springer Netherlands.
Irish, J.W., 1975. Normed near algebras and finite dimensional near algebras of continuous functions.
PhD thesis, University of Maine, Massachusetts. https://scholars.unh.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2082&
context=dissertation retrieved on April 17th, 2018
André, J., 1975. Affine Geometrien über Fastkörpern. Selbstverlag des Mathematischen Seminars.
Jordan, P., 1975. Pascual Jordan ∗ 1902 in Philosophie in Selbstdarstellungen. Volume I, (pp. 194218). Felix Meiner Verlag.
Stormer, E.,1976. Jordan Algebras Versus C∗ -Algebras. In Quantum Dynamics: Models and Mathematics (pp. 1-114). Springer Vienna-New York.
Pilz, G., Near-rings. 1977. North Holland. Amsterdam and New Yark.
Buchanan, T. and Hähl, H., 1977. On the kernel and the nuclei of 8-dimensional locally compact
quasifields. Archiv der Mathematik, 29 (1), pp. 472-480.
Strambach, K., 1977. Mehrfach scharf transitive Liesche Moufang-Loops. Archiv der Mathematik,
29 (1), pp.1-19.
Biedenharn, L.C.,1977. A Kinematical Symmetry Group Construction of Hadrons as Regge Trajectories. In Quantum Theory and the Structures of Time and Space. Vol.2 ( pp. 201-213).1977. Hanser
Munich.
Biedenharn, L.C., and Horwitz, L.P., 1978. Some Remarks on the Problem of Incorporating Octonions
in Quantum Mechanics. In Quantum Theory and the Structures of Time and Space. Vol.3( pp. 61-76).
1978. Hanser Munich.
Günaydin, M., Piron, C. and Ruegg, H., 1978. Moufang plane and octonionic quantum mechanics.
Communications in Mathematical Physics, 61 (1), pp. 69-85.
Kosinski, P., and Rembielinski, J., 1978. Difficulties with an octonionic Hilbert space description of
the elementary particles. Physics Letters, 79, pp. 309-310.
Gürsey, F., 1979. Octonionic structures in particle physics. In Group Theory and Mathematical
Physics, (Vol. 94, pp. 508-521).
Zelmanov, E., 1979. On prime Jordan rings. Algebra i Logika, 18, pp. 162-175.
Biedenharn, L.C., Horwitz, L.P., 1979. Some Remarks on the Problem of Incorporating Octonions in
Quantum Mechanics. In Quantum Theory and the Structures of Time and Space. Vol.3 (pp. 61-76).1979.
Hanser München.
Biliotti, M., 1979. Su una generalizzazione di Dembowski dei piani di Hughes.Bollettino dell’Unione
Matematica Italiana, 5(16, pp. 674-693).
Von Müller, W.B., 1979, April. Über die Kettenregel in Fastringen. In Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg (Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 108-111). Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.
Pauli, W., 1980. General principles of quantum mechanics. Heidelberg: Springer, 1980.

10 References

73

Koecher, M., 1980. On commutative nonassociative algebras. Journal of Algebra, 62 (2), pp. 479-493.
Primas, H., 1981. Beyond Pioneer Quantum Mechanics. Section 4.2 (pp .163-167). Algebraic Quantum
Mechanics & Section 4.4 The Development of Quantum Logics (pp. 210-213). In Chemistry, Quantum
Mechanics and Reductionism (pp. 160-249). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Benkart, G.M. and Osborn, J.M., 1981. Derivations and automorphisms of nonassociative matrix
algebras. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 263 (2), pp. 411-430.
Truini, P. and Biedenharn, L.C., 1981. Comment on the dynamics of M38 . Hadronic Journal, 4 (3),
pp. 995-1017.
A. Kaidi, J. Martı́nez, and A. Rodrı́guez., 1981. On a non-associative Vidav–Palmer theorem.
Quart. J. Math. Oxford 32 pp. 435–42. 136
Payá, R., Pérez, J. and Rodrı́guez, A., 1982. Noncommutative Jordan C∗ -algebras. manuscripta
mathematica, 37 (1), pp. 87-120.
Braun, R.B., 1983. Structure and representations of noncommutative C∗ -Jordan algebras. manuscripta
mathematica, 41 (1), pp.139-171.
Thomsen, M.J., 1983. Bilinearly generated near-algebras. In North-Holland Mathematics Studies
(Vol. 78, pp. 753-760). North-Holland.
Biedenharn, L.C., Truini, P., 1983. Quarks and Generalized Quantum Mechanics. In Quantum Theory
and the Structures of Time and Space. Vol.5 (pp. 133-156).1984. Hanser München.
Biedenharn, L.C., 1984. Some Remarks on using Octonions in Quantum Mechanics. In Theoretical
Physics Meeting: atti del convegno, Amalfi 6-7 maggio, 1983 (Vol. 7, pp. 189-191). Edizioni scientifiche
italiane.
Braun, R.B., 1984. A Gelfand-Neumark theorem for C∗ -alternative algebras. Mathematische Zeitschrift,
185 (2), pp. 225-242.
Hanche-Olsen, H., Størmer,E., Jordan operator algebras. Monographs and Studies
in Mathematics 21, Pitman, Boston, 1984.
Tilgner, H., 1985. Conformal orbits of electromagnetic Riemannian curvature tensors electromagnetic
implies gravitational radiation. In Global Differential Geometry and Global Analysis 1984 (pp. 316-339).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Okubo, S., 1986. Dimensional regularization and non-associative Dirac-Clifford algebra. Progress of
Theoretical Physics Supplement, 86, pp. 287-296.
Hofmann, K. and Strambach, K., 1986. Lie’s fundamental theorems for local analytical loops. Pacific
Journal of Mathematics, 123 (2), pp. 301-327.
Myung, H.C., 1986. Malcev-admissible algebras. Springer Science & Business Media.
Weigand, C., 1987. Konstruktion topologischer projektiver Ebenen, die keine Translationsebenen sind
(Vol. 177). Selbstverlag des Mathematischen Instituts.
André, J., 1987. Non-commutative geometry, near-rings and near-fields. In North-Holland Mathematics Studies (Vol. 137, pp. 1-13). North-Holland.
Tecklenburg, H., (1987). Vektorräume über Fastkörpern. In Results in Mathematics,120 (3-4) pp.
422-427.
Prigogine, I. and Petrosky, T.Y., 1988. An alternative to quantum theory. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, 147 (3), pp. 461-486.
Gross, D.J., Mende, P.F., 1988. String theory beyond the Planck scale. Nuclear Physics B 303 (3),
pp. 407-454.
Leech, J., 1989. Skew lattices in rings. Algebra Universalis, 26 (1), pp. 48-72.
Pedersen, G., K. 1989 Analysis Now. Springer New York, Heidelberg
a. Weinberg, S., 1989. Testing Quantum Mechanics. Annals of Physics, 194, pp. 336-386.
b. Weinberg, S., 1989. Precision Tests of Quantum Mechanics. Physical Review Letters, Vol. 62, No.
5, pp. 485-488.
Dubois-Violette, M., Kerner, R. and Madore, J., 1989. Classical bosons in a non-commutative geometry. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 6 (11), p.1709.
Gisin,N., 1990. Weinberg’s non-linear quantum mechanics and supraluminal communications. Physics
Letters A. Vol. 143 Iss. 1-2, pp. 1-2.

74

10 References

Bugajski, S., 1991. Nonlinear quantum mechanics is a classical theory. International Journal of
Theoretical Physics Vol. 30 Iss. 7, pp. 961-971.
Connes, A. and Lott, J., 1991. Particle models and noncommutative geometry. Nuclear Physics BProceedings Supplements, 18 (2), pp. 29-47
Landau, L.J., 1992. Experimental tests of distributivity. Letters in mathematical physics, 25 (1), pp.
47-50.
Cabrera, M., MartÍnez, J. and RodrÍguez, A., 1992. Structurable H∗ -algebras. Journal of Algebra,
147(1), pp. 19-62.
Kojevnikov, A. B. (1993). Paul Dirac and Igor Tamm correspondence; 1, 1928-1933, P00020744.
Pordt, A. and Wieczerkowski, C., 1994. Nonassociative algebras and nonperturbative field theory for
hierarchical models (No. hep-lat/9406005).
Pordt, A., 1995. Hierarchical renormalization group fixed points. Nuclear Physics. B, Proceedings
Supplements, 42, pp.829-831.
Adler, S.L., 1995. Quaternionic Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Fields. Oxford University Press.
Magill Jr, K.D., 1996. Nearrings of continuous functions from topological spaces into topological
nearrings. Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 39 (3), pp. 316-329.
Horwitz, L.P., 1996. Hypercomplex quantum mechanics. Foundations of Physics, 26 (6), pp.851-862.
Leo, S.D. and Abdel-Khalek, K., 1996. Octonionic quantum mechanics and complex geometry.
Progress of theoretical physics, 96 (4), pp. 823-831.
Wulkenhaar, R., 1997. Non-associative geometry-unifield models based on L-cycles (Doctoral dissertation).
Mahmood, S.J. and Mansouri, M.F., 1997. Tensor Product of Near-Ring Modules. In Nearrings,
Nearfields and K-Loops, pp. 335-342. Springer, Dordrecht.
Lõhmus, J., Paal, E. and Sorgsepp, L., 1998. About nonassociativity in mathematics and physics.
Acta Applicandae Mathematica, 50 (1-2), pp. 3-31.
Nesterov, A.I. and Sabinin, L.V., 2000. Non-associative geometry and discrete structure of spacetime.
Comment. Math. Univ. Carolin, 41 (2), pp. 347-357.
Bertram, W., 2000. The geometry of Jordan and Lie structures (Vol. 1754). Springer Science &
Business Media.
Tian, Y., 2000. Matrix representations of octonions and their applications. Advances in Applied
Clifford Algebras, 10 (1), pp. 61-90.
Binder, F. and Mayr, P., 2001. Algorithms for Finite Near-rings and their N-groups. Journal of
Symbolic Computation, 32 (1-2), pp.23-38.
Lukierski, J. and Toppan, F., 2002. Generalized space–time supersymmetries, division algebras and
octonionic M-theory. Physics Letters B, 539 (3), pp. 266-276.
Ho, P.M. and Ramgoolam, S., 2002. Higher-dimensional geometries from matrix brane constructions.
Nuclear Physics B, 627 (1-2), pp.266-288.
Hensinger, W.K., Heckenberg, N.R., Milburn, G.J., Rubinszstein-Dunlop, H., 2003.Experimental
tests of quantum nonlinear dynamics in atom optics. Journal of Optics B: Quantum and Semiclassical
Optics. Vol. 5 No.2. R83-R120.
McCrimmon, K., 2004. A Colloquial Survey of Jordan Theory. A Taste of Jordan Algebras, pp. 1-36.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Bremner, M. and Hentzel, I., 2004. Identities for algebras of matrices over the octonions. Journal of
Algebra, 277 (1), pp. 73-95.
De Medeiros, P. and Ramgoolam, S., 2005. Non-associative gauge theory and higher spin interactions.
Journal of High Energy Physics, 2005 (03), p. 072.
Sasai, Y. and Sasakura, N., 2006. One-loop unitarity of scalar field theories on Poincaré invariant
commutative nonassociative spacetimes. Journal of High Energy Physics, 2006 (09), p .046.
Hentzel, I.R. and Labra, A., 2007. On left nilalgebras of left nilindex four satisfying an identity of
degree four. International Journal of Algebra and Computation, 17 (01), pp. 27-35.
Tian, J.P., 2007. Evolution algebras and their applications. Springer. New York.
a. Bertram, W., 2008. Is there a Jordan geometry underlying quantum physics? International Journal
of Theoretical Physics, 47 (10), pp. 2754-2782.

10 References

75

b. Bertram, W., 2008, November. On the Hermitian projective line as a home for the geometry of
quantum theory. In AIP Conference Proceedings (Vol. 1079, No. 1, pp. 14-25). AIP.
Moorhouse, G.E. and Williford, J., 2009. Embedding finite partial linear spaces in finite translation
nets. Journal of Geometry, 91 (1-2), pp.73-83.
Iordănescu, R., 2009. Jordan structures in analysis, geometry and physics. Ed. Acad. Romane.
Khalkhali, M., 2009. Basic noncommutative geometry. European Mathematical Society.
Raden, Y., 2009. Über die Campbell-Hausdorff-Gruppe auf abzählbaren Mengen und Solomons Algebra
(Doctoral dissertation, Christian-Albrechts Universität Kiel).
Girelli, F., 2010. Snyder space-time: K-loop and Lie triple system. SIGMA, 6 (074), p.19.
Oriti, D., 2010. The microscopic dynamics of quantum space as a group field theory. pp. 257-320 in
Murugan, J., (ed), Weltman, A., (ed), Ellis, G.R.(ed), 2010. Foundations of Space and Time: Reflections
on Quantum Gravity. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Laurent Poinsot, Gérard Duchamp., 2010. A formal calculus on the Riordan near algebra. Advances
and Applications in Discrete Mathematics, Pushpa Publishing House, 6 (1), pp. 11-44.
Schroer, B. 2011. Pascual Jordan’s legacy and the ongoing research in quantum field theory. The
European Physical Journal H, 35(4), pp. 377-434.
Bertram, W., 2011. Jordan structures and non-associative geometry. In Developments and Trends in
Infinite-Dimensional Lie Theory (pp. 221-241). Birkhäuser Boston.
Bertram, W., 2012, The projective geometry of a group, arXiv:math.GR/1201.6201.
Emmons, C., Krebs, M. and Shaheen, A., 2012. K-quasiderivations. Open Mathematics, 10 (2), pp.
824-834.
Raden, Y., 2013. The Campbell–Hausdorff near-ring over N—A topological view. Advances in Mathematics, 245, pp.113-136.
Günaydin, M. and Minic, D., 2013. Nonassociativity, Malcev algebras and string theory. Fortschritte
der Physik, 61 (10), pp. 873-892.
Kus, M., 2014. Geometry of quantum correlations. In Mathematical Structures of the Universe,
(pp.155-175).
Bertram, W. and Souvay, A., 2014. A general construction of Weil functors. Cahiers de topologie et
géométrie différentielle catégoriques, 55, pp. 267-313.
Natarajan, P.N., 2014. Ultrametric Functional Analysis. In An Introduction to Ultrametric Summability Theory (pp. 23-28). Springer, New Delhi.
Bertram, W., 2014, “Universal associative geometry” , http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.1692.
Anastasiou, A., Borsten, L., Duff, M.J., Hughes, L.J. and Nagy, S., 2014. An octonionic formulation
of the M-theory algebra. Journal of High Energy Physics, 2014 (11), pp. 1-10.
Cabrera, M. and Rodrı́guez, A. 2014. Non-Associative Normed Algebras: Volume 1, The Vidav–Palmer and Gelfand–Naimark Theorems (Vol. 154). Cambridge University Press.
Boyle, L. and Farnsworth, S., 2014. Non-commutative geometry, non-associative geometry and the
standard model of particle physics. New Journal of Physics, 16 (12), pp.123027-123035.
Farnsworth, S. and Boyle, L., 2015. Non-associative geometry and the spectral action principle.
Journal of High Energy Physics, 2015 (7), pp. 23-49.
Farnsworth, S., 2015. Standard model physics and beyond from non-commutative geometry (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Waterloo).
Dubois-Violette, M., 2016. Exceptional quantum geometry and particle physics. Nuclear Physics B,
912, pp. 426-449.
Štrajn 2017, R., 2017. Aspects of Snyder geometry. PhD thesis.
Bojowald, M., Brahma, S., Büyükçam, U. and Strobl, T., 2017. Monopole star products are nonalternative. Journal of High Energy Physics, 4 (2017), pp. 1-18.
Helu, B., Chen,Y., 2017. Extensions of Born’s rule to non-linear quantum mechanics, some of which
do not imply superluminal communication. Journal of Physics. Conference Series, 880,012021.
Cabrera, M. and Rodrı́guez, Á., 2018. Non-Associative Normed Algebras: Volume 2, Representation
Theory and the Zel’manov Aprroach(Vol. 167). Cambridge University Press.
Howell, K.T. and Sanon, S.P., 2018. On spanning sets and generators of near-vector spaces. Turkish
Journal of Mathematics, 42 (6), pp. 3232-3241.

