VLC-BASED N ETWORKING : F EASIBILITY AND C HALLENGES
A P REPRINT

arXiv:1909.04350v1 [eess.SP] 10 Sep 2019

Alain R. Ndjiongue∗
ndjiongue@gmail.com

Telex M. N. Ngatched †
tngatched@grenfell.mun.ca

Octavia A. Dobre ‡
odobre@mun.ca

Ana G. Armada §
anagar@ing.uc3m.es

A BSTRACT
Visible-light communication (VLC) has emerged as a prominent technology to address the radio
spectrum shortage. It is characterized by the unlicensed and unexploited high bandwidth, and provides
the system with cost-effective advantages because of the dual-use of light bulbs for illumination
and communication and the low complexity design. It is considered to be utilized in various
telecommunication systems, including 5G, and represents the key technology for light-fidelity. To this
end, VLC has to be integrated into the existing telecommunication networks. Therefore, its analysis
as a network technology is momentous. In this article, we consider the feasibility of using VLC
as a network technology and discuss the challenges related to the implementation of a VLC-based
network, as well as the integration of VLC into existing conventional networks and its inclusion in
standards.
Keywords VLC-Based Networking · Feasibility · Challenges · VLC-based Communication Protocol · VLC
Connectivity Configurations · Classification · Architecture for VLC-based Networks · Standardization · Channel
Capacity · Research Opportunities

1

Introduction

Visible light communication (VLC) is a data transmission technology which exploits the light beam as a communication
medium. It is a variant of optical wireless communications, which uses light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as antennas and
is characterized by short transmission range. In the indoor environment, VLC provides both data transmission and
illumination [1]. Its main applications include light-fidelity (Li-Fi), indoor positioning, as well as vehicle-to-vehicle
and infrastructure-to-vehicle communications. It has recently been demonstrated that using laser diodes (LDs), VLC
can also be utilized in access networks [2]. The efficient utilization of VLC for such applications requires its analysis as
a network technology, which is the focus of this article.
The interest in the VLC technology can be evidenced by the growing number of research works in the literature
[1, 3, 4, 5, 6] (and references therein), the prototypes and field trials proposed by researchers and industry, and
by the standardization activities. Following these efforts, the effective deployment is seen as the next key step.
Several challenges are to be overcome when practically deploying communication systems using VLC in both simplex
and duplex configurations. Among these challenges, we underline the fact that the return path in a VLC-based
communication system may use a different technology, such as radio frequency (RF), power line communication,
fiber optics, and free space optical. If using VLC, the return path can be based on a different wavelength. Another
important challenge is the illumination coverage. The VLC transmission range is limited, as it is imposed by the
lighting coverage of the source, which is short by nature [7]. LEDs and LDs are the two main types of light sources
considered in VLC. Compared to LEDs, whose lighting range is only a couple of hundred meters, LDs provide an
illumination coverage in the order of a couple of kilometers. On the other hand, since only positive and real signals
can be successfully transmitted in VLC systems, the modulation schemes that can be employed should produce a
non-complex and asymmetric signal.
∗

Alain R. Ndjiongue is with the Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of Johannesburg.
Telex M. N. Ngatched is with the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science, Memorial University.
‡
Octavia A. Dobre is with the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science, Memorial University.
§
Ana G. Armada is with the Signal Theory and Communications Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
†

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

The fact that light cannot go through opaque objects confers a security aspect to VLC. However, it compels the indoor
VLC-based network to be confined in a room. Consequently, VLC can be used in optical wireless personal area network
(OWPAN) and several OWPANs may be linked using VLC to form a wide OWPAN (W-OWPAN). In OWPANs with
multiple access points (APs) and mobile user devices (UDs), handover is one of the most challenging problems [8].
While there are many proposals for VLC transmitter and receiver, the success of the technology depends on the ability to
create networks with them and facilitate the deployment. This article discusses the use of VLC as a network technology
and its integration into existing networks. It describes VLC-based networking and presents topologies and network
structures. It also examines the main types of VLC-based W-OWPAN and introduces connectivity configurations.
The article proposes an architecture for VLC-based networks, highlights challenges related to VLC-based network
design and implementation, and underlines the recommendations of IEEE on VLC networking. Finally, the future of
networking using VLC is discussed.

2

VLC-based Networking

This section introduces VLC-related networks, highlights link configurations and types of networks, and provides an
overview of the communication protocols for VLC-based networks.
2.1

VLC Connectivity Configurations

Two main topologies, defined by the shape of the light beam, govern the transmission in VLC-based networks [9]:
point-to-point (P2P) and point-to-multipoint (P2MP) topologies. In the P2P topology, the light source, which has a
narrow beam with a small divergence angle, is only exploited for communication and cannot be used for illumination.
In the P2MP topology, also defined as AP-based VLC network, the beam has a diffuse or a quasi-diffuse shape. In
this case, the light source serves as communication antenna and illumination device simultaneously. These topologies,
together with the connectivity mode, critically characterize the design of a VLC-based network. In these topologies,
six connectivity scenarios can be defined based on the link between the light source and the photodetector (PD), as
depicted in Fig. 1. Scenarios (1), (2), and (3) represent line-of-sight cases, whereas Scenarios (4), (5), and (6) utilize
non-line-of-sight links; the latter respectively correspond to the former when an obstacle constrains the message signal
to reach the UD through reflected rays.
The light source and the UD may be connected based on the P2P configuration (Fig. 1b), where the VLC receiver is
made up of a narrow field-of-view [Fig. 1a, Scenario (1)]. Using the P2MP configuration (Fig. 1c), the receiver may
have a narrow field-of-view [Fig. 1a, Scenario (2)], or a wide field-of-view [Fig. 1a, Scenario (3)].
VLC-based networks utilizing APs, i.e., OWPAN, may have two variants: (i) the conventional distributed architecture,
where each light source contains both the electrical front-end and the optical front-end, and thus, performs both baseband
processing and power allocation. Each VLC AP serves as a unique optical transceiver. It receives the message to
be re-transmitted from the backbone network and proceeds with the re-transmission; (ii) the centralized light access
network architecture, in which all VLC APs computational resources are grouped into a unique centrally managed pool
[10]. Here, the AP contains only an optical front-end, and thus, is only in charge of connecting the light source to both
the communication and electrical signals. The centralized light access network architecture decreases the associated
cost and complexity of each VLC light source for an efficient implementation, and also reduces interference from
neighboring cells.
2.2

VLC-based Communication Protocol

VLC-based networks use a communication protocol which is adapted from the generic Open Systems Interconnection
protocol model and utilizes the layered-architecture of the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP)
model. When compared to protocols developed for RF-based networks, the communication protocol for VLC-based
networks mainly differs on the two bottom layers. This difference is crucial in the design of VLC-based networks
because the antenna used in the VLC technology (LED/LD) may also be exploited for illumination. Consequently, the
design of a VLC-based network card, which includes an LED/LD or a PD, is different from that of the conventional
network card. The physical (PHY) layer, on the transmitter side, decides on the bit representation across the networking
medium and on the illumination level, while on the receiver side, it is in charge of detecting the message-signal. An
example of a protocol for VLC-based networks, referred to as decoupled TCP, is proposed in [11]. While this protocol
utilizes the layered-architecture of the TCP/IP model, it considers a unidirectional link between VLC APs and UDs in
an aggregate VLC-based network.
2

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

(1)

LS

(2)

(3)

LS

PD

PD
(4)

LS

(5)

Obstacle

LS

PD
LS

(6)

LS
Obstacle

Obstacle

PD

PD

A P REPRINT

PD

(a) Typical VLC connectivity configurations.

N1

VLC AP

N1
N2

N3

(b) VLC-based P2P network.

N2

(c) VLC-based OWPAN.

Figure 1: Illustration of VLC-based PANs. LS: light source.

2.3

Classification of VLC-based Networks

VLC-based networks are defined by five main characteristics: (i) the transmission distance, which determines if the
system is relayed or non-relayed; (ii) the need of a return path, which makes the network duplex or simplex; (iii) the
technology used in the return path, which defines whether the network is standalone or aggregate; (iv) the category of
UDs and protocols, which specifies whether the network is homogeneous or heterogeneous; (v) the use of single or
multiple channels to transmit data. These network types are presented in Fig. 2 and discussed in the following.
2.3.1

Relayed vs. Non-relayed VLC-based Networks

To create a network with VLC, the data to be transmitted may be generated locally or remotely, depending on the
transmitter-receiver distance. Hence, networks with VLC can be classified as relayed or non-relayed networks. For the
latter, the transmission distance is within the lighting range of the light source. Here, a relay is not needed because the
receiver is situated at the correct distance under the transmitter’s light beam.
On the contrary, if the transmission distance is outside the illumination coverage of the light source, or if the light is
severely attenuated at the receiver, as illustrated in Fig. 2a, then the transmitted message is first sent to a relay, which
then forwards it to the recipient [12]. In this case, the transmission may be based on IEEE 802.15.7 (VLC), IEEE 802.3
(Ethernet), IEEE 802.11 [wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi)], IEEE 1901 (power line communications), etc. An example of a
3

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

N

Relay

VLC AP

A P REPRINT

(a) Relayed VLC-based network.
Uplink (VLC)
Downlink (VLC)

N1

N2

(b) Standalone VLC-based network highlighting both uplink and downlink channels,
which are VLC channels.

VLC AP
Uplink (RF/PLC/FO)

Downlink (VLC)

N1

VLC AP

N1
(c) Aggregate VLC-based network: Downlink channel is VLC based and uplink
uses a different technology.

N2

N3

N4

(d) Homogeneous VLC-based network.

VLC AP

VLC AP
UD

N1

N2

N3

N4
(f) Multi-channel VLC-based network.

(e) Heterogeneous VLC-based network.

Figure 2: Relayed, standalone, aggregate, homogeneous, heterogeneous, and multi-channel VLC-based networks.

4

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

relayed VLC-based network is the Li-Fi, in which the original message is transmitted to the VLC AP via RF, fiber
optics or any other data communication technology.
Note that cooperative communication techniques which have been widely used in RF systems to improve reliability,
can also be employed in relayed VLC-based networks [12]. Traditional cooperative techniques, such as amplify-andforward and decode-and-forward can be adopted. More spectral-efficient relaying techniques, such as incremental
decode-and-forward and incremental selective decode-and-forward, can also be used.
2.3.2

Simplex vs. Duplex VLC-based Networks

In numerous VLC applications such as infrastructure-to-vehicle communications, the return path is not required. The
message is transmitted from one node to another and not vice-versa. This type of links, also known as simplex links,
present the advantage of low-complexity and ease of implementation. However, if the application requires a return path,
Li-Fi for example, then the link is said to be duplex. Duplex links use both downlink and uplink traffic and have higher
design complexity. Technologies for return path (uplink traffic) can be any other data communication technology, such
as those listed for relayed VLC-based networks. Simplex and duplex VLC links can be combined with relayed and
non-relayed networks.
2.3.3

Standalone vs. Aggregate VLC-based Networks

Standalone and aggregate VLC-based networks are based on a duplex link, but differ on whether or not the same
technology is used in both downlink and uplink connections.
In the former, both downlink and uplink use the VLC technology [2]. As shown in Fig. 2b, the duplex connection
between two nodes using VLC will be more efficient if the two (downlink and uplink) light beams do not interfere, and
correspond to two P2P links. If the light sources are also used for illumination, then numerous interference signals and
significant path loss are expected. This would occur even if the links use different wavelengths.
For the latter, VLC is used for downlink and a different technology is employed in uplink. This configuration is
illustrated in Fig. 2c, where the light source is employed to guide the downlink traffic, and serves as an illumination
device as well. This configuration has been investigated in the literature in the deployment of Li-Fi [5] and the practical
implementation of 5G [13], in both its enhanced mobile broadband and massive machine type communications slices.
The former uses Wi-Fi, whereas the latter uses celular to complement the VLC. A variance of aggregate VLC-based
networks can be obtained by connecting the UD to the router using a duplex VLC in parallel with another technology,
resulting in two independent connections between the router and the UD. As an example, VLC and RF can be combined
such that the UD is connected to the router via both VLC AP and RF AP in both downlink and uplink [13]. This helps
to manage the traffic on the RF channel and release its spectrum during congestion time.
2.3.4

Homogeneous vs. Heterogeneous VLC-based Networks

The concept of homogeneity/heterogeneity is related to the similarity between UDs and their connectivity protocols,
and is generally associated with AP-based networks. In a homogeneous VLC-based network, several similar UDs are
connected to the VLC AP using analogous connectivity protocols, whereas in a heterogeneous VLC-based network,
different types of UDs with different connectivity protocols are linked to the VLC AP. These two types of VLC-based
networks are illustrated in Figs. 2d and 2e. Note that the concept of VLC heterogeneous networks is to be contrasted
from aggregate VLC-based networks, which are also seen and defined by some researchers as heterogeneous networks
due to the use of different technologies.
2.3.5

Multi-channel VLC-based Networks

A multi-channel VLC-based network can be implemented using a class of light-sources that exploits multiple wavelengths to generate light [14]. In contrast to single channel VLC-based networks, the beam in multi-channel VLC-based
networks is formed by several single light beams, as illustrated in Fig. 2f for a single user. Typically, such networks use
the color-shift-keying scheme [14] or may exploit the multiple-input multiple-output technique [15] to transmit data. In
both cases, considering a single user, the data rate is improved when compared with single channel systems. In the case
where multiple users are connected to the AP, a multi-channel VLC-based network also helps to multiplex the users.

3

Proposed architecture for VLC-based Networks

In Fig. 3a, we propose an architecture for VLC-based W-OWPAN. It highlights the duplex link required between UDs
and APs (indoor), and between APs (outdoor). The system links two VLC-based OWPANs (OWPAN A and OWPAN B)
5

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

VLC AP1

A P REPRINT

VLC AP2

(c)
(c)

(b)

(b)
(a)

(a)

(b)

VLC link
RF link

OWPAN A
A1

(a)

(a)

(b)

OWPAN B

A2

B2

B1
(a) A proposed VLC-based W-OWPAN.

Light source 1
RF receiver

Laser beams

PD
Light source 2

Light
source

VLC channel
RF channel

PD
Amplification

(b) Structure of VLC AP with communication links.

LED

RF /
ADC

Driver

OFDM
(RF)

Amplifier

Decoder

(c) Example of amplification circuit.

OFDM
(Optical)

Bits

Encoder

TIA

OFDM
(Optical)

PD

Driver

LD

(d) The VLC AP block diagram.

Figure 3: Proposed VLC-based W-OWPAN, with the structure of the VLC AP, its block diagram, and the amplification
circuit.

in which nodes (A1 and A2 ; B1 and B2 ) are respectively connected to APs (VLC AP1 and VLC AP2 ) in an aggregate
VLC-based network. The VLC AP1 -to-VLC AP2 link is a laser beam connection, whereas the VLC AP-to-UD link has
LED-based downlink traffic and is also used for illumination, and the uplink UD-to-AP is based on RF.
3.1

Network and VLC AP Structures

The VLC AP, whose structure is shown in Fig. 3b, performs four main operations: one VLC detection, one RF detection
and two VLC transmissions. Thus, each AP consists of a VLC receiver, an RF receiver, and two VLC transmitters. The
6

20
α = 5 dB/km
α = 20 dB/km
α = 50 dB/km
α = 80 dB/km

15

LD-LED channel capacity (bits/s)

LD-LED channel capacity (bits/s)

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

L = 160 m

10

5

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

20
α = 5 dB/km
α = 20 dB/km
α = 50 dB/km
α = 80 dB/km

15

10

5
Pr/N0 = 30 dB
20

Pr/N0 (dB)

A P REPRINT

40

60

80

100 120 140 160

L (m)

(a) Capacity of a simplex downlink of a W-OWPAN versus (b) Capacity of a simplex downlink of a W-OWPAN versus L,
Pr /N0 , for different values of the attenuation factor, α.
for different values of the attenuation factor, α.

Figure 4: Channel capacity of VLC-based W-OWPAN.

Table 1: Parameters used in the analysis.
Parameter

Symbol

Value

Unit

Attenuation coefficient

α

5, 20, 50, 80

dB/km

Distance between OWPANs

L

160

m

Laser detector effective area

Ac

100

mm2

Small angle divergence

θ

8.38×10−7

rads

Room area

Ar

25

m2

Photodetector area

Aa

26

mm2

Average walls’ reflectivity

ρ

0.7

N/A

Angle of incidence

φ

1.2217

rads

Half-intensity beam angle

φ1/2

0.5236

rads

Distance between LED and PD

d

2.5

m

Angle of iradiance

Φ

1.7453

rads

Frequency

f

10

MHz

Cutoff frequency at 3 dB

f0

1.7111

MHz

Delay of the line-of-sight link

t1

0.01

ns

Delay of non line-of-sight link

t2

0.03

ns

Responsivity of the laser detector

λ1

0.8

N/A

Responsivity of the PD

λ1

0.8

N/A

Received power/noise power

Pr /N0

30

dB

Amplification coefficient

g0

1

N/A

Beam natural waist

ω0

0.588

mm

Wavelength

λ

1550

nm

7

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

VLC transmitters include two light sources. The first light source, which is used for both lighting and communication
[the downlink (a) in Fig. 3a] is made up of LEDs, and utilizes the P2MP topology. It represents the message source
for the optical connection between VLC AP and UDs. The second light source is an LD, which produces a light with
a narrow beam due to its small divergence angle [link (c) in Fig. 3a]. This light source connects the two VLC APs
(P2P) and is not used for illumination. The PD included in each VLC AP is used to detect the light produced by the
opposite counterpart. The UDs are equipped with a PD, which is in charge of detecting the optical signal from link (a)
and converting it into an electric current, and an RF transmitter which connects UDs to the VLC AP through link (b).
Here, the RF receiver included in the VLC AP detects the uplink signal.
For a complete connection between the two sub-networks, OWPAN A and OWPAN B, the overall connection is RF
(b)-LD (c)-LED (a), in both directions. The first relaying scenario, which is RF (b)-LD (c) (uplink traffic), is based
on decode-and-forward strategy, because the signals over both channels are symmetric (positive and negative) for RF
and strictly positive for VLC. In this case, a direct signal conversion using the amplify-and-forward strategy, would
result in an important loss of data. The second relaying scenario, which is LD (c)-LED (a) (downlink traffic), is built on
the amplify-and-forward strategy, as it provides the system with cost-effective advantages. Here, the relay uses the
circuit diagram shown in Fig. 3c. The related amplification gain (see Figs. 3b and 3c), helps to mitigate the attenuation
experienced by the optical signal over link (c).
The VLC AP, whose block diagram is shown in Fig. 3d, is made up of two parallel equipment to achieve full signal
re-transmission. Data to be sent from any UD of OWPAN A is firstly treated using the orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing (OFDM) principle, for example. Afterwards, the obtained signal is transmitted using the RF channel
(uplink). The resulting signal is collected from the RF channel by the RF antenna (in VLC AP1 ) and digitized. The
obtained digital signal is treated and the resulting bits are decoded. These bits are re-encoded, and the packets are
converted into optical OFDM signals. Through an LD-driver, the latter is forwarded to an LD for re-transmission. At
VLC AP2 , a PD equipped with a lens to concentrate the beam on the receiving area and a transconductance amplifier
converts the laser light into an electrical signal. The latter is then amplified and forwarded to a conventional high-power
LED via an analog LED-driver, for simultaneous lighting and communication whithin OWPAN B. The LED broadcasts
a light containing optical OFDM signals, which are collected by the PDs of the UDs. Finally, this received signal is
demodulated, decoded and the resulting bits are sent to the recipient.

3.2

W-OWPAN Channel Capacity

The link evaluation of the proposed W-OWPAN is fundamentally related to the overall channel behavior, which is a
combination of the channels of links (a), (b) and (c), as the overall link is a cascaded combination of the three links.
Thus, the performance of the system is dictated by the worst channel. Since link (b), which is RF-based, has been
extensively studied in the literature, the channels analyzed are only those of links (a) and (c). Link (a) is the indoor
optical part of the system, and its channel is a stochastic beam based on the diffuse topology. Its gain mainly depends on
the geometrical parameters of the room and those of the beam. Link (c), the outdoor section of the system, is a narrow
beam due to the small divergence angle and is based on the P2P topology. Its channel depends on: (i) the attenuation
of the laser power through the atmosphere, which is deterministic and described by the exponential Beers-Lambert
law; (ii) the atmospheric turbulence; and (iii) the pointing error also modeled as Beckmann misalignment. Note that
atmospheric turbulence and pointing errors are random and their distributions vary. Apart from these, the signal-to-noise
ratio takes into account the laser detector effective area, the attenuation coefficient, α, the input power, the distance
between OWPANs, L, the beam angle, the transmission bandwidth, and the noise power. The maximum rate related to
link (a) can be calculated based on its own signal-to-noise ratio, which fundamentally depends on the PD’s effective
area, the receiver field-of-view, the light incident angle, the Lambertian order, the transmit power, the transmission
bandwidth, the amplification gain, the distance between VLC APs and UDs, and the noises over the channel. The link
between OWPAN-A and OWPAN-B is established without significant turbulence effects and pointing error.
The analytical results shown in Fig. 4 are obtained using the parameters displayed in Table 1. These values are
commonly used in the literature in practical implementation of both free space optical and indoor VLC. Taking into
account the ratio of received signal power to the received noise power, Pr /N0 , it is clear that the channel capacity
increases as Pr /N0 increases regardless of the value of α (Fig. 4a). This capacity decreases as the outdoor distance, L,
increases (Fig. 4b). For low values of α, this decrement is slow, while it exhibits a fast drop for higher values of α.
Although some outdoor VLC impairment factors, such as turbulence, scintillation and pointing error, are not taken into
account here, these results give a good indication on the harshness of the overall channel, which is mostly affected by
the outdoor part of the network.
8

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

Table 2: IEEE 802.15.7/D3a: Summary of the operating modes for PHY I to VI [7].
Mod. scheme

Line Code

Clock Rate

Forward Error Correction
Outer Code

Data Rate

Std. Version

Inner Code

|PHY I|
11.67 kbps to 100 kbps
35.56 kbps to 266.6 kbps

, /D2a/D3/D3a
, /D2a/D3/D3a

RS
RS

1.25 Mbps to 5 Mbps
6 Mbps to 96 Mbps

, /D2a/D3/D3a
, /D2a/D3/D3a

RS
RS

1.25 Mbps to 5 Mbps
12 Mbps to 96 Mbps

, /D2a/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a

10 bps
4 kbps
5 kbps
22 kbps
18 bps

/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a

120 bps
400 bps
60 bps
7.51 bps

/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a

RS
RS
RS

5.54 kbps
140 bps
512 kbps
368 kbps
32 kbps

/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a
/D3/D3a

RS

256 kbps

/D3/D3a

OOK
VPPM

Manchester
4B6B

200 kHz
400 kHz

RS
RS

CC
-.-

VPPM
OOK

4B6B
8B10B

3.75 MHz/7.5 MHz
15 MHz to 120 MHz

CSK
OOK

-.8B10B

12 MHz/24 MHz
15 MHz to 120 MHz

UFSOOK
Twinkle VPPM
S2-PSK
HS-PSK
Offset VPPM

-.-.Half-rate code
Half-rate code
-.-

Multiframe rate
4x bit rate
10 Hz
10 kHz
25 Hz

RS-FSK
C-OOK
CM-FSK
MPM

-.Manchester/4B6B
-.-.-

30 Hz
2.2 kHz/4.4 kHz
10 Hz
12.5 kHz

XOR FEC
Hamming code
Optional/RS
-.Optional
Temporal error correction

A-QL
HA-QL
VTASC
SS2DC
IDE-MPSK
BLEND
IDE-WM

-.Half-rate code
-.-.-.-

10 Hz
10 Hz
30 Hz
30 Hz
30 Hz

RS
RS

-.-

30 Hz

|PHY II|

|PHY III|

|PHY IV|
MIMO path dependent
RS
Temporal error correction
RS
RS
|PHY V|

|PHY VI|
CC
CC

= IEEE Std 802.15.7-2011;  = IEEE P802.15.7; OOK = on-off keying; VPPM = variable pulse position modulation; CC = convolutional encoder;
UFSOOK = undersampled frequency shift OOK; PSK = phase-shift-keying; S2-PSK = spatial 2-PSK; C-OOK = camera OOK;
CM-FSK = camera M-ary frequency-shift-keying; VTASC = variable transparent amplitude-shape-color; SS2DC = sequential scalable 2D code;
A-QL = asynchronous quick link; HS-PSK = hybrid spatial phase-shift-keying; HA-QL = hidden asynchronous quick link.
-.- no line code or no forward error correction code is proposed.

4

Standardization Efforts

The deployment of VLC technology and efficient implementation of OWPANs require rules and regulations, which are
still in the development phase. A few drafts have recently been prepared, each having specific focuses. Examples are
those proposed by the Visible Light Communication Consortium and IEEE. Among them, IEEE provides the major
contribution because its proposition is broader and looks at most aspects of the VLC technology. In the sequel, we
focus on the efforts of IEEE, which is led by the IEEE 802.15.7 Task Group. It proposes a layer-based architecture
which follows the IEEE 802.15.4 layout based on TCP/IP. Their efforts focus on media access control (MAC) and PHY
layers because the upper layers are similar to the other networking standards, such as IEEE 802.11. An overview of the
IEEE 802.15.7 MAC and PHY layers is discussed next.
4.1

MAC Layer Frame

The IEEE 802.15.7 standard proposes a MAC frame which consists of three main parts, namely the MAC header,
payload, and footer. It depends on the targeted PHY layer (PHY I to VI), and the network topology (P2P, P2MP,
OWPAN, etc.). The standard supports three main MAC network types, which are P2P, star, and broadcast [7]. P2P
uses the configuration in Scenario (1) of Fig. 1a, while star and broadcast use Scenarios (2) and (3), and are based
on the P2MP topology. In each of these network categories, the nodes have a unique 64-bit address that is used for
communication within the network, which in general is an OWPAN. The P2P topology may be a duplex transmission
that uses the configuration illustrated in Fig. 2b based on an extra-narrow beam, while the other types use the diffuse
link shown in Fig. 2c.
To achieve transmission in OWPAN using the P2MP topology, the IEEE 802.15.7 MAC layer utilizes a super-frame
format. It is used to group and align channels in order to determine channel locations in the received stream, and is
defined by the coordinator (VLC AP). The latter is the owner of the super-frame, and consequently, allocates guaranteed
time slots and forms the contention free period.
4.2

Physical Layer

The IEEE 802.15.7 PHY layer has evolved within the original and actual version of the standard. Compared to the
original version of IEEE 802.15.7, which has three categories of physical layers (PHY I, PHY II, and PHY III), the
9

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

newer version, IEEE 802.15.7/D3a, divides the VLC PHY layer into six categories, i.e., PHY I to VI. Each of them
is characterized by particular specifications related to the modulation scheme, forward error correction techniques,
data rate, to mention only a few parameters. PHY I is dedicated to data rates between 11.67 kbps and 266.6 kbps. It
is divided into two sections: 11.67 kbps to 100 kbps and 35.56 kbps to 266.6 kbps depending on the optical clock
rate used. Hence, the choice of optical clock rate determines if the header is transmitted with 11.67 kbps or 35.56
kbps. 11.67 kbps is used for an optical clock rate of 200 kHz. A Manchester code is employed as line code, and Reed
Solomon and convolutional codes are used for error correction. They are combined with the on-off keying, selected
as the modulation scheme. 35.56 kbps is selected to transmit the header for an optical clock rate of 400 kHz. Here,
variable pulse position is the modulation of choice with 4B6B line code and Reed Solomon as an outer code. A full
description of the six PHY layers proposed in IEEE 802.15.7/D3a is provided in Table 2.

5

Challenges related to VLC-based Networking

In light of the above discussion, it is clear that one of the most important challenges of VLC-based networks practical
deployment resides in the integration of the technology used in the uplink. It is also worth underlining the dual-use of
the light source, as a telecommunication antenna and illumination device, which requires efficient algorithms to meet
both lighting and communication requirements.
In case of mobile UDs, the handover mechanism represents another challenge if several VLC APs are used. It is
important to note that, since the propagation of the transmitted signal in VLC technology is different compared to RF,
the handover techniques exploited for RF systems cannot be directly applied to VLC-based networks [8].
In aggregate VLC-based networks involving technologies such as RF, fiber optic, power line communications, and
free space optical, the message frame compatibility is a critical issue that must be addressed. VLC systems must be
compatible with the existing schemes.
Relayed networks based on the amplify-and-forward strategy are cost-effective compared to other schemes such as
decode-and-forward, because the signal is just amplified and forwarded without any processing. For this reason, the
amplify-and-forward scenario should be the primary choice. The modulation schemes exploited in the first link should
be similar or compatible with that of the second link, for an efficient implementation of the bridge between the channels.
In this case, finding the correct combination between modulation schemes to be used in different technologies represents
another challenge.
Note that these challenges, related to single channel systems, increase with the number of channels in multi-channel
networks.
More importantly, high capacity and throughput represent two challenges in VLC-based networking due to the
bandwidth limitations of LEDs and LDs. However, solving this specific drawback is the responsibility of not only the
networking designers, but also that of the LEDs/LDs manufacturers. Any solution to this design aspect should maintain
compatibility between data transmission and illumination functions.

6

Research Opportunities for VLC-based Networks

The proof of the VLC concept has now been well established [5, 13]. A few companies such as Pure Li-Fi have
started to manufacture VLC APs and optical components for mobile devices such as laptops and mobile phones. In a
near future, VLC equipment will be extended to other VLC systems including standalone and aggregate, relayed and
non-relayed, simplex and duplex, homogeneous and heterogeneous, and multi-channel VLC-based systems. Several
applications are targeted including indoor positioning, internet broadcasting, massive data transfer between two VLC
nodes, underwater communications, intelligent transportation systems, and health-care applications.
There are considerable opportunities for the design and implementation of VLC-based networks. Research is needed
to explore VLC-based networking in different VLC-based network types discussed in this article. These new efforts
will be associated not only with research in telecommunication, but also with improvement happening in the lighting
industry, which will lead to undeniable enhancement of both lighting and communication performances.
The heterogeneous network will require more studies and analysis before integration, as the technologies and protocols
in place need to be compatible. Synchronization between frequencies in some cases needs to be handled carefully.
More experimental results and practical deployments are required to corroborate results obtained by theoretical analysis.
This applies to all enumerated VLC-based network types and represents a great deal of research opportunity for
standalone, aggregate, homogeneous, heterogeneous, duplex, and relayed networks using VLC technology.
10

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

Most research results in VLC technology are related to Li-Fi, intelligent transportation systems, indoor positioning and
some cooperative systems. VLC can be associated with power line communications, Wi-Fi and free space optical to
form cost-effective communication systems. Emerging VLC applications such as massive data transfer between two
VLC nodes and those in the underwater environment need to be investigated. VLC can mimic technologies such as
Bluetooth to transfer files between two nodes. This has not been investigated yet. Potential underwater applications
of VLC that deserve to be explored include surveillance, climate change, and oceanic fauna monitoring. Channel
modeling, network protocols, design and practical implementation issues of these applications represent potential
research directions.

7

Conclusion

This article has elaborated on VLC-based networking through possible connectivity configurations, along with applicable
topologies and technologies for the return path in duplex transmissions. The protocol models are highlighted and
reveal that VLC-based networks use the layered protocol with differences at both MAC and PHY layers compared to
conventional networks. Specifications for these two layers are provided for the IEEE 802.15.7/D3a standard in terms of
modulation and forward error correction schemes. An architecture of a VLC-based network for sharing data between
two OWPANs, linked using a duplex outdoor VLC backbone subsystem, is also proposed and discussed, and the related
link capacity is presented. Finally, research opportunities toward the utilization of VLC technology in OWPAN and its
integration into existing conventional networks is outlined.

References
[1] P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu, and P. Mohapatra. Visible light communication, networking, and sensing: A survey,
potential and challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., 17(4):2047–2077, Fourth quarter 2015.
[2] A. R. Ndjiongue, T. M. N. Ngatched, and H. C. Ferreira. Access telecommunication systems using VLC
technology: Cascaded LD-LED channel analysis. In Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Conf., Abu Dhabi, UAE, pages
1–6, Dec. 2018.
[3] T. Kishi, H. Tanaka, Y. Umeda, and O. Takyu. A high-speed LED driver that sweeps out the remaining carriers for
visible light communications. IEEE/OSA J. Lightw. Technol., 32(2):239–249, Jan. 2014.
[4] Harald Haas, Liang Yin, Yunlu Wang, and Cheng Chen. What is LiFi? IEEE/OAS J. Lightw. Technol., 34(6):1533–
1544, Mar. 2016.
[5] M. Ayyash, H. Elgala, A. Khreishah, V. Jungnickel, T. Little, S. Shao, M. Rahaim, D. Schulz, J. Hilt, and
R. Freund. Coexistence of WiFi and LiFi toward 5G: concepts, opportunities, and challenges. IEEE Commun.
Mag., 54(2):64–71, Feb. 2016.
[6] Y. Wang, N. Chi, Y. Wang, L. Tao, and J. Shi. Network architecture of a high-speed visible light communication
local area network. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 27(2):197–200, Jan. 2015.
[7] IEEE approved draft standard for local and metropolitan area networks - Part 15.7: Short-range optical wireless
communications. IEEE P802.15.7/D3a, pages 1–428, Aug. 2018.
[8] Q. Dang and M. Yoo. Handover procedure and algorithm in vehicle to infrastructure visible light communication.
IEEE Access, 5:26466–26475, Nov. 2017.
[9] AR Ndjiongue and Hendrik C Ferreira. An overview of outdoor visible light communications. Wiley Trans. Emerg.
Telecommun. Technol., 29(7):1–15, Jun. 2018.
[10] Refik Caglar Kizilirmak, Omer Narmanlioglu, and Murat Uysal. Centralized light access network (C-LiAN): a
novel paradigm for next generation indoor VLC networks. IEEE Access, 5:19703–19710, Sep. 2017.
[11] Y. Liu, X. Qin, T. Zhang, T. Zhu, X. Chen, and G. Wei. Decoupled TCP extension for VLC hybrid network.
IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun. Netw., 10(5):563–572, May 2018.
[12] Z. Na, Y. Wang, M. Xiong, X. Liu, and J. Xia. Modeling and throughput analysis of an ADO-OFDM based
relay-assisted VLC system for 5G networks. IEEE Access, 6:17586–17594, Mar. 2018.
[13] A. F. Hussein, H. Elgala, and T. D. C. Little. Evolution of multi-tier transmission towards 5G Li-Fi networks. In
Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Conf., Abu Dhabi, UAE, pages 1–7, Dec. 2018.
[14] P. Ge, X. Liang, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Gao, and Z. Ding. Optical filter designs for multi-color visible light
communication. IEEE Trans. Commun., 67(3):2173–2187, Mar. 2019.
11

VLC-Based Networking: Feasibility and Challenges

A P REPRINT

[15] F. I. K. Mousa, N. Al Maadeed, K. Busawon, A. Bouridane, and R. Binns. Secure MIMO visible light communication system based on user’s location and encryption. IEEE/OSA J. Lightw. Technol., 35(24):5324–5334, Dec.
2017.

12

