Strain tunable single-photon source based on a quantum dot-micropillar
system
Magdalena Moczała-Dusanowska1, Łukasz Dusanowski1, Stefan Gerhardt1, Yu Ming He2,
Marcus Reindl3, Armando Rastelli3, Rinaldo Trotta3,4, Niels Gregersen5, Sven Höfling1,6, and
Christian Schneider1
1 Technische Physik and Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen Research Center for Complex Material
Systems, Physikalisches Institut, Würzburg University, Am Hubland, Würzburg, Germany
2 Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and Department of Modern Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, China
3 Institute of Semiconductor and Solid State Physics, Johannes Kepler University, Altenbergerstr.
69, 4040 Linz, Austria
4 Department of Physics, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy
5 DTU Fotonik, Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds
Plads 343, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
6 SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9SS, UK

ABSTRACT
Scalable quantum photonic architectures demand highly efficient, high-purity single-photon
sources, which can be frequency matched via external tuning. We demonstrate a singlephoton source based on an InAs quantum dot embedded in a micropillar resonator, which is
frequency tunable via externally-applied stress. Our platform combines the advantages of a
Bragg micropillar cavity and the piezo-strain-tuning technique enabling single photon
spontaneous emission enhancement via the Purcell effect and quantum dot (QD) with tunable
wavelength. Our optomechanical platform has been implemented by integration of
semiconductor-based QD-micropillars on a piezoelectric substrate. The fabricated device
exhibits spontaneous emission enhancement with a Purcell factor of 4.4±0.7 and allows for a
pure triggered single-photon generation with g(2)(0) < 0.07 under resonant excitation. A
quantum dot emission energy tuning range of 0.75 meV for 27 kV/cm applied to the piezo
substrate has been achieved. Our results pave the way towards the scalable implementation
of single-photon quantum photonic technologies using optoelectronic devices.

Keywords: semiconductor quantum dots; micropilar cavity; strain tuning; single-photon
source; resonance fluorescence;

1

Bright sources of indistinguishable single photons are key components for advanced quantum
optics applications such as quantum communication in repeater architectures1, boson
sampling2, and linear optical quantum computing3. Among different kinds of quantum
emitters, semiconductor self-assembled quantum dots (QDs)4 have been shown to be one of
the prime candidates for the generation of single photons5,6 as well as entangled photon
pairs7. However, since QDs are embedded in a high refractive index material, light extraction
in a homogeneous semiconductor medium is strongly limited due to total internal reflection.
Photon extraction can be significantly enhanced by embedding QDs into photonic structures
such as photonic crystal cavities8, circular Bragg grating cavities9, microlenses10, nanowires11,
microdiscs12 or micropillar cavities13,14. Among these architectures, QDs coupled to
micropillar resonators have been shown to effectively utilize spontaneous emission
enhancement via the Purcell effect15, allowing to simultaneously achieve very high degrees
of single photon indistinguishability and high photon extraction efficiencies. The narrowband
spectral enhancement provided by the pillar cavities mitigates the detrimental effects of the
phonon sideband emission on the indistinguishability16,17 in contrast to broadband photonic
structures. In combination with pulsed, resonant excitation schemes, single photon
generation with simultaneous photon indistinguishability higher than 98%, purities above
99% and extraction efficiencies close of 66% were reported, thus outperforming any other
solid state system 5,6,18.

The exploitation of the Purcell effect in high-Q cavities requires careful spectral alignment of
the QD emission and the cavity resonance. This can be accomplished to some extent by
deterministic fabrication of micropillar cavities19,20, but usually a post-fabrication reversible
spectral fine-tuning is still required. Spectral tuning is also critical for the implementation of
identical multiple single-photon sources (SPSs), which can be operated within the spectral
emission bandwidth (homogeneous broadening), and it seems unlikely that growing multiple
QDs of exactly the same energy within the radiative linewidth will become possible. Thus,
post-fabrication tuning of individual QD states to a common frequency seems to be the only
realistic option.
For these reasons, several approaches have been developed in order to tune the emission
energy of self-assembled QDs: Reversible tuning methods, which are feasible to adopt with a
micropillar cavity device involve temperature tuning20 as well as the application of external
2

electric21,22 and magnetic fields23. Spectral control via temperature is rather inadvisable for
high-performance SPSs since the increase of temperature causes phonon-induced
decoherence and consequently loss of photon indistinguishability24,25. On the other hand,
electric-field-based QD energy control in micropillar cavities has been successfully
demonstrated18,21, however, electrical contacting is rather challenging due to the difficulties
in fabricating reliable metal-semiconductor contacts compatible with resonant optical driving
due to the undesired laser scattering from the metal surfaces.
Recently, strain tuning induced by integrated piezoelectric actuators has been successfully
employed as a reliable and powerful tuning knob to control the optical properties of QDs26–
30.

Strain tuning allows for control of QD emission energy31, polarization32, exciton fine

structure27 or even light-hole admixture while maintaining high QD coherence33. Thus far,
strain-tuning of QDs was mostly implemented in planar heterostructures33,34 and broadband
photonic structures providing no or only modest Purcell-enhancement to improve the photon
extraction and indistinguishability. It was further utilized in different photonic structures,
including nanowires35,36, photonic crystal cavities30,37,38, microlenses39, and QDs integrated
into photonic circuits40, which were optimized for in-plane coupling. However, the
implementation of a strain-tunable, resonant cavity platform, such as a micropillar, that
directly utilizes the Purcell-enhancement for the implementation of a highly efficient singlephoton source, has remained elusive.
In this work, we present the successful implementation of such a coupled QD-micropillar
cavity platform integrated onto a piezoelectric actuator. By externally applied stress, we can
tune the energy of QD transitions through the optical resonances of the microcavity, yielding
a strong enhancement of spontaneous emission due to the Purcell effect and making it
possible to characterize the system under various QD-cavity detuning.

DEVICE DESIGN AND FABRICATION
Our devices are based on epitaxially grown self-assembled In(Ga)As QDs, embedded in a
planar microcavity. The epitaxial structures provide strong optical confinement in the growth
direction by distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) composed of 15 and 25 periods of GaAs and
AlAs layers in the top and bottom mirrors, respectively, surrounding a GaAs cavity.

3

The substrate was mechanically lapped down to a thickness of approximately 30 μm.
Afterwards, an epoxy-based photoresist (SU8) was used to bond the sample to a 300 μmthick [Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.72[PbTiO3]0.28 (PMNPT) substrate side coated with chromium/gold
contacts27. As a result, a device consisting of approximately 25 μm GaAs substrate and the
planar microcavity with QDs attached to the piezoelectric actuator has been obtained. In the
next steps, high-resolution electron beam lithography and a subsequent lift-off process were
used to define the micropillars. The pattern was transferred to the sample using Reactive Ion
Etching with an Ar/Cl2 plasma. The etch depth of the micropillars was carefully adjusted, such
that only the top DBR mirrors, the cavity region and finally two to four bottom DBR mirror
pairs were etched. In Figure 1(a) we depict an artistic sketch of the device. A scanning electron
microscope (SEM) image showing an exemplary etched micropillar with a diameter d of about
2.5 μm and a height of about 2.6 μm is presented in the inset of Fig. 1(b). As the last step,
planarization using benzocyclobutene (BCB) polymer was performed to mechanically stabilize
the pillars and protect the etched sidewalls from oxidation. The final devices were mounted
onto an AlN chip carrier, providing heat transfer and electrical contacts to the piezoelectric
actuator via wire bonding.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Our micropillar devices were characterized by means of micro-photoluminescence (μPL)
spectroscopy at a nominal temperature of around 4.5 K. For all experiments, the QDs were
excited optically through a microscope objective with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.4. The
signal emitted from the sample was collected by the same objective, then introduced into a
single mode optical fiber and finally analyzed by a 0.75 m focal length monochromator
equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled silicon CCD detector. For resonance fluorescence
experiments, the cross-polarization configuration was used and the QDs were excited by a
tunable 2 ps pulsed laser with 82 MHz repetition rate. For time-resolved experiments, we
utilized a fast avalanche photo-diode (APD) with 40 ps time-resolution. Second-order photon
correlation measurements were performed in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss configuration by
utilizing a fiber-based beam splitter and a pair of single photon counting APDs with 350 ps
resolution. The photon correlation and time-resolved emission events were acquired by a
multichannel picosecond event timer.
4

The μPL spectrum recorded under non-resonant cw excitation (532 nm laser line) for device
#1 with a 2.5 μm-diameter micropillar is shown in Fig. 1(b). Several sharp peaks stemming
from the emission from QDs and a wider peak which can be assigned to the fundamental
cavity mode are observed. The optical cavity mode peak centered 1.365 eV energy is
characterized by a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 327 μeV, corresponding to a quality
factor Q of 3660. We note that for micropillars with similar diameters, which were etched
through the whole bottom DBR mirror, we would expect an increase of the maximally
obtainable Q factors by approximately a factor of two. However, etching the full structure
would strongly limit the amount of strain transferred from the substrate to the QDs. To study
how the etching depth influences the Purcell factor obtainable in our micropillars, we have
performed numerical simulations using a Fourier Modal Method41 of the Purcell factor as a
function of the number of etched bottom DBR layer pairs and pillar diameter. Indeed, the
reduction of the quality factor, in combination with increased mode volumes, yield a
reduction of the maximally achievable Purcell factors, as displayed in Fig. 1(c). A pillar
diameter in the range of 2-3 µm42,43 is preferred to ensure a narrow beam divergence and a
high collection efficiency. In this diameter range, a good compromise is obtained for a 2-4 of
etched DBR layer pairs for which the Purcell factor is only slightly reduced.

5

FIG. 1. (a) Artistic sketch of a QD-micropillar cavity integrated with the piezoelectric substrate.
(b) Micro-photoluminescence spectrum of a micropillar cavity with embedded QDs (at a temperature
of 4.5 K). Visible are the microcavity fundamental mode and QD emission lines. The microcavity
exhibits a quality factor of around Q = 3660. Inset: SEM image of the studied micropillar cavity (before
planarization) with a diameter of d=2.5 μm. (c) Numerical simulations of the Purcell factor as a
function of pillar diameter d and numbers of bottom DBR etched layer pairs. (d) Numerical simulations
of the extraction efficiency as a function of pillar diameter d and numbers of bottom DBR etched layer
pairs for 0.4 NA and 0.8 NA collection optics.

Numerical simulations of the collection efficiency of our devices, assuming a numerical
aperture of 0.4 and 0.8, as a function of the number of etched bottom DBR layer pairs and
pillar diameter have been performed using a Fourier modal method 41 and are presented in
Fig. 1(d). For shallow etched micropillars, the efficiency as well as the Purcell factor are slightly
reduced by around 10-40%, in comparison to a fully etched micropillar resonator, depending
on the number of the etched DBR mirrors. For the case of four etched DBR layers underneath
the cavity, one can expect extraction efficiencies up to 73% (77%) for micropillars with
dimeters of 2-3 µm and 0.4 (0.8) NA collection optics. Figure 2 depicts the QD emission
tunability of the device #1 as a function of the voltage applied to the PMNPT. The PMNPT was
poled such that a positive (negative) voltage leads to in-plane compression (expansion) of the
substrate and thus of the micropillars. Figure 2(a) shows a color-coded µPL spectral intensity
map (logarithmic scale) recorded for QDs located in device #1 as a function of the voltage
applied to the piezo substrate. The applied voltage was swept in the range from −350 V to
450 V, ramped in steps of 5 V. As expected34, the compressive (tensile) biaxial strain results in
an increase (decrease) of the QD emission energy. A statistical analysis carried out on more
than 100 QDs yielded, that the emission energy of the majority of the QDs placed within the
same micropillar show very similar tuning range and the ratio (within a 15 % margin). On the
other hand, the cavity mode is rather insensitive to the applied strain, and shift only 30 μeV.
This particular feature, which has been already observed and explained for QD in planar
cavities28, gives us the possibility to design a cavity for a specific wavelength and use strain to
tune the QD emission through the cavity mode. In Figure 2(b), we display a zoom on one QD
emission line in the close spectral vicinity of the microcavity mode (plotted in linear color
scale). As we apply external stress to our system, we can spectrally tune this QD through the
cavity mode and observe a strong enhancement of the QD emission at spectral resonance
with the cavity mode.

6

The relation between the QD emission energy and the applied electric field to piezo is plotted
in Fig. 2(c). We extract an overall tuning range of 745 μeV (0.49 nm) over an electric field
modification of 27 kV/cm. A linear relationship between these two parameters is clearly
observed with a strain-tuning slope of 0.93 μeV/V. We note that there exists a trade-off
between the Q factor of the cavity and the obtainable tuning range. The tuning range of our
device is increased by reducing the number of etched mirror pairs in the bottom DBR at the
price of a reduction of the obtainable Q factor and thus, the Purcell factor. For deeply etched
devices, we anticipate that strain relaxation in the bottom DBR section limits the obtainable
tuning range. Therefore, etching a few bottom DBR pairs seems to be the optimal choice for
strain-tunability of QD emission lines and Q factor, as discussed in more detail below.

FIG. 2. (a and b) Color-coded µPL intensity spectral maps of the QDs emission as a function of the
electric field applied to the piezo substrate. (a) Broadband μPL emission map of several QDs located
in one micropillar cavity (logarithmic intensity scale). Most of the emission lines follow the same
spectral shift. (b) Zoom into the μPL intensity map in the area of the fundamental cavity mode (linear
intensity scale). A strong enhancement of the emission due to the Purcell effect at spectral resonance
is observed. (c) QD emission energy as a function of applied piezo-voltage. The application of external
stress via the piezocrystal induces a linear shift of the QD emission energy up to 0.75 meV
(0.93 μeV/V).

For further studies, we investigated a similar device (micropillar #2) with a diameter of d =
2.8 μm with four etched bottom DBR pairs and a slightly improved cavity quality factor of Q =
4388. For this device, a theoretical analysis shows that the attainable value of the Purcell
factor is around 7. In this case, the QD emission at 4.5 K is slightly red detuned from the
fundamental cavity mode resonance (180 μeV) and thus cannot be brought into resonance
by increasing the temperature. Yet, by applying a positive piezo-voltage to our system, it is
possible to tune the QD almost completely into the cavity resonance as depicted in Fig. 3(a).
7

In the inset of Fig. 3(a), the color-coded µPL intensity map of the QD emission as a function of
applied voltage is shown. As the applied positive piezo-voltage is increased, the QD lines blueshift (120 μeV for 13.4 kV/cm), and can be tuned into resonance with the cavity mode. At the
same time, we observe a significant increase of the QD emission intensity, indicating the
spontaneous emission enhancement due to the Purcell effect.

FIG. 3. (a) Micro-photoluminescence spectrum of a micropillar #2 for positive and negative applied
voltages resulting in different energy detuning Δ of QD emission from the cavity mode. By applying a
positive piezo-voltage, the QD emission can be tuned into resonance with the microcavity
fundamental mode. Inset: Color-coded µPL intensity map of the QD emission as a function of the
voltage applied to the piezo substrate. A strong emission enhancement at spectral resonance due to
the Purcell effect is observed. (b) Time-resolved resonance fluorescence measurements of the straintunable single-photon source. Resonance fluorescence time-traces of the QD emission almost at
spectral resonance with the fundamental cavity mode (67 μeV detuning) and (c) detuned by 490 μeV.
Red lines indicate the double exponential fit, where a fast decay corresponds to the QD emission into
the micropillar fundamental mode. (d) Resonance fluorescence decay time (fast component) as a
function of QD-cavity-resonance detuning. Black points are recorded at 4.5 K temperature and various
piezo-voltages; color points are recorded under varied temperatures. The red solid line is a fit to the
QD lifetime vs QD-cavity detuning. A maximum Purcell factor of 4.4±0.7 has been extracted from a
fitting procedure.

To estimate the Purcell enhancement factor for a device #2, we performed time-resolved
resonance fluorescence measurements. For that purpose, the QD has been gradually tuned
into resonance and out of resonance with the fundamental cavity mode using a combination
of piezo- and temperature-tuning. A PL decay curve recorded for the QD emission almost
perfectly tuned into cavity mode resonance (67 μeV detuning) is presented in Fig. 3(b). The
recorded emission time-trace exhibits a two-component exponential decay. We associate the
fast decay with the Purcell-enhanced spontaneous emission of the QD state into the
fundamental cavity mode, while the slower component is interpreted as the cavity mode
emission fed by other QD transitions, which are detuned from the mode resonance 44,45. Our
experimental data have been fitted using a double exponential function indicated in the graph
8

by a red solid line. Upon the fitting procedure, the characteristic decay time τ1 = 133 ps is
extracted for the fast component. Figure 3(c) shows the time-resolved resonance
fluorescence measurement for the QD detuned from the cavity mode by 490 μeV. As in the
previous case, we observe the double exponential decay, with the faster decay time equal to
around 495 ps. This observation proves that our QD-micropillar device indeed exhibits Purcell
enhancement. To quantify more precisely the Purcell enhancement, the decay time traces
have been recorded for several different voltages applied to the piezo substrate at a
temperature of 4.5 K and two additional measurements performed at temperatures of 6.5 K
and 8 K (to enable slightly larger detunings). The extracted characteristic emission times τ1
were then plotted as a function of the emitter-cavity detuning in Fig. 3(d).
This analysis enables us to accurately determine the Purcell factor of our QD-cavity device by
fitting the decay time 𝜏 as a function of the detuning Δ via46
𝜏(𝛥) =

where 𝐹𝑃(max) =

3𝑄(𝜆/𝑛)3
4𝜋 2 𝑉𝑚

𝐹𝑃(max)
ℏ𝜖0 𝑉𝑚
⋅
2
𝐹𝑃(max) 𝛿 + 1 2𝑄𝜇12
Δ𝜔 2

𝑐
is the maximal Purcell factor, 𝛿 = 𝜉 2 ⋅ 4(Δ2 )+Δ𝜔
2 , 𝜉 represents the
𝑐

orientation mismatch between the local cavity field and the dipole moment of the QD, and
Δ𝜔𝑐 is the linewidth of the cavity mode. μ12 is the dipole moment of the radiative transition
and Q and Vm are the quality factor and the mode volume of the cavity mode, respectively.
The analysis yields a Purcell factor of 4.4±0.7, which is in qualitative agreement with the
Purcell-factor derived for a shallow etched pillar microcavity as it is depicted in Fig. 1(c). In
order to estimate the brightness of our experimentally investigated micropillar device, we
calculated the beta factor 𝛽, which describes the emitter coupling efficiency into the pillar
cavity mode. Following the formula 𝛽 = 𝐹𝑃 ⁄(𝐹𝑃 + 1) for Purcell factor 𝐹𝑃 equal to 4.4±0.7, we
estimated that 𝛽 ≈ 80%.

In Figure 4(a), we plot the power dependency of our pulsed resonance fluorescence signal,
measured for QD-cavity detuning of Δ = 180 μeV. A clear oscillatory behavior is observed,
which is a hallmark of the damped Rabi oscillations of a coherently driven two-level system47.
The resonance fluorescence intensity reaches a maximum for the laser power of 223 nW,
corresponding to a π–pulse, where the system reaches inversion. The red solid line is a fit
using a damped Rabi rotation model25. Within this approximation, the dominant phonon
coupling effects are captured by a temperature-dependent Rabi frequency renormalization.
9

Under these conditions, we confirm the single-photon character of the generated resonance
fluorescence photons in a second-order correlation experiment. In Figure 4(b), we plot the
normalized second-order correlation function g(2)(τ) histogram recorded for the considered
QD transition as a function of delay time between subsequently emitted photons. The central
peak is strongly suppressed, a core signature of a single photon source. In order to derive the
purity of the source, we divide the integrated counts of the central peak by the mean value
of the adjacent set of peaks, yielding a g(2)(0) value of 0.07±0.02.

FIG. 4. (a) Resonance fluorescence intensity plotted versus the square root of the excitation power,
recorded for QD-cavity detuning of Δ = 180 μeV. The red solid line is a fit using a damped Rabi rotation
model. (b) Second-order autocorrelation histogram as a function of delay time between subsequently
emitted photons recorded under pulsed s-shell resonant excitation with a π-pulse area (223 nW). The
red solid line is a two-sided exponential decay fit.

In summary, we have realized a strain-tunable single-photon source by integrating a QD-pillar
microcavity onto a piezoelectric substrate. We apply external stress to induce a linear shift of
the QD emission energy (0.75 meV for 27 kV/cm), which is sufficiently large to tune QDs
through the spectral resonances of our pillar cavity. We used a partially etched pillar
geometry that allows achieving an optimal trade-off between spontaneous emission
enhancement and the transfer of strain from the piezoelectric substrate. Using this approach,
we demonstrated that it is possible to tune the QD emission energy in resonance with the
cavity mode and obtain an appreciable Purcell enhancement factor of around 4.4, despite the
quality factor being limited to ~4500. Further development of the tuning capabilities could be
realized following one of two approaches: (i) application of more advanced planarization
schemes40 to increase strain transfer from substrate to layer containing QDs, (ii) using more
powerful piezo substrates such as a micromachined ones33,48, where much higher strain could
be potentially achieved, and thus lead into increase of spectral tuning range. Under resonant
10

pulsed excitation conditions, we demonstrated that our device maintains high purity singlephoton generation with g(2)(0) = 0.07±0.02. The presented platform makes it possible to fully
exploit the advantages of the micropillar structure, with extraction efficiencies up to 73%
(77%) for micropillars with dimeters of 2-3 µm. Due to the applied resonant excitation
scheme, the time uncertainty of the exciton creation has been most likely eliminated6,18 so
that our source may be useful for linear optical quantum computing protocols, where a high
degree of photon indistinguishability is demanded. Spectral tuning capabilities of our single
photon source pave the way towards the scalable quantum photonic architectures, where
multiple single photon sources need to be engineered and tuned into a common energy
resonance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge Silke Kuhn’s technical support. Ł.D. acknowledges financial support
from the Alexander‐von‐Humboldt Foundation. This work has been supported by the State of
Bavaria and the QuantERA HYPER-U-P-S project. Project HYPER-U-P-S has received funding
from the QuantERA ERA-NET Cofund in Quantum Technologies implemented within the
European Union's Horizon 2020 Programme.

REFERENCES
(1)

Sangouard, N.; Simon, C.; Minář, J.; Zbinden, H.; de Riedmatten, H.; Gisin, N. LongDistance Entanglement Distribution with Single-Photon Sources. Phys. Rev. A 2007,
76, 050301.

(2)

Wang, H.; He, Y.-M.; Li, Y.-H.; Su, Z.-E.; Li, B.; Huang, H.-L.; Ding, X.; Chen, M.-C.; Liu,
C.; Qin, J.; et al. High-Efficiency Multiphoton Boson Sampling. Nat. Photonics 2017,
11, 361–365.

(3)

Carolan, J.; Harrold, C.; Sparrow, C.; Martin-Lopez, E.; Russell, N. J.; Silverstone, J. W.;
Shadbolt, P. J.; Matsuda, N.; Oguma, M.; Itoh, M.; et al. Universal Linear Optics.
Science (80-. ). 2015, 349, 711–716.

(4)

Marzin, J.-Y.; Gérard, J.-M.; Izraël, A.; Barrier, D.; Bastard, G. Photoluminescence of
Single InAs Quantum Dots Obtained by Self-Organized Growth on GaAs. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 1994, 73, 716–719.
11

(5)

Unsleber, S.; He, Y.-M.; Gerhardt, S.; Maier, S.; Lu, C.-Y.; Pan, J.-W.; Gregersen, N.;
Kamp, M.; Schneider, C.; Höfling, S. Highly Indistinguishable On-Demand Resonance
Fluorescence Photons from a Deterministic Quantum Dot Micropillar Device with 74%
Extraction Efficiency. Opt. Express 2016, 24, 8539.

(6)

Ding, X.; He, Y.; Duan, Z.-C.; Gregersen, N.; Chen, M.-C.; Unsleber, S.; Maier, S.;
Schneider, C.; Kamp, M.; Höfling, S.; et al. On-Demand Single Photons with High
Extraction Efficiency and Near-Unity Indistinguishability from a Resonantly Driven
Quantum Dot in a Micropillar. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 020401.

(7)

Huber, D.; Reindl, M.; Covre da Silva, S. F.; Schimpf, C.; Martín-Sánchez, J.; Huang, H.;
Piredda, G.; Edlinger, J.; Rastelli, A.; Trotta, R. Strain-Tunable GaAs Quantum Dot: A
Nearly Dephasing-Free Source of Entangled Photon Pairs on Demand. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2018, 121, 033902.

(8)

Englund, D.; Fattal, D.; Waks, E.; Solomon, G.; Zhang, B.; Nakaoka, T.; Arakawa, Y.;
Yamamoto, Y.; Vučković, J. Controlling the Spontaneous Emission Rate of Single
Quantum Dots in a Two-Dimensional Photonic Crystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95,
013904.

(9)

Davanço, M.; Rakher, M. T.; Schuh, D.; Badolato, A.; Srinivasan, K. A Circular Dielectric
Grating for Vertical Extraction of Single Quantum Dot Emission. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011,
99, 1–4.

(10)

Gschrey, M.; Thoma, A.; Schnauber, P.; Seifried, M.; Schmidt, R.; Wohlfeil, B.; Krüger,
L.; Schulze, J. H.; Heindel, T.; Burger, S.; et al. Highly Indistinguishable Photons from
Deterministic Quantum-Dot Microlenses Utilizing Three-Dimensional in Situ ElectronBeam Lithography. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7662.

(11)

Friedler, I.; Sauvan, C.; Hugonin, J. P.; Lalanne, P.; Claudon, J.; Gérard, J. M. Solid-State
Single Photon Sources: The Nanowire Antenna. Opt. Express 2009, 17, 2095.

(12)

Balram, K. C.; Davanço, M.; Lim, J. Y.; Song, J. D.; Srinivasan, K. Moving Boundary and
Photoelastic Coupling in GaAs Optomechanical Resonators. Optica 2014, 1, 414.

(13)

Moreau, E.; Robert, I.; Gérard, J. M.; Abram, I.; Manin, L.; Thierry-Mieg, V. SingleMode Solid-State Single Photon Source Based on Isolated Quantum Dots in Pillar
Microcavities. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 79, 2865–2867.

(14)

Pelton, M.; Santori, C.; Vuc̆ković, J.; Zhang, B.; Solomon, G. S.; Plant, J.; Yamamoto, Y.
Efficient Source of Single Photons: A Single Quantum Dot in a Micropost Microcavity.
12

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89, 233602.
(15)

Gérard, J.; Sermage, B.; Gayral, B.; Legrand, B.; Costard, E.; Thierry-Mieg, V. Enhanced
Spontaneous Emission by Quantum Boxes in a Monolithic Optical Microcavity. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 1998, 81, 1110–1113.

(16)

Grange, T.; Somaschi, N.; Antón, C.; De Santis, L.; Coppola, G.; Giesz, V.; Lemaître, A.;
Sagnes, I.; Auffèves, A.; Senellart, P. Reducing Phonon-Induced Decoherence in SolidState Single-Photon Sources with Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2017, 118, 253602.

(17)

Iles-Smith, J.; McCutcheon, D. P. S.; Nazir, A.; Mørk, J. Phonon Scattering Inhibits
Simultaneous Near-Unity Efficiency and Indistinguishability in Semiconductor SinglePhoton Sources. Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, 521–526.

(18)

Somaschi, N.; Giesz, V.; De Santis, L.; Loredo, J. C.; Almeida, M. P.; Hornecker, G.;
Portalupi, S. L.; Grange, T.; Antón, C.; Demory, J.; et al. Near-Optimal Single-Photon
Sources in the Solid State. Nat. Photonics 2016, 10, 340–345.

(19)

Dousse, A.; Lanco, L.; Suffczyński, J.; Semenova, E.; Miard, A.; Lemaître, A.; Sagnes, I.;
Roblin, C.; Bloch, J.; Senellart, P. Controlled Light-Matter Coupling for a Single
Quantum Dot Embedded in a Pillar Microcavity Using Far-Field Optical Lithography.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101, 30–33.

(20)

He, Y.-M.; Liu, J.; Maier, S.; Emmerling, M.; Gerhardt, S.; Davanço, M.; Srinivasan, K.;
Schneider, C.; Höfling, S. Deterministic Implementation of a Bright, on-Demand
Single-Photon Source with near-Unity Indistinguishability via Quantum Dot Imaging.
Optica 2017, 4, 802.

(21)

Kistner, C.; Heindel, T.; Schneider, C.; Rahimi-Iman, A.; Reitzenstein, S.; Höfling, S.;
Forchel, A. Demonstration of Strong Coupling via Electro-Optical Tuning in HighQuality QD-Micropillar Systems. Opt. Express 2008, 16, 15006.

(22)

Nowak, A. K.; Portalupi, S. L.; Giesz, V.; Gazzano, O.; Dal Savio, C.; Braun, P.-F.; Karrai,
K.; Arnold, C.; Lanco, L.; Sagnes, I.; et al. Deterministic and Electrically Tunable Bright
Single-Photon Source. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3240.

(23)

Reitzenstein, S.; Münch, S.; Franeck, P.; Rahimi-Iman, A.; Löffler, A.; Höfling, S.;
Worschech, L.; Forchel, A. Control of the Strong Light-Matter Interaction between an
Elongated In0.3Ga0.7As Quantum Dot and a Micropillar Cavity Using External
Magnetic Fi. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 127401.
13

(24)

Thoma, A.; Schnauber, P.; Gschrey, M.; Seifried, M.; Wolters, J.; Schulze, J.-H.;
Strittmatter, A.; Rodt, S.; Carmele, A.; Knorr, A.; et al. Exploring Dephasing of a SolidState Quantum Emitter via Time- and Temperature-Dependent Hong-Ou-Mandel
Experiments. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 033601.

(25)

Gerhardt, S.; Iles-Smith, J.; McCutcheon, D. P. S.; He, Y.-M.; Unsleber, S.; Betzold, S.;
Gregersen, N.; Mørk, J.; Höfling, S.; Schneider, C. Intrinsic and Environmental Effects
on the Interference Properties of a High-Performance Quantum Dot Single-Photon
Source. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97, 195432.

(26)

Zander, T.; Herklotz, A.; Kiravittaya, S.; Benyoucef, M.; Ding, F.; Atkinson, P.; Kumar,
S.; Plumhof, J. D.; Dörr, K.; Rastelli, A.; et al. Epitaxial Quantum Dots in Stretchable
Optical Microcavities. Opt. Express 2009, 17, 22452–22461.

(27)

Trotta, R.; Martín-Sánchez, J.; Wildmann, J. S.; Piredda, G.; Reindl, M.; Schimpf, C.;
Zallo, E.; Stroj, S.; Edlinger, J.; Rastelli, A. Wavelength-Tunable Sources of Entangled
Photons Interfaced with Atomic Vapours. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 10375.

(28)

Trotta, R.; Atkinson, P.; Plumhof, J. D.; Zallo, E.; Rezaev, R. O.; Kumar, S.; Baunack, S.;
Schröter, J. R.; Rastelli, A.; Schmidt, O. G. Nanomembrane Quantum-Light-Emitting
Diodes Integrated onto Piezoelectric Actuators. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 2668–2672.

(29)

Trotta, R.; Rastelli, A. Engineering of Quantum Dot Photon Sources via Electro-Elastic
Fields. In: Pre. In Engineering the Atom-Photon Interaction. Nano-Optics and
Nanophotonics.; Predojević, A., Mitchell, M., Eds.; Springer, Cham, 2015.

(30)

Sun, S.; Kim, H.; Solomon, G. S.; Waks, E. Strain Tuning of a Quantum Dot Strongly
Coupled to a Photonic Crystal Cavity. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 151102.

(31)

Kumar, S.; Trotta, R.; Zallo, E.; Plumhof, J. D.; Atkinson, P.; Rastelli, A.; Schmidt, O. G.
Strain-Induced Tuning of the Emission Wavelength of High Quality GaAs/AlGaAs
Quantum Dots in the Spectral Range of the 87 Rb D 2 Lines. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99,
161118.

(32)

Plumhof, J. D.; Trotta, R.; Křápek, V.; Zallo, E.; Atkinson, P.; Kumar, S.; Rastelli, A.;
Schmidt, O. G. Tuning of the Valence Band Mixing of Excitons Confined in
GaAs/AlGaAs Quantum Dots via Piezoelectric-Induced Anisotropic Strain. Phys. Rev. B
- Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2013, 87, 33–35.

(33)

Yuan, X.; Weyhausen-Brinkmann, F.; Martín-Sánchez, J.; Piredda, G.; Křápek, V.; Huo,
Y.; Huang, H.; Schimpf, C.; Schmidt, O. G.; Edlinger, J.; et al. Uniaxial Stress Flips the
14

Natural Quantization Axis of a Quantum Dot for Integrated Quantum Photonics. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9, 1–8.
(34)

Ding, F.; Singh, R.; Plumhof, J. D.; Zander, T.; Křápek, V.; Chen, Y. H.; Benyoucef, M.;
Zwiller, V.; Dörr, K.; Bester, G.; et al. Tuning the Exciton Binding Energies in Single SelfAssembled InGaAs/GaAs Quantum Dots by Piezoelectric-Induced Biaxial Stress. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 2–5.

(35)

Kremer, P. E.; Dada, A. C.; Kumar, P.; Ma, Y.; Kumar, S.; Clarke, E.; Gerardot, B. D.
Strain-Tunable Quantum Dot Embedded in a Nanowire Antenna. Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2014, 90, 201408.

(36)

Yeo, I.; De Assis, P. L.; Gloppe, A.; Dupont-Ferrier, E.; Verlot, P.; Malik, N. S.; Dupuy, E.;
Claudon, J.; Gérard, J. M.; Auffèves, A.; et al. Strain-Mediated Coupling in a Quantum
Dot-Mechanical Oscillator Hybrid System. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 106–110.

(37)

Beetz, J.; Braun, T.; Schneider, C.; Höfling, S.; Kamp, M. Anisotropic Strain-Tuning of
Quantum Dots inside a Photonic Crystal Cavity. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2013, 28.

(38)

Luxmoore, I. J.; Ahmadi, E. D.; Luxmoore, B. J.; Wasley, N. A.; Tartakovskii, A. I.;
Hugues, M.; Skolnick, M. S.; Fox, A. M. Restoring Mode Degeneracy in H1 Photonic
Crystal Cavities by Uniaxial Strain Tuning. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100, 121116.

(39)

Fischbach, S.; Helversen, M. v.; Schmidt, M.; Kaganskiy, A.; Schmidt, R.; Schliwa, A.;
Heindel, T.; Rodt, S.; Reitzenstein, S. A Deterministically Fabricated Spectrally-Tunable
Quantum Dot Based Single-Photon Source. 2018.

(40)

Elshaari, A. W.; Büyüközer, E.; Zadeh, I. E.; Lettner, T.; Zhao, P.; Schöll, E.; Gyger, S.;
Reimer, M. E.; Dalacu, D.; Poole, P. J.; et al. Strain-Tunable Quantum Integrated
Photonics. Nano Lett. 2018, acs.nanolett.8b03937.

(41)

Häyrynen, T.; de Lasson, J. R.; Gregersen, N. Open-Geometry Fourier Modal Method:
Modeling Nanophotonic Structures in Infinite Domains. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 2016, 33,
1298.

(42)

Barnes, W. L.; Björk, G.; Gérard, J. M.; Jonsson, P.; Wasey, J. A. E.; Worthing, P. T.;
Zwiller, V. Solid-State Single Photon Sources: Light Collection Strategies. Eur. Phys. J. D
- At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2002, 18, 197–210.

(43)

Reitzenstein, S.; Forchel, A. Quantum Dot Micropillars. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 2010,
43, 033001.

(44)

Hennessy, K.; Badolato, A.; Winger, M.; Gerace, D.; Atatüre, M.; Gulde, S.; Fält, S.; Hu,
15

E. L.; Imamoğlu, A. Quantum Nature of a Strongly Coupled Single Quantum Dot–cavity
System. Nature 2007, 445, 896–899.
(45)

Suffczyński, J.; Dousse, A.; Gauthron, K.; Lemaître, A.; Sagnes, I.; Lanco, L.; Bloch, J.;
Voisin, P.; Senellart, P. Origin of the Optical Emission within the Cavity Mode of
Coupled Quantum Dot-Cavity Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 027401.

(46)

He, Y.-M.; Liu, J.; Maier, S.; Emmerling, M.; Gerhardt, S.; Davanço, M.; Srinivasan, K.;
Schneider, C.; Höfling, S. Deterministic Implementation of a Bright, on-Demand
Single-Photon Source with near-Unity Indistinguishability via Quantum Dot Imaging.
Optica 2017, 4, 802.

(47)

Muller, A.; Flagg, E. B.; Bianucci, P.; Wang, X. Y.; Deppe, D. G.; Ma, W.; Zhang, J.;
Salamo, G. J.; Xiao, M.; Shih, C. K. Resonance Fluorescence from a Coherently Driven
Semiconductor Quantum Dot in a Cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 187402.

(48)

Martín-Sánchez, J.; Trotta, R.; Piredda, G.; Schimpf, C.; Trevisi, G.; Seravalli, L.; Frigeri,
P.; Stroj, S.; Lettner, T.; Reindl, M.; et al. Reversible Control of In-Plane Elastic Stress
Tensor in Nanomembranes. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2016, 4, 682–687.

16

