Pathos in Play: How Game Designers Evoke Negative Emotions
Tom Blount

Callum Spawforth

University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
T.Blount@soton.ac.uk

University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
C.Spawforth@soton.ac.uk

arXiv:1909.06799v1 [cs.CY] 15 Sep 2019

ABSTRACT
Much in the same way that people enjoy, from time to time, the
pathos of consuming a tragic film or piece of literature, designers
of digital games are increasingly including elements within their
games that evoke uncomfortable or negative emotions in their
audience, allowing players to introspect and explore “adult” themes
and topics, including loss, regret, powerlessness, mental-health, and
mortality. In this paper we examine a number of recent games as
case studies and explore the way in which they use their mechanics
to evoke feelings of discomfort in their players, and the way in
which pathos serves play. Through this, we highlight a number
of different techniques used by game designers and conclude by
proposing further work in this space to determine exactly why
players are drawn to these types of games, and to explore the ways
in which research in this field could be used to drive yet more
emotive and empathetic games.

KEYWORDS
digital games, game design, mature games, empathetic design, pathos

1

INTRODUCTION

Many people enjoy, from time to time, the pathos from consuming
a tragic film or piece of literature; the so-called “sad film paradox”
centres around the seemingly contradictory, yet eminently observable, fact that people enjoy partaking in something that causes
them to be sad [7, 13]. Equally, the notion that games have to be
“fun” to have value has long been disputed [6, 8, 12, 16, 18]; games
as a medium are able to fill a similar niche of embracing tragedy
for the purpose of enjoyment and catharsis. Jørgensen describes
this gratifying experience of negative emotions as “positive discomfort” [9].
However, as an interactive medium, games offer the unique ability to place their audience at the heart of the emotional core of
their story, allowing developers to build a player’s empathy for
characters through the use of organic exploration and dialogue,
place players in ethical quandaries that they will (hopefully) never
be forced to encounter in real life, and even making the player complicit in the immoral actions of the story’s characters, by enforcing
their participation (rather than their passive observation) in the
events of the story.
In this paper we consider a number of popular games that fulfil
this role, examine the techniques the developers utilise to evoke
negative feelings in their audience, and discuss the merits of these
techniques, as well as areas of further research in this space.

2

CASES

In this section, we explore some of the techniques used by game
designers to deliberately evoke feelings of sadness or discomfort in

the audience. Specifically, these are not games aimed as a means
of education or therapy to survivors of loss or trauma; these are
games aimed more generally at mass-market entertainment.

2.1

Soma

Horror games are perhaps one of the more traditional ways that
audiences allow themselves to experience a negative emotional
state – fear, in this instance – in a safe environment. Soma [4] is
one example of a psychological horror game designed to give the
player a persistent sense of dread; in this case, as they explore the
underwater facility of PATHOS-II. The player is faced with a variety
of experiences designed to scare them using classic film tricks such
as jump-scares and disquieting audio-visual design – for example,
distorting the player’s view when they look directly at a monster,
which is in itself uncomfortable and helps prolong their fear of the
unknown.
This is particularly effective with combined with the interactivity
inherent to games. Any action the player takes such as pushing a
button, opening a door or walking forward, risks triggering one
of these experiences. The result is a tense atmosphere, in which
taking any action is both uncomfortable and exciting. Notably, none
of these actions allow the player to harm or delay the monsters
they come across, leading the player to feel powerless against them.
Reinforcing these feelings is the game’s soundscape, in which the
irregular clang of machinery or distant footsteps of monsters serve
to remind the player of their fragility of their safety.

Figure 1: “Did something just move?” Soma discourages players from taking a close look at the monsters

2.2

Depression Quest

Depression Quest [14] is a choose-your-own adventure game created
using Twine. In the game, the protagonist suffers from depression;
the player guides them through their day to day life, in which they
wrestle with dissatisfaction at work, relationship issues, and their
compounding symptoms.

arXiv Preprint, Sept. 2019,

Tom Blount and Callum Spawforth

Throughout the game, the player is presented with a number of
choices of how to act. However, as the player progresses, the more
“positive” options (such as spending time with friends, or talking
about their feelings with their partner) may become “locked off”
due to their worsening illness. These choices can still be viewed,
but are inaccessible (struck through with bold red). This serves as
a metaphor for what the protagonist is experiencing, and instils a
feeling of hopelessness and powerlessness in the player; they are
able to see what they would like to do — or what they “should” do
— but are unable to take action towards it, without having carefully
and deliberately shepherded their limited resources.

Figure 3: As the narrative of Doki Doki progresses, reality
begins to warp around the protagonist

2.4

Figure 2: Some of the choices presented in Depression Quest

2.3

Doki Doki Literature Club!

Doki Doki Literature Club! [15] is, at first glance, a typical animestyle dating-sim, in which the protagonist joins their high school’s
literature club in order to deepen their relationship with their classmates. However, events quickly take a subversive turn when Sayori
(the protagonist’s childhood sweetheart), reveals she is depressed
and, shortly afterwards, hangs herself. At this point, the game
restarts, with the player’s previous saves erased, and Sayori notably
absent from the game, the other characters having no memory of
her existence.
This pattern ultimately repeats itself, with the game appearing
more and more corrupted each time (such as in Figure 3), until
only one character, Monika, is left. In this playthrough, Monika
reveals herself to be the game’s ultimate antagonist who has been
manipulating the files of the other characters after she became selfaware within the confines of the game. She confesses her love for
the player — not the protagonist, but the player — and the player
is only able to progress by exiting the game and manipulating the
game’s files directly (mirroring the way Monika manipulated the
other characters).
While this might shatter the player’s immersion in one sense, in
another it heightens it by creating a new narrative that acknowledges the existence of the game itself, while deliberately blurring
the lines between fiction and reality.

This War of Mine

This War of Mine [1] puts the player directly in control of the plight
of a group of civilians caught in an ongoing civil war. The player
must help them build and maintain their shelter during the day,
and scavenge for resources (such as food, medicine, and building
materials) during the night.
While This War of Mine never explicitly coerces the player into
making an immoral choice, the game is rife with the opportunity,
and circumstances often lead the player to take actions that make
them feel uneasy. As an example, while out scavenging, the player
may stumble across a soldier threatening to assault a young woman;
the player is often ill-equipped to intervene, and has the choice
to simply walk away and pretend they saw nothing. As another
example, as the game progresses, and winter draws in, supplies
become more and more scarce, subtly reinforcing more and more
desperate behaviour from the player, potentially culminating in
violently robbing an elderly couple for their supplies (Figure 4), to
save their own group from starvation [3].

Figure 4: Stealing from an elderly couple to avoid starvation
in This War of Mine

2.5

That Dragon, Cancer

Some games are able to evoke feelings of discomfort just from
their premise alone (and so much so that, while writing this paper,

Pathos in Play: How Game Designers Evoke Negative Emotions
we had to draw straws to decide who would play this particular
example). As the name suggests, That Dragon, Cancer [5] describes
the true story of a couple, raising their son who was diagnosed
with terminal cancer at the age of twelve months. The story is told
through small vignettes of their experiences over the next four
years, using point-and-click exploration and puzzle-solving. While
the mechanics of this game do not inherently convey the emotional
content of the game, we feel that this title merits inclusion to our
case study purely down to the raw emotional force of the narrative
as presented through interaction; the game encourages players to
contemplate both their own mortality, and how they may have to
cope with the mortality of the ones they love [17].

arXiv Preprint, Sept. 2019,
use certain weapons. However, as the game goes on, these gradually
become more disturbing (“Cognitive dissonance is an uncomfortable
feeling caused by holding two conflicting ideas simultaneously,” “The
US military does not condone the killing of unarmed combatants. But
this isn’t real, so why should you care?”, or “To kill for yourself is
murder. To kill for your government is heroic. To kill for entertainment
is harmless.” ) until finally, they begin to outright blame and chastise
the player for their part in the events of the game: “This is all your
fault.” “Do you feel like a hero yet?” “If you were a better person, you
wouldn’t be here.” By using influences outside of gameplay (in conjunction with the gameplay itself) the player is directly compelled
to feel uncomfortable not just at the actions of the protagonist, but
at themselves for allowing those actions to happen. In a game that
frequently examines the themes of choice, and choicelessness, the
only real choice left to the player is to be complicit in immoral
actions, or not to play at all.

Figure 5: One of the many moving scenes captured in That
Dragon, Cancer

2.6

Spec Ops: The Line

Spec Ops: The Line [19] has, on the surface, all the appearances
of a fairly standard gung-ho, war-glorifying, third-person-shooter.
However, as with Doki Doki, this initial appearance is quickly subverted. The protagonist – Walker, a special-forces soldier sent into
a disaster-ravaged Dubai to aid the rescue of the civilian populace
– finds himself drawn into conflict with “friendly” American forces
which continues to escalate, partly due to circumstance and mutual
miscommunication, and partly due to the choices Walker makes.
One of the pivotal moments of the game has the protagonist
use white phosphorus — a controversial incendiary weapon — on
American troops (shown in Figure 6). This is a desperate and deeply
disturbing act in itself, but is worsened all the more when (unintentionally, and unavoidably) a group of refugees are caught in
the crossfire. After this moment, and throughout the rest of the
game, Walker begins to exhibit symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder, suffering from hallucinations, and delusions.
In fact, Spec Ops has so many of these well-designed, explicitly
uncomfortable and disquieting moments of gameplay, that an entire
paper could be dedicated to critiquing their meaning and impact.
Fortunately, Keogh has already done just that [10].
Despite the more explicitly disturbing elements that the player
experiences through gameplay, perhaps one of the most effective
techniques to evoke a response in the player within Spec Ops is the
use, and evolution of, the game’s loading screens. Initially, they contain tips for playing the game, such as how to take cover, or how to

Figure 6: The aftermath of a white phosphorous attack in
Spec Ops: The Line

3

ANALYSIS

While the games presented above represent a tiny fraction of the
games that evoke negative emotions in their players, we can already
see a number of generalisable techniques beginning to emerge.
Depression Quest and Soma both render feelings of hopelessness
and powerlessness in their players by presenting the players with
challenging situations, then removing the player’s ability to address
those challenges. These games do this in stark contrast to standard
game design philosophy, in which more interactivity and choice is
better; they sacrifice these in order to deliver a greater emotional
blow to the player. This effect is only amplified by contrasting it
with the power-fantasy prevalent in games.
Spec Ops and Doki Doki share a number of similar traits in the
way in which the evoke a response from their players. Firstly, both
present themselves as typical examples of a particular genre, before
going out of their way to subvert the established norms of that
genre. Another technique common to both Spec Ops and Doki Doki
is breaking the fourth wall and addressing the player directly, albeit
in different ways. Doki Doki directly addresses the player, through
dialogue and by “threatening” their save file, while Spec Ops forces
the player to reflect on their actions in the game. In both cases, the
games seek to erode the wall between the safe environment of the
game and reality, leaving the player more vulnerable to the game’s
emotional payload than they otherwise might have been.

arXiv Preprint, Sept. 2019,
In the case of Spec Ops, this may have been necessary; many
games (such as Grand Theft Auto, Infamous, or Star Wars: Knights
of the Old Republic, to name a few) allow, and even encourage, the
player to not only take unambiguously “evil” actions, but to revel
in them. These games do not evoke that same visceral level of
unease that, for example, Spec Ops creates (Jørgensen’s “positive
discomfort”), instead allowing the player to experience a sense of
catharsis through subverting common social taboos.
Finally, a game’s premise or theming alone may be enough to
evoke a sense of discomfort in the player, such as in That Dragon,
Cancer, by forcing the player to address difficult topics frequently
avoided in day-to-day life. Other narrative-focused games such
as The Beginner’s Guide, Gone Home, or Dear Esther use environments and exploration to convey their story and instil a sensation
of melancholy and nostalgia in their players. This can be compared
(and contrasted) with games which use deliberately shocking material and imagery that do so to generate outrage in the popular eye
as a means of marketing, rather than providing the player with any
sort of deeper emotional experience.

4

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we have examined a number of techniques used
by game designers, such as manipulating the player’s sense of
perception, limiting the choices available to the player, encouraging
(and outright forcing) them to commit actions that they would
otherwise choose not to, and “meta-game” elements which toy with
the accepted norms of games, such as breaking the fourth wall or
manipulating loading screens and save files.
Our intention is that this discussion inspires new and interesting avenues of research. For example, although we discuss several
different techniques used by designers, in this work we only discuss our own anecdotal experiences of how these games affected
us. A broader study could aim to do further this work twofold:
firstly, to construct a complete taxonomy of the design techniques
used to evoke negative emotions in games, and secondly to thoroughly deconstruct the range of players’ emotional responses to
these techniques. In addition, it may be beneficial to seek a better
understanding of what draws players to these games in general,
and whether there is an overlap with similar media such as films
or literature.
Another avenue in this direction of research is exploring how
the level of immersion [2] affects the level of emotional impact,
both in terms of empathy with non-player characters, and with the
willingness (and ability) to perform particular acts. For example,
are players more impacted when witnessing events from a firstperson perspective, than they are from a third-person perspective
(despite maintaining the same ability to interact with the virtual
world around them). This could be further extended to investigate
virtual reality, and they ways in which players react to some of the
techniques described above – as well as more “traditional” actions
encountered in games, such as the application of violence – in a
wholly immersive environment. Taking this to the extreme, this
type of research could be extended further to encapsulate the genre
of “Alternate Reality Games” [11] in which the lines between game
and reality are blurred even further. However, the findings from

Tom Blount and Callum Spawforth
work such as this may not be applicable to more traditional games
media.
Overall, we aim to reiterate that games do not have to be “fun” to
be absorbing or engaging; there is clearly a desire for a wide range
of games that allow players – or give players the opportunity to
allow themselves – to explore an equally wide range of emotions,
both positive and negative.

REFERENCES
[1] 11 bit studios. 2014. This War of Mine. Mobile/Console/Desktop.
[2] Emily Brown and Paul Cairns. 2004. A grounded investigation of game immersion.
In CHI’04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 1297–
1300.
[3] Stephanie de Smale, Martijn JL Kors, and Alyea M Sandovar. 2017. The case
of This War of Mine: A production studies perspective on moral game design.
Games and Culture (2017), 1555412017725996.
[4] Frictional Games. 2015. Soma. Console/Desktop.
[5] Numinous Games. 2016. That Dragon, Cancer. Mobile/Desktop.
[6] Clifford Geertz. 1973. The interpretation of cultures. Vol. 5019. Basic books.
[7] Julian Hanich, Valentin Wagner, Mira Shah, Thomas Jacobsen, and Winfried
Menninghaus. 2014. Why we like to watch sad films. The pleasure of being
moved in aesthetic experiences. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts
8, 2 (2014), 130.
[8] Kristine Jørgensen. 2014. Devil’s Plaything: On the Boundary between Playful
and Serious. In Proceedings of Nordic DiGRA 2014 Conference.
[9] Kristine Jørgensen. 2016. The Positive Discomfort of Spec Ops: The Line. Game
Studies 16, 2 (2016).
[10] Brendan Keogh. 2013. Killing is Harmless: A Critical Reading of Spec Ops The Line.
Stolen Projects.
[11] Jeffrey Kim, Elan Lee, Timothy Thomas, and Caroline Dombrowski. 2009. Storytelling in new media: The case of alternate reality games, 2001–2009. First
Monday 14, 6 (2009).
[12] Thomas M Malaby. 2007. Beyond play: A new approach to games. Games and
culture 2, 2 (2007), 95–113.
[13] Mary Beth Oliver. 1993. Exploring the paradox of the enjoyment of sad films.
Human Communication Research 19, 3 (1993), 315–342.
[14] Zoë Quinn. 2014. Depression Quest. Web. http://www.depressionquest.com/
[15] Team Salvato. 2017. Doki Doki Literature Club! Desktop.
[16] Richard Schechner. 2017. Performance studies: An introduction. Routledge.
[17] Gareth Richard Schott. 2017. That Dragon, Cancer: Contemplating life and death
in a medium that has frequently trivialized both. In Digital Games Research
Association Conference (DiGRA), Vol. 14. Digital Games Research Association,
1–10.
[18] Jaakko Stenros. 2015. Playfulness, play, and games: A constructionist ludology
approach. (2015).
[19] Darkside Game Studios Yager Development and YAGER. 2012. Spec Ops: The
Line. Console/Desktop.

