MPP–2019–198, LMU–ASC 32/19, IPhT-T19/133, CPHT-RR055.092019

Swampland, Gradient Flow and Infinite Distance
Alex Kehagiasa , Dieter Lüstb,c , Severin Lüstd,e

arXiv:1910.00453v3 [hep-th] 14 Apr 2020

a

Physics Division, National Technical University of Athens
15780 Zografou Campus, Athens, Greece
b

Arnold–Sommerfeld–Center for Theoretical Physics,
Ludwig–Maximilians–Universität, 80333 München, Germany
c

d

Max–Planck–Institut für Physik, Werner–Heisenberg–Institut,
80805 München, Germany

Institut de Physique Théorique, Université Paris Saclay, CEA, CNRS
Orme des Merisiers
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
e

CPHT, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris,
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France

Abstract
In the first part of this paper we will work out a close and so far not yet noticed
correspondence between the swampland approach in quantum gravity and geometric flow
equations in general relativity, most notably the Ricci flow. We conjecture that following
the gradient flow towards a fixed point, which is at infinite distance in the space of
background metrics, is accompanied by an infinite tower of states in quantum gravity. In
case of the Ricci flow, this conjecture is in accordance with the generalized distance and
AdS distance conjectures, which were recently discussed in the literature, but it should
also hold for more general background spaces. We argue that the entropy functionals
of gradient flows provide a useful definition of the generalized distance in the space of
background fields. In particular we give evidence that for the Ricci flow the distance ∆
can be defined in terms of the mean scalar curvature of the manifold, ∆ ∼ log R̄. For a
more general gradient flow, the distance functional also depends on the string coupling
constant.
In the second part of the paper we will apply the generalized distance conjecture
to gravity theories with higher curvature interactions, like higher derivative R2 and W 2
terms. We will show that going to the weak coupling limit of the higher derivative terms
corresponds to the infinite distance limit in metric space and hence this limit must be
accompanied by an infinite tower of light states. For the case of the R2 or W 2 couplings,
this limit corresponds to the limit of a small cosmological constant or, respectively, to a
light additional spin-two field in gravity. In general we see that the limit of small higher
curvature couplings belongs to the swampland in quantum gravity, just like the limit of
a small U (1) gauge coupling belongs to the swampland as well.

1

Introduction

Recently the so-called swampland approach [1–3] addressed the important question of what
kind of effective field theories, albeit being apparently fully consistent from the quantum
field theory point of view, cannot be consistently embedded into quantum gravity. During
the course of this discussion, it turned out that directions in the field space, which are
associated to large field values and to weak coupling in quantum field theory, are rejected
in quantum gravity in the sense that they are accompanied by an infinite tower of almost
massless particles. Hence the field theory cutoff scale has to be as low as the mass scale of
the tower itself and eventually becomes zero for infinite field values, where the effective field
description is invalidated at all. One of the best understood examples of the swampland idea
is the weak gravity conjecture [4], stating that a U (1) gauge theory with very small gauge
coupling constant is accompanied by a tower of very light states.
The swampland idea together with the infinite distance conjecture was tested in string
theory in many interesting instances [5–21]. In many cases so far one asks the question, if
particular effective matter quantum field theories like effective gauge theories can be consistently coupled to quantum gravity or not. In this paper we will consider the problem,
which kind of effective gravity theories belong to the swampland and which ones, on the
other hand, constitute fully consistent quantum gravity theories. Previous attempts in this
direction are the (refined) de Sitter conjecture [22, 23], bounds on slow roll inflation and
the de Sitter swampland [24] and the quantum exclusion of de Sitter space [25–29], which
conjecture that quantum gravity with a positive cosmological constant is inconsistent. For
anti-de Sitter space, the AdS distance conjecture [30] states that the limit of vanishing AdS
cosmological constant Λ → 0 is at infinite distance in field space and hence accompanied by
an infinite tower of massless states. Another example [31], where the swampland idea was
utilized within gravity, are massive spin-two theories, leading to the conjecture that the limit
of very light massive spin-two particles belongs to the swampland in the sense that it is again
vetoed by an infinite tower of light states.
The AdS distance conjecture is based on a specific generalization [30] of the original distance conjecture, applying it not only to internal moduli fields but also to the d-dimensional
space-time metric itself. For the case of Weyl rescaling of the space-time metric the generalized distance conjecture then immediately leads to the AdS distance conjecture.
Looking at the generalized distance conjecture from a more general, geometric point
of view, we will show that the definition of the distance within the space of background
metrics is very closely related to mathematical flow equations in general relativity, where one
follows the flow of a family of metrics with respect to a certain path in field space. The most
famous example is the Ricci flow, introduced by Hamilton [32], and subsequently investigated,
among others, by Perelman [33]. In the first part of this paper we will work out the close
correspondence between the generalized distance conjecture and the Ricci flow. We will
first show that for curved Einstein spaces the fixed points of the Ricci flow with vanishing
curvature are indeed at infinite distance in the field space with respect to a canonically
defined distance, which was already used in [30]. Even more concretely, the Ricci flow in
the cosmological constant Λ leads to a fixed point with zero cosmological constant, which
is infinitely far away from any finite value of Λ. Using this observation we conjecture that
following the Ricci flow towards a fixed point, which is at infinite distance in the background
space, is accompanied by an infinite tower of states in quantum gravity. We are testing this
conjecture also by several other examples. We also discuss the role of the Ricci flow in a
1

proper string theory embedding and also for large distance ”flows” in the moduli space of
Calabi-Yau manifolds.
A second important point, we conjecture and give evidence for, is that the entropy functionals of the gradient flow equations provide a sensible definition for the distance and hence
for corresponding masses of the tower of states along the flow. For the case of the Ricci
flow, the relevant distance can be defined in terms of the scalar curvature of the background
metric: ∆ ≃ log R. Considering the combined dilaton-metric flow, the corresponding grading
flow is derived from the entropy functional F. As we will see F provides a good definition
for the distance in the combined field space of the background metric and of the string coupling constant gs . This argument will be again augmented by an explicit example related to
two-dimensional λ-deformed backgrounds [34, 35] and the two-dimensional black hole solution [36]. Finally, the entropy functional W of Perelman provides a proper definition of the
distance for the Perelman flow.
The use of the geometric flow equations provides a new and more geometric understanding
of the infinite distance conjecture within the swampland approach. But this connection also
puts the gradient flows in mathematics into a quantum gravity perspective, in the sense that
it shows that approaching infinite distance fixed points of the gradient flow the associated
gravity theories always need a quantum gravity completion in the form of extra light quantum
states.
In the second part of the paper we consider the generalized distance conjecture, applied
for Weyl rescalings of the external space-time metric in the context of effective d-dimensional
gravity theories that include higher curvature interactions. Concretely, we will argue that
the associated higher curvature coupling constants exhibit an infinite distance behaviour
with respect to Weyl rescalings of the d-dimensional metric. This means that whenever one
of these couplings goes to zero (or infinity) an infinite tower of states becomes massless. This
behaviour results entirely from an infinite distance with respect to the d-dimensional external
metric and applies with no reference to any internal space. However the associated tower of
massless states often originates from some extra internal compact space, like KK modes of
the internal space.1
We will also argue that already the limit of vanishing gauge coupling constants of an
effective U (1) gauge theory is at infinite distance with respect to Weyl rescalings of the
external metric. Then we will discuss in more detail first quadratic gravity theory with R2
action. The weak coupling limit with respect to the R2 coupling constant will be shown to be
at infinite distance; this behaviour is shown to be equivalent to the AdS distance conjecture of
the cosmological constant. Similarly, for the quadratic Weyl-square theory with W 2 action,
we will see that the weak coupling limit is at infinite distance with respect to Weyl rescalings.
Now this behaviour is equivalent to the spin-two swampland conjecture [31], stating that the
limit of vanishing spin-two mass is at infinite distance, being always associated with an
infinite tower of light states. As we will discuss in addition, considering the W 2 -theory on an
(A)dS background, one obtains a theory with a partially massless spin-two field. As already
mentioned in [37], we will also show that the Higuchi limit [38] is at infinite distance with
respect to Weyl rescaling of the (A)dS metric.
1

But it could also be that the infinite tower has no interpretation in terms of extra dimensions.

2

2

Einstein gravity, the generalized distance conjecture and
Ricci flow

The generalized distance conjecture
Let us recall the generalized distance conjecture [30]: in the following we consider d-dimensional
manifolds Md with metric variations gµν (τ ), where τ parametrizes a family of metrics of Md .
This means that we do not apply the distance conjecture to the variations of some matter
fields, like the scalar moduli of an internal Calabi-Yau manifold, but to the variations of the
space-time metric itself. We consider a geodesic path γ in field space, which is parametrised
by τ ranging from an initial τi to a final τf , so that the proper metric distance ∆ along the
path is [40, 41]
1
Z
Z τf 
√ M N OP ∂gM O ∂gN P 2
1
gg
g
dτ ,
(1)
∆g = c
VM M
∂τ
∂τ
τi
where c ∼ O(1) is a constant depending on the dimension of M .2 Then the generalized
distance conjecture states that there must be an infinite tower of states with mass scale m (τ )
such that
m (τf ) ∼ m (τi ) e−α|∆g | ,
(2)
where α ∼ O(1). Generically the masses m (τi ) at the initial value τi are of the order of the
Planck mass, such that one obtains
m ∼ Mp e−α|∆g | .

(3)

The mass scale m is setting the natural cut-off space, above which the effective field theory
description breaks down. Hence for large distance variations with |∆g | → ∞ in the space of
metrics, we get in quantum gravity a massless tower of states, which invalidates the effective
field theory description. In this sense the large distance limit is said to lead to effective field
theories that belong to the swampland.
Besides the general notion of distance in the space of metrics, the so-called Weyl distance
was especially considered in [30]. It refers to distances in metric space associated to variations
of the external metric that are Weyl rescalings. Specifically, under an external Weyl variation
of the external space with an exponential Weyl factor of the form
g̃µν = e2τ gµν .

(4)

Applying the distance formula (1) to the Weyl transformed metric, or equivalently determining the canonically normalised field for measuring the distance, one gets that the metric
distance with respect to Weyl rescalings is just given by the field τ :
∆g ≃ τf − τi ≃ τ .

(5)

According to the distance conjecture there is a corresponding tower of states with masses
that scale as
m ∼ e−ατ .
(6)
2
In this distance formula was applied for transverse traceless metric variations. However it is also valid for
general variations of the metric.

3

These tower of states become light in the limit ∆g ≃ τ → ∞. Note that there is also the
opposite large distance limit where ∆g ≃ τ → −∞. In this second large distance limit it
can happen that a different, dual tower of states becomes light, which scales as m′ ∼ eατ .
Whether there is only one or two tower of light states depends on the circumstances of the
considered coupling (see also the discussion in section III).
As in [30], we can now consider a family of (A)dS vacua parametrised by a variation of
the cosmological constant Λ(τ ) from Λi to Λf . Specifically, under Weyl rescaling (4) the AdS
cosmological constant is transforming in the following way:
1
Λ = − (d − 1) (d − 2) Mp2 e−2τ .
2

(7)

It follows that the metric distance between an initial value Λi and a final value Λf is given as
!
Λi
.
(8)
∆g ≃ τf − τi ≃ log
Λf
We see that the limit Λf → 0 is at infinite distance with respect to Weyl rescalings of the
(A)dS metric, since it corresponds to the limit τ → ∞. Actually, this behaviour can then be
combined with the generalised distance conjecture (6) to state the
AdS Distance Conjecture : In quantum gravity on a d-dimensional AdS space with cosmological constant Λ, there exists an infinite tower of states with mass scale m which, as
Λ → 0, behaves (in Planck units) as
m ∼ |Λ|α ,
(9)
where α is a positive order-one number.
Furthermore one expects that for AdS spaces that α ≥ 1/2. The same kind of distance
conjecture can be also formulated for positive cosmological constant, i.e. in de Sitter space,
if it exists in string theory or in quantum gravity. In fact, it was argued in [30] that for dS
space the same relation between Λ and m holds, but with 0 ≤ α ≤ 1/2.3
Formally one could also consider a ”dual” infinite distance limit with τ → −∞. However
this limit leads to a very large cosmological constant, Λ → ∞ in Planck units, and the
associated curvature of space time is also super-Planckian. It is not clear, if a tower of light
states appears in this large curvature limit. Therefore we discard this non-geometric regime
for the moment, keeping τ ≥ 0, but we will come back to the limit τ → −∞ in string theory,
in M-theory and also in section III, when we discuss various coupling constants.

2.1

Ricci flow and infinite distance

Let us now consider Einstein gravity on d-dimensional spaces Md and a specified family of
background metrics gµν (t), where now t is the parameter, along we want to consider the Ricci
flow. The Ricci flow equation, introduced by Hamilton [32], is a particular partial differential
equation, which relates the change of the metric to the Ricci tensor Rµν of the associated
manifold:
∂
gµν (t) = −2Rµν (t).
(10)
∂t
3
It might be tempting to speculate that there is a kind of duality between AdS and dS space, namely an
′
′
exchange of the towers mAdS ↔ mdS when exchanging (−ΛAdS )1/2+α ↔ (ΛdS )1/2−α .

4

Note that t here has mass dimensions −2 and it is different from the parameter τ parametrizing the Weyl rescaling in (4). Notice also that t should not be confused with the physical time
coordinate. Ricci flow implies that for positive Ricci curvature the manifold is contracting
and for regions of negative curvature the manifold is extending. Of particular interest are
the fixed points ĝµν (t̂) of the Ricci flow, namely those points, where the Ricci flow is ending.
These fixed points satisfy
∂
gµν (t)|t=t̂ = 0 .
(11)
∂t
Hence the Ricci tensor is zero at the fixed point of the Ricci flow:
R̂µν (t̂) = 0 .

(12)

From this equation we see that the fixed point of the Ricci flow is flat space-time with
vanishing curvature and vanishing cosmological constant. On the other hand, as discussed
in [30], the metric with vanishing cosmological constant is at infinite Weyl distance in the
space of all AdS metrics. This observation leads us to the following Ricci flow conjecture:
Conjecture A: Consider quantum gravity on a family of background metrics gµν (t)
satisfying the Ricci flow equation (10). There exists an infinite tower of states which become
massless when following the flow towards a fixed point ĝµν at infinite distance.
In general, the metric distance ∆g (t, t̂) along the Ricci flow between t and the fix-point
t̂ is a function of t and t̂, which has to be determined for a given background metric. The
associated tower of states is supposed to scale as
m(t̂) ∼ m(t)e−α|∆g (t,t̂)| .

(13)

Typically for many examples the fix-point t̂ will be either at t̂ = +∞ or t̂ = −∞. Note the
tower of states can only appear when following the Ricci flow to the fixed point. The theory
at the fixed point, like e.g. Minkowski space, does not necessarily contain an infinite tower of
massless states, but it is typically part of a larger (higher dimensional) space-time. However
in case of infinite distance, the fixed point theory can never be reached, which means that
the transition from the theories along the flow to the fixed point theory is discontinuous.
Let us check this conjecture for the simple cases of Einstein spaces and in particular for
(A)dS with non-zero cosmological constant. For that purpose let us calculate the evolution
of the scalar curvature. It is easy to verify that, using (10) and the definition of the scalar
curvature, the latter evolves as
∂R
= ∇2 R + 2Rµν Rµν .
∂t

(14)

For an AdS or dS space and more general for a d-dimensional Einstein space with
Rµν = Λgµν ,

(15)

we find that Eq.(14) leads to the following simple Ricci flow equation for the cosmological
constant:
dΛ
= 2 Λ2 .
dt
5

(16)

It is obvious that the fixed point of the flow equation for the cosmological constant is at
Λ = 0. The explicit solution to the above equation is
Λ(t) =

Λ0
,
1 − 2Λi (t − ti )

(17)

where Λi is the cosmological constant at some initial time ti .
Λi = Λ(ti ).

(18)

We see that |Λ(t)|, depending on its sign, approaches zero at t → ∞ or t → −∞. In
particular for an initial AdS space with negative Λi < 0, the Ricci flow ends at flat space at
t → ∞ (fixed point of the Ricci flow) corresponding to an immortal Ricci soliton. If on the
other side, Λi > 0 is positive, the cosmological constant approaches zero and an initial dS
space ends at a flat space at t → −∞ corresponding to a ancient Ricci soliton.
Note that, using the explicit AdS metric, the general Ricci flow equation (10) also immediately leads to the Ricci flow equation (16) for the cosmological constant.
On the other hand, for the path derived from the canonical Weyl rescalings (4), the
cosmological constant evolves as a function of τ in the following way:
Λ(τ ) = e−2τ Λ0 .

(19)

Comparing then (17) and (19), we find that the parameter t in the Ricci flow and the parameter τ in the canonical Weyl rescaling are both affine parameters of the same path in field
space if they are related by the following reparametrization:

1 
(20)
τ = ln 1 − 2Λi (t − t0 ) .
2
Since we are working in the regime τ ≥ 0, t − ti must be positive for AdS space and it must
be negative for dS.4
It should be noted that the relation (20) is generic for Einstein spaces. Indeed, let us
consider an Einstein space with
R0µν = Λi g 0µν .

(21)

Then the solution to the Ricci flow equation (10) is


gµν (t) = 1 − 2Λi t g 0µν .

(22)

In other words, it is just a Weyl rescaling of the initial metric. If the latter is parametrized
as in (4), then (20) follows.
We may also explicitly calculate the distance in field space of the AdS or dS, or more
general of the Einstein space (15) to the flat space at t → ∞ or t → −∞ along the Ricci
glow. Using the metric distance formula (1) for the Ricci solitons with cosmological constant
satisfying (16), we find that the metric distance ∆g in field space is
Z tf
√
dt
∆g = 2 d|Λi |c
ti 1 − 2Λi (t − ti )

t
√
= c d ln 1 − 2Λi (t − ti )
.
(23)
ti

4
Formally we could also consider the ”dual” limit (t − t0 ) → 1/2Λ0 with τ → −∞, but this would imply
an infinite cosmological constant and infinite curvature.

6

Using the reparametrization eq.(20) between
√ t and τ , this is nothing else than the distance
with respect to Weyl rescalings, ∆g = 2c d τ , and hence we see that the distances with
respect to Weyl rescalings and along the Ricci flow agree with each other, namely they are
both proportional to the Weyl rescaling parameter τ . In fact, here the Ricci flow and the Weyl
rescaling are just reparametriziations of the same path. So this follows of course from the
reparametrization invariance of the definition of ∆g . In particular, the distance of an initial
AdS space to the flat fixed point space is logarithmically divergent in Ricci flow parameter t
or linearly divergent in Weyl rescaling parameter τ and therefore at infinite distance.
One may wonder if the above analysis is a peculiarity of Einstein manifolds. In the next
section about strings we will consider another example of a non-Einstein homogeneous space,
namely the so-called Nilmanifold of negative curvature, which will again flow to vanishing curvature. On the other hand for spaces Md with positive curvature, the manifold is contracting,
∂
gµν (t) is zero is an unstable fixed point, which might be nevertheless
and the point where ∂τ
at infinite distance away from any other point within the family of metrics gµν (t).
Let us consider also the case in which the Riemann space may get both signs of the Ricci
scalar R in its moduli space under the Ricci flow. Such a case is provided for example by the
squashed S 3 (although it is not meant to be a solution in string theory). There are regions
in the moduli space where R is positive, negative or zero. Indeed, the scalar curvature for
the squashed S 3 with metric
ds2 = λ21 (t)σ12 + λ22 (t)σ22 + λ23 (t)σ32 ,

(24)

where σi (i = 1, 2, 3) are the SU (2) left-invariant one-form, takes the form
R=



1
2 2
2 2
2 2
4
4
2
2λ
λ
+
2λ
λ
+
2λ
λ
−
λ
−
λ
−
λ
1 2
1 3
2 3
1
2
3 .
2λ21 λ22 λ23

(25)

In addition, the Ricci flow equations are explicitly written as
∂t λ21 = −

λ41 − (λ22 − λ23 )2
,
λ22 λ23

∂t λ22 = −

λ42 − (λ21 − λ23 )2
,
λ21 λ23

∂t λ23 = −

λ43 − (λ21 − λ22 )2
.
λ21 λ22

(26)

By inspecting the above equations one may infer that starting for example with an initial
metric with positive scalar curvature, the flow will always be along metrics with positive
scalar curvature. In other words, crossing R = 0 is not possible by the flow. In fact, this
is not restricted only to the squashed sphere but is a general result [39]. Indeed, it is easy
to see that even if we start with λ1 = λ2 , the point λ3 = 2λ1 , which correspond to R = 0,
can never be reached. This shows that although there are points in moduli space that have
R = 0, one should check that such points are reachable under the Ricci flow. In fact, it is
known that the Ricci flow not only of the squashed S 3 but of any homogeneous metric on
SU (2) shrinks to a point in finite time and asymptotes to the round S 3 [39].
This is also consistent with the SU (2)k WZW model which has positive curvature in the
entire moduli space, given by the positive level k of the Kac-Moody algebra. For large positive
k the curvature become zero, and this is a fixed point of the backwards Ricci flow, which
is at infinite distance. One can go to negative levels k and indeed then the SU (2)k WZW
describes a hyperbolic sphere with negative curvature. However the transition from positive
k (i.e. positive curvature) to negative k (i.e. negative curvature) occurs in the non-geometric
regime of the WZW model.

7

String theory (quantum gravity) realization
At the beginning of this section let us address the question, why the Ricci flow is a useful
concept and provides sensible answers concerning the large distance discussion in string theory
and in quantum gravity. For the moment let us consider purely geometrical backgrounds in
string theory, given in terms of a background metric gµν (t), where for the moment we do not
add any other background fields like the dilaton φ. Clearly, the Ricci flow is only non-trivial
for curved, d-dimensional manifolds Mtd with non-vanishing Ricci tensor. In case the Ricci
flow has a fixed point at infinite distance, then the scalar curvature flows to zero and the Ricci
flow conjecture “correctly” states that these manifolds must be supplemented by an infinite
tower of states in order to be consistent in string theory or quantum gravity. In a usual
string theory embedding the curved manifolds Mtd are only part of the total 10-dimensional
space time (see also below), and the change of the flow parameter t of Mtd is correlated to a
simultaneous change of another parameter in the remaining part of the total space.
As we will discuss, the formulation of the infinite distance conjecture using the Ricci flow
provides a very good and geometric definition of the distance in the space of background
metrics in terms of the scalar curvature of Mtd . Even more, this definition of the distance can
be nicely generalized for the case of adding other background fields, like the dilaton, via use of
generalized gradient flows and their associated entropy functionals. A strong argument, why
the distance along the Ricci flow is ”superior” to the original generalized distance conjecture,
is provided by backgrounds, which are consistent in string theory/quantum gravity without
the necessity to add an additional tower of massless states. Consider for example a consistent
string background of the form
M 10 = R1,8 × S 1 ,
(27)
where S 1 is a circle. Now sending the radius R of S 1 to very large values does not lead to a
tower of states on M 10 . This theory is complete in quantum gravity as it stands. Only in the
effective R1,8 theory there is a tower of massless states in the limit of R → ∞, because the
distance in the scalar fields space of the modulus R is infinite in the decompactification limit.
However applying the original infinite distance arguments to the metric of R1,8 × S 1 would
lead to a misleading result, it would predict an infinite tower of states on the full space M 10 .
On the other hand, R1,8 × S 1 being flat, it does not flow under the Ricci-flow, and therefore
the Ricci-flow conjecture applied to M 10 leads to a correct result.5
Furthermore using the Ricci flow, one realizes that the infinite distance conjecture has a
close connection to renormalization group (RG) flow in the underlying 2-dimensional string
σ model: Being non Ricci-flat, the curved manifolds Mtd themselves do not satisfy the 2dimensional β-function equations for the metric. (Of course the total 10-dimensional space
has to satisfy all 2-dimensional β-function equations.) Therefore the Ricci flow from curved
spaces to their fixpoints is equivalent to consider the renormalization group (RG) flow from
curved background spaces Mtd towards the solutions of the β-function equations, which are
just the CFT backgrounds in string theory with vanishing two-dimensional β-function.6
E.g., the AdS space flows to flat space, which is at infinite distance and obviously solves
the metric beta function equations. In general, the CFT fixed point M̂ d might be at infinite
distance, and then the infinite distance conjecture is stating that the background Mtd in the
5

We thank E. Palti for discussion on this point.
See e.g. [42,43] for a more detailed discussion about the relation between the geometric Ricci flow and the
2d RG flow. Furthermore the connection between the swampland conjecture and the RG in energy was also
discussed recently in [44].
6

8

neighbourhood of the fixed point must be always accompanied by an infinite tower of states.
In case of infinite distance the CFT fixed point can never be reached, which means that the
transition to the CFT fixed point is discontinuous. However the CFT fixed point also can be
at finite distance and then there is no tower of massless states. In this case the transition to
the CFT fixed point is continuous. In the next section, we will provide an example of a flow
to a CFT fixed point, which is at finite distance.
In case the fixed point is at infinite distance one has to ask what is the origin of the
massless tower of states in string theory or in quantum gravity. One typical way to answer
this question is to supplement the backgrounds Mt (like AdS) with an extra space factor Kt
(like a sphere) which, when Mt flows to flat space, typically flows to flat space, too. Then
the KK modes of Kt are the origin of the massless tower in the effective field theory of Mt .
So, typical string theory or M-theory examples, where the Ricci-flow argument applies, are
of the form
Mt × Kt .

(28)

The massless tower can however also have a different origin. The associated states can also
correspond to tensionless strings with light string excitations (Regge modes), which become
massless in the infinite distance limit, or also to wrapped tensionless strings and branes.
Another related question is if one can describe the infinite distance arguments via Ricci
flow for the moduli space of Calabi-Yau manifolds. As already said before, for Ricci flat
metrics like string compactifications on a Ricci-flat Calabi-Yau manifold or on a circle, there
is no Ricci flow along the marginal directions at all. This is in agreement with our conjecture
as the full ten-dimensional theory is consistent at all points in the Calabi-Yau moduli space.
Only in an effective lower-dimensional description, where the internal Calabi-Yau manifold is
not part of the (lower-dimensional) background metric, there is an infinite tower of massless
states when going to an inifinite distance point in moduli space.
One way to bypass the situation that the Ricci-flow does not exist for marginal directions
of Ricci-flat spaces, let us consider instead manifolds, where the Ricci-flat Calabi-Yau space
is non-trivially fibred over some base, such that the total space has non-zero curvature. As
we will show in the following, now the Calabi-Yau (Kähler) moduli will start to flow, and in
this way one can test the Ricci-flow conjecture also for Calabi-Yau spaces. The prototype
example of this kind is a d-dimensional spacetime of the form Md = M̃ d−3 × N , where N is
the Nilmanifold, namely the 3-dimensional twisted torus with metric
ds2 = a2 (dx21 +dx22 )+b2 (dx3 +x1 dx2 )2 .

(29)

The Nilmanifold has negative curvature and can be viewed as a circle fibration over a torus.
We will be mainly interested in the circle S 1 in the x1 direction, whose radius, being proportional to r1 = a, stays constant under the fibration. As we will see the Ricci-flow is
non-trivial, it leads to a flow with respect to the radius r1 , which ends at the infinite radius
fixed point, where a → ∞ and the curvature of the Nilmanifold is vanishing. Specifically, for
a = a(t) and b = b(t), the Ricci flow (10) is determined by the equations
y(t)
,
x(t)
y(t)2
y ′ (t) = −
,
x(t)2

x′ (t) =

(30)
x(t) = a(t)2 , y(t) = b(t)2 ,
9

(31)

where prime denotes derivative with respect to t. From the above equations we find that
x y = C0 .

(32)

In addition, the Ricci scalar
R(t) = −

y(t)
,
2x(t)2

(33)

satisfies the equation
R′ = 6R2 ,

(34)

from where we get
R(t) =

Ri
1 − 6Ri t

with

Ri < 0 .

(35)

Since we do not want to enter the regime of large curvature, we restrict the flow parameter
to the regime t ≥ 0. At the end of the discussion we will also comment on the large curvature
limit where t → 1/6Ri . Therefore, from Eqs.(32) and (33) we get
1/3
C0 
1 − 6Ri t
=
−
Ri

1/3
,
= a20 1 − 6Ri t


2

a

b2 =

=

(36)

C0

1/3

0
1
−
6R
t
−C
i
Ri
b20

1/3 ,
1 − 6Ri t

b20 a20 = C0 .

(37)

Notice, that in this case, the Ricci flow is not simply a Weyl rescaling of the metric since the
Nilmanifold is not an Einstein space. On the other hand, under the Weyl rescaling (4) on
the initial metric with scalar curvature Ri , the latter transforms as
R̂(t) = e−2τ Ri ,

(38)

from where we find that7
τ=


1 
ln 1 − 6Ri t ,
2

τ ≥ 0.

(39)

Then, from Eq.(1) we may calculate the distance ∆g , which turns out to be
Z
√
∆g ≃ 3C0

tf
0



1
dt
√
ln 1 − 6Ri t
=
a3
2 3

tf
0

1
= √ τ.
3

(40)

7
Note that we compare here the transformation of the curvature scalar under rescalings with that of the
curvature under the Ricci flow since the metric undergoes an anisotropic dilation. We could of course compare
other geometric quantities like the volume for example, which is also rescaled under the Ricci flow.

10

Note that points at infinite distance are at τ → ∞, which corresponds to t → ∞ At this
point we have the behaviour
t → ∞,

a → ∞,

b → 0.

(41)

Therefore, we see that at t → ∞ the radius r1 of the circle in the first direction becomes very
large. The associated KK states with masses mKK ∼ 1/a = 1/r1 become light and build an
infinite tower massless states.
Here we can also ask what is possibly happening, if one takes the dual limit with τ → −∞,
leading to t → 1/6Ri , a → 0 and b → ∞. This limit corresponds to vanishing radius
r1 → 0. The corresponding light states could be identified with the string winding modes, i.e.
fundamental strings wrapped around the circle in the first direction. They have masses of the
order mF 1 ∼ a = r1 . But this limit is not controllable, it corresponds to infinite curvature of
the Nilmanifold and is also not a fixed point of the Ricci-flow. This is in agreement with the
Ricci-flow conjecture which states that the massless tower of states appears in the controllable
regime of general relativity at the fixed point of the Ricci-flow at weak curvature.
We can also try identify the x1 direction with the S 1 of M-theory. From the tendimensional point of view the KK states, namely the D0-branes of the IIA string theory
have masses
3

mD0 ∼ a−9/8 ∼ e− 4 τ .

(42)

In the limit τ, t → ∞ with r1 → ∞ and with zero curvature they become light and lead to
an infinite tower of states.
Again we can look at the dual limit with τ → −∞ in M-theory with vanishing radius
r1 → 0. In M-theory there are now light states, which are dual to the D0-branes, namely
they correspond to IIA D6-branes wrapping the S 1 . From the ten-dimensional point of view,
the corresponding tensions of the light D6-branes are then
3

mD6 ∼ a9/8 ∼ e 4 τ .

(43)

Being not particles, it is however not clear in what sense these wrapped branes correspond
to a tower of massless states. Again this is in agreement with the Ricci-flow conjecture.
Alternatively one could consider quantum gravity or strings on Calabi-Yau spaces X̃ 6
equipped with a non-Ricci flat metric. Here one again expects a Ricci-flow of the complex
metric X̃ 6 towards the Ricci flat Calabi-Yau metric of X 6 , and the question is, if the fixed
point of this flow is again accompanied by an infinite tower of massless states. Actually string
compactifications on
R1,3 × X̃ 6 ,
(44)

were recently considered in [45], where the associated SU (3) group structure of X̃ 6 is nontrivial and is not the same as the SU (3) group structure of its Ricci-flat relative X 6 . Since the
4D space M4 is flat Minkowski space, one does not expect an infinite tower of states emerging
at the endpoint of this flow. However this a priori is not an argument against our Ricciflow conjecture, since these SU(3) structures of X̃ 6 [46–48] have a non- vanishing and nonclosed three-form flux which needs to be supported by source terms in the associated Bianchi
identity. Theses fluxes and the additional sources most likely do not allow a flow towards
the Ricci-flat Calabi-Yau space, and hence the Ricci-flow argument cannot be invalidated by
these spaces.
11

2.2

Entropy functionals and generalized distances

Let us recall that the Gibbons-Hawking entropy [50] is proportional to the area of the event
horizon, namely
SGH = 1/Λ
(45)
Subsequently SGH was interpreted as the dimension of the Hilbert space H in an observer’s
causal domain [52, 53]:
dim H = e1/Λ .
(46)
In the limit Λ → 0 this quantity becomes infinite. This observation was used in [23] to relate
the refined de Sitter conjecture to the entropy of tower of massless states, which appear at
infinite distance in the limit Λ → 0. In this section we want to describe the distance via the
entropy functionals of Perelman, which played an important role for the proof of the Poincare
conjecture by Perelman.
As explained before (see eq.(8)) the distance ∆ is related to the (A)dS cosmological
constant Λ in the following way:
∆ ≃ − log |Λ| .
(47)
For de Sitter space with Λ > 0, one gets that
∆ ≃ log SGH .

(48)

Therefore the entropy becomes large in the large distance limit, which leads a large tower of
light states.
On the other hand, Λ is part of the effective string action, which is given as


Z
1
2
d √
(49)
d x −g R − (∇φ) + Λ .
Seff =
2
Now, trading Λ by the scalar curvature plus the dilaton action, one could propose that the
distance ∆ is given as
Seff
∆ ≃ log
,
(50)
VM
where VM is the d-dimensional volume. However as we will discuss in the following, the more
useful definition of the distance is given in terms of generalized entropy functionals of the
relevant gradient flow.
2.2.1

Distance for the Ricci flow in terms of the scalar curvature R

As discussed above, only considering the geometric distance (1) on the space of background
metrics can lead to misleading results. There are simple examples of families of metrics which
can be all used as backgrounds in a consistent quantum gravity theory without including an
additional tower of light states, even in the infinite distance limit. For these examples it is
only upon compactification that such a tower appears. However, taking into account only
distances which are measured along the Ricci flow can cure this ambiguity. For this reason we
would now like to use our previous results to go away from the geometric definition (1) and to
propose alternative, more abstract distance measures. This will also allow us to accommodate
for additional fields like the dilaton.

12

Let us first consider pure Einstein gravity and the corresponding Ricci-flow. Here we like
to formulate the following distance conjecture for the Ricci flow:
Conjecture B1: For a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold, the distance ∆R in the field
space of the background metrics along the Ricci-flow is determined by the scalar curvature
R(g). At R = 0 there is an infinite tower of additional massless states in quantum gravity.
Furthermore we propose an alternative definition for the distance to be used in the mass
formula (13), along the Ricci flow between an initial flow parameter ti and a final flow
parameter tf :
!
Ri
.
(51)
∆R ≃ log
Rf
Here Ri and Rf are the corresponding initial and final values of the scalar curvature. Note
that we sometimes follow the flow backwards, e.g. tf < ti ; this is related to the additional sign
in eq.(57). In the vicinity of the fixed point Rf = 0 and assuming that Ri is non-vanishing
we can write this formula in the following simpler way:
∆R ≃ log R ,

(52)

Using this distance formula one expects a tower of massless states which scale in the infinite
distance limit ∆R → ∞, R → 0, as
α
m ∼ Mp e−α|∆R | ≃ R ,
(53)
We see that in general the flat space limit should be accompanied by an infinite number of
states. The flat space itself is infinitely far away from the curved manifolds along the flow,
which means that the flat space never be reached. In other words the transition to flat space
is discontinuous. In a certain sense, the associated entropy S ≃ e∆R of space-time in the flat
space limit becomes infinite. In fact, that flat space has infinite entropy was already pointed
out in [51] in the context of black hole entropy considerations.

Let us try to make contact between the definition of the distance ∆R in (51), which
contains the curvature R, and the original metric distance ∆g given in eq.(1). Assume there
is a Ricci flow such that
k
(54)
Rµν Rµν = R2 ,
2
for some constant k and with R the scalar curvature. Moreover, we also assume that R is
constant over the manifold, i.e. it is only a function of the flow parameter t. This class of manifolds is a slight generalization of Einstein Manifolds and includes e.g. also the Nilmanifold.
Then (14) becomes
dR
= kR2 ,
(55)
dt
which can be straight forwardly integrated such that
R(t) =

Ri
.
1 − kRi t

(56)

We can now use (54) and the fact that R depends only on t to compute the distance ∆g ,
r
r Z t
 
f
√ Z tf
Rf
R′ (t)
2
2
=c
sgn(Ri ) log
dt
.
(57)
∆g = c 2k
dt |R(t)| = c
k ti
R(t)
k
Ri
ti
13

For Einstein manifolds one has k = d2 , and the three-dimensional Nilmanifold satisfies (54)
with k = 6, which reproduces the discussion there. Hence for this class of manifolds one
precisely obtains the advertized result in eq.(51).
What about spaces with non-constant curvature R(t, xµ )? For this spaces the distance
now is assumed to take the form
 R̄(t ) 
i
,
(58)
∆R ≃ log
R̄(tf )
where R̄(t) is the mean curvature.
In fact, for a flow which ends up at the fixed point, which is flat space with R̄(tf ) ≡
R(tf ) = 0, but where R̄(ti ) 6= 0, we can still write the distance near the fixed point approximately as
∆R ≃ log R̄(t) ,
(59)
and the distance to reach the fixed point at R(tf ) = 0 is indeed infinite.
2.2.2

Distance for the metric-dilaton flow in terms of the entropy functional F

Studying backgrounds which are more complicated than Einstein manifolds, where we have
argued that the Ricci-flow gives a good distance measure, is only possible in the presence of
additional fields. Hence, one should study more complicated flows and associated distance
functionals. This is in general quite difficult, therefore we first want to include only the
dilaton field. The relevant quantities, which are monotonic along the flow, are the entropy
functionals of Perelman [33]. Note that these are slightly different from the effective string
action - see also the comments at the end of this subsection. Using the notation of [33],
Perelman first considers the following entropy functional:


Z
2
d √
(60)
F(g, f ) = d x −g Rg + (∇f )g e−f .
Actually, F(g, f ) and Seff are closely related quantities, and f basically plays the role of the
dilaton φ in string theory, namely f = 2φ, with F being the string effective action in the
string frame.
The string coupling constant is then gs2 = ef . Varying F while keeping the
R d √
integral d x −ge−f fixed, the combined metric-dilaton gradient flow is then determined
by the following two differential equations:


∂
gµν (t) = −2 Rµν (t) + ∇µ ∇ν f (t) ,
∂t
∂
f (t) = −R(t) − ∆f (t) .
(61)
∂t
In fact, after appropriate diffeomorphism, the above equations can be written as
∂
gµν (t) = −2Rµν (t) ,
∂t
∂
f (t) = −R(t) − ∆f (t) + (∇f )2 .
∂t

(62)

In analogy to the case of the pure Ricci flow case considered before we now formulate the
following second conjecture about the combined metric-dilaton flow:
14

Conjecture B2: For a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold, the distance ∆F in the
background field space along the combined dilaton-metric flow is determined by the entropy
functional F(g, f ). At F = 0 there is an infinite tower of additional massless states in
quantum gravity.
Furthermore we propose that the generalized distance between an initial flow parameter
ti and a final flow parameter tf can be defined as follows:
!
Fi
,
(63)
∆F ≃ log
Ff
Here Fi and Ff are the corresponding initial and final values for the entropy functional. In
case Ff → 0 is a fixed point of the flow equations, the tower of massless states should now
scale in the infinite distance limit as
α
(64)
m ∼ Mp e−α|∆F | ≃ F(τ ) ,
The distance ∆F describes the total distance along the combined flow of metric-dilaton
field. For constant dilaton, where we have only the Ricci flow of the metric, ∆F becomes
∆R ≃ log R, which is the correct distance for the metric. On the other hand, when one has
only a flow of the dilaton, it is easy to see that ∆F becomes
∆F ≃ log gs .

(65)

This is the correct distance for the string coupling constant.8
Before we come to the combined flow, let us first consider the case, where we keep the
metric fixed and only consider a flow in the dilaton field. The gradient flow then as follows
from the variation of F with respect to f turns out to be
∂
f (t) = −2∆f (t) + (∇f )2 .
∂t

(68)

Using this equation, we find that the inverse of the string coupling gs = ef /2 satisfies the
heat equation (after redefining t → 2t)
∂ −1
g (t) = −∆gs−1 (t).
∂t s

(69)

A simple solution of the heat equation in one spatial dimension is:
gs−1 ≃ ex−t .
8

(70)

That this is indeed the correct relation between the distance and the string coupling constant can be seen
from the Weyl rescaling, which we discuss in the next chapter of the paper, and where we get that gs ≃ ecτ ,
where τ is the Weyl distance. Another argument, why the distance for the string coupling constant is like in
(65) is provided by looking at the effective action for the string coupling constant, i.e. for the dilaton field
φ = f /2:
(∂gs )2
Leff ≃ (∂φ)2 ≃
.
(66)
gs2
So the canonically normalized field is indeed f = 2φ and according to the original distance conjecture the
distance is
∆ ≃ φ = 2f ≃ log gs .
(67)

15

The fixed point is at t → +∞ where gs becomes very large, i.e. we deal with strong string
coupling. This fixed point is at infinite distance, and the corresponding entropy functional
F ≃ 4a2 e2x−2t ≃ gs−2 is vanishing at the fixed point. And the corresponding distance is indeed
∆F ≃ log gs . Hence we expect a tower of massless states, when we approach the fixed point.
Since this tower of states emerges at strong string coupling, it cannot be given in terms of
perturbative string states, but the tower of states must be related to non-perturbative states
like wrapped branes. As we will discuss in the next section, there is a dual infinite distance
point with respect to Weyl rescaling at weak string coupling, where the tower of additional
states corresponds to the excited string modes.
Now let us consider a combined flow of the metric-dilaton background. For a d-dimensional
Einstein space in particular, the metric is given by (22) and the solution for f of (62) is

d
gs (t)2 = ef (t) = 1 − 2Λi t .

(71)

d Λi
VM = d Λ(t)VM ,
1 − 2Λi t

(72)

Then, the value of F turns out to be
F=
whereas the distance ∆F is

∆F ≃ − ln |Λ|,

(73)

in accordance with (47). So the infinite fixed point of the gradient flow is again at vanishing
curvature and also at large f (t), which means that the flow ends at very large string coupling
gs . This is a general feature of the flow since combining the two equations of (61) we find
√
√
that e−f g = c0 where c0 is t-independent. Therefore, ef is small when g is small, i.e. at
collapse, where the curvature is large, and is large at small curvature.
However, there are also cases where fixed point solutions of the combined gradient flow
are at finite distance. Let us consider for example the SL(2, R)/U (1) CFT with metric [34,35]


1 − λ 2
2
dr + tanh2 rdθ 2
ds = k
1+λ
2 
4λ 
+
cos θdr − sin θ tanh rdθ
,
(74)
1 − λ2
and dilaton
f = −2 ln(cosh r).

(75)

It can easily be verified that (74) and (75) satisfy (61) if λ is
4t

λ = e− k .
At the fixed point t → ∞, the solution above approaches


ds2 ≈ k dr 2 + tanh2 rdθ 2 , f = −2 ln(cosh r),
16

(76)

(77)

which is just the Witten cigar [36]. The F-functional on the other side,
 
4t
,
F ∼ coth
k

(78)

is finite as t → ∞ and therefore the Witten cigar is at finite distance from the λ-deformed
background.
Let us note at the end of this subsection that eqs. (61) are similar to the two-dimensional
σ-model β-functions with dilaton φ = f /2, which are written as


βµν = ℓ2s Rµν + ∇µ ∇ν f ,


(79)
βf = 2(d − 26) + 3ℓ2s (∇f )2 − 2∆f − R ,

where ℓs is the string scale. Comparing eqs.(61) and (79), we see that
∂
2
gµν (t) = − 2 βµν ,
∂t
ℓs
βf
2(d − 26)
∂
+
+ ∆f − (∇f )2 .
f (t) =
2
∂t
3ℓs
3ℓ2s

(80)

A final comment concerns the functional F. One could consider instead ofRF the string
√
effective action Seff which is identical to F but without the constraint of fixed dd x g e−f .
In this case, one gets instead



∂
1
gµν (t) = −2 Rµν + ∇µ ∇ν f − gµν 2∆f − (∇f )2 + R ,
∂t
2
∂
f (t) = −R − 2∆f + (∇f )2 .
∂t

(81)

We see that when f is constant, the metric satisfies
∂
gµν (t) = −2Rµν + Rgµν ,
∂t

(82)

which does not have even short time solutions as it implies a backward heat equation for the
curvature scalar R [32]. Only the critical points of the flow generated by F and Seff are the
same (provided ∆f = (∇f )2 ). In other words, it is the F that generates the flow and not
the Seff . The latter cannot even generate a flow and just gives the critical points. Therefore,
it is the functional F that is connected with the distance in field space and it is the one that
we have considered here.
2.2.3

Distance for the Perelman flow in terms of the entropy functional W

In order to treat also the case of collapsing cycles, Perleman [33] also introduced another
entropy functional. It substitutes the effective action by the following expression


Z
√
e−f
,
(83)
W(g, f, λ) = dd x −g λ(Rg + (∇f )2g ) + f − d
(4πλ)d/2
17

under the constraint

Z

√
dd x −g

e−f
= 1.
(4πλ)d/2

(84)

Notice that we use λ instead of τ which is usually used in the literature as τ has already been
reserved. Here f again corresponds to the dilaton and λ is a rescaling factor, which is e.g.
closely related to the Weyl rescaling. The new term f e−f together with the λ factor have
the effect that the flow of the metric tensor is entirely determined by the Ricci tensor, as it is
the case for the original Ricci-flow. In total, the variation of the functional W(g, f, λ) leads
to the following set of flow equations (after an appropriate diffeomorphism [33]):
∂
gµν (t) = −2Rµν (t) ,
∂t
d
∂
f (t) = −R(t) − ∆f (t) + |∇f (t)|2 +
,
∂t
2λ(t)
∂
λ(t) = −1 .
∂t

(85)

This eventually leads us to the following third conjecture about the Perelman flow and the
generalized distance conjecture.
Conjecture B3: For a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold, the distance ∆W in the
background field space along the Perelman flow is determined by the entropy functional
W(g, f, λ). At W = 0 there is an infinite tower of additional massless states in quantum
gravity.
In analogy to the two cases considered before, we propose that the distance in field space
along the Perelman flow can be defined as follows:
!
Wi
,
(86)
∆W ≃ log
Wf
Here Wi and Wf are the corresponding initial and final values for the entropy functional. In
case the limit Wf → 0 is a fixed point of the flow equations, the tower of massless states
should now scale in the infinite distance limit as
α
(87)
m ∼ Mp e−α|∆W | ≃ W(τf ) ,
For a d-dimensional Einstein space we find now that
f (t) =

 d
d 
ln 1 − 2Λi t − ln t,
2
2

(88)

and Perelman’s entropy functional W turns out to be
W=

 −2Λ t

d
i
+
ln(1
−
2Λ
t)
−
ln
t
−
2
VM .
i
2(4π)d/2 1 − 2Λi t

As an explicit example, let us consider an SO(2) symmetric 2D space with

ds2 = a(t, r)2 dr 2 + r 2 dθ 2 ), f = f (t, r).
18

(89)

The corresponding equations for a and f are explicitly written as
∂t a =
∂t f

=

a′′ a′ 2
a′
−
+
,
a2
a3
ra2
f ′′
f ′2
f′ 1
∂t a2
−
+
−
− .
2
2
2
a
∂t a
∂t a
r
t

(90)
(91)

Remarkably, although the above system of equations look quite complicated, there is a simple
solution which is


1
2
2
2 2
ds = 4t
(92)
dr + r dθ ,
e + r 2

(93)
f = − ln e4t + r 2 − ln t + 4t.

For t = const., one immediately recognizes the Witten cigar solution. In order to find ∆W ,
we need the value of Perelman’s entropy (83). The latter, using (92) and (93) turns out to
be
o
n

1
(94)
W = − 1 + e−4t r 2 1 + 4t + log t + log 1 + e−4t r 2 ,
4
so that

1
∆W = − log |W|.
a

(95)

Notice that W ∼ −t at t → ∞ (at fixed r) so that, according to the conjecture B3, an infinite
tower of additional massless states should appear in the spectrum.

3

The Weyl distance in effective field theories

Let us consider a d-dimensional effective action which contains local operators Oi (gµν , x) with
corresponding coupling constants gi of the following form:
Z
X 1
p
(96)
Seff ≃ dd x −g(x)
2 Oi (gµν , x) .
g
i
i
In general the operators Oi (gµν , x) will transform non-trivially under Weyl rescalings (4):
′

Õi (g̃µν , x) = ec τ ,

(97)

The coupling constants gi are usually inert under the Weyl rescalings of the metric.
However, on the other hand, consider the case where we replace the operators by some
constant, non-vanishing vacuum expectation values:
Oi (gµν , x) → hOi (gµν , x)i = Ōi .

(98)

Therefore let us now consider the Weyl flow (or also the Ricci) flow, keeping the operator
Oi (gµν , x) constant under the flow. If we require that the product g12 Oi still transforms the
i
same under Weyl rescalings as before, we now have to demand that the coupling constants
transform non-trivially under Weyl rescalings as
′

g̃i2 = e−c τ gi2 .
19

(99)

First consider the infinite distance with respect to Weyl rescalings in the direction τ → +∞
for c′ > 0. For c′ < 0, we should consider the τ → −∞ instead. It then follows that there
exist an associated tower of states with masses mi being proportional to some power of the
parameter gi :
mi ∼ giα with α ≥ 0 .
(100)
Alternatively we can also consider the flow in the direction τ → −∞. Now the infinite tower
of states should be associated with the inverse (dual) coupling constant, i.e. one gets that
the mass of the tower scales as
mi ∼ gi−α

with

α≥0.

(101)

Which of the two directions, τ → +∞ or τ → −∞, leads to an infinite tower of massless
states depends on the microscopic details of the quantum gravity resp. string theory. In
case there is a strong-weak coupling self-duality one expects that both directions lead to an
infinite tower of states.
Let us give some examples. First consider the 4-dimensional gauge kinetic term for a
U (1) gauge symmetry:
Z
p
1
(102)
Seff ≃ d4 x −g(x) 2 Fµν Fρσ gµρ gνσ .
gU (1)
As it is believed from the weak gravity conjecture, the limit gU (1) → 0 is accompanied by
a tower of infinitely many light states, and hence is at infinite distance. This behaviour of
the is confirmed in string theory by knowing that gU (1) is a field dependent quantity, given
in terms of the moduli of the internal, compact space. Then in particular the tower of KK
or winding modes provides the infinite distance behaviour of gU (1) , as it can be explicitly
checked by computing one-loop threshold corrections to the gauge coupling constants.
Let us emphasize that here we argue that the infinite distance behaviour of gU (1) already
entirely follows from the four-dimensional action, namely from the Weyl rescalings (99) of
the four-dimensional metric gµν . In fact it is well-known that the 4D U (1) action (102) is
invariant under Weyl invariant, and the operator F 2 transform under Weyl rescalings as
F̃ 2 = e−4τ F 2 .

(103)

Hence following the previous argument, we should keep the F 2 invariant under the Weyl
rescaling giving the appropriate Wel weight to the coupling instead. Therefore, we conclude
that the U (1) gauge coupling behaves as
2
g̃U2 (1) = e4τ g(1)
.

(104)

Therefore, there is an infinite tower of states with masses that scale as
mU (1) ∼ gUα (1)

with

α≥0,

(105)

which become massless in the τ → −∞ limit. As a remark, one could also could consider the
opposite scale limit with τ → ∞. The inverse gauge coupling 1/gU (1) goes to zero at infinite
distance, which corresponds to the magnetic version of the weak gravity conjecture.
Next consider a four-dimensional effective action with higher curvature term:
Z
p
1
(106)
Seff ≃ d4 x −g(x) 2 Rn .
gn
20

Here the term Rn denotes all possible combinations of contractions of the Riemann tensor.
Under Weyl rescalings Rn transforms as:
R̃n = e−2nτ Rn .

(107)

g̃n2 = e2nτ gn2 .

(108)

Hence we require that
This implies that at weak coupling gn → 0, there is an infinite tower of states of the form
mn ∼ gnα

with

α≥0.

(109)

Therefore the Weyl distance conjecture implies just from effective field theory considerations
that the limit gn → 0 is at infinite distance and therefore it is not possible in string theory
or more generally in quantum gravity to discard the infinite higher curvature terms in the
effective action.
We can also apply this procedure to Einstein gravity itself. Using the standard Einstein
action we see that the Planck mass has to scale under Weyl rescalings as
M̃p = e−τ Mp .

(110)

Now consider the infinite distance limit τ → −∞. It follows that large Planck masses, i.e.
sending Mp → ∞, is accompanied by a tower of massless states:
m ∼ Mp−1 .

(111)

Indeed this behaviour is seen via the following (4D) relation
Mp = Ms /gs ,

(112)

and the limit of large Mp is obtained at weak string coupling, i.e. gs → 0. Since in the string
frame the masses of the string excitations scale like m ≃ gs Ms ≃ Ms2 /Mp , one indeed expects
that the tower of string excitations becomes massless in the tensionless string limit.
There is also a dual infinite distance limit τ → ∞. In this limit the Planck mass becomes
very small, i.e. Mp → 0, and we expect a tower of states like
m ∼ Mp .

(113)

Actually the limit Mp → 0 is the limit of very strong gravitational force, which according to
the weak gravity conjecture should be indeed at infinite distance. In string theory, using the
relation (112), the limit of small Mp is obtained at strong string coupling, i.e. gs → ∞. This
limit corresponds to a dilaton flow to large values, i.e. φ(t) → ∞, which we discussed in the
last section on generalized flow equations.
We can also use the relation (112) to derive the scaling behaviour of the (4D) string
coupling constant:
g̃s = eτ gs .
(114)
So we see that the weak (strong) coupling limit is at infinite distance, when τ → −∞ (τ → ∞)
and the distance is given as ∆gs ≃ τ ≃ log gs , in agreement with the distance ∆F in (65).

21

4

The (A)dS distance conjecture from the higher curvature
R2 theory

(A)dS background
Now consider the 4-dimensional, quadratic R2 action of the form
Z
p
1 2
R ,
Seff ≃ d4 x −g(x)
gR2

(115)

where R is the Ricci scalar. As it was explained in [54], in a flat background with R̄ = 0
the pure R2 action does not propagate a physical mass spin-two graviton state. However the
situation changes if one considers the R2 theory in an (A)dS background with a non-vanishing
background metric, i.e.
R̄ 6= 0 .
(116)

In this case scale invariance of the R2 action is spontaneously broken, and it follows that the
corresponding coupling constant transforms under Weyl rescalings as
−4|τ | 2
2
gR2 .
g̃R
2 = e

(117)

This implies the existence of an infinite tower of states associated to R2 coupling:
mR2 ∼ |gR2 |α

with α ≥ 0 .

(118)

As we will now show, the infinite distance behaviour of the R2 with coupling constant
gR2 is equivalent to the infinite distance conjecture (ADS conjecture) of the cosmological
constant. For that recall that the pure R2 theory describes a massless scalar field, coupled
to standard Einstein gravity with a massless spin-two graviton plus a cosmological constant
Λ. To see observe that the action eq.(115) can equivalently be written as


Z
2
gR
2
2
4 √
Φ .
(119)
S = d x −g ΦR −
4
The dimension 2 scalar field Φ plays the role of a Lagrange multiplier and arises in this
conformal (Jordan) frame without space-time derivatives. Through its equation of motion Φ
is proportional to the background scalar curvature R̄:
Φ=

2

2 R̄.
gR
2

(120)

Performing a conformal transformation
1
gµν = Mp2 Φ−1 g̃µν
2
the action (119) can be written as


Z
2
p
3 ∂µ Φ∂ν Φ gR
2
2
4
2 1
M .
−
R̃ −
S = d x −g̃Mp
2
4 Φ2
16 p

(121)

(122)

We see that the cosmological constant is given
Λ=

2
gR
2
M2 .
16 p

22

(123)

We have in particular:
(i) de Sitter backgrounds:
R̄ > 0,

2
gR
2 > 0.

(124)

In this case Φ is positive and this class of solutions of the R2 theory describes de Sitter like
backgrounds with positive cosmological constant Λ in the Einstein frame. Both the signs
of the Einstein term as well as of the scalar kinetic term in the Einstein action (122) are
such that the spin-2 graviton as well as the scalar field Φ are physical, ghost-free degrees of
freedom.
(ii) anti-de Sitter backgrounds:
R̄ < 0,

2
gR
2 < 0.

(125)

Φ is again positive. Now this class of solutions of the R2 theory describes anti-de Sitter like
backgrounds with negative cosmological constant Λ in the Einstein frame. Again the spin
two graviton as well as the scalar field Φ are physical, ghost-free degrees of freedom.
Since in eq.(123) the cosmological constant is given in terms of the coupling constant
gR2 , it immediately follows that the AdS distance conjecture is directly inherited from the
R2 distance conjecture, i.e. there is a infinite tower of light states in the limit Λ → 0, which
scales as
mΛ ∼ |Λ|α with α ≥ 0 .
(126)
In other words, the derivation of the AdS distance conjecture in [30] completely agrees with
the higher R2 distance conjecture, introduced in this paper.
We can extend the previous discussion by adding the standard Einstein term to the R2
action, which was already considered in [55]:
Z

√ 
1
(127)
S = d4 x −g Mp2 R + 2 R2 .
gR2
The ghost-free spectrum of the theory contains one massless spin-2 (the standard graviton),
plus a massive scalar, whose mass is determined by the dimensional coupling constant as
m2 =

2
gR
2
Mp2 .
6

(128)

This can be seen by again introducing a Lagrange multiplier t, one can replace the R2 term
with,
2 2
2
2tR − gR
2 Mp t ,

2 , reproduces the initial R2 term. Thus
which after the t equation of motion, t = R/Mp2 gR
2
the action can be written in an equivalent way in terms of the scalar field t:
Z
√ 1 2
2 2
.
(129)
Mp (1 + 2t)R − Mp4 gR
S = d4 x g
2t
2

In this Jordan frame, t looks like a non-propagating field. This however is an illusion of this
frame. Performing a rescaling of the metric in order to obtain a canonical Einstein term,
gµν → gµν e− log(1+2t) ,

23

the action takes the form:
#
"
Z
2 M4
µ
gR
(2t)2
2
p
2
2 ∂µ t∂ t
4 √
−
,
S = d x g Mp R − 6Mp
(1 + 2t)2
4 (1 + 2t)2
S=

Z

4

√

d x g

"

Mp2 R

#
2
g2 Mp4 
−λφ
,
1−e
− ∂µ φ∂ φ −
4
µ

(130)

(131)

where in the second equation above we introduced the canonically normalized scalar field φ,
r
2
λφ = log(1 + 2t) with λ =
(Mp )−1 .
(132)
3
Therefore in the R + R2 theory (when written in the Einstein frame), the canonically normalized scalar field φ possesses the very special Starobisky [55] potential:
V =

2
2

gR
2
Mp4 1 − e−λφ .
8

(133)

2 > 0. For large positive values
Notice that the potential is semi-positive definite as soon as gR
2
of φ, V asymptotes to a cosmological ”constant”, while for large negative values the potential
grows exponentially. The Minkowski ground state is at φ = 0, where the potential vanishes
and the scalar field acquires a mass as given in eq.(128). On the other hand for large positive
values of φ, the vacuum is described by an approximate de Sitter space with cosmological
constant
g2 2
(134)
Λ = R Mp2 .
8
Therefore the scalar mass (128) at the Minkowski ground state and the cosmological constant
are related as follows:
2 1
(135)
m = √ Λ2 .
3

Furthermore we also see that the asymptotic de Sitter state and the Minkowski ground state
are at infinite distance between each other. Furthermore the limits Λ → 0 as well as the limit
of vanising scalar mass m → 0 are at infinite distance in the four-dimensional metric space.

5
5.1

The spin-two distance conjecture from the higher curvature
W 2 theory
Flat background

Let us consider the quadratic Weyl action
Z
√
1
d4 x −g Wµνρσ W µνρσ .
SW = − 2
2gW 2

(136)

Since we have the identity
1
Wµνρσ W µνρσ = Rµνρσ Rµνρσ − 2Rµν Rµν + R2 ,
3
24

(137)

we may write
2
Wµνρσ W µνρσ = GB + 2Rµν Rµν − R2 ,
3

(138)

where GB is the Gauss-Bonnet scalar
GB = Rµνρσ Rµνρσ − 4Rµν Rµν + R2 .

(139)

Since the integral of the latter is simply 32π 2 χ where χ is the Euler number and it is the
topological invariant, we may express (136) as
Z
√
1
(140)
d4 x −g Wµνρσ W µνρσ
SW = − 2
2gW 2
Z
√ 
1
1 
=− 2
d4 x −g Rµν Rµν − R2 − 32π 2 χ.
3
gW 2
Under Weyl rescalings the quadratic W 2 transform as
−4|τ | 2
2
gW 2 .
g̃W
2 = e

(141)

This again implies the existence of an infinite tower of states associated to W 2 coupling:
mW 2 ∼ |gW 2 |α

with

α≥0.

(142)

Now let us recall that the Weyl-square action is equivalent to the standard Einstein action
plus a massive spin-two field wµν given by the following two-derivative action [56, 57, 59]:
Z
√ 
d4 x −g Mp2 R(g) + 2Mp Gµν (g)wµν
SW =
M

2
− MW
(wµν wµν − w2 ) .
(143)

Here Gµν = Rµν − 1/2R gµν is the Einstein-tensor constructed from the metric gµν and the
last term is a mass term for the second metric wµν . This action contains a massless spintwo field gµν plus a massive spin-two field wµν . Note that the two-derivative kinetic term
for wµν is hidden in the coupling Gµν (g)wµν , which can be seen by performing two partial
integrations on this term. However after the partial integrations the kinetic term for wµν has
the wrong sign, i.e. wµν is a ghost-like field.
The mass of spin-two field wµν in eq.(143) is given as
MW = gW 2 Mp .

(144)

Since the coupling constant gW 2 exhibits the infinite distance behaviour as shown eq.(142),
it follows that there is a infinite tower of light states in the limit MW → 0, which again scales
as
α
with α ≥ 0 .
(145)
mW 2 ∼ MW
Hence this agrees with spin-two swampland conjecture, which was first formulated in [31].

25

5.2

(A)dS background

Let us now consider the Weyl-square theory in a curved dS or AdS background and also
relate the infinite distance conjecture to the Higuchi bound for higher-spin fields in de Sitter
space. The equations of motion for the Weyl theory are written as
Bµν = 0,

(146)

where Bµν is the Bach tensor, defined as
1
Bµν = ∇ρ ∇σ W σµρν + Rρσ Wρµσν .
2

(147)

Under conformal transformation of the metric
gµν → e2τ (x) gµν ,

(148)

bµν = e−2τ (x) Bµν .
B

(149)

it transforms homogeneously as

The Bach tensor is symmetric, traceless due to conformal invariance and due to diff. invariance, it is also divergence-free
B µµ = 0,

∇µ Bµν = 0.

(150)

The field equations for Weyl gravity can also be written as
1
1
Rαβ Rαβ gµν − 2Rαβ Rµαβν + Rgµν
2
2
1 2
2
1
− Rµν − R gµν + RRµν + ∇µ ∇ν R = 0.
6
3
3

(151)

It is easy to verify that Einstein spaces (Rµν = Λgµν ) satisfy the field equation (151).
Therefore, one such solution is dS space with


Rµνρσ = H 2 gµρ gνσ − gµσ gνρ ,
= 3H 2 gµν ,

Rµν

R = 12H 2 .

(152)

This solution describes a spontaneous breaking of local scale invariance of the Weyl-square
theory.
We can now expand the Weyl action (140) around the dS vacuum. At quadratic order in
hµν = gµν − ḡµν , where ḡ is the background de Sitter metric and in the transverse-traceless
gauge
hµµ = ∇µ hµν = 0,

(153)

we find
SW

Z


d4 x hµν hµν − 6H 2 hµν hµν

+ 8H 4 hµν hµν .

1
= − 2
2gW 2

26

(154)

The equation obeyed by the spin-2 fluctuations are then
2 hµν − 6H 2 hµν + 8H 4 hµν = 0.
We can write the above equation as



 − 4H 2  − 2H 2 hµν = 0.

Therefore there are two solutions to the above equation, namely


 − 2H 2 hµν = 0,


 − 4H 2 hµν = 0.

(155)

(156)

(157)
(158)

The first equation (157) describes a massless helicity-2 state in de Sitter, whereas the second
one (158) describes a partially massless spin-2 state of mass m2 = 2H 2 . However, one of
these states is a ghost.
This can also be confirmed by the quadratic action (154). Indeed, let us write the action
(154) as
Z


n
1
2
4
2 µν
hµν
SW =

−
2H
d
x
2H
h
2
2gW
2
2
o

(159)
− hµν  − 2H 2 hµν .
Introducing a Lagrange multiplier tensor field wµν we may write (159) as follows
Z




1
µν
2
4
2 µν
SW =

h
+
w

−
2H
d
x
2H
h
µν
2
2gW
2


1  µν
− 2H 2 hµν +
w wµν − w2 .
4

(160)

Defining now new fields

h̄µν = hµν −

wµν
,
2H 2

w̄µν =

wµν
,
2H 2

(161)

we may express (160) as
SW =
−


Z


1
1 µν 
2
4
2 µν

−
2H
h̄
+
d
x
2H
h̄

w̄
µν
2
2
2gW
2
o


2H 2 w̄µν + H 2 w̄µν w̄µν − w̄2 .

(162)

Therefore, we see that we have a massless helicity-2 state described by h̄µν and a partially
massless spin-2 ghost state w̄µν of mass, which precisely satisfies the Higuchi bound:
2
MW
= 2H 2

with

MW = gW 2 Mp .

(163)

Once again we see that the simultaneous limit MW , H → 0 is at infinite distance with respect
to the Weyl rescalings of the four-dimensional metric.
27

5.3

Infinite distance and the Higuchi bound from the Einstein-W 2 theory

Let us consider now the Einstein-Weyl2 theory
 
Z

4
S =
d x Mp2 R − 2Λ
−


1
µνρσ
W
W
.
µνρσ
2
2gW
2

(164)

This theory can be considered as a massive Weyl2 theory [58, 59] as the conformal invariance
of the Weyl action is broken both by the Einstein term and the cosmological constant Λ. In
order the theory to admit the dS solution (152), we choose Λ = 3H 2 . Then the theory (164)
has as vacuum solution the dS spacetime with
Rµν (ḡ) = 3H 2 ḡµν .

(165)

Notice that the Einstein term and the cosmological term removes the degeneracy of the
conformal Weyl theory, solutions of which are whole conformal classes, i.e., spacetimes that
are conformally related to each other. Expanding now (164) at quadratic order in hµν =
gµν − ḡµν we find that
(
Z
i
Mp2 h µν
1  µν
h ( − 2H 2 )hµν − 2
h hµν
S =
d4 x
2
2gW 2
o
,
(166)
−6H 2 hµν hµν + 8H 4 hµν hµν
which, equivalently can be written as
(
Z
Mp2 h µν
1  2
4
h ( − 2H 2 )hµν ] + 2
2H
S =
d x
2
2gW 2

2



2
µν
2
µν
 − 2H
hµν .
 − 2H hµν − h
h

(167)

We can repeat the steps above, introduce a Lagrange multiplier tensor field wµν and write
(167) as
(
Z
i
Mp2 h µν
1  2
4
h ( − 2H 2 )hµν + 2
S =
d x
2H
2
2gW 2




hµν  − 2H 2 hµν + wµν  − 2H 2 hµν

1
+ wµν wµν − w2
.
(168)
4

We may introduce new fields h̄µν and w̄µν , defined as
hµν = h̄µν − w̄µν ,

2
2
wµν = 2gW
2 M̄p w̄µν ,

(169)

where
M̄p2 = Mp2 +
28

2H 2
2 ,
gW
2

(170)

is a new effective Planck mass square. Then, the quadratic action (168) turns out to be
(
Z
i M̄ 2 h
M̄p2 h µν
p
w̄µν (
h̄ ( − 2H 2 )h̄µν −
S =
d4 x
2
2
)
i g 2 2 M̄ 4 

p
W
2
µν
2
−2H )w̄µν +
.
(171)
w̄ w̄µν − w̄
2
This is the action of a massless helicity-2 state h̄µν and a spin-2 ghost wµν of mass
MW = gW 2 M̄p ,

(172)

2 . Therefore, the
where the effective Planck mass is now M̄p2 which is Mp2 shifted by 2H 2 /gW
2
mass square of the spin-2 state w̄µν , using (170) is
2
2
2
2
2
MW
= gW
2 Mp + 2H > 2H .

(173)

Hence, the Higuchi bound for a spin-s massive state
2
≥ s(s − 1)H 2 ,
MW

(174)

is clearly satisfied. In other words, the spectrum of Einstein-Weyl2 theory belongs to the
2
complementary series of UIRs of the de Sitter group SO(1, 4). Since, the limt gW
2 → 0
is at infinite distance, it follows that saturating the Higuchi bound [38] is also at infinite
distance. Therefore, √
all massive states of the Einstein-Weyl2 theory that belong to this UIRs,
are accumulated at 2H. Furthermore these states become light in the H → 0 limit, in
agreement with the spin-2 swampland conjecture.

6

Gravitational Threshold Corrections

The infinite distance behaviour with respect to Weyl rescaing of the external metric is often
related to infinite distance in internal space, such that extra dimensions are opening up in
the infinite distance limit. This is in fact well for the U (1) gauge coupling constants, where
threshold effects from the internal KK modes provide an infinite contribution to the inverse
gauge coupling in the decompatification limit. Concerning the AdS distance conjecture the
limit of Λ → 0 is also accompanied by a tower of massless states from an extra compact
′
space [30], as it is true for the KK modes in the well-known AdSd × S d superstring vacua.
Here we want to investigate in more detail the infinite distance behaviour of the Weylsquare coupling gW 2 . As will we discuss, one-loop threshold corrections to the W 2 -action
2
provide contributions to 1/gW
2 which become very large in the decompactification limit of
the internal compact space. Therefore at one-loop level gW 2 goes to zero, when summing
over an infinite number of light KK states. This behaviour is consistent with the proposal
that coupling constants are emergent, i.e. go to zero at the boundary of the moduli space,
assuming that we can neglect a tree level contribution.
The best-known examples of threshold corrections to the Weyl-square coupling gW 2 are
provided by N = 2 heterotic or type II string vacua. Here the N = 2 BPS states play an
important role in the computation of the one-loop threshold corrections. The N = 2 gauge
couplings are given in terms of the N = 2 prepotential. Moreover in N = 2 supergravity
29

the W 2 action resided in the square of the chiral Weyl superfield. Its coupling to the abelian
vector multiplets is governed by a holomorphic function Fgrav , which at one loop is related
to the topological string partition function [60, 61], and whose real part, up to some nonholomorphic corrections is just the Weyl-square coupling gW 2 , i.e. gW 2 = ℜ(Fgrav ) + . . . .
Typically Fgrav diverges at the boundary of the moduli space due to the sum over an
infinite number of light states. Consider e.g. the heterotic string on K3 × T 2 , where the twotorus is described by the standard moduli fields T and U . In addition S denotes the heterotic
dilaton. Then summing over the N = 2 BPS states, namely KK and winding modes, the
holomorphic function Fgrav is given by the following expression (see e.g. [62]):
Fgrav = S +

bgrav
log η −2 (T )η −2 (U ) + . . . ,
8π 2

(175)

where bgrav = 46 + 2(nH − nV ). In the large moduli limit, the Dedekind η function behaves
like η(T ) → e−iπT /12 . It follows that
lim Fgrav = S − i

T →∞

bgrav
(T + U ) .
48π

(176)

2
So we see that for large T and large U , 1/gW
2 diverges, in agreement with the observation
that this limit is at large distance in the internal T 2 moduli space.
Let us mention at the end of this section that the topological string partition function
Fgrav seems to be closely related to the entropy functional F, which we discussed in section
bgrav 2
R . Therefore
2.2.2. Using S ≃ 1/gs2 and T ≃ iR2 , Fgrav becomes Fgrav ≃ g12 + 48π
s
1/Fgrav → 0 at weak string coupling or for large radius and the distance ∆ ≃ log Fgrav
becomes infinite in this limit.

7

Summary

In the first part of the paper we were discussing a close relation between the infinite distance
conjecture in the context of the swampland hypothesis in quantum gravity and the geometric
Ricci flow equations. One of the main points of the paper is the conjecture that fixed points
of the Ricci flow that appear at infinite distance in the space of backgrounds metrics have to
be accompanied by an infinite tower of massless states. Generically the considered infinite
distance fixed points belong to Ricci flows from a non-flat space towards their corresponding
flat-space limit. Since the non-flat spaces need an additional tower of extra states in addition to their zero modes, they typically belong to the swampland, as long as they are not
augmented by an extra space factor. Note that the transition to the end point of the flow is
somehow discontinuous, since the background at the end point normally has no infinite tower
of states.
As mentioned before in the literature, the Ricci flow is closely related to the RG flow with
respect to the energy scale in the underlying two-dimensional non-linear σ-models. Hence
this connection, when flowing from off-shell string backgrounds towards the on-shell zeroes
of the two-dimensional β-functions, provides an interesting connection between RG and the
swampland idea. This kind of connection was also recently noted in [44].
The tower of massless states, which appear at the infinite distance fixed points of the Ricci
flow, can often be identified with the KK modes or other states of the extra space-factor that
is needed in order to get a consistent string background. Moreover, the Ricci-flow as well
30

as the more generalized gradient flows also provide very useful entropy functionals, denoted
by F and W, which themselves lead to sensible definitions for the related distances in field
space. These entropy functionals should be closely related to the degeneracy of the tower
of states, which appear in the infinite distance limit. It is then tempting to speculate that
these entropy functionals together with their associated tower of light or massless states are
in very close relation with the micro states in quantum gravity, in particular for backgrounds
with horizons, like for de Sitter space.
Moreover, it would be very interesting to see if there is a possible relation between the
tower of states in the context of the infinite distance conjecture to the soft graviton modes
and their associated asymptotic symmetry groups on the horizon of these backgrounds. For
finite horizon, the BMS-like modes should be massive, but in the infinite distance limit of
small cosmological constant or of small curvature, the horizon should approach null infinity
and the massive modes become massless, just like the massless soft graviton modes. So in
the flat space limit, these modes could possibly become the standard massless soft graviton
modes of the infinite BMS symmetry group at null infinity. But to understand how the BMS
modes get a mass, when space is curved, is crucial, and furthermore one has to understand
why the massive soft modes on the finite horizon scale in the same way as the tower of modes
in the context of the large distance conjecture. This possible complementary explanation
of the tower is analogous to the way when one tries to explain the microscopic degrees of
freedom of a (Schwarzschild) black hole in terms of BMS-like modes - see e.g. [51,63–68]. For
this we refer to some possible future work in progress [69].
In the second part of the paper we considered the generalized distance conjecture for the
couplings of the higher curvature interactions. We saw that the weak coupling limit is at
infinite distance with respect to Weyl rescalings, and hence this limit should be accompanied
by an infinite tower of massless states. For the quadratic Weyl-square theory this result
agrees with the swampland spin-two conjecture and for the R2 we rederive the (A)dS distance
conjecture in this way.
In general the infinite distance conjecture applied to higher curvature theories shows that
the limit, when one turns off the higher derivative couplings, belongs to the swampland. This
confirms the general point of view that quantum gravity is only consistent when including an
infinite number of higher curvature terms in the effective action.

Acknowledgements
We thank C. Gomez, E. Palti, K. Sfetsos and C. Vafa for very useful discussions. The
work of D.L. is supported the Origins Excellence Cluster. The work of S.L. is supported
by the ERC Starting Grant 679278 Emergent-BH and the ERC Consolidator Grant 772408Stringlandscape.

References
[1] C. Vafa, “The String landscape and the swampland,” hep-th/0509212.
[2] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “On the Geometry of the String Landscape and the Swampland,”
Nucl. Phys. B 766 (2007) 21 doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2006.10.033 [hep-th/0605264].
[3] E. Palti, “The Swampland: Introduction and Review,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 (2019) no.6,
1900037 doi:10.1002/prop.201900037 [arXiv:1903.06239 [hep-th]].
31

[4] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis and C. Vafa, “The String landscape, black
holes and gravity as the weakest force,” JHEP 0706 (2007) 060 doi:10.1088/11266708/2007/06/060 [hep-th/0601001].
[5] D. Klaewer and E. Palti, “Super-Planckian Spatial Field Variations and Quantum Gravity,” JHEP 1701 (2017) 088 doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2017)088 [arXiv:1610.00010 [hep-th]].
[6] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, “The Weak Gravity Conjecture and
Emergence from an Ultraviolet Cutoff,” Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) no.4, 337
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-018-5811-3 [arXiv:1712.01868 [hep-th]].
[7] S. Andriolo, D. Junghans, T. Noumi and G. Shiu, “A Tower Weak Gravity
Conjecture from Infrared Consistency,” Fortsch. Phys. 66 (2018) no.5, 1800020
doi:10.1002/prop.201800020 [arXiv:1802.04287 [hep-th]].
[8] T. W. Grimm, E. Palti and I. Valenzuela, “Infinite Distances in Field Space and
Massless Towers of States,” JHEP 1808 (2018) 143 doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2018)143
[arXiv:1802.08264 [hep-th]].
[9] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, “Emergence of Weak Coupling at
Large Distance in Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) no.5, 051601
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.051601 [arXiv:1802.08698 [hep-th]].
[10] R. Blumenhagen, D. Kläwer, L. Schlechter and F. Wolf, “The Refined Swampland Distance Conjecture in Calabi-Yau Moduli Spaces,” JHEP 1806 (2018) 052
doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2018)052 [arXiv:1803.04989 [hep-th]].
[11] R. Blumenhagen, “Large Field Inflation/Quintessence and the Refined Swampland Distance Conjecture,” PoS CORFU 2017 (2018) 175 doi:10.22323/1.318.0175
[arXiv:1804.10504 [hep-th]].
[12] S. J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, “Tensionless Strings and the Weak Gravity Conjecture,” JHEP 1810 (2018) 164 doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2018)164 [arXiv:1808.05958 [hepth]].
[13] S. J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, “A Stringy Test of the Scalar Weak Gravity Conjecture,” Nucl. Phys. B 938 (2019) 321 doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2018.11.001
[arXiv:1810.05169 [hep-th]].
[14] T. W. Grimm, C. Li and E. Palti, “Infinite Distance Networks in Field Space and Charge
Orbits,” JHEP 1903 (2019) 016 doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2019)016 [arXiv:1811.02571 [hepth]].
[15] P. Corvilain, T. W. Grimm and I. Valenzuela, “The Swampland Distance Conjecture for Kähler moduli,” JHEP 1908 (2019) 075 doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2019)075
[arXiv:1812.07548 [hep-th]].
[16] S. J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, “Modular Fluxes, Elliptic Genera,
and Weak Gravity Conjectures in Four Dimensions,” JHEP 1908 (2019) 104
doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2019)104 [arXiv:1901.08065 [hep-th]].
[17] A. Joshi and A. Klemm, “Swampland Distance Conjecture for One-Parameter
Calabi-Yau Threefolds,” JHEP 1908 (2019) 086 doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2019)086
[arXiv:1903.00596 [hep-th]].
[18] F. Marchesano and M. Wiesner, “Instantons and infinite distances,” JHEP 1908 (2019)
088 doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2019)088 [arXiv:1904.04848 [hep-th]].
32

[19] A. Font, A. Herraez and L. E. Ibanez, “The Swampland Distance Conjecture and
Towers of Tensionless Branes,” JHEP 1908 (2019) 044 doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2019)044
[arXiv:1904.05379 [hep-th]].
[20] S. J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, “Emergent Strings, Duality and Weak Coupling
Limits for Two-Form Fields,” arXiv:1904.06344 [hep-th].
[21] D. Erkinger and J. Knapp, “Refined swampland distance conjecture and exotic hybrid
Calabi-Yaus,” JHEP 1907 (2019) 029 doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2019)029 [arXiv:1905.05225
[hep-th]].
[22] G. Obied, H. Ooguri, L. Spodyneiko and C. Vafa, “De Sitter Space and the Swampland,”
arXiv:1806.08362 [hep-th].
[23] H. Ooguri, E. Palti, G. Shiu and C. Vafa, “Distance and de Sitter Conjectures on
the Swampland,” Phys. Lett. B 788 (2019) 180 doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2018.11.018
[arXiv:1810.05506 [hep-th]].
[24] S. K. Garg and C. Krishnan, “Bounds on Slow Roll and the de Sitter Swampland,”
arXiv:1807.05193 [hep-th].
[25] G. Dvali and C. Gomez, “Quantum Compositeness of Gravity: Black Holes, AdS and
Inflation,” JCAP 1401 (2014) 023 doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2014/01/023 [arXiv:1312.4795
[hep-th]].
[26] G. Dvali and C. Gomez, “Quantum Exclusion of Positive Cosmological Constant?,”
Annalen Phys. 528 (2016) 68 doi:10.1002/andp.201500216 [arXiv:1412.8077 [hep-th]].
[27] G. Dvali, C. Gomez and S. Zell, “Quantum Break-Time of de Sitter,” JCAP 1706 (2017)
028 doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2017/06/028 [arXiv:1701.08776 [hep-th]].
[28] G. Dvali and C. Gomez, “On Exclusion of Positive Cosmological Constant,” Fortsch.
Phys. 67 (2019) no.1-2, 1800092 doi:10.1002/prop.201800092 [arXiv:1806.10877 [hepth]].
[29] G. Dvali, C. Gomez and S. Zell, “Quantum Breaking Bound on de Sitter and
Swampland,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 (2019) no.1-2, 1800094 doi:10.1002/prop.201800094
[arXiv:1810.11002 [hep-th]].
[30] D. Lüst, E. Palti and C. Vafa, “AdS and the Swampland,” arXiv:1906.05225 [hep-th].
[31] D. Klaewer, D. Lüst and E. Palti, “A Spin-2 Conjecture on the Swampland,” Fortsch.
Phys. 67 (2019) no.1-2, 1800102 [arXiv:1811.07908 [hep-th]].
[32] R.S.Hamilton, “Three manifolds with positive Ricci curvature,” Jour. Diff. Geom. 17
(1982), 255-306.
[33] G. Perelman, “The Entropy formula for the Ricci flow and its geometric applications,”
math/0211159 [math-dg].
[34] K. Sfetsos, “Integrable interpolations: From exact CFTs to non-Abelian T-duals,” Nucl.
Phys. B 880, 225 (2014) [arXiv:1312.4560 [hep-th]].
[35] K. Sfetsos and D. C. Thompson, “Spacetimes for λ-deformations,” JHEP 1412 (2014)
164 [arXiv:1410.1886 [hep-th]].
[36] E. Witten, “On string theory and black holes,” Phys. Rev. D 44 (1991) 314.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.44.314
[37] D. Lüst and E. Palti, “A Note on String Excitations and the Higuchi Bound,”
arXiv:1907.04161 [hep-th].
33

[38] A. Higuchi, “Forbidden Mass Range for Spin-2 Field Theory in De Sitter Space-time,”
Nucl. Phys. B 282 (1987) 397. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(87)90691-2
[39] B. Chow and D Knopf, “The Ricci Flow: An Introduction,” AMS, 2004.
[40] B. S. DeWitt, Phys. Rev. 160, 1113 (1967).
[41] O. Gil-Medrano, P. W. Michor, arXiv:math/9201259 [math.DG].
[42] I. Bakas, “Geometric flows and (some of) their physical applications,” Bulg. J. Phys. 33
(2006) no.s3, 091 [hep-th/0511057].
[43] I. Bakas, “Renormalization group equations and geometric flows,” Ann. U. Craiova Phys.
16 (2006) no.II, 20 [hep-th/0702034 [HEP-TH]].
[44] C. Gomez, “Gravity as universal UV completion: Towards a unified view of Swampland
conjectures,” arXiv:1907.13386 [hep-th].
[45] M. Larfors, A. Lukas and F. Ruehle, “Calabi-Yau Manifolds and SU(3) Structure,” JHEP
1901 (2019) 171 doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2019)171 [arXiv:1805.08499 [hep-th]].
[46] A. Strominger, “Superstrings with Torsion,” Nucl. Phys. B 274 (1986) 253.
doi:10.1016/0550-3213(86)90286-5
[47] C. M. Hull, “Compactifications of the Heterotic Superstring,” Phys. Lett. B 178 (1986)
357.
[48] G. Lopes Cardoso, G. Curio, G. Dall’Agata, D. Lüst, P. Manousselis and G. Zoupanos,
“NonKahler string backgrounds and their five torsion classes,” Nucl. Phys. B 652 (2003)
5 doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(03)00049-X [hep-th/0211118].
[49] D. Lüst and D. Tsimpis, “Supersymmetric AdS(4) compactifications of IIA supergravity,” JHEP 0502 (2005) 027 doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/02/027 [hep-th/0412250].
[50] G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, “Cosmological Event Horizons, Thermodynamics,
and Particle Creation,” Phys. Rev. D 15 (1977) 2738. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.15.2738
[51] G. Dvali, C. Gomez and D. Lüst, “Classical Limit of Black Hole Quantum N-Portrait
and BMS Symmetry,” Phys. Lett. B 753 (2016) 173 doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2015.11.073
[arXiv:1509.02114 [hep-th]].
[52] T. Banks, “Cosmological breaking of supersymmetry?,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16 (2001)
910 doi:10.1142/S0217751X01003998 [hep-th/0007146].
[53] E. Witten, “Quantum gravity in de Sitter space,” hep-th/0106109.
[54] L. Alvarez-Gaume, A. Kehagias, C. Kounnas, D. Lüst and A. Riotto, “Aspects of
Quadratic Gravity,” Fortsch. Phys. 64 (2016) no.2-3, 176 doi:10.1002/prop.201500100
[arXiv:1505.07657 [hep-th]].
[55] A. A. Starobinsky, “Spectrum of relict gravitational radiation and the early state of the
universe,” JETP Lett. 30 (1979) 682 [Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 30 (1979) 719].
[56] E. A. Bergshoeff, O. Hohm and P. K. Townsend, “Massive Gravity in Three Dimensions,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 201301 (2009). [arXiv:0901.1766 [hep-th]].
[57] B. Gording and A. Schmidt-May,
arXiv:1807.05011 [gr-qc].

“Ghost-free

infinite

derivative

gravity,”

[58] S. Ferrara, A. Kehagias and D. Lüst, “Aspects of Weyl Supergravity,” JHEP 1808, 197
(2018) [arXiv:1806.10016 [hep-th]].
34

[59] S. Ferrara, A. Kehagias and D. Lüst, “Bimetric, Conformal Supergravity and its Superstring Embedding,” JHEP 1905 (2019) 100 [arXiv:1810.08147 [hep-th]].
[60] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Holomorphic anomalies in topological field theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 405 (1993) 279 [AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math. 1 (1996)
655] doi:10.1016/0550-3213(93)90548-4 [hep-th/9302103].
[61] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, “Topological amplitudes
in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 413 (1994) 162 doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90617-3
[hep-th/9307158].
[62] G. Lopes Cardoso, G. Curio, D. Lüst, T. Mohaupt and S. J. Rey, “BPS spectra and
nonperturbative gravitational couplings in N=2, N=4 supersymmetric string theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 464 (1996) 18 doi:10.1016/0550-3213(96)00069-7 [hep-th/9512129].
[63] S. W. Hawking, “The Information Paradox for Black Holes,” arXiv:1509.01147 [hep-th].
[64] S. W. Hawking, M. J. Perry and A. Strominger, “Soft Hair on Black Holes,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 116 (2016) no.23, 231301 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.231301 [arXiv:1601.00921
[hep-th]].
[65] A. Averin, G. Dvali, C. Gomez and D. Lüst, “Gravitational Black Hole Hair from Event
Horizon Supertranslations,” JHEP 1606 (2016) 088 doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2016)088
[arXiv:1601.03725 [hep-th]].
[66] A. Averin, G. Dvali, C. Gomez and D. Lüst, “Goldstone origin of black hole hair
from supertranslations and criticality,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 31 (2016) no.39, 1630045
doi:10.1142/S0217732316300457 [arXiv:1606.06260 [hep-th]].
[67] S. W. Hawking, M. J. Perry and A. Strominger, “Superrotation Charge and Supertranslation Hair on Black Holes,” JHEP 1705 (2017) 161 doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2017)161
[arXiv:1611.09175 [hep-th]].
[68] S. Haco, S. W. Hawking, M. J. Perry and A. Strominger, “Black Hole Entropy and Soft
Hair,” JHEP 1812 (2018) 098 doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2018)098 [arXiv:1810.01847 [hepth]].
[69] Q. Bonnefoy, L. Ciambelli, D. Lüst and S. Lüst, “Infinite Black Hole Entropies at Infinite
Distances and Tower of States,” [arXiv:1912.07453 [hep-th]].

35

