A TOPOLOGICAL BOUND ON THE CANTOR-BENDIXSON RANK OF
MEROMORPHIC DIFFERENTIALS

arXiv:1910.06049v3 [math.GT] 4 Oct 2020

GUILLAUME TAHAR
Abstract. In translation surfaces of finite area (corresponding to holomorphic differentials), directions of saddle connections are dense in the unit circle. On the contrary,
saddle connections are fewer in translation surfaces with poles (corresponding to meromorphic differentials). The Cantor-Bendixson rank of their set of directions is a measure
of descriptive set-theoretic complexity. Drawing on a previous work of David Aulicino,
we prove a sharp upper bound that depends only on the genus of the underlying topological surface. The proof uses a new geometric lemma stating that in a sequence of three
nested invariant subsurfaces the genus of the third one is always bigger than the genus
of the first one.

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Statement of main results
3. Translation structures defined by meromorphic differentials
4. Invariant components and Cantor-Bendixson rank
References

1
2
3
4
9

1. Introduction
In [2], Bridgeland and Smith give a connection between spaces of stability conditions on
triangulated categories and moduli spaces of quadratic meromorphic differentials. Slopes
of stable objects in triangulated categories correspond to directions of saddle connections
(geodesic segments between singularities) for the flat structure defined by a meromorphic
differential on a Riemann surface. They appear in counting BPS states of string theory,
see [4].
The set of directions of saddle connections for a meromorphic quadratic differential crucially depends on the order of the singularities. It is well known (see [7]) that when poles
are at most simple, the flat surface is of finite area and the directions of saddle connections
are dense in the unit circle. On the contrary, when there is a pole of order at least two,
then the flat surface is of infinite area and the set of directions of saddle connections is
closed, see [1, 6].
In order to quantify the complexity of the set of directions of saddle connections, Aulicino
introduces in [1] the Cantor-Bendixson rank of a meromorphic quadratic differential that
is the smallest number of times the set of directions has to be derived to stabilize (see
Definition 2.1). The moduli space is stratified by fixing the orders of the singularities. For
differentials that belong to a given stratum, the rank is bounded by the dimension of the
stratum.
Actually, the framework used by Aulicino is not exactly that of meromorphic differentials
Date: July 23, 2020.
Key words and phrases. Translation surface, Saddle connection, Invariant component, CantorBendixson rank.
1

but rather holomorphic differentials with a slit. He considers only saddle connections that
do not cross the slit. Up to easy surgeries, it is always possible to associate to a meromorphic differential a holomorphic differential with slits in such a way that the set of directions
of saddle connections is the same, see [1]. In this paper, we provide a sharp bound on the
Cantor-Bendixson rank. The bound provided in [1] was the dimension 2g + n − 1 of a
stratum H(a1 , . . . , an ) of holomorphic differentials with n zeroes and slits on a surface of
genus g. Instead, we prove that the maximal rank is 2g, 2g + 1 or 2g + 2 depending on
the number of zeroes and poles. It is a significant improvement in particular in principal
strata (where the number n of zeroes is maximal).
In addition to the counting of BPS states in some supersymmetric field theories, the CantorBendixson rank of a meromorphic differential is involved in the counting of saddle connections. For a translation surface X, let N (L, X) be the number of saddle connections
of length smaller than L. The classical result of Masur (see [5]) state in particular that
N (L, X) ∼ L2 when X is defined by a holomorphic 1-form. Following an unpublished
conjecture of Aulicino, Pan and Su, when X is defined by a meromorphic 1-form (with at
least one pole) whose Cantor-Bendixson rank is kX , then we have:
N (L, X) ∼ L0 if kX = 1
N (L, X) ∼ L(log L)kX −2 if kX ≥ 2.
An optimal estimate of the Cantor-Bendixson rank of meromorphic differentials thus takes
a greater importance.

2. Statement of main results
In the following, we denote by translation surface with pole a pair (X, φ) where X is a
compact Riemann Surface of genus g and φ is a meromorphic 1-form whose singularities are
of order a1 , . . . , an , −b1 , . . . , −bp . Such pairs belong to strata H(a1 , . . . , an , −b1 , . . . , −bp )
p
n
P
P
bj = 2g − 2. We assume the the meromorphic differential has at least
where
ai −
i=1

j=1

one zero and one pole.
The meromorphic differential defines a flat metric on the surface punctured at the poles.
The zeroes of the differential are the conical singularities of the metric, see Section 3 for
details. Saddle connections are geodesic segments whose ends are conical singularities. We
study the set Θ(X, φ) ⊂ S 1 of directions of saddle connections where S 1 is the unit circle.
When there is no ambiguity, we simply denote this set by Θ.
We introduce the definition of Cantor-Bendixson rank used by Aulicino in [1].
Definition 2.1. Let A ⊂ S 1 . The derived set A? is the subset of A such that all isolated
points of A are removed. We denote by A?n the nth derived set of A.
The Cantor-Bendixson rank of a set A is the smallest non-negative integer n such that
A?n+1 = A?n .
The Cantor-Bendixson rank of a translation surface with poles is the Cantor-Bendixson
rank of its set of directions of saddle connections Θ(X, φ).
The main result of the paper is a topological upper bound on the Cantor-Bendixson
rank of the set of directions of saddle connections for a meromorphic differential of given
genus. The equality case is realized by some surfaces constructed in [1]. Our main tool
in proving Theorem 2.2 is Lemma 4.3 which states that in a sequence of three nested
invariant subsurfaces, the genus always increases. This technical lemma can be used for
general translation surfaces (and not only meromorphic differentials).
Theorem 2.2. For a meromorphic differential of genus g, the Cantor-Bendixson rank of
the set of directions of saddle connections is at most 2g + 2.
2

If the differential has at most one zero or at most one pole, the bound can be improved to
2g + 1. Furthermore, if the differential has exactly one zero and one pole, the bound can
be improved to 2g.
The structure of the paper is the following:
- In Section 3, we recall the background about translation surfaces: flat metric, saddle
connections, moduli space, core, directional foliation.
- In Section 4, drawing on an analysis of the relation between the Cantor-Bendixson rank
and the topological complexity of invariant components, we prove the main theorem.
3. Translation structures defined by meromorphic differentials
3.1. Translation structures. Let X be a compact Riemann surface and let φ be a meromorphic 1-form. We denote by Λ the set of zeroes of φ and by ∆ the set of its poles.
Outside Λ and ∆, integration of φ gives local coordinates whose transition maps are of
the type z 7→ z + c. The pair (X, φ) seen as a compact surface with such an atlas is called
a translation surface with poles.
In a neighborhood of a zero of order a > 0, the metric induced by φ admits a conical
singularity of angle (1 + a)2π, see [7] for details.
Geometry of neighborhoods of poles is not useful in our study because saddle connections
belong to the core of the translation surface which is precisely the complement of a union
of neighborhoods of the poles.
3.2. Moduli space. If (X, φ) and (X 0 , φ0 ) are translation surfaces such that there is a
biholomorphism f from X to X 0 such that φ is the pullback of φ0 , then f is an isometry
for the flat metrics defined by φ and φ0 .
We define the moduli space of meromorphic differentials as the space of equivalence classes
of translation surfaces with poles (X, φ) up to biholomorphism preserving the differential.
We denote by Hk (a1 , . . . , an , −b1 , . . . , −bp ) the stratum that corresponds to meromorphic
1-forms with singularities of orders a1 , . . . , an , −b1 , . . . , −bp . The integer g is the genus of
the underlying Riemann surface. For sake of simplicity we will use the term of strata of
genus g to designate strata of differentials that exist only on surfaces of genus g.
Definition 3.1. A saddle connection is a geodesic segment joining two conical singularities
of the flat surface such that all interior points are not conical singularities.
e \ ∆, Λ) to saddle connections. Two saddle conWe associate homology classes of H1 (X
nections are said to be parallel when their relative homology classes are linearly dependant
over R.
The holonomy vector of a saddle connection is the period of its relative homology class. Its
direction is the argument of the period and its length is the modulus of the period. Strata
are complex-analytic orbifolds with local coordinates given by the period map, see [2].
3.3. Core of a translation surface with poles. Nearly all of the geometry of a translation surface with poles is encompassed in a subsurface of finite area that is the convex
hull of the conical singularities. This notion of core of a translation surface with poles was
introduced in [3] and developed in [6]. Most foundational results about the core given in
this subsection are proved in the latter paper.
In [1], Aulicino considers slit translation surfaces that are translation surfaces (of finite
area) with distinguished cuts that play the role of the boundary of the core. For that
reason, our foundational results agree.
3

Definition 3.2. A subset E of a translation surface with poles (X, φ) is convex if and
only if every element of any geodesic segment between two points of E belongs to E.
The convex hull of a subset F of a translation surface with poles (X, φ) is the smallest
closed convex subset of X containing F .
The core of (X, φ) is the convex hull core(X) of the conical singularities Λ of the meromorphic differential.
IC(X) is the interior of core(X) in X and ∂C(X) = core(X) \ IC(X) is its boundary.
The core separates the poles from each other. The following lemma shows that the
complement of the core has as many connected components as there are poles. We refer
to these connected components as domains of poles. It has been proved as Proposition 4.4
and Lemma 4.5 in [6].
Proposition 3.3. For translation surface with p poles (X, φ), ∂C(X) is a finite union of
saddle connections. Moreover, X \ core(X) has p connected components. Each of them is
a topological disk that contains a unique pole.
Remark 3.4. We can define a Cantor-Bendixson rank for every connected component of the
interior of the core of the surface. Since strata are decomposed into chambers depending
on the topological pair (X, core(X)), we can deduce specific optimal ranks for chambers.
3.4. Directional Foliation. Dynamics of translation surfaces with poles are different
from translations of finite area because most trajectories go to infinity. The following
proposition describes the invariant components of the directional foliation in a translation
surface with poles. The following result has been proved as Proposition 5.5 in [6].
Proposition 3.5. Let (X, φ) be a translation surface with poles. Cutting along all saddle connections sharing a given direction θ, we obtain finitely many connected components
called invariant components of the directional foliation in direction θ. There are four types
of invariant components:
- finite area cylinders where the leaves (waist curves) are periodic with the same period,
- minimal components of finite area where the foliation is minimal and whose dynamics
are given by a nontrivial interval exchange map,
- infinite area cylinders bounding a simple pole and where the leaves are periodic with
the same period,
- free components of infinite area where generic leaves go from a pole to another or return to the same pole.
Finite area components belong to core(X).
The simplest example of a minimal component in a translation surface is a flat torus
foliated in an irrational direction. Its dynamics is given by an irrational rotation.
A first step in the interpretation of the set Θ(X, φ) of directions of saddle connections
in terms of invariant components is the following proposition, proved as Proposition 5.10
in [6] and Lemma 4.4 in [1].
Proposition 3.6. Let (X, φ) be a translation surface with poles. Then the directions of
the waist curves of finite area cylinders and the directions of minimal components of (X, φ)
are exactly the accumulation points of the set Θ(X, φ) of directions of saddle connections
of (X, φ). In particular, Θ(X, φ) is closed in the unit circle S 1 .
4. Invariant components and Cantor-Bendixson rank
In this section, we consider only invariant components of finite area because they are
those which contribute to the set of saddle connections (they belong to the core of the
4

surface). For sake of simplicity, we use the term invariant component only in the case of
invariant components of finite area.
4.1. ω-limit sets. In the following, we use the notion of ω-limit set to describe how a
sequence of invariant components accumulates on another. This approach was already
used by Aulicino in [1].
Definition 4.1. In a translation surface with poles (X, φ), we consider a sequence (Bk (θk ))k∈N
∞ S
T
Bk .
of invariant components. The ω-limit set of sequence (Bk )k∈N is Ω =
n=1 k≥n

The following lemma corresponds to Lemma 7.2 and Lemma 7.3 in [1]. We reformulate
its proof in the context of translation surfaces with poles.
Lemma 4.2. In a translation surface X, we consider a sequence (Bk (θk ))k∈N of invariant
components of direction θk where θk −→ θ. Its ω-limit set Ω is a union of invariant
components that belong to the same direction θ. Moreover, there is a subsequence α such
that any component Bα(k) is included in Ω.
Proof. First, Ω is clearly a closed subset of core(X) that contains at least one conical
singularity. At least one trajectory in direction θ starting from this singularity also belongs
to Ω because it is contained in the closure of an infinite sequence of invariant components
whose direction converges to θ. If the trajectory goes to a pole, we get a contradiction
because such a trajectory would be stable under small perturbations and in the sequence
there could not be invariant components whose direction would lie in a neighborhood of
θ. Therefore, either the trajectory is critical (ends in another conical singularity) or it is
minimal and accumulates on a minimal invariant component whose boundary is formed by
saddle connections of direction θ. We proceed this way for every point of Ω. Therefore,
Ω is a union of saddle connections and invariant components in direction θ. Following
Proposition 3.5, there is only a finite number of invariant components in a given direction.
Therefore, Ω is a finite union of invariant components and saddle connections.
By contradiction, we assume there is a number N such that ∀n ≥ N , Bn is not included
in Ω. Then there is a saddle connection σ of the boundary of Ω such that there is a
subsequence β such that every component Bβ(n) crosses σ. We also assume θβ(n) converges
monotonically to θ. Saddle connection σ goes from a conical singularity z0 to another
conical singularity z1 . We assume σ is a left boundary of Ω. Turning clockwise around
z1 with an angle of π, we get another direction that belongs to the closure of components
Bβ(n) . Using the same argument as previously, we show that this direction is either minimal
or critical. In the first case, we get another component in direction θ that would necessarily
belong to Ω and that would be located precisely at the left of σ. Therefore, the direction
is critical. We get a saddle connection from z1 to another saddle connection z2 . Turning
clockwise around z2 with an angle of π, we get another direction to which we can apply the
same reasoning. This process ends with a cyclic chain of saddle connections bounding a
cylinder to the left of σ whose periodic geodesics belong to direction θ. We choose a closed
geodesic γ of the cylinder. It is crossed by every component Bβ(n) . There is at least one
point z of γ such that any neighborhood of z intersects an infinite number of components
Bβ(n) . Such a point z thus belongs to Ω and the whole cylinder is included in Ω too. This
contradicts the hypothesis. Therefore, there is always an infinite number of components
of the sequence that always remain in Ω.

4.2. Topological upper bound. We first prove that in a sequence of inclusions of three
invariant subsurfaces (union of invariant components in the same direction), the genus
should increase. The intuitive idea is that between two invariant subsurfaces, there is the
gluing of a pair of pants. This operation may either increase the genus or the number of
5

connected components (depending on the way the pair of pants is glued). We prove that
two consecutive such operations always increase the genus at least one time.
Lemma 4.3. In a translation surface with three invariant subsurfaces A ⊂ B ⊂ C such
that θA 6= θB and θB 6= θC , the genus gC of C is strictly bigger than the genus gA of A.
Proof. Since we have clearly gA ≤ gB ≤ gC , we just have to deduce a contradiction from
gA = gB = gC . We consider a connected component X of the symmetric difference A∆C.
We deduce from the initial hypothesis that X is a surface of genus zero with a boundary
formed by saddle connections in directions θA and θC . If X has several boundary components, then exactly one of those contains saddle connections in direction θA because
otherwise the union of A with X would amount to adding a handle (the genus would
increase). We denote by X 1 this special boundary component. The other boundary components are formed by saddle connections in direction θC . Without loss of generality, we
assume that the latter boundary components are not the boundary of cylinders in direction
θC inside X. In this case, we could cut out these cylinders and get a smaller surface without such cylinders that displays the same situation (inclusion of three consecutive invariant
surfaces). Indeed, any trajectory in direction θB that would enter into the cylinder would
leave the surface. Therefore, the cylinder is disjoint from B. Consequently, if there is a
counterexample with cylinders, there also exists a counterexample without cylinders.
Then, we consider trajectories in X starting from the boundary of A and that belong
to direction θB . In a surface of genus zero, there is no minimal trajectories. Therefore,
such trajectories either hit a singularity or finally cross another boundary of the surface.
Because of their direction, these trajectories clearly stay in B. Therefore, generically, they
go from a boundary saddle connection of direction θA to another (with the opposite orientation). These trajectories describe parallelograms inside X.
If we identify the special boundary component X 1 with a circle, choosing one trajectory in
each of these parallelograms defines a chord diagram where chords do not cross each other
(we remind that X is of genus zero). In any such drawing, there is at least one chord that
separates the disk into two connected components one of which does not contain any of the
drawn chords. This implies that there is a parallelogram whose complement in X has two
connected components one of which has no boundary saddle connection in direction θA ,
see Figure 1. We denote by Y this connected component. It is of genus zero and if it has
several boundary components, only one of them has saddle connections in both direction
θB and θC . We denote by Y 1 this special boundary component.
A discrete Gauss-Bonnet theorem (obtained by a geodesic triangulation of the flat surface
and a counting of the triangles) implies that the sum of the angle defects in translation
surface with a boundary is a topological invariant. In any corner of the boundary, if the
angle of the corner is α, then the angle defect is α − π. For a singularity in the interior the
surface of angle β, the angle defect is β − 2π. In a surface of genus zero with b boundary
components, the sum of the angle defects is (b − 2)2π. We prove first that the contribution
of the boundary component Y 1 should be negative.
First, if there are singularities in the interior of the surface, their angle is an integer multiple
of π so there angle defect is not negative. Corners in boundary components different from
Y 1 are between saddle connections that both lie in direction θC . Their angles are thus
multiple integers of π. In the beginning of the proof, we excluded the case where these
boundary components bound a cylinder. Therefore, their angles cannot be all equal to
π. Finally, the sum of the angle defects of a boundary component is an integer multiple
of 2π because otherwise the parallel transport of the translation surface along the loop
would define a holonomy map which would fail to be a translation (directions are defined
unambiguously in a translation surface). Consequently, for boundary components different
6

Figure 1. X is a surface of genus zero with three boundary components.
In the middle of the disk there is a parallelogram that separates the surface
into two components. The left part (in grey) is the component Y we consider
for the angle defect argument.
from Y 1 , the angle defect is at least 2π. This implies that the total angle defect of Y 1 is
at most −2π (like the boundary of a polygon).
We have to distinguish the various parts of Y 1 . One part of it also belongs to X 1 , it is
formed by saddle connections in direction θC . Another part is formed by saddle connections
in direction θB that also bound the parallelogram that separates Y from the rest of X,
see Figure 1. The last part is formed by saddle connections in direction θC that belong to
other boundary components of X. We first focus on the latter. As we proved previously,
the total angle defect around one of these boundary components is at least 2π. Such
a boundary component is attached to Y 1 by a unique singularity that that belongs to
three corners: two inside Y between saddle connections of direction θB and θC , the last
one inside the parallelogram (with an angle of π). To compute the contribution of this
boundary component to the total angle defect of Y 1 , we have to take into account the fact
that one singularity appears in two corners and also that an angle of π does not count for
Y 1 (because this corner belongs to the parallelogram). Thus, if the total angular defect of
a loop around this boundary component is 2kπ, its contribution to Y 1 is 2(k − 1)π. Since
we excluded cylinders, we know that k ≥ 1. Finally, angles α and β (corresponding to the
two corners between the saddle connections that belong to X 1 and those that bound the
parallelogram) are nonzero. Therefore, we have α − π > −π andβ − π > −π. Since there
is no negative contribution of corners between saddle connections with the same direction,
the total angle defect of Y 1 is strictly bigger than (b−2)2π where b the number of boundary
components. This is the contradiction we look for. This ends the proof.

The upper bound proved in [1] relies on a proof by induction that directions that belong
to the (k − 1)th derived set of directions of saddle connections of a translation surface with
poles are directions of invariant components whose complex dimension of the deformation
space is at least k. We directly use the genus as measure of complexity of invariant
components.
Proposition 4.4. In a translation surface with poles (X, φ), every element of Θ?(k−1) is
the direction of an invariant subsurface of genus at least k−2
2 . If the genus of the subsurface
k−2
is exactly 2 , then its boundary has at least two connected components.
7

Proof. We proceed by double induction on k. Every element of Θ? is the direction of an
invariant component (Proposition 3.6). If it is a minimal component, its genus is at least
one. If it is a cylinder, it has exactly two boundary components so the proposition holds
for k = 2.
Every element of Θ?? is the direction of an invariant subsurface that is the ω-set of a sequence of invariant components (Lemma 4.2). Therefore, we have two invariant subsurfaces
A ⊂ B. If the genus of B is at least one, the proposition is proved. If B has genus zero,
then A is also a subsurface of genus zero. They are both formed by cylinders. Without loss
of generality, we can assume that A is a cylinder. This implies that waist curves of A are
also waist curves of B. They belong to the same direction which is impossible. Therefore,
the proposition holds for k = 3.
By induction, we assume the proposition holds for k < 2m + 2. Following Lemma 4.2,
every element of Θ?(2m+1) is the ω-set of a sequence of invariant components whose directions lie in Θ?(2m) . For the same reasons, these invariant components are ω-sets of other
sequences of invariant components in Θ?(2m−1) . Consequently, we have three invariant
components A ⊂ B ⊂ C whose direction is respectively in Θ?(2m−1) , Θ?(2m) and Θ?(2m+1) .
The genus of A is at least m − 1 and the genus of B is at least m. Therefore, the genus of
C is at least m. If the genus of C is exactly m, then we will prove that C has at least two
boundary components.
If C has only one boundary component, then B should also have only one boundary component (otherwise, the gluing of B∆C would increase the genus by adding a handle). The
symmetric difference B∆C is formed by connected components of genus zero. If one of
these components has several boundary components, then there is a loop inside it such
that the complement of this loop has two connected components, one of which contains
the boundary of C. In this case, B∆C is an annulus with two boundary components, each
of which is formed by saddle connections in the same directions. Just like in the proof
of Lemma 4.3, we compute the total angle defect of this component, where every corner
has an angle which is a multiple integer of π. The total angle defect of an annulus is zero
so the two boundary components bound cylinders, which is impossible. Then, we have to
deal with the case where the connected components of B∆C are polygons. The boundary
of any of these polygons is formed by saddle connections in alternating directions (θB and
θC ) with at least two of each. Drawing a path relating two of these saddle connection in
direction θB and closing it inside B provides a loop separating the boundary of C into
several connected components. Therefore, C cannot have only one boundary component.
The proposition holds for k = 2m + 2.
Then, we assume by induction the proposition holds for k ≤ 2m + 2. Following Lemma
4.2, every element of Θ?(2m+2) is the ω-set of a sequence of invariant components whose
directions lie in Θ?(2m+1) . Similarly, we have three invariant components A ⊂ B ⊂ C
whose direction is respectively in Θ?(2m) , Θ?(2m+1) and Θ?(2m+2) . The genus of both A
and B is at least m. Therefore, the genus of C is at least m + 1 (Lemma 4.3). This ends
the proof.

Now we are able to prove the main theorem of the paper: the topological bounds on the
descriptive set-theoretic complexity of the set of directions of saddle connections.
Proof of Theorem 2.2. Following Proposition 4.4, every element of Θ?(k−1) is the direction
0
of an invariant subsurface of genus g 0 ≥ k−1
2 . Since g cannot be bigger than the genus g
?(k−1)
of the whole surface, Θ
is empty if k > 2g + 1. Thus, the sequence of derived sets
stabilizes and the Cantor-Bendixson rank of (X, φ) is at most 2g + 2.
If the Cantor-Bendixson rank of a meromorphic differential is exactly 2g + 2, then then
8

Θ?(2g+1) is nonempty and there is an invariant subsurface A of genus g with at least two
boundary components. The symmetric difference A∆X is formed by several genus zero
surfaces with exactly one boundary component formed by saddle connections in direction
θA . Since these topological disks are also invariant in this direction and there is no such
translation surfaces, they contain poles and at least one conical singularity. Therefore, the
meromorphic differential should contain at least two zeroes and two poles.
If the Cantor-Bendixson rank of a translation surface with poles is exactly 2g + 1, then for
the same reasons there is an invariant subsurface A of genus g. The symmetric difference
A∆X is formed by at least one topological disk. If the meromorphic differential has
only one pole and one zero, then A∆X is just a topological disk whose boundary has a
total holonomy equal to zero (the residue of the unique pole is zero). Therefore, there
should be at least two different conical singularities otherwise there would not be any
saddle connection in the boundary of the disk (their period would automatically be zero).
Therefore, there are at least three distinct singularities.
As a consequence of the above, if n = p = 1, then the Cantor-Bendixson rank of the
meromorphic differential is at most 2g.

In [1], Aulicino already constructed families of square-tiled translation surfaces with
slits. They are invariant components nested in each other. These examples show that the
bound of this paper is sharp for a given genus.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant
No. 1167/17) and has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
No. 802107). The author is grateful to David Aulicino, Dmitry Novikov and the anonymous referee for their valuable remarks.

References
[1] D. Aulicino. The Cantor-Bendixson rank of certain Bridgeland-Smith stability conditions . Commun.
Math. Phys.„ Volume 357, Issue 2, 791–809, January 2018.
[2] T. Bridgeland, I. Smith. Quadratic differentials as stability conditions. Publications de l’IHES, Volume
121, Issue 1, 155-278, 2015.
[3] F. Haiden, L. Katzarkov, M. Kontsevich. Flat surfaces and stability structures. Publications de l’IHES,
Volume 126, Issue 1, 247-318, November 2017.
[4] S. Kachru, R. Nally, A. Tripathy, M. Zimet. Semiclassical Entropy of BPS States in 4d N=2 Theories
and Counts of Geodesics. Preprint, arXiv:1409.8611, 2019.
[5] H. Masur The growth rate of trajectories of a quadratic differential. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical
Systems, Volume 10, Issue 1, 151-176, 1990.
[6] G. Tahar Counting saddle connections in flat surfaces with poles of higher order. Geometriae Dedicata,
Volume 196, Issue 1, 145-186, October 2018.
[7] A. Zorich. Flat Surfaces. Frontiers in Physics, Number Theory and Geometry, 439-586, 2006.
(Guillaume Tahar) Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel
Email address: tahar.guillaume@weizmann.ac.il

9

