Memory-induced motion reversal in Brownian liquids
Lucas L. Treffenstädt and Matthias Schmidt

arXiv:1910.03417v1 [cond-mat.soft] 8 Oct 2019

Theoretical Physics II, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstr. 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany
(Dated: 8th October 2019)
We study the Brownian dynamics of hard spheres under spatially inhomogeneous shear, using
event-driven Brownian dynamics simulations and power functional theory. We examine density
and current profiles both for steady states and for the transient dynamics after switching on and
switching off an external square wave shear force field. We find that a dense hard sphere fluid (volume
fraction ≈ 0.35) undergoes global motion reversal after switching off the shear force field. We use
power functional theory with a spatially nonlocal memory kernel to describe the superadiabatic force
contributions and obtain good quantitative agreement of the theoretical results with simulation data.
The theory provides an explanation for the motion reversal: Internal superadiabatic nonequilibrium
forces that oppose the externally driven current arise due to memory after switching off. The effect
is genuinely viscoelastic: in steady state, viscous forces oppose the current, but they elastically
generate an opposing current after switch-off.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The non-equilibrium properties of hard spheres under shear have attracted considerable attention. Rheological experiments under steady shear, e.g. using silica
particles1,2 , show non-Newtonian viscosity effects, with
both shear thickening and shear thinning occurring depending on the volume fraction. Shear thinning was
observed in Brownian dynamics (BD) simulation, e.g.
by Foss and Brady3 . Dhont et al. studied the distortion of the microstructure of colloids using light scattering experiments4 . Dhont and Nägele derived the viscoelastic response of a suspension of colloids to shear
from the Smoluchowski equation5 . Fuchs and coworkers have developed theoretical descriptions of these effects using mode coupling theory and integration through
transients6–8 . A thorough overview of the nonlinear rheology of colloidal dispersions has been given by Brader9 .
Hard spheres under inhomogeneous shear exhibit a
broad range of effects. In particular, inhomogeneities
in the shear rate can induce particle migration10 and
thus lead to inhomogeneities in the density profile. Examples of this mechanism are lane formation, where
particles move in stacked layers separated by low density
bands11,12 , and deformation of boundary density profiles
of sheared systems in confinement13–15 . Howon et al.
studied flow instabilities in inhomogeneous shear with
Browninan dynamics simulations16 .
The transient behaviour in the time evolution from
equilibrium to a sheared steady state and the reverse
process from steady shear to equilibrium has attracted
similar attention. Reinhardt et al.17 studied the distortion of the pair correlation function under start-up shear.
Koumakis et al.18 reported on stresses in the start-up
phase of shearing, in particular on the dependence of
the stress overshoot on the Peclet number and on the
volume fraction, using both simulation and experiments
with sterically stabilized PMMA spheres using confocal
microscopy and rheological measurements. Stress overshoot in start-up and cessation of shear and the connection to the microscopic fluid structure have also been

studied19 . Ackerson et al.20 reported on solid-like ordering of nearly hard spheres under the influence of oscillatory shear. Krüger and Brader applied dynamic density
functional theory21,22 , extended to sheared systems with
a scattering kernel approach13 , to study sedimentation of
colloids under time-dependend shear23 , and Metzger and
Butler examined the time evolution of particle clusters
in periodic shear24 .
Microscopic methods such as BD or molecular dynamics simulations are based on equations of motions
which are instantaneous in time on the many-body level.
However, on the one-body level, nonequilibrium states
are generally dependend on the history of the system.
By integrating out degrees of freedom, coarse-grained
methods can be obtained, which generally have nonMarkovian form, as can be shown with the Mori-Zwanzig
formalism25,26 . There is previous work done to derive
accurate memory kernels for generalised Langevin equations for Brownian dynamics. Smith and Harris27 proposed a method to approximate memory kernels and generate random forces with a given autocorrelation. Szymczak and Cichocki28 studied memory in the macroscopic
dynamics of Brownian systems. Bao et al.29 investigated
breaking of ergodicity due to memory in non-Markovian
Brownian dynamics. Recently, iterative methods have
been developed to reconstruct memory kernels for generalized Langevin equations from molecular dynamics simulations by matching the force autocorrelation function
or the velocity autocorrelation function between both
methods30,31 .
In this paper, we examine a system of Brownian hard
spheres both in steady state under temporally constant
but spatially inhomogeneous shear as well as the transient dynamics after switching the driving field both on
and off. Figure 1 shows a sketch of the dynamics: Starting in a well-defined equilibrium state, a shear force field
is switched on. The system needs some time to relax into
a steady state. Then, the shear force field is switched off,
and the system relaxes back into equilibrium. We report
in particular on the shape of the current profile in the
steady state under the influence of a square wave shear

2

0

time

equilibrium

transient

steady state

transient

equilibrium

external force
system response

overall memory strength – are determined using a leastsquares fit to BD simulation data.
This paper is organised as follows: In section II, we
introduce the considered system and our PFT approach.
Section III contains implementation details for the BD
simulations. Sections IV and V cover results in steady
state and during transients, respectively. We draw conclusions and provide an outlook in section VI.

T

Figure 1. Sketch of the time evolution of the system, external
force (solid red line) and system response (dashed purple line)
in arbitrary units. The system was in equilibrium at negative
times. An external force is switched on at t = 0, and the
system is monitored during the transient into a steady state
as well as in the steady state itself. At time t = T , the external
force is switched off and the system is observed until it has
reached equilibrium again.

II.

SYSTEM AND THEORY

We consider a fluid of N monodisperse hard spheres
with diameter σ. The system has planar geometry with
Cartesian coordinates r = (x, y, z) and we take σ as the
unit of length. Isotropy is broken by an external shear
force field
fext (r) = fext (x)êz ,

profile. This particular form of shear is well suited to
show and examine nonlocal effects, since small regions
of extreme shear rate alternate with large regions of low
shear rate. We find that the transition in the current
field between opposite flow directions is non-monotonic.
After switching-off of the driving shear force, the current
field reverses globally before settling into equilibrium.
We employ state-of-the-art event driven Brownian dynamics simulations32 , which solve the problem of infinite gradients in the hard sphere interaction potential by
evolving the system continuously with ballistic motion
between BD timesteps. At fixed timesteps, the velocities
of the particles are randomised according to a Maxwell
distribution.
In addition to observations in simulation, the system
is examined in the framework of power functional theory (PFT)33 , which describes the full non-equilibrium
dynamics of many-particle systems, beyond the adiabatic approximation made in dynamical density functional theory (DDFT). DDFT is an extension of equilibrium density functional theory (DFT) to nonequilibrium systems34,35 , which approximates the time evolution of the system through a series of adiabatic states,
where the internal forces can be calculated from an equivalent equilibrium system with matching instantaneous
density36 . However, this approximation leads to shortcomings, such as underestimation of relaxation times34 .
There have been attempts to correct these shortcomings
via empirical corrections, see e.g.37,38 .
Superadiabatic forces were shown to occur in a variety of systems, such as Gaussian core particles39 , hard
spheres40 and active Brownian particles41 . We extend here an approximation for superadiabatic forces
for Brownian hard spheres, presented recently by de las
Heras and Schmidt40 by introducing a diffusing memory
kernel. This approximation derives forces from the gradient of the velocity field. The free parameters in this
model – memory time, memory diffusion constant, and

(1)

where êz is the unit vector in the z-direction and fext =
|fexc | is the modulus of the force field. Since the intrinsic
dynamics are diffusive, we choose as the unit of time the
diffusion time τ = σ 2 /D with diffusion constant D =
kB T /γ, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T indicates
the absolute temperature, and γ is the friction constant
against the implicit solvent.
The particle positions r1 , . . . , rN ≡ rN evolve in time
according to the Langevin equation of motion
p
γ r˙i (t) = fint,i (rN ) + fext (ri , t) + 2γkB T Ri (t) (2)
where fint,i = −∇i u(rN ) is the internal force that all
other particles exert on particle i due to the interaction potential u(rN ) and Ri (t) is a delta-correlated
Gaussian random white noise with hRi (t)i = 0 and
hRi (t)Rj (t0 )i = δ(t − t0 )δij 1, where δ(·) is the Dirac distribution, δij indicates the Kronecker delta, and 1 is the
3 × 3 unit matrix.
The one-body density distribution is defined as
*
+
X
ρ(r, t) =
δ(r − ri ) ,
(3)
i

where h·i indicates an average over the noise and over
initial microstates. The one-body current distribution is
defined as
*
+
X
J(r, t) =
δ(r − ri )vi (t) ,
(4)
i

where, in a numerical simulation, vi must be calculated
with a finite difference centred at time t42 . The velocity
field v(r, t) is defined as
v(r, t) =

J(r, t)
.
ρ(r, t)

(5)

3
where

The dynamics of (3) and (4) can be expressed as

Z
γv(r, t) = fint + fext − kB T ∇ ln ρ,
∂
ρ(r, t) = −∇ · J(r, t),
∂t

(6)
(7)

with total internal force field
1
fint (r, t) =
ρ

*

+
X

δ(r − ri )fint,i

.

(8)

i

This internal force field can be split into two parts according to

Ḟ [ρ] =

(9)

with the adiabatic force fad and the superadiabatic force
fsup 33,36 . The adiabatic force is defined as the internal
force acting in a constructed equilibrium system with an
external potential Vad (r) chosen such that the equilibrium density matches the instantaneous density ρ(r, t).
The underlying map from the equilibrium density distribution to the external potential Vad has been shown by
Evans43 and Mermin44 . Thus, fad depends only on the
density at time t. The superadiabatic force field, in contrast, depends in general on the history of both ρ(r, t0 )
and J(r, t0 ) for t0 ≤ t, making (6) in general an implicit
equation. This distinction physically defines the splitting
of internal forces. Superadiabatic forces can be measured
in particle-based simulations36 .
Power functional theory is based on the free power
functional Rt [ρ, J], which captures in a formally exact
way the full many-body dynamics. Rt generates via a
minimisation principle
δRt
= 0 (min),
δJ(r, t)

(10)

an Euler-Lagrange equation of motion (6) for the current, given a density profile at fixed time t and the history ρ(r, t̃), J(r, t̃) for t̃ < t. The resulting current at
time t can then be used in conjuction with the continuity
equation (7) to evolve the density in time.
The power functional Rt [ρ, J] for a many-body system
splits into
Rt [ρ, J] = Ḟ + Pt − Xt ,

Ptexc

γ
=
2

Z

Z
dr

dr

0

Zt

−∞

(11)

δF [ρ]
,
δρ

(12)

is the time derivative of the intrinsic Helmholtz free energy functional F [ρ] of equilibrium DFT. F [ρ] can be split
into an ideal part Fid [ρ], which contains contributions to
the free energy from the ideal gas, and the excess free energy Fexc [ρ], which depends on the particle interactions.
For the excess free energy functional, we choose the wellknown Rosenfeld functional45 . The negative functional
derivative of Ḟexc with respect to J produces the adiabatic forces, which only depend on the density ρ at time
t. Hence
fad = −

fint = fad + fsup ,

dr J · ∇

δ Ḟexc
δFexc
= −∇
.
δJ
δρ

(13)

The external power Xt depends on the external force
field fext , as well as the time derivative V̇ext of the external
potential, should it be time-dependend. The functional
has the form
Z
h
i
Xt = dr J · fext (r, t) − ρV̇ext .
(14)
Here, V̇ext = 0 and the external force field is a shearing
force (cf. eq. (1)). Additionally, we employ a temporally
constant conservative force field fc = −∇Vext to induce
particle migration effects.
Finally, Pt can be split into an ideal and an excess
(over-ideal) part
Pt = Ptid + Ptexc ,
with the ideal dissipation functional
Z
J2
Ptid = γ dr ,
2ρ

(15)

(16)

which is local in time and space, as is appropriate for free
diffusion.
Ptexc contains all superadiabatic effects and is, in general, nonlocal in both space and time via causal history
dependence. It generates the superadiabatic forces via
fsup = −

δPtexc
.
δJ

(17)

Ptexc is specific to the type of interparticle interaction
potential and must in general be approximated. This
status is very similar to that of the excess free energy
functional Fexc [ρ] in equilibrium DFT. Here, we choose
the generic velocity gradient approximation40

dt0 ρ(r, t) [η(∇ × v) · (∇0 × v0 ) + ζ(∇ · v)(∇0 · v0 )] ρ(r0 , t0 )K(r − r0 , t − t0 ),

(18)

4
where v = v(r, t) (and v0 = v(r0 , t0 )) is the velocity field
as defined in (5), and ∇0 is the derivative with respect to
r0 . Ptexc depends not only on the instantaneous density
and velocity fields, but also on the history of the system,
and it is non-local in space. ζ and η is the volume viscosity and the shear viscosity, respectively. The particular coupling to the history is governed by the memory
0
0
kernel
R
R K(r
R − r , t − t ), which is normalised such that
dr dr0 dt0 K = 1.
We examine two different functional forms of K. The
simpler of the two is local in space:
KL (r, t) = δ(r)τM −1 exp (−t/τM ) Θ(t),

(19)

with memory time τM and the Heaviside step function
Θ(·). We expect this form to perform well in cases of
mild shear rates, where it is well suited to explore timedependend behaviour in isolation from spatial effects.
The second version is spatially non-local and based
on the idea that interactions between distant particles
propagate according to the underlying microscopic dynamics, which are diffusive. We introduce a corresponding memory diffusion constant DM . The memory kernel
takes the form
r2
t
−
−
1
−3/2
e 4tDM , (20)
KD (r, t) = Θ(t) e τM (4πtDM )
τM
with memory time τM as before. We shall call this form
the diffusing memory kernel, since the spatial part corresponds to a simple diffusion process. The constants τM
and DM are treated as free parameters.
The timescale τM controls the exponential decay of the
memory effect. DM has the units of a square length per
time and controls how fast information from a point r0
can reach the point r. This corresponds to a diffusion
process. In the limit of t0 → t, the spatial part of KD
approaches the Dirac delta distribution. Therefore, there
are no instantaneous non-local interactions in this model.
In steady state, density and current do not depend
on time, i.e. ρ(r, t) = ρs (r) and J(r, t) = Js (r) with
∇ · Js = 0. In this case, the time integral in (18) acts
only on K and, as K is known from (19) or (20), can
be carried out explicitly. The respective results for both
kernels are

KLS

Zt
=

KL (r − r0 , t − t0 )dt0 = δ(r − r0 ),

(21)
III.

−∞
S
KD
=

Zt

which can be interpreted as an effective interaction length
in steady state. The parameters τM and DM can therefore
not be independently determined from measurements of
one-body quantities in steady state. However, one can
determine the value of σM . In steady state, it is less
computationally intensive to obtain accurate density and
current profiles from particle simulations, so σM can be
determined with high accuracy. Knowledge of σM then
reduces the number of free parameters to be determined
with measurements in the full time evolution.
For the given system, all integrals in y and z in Rt [ρ, J]
can be explicitly carried out, since density and current
are by construction homogeneous in these directions.
Thus, the current only depends on one space coordinate x and time t: J(x, t) = Jx (x, t)êx + Jz (x, t)êz , where
Jx is the current in gradient direction êx , and Jz is the
current in flow direction êz .
It should be noted that the form of Ptexc applied here
contains no coupling between the flow direction and the
gradient direction of J. Therefore, a system with an initially homogeneous density and no external force acting
in the x direction will always remain homogeneous in
this approximation, whereas in reality, structural migration forces occur. Ptexc can be extended to include these
effects39 , but that is beyond the scope of this work. Instead, we impose the density profile ρBD obtained in BD
simulations via an external potential Vext (x), chosen so
that ρBD (x) is the equilibrium density in the potential.
We numerically minimize Rt [ρ, J] for a given ρ(x, t) at
time t using a generic nonlinear numerical optimiser46 ,
thus solving the Euler-Lagrange-equation (10) and obtaining J(x, t). Using the continuity equation (7), we
numerically evolve ρ in time, i.e. proceed by one time
step ∆t and repeat the procedure.
Then, we compare results for ρ(x, t) and J(x, t) calculated with PFT to results for the same quantities sampled
in BD simulations. The free parameters in Ptexc can be
determined via a least-squares fit with an appropriate
observable. We choose here the velocity field, sampled at
fixed time intervals during transients, or averaged over
multiple simulation snapshots in the case of steady state.
In principle, other observables could be used. We start
from reasonable estimates and use a nonlinear numerical
optimiser46 with a derivative-free optimisation routine47
to obtain estimates of the free parameters.

KD (r − r0 , t − t0 )dt0
(22)

−∞



=

0

1
|r − r |
exp − √
4πτM DM |r − r0 |
τM DM


.

Thus, KLS does not depend on the parameter τM and
S
KD
depends only on a new length scale
p
σM = τM DM ,
(23)

BROWNIAN DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS

We employ event-driven Brownian Dynamics
simulations32 to integrate the Langevin equation (2) and
obtain particle trajectories. We use N = 1090 particles
in a simulation box of size 10 × 10 × 15 σ 3 with periodic
boundary conditions in all directions. By choosing a
strongly inhomogeneous shear force field, we expect to
clearly showcase the importance of nonlocal interactions.
Our choice of a field that is periodic in x relieves us from
the need for Lees-Edwards boundary conditions48 , which

5

0.9

2

0.8
0.7

Jz σ 2 τ

0

BD
BD
KL
KD

−2
−4

current
density
current
current
fext

0.6

ρσ 3

fext σ / kB T

1.0
4

0.5
0.4
0.3

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

x/σ

Figure 2. Steady state current Jz (x) and density profile ρ(x)
in BD simulation under a square wave shear force fext (x)
acting along êz . The plot shows only part of the simulation
box.

are commonly used for periodic systems with constant
shear rate.
We calculate one-body quantities such as density and
current by averaging over many-body trajectories.
We obtain the steady state current and density profile
by averaging 106 trajectory samples from a runlength of
103 τ after an initial relaxation period of 2τ . For startup dynamics, the system is simulated in equilibrium for
an initial 0.1τ , after which shear is switched on and the
system is evolved for a further 0.4τ . Dynamics after
switch-off are simulated initially for 1.5τ under shear,
after which the shear force is switched off and the system is evolved for a further 0.1τ . In our experience, this
protocol is sufficient to ensure that a steady state has
been reached, given our parameters. Time-dependent
current and density profiles for the dynamics in full nonequilibrium are then calculated per timestep via an average over 104 realisations.

IV.

STEADY STATE

We subject our system to a strongly inhomogeneous,
but steady, square wave external force in z direction with
an amplitude of 5 kBσT and a period of 5σ (see figure 2).
After a short time ≈ 10−1 τ , the system settles into a
steady state (∂t ρ = ∂t J = 0).
This state has some interesting properties (Figure 2,
current and density profile in steady state). The BD
results indicate that, even though no external force is
acting in the x direction, the density profile becomes
inhomogeneous. This effect is driven purely by superadiabatic forces and is thus a true nonequilibrium effect.
Phenomenological approaches to incorporate such forces
into DDFT have been proposed in9,23 . Stuhlmüller et
al.39 have studied shear induced particle migration in
a system of Gaussian core particles with PFT. In our
PFT calculations, we impose the inhomogeneous density sampled in BD with a temporally constant external

potential Vext (x).
The harsh spatial step in the driving force field is reflected in the current profile: The current reverses its
orientation in a region smaller than σ/10. Inside the regions of near-constant force, instead of a monotonic approach to the maximum, the current profile displays an
oscillation close to the edge. The occurence of this effect
suggests a complex nonlocal interaction, supporting our
corresponding approach in PFT.
Using a least-squares fit of the PFT velocity profile to
the BD velocity profile, we can obtain values for η in
KL and σM in KD (22),(23). Figure 2 shows the resulting velocity profiles from PFT. In the given case, we
obtain σM ≈ σ/3, which is close to the sphere radius.
The effective interaction in steady state is therefore quite
short-ranged.
While not perfect, the agreement between BD and
PFT is much better for the diffusing memory form (20)
than it is for the local form (19). Perhaps contrary to intuition, the profile obtained from the local memory model
is smoother and does not represent the jump in the current profile that is observed in BD. The reason for this
becomes clear when considering the effect of the spatial
nonlocality of KD .
The velocity gradient ∂x vz has a large spike at the
jump of the velocity itself. In the local memory model,
this spike contributes evenly for every point in the history
of the system. In the diffusing model, it is smoothed out
by the integral over x0 for times t0 < t. The penalty for a
jump in the velocity is thus much lower in the diffusing
model.
Since Ptexc depends only on inter-particle interactions
and not on external forces, and should be translationally invariant, no spatially local memory kernel can accurately represent this feature in the velocity profile, no
matter how complex the temporal behaviour. In other
words, spatial nonlocality is not only the most general
form of memory, but it is required for the correct description of strong inhomogeneities within the velocity
gradient approach.

V.

TRANSIENT DYNAMICS

We next investigate the transient dynamics into and
out of the steady state. First, we address the transient
going from equilibrium to a sheared system. The external
shear force field is the same as above. It is switched
on instantaneously at t = 0 and switched off again at a
later time. The system responds instantly to the external
force, with an instantaneous current profile that has larger magnitude than the steady state current. This instant response to the external force is consistent with the
fact that inertia is neglected in overdamped BD. Then,
viscosity slows the system down into the steady state
(see figure 3). This process takes finite time, because the
particles
√ need to traverse, on average, the mean free path
λ = ( 2πρσ 2 )−1 between collisions49 , which takes, with

6
17
a = (2.86 ± 0.04)kB T τ −1 σ −3
b = (1.10 ± 0.02) × 10−2 τ

Xt [J]τ σ 3 /kB T V

16

c = (13.942±0.004)kB T τ −1 σ −3

15

14

BD simulation
PFT
a exp(−t/b) + c

0.001

0.01

0.1

0.4

t/τ

Figure 3. Time evolution (on a logarithmic scale) of the
scaled mean external power Xt per volume after switching
on the shear force at t = 0, from BD simulation and PFT,
together with a least-squares fit of a simple exponential decay
a exp(−t/b) + c.

diffusive dynamics, about λ2 /D, which is ≈ 0.1τ in our
system.
The decay of the mean external power (14) into the
steady state can be described reasonably well with an
exponential decay model Xt /V = a exp(−t/b) + c, where
a and c are parameters with the dimension of power
per volume, and b is a parameter with the dimension
of a time. Physically, c can be identified as the mean
steady state external power density, a as the initial mean
super-steady external power density, and b as the decay
time. However, the decay shows features beyond a simple
exponential, which are captured by PFT with diffusing
memory kernel. For times 0.05 ≤ t/τ ≤ 0.1, the external
power dips below the plateau value, and the initial decay
is steeper than exponential.
Next, we explore the dynamics after switching off the
shear force (see figure 4). Surprisingly, the current does
not relax monotonically into equilibrium, but rather undergoes a global reversal first, and then smoothly equilibrates. This remarkable result has perhaps been hinted at
by Krüger and Brader23 , who report ”If the shear field
is suddenly switched off, we find that the equilibration
dynamics show an interesting symmetry with that following switch on[...].” Other than that, to the best of
our knowledge, this effect has not been reported in the
literature.
Using the time-dependend velocity field measured in
BD for switch-on and switch-off, we can determine the
remaining free parameters in KL and KD . The exponential decay in both KL and KD is one of the most simple
forms of memory. Starting from an initial equilibrium
state, the memory integral at time t = 0 vanishes, because the velocity gradient vanishes at negative times.

Therefore, the superadiabatic force field is also zero just
after switching on, and the current is directly proportional to the driving force.
Memory then slowly builds up, with a dynamical behaviour that is governed in our approximation by the
memory time τM . We obtain memory times of roughly
τM = 0.02τ for switch-on. The superadiabatic forces oppose the current, slowing the system into a steady state.
The steady state is truely reached once the current
has not changed over a few memory times τM and thus
the memory integral no longer changes. Then, the driving force can be switched off and the transient back into
equilibrium can be observed. PFT accurately predicts
the motion reversal observed in BD and provides an explanation: In the steady state, the force balance (cf.
eq. (6)) includes adiabatic forces fad , external forces fext
and superadiabatic forces fsup . In the direction of shear,
fad · êz = 0 because of the homogeneity of ρ in z. As we
know, fsup is opposed to the external force. With fext = 0
after switching-off, the superadiabatic excess forces still
remain, because they arise from the memory integral.
Thus, the superadiabatic forces become driving forces
with an opposed direction of motion. The system returns
to equilibrium only after the memory has cleared. The
memory time obtained here is roughly τM = 0.01τ . While
the decay of the counter-current is well described by the
exponential decay memory model up until t ≈ 0.02τ ,
it seems to overestimate the rate of relaxation for later
times (see figure 4).

VI.

CONCLUSION

We have studied the Brownian hard sphere fluid under
inhomogeneous, time-dependent shear with BD simulations and PFT. In steady state, under strongly inhomogeneous shear, spatially nonlocal memory shapes the current profile in ways spatially local memory cannot. Nonlocal memory is therefore required to describe general
external forces acting on the fluid with a true separation
of intrinsic and extrinsic effects. Exponential memory
is an adequate and simple approximation that well describes nonequilibrium dynamics after switching (on and
off) of an external field. The effect of motion reversal
after switch-off is surprising if thought about in a microscopic picture, but has a straightforward explanation in
PFT: Slowing memory forces in steady state become driving forces after the shear force has been switched off. The
rigorous framework of PFT is therefore an appropriate
tool to gain insight into the behaviour of the Brownian
hard-sphere fluid.
Non-local memory could be a relevant factor in the
study of inhomogeneous colloidal systems such as colloids
undergoing capillary collapse at an interface50 . We are
also interested to investigate the effect of the approximation presented here on the bulk dynamics of hard spheres,
such as the van Hove correlation function, which has been
studied recently experimentally and with DDFT51 . To

7
steady state

t = 0.001τ

t = 0.005τ

4
BD
KL
KD

BD
KL
KD

0

BD
KL
KD

1

Jz σ 2 τ

1

Jz σ 2 τ

Jz σ 2 τ

2

0

0

−2
−1

−1

−4

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2

4

5

6

7

8

2

5

6

x/σ

t = 0.010τ

t = 0.020τ

t = 0.040τ

0.4

−0.2

0.0

−0.2

−0.4

5

6

7

8

7

8

0.0

−0.2

−0.4

4

8

BD
KL
KD

0.2
Jz σ 2 τ

0.0

7

0.4
BD
KL
KD

0.2
Jz σ 2 τ

0.2

3

4

x/σ

BD
KL
KD

2

3

x/σ

0.4

Jz σ 2 τ

3

−0.4

2

3

x/σ

4

5

6

x/σ

7

8

2

3

4

5

6

x/σ

Figure 4. Time evolution of the scaled current profile Jx σ 2 τ as a function of x σ after switching off the shear force at t = 0,
obtained from BD simulation (symbols), and PFT with local memory kernel KL (dashed line) and diffusing memory kernel
KD (solid line). The sign of the current flips globally after the shear force is switched off, followed by a decay into equilibrium.
The diffusing memory model in PFT significantly outperforms the local approach in representing the BD current profiles.

this end, we plan to employ PFT in the dynamic test
particle limit21,22,52 .
The excess superadiabatic functional can be further
developed in two directions: Spatially, structural forces
can be incorporated with higher orders of the velocity
gradient. The diffusing nonlocality provides good results, but has free parameters that need to be tuned by
BD simulation or other benchmarks. Instead, they might
be derived from the particle interaction, perhaps based
on fundamental measures to allow for a deeper physical
interpretation. Temporally, the exponential decay model
could be improved. Research on memory in molecular
dynamics provides a jumping-off point30 . Recently, Jung
et al31 presented a method to obtain memory kernels that

1

C. d. de Kruif, E. Van Iersel, A. Vrij, and W. Russel,
Hard sphere colloidal dispersions: Viscosity as a function
of shear rate and volume fraction, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 4717
(1985).

could be adapted to our approach.
Finally, we expect the current reversal effect, presented
here for Brownian hard spheres, to re reproducible in an
experimental realisation.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Daniel de las Heras for useful comments.
This work is supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) via SCHM 2632/1-1.

2

L. Marshall and C. F. Zukoski, Experimental studies on the
rheology of hard-sphere suspensions near the glass transition, J. Phys. Chem. 94, 1164 (1990).

8
3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

D. R. Foss and J. F. Brady, Brownian dynamics simulation of hard-sphere colloidal dispersions, J. Rheol. 44, 629
(2000).
J. K. G. Dhont, M. P. Lettinga, Z. Dogic, T. A. J. Lenstra,
H. Wang, S. Rathgeber, P. Carletto, L. Willner, H. Frielinghaus, and P. Lindner, Shear-banding and microstructure of colloids in shear flow, Faraday Discuss. 123, 157
(2003).
J. K. G. Dhont and G. Nägele, Critical viscoelastic behavior of colloids, Phys. Rev. E 58, 7710 (1998).
M. Cates, C. Holmes, M. Fuchs, and O. Henrich, Schematic
mode coupling theories for shear thinning, shear thickening, and jamming, in Unifying Concepts in Granular Media and Glasses, edited by A. Coniglio, A. Fierro, H. Herrmann, and M. Nicodemi (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2004).
M. Fuchs and M. E. Cates, Integration through transients
for brownian particles under steady shear, J. Phys. Cond.
Mat. 17, S1681 (2005).
M. Fuchs and M. E. Cates, A mode coupling theory for
Brownian particles in homogeneous steady shear flow, J.
Rheol. 53, 957 (2009).
J. M. Brader, Nonlinear rheology of colloidal dispersions,
J. Phys. Cond. Mat. 22, 363101 (2010).
D. Leighton and A. Acrivos, The shear-induced migration
of particles in concentrated suspensions, J. Fluid Mech.
181, 415 (1987).
J. Chakrabarti, J. Dzubiella, and H. Löwen, Reentrance
effect in the lane formation of driven colloids, Phys. Rev.
E 70, 012401 (2004).
C. W. Wächtler, F. Kogler, and S. H. L. Klapp, Lane formation in a driven attractive fluid, Phys. Rev. E 94, 052603
(2016).
J. M. Brader and M. Krüger, Density profiles of a colloidal
liquid at a wall under shear flow, Mol. Phys. 109, 1029
(2011).
A. A. Aerov and M. Krüger, Driven colloidal suspensions in
confinement and density functional theory: Microstructure
and wall-slip, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 094701 (2014).
A. A. Aerov and M. Krüger, Theory of rheology in confinement, Phys. Rev. E 92, 042301 (2015).
H. Jin, K. Kang, K. H. Ahn, and J. K. G. Dhont, Flow
instability due to coupling of shear-gradients with concentration: non-uniform flow of (hard-sphere) glasses, Soft
Matter 10, 9470 (2014).
J. Reinhardt, F. Weysser, and J. M. Brader, Density functional approach to nonlinear rheology, Europhys. Lett.
102, 28011 (2013).
N. Koumakis, M. Laurati, A. R. Jacob, K. J. Mutch,
A. Abdellali, A. B. Schofield, S. U. Egelhaaf, J. F. Brady,
and G. Petekidis, Start-up shear of concentrated colloidal
hard spheres: Stresses, dynamics, and structure, J. Rheol.
60, 603 (2016).
S. Marenne, J. F. Morris, D. R. Foss, and J. F. Brady,
Unsteady shear flows of colloidal hard-sphere suspensions
by dynamic simulation, J. Rheol. 61, 477 (2017).
B. J. Ackerson and P. N. Pusey, Shear-induced order in suspensions of hard spheres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1033 (1988).
A. J. Archer, P. Hopkins, and M. Schmidt, Dynamics in inhomogeneous liquids and glasses via the test particle limit,
Phys. Rev. E 75, 040501 (2007).
P. Hopkins, A. Fortini, A. J. Archer, and M. Schmidt, The
van hove distribution function for brownian hard spheres:
Dynamical test particle theory and computer simulations
for bulk dynamics, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 224505 (2010).

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

M. Krüger and J. M. Brader, Controlling colloidal sedimentation using time-dependent shear, Europhys. Lett.
96, 68006 (2011).
B. Metzger and J. E. Butler, Clouds of particles in a periodic shear flow, Phys. Fluid. 24, 021703 (2012).
R. Zwanzig, Memory effects in irreversible thermodynamics, Physical Review 124, 983 (1961).
H. Mori, Transport, collective motion, and Brownian motion, Prog. theo. phys. 33, 423 (1965).
D. E. Smith and C. B. Harris, Generalized Brownian
dynamics. I. Numerical integration of the generalized
Langevin equation through autoregressive modeling of the
memory function, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 1304 (1990).
P. Szymczak and B. Cichocki, Memory effects in collective
dynamics of Brownian suspensions, J. Chem. Phys. 121,
3329 (2004).
J.-D. Bao, P. Hänggi, and Y.-Z. Zhuo, Non-markovian
Brownian dynamics and nonergodicity, Phys. Rev. E 72,
061107 (2005).
D. Lesnicki, R. Vuilleumier, A. Carof, and B. Rotenberg,
Molecular hydrodynamics from memory kernels, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 116, 147804 (2016).
G. Jung, M. Hanke, and F. Schmid, Iterative reconstruction of memory kernels, J. Chem. Theo. Compu. 13, 2481
(2017).
A. Scala, T. Voigtmann, and C. De Michele, Event-driven
Brownian dynamics for hard spheres, J. Chem. Phys. 126,
134109 (2007).
M. Schmidt and J. M. Brader, Power functional theory for
Brownian dynamics, J. Chem. Phys. 138, 214101 (2013).
U. M. B. Marconi and P. Tarazona, Dynamic density functional theory of fluids, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 8032 (1999).
A. J. Archer and R. Evans, Dynamical density functional
theory and its application to spinodal decomposition, J.
Chem. Phys. 121, 4246 (2004).
A. Fortini, D. de las Heras, J. M. Brader, and M. Schmidt,
Superadiabatic forces in Brownian many-body dynamics,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 167801 (2014).
D. Stopper, K. Marolt, R. Roth, and H. Hansen-Goos,
Modeling diffusion in colloidal suspensions by dynamical
density functional theory using fundamental measure theory of hard spheres, Phys. Rev. E 92, 022151 (2015).
D. Stopper, R. Roth, and H. Hansen-Goos, Dynamical
density functional theory for dense suspensions of colloidal
hard spheres, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 181105 (2015).
N. C. X. Stuhlmüller, T. Eckert, D. de las Heras, and
M. Schmidt, Structural nonequilibrium forces in driven colloidal systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 098002 (2018).
D. de las Heras and M. Schmidt, Velocity gradient power
functional for Brownian dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
028001 (2018).
P. Krinninger and M. Schmidt, Power functional theory for
active Brownian particles: General formulation and power
sum rules, J. Chem. Phys. 150, 074112 (2019).
D. de las Heras, J. Renner, and M. Schmidt, Custom flow in
overdamped Brownian dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 99, 023306
(2019).
R. Evans, The nature of the liquid-vapour interface and
other topics in the statistical mechanics of non-uniform,
classical fluids, Adv. Phys. 28, 143 (1979).
N. D. Mermin, Thermal properties of the inhomogeneous
electron gas, Phys. Rev. 137, A1441 (1965).
Y. Rosenfeld, Free-energy model for the inhomogeneous
hard-sphere fluid mixture and density-functional theory of

9

46

47

48

49

freezing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 980 (1989).
S. G. Johnson, The nlopt nonlinear-optimization package,
http://ab-initio.mit.edu/nlopt.
M. J. Powell, A direct search optimization method that
models the objective and constraint functions by linear
interpolation, in Advances in optimization and numerical
analysis (Springer, 1994) pp. 51–67.
A. W. Lees and S. F. Edwards, The computer study of
transport processes under extreme conditions, J. Phys. C:
Sol. St. Phys. 5, 1921 (1972).
J.-P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids, 4th ed. (Academic Press, Oxford, 2013).

50

51

52

J. Bleibel, S. Dietrich, A. Domı́nguez, and M. Oettel,
Shock waves in capillary collapse of colloids: A model system for two-dimensional screened newtonian gravity, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 128302 (2011).
D. Stopper, A. L. Thorneywork, R. P. A. Dullens, and
R. Roth, Bulk dynamics of brownian hard disks: Dynamical density functional theory versus experiments on twodimensional colloidal hard spheres, J. Chem. Phys. 148,
104501 (2018).
J. M. Brader and M. Schmidt, Power functional theory for
the dynamic test particle limit, J. Phys. Cond. Mat. 27,
194106 (2015).

