Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Co-contributorship Network and Division of Labor in Individual
Scientific Collaborations
Chao Lu1, Yingyi Zhang2, Yong-Yeol Ahn3, Ying Ding4, Chenwei Zhang3, 5, Dandan
Ma6, *

1. Business School, Hohai University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
2. School of Economics and Management, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
3. School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA
4 School of Information, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, U.S.A.
5. Qiqihar Institute of Engineering, Qiqihar, Heilongjiang, China
6. School of Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Finance and Economics,
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dr. Ma Dandan,
Email: jane.ma1030@gmail.com

1

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Scientific
Collaboration
Abstract: Collaborations are pervasive in current science. Collaborations have been
studied and encouraged in many disciplines. However, little is known how a team
really functions from the detailed division of labor within. In this research, we
investigate the patterns of scientific collaboration and division of labor within
individual scholarly articles by analyzing their co-contributorship networks. Cocontributorship networks are constructed by performing the one-mode projection of
the author-task bipartite networks obtained from 138,787 papers published in PLoS
journals. Given a paper, we define three types of contributors: Specialists, Teamplayers, and Versatiles. Specialists are those who contribute to all their tasks alone;
team-players are those who contribute to every task with other collaborators; and
versatiles are those who do both. We find that team-players are the majority and they
tend to contribute to the five most common tasks as expected, such as “data analysis”
and “performing experiments”. The specialists and versatiles are more prevalent than
expected by a random-graph null model. Versatiles tend to be senior authors
associated with funding and supervisions. Specialists are associated with two
contrasting roles: the supervising role as team leaders or marginal and specialized
contributions.
Keywords: Scientific collaboration; Author contribution; Co-contributorship Network;
NLP; Scholarly Communication.

1. INTRODUCTION
In science, many solitary individuals’ efforts are appreciated and emphasized. For
example, people often link some individuals’ names with great findings, such as
2

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Sigmund Freud with the Interpretation of Dreams, Albert Einstein with the Theory of
Relativity, and John von Neumann with the Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior. However, more scientific and industrial progress that has made history
come from powerful collaborations. In recent decades more and more research has
been conducted by groups of scholars. For example, thanks to the joint efforts of
Watson, Crick, Franklin, and Wilkins, the double-helix structure of DNA was
discovered, which is fundamental to the modern biotechnology (Science History
Institute, 2017). Later since 1990, twenty institutions from six countries participated
in the great exploration of sequence and map of all human genes, known as Human
Genome Project. After more than 20 years’ hard working, scientists are able to present
nature’s complete genetic blueprint of a human being; such findings greatly contribute
to treat, cure, and prevent various human diseases (National Human Genome
Research Institute, 2019). With the increasing complexity of problems to solve, such
as designing the new functional protein or developing self-driving cars, collaboration
is necessary. When checking up recent leading studies, we will find that many of them
have a long list of contributors or acknowledgment, which reveal the intensity of
collaborations. Collaboration can bring a lot of advantages, for example, it can
decrease the cost (Katz & Martin, 1997), bring in more expertise thus boost up the
efficiency (Goffman & Warren, 1980), and increase the scientific popularity, visibility,
and recognition (Price & Beaver, 1966; O’Connor, 1970). Collaborations make
impossible possible. Many believe the power of scientific collaborations and have
spent efforts to find collaborators and work in teams (Fox & Faver, 1984).
The increasing demand for scientific collaboration has attracted numerous scholars to
study the mechanism of collaboration from different perspectives, such as
bibliometrics (e.g., Ding, Foo, & Chowdhury, 1998; Glänzel, 2002), social network
analysis (e.g., Barabâsi et al., 2002; Newman, 2004; Zhang, Bu, Ding, & Xu, 2018),
and qualitative approaches (e.g., Birnholtz, 2006; Hara, Solomon, Kim, &
3

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Sonnenwald, 2003; Lee & Bozeman, 2005;). Despite some differences, in
bibliometrics, most of the researches use co-authorship to measure scientific
collaborations (Milojević, 2010). Studies using co-authorship usually assume that
each collaborator shares equal contributions to their scientific works and based on that
they build co-author networks to study scientific collaboration (e.g., Birnholtz, 2006;
Chompalov, Genuth, & Shrum, 2002; Newman, 2004). However, little is known about
how each collaborating individual works in a team. Do they still collaboratively
complete the whole procedure of work? Or do they divide the labor thus each only
accomplishes certain tasks within a team then the final goal is achieved by assembling
all these tasks?
Early in about fourth century BC, Plato stated the importance of the division of labor
for the emergence of cities in his Republic; Xenophon also noticed the existence of
specialization and mentioned the division of labor enhances productivity in his
Cyropaedia. Centuries ago, Smith (1776) discovered that division of labor, a proper
division and combination of different operations in manufacturing, improves the
efficiency of production; it further impacts our whole modern society as it shapes how
people are interacting with each another to achieve goals (e.g., Durkheim, 1933;
Earley, 1993; Ezzamel & Willmott, 1998).For this concern, in a team of various
forms, how the tasks are divided and performed among the members determines its
performance (Delfgaauw, Dur, & Souverijn, 2018). Thus, it is in a great need to
examine the mechanisms of teamwork via investigating the division of labor in
teamwork (or collaboration). In scientific collaborations, faster and greater scientific
innovations are always encouraged. Therefore, it is of greater value to know how to
achieve a successful scientific collaboration by proper division of labor—which tasks
each team member should take on and what kind of collaborations enables
collaborators to better achieve their scientific goals (Hara et al., 2003; Ilgen et al.,
2005; Leahey & Reikowsky, 2008; Melin, 2000).
4

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Currently, only a few have examined the scientific collaboration at the level of task
assignments (Larivière et al., 2016; Jabbehdari & Walsh, 2017; Corrêa Jr, Silva,
Costa, & Amancio, 2017; Yang, Wolfram, & Wang, 2017). However, their focus is on
tasks globally, rather than from the perspective of interactions within each team. For
example, Jabbehdari & Walsh (2017) estimated the likelihood of specialist authors by
checking the authors’ tasks via a survey on 8,864 papers. Yang et al. (2017) analyzed
the relationship between authors’ tasks in the contribution lists and their positions in
the bylines. There is a lack of research investigating the detailed division of labor
within every single collaboration. Here, we comprehensively analyze how members in
a team divide the labor by recognizing and examining different roles they conduct on
a large-scale dataset. Our study helps understand scientific collaborations in depth by
revealing the fundamental mechanisms of how collaborative teams function. Inspired
by the approaches to using the contribution statements to study author contribution
patterns (Corrêa et al., 2017; Larivière et al., 2016; Sauermann & Haeussler, 2017),
we analyze the networks of authors and tasks in more than 130,000 papers published
in PLoS journals. First, we study the density of the co-contributorship networks,
which reflects the degree of labor division. We then define three types of author
contributions—specialists, team-players, and versatiles—based on the cocontributorship networks, and examine the abundance of these types of contributors.
We find that team-players tend to contribute to the five most common tasks, such as
“data analysis” and “performing experiments”. Versatiles tend to be senior authors
associated with funding and supervisions. Specialists are associated with two
contrasting roles: the supervising role as a team leader or marginal and specialized
contribution. These features will also facilitate us further assess the division of labor
and specialization in teams in the future.

5

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

2. RELATED WORK
2.1. Division of Labor in Teamwork Studies
Teamwork is a complex process that involves interactions between members with
different expertise and skills with a spectrum of degrees of division of labor. Ilgen et
al. (2005) argued that the classic IPO (input-process-output) model is insufficient to
describe the process of teamwork, due to its complexity. LePine et al. (2008)’s metaanalysis found that teamwork generally includes three general processes: mission
analysis, action process, and interpersonal process; each of them includes several subprocesses. In the action process, Earley (1993) observed that the psychological statues
of team members can affect their diverse collaboration patterns with others,
individually or collectively. Studies also extend to classifying task types (e.g., Salas,
Sims, & Burke (2005) and team roles (e.g., Belbin, 2012). For instance, Belbin found
that a team full of “Apollos” (i.e., geniuses) usually exhibits terrible performance, and
that role allocation is necessary for successful teamwork.
Smith (1776) argued that division of labor is a strong impetus for increased
productivity and specializations. For example, factory workers can be distributed to
specific tasks in the pipeline, so that they can be more concentrated on fine-grained
tasks and improve their skills (Leroy, 2009). The degree of division of labor was
believed to be limited only by the number of laborers in the market (Stigler, 1951).
Meanwhile, if the tasks are complex and interdependent, the coordination cost can be
a significant limiting factor on specialization (Becker & Murphy 1992). Therefore, the
extent of division of labor may be largely affected by the nature of the tasks.
2.2. Scientific Collaboration and Division of Labor
Scientific collaboration as a particular form of teamwork mainly focusing on
scientific activities with high intelligence and innovation increasingly prevails in
6

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

academia (Fox, & Faver, 1984; Guimerà, Uzzi, Spiro, & Amaral, 2005; Katz, &
Martin, 1997; Larivière et al., 2015; Wuchty, Jones, & Uzzi, 2007). In this form of
teamwork, division of labor is commonly suggested by some studies (Birnholtz, 2006;
Fox, & Faver, 1984; Kraut, Galegher, & Egido, 1987; Leahey & Reikowsky, 2008).
For example, Merlin (2000) classified scientific teams into two categories: one where
everyone in the team is given a clear task assignment and the other where everyone
works together. The two types are defined in a similar way by Hara (2003) as
“complementary” and “integrative” teams. Chompalov et al. (2002) classified teams
into four categories based on their topological features: bureaucratic, leaderless, nonspecialized, and participatory teams.
Current studies investigate scientific collaboration via co-authorship network analysis
(Ahuja, 2000; Yan & Ding, 2009; Newman, 2004; Xie et al., 2018) or using case
studies (Amabile et al., 2001) and interviews (Birnholtz, 2006; Chompalov et al.,
2002; Chung, Kwon, & Lee, 2016; Fox, & Faver, 1984). These studies reveal several
important features in collaborations, such as homophily (Zhang et al., 2018),
transitivity (Newman, 2014), and preferential attachment (Milojević, 2010). They also
suggest that collaboration improves productivity in science (Lee & Bozeman, 2005)
and collaborative researches tend to attract more citations (Larivière et al., 2015).
However, such co-authorship studies usually overlooked the division of labor in
scientific collaboration at large; and some of them only relied on a limited number of
cases. Only a few studies started investigating the tasks conducted by the members of
a team. But there is still a lack of research investigating the roles scientists have taken
within every single collaboration. These drive us to use author contribution statements
embedded in the full text of scientific articles provided by authors to investigate how
scientific teams design their tasks and distribute them to collaborators, which is the
process of division of labor. So that we can investigate the scientific collaboration
between co-authors from the task level and reveal different roles taken by these
7

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

authors.
2.3 Contribution Statement for Scientific Collaboration Studies
Although the author contribution patterns in scholarly articles have been of interest in
scientometrics (e.g., Giles & Councill, 2004; Laudel, 2002), it was the wide adoption
of the contribution disclosure policies that enabled large-scale data-driven studies
(Allen et al., 2014; Brand et al., 2015; Lariviere et al., 2016). For example, Larivière
et al. (2016) examined the forms of division of labor across disciplines, the
relationship between contribution types (i.e., writing the paper, performing the
experiments, conceiving ideas, analyzing data, and contributing tools) and authors
seniority, such as academic ages and that between types of tasks and byline positions.
They have found that authors contribute to their studies unevenly across disciplines;
that most authors are identified to contribute to writings; and that those who write the
papers usually design the studies and those providing materials usually do not perform
an experiment and vice versa. They also found that senior authors usually do fewer
tasks such as conducting experiments than junior ones but do more tasks such as
writing papers and contributing tools and materials. First and last authors usually
contribute more tasks than middle ones to their studies. Corrêa et al. (2017) placed
more emphasis on the relationship between authors’ rank positions and the
corresponding contributions. They collected author contribution statements in PLoS
ONE, identified five common tasks and built a bipartite graph for each paper, where
authors and the five tasks are the two groups of nodes and an edge between author and
task means the author performed the task, treating tasks as equal contributions. Using
the average number of tasks authors performed across papers, they found that usually
the first and the last authors contribute more to their papers than middle authors,
which echoes the findings by Larivière et al. (2016). They further identified three
general patterns of author contribution with their byline position: the contribution
increases with authors’ ranks, the contribution decreases with authors’ rank, and the
8

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

contribution decreases then increases with the author’s ranks. Sauermann & Haeussler
(2017) presented two studies: the first investigated how informative the byline
position of an author is about the type and broadness of the author’s contribution
using more than 12,000 PLoS ONE articles; the second reported how author
contribution statements are used and scholars’ several concerns on authorship and
author contribution statement after surveying nearly 6,000 corresponding authors
from PLoS ONE and PNAS (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States). The two data sources suggest no significant differences. They also
found similar observations that the first and the last authors contribute more than the
middle authors to their papers (Corrêa et al., 2017, Larivière et al., 2016). Besides,
they also observed that corresponding authors are more likely to be the last authors.
First authors usually tend to make more contributions than other authors. When the
team gets larger, authors tend to perform fewer tasks, suggesting a stronger degree of
division of labor. The top 10% most cited articles maintain similar results from the
models generated from the full data set, suggesting the reliability of the author
contribution statements from PLoS ONE articles.
To sum up, as the division of labor has been an important driving force in the modern
society (e.g., Durkheim, 1933; Earley, 1993; Ezzamel & Willmott, 1998), there has
been much interest in studying the division of labor or roles in teams, particularly in
scientific collaboration teams. The author contribution statements can serve as a good
proxy to concretely measure the role allocation and division of labor in scientific
collaboration. Given the complex nature of scholarly work, it is of great value to ask
how a team can achieve a successful scientific collaboration, how the division of labor
occurs in scientific collaboration, and what the patterns of role and labor distribution
are (Hara et al., 2003; Ilgen et al., 2005; Leahey & Reikowsky, 2008; Melin, 2000).

9

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

3. METHODOLOGY
This section explains our dataset and approach to constructing and analyzing the
contribution network. Figure 1 illustrates the workflow of this study. First, we collect
138,787 full-text articles from PLoS, from which we extract and parse the author
contribution statements. From each statement, we extract author-task pairs, which we
assemble to construct an author-task contribution network for each paper. The onemode projection of this network produces a co-contributorship network, from which
we define the three types of collaborators. Finally, we further investigate the tasks
they partook using content analysis.
3.1. Data
Full-text Data Source
PLoS is one of the largest open-access journal article publishers in the world. Under
its authorship policy1 (which accords with CRediT Taxonomy2 since 2016), authors
are required to state their agreed contributions in their manuscripts. To collect author
contribution statements, nearly 170,000 full-text articles published in PLoS between
2006 and 2015 have been harvested in the XML format.
In each XML file, the author contribution statement is either embedded in the tag of
“<fn fn-type="con">” (See the sample article in Figure 1) or the acknowledge part (a
few of them).

1

http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/authorship

2

http://www.cell.com/pb/assets/raw/shared/guidelines/CRediT-taxonomy.pdf
10

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Figure 1. An example author contribution statement of a sample article in XML format.

Author-task Pairs
We used the XML package in Python 2.7 to extract the contribution statements. Then
we used regular expressions to extract author-task pairs from each statement of every
paper. Table 1 shows the parsed data from the sample article. We did not separate
commonly grouped tasks into sub-tasks. For instance, we consider “Contributed
reagents/materials/tools” or “conceived and designed the experiments” as single tasks
on their own.
Table 1. Author-task Pairs of a Sample Article.
Id
1
2
3
4
5

Authors
EG; ES; JD
ES; JD; MH; JP; MS
EG; ES; FC; JD; JP; MS
ES; JD; MH; JP; MS
EG; ES

Task
Conceived and designed the experiments
Performed the experiments
Analyzed the data
Contributed reagents/materials/tools
Wrote the paper

The final collected 138,787 articles belong to seven journals in PLoS as are shown in
Table 2. The table suggests that 90% of articles are from PLoS ONE, and the rest 10%
belong to the other six journals by PLoS. The distribution of those articles by year in
our data set is presented in Figure 2, suggesting most of the articles are published
before the middle of the year of 2016 when CRediT Taxonomy was launched for
regulating author contribution statements.
Table 2. Journal distribution of our collected author contributions
Journal
PLoS ONE

# of articles
12,422
11

Ratio (%)
89.5%

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

PLoS Genetics
PLoS Pathogens
PLoS Computational Biology
PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases
PLoS Biology
PLoS Medicine

3,919
3,445
3,067
2,783
921
432

Lu et al.

2.8%
2.5%
2.2%
2.0%
0.7%
0.3%

Figure 2. Yearly distribution of articles in our data set.

3.2. Co-contributorship Network Construction
Definitions
Figure 2 illustrates different types of collaboration patterns that one can observe from
co-contributorship networks. In Figure 3A, every author works collectively on each
task, forming a complete graph. Under this scenario, the division of labor does not
occur as everyone works on all tasks collectively. By contrast, in Figure 3C, every
author works on his/her tasks independently, thus, having a strong division of labor. In
our dataset, we expect to see the whole spectrum from no-division to complete
division, while most collaborations would occur somewhere in the middle (e.g.,
Chompalov et al., 2002; Fox, & Faver, 1984; Heffner, 1979).

12

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Figure 3.Modes of division of labor in teams (A-C); co-contributorship network (D); and
types of collaborators (E).

Building on this intuition, we formally consider a weighted undirected cocontributorship network, which can be obtained by performing a special one-mode
projection to the author-task network. This process is different from the standard onemode projection because we also create self-edges if a task is performed by only one
person. In the co-contributorship network, each node represents an author
(collaborator). An edge between authors means that there is at least one task where
two authors collaborated. The weight of each edge represents the number of tasks coperformed by the two authors. If a task is performed by more than two authors, every
possible pair of authors will have an edge between them. If a task is performed by a
single person, the node (collaborator) will have a self-loop, and its weight is decided
by the number of tasks that the author performed independently. As an example,
Figure 3D demonstrates a co-contributorship network between four authors in one
article. The weight of the edge (C2, C3) is three, which means authors C2 and C3
13

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

worked together on three different tasks. The weight for the self-edge of C1 is two,
indicating that C1 independently worked on two different tasks alone.
Types of Collaborators
Based on its connectivity patterns, each node is classified into one of the three roles:
team-players, specialists, and versatiles, as shown in Figure 3E. Team-players are
those who do not have any self-edges; they performed all their tasks with someone
else. Specialists are those who have only self-edge(s) (e.g., C1); they are those who
finish their tasks on their own. Versatiles are those who have both self-edges and
normal edges (e.g., C2).
Null Models
To estimate the expected prevalence of each type of authors, we adopt two null
models to the author-task contribution networks: the configuration model (Molloy &
Reed, 1995) and the Erdős–Rényi random graph model (Erdös & Rényi, 1959). In the
configuration model (CFM), the degrees of nodes are fixed while the actual
connections are randomized. In creating the networks, we reject the cases with multiedges. Finally, we project this author-task bipartite graph to a co-contributorship
network (see Figure 4-A). For the Erdős–Rényi random graph model (ERM), we fix
the number of edges in the author-task graph and randomize the connections without
conserving the degree sequences. To make the random graph realistic, we enforce the
connectivity of the network—each author node and each task node should have at
least one edge. After obtaining an initial random graph, we perform a rejection
sampling to obtain a graph where every node has at least one connection (see Figure
4-B). By examining the differences between the actual networks and the two null
models, we put our measurements in a reasonable context of random cases.

14

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

A

Lu et al.

B

Figure 4. Producing null models using CFM and ERM. (A) Configuration model (CFM),
where the degree sequences on both sides are preserved. (B) Erdős–Rényi random graph
model (ERM), where only the total number of edges is preserved with every node has at least
one connection.

3.3 Research Hypotheses
Using the networks we built above, we are to answer three questions concerning the
division of labor within teams.
RQ1. Is division of labor common in scientific collaborations?
To answer this question, we are to examine the density of each bipartite graph we
build compared to the expectation from the ER random graph, maintaining the
number of edges between authors and tasks. Ideally, if the division of labor is not
necessary for scientific collaboration the graph density distribution of all the networks
we build will follow a binomial distribution where the chance to connect an author
and a task in an author-task bipartite network is equal. So our first null hypothesis for
this question will be:
H01. There no difference in the graph density distribution between the real-world
author-task bipartite networks and random ones.

15

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

RQ2. Concerning the three types of collaborators, are they more common than one
another in scientific collaboration?
To answer this question, we are to examine the distribution of the three types of
authors in their scientific collaborations at a paper level from three perspectives: the
existence of the collaborators, the ratios of them in all of the publications, and the
ratios of them in the publications with non-teamplayers. we also designed the ER
model and the CRF model to remove random factors from the observations. So our
null hypotheses for this question will be:
H2. The three types of collaborators are equally common in scientific collaborations.
H3. The ratios of the three types of collaborators in all publications are equal to each
other.
H4. The ratios of the three types of collaborators in the publications with nonteamplayers are equal.
RQ3. Do the three types of collaborators perform different tasks in their
collaborations against each other?
To answer this question, we are to examine the distribution of the tasks that the three
types of authors performed in their scientific collaborations at a paper level in two
parts: the five common tasks and the rest less frequent tasks in all publications. The
ER model and the CRF model will serve to remove random factors from the
observations. So our null hypotheses for this question will be:
H5. The three types of collaborators contribute equally to the five common tasks in
their scientific collaborations.
H6. The three types of collaborators contribute equally to the less frequent tasks in
16

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

their scientific collaborations.
Following the three questions above with 6 null hypotheses, we will use the author
co-contributorship networks built from each paper’s author contribution statement to
address these questions and hypotheses.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1. Overview
More than 90% of the articles in our dataset are written by at least two authors,
agreeing with the previous observations that collaborative studies are dominating
(Guimerà et al., 2005; Wuchty et al., 2007). 87 percent of articles are written by teams
of no more than 10 members; and 99 percent of teams have no more than 20 authors,
including 1,370 single-authored articles (8.2%), shown in Figure 5 -A. In the
following analyses, we focus on the papers with fewer than 20 authors in our dataset
because they occupy the vast majority of the dataset and it is easier to implement the
null models for the papers with fewer authors.

A

B

Figure 5. Author distribution by team size (A); and normalized graph density distribution in
author-task bipartite graph (B) (* on the legend denotes the p-value from Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test against the null model, * for p-value <0.05, ** for p-value <0.01, *** for p-value
17

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

<0.001).

To depict the division of labor in scientific collaboration, we first calculate the
normalized graph density of each author-task bipartite graph compared with one null
model generated by Erdős–Rényi random bipartite graph (detailed below). The
normalized graph density is calculated using Formula (1):

𝑁𝐺𝐷 =

𝑘−max(𝑁𝑡 ,𝑁𝑎 )

(1)

𝑁𝑡 ×𝑁𝑎−max(𝑁𝑡 ,𝑁𝑎 )

Where k represents the number of edges in the graph, 𝑁𝑡 number of tasks, and 𝑁𝑎 the
number of authors. So 𝑁𝑡 × 𝑁𝑎 denotes the maximum number of edges in an authortask bipartite graph and max(𝑁𝑡 , 𝑁𝑎 ) represents the minimum when all nodes should
be connected3.
To generate our null model here, another Erdős–Rényi random bipartite graph is
adopted here, using 𝐺(𝑁𝑡 , 𝑁𝑎 , 𝑝 𝑗 ⟨𝑁𝑎 ⟩) where 𝑝 𝑗 ⟨𝑁𝑎 ⟩ is the probability for an author
to perform a task in article j which contains 𝑁𝑎 collaborators (Batagelj & Brandes,
2005), estimated by using Formula (2):

𝑝 𝑗 ⟨𝑁𝑎 ⟩ =

𝑗

𝑁𝑒 /𝑁𝑎
̅𝑡
𝑁

(2)

𝑗

In Formula (2), 𝑁𝑒 is the number of edges in the author-task bipartite graph of article
̅𝑡 is the mean number of tasks in all articles with 𝑁𝑎 collaborators; and 𝑁𝑒𝑗 /𝑁𝑎
j, 𝑁
average number of tasks per collaborator performed in 𝑁𝑎 -author article j. Then we
use Formula (1) to calculate the normalized graph density for these random graphs.
Figure 5-B shows that the author-task bipartite graphs in our dataset present larger

3

When using Formula (1) to calculate the normalized graph density, if either m or n equals to one, then

𝑚 × 𝑛 = max(𝑚, 𝑛). Under this situation we decide the density is one.
18

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

variance in the degree of labor division, compared with a null model that assumes a
homogeneous contribution from authors. By examining two ends of the x-axis, it is
found that both a strong division of labor and no division of labor are more probable
than expected by the homogeneous null model. It might suggest that scientific teams
tend to employ a wider variety of collaboration strategy, although our results may be
explained by the heterogeneous author degree distribution (i.e. large variation in the
number of tasks one performs).
Figure 6 shows the graph density of groups with different team size. A clear trend
can be observed that the graph density distribution of the real-world author-task
bipartite graphs is more and more divergent from the density expected by the null
model when team size grows. Specifically, the author-task graphs in real
collaboration tend to be sparser and sparser than expected in the null model, which
might suggest a stronger degree of labor division in larger teams.

19

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Figure 6. Graph density against null model by team size (* on the legend denotes the p-value
from Kolmogorov–Smirnov test against the null model, * for p-value <0.05, ** for p-value
<0.01, *** for p-value <0.001).

4.2. Quantifying types of collaborators
In this section, we examine the prevalence of the three types of collaborators. First of
all, we examine how many articles involve these three types of collaborators. We
20

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

calculate the ratio of the articles containing collaborator type ci, given team size
k, 𝑃𝑅𝐶𝑘𝑖 , using Formula (3) as follows:

𝑃𝑅𝐶𝑘𝑖 =

𝑁𝑐𝑘𝑖
𝑁𝑘

, 𝑐𝑖 ∈ {𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑠, 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚 − 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟},

(3)

where 𝑁 𝑘 is the number of articles with k authors, and 𝑁𝑐𝑘𝑖 is the number of articles
with k authors that contain collaborator type ci.

A

B

Figure 7. Frequency Distribution of papers containing given collaborator type by team size:
(A) against ERM null model; and (B) against CFM null model (* on the legend denotes the
p-value from K-S test against the null model, * for p-value <0.05, ** for p-value <0.01, ***
for p-value <0.001).

Figure 7 shows that most articles have team-players, and that is expected by both null
models (in A and B). There is a slight increase in the number of articles with
specialists as team size increases. The articles with versatiles become less common as
21

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

the size of teams increases, and the final ratio of such articles stabilizes around 25%.
When compared with the ERM null model, which shuffles author and task nodes in
author-task bipartite graphs, it is found that non-team-players are more common in
real-world collaborations than expected. More articles involve versatiles in real
scientific collaborations. Specialists, instead of disappearing in larger teams as ERM
suggests, keep playing a role in teams whose size varies from two to 20. It might
suggest that non-team-players are associated with special and prevalent types of
contributions in scientific collaborations.
Our result also suggests that the actual prevalence of each author type closely matches
the expectation from the CFM null model, which shuffles authors’ specific
contributions in the bipartite graphs. It indicates that the degree sequence—how many
tasks are performed by each author—accurately reproduces the co-contribution
patterns that are observed.

22

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

A

B

C

Figure 8. (A)Types of collaborators in publications; (B) Team structure in NTAs (non-teamplayer-involved articles); and (C) Population ratio of types of collaborators. From left to
right in each sub-plot are specialists, versatiles, and team-players; error bars in plots
represent 95% confidence intervals generated via 10,000 bootstrapping iterations.

To observe three types of collaborators’ existence in scientific collaborations, we
calculate the average number of each type of collaborators 𝐶𝑖 in teams by team size k,
using Formula (4) as follows:

𝐴𝐶𝑖𝑘 =

𝑇𝐶𝑖𝑘
𝑁𝑘

, 𝑐𝑖 ∈ {𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒, 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚 − 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟}, 2 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 20,

(4)

where 𝑁 𝑘 is the number of teams with team size k, and 𝑇𝐶𝑖𝑘 is the total number of
collaborator i in k-authored publications. The results in Figure 7-A suggest that, on
average, each paper contains around 0.075 specialists, 0.35 or more versatiles, and the
rest team-players when the team size is greater than five. Specifically, when the team
23

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

size is smaller than eight, the number of specialists increases along with the increase
of team size and peaks at 0.1, which is well captured by both our null models. When
team size continues growing, the real number of specialists fluctuates around the top,
whereas that expected by ERM starts to diminish (shown in Figure 8-A-Left).
Versatiles are more prevalent than specialists in scientific collaborations, especially
among smaller teams. When the team grows larger, the average number of versatiles
continues decreasing to 0.35 per paper then maintains stable. Besides that, despite the
decreasing average number of versatiles in teams, it is still more than expected by
ERM, in which the average number of versatiles keeps declining when the team size
is larger than ten. Team-players dominate the participation in scientific collaborations,
which is well captured by our two null models. The ERM null model only keeps the
number of task assignments, while the CFM model sets some rules of labor division
since it restricts how many tasks one author would participate and how many
participants are involved for each individual task. By comparing the figures of the real
situation in Figure 8-A with the two null models, we could see that there exist strong
division of labor and that there are still more specialists and versatiles than we would
expect from the random case among the collaborators. A downtrend of the number of
versatiles along with the increase of team size is understandable, since the total
number of tasks will not have an unlimited grow, so some authors may collaborate
more with others when there are more team members. However, the slight increase or
unchanged number of specialists demonstrates that there always exist some tasks that
should be completed individually; the existence of specialists is important even in the
environment of heavy collaboration. The distinction between the figures of non-teamplayers for the real-world collaborations and ERM indicates that the existence of nonteam players is not because of small teams or limited labors in scientific
collaborations but for particular purposes left for us to uncover. We are more
interested in understanding the structure of scientific teams when they involve
heterogeneous collaborators. So we exclude all the articles which were collaborated
24

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

by only team-players and plot the average number of three different collaborator types
among the remaining in Figure 8-B. In general, the team structure is quite stable with
non-team-players among all different team sizes: 1.25 specialists on average, 1.3
versatiles on average, and with the rest team-players. More than often, a team includes
one or two non-team-players to perform their research. Despite that, when teams
grow larger than 15 participants, more non-team-players, specialists or versatiles,
could contribute to the teams (suggested by the error bars). Team-players, similarly,
are still dominating a team. The null models, however, do not show great disparity
from the real collaborations in the team structures. It indicates when teams include
non-team-players, there is no big variance among teams, especially for smaller teams
whose size are less than ten.
We continue our focus on the overall population of the three types of collaborators
among all the publications. We modify Formula (4) and calculate 𝑅𝐶𝑖𝑘 , the ratio of
collaborator Ci given by team size (k), using Formula (5) as follows:
𝑇𝐶 𝑘

𝑅𝐶𝑖𝑘 = 𝑘×𝑁𝑖 𝑘 , 𝑐𝑖 ∈ {𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒, 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚 − 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟}, 2 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 20,

(5)

where 𝑁 𝑘 is the number of teams with team size k, and 𝑇𝐶𝑖𝑘 is the total number of
collaborator i in k-authored publications. The results of Formula (4) is the results
from Formula (3) normalized by team size accordingly (shown in Figure 8-C). Since
the authors in our whole dataset are not disambiguated, the population character of
these collaborators reflects how frequently a certain role (as three types of
collaborators) have been played in scientific collaborations.
Figure 8-C demonstrates that non-team-players are the minority in scientific
collaborations, as suggested above, especially for specialists. In particular, when team
size grows, the ratio of specialists among collaborators drops from 15 percent to 0.5
percent then remains stable; the ratio of versatiles also falls from 55 percent to 3
25

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

percent and remains stable. Team-players, on the contrary, show an opposite trend,
keeping increase from around 45 percent to around 95 percent. Both our two null
models also roughly capture this trend.
To sum up, team-players are the major collaborators in scientific collaboration. Nonteam-players are the minority, but they widely exist in small teams (a size no more
than five) and also exist in larger teams (a size larger than five) with a relatively small
and stable ratio.
A possible reason for the observations is that more team members enable division of
labor and specialization (Smith, & McCulloch, 1838) rather than wiping out nonteam-players. Some of the tasks performed by versatiles in smaller teams can be
distributed to extra team members, accounting for more team-players. Regarding
specialization, some team members can focus on particular tasks when more members
are added to the team. For instance, in a dyatic team between advisor and advisee,
besides supervision, the advisor may also need to take up some tasks such as writing
and data analysis to accelerate the research progress. When more collaborators get
involved, the advisor may spare more time and only focus on the supervision of
advisees and funding application. Other collaborators can share the burden of the
advisor (Bray et al., 1978) when the advisor could be a specialist and the other
collaborators can function as team-players. Besides, specialized collaborators can be
invited to the team to perform some special tasks as Specialists (or Specialists
proposed in (Belbin, 2012)). The benefit of this evolution—division of labor and
specialization—can increase the productivity of a team. On the other, however, more
collaborators could bring the so-called “Ringelmann effect” (Ingham, Levinger,
Graves, & Peckham, 1974) or “social loafing” (Earley, 1993), which means
collaborators of a team tend to become increasingly less productive as the size of their
team increases. However, this increasing tendency of specialization reaches saturation
instead of excessively extending, which might be taken as the consideration of huge
26

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

coordination cost that specialization may lead to (Becker & Murphy, 1992).
Randomly assigning tasks to authors (in ERM) leads to more non-team-players in
smaller teams (≤10) and less in larger teams (≥15). By contrast, in real scientific
collaborations, non-team-players maintain a relatively stable ratio in smaller teams
and also exist in larger teams. Such existence is surprising in larger teams since
adequate human resource facilitates us to perform tasks collaboratively to achieve
seemingly efficiency and effectiveness.
Besides, it is worth noticing that versatiles tend to be more favorable than expected in
scientific teams suggested by Figure 7. On the contrary, fewer versatiles in the ERM
plot may imply that team-players are more welcome when they can also work
independently as versatiles. The possible reason for this can be a moderate degree of
specialization improves the efficiency of the collaboration when some tasks are
performed alone and some collaboratively (Becker & Murphy, 1992).
4.3. Understanding Collaborators’ Tasks
After quantitatively describing the prevalence of the three types of collaborators in
our dataset, here we analyze their characteristics by examining the tasks in which they
participated. We look at the most common five tasks (e.g., Corrêa et al., 2017;
Larivière et al., 2016) as well as the other less frequent tasks. Using the data generated
by our null models used in the previous section, i.e., CFM and ERM, we can also
investigate the different patterns in task distributions between real collaborations and
two random scenarios for different purposes. CFM controls authors’ and tasks’ degree
sequence in an author-task network; thus, the differences from real collaborations
highlight the differences in task-performing, which will suggest prevailing patterns of
different types of authors in reality. ERM only controls the number of edges in the
networks. The corresponding results can be used to exam whether these task patterns
can be generated randomly. We extract the top 100 most frequent tasks for each type
27

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

of collaborators from the three data sets (including the two generated null model data
sets) and consolidate similar tasks. As a result, 52 unique tasks are obtained.
Five Common Tasks
Figure 9 presents the five most common tasks in the author contribution statement
from PLoS. The radar plots suggest that although the three types of authors all engage
in the five most common tasks, the emphasis varies. For instance, Specialists
“contribute reagents/materials/analysis tools” much more often than expected while
“performed experiments” much less than expected (Figure 9-A). This result suggests
that “reagents/materials/analysis tools” task can be more easily isolated to a single
person than other tasks, and that it is rare for an author to just perform experiments
and not participating in other tasks with others, indicating the central role of the task
of performing experiments in scientific studies. Compared with null models,
specialists make much less contribution to performing experiments. It might indicate
that specialists are not usually implementers but toolmakers in a team. On the
contrary, versatiles and team-players show more balanced contributions to all the five
common tasks. Despite that, the null models suggest that versatiles contributed much
less to the five common tasks than expected, indicating their emphasis on less
common tasks. Team-players show indifferences in null models, which could be
attributed to their massive population in our data set.

28

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

B

A

C

Figure 9. Common tasks performed by the three types of collaborators: A, Specialists; B,
Versatiles; C, Team-players.

Less frequent tasks
Figure 10 and Figure A1 (in Appendix) show the participation patterns of the less
frequent tasks. Greater disparities emerge, which have been overlooked by existing
studies that focus only on a few core tasks (e.g., Corrêa et al., 2017; Larivière et al.,
2016). First, team-players participate in these activities much less frequently, except
for “approve the paper”, which usually occurs at the final stage of their research.
“Data interpretation” is another task that team-players do more frequently than nonteam-players. The possible reason for this is that data interpretation is interdependent
with data analysis, which is team-players’ major task in Figure 9-C. Similar to Figure
9-C, both null models capture almost identical patterns for less frequent tasks.
Second, Specialists show a strong tendency to take the tasks like “review paper”,
“revise paper”, and “supervised the research.” This might indicate that specialists can
be senior investigators in teams. Some of the following tasks, like “principal
investigator” and “provided guidance”, also suggest our inference. The CFM confirms
that specialists contributed more to these tasks as senior authors than expected, such
29

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

as “revise paper” and “supervise the research”. In addition, Specialists also perform
tasks that may not be that crucial, such as “collected data” and “collected samples.”
This type of tasks may also suggest that specialists can be mild collaborators (Hara et
al., 2003). As suggested by the following tasks as well, they also take charge of
“database management” and “provided technical support” (In Figure A1). CFM also
confirms this tendency. Versatiles tend to partake in authority-intensive and ideaintensive tasks. For example, most of the funding related tasks are versatiles’ work.
Designing software and designing models are usually versatiles’ tasks. It is confirmed
by our CFM. We may infer that some versatiles are either leaders of certain projects
or chief authors of the studies.

Figure 10. Less frequent tasks performed by the three types of collaborators (More
information about less frequent tasks is presented in Figure A1).

30

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

5. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a refined approach—author contribution network for each
publication based on the author contribution statements embedded in the body of
manuscripts. It aims at better understanding scientific collaboration at the task
assignment level. More than 130 thousand articles were collected to perform our
analyses.
The results suggested that scientific collaboration within the team could be diverse.
Inspired by the concepts of division of labor and specialization by Adam Smith, we
identified three types of collaborators in the author co-contributorship network: they
are called specialists, versatiles, and team-players. The three types of collaborators
form diverse teams and contribute to publications in various ways.
Team-players are the backbones in scientific studies. They usually contribute to the
five common tasks (data analysis, performing experiments, writing papers, and
contribute materials and tools). They seldom take up tasks with authorities (i.e.,
providing funding or project supervision). Versatiles are not that common in a team as
team-players are. They are usually those who connect collaborators in a team (with
edges to other collaborators) and do well in all five common tasks with a specialty in
performing experiments. They are also featured with a high level of authorities in
teams. For example, study supervision and obtaining funding are their dominant tasks
among the less frequent ones. Specialists are special since they usually maintain such
a small population across different team sizes. Larger teams cannot eliminate them.
Besides, they put themselves in a distinct position of performing collaborations. They
are usually those who contribute tools, materials, and special supports. These supports
can either sign their authority in a team, like providing financial support, or their blur
figures, such as technical support.

31

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

These observations can help in various ways in the future: author credit assessment,
team structure optimization, and candidate projects assessment guidance. Usually,
author credit is given by the authors’ byline position either evenly or differently
(Stallings et al., 2013). These operations can be problematic sometimes when the
collaboration between authors are not well assigned (e.g., Sauermann, & Haeussler,
2017). Given the contributions the authors performed, their roles and credits could be
given more fairly with a well-defined system of contribution scoring.
Teams vary but only a few of them succeed. And they are not simple combinations of
the geniuses but of diverse roles and complementary skills (Amabile et al., 2001;
Belbin, 2012). Our work might signify a way to build a scientific team with
consideration of members’ most frequent tasks in their earlier studies given limited
resources and expense.
Similarly, the co-contributorship network may also help us to find patterns of success
based on the characteristic of the team members, task division and assignment, and
specialization within the teams. Thus, the funding agencies can achieve better
assessment with the team structure of the proposals according to their publication
history and their roles in these studies.
However, with so many aforementioned potentials, this study has several limitations.
One is that this study so far takes each contribution equally while the criteria could
vary across disciplines. How to weigh different types of contributions based on
specific applications could become an interesting area to study. Second, the dataset of
this study mainly comes from natural science, especially biology. But , among the five
common tasks “contributed reagent/materials/analysis tools” is not common in social
science.. Extending data to social science or other fields is an important next step to
follow. Third, this study has only studied a collaborative team associated with one
single article. It does not investigate the perspective that a researcher joining different
32

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

teams and playing various roles. After author names have been disambiguated, we can
address fascinating questions, such as, . how a scholar’s career evolves based on
his/her team roles in collaborations. Fourth, Collaboration is becoming international.
Taking nationalities, culture barriers, institutional prestige, skill diversity into the
consideration, the division of labor can be further expanded to the social, behavioral,
and political arena which makes it complicated yet exciting to pursue.

Acknowledgments
The authors would thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions
for improving this manuscript.

REFERENCES
Ahuja, G. (2000). Collaboration Networks, Structural Holes, and Innovation: A
Longitudinal Study. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45(3), 425–455.
Allen, L., Scott, J., Brand, A., Hlava, M., & Altman, M. (2014). Publishing: Credit
where credit is due. Nature News, 508(7496), 312.
Amabile, T. M., Patterson, C., Mueller, J., Wojcik, T., Odomirok, P. W., Marsh, M., &
Kramer, S. J. (2001). Academic-Practitioner Collaboration in Management
Research: A Case of Cross-Profession Collaboration. The Academy of
Management Journal, 44(2), 418–431.
Barabâsi, A. L., Jeong, H., Néda, Z., Ravasz, E., Schubert, A., & Vicsek, T. (2002).
Evolution of the social network of scientific collaborations. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 311(3-4), 590-614.
Batagelj, V., & Brandes, U. (2005). Efficient generation of large random networks.
Physical Review E, 71(3), 036113.
Belbin, R.M. (2012) Management Teams: Why They Succeed or Fail (3rd ed.).
London: Routledge.
Becker, G. S., & Murphy, K. M. (1992). The division of labor, coordination costs, and
knowledge. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1137-1160.
Birnholtz, J. P. (2006). What does it mean to be an author? The intersection of credit,
contribution, and collaboration in science. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 57(13), 1758–1770.
33

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Brand, A., Allen, L., Altman, M., Hlava, M., & Scott, J. (2015). Beyond authorship:
attribution, contribution, collaboration, and credit. Learned Publishing, 28(2),
151-155.
Bray, R. M., Kerr, N. L., & Atkin, R. S. (1978). Effects of group size, problem
difficulty, and sex on group performance and member reactions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 36(11), 1224.
Chompalov, I., Genuth, J., & Shrum, W. (2002). The organization of scientific
collaborations. Research Policy, 31(5), 749–767.
Chung, E., Kwon, N., & Lee, J. (2016). Understanding scientific collaboration in the
research life cycle: Bio- and nanoscientists’ motivations, information-sharing and
communication practices, and barriers to collaboration. Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology, 67(8), 1836–1848.
Corrêa Jr, E. A., Silva, F. N., Costa, L. D. F., & Amancio, D. R. (2017). Patterns of
authors contribution in scientific manuscripts. Journal of Informetrics, 11(2),
498-510.
Delfgaauw, J., Dur, R., & Souverijn, M. (2018). Team incentives, task assignment,
and performance: A field experiment. The Leadership Quarterly.
Ding, Y., Foo, S., & Chowdhury, G. (1998). A bibliometric analysis of collaboration in
the field of information retrieval. The International Information & Library
Review, 30(4), 367-376.
Durkheim, E. (1933). The division of labor in society. New York: Free Press.
Earley, P. C. (1993). East meets West meets Mideast: Further explorations of
collectivistic and individualistic work groups. Academy of Management
Journal, 36(2), 319–348.
Erdös, P., & Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs, I. Publicationes Mathematicae
(Debrecen), 6, 290-297.
Ezzamel, M., & Willmott, H. (1998). Accounting for teamwork: A critical study of
group-based systems of organizational control. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 358-396.
Fiore, S. M. (2008). Interdisciplinarity as teamwork: How the science of teams can
inform team science. Small Group Research, 39(3), 251-277.
Fox, M. F., & Faver, C. A. (1984). Independence and cooperation in research: The
motivations and costs of collaboration. The Journal of Higher Education, 55(3),
347–359.
Gibbs, J. P., & Poston, D. L. (1975). The Division of Labor: Conceptualization and
Related Measures. Social Forces, 53(3), 468–476.
Giles, C. L., & Councill, I. G. (2004). Who gets acknowledged: Measuring scientific
contributions through automatic acknowledgment indexing. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(51), 1759917604.
Glänzel, W. (2002). Co-authorship patterns and trends in the sciences (1980–1998): A
bibliometric study with implications for database indexing and search strategies.
34

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Library Trends, 50(3), 461–473.
Goffman, W., & Warren, K. S. (1980). Scientific information systems and the
principle of selectivity. Holt-Saunders Ltd..
Guimerà, R., Uzzi, B., Spiro, J., & Amaral, L. A. N. (2005). Team Assembly
Mechanisms Determine Collaboration Network Structure and Team
Performance. Science, 308(5722), 697–702.
Sauermann, H., & Haeussler, C. (2017). Authorship and contribution disclosures.
Science Advances, 3(11), e1700404.
Hagstrom, W. O. (1964). Traditional and Modern Forms of Scientific Teamwork.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 9(3), 241–263.
Hara, N., Solomon, P., Kim S. L., & Sonnenwald, D. H. (2003). An emerging view of
scientific collaboration: Scientists’ perspectives on collaboration and factors that
impact collaboration. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 54(10), 952–965.
Ilgen, D. R., Hollenbeck, J. R., Johnson, M., & Jundt, D. (2005). Teams in
organizations: From input-process-output models to IMOI models. Annu. Rev.
Psychol., 56, 517-543.
Ingham, A. G., Levinger, G., Graves, J., & Peckham, V. (1974). The Ringelmann
effect: Studies of group size and group performance. Journal of experimental
social psychology, 10(4), 371-384.
Jabbehdari, S., & Walsh, J. P. (2017). Authorship norms and project structures in
science. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 42(5), 872-900.
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. (2015). The wisdom of teams: Creating the highperformance organization. Harvard Business Review Press.
Katz, J. S., & Martin, B. R. (1997). What is research collaboration? Research Policy,
26(1), 1–18.
Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the Effectiveness of Work
Groups and Teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(3), 77–124.
Kraut, R. E., Galegher, J., & Egido, C. (1987). Relationships and tasks in scientific
research collaboration. Human–Computer Interaction, 3(1), 31–58.
Larivière, V., Desrochers, N., Macaluso, B., Mongeon, P., Paul-Hus, A., & Sugimoto,
C. R. (2016). Contributorship and division of labor in knowledge production.
Social Studies of Science, 46(3), 417-435.
Larivière, V., Gingras, Y., Sugimoto, C. R., & Tsou, A. (2015). Team size matters:
Collaboration and scientific impact since 1900. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology, 66(7), 1323-1332.
Laudel, G. (2002). What do we measure by co-authorships? Research Evaluation,
11(1), 3-15.
Leahey, E., & Reikowsky, R. C. (2008). Research Specialization and Collaboration
Patterns in Sociology. Social Studies of Science, 38(3), 425–440.
Lee, S., & Bozeman, B. (2005). The Impact of Research Collaboration on Scientific
Productivity. Social Studies of Science, 35(5), 673–702.
35

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Leroy, S. (2009). Why is it so hard to do my work? The challenge of attention residue
when switching between work tasks. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 109(2), 168-181.
Melin, G. (2000). Pragmatism and self-organization: Research collaboration on the
individual level. Research policy, 29(1), 31-40.
Milojević, S. (2010). Modes of collaboration in modern science: Beyond power laws
and preferential attachment. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 61(7), 1410-1423.
Molloy, M., & Reed, B. (1995). A critical point for random graphs with a given
degree sequence. Random structures & algorithms, 6(2‐3), 161-180.
National Human Genome Research Institute (2019, January 9). The Human Genome
Project. Retrieved from https://www.genome.gov/human-genome-project
Newman, M. E. (2004). Co-authorship networks and patterns of scientific
collaboration. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 101(suppl 1),
5200-5205.
O'Connor, J. (1970). Growth of multiple authorship. In DRTC Seminar (Vol. 7, pp.
463-483).
Price, D. D. S., & Beaver, D. (1966). Collaboration in an invisible college. American
psychologist, 21(11), 1011-1018.
Salas, E., Sims, D. E., & Burke, C. S. (2005). Is there a “Big Five” in Teamwork?
Small Group Research, 36(5), 555–599.
Sauermann, H., & Haeussler, C. (2017). Authorship and contribution disclosures.
Science Advances, 3(11), e1700404.
Science History Institute (2017, December 4). James Watson, Francis Crick, Maurice
Wilkins, and Rosalind Franklin. Retrieved from
https://www.sciencehistory.org/historical-profile/james-watson-francis-crickmaurice-wilkins-and-rosalind-franklin
Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
Methuen.
Sonnenwald, D. H. (2007). Scientific collaboration. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology, 41(1), 643–681.
Stallings, J., Vance, E., Yang, J., Vannier, M. W., Liang, J., Pang, L., ... & Wang, G.
(2013). Determining scientific impact using a collaboration index. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(24), 9680-9685.
Stigler, G. J. (1951). The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market.
Journal of political economy, 59(3), 185-193.
Whitley, R., (2000). The intellectual and social organization of the sciences. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in
production of knowledge. Science, 316(5827), 1036-1039.
Yan, E., & Ding, Y. (2009). Applying centrality measures to impact analysis: A
coauthorship network analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
36

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Lu et al.

Science and Technology, 60(10), 2107–2118.
Yang, S., Wolfram, D., & Wang, F. (2017). The relationship between the author byline
and contribution lists: a comparison of three general medical journals.
Scientometrics, 110(3), 1273-1296.
Zhang, C., Bu, Y., Ding, Y., & Xu, J. (2018). Understanding scientific collaboration:
Homophily, transitivity, and preferential attachment. Journal of the Association
for Information Science and Technology, 69(1), 72-86.
Xie, Z., Ouyang, Z., Li, J., Dong, E., & Yi, D. (2018). Modelling transition phenomena
of scientific coauthorship networks. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 69(2), 305–317.

37

Co-contributorship Networks and Division of Labor in Individual Scientific Collaborations

Appendix
Figure A1. less frequent tasks performed by different collaborators

38

Lu et al.

