arXiv:1911.12852v1 [physics.optics] 28 Nov 2019

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase
only parallel aligned LCoS display
M Vergara1,2 and C Iemmi1,2
1

Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Departamento de Fı́sica, Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
2
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
E-mail: marto@df.uba.ar
Abstract. We propose two schemes for achieving continuous and complete orbital
angular momentum tuning using a simple device based on a phase only parallel aligned
liquid crystal on silicon display, where the tuning is managed by changing the input
beam state of polarization. We use an optical tweezers toolbox to simulate the optical
force field of the tuned beams applied to dielectric spherical particles in order to prove
the applicability of the method.

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

2

Since the discovery in 1992 [1] that light with an azimuthally varying phase like
exp(ilθ), with integer l, carried orbital angular momentum (OAM) of lh̄ per photon
[arbitrarily higher than spin angular momentum (SAM)] there has been a huge effort
oriented to generate, characterize and apply these kind of light, in different research
fields. Orbital contribution to light’s angular momentum has given a new degree
of freedom with a great variety of applications, from quantum information [2] and
microscopy [3] to astrophysics [4]. One of the fundamental properties of light’s OAM
is that it can be transferred to dielectric particles in the form of a mechanical torque
[5], providing the possibility to rotate optically trapped particles, which gives important
advances in micromanipulation [6], and in the design and controlling of micromachines
[7].
Several approaches have been proposed for experimental generation of beams
carrying OAM [8]. However, continuous controlled OAM tuning is still not a simple
task and has attracted attention in recent years. The main challenge is to achieve
continuous arbitrary modulation of the OAM of a beam leaving unaltered the intensity
distribution, and keeping in every case the stability of the beam during propagation.
Techniques like superposition of opposite handedness vortexes [9] and creation of beams
with fractional OAM [10] are unsuccessful in this sense, since the OAM change goes hand
in hand with a change in the intensity distribution and a loss of symmetry, making these
methods inconvenient for example for optical trapping. In a more recent approach M.
Gecevičius et al. use a super-structured half-wave plate polarization converter to control
the OAM by controlling the spin angular momentum of the input light [11]. Also there
have been used a device based on a spatial light modulator (SLM) to create 2 beams
with orthogonal polarization and inverse OAM, achieving a complete OAM tuning by
attenuating one of them and inverting the phase addressed onto the SLM [12].
In this letter we propose two simple schemes for achieving continuous and arbitrary
OAM tuning based on a commercially available parallel aligned liquid crystal on silicon
(PA-LCoS) display, where the OAM tuning is achieved by varying the input light’s
polarization angle or ellipticity, respectively. We numerically simulate the optical forces
involved and show how this can be applied to optical trapping and micromanipulation.
The first proposed device is sketched in Fig. 1. An input beam, polarized according
to the orientation angle of a linear polarizer LP, is reflected by a first beam splitter BS
and impinges onto one half of the LCoS, which introduces a phase modulation on the
horizontal component of the field (let us suppose that the director of the LC molecules
is horizontally oriented). This half is programmed with a phase modulation of ψ = mθ,
where θ is the azimuthal coordinate and m is any integer number. Then, the reflected
beam is imaged by means of a lens L1 of focal length f, and a mirror M (both conforming
a 4f system) onto the second half of the LCoS. The quarter wave plate Q2, oriented at
45◦ , rotates the polarization angle 90◦ due to the double passage. This way, the initially
vertical polarization becomes horizontal and is modulated by the phase −ψ = −mθ
encoded on this second half. The output field is redirected by a second BS and focused

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

3

by means of a lens L2. The Jones matrix describing the effect of the device is then
J(θ) = D−m (θ) · Q(−45◦ ) · M · Q(45◦ ) · Dm (θ),

(1)

where Dm (θ), Q(φ) and M are the Jones matrices of the LCoS display programmed
with a phase mθ, a quarter wave plate oriented at an angle φ [13], and a plane mirror,
respectively. Since these matrix expressions are given by
Dm (θ) =


Q(φ) = 
M=

exp(imθ) 0
0
1
√1
2

+

!

(2)

√i
2

cos(2φ)
i
√ sin(2φ)
2

1 0
0 −1

,


√i
2
√1
2

sin(2φ)
,
− √i2 cos(2φ)

(3)

!

,

(4)

the resulting matrix of the device is
J(θ) =

0
−i exp(−imθ)
i exp(imθ)
0

!

.

(5)

This way, the horizontal component of the input beam is turned into vertical and
emerges with a phase factor exp(imθ), while vertical component of the input field is
turned into horizontal, with a phase factor exp(−imθ). The use of this LCoS display
allows changing the addressed phase at will, without requiring to use different elements
to reach different OAM values.
When the input beam is linearly polarized, the polarization angle gives the ratio
between the horizontal and vertical components of the electric field, and in consequence
the ratio between the intensity of the output beam carrying OAM with l = m and that
carrying OAM with l = −m. Thereby, in the proposed scheme, it is possible to achieve a
continuous variation of the total OAM between −m ≤ l ≤ m by rotating the orientation
of the linear polarizer LP.
Since the OAM topological charges of both polarization components are integer and
opposite, they show the same intensity distribution, stable through propagation. And
since orthogonal polarization components do not interfere, this intensity distribution is
unaffected when tuning the OAM.

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

4

M
f
Q2

45°

L1
f

BS

L2

LP

Focal
plane

LCoS

Figure 1: Experimental setup proposed for arbitrary controlled OAM tuning. LP is a
linear polarizer, Q2 is a quarter wave plate, Ls are convergent lenses, M is a mirror and
BS is a pair of beam-splitters. Horizontal and vertical polarization components of the
input beam acquire helical phase profiles of opposite handedness, which are programmed
onto a phase only LCoS.
In Fig. 2 we show the far field diffraction intensity and polarization structure of the
resulting beam for m = 1, when impinging with a linearly polarized top-hat beam with
polarization angles 0◦ , 45◦ and 90◦ . The result is a beam with variable topological charge
(l = 1, l = 0 and l = −1, respectively). See Visualization 1 for a short movie showing the
complete evolution of the output SoP. Intensity distribution remains donut shaped as a
Laguerre-Gauss like beam, while polarization structure changes from uniformly vertical
to uniformly horizontal passing through hybrid SoPs. In order to plot the polarization
ellipses we used a color code based on the form factor f = b/a, which is the ratio
between the minor b axis and mayor a axis of the polarization ellipse, and whose sign
depends on the vector sense of rotation (negative for right-handed and positive for lefthanded). In a neighborhood near f = 0 we considered polarization to be linear (green),
and around f = ±1 we considered polarization to be circular (blue), in any other case
the polarization is elliptical (red).

Figure 2: OAM tuning with a linear polarization basis. Top: SoP of the incident
light. Middle: Intensity and polarization structure of the OAM tuned beam. Bottom:
OAM topological charge. Intensity distribution remains, while polarization changes its
structure. In Visualization 1 we show the complete evolution of the output SoP.

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

5

In order to test the applicability of these OAM-tuned beams we used an optical
tweezers Matlab toolbox designed by T. Nieminen et al. [14]. This software allows
the calculation of optical forces and torques, and can be used for both spherical and
non-spherical particles with Gaussian and other beams. We simulated the resulting
optical force over a dielectric sphere with radius 0.25λ (where λ is the wavelength) and
refractive index np = 1.45 (silica), suspended in a medium with nm = 1.333 (water),
exerted by the superposition of a vertically polarized Laguerre-Gaussian (LGlp ) beam
with radial index p = 0 and azimuthal index l = 1 and a horizontally polarized LGlp
beam with radial index p = 0 and azimuthal index l = −1, both focused by means of
an objective with a numerical aperture N A = 0.5. The parameters chosen are typical
of optical tweezers experiments, see for example [11].
In Fig. 3 we show the optical force field in the xy plane obtained when input light
is horizontally polarized, i.e. the force exerted over the particle by a vertically polarized
LG10 beam. The force is in arbitrary units and axes in units of the wavelength λ. Optical
force in the propagation direction z shows a stable equilibrium point (trap), which does
not coincide with the focus for LGlp beams [14]. The z-position of the particle is fixed
to this stable equilibrium point in the simulation. The force due to intensity gradient
traps the particle in the maximum intensity ring, while the force due to phase gradient
gives the rotation around beam axis, as expected [15].
The OAM tuning of the resulting beam is evident when simulating the motion of
a particle due to these optical forces, while varying the incident polarization angle. A
short movie showing the evolution of a particle inside the trap with m = 1 for five
different input polarization angles is provided in Visualization 2. This simulation was
done by numerically integrating the second order non-linear vector equation of motion
ẍ = F(x) − γ ẋ,

(6)

where x = (x, y) is the position vector, F is the bi-dimensional optical force field
calculated with the toolbox, γ is a dissipative parameter due to the medium and mass
is taken as 1. This equation can be rewritten as a first order system
ẋ = v
v̇ = F(x) − γv
and solved using an iterative method, like Runge-Kutta [16].

(7)

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

6

Figure 3: Optical force exerted by a vertically polarized LG10 beam focused with
a numerical aperture N A = 0.5 over a spherical dielectric particle of radius 0.25λ
and refractive index np = 1.45 (silica) suspended in a medium with refractive index
nm = 1.333 (water). The particle is at a point of stable equilibrium in the propagation
axis (optical trap). Axes are in units of λ. In Visualization 2 we show the motion of the
particle inside the OAM tunable trap, for five different angles of LP.
This scheme offers a simple way of continuous OAM tuning and shows good results
for low numerical apertures. Although, it is known that when focusing a beam with
uniform linear polarization the symmetry of the intensity distribution is lost as numerical
aperture is increased [17], due to the unbalanced contribution of the outer regions of
the beam. This symmetry breaking is therefore present in the respective optical force
field, which causes the loss of the trapping properties and the described behaviours. In
Visualization 3 we show the performance of the device when input light is horizontally
polarized and output light is focused with a numerical aperture N A = 0.95 over the
particle previously described. Since output beam’s polarization is uniformly vertical,
upper and lower regions loss intensity at focus, and the optical force field is deformed,
as seen in Fig. 4a. As a result, the particle moves slowly through these regions. This
can be easily overcame using elliptically polarized light instead.

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display
(a)

7

(b)

Figure 4: Optical force fields exerted by (a) a vertically polarized LG10 beam and (b) a
right circularly polarized LG10 beam, both focused with a numerical aperture N A = 0.95,
over a spherical dielectric particle of radius 0.25λ and refractive index np = 1.45 (silica)
suspended in a medium with refractive index nm = 1.333 (water). The particle is at a
point of stable equilibrium in the propagation axis (optical trap). Axes are in units of λ.
In Visualizations 3 and 5 we show the motion of the particle in each case, respectively.
A beam with uniform circular polarization preserves symmetry at focus,
independently of the numerical aperture of the system. So the solution is to adapt the
scheme for using orthogonal states of circular polarization instead of linear polarization.
That is turning the left circular component of the input beam into right circular, with
a phase exp(imθ), and turning the right circular component of the input beam into left
circular, with a phase exp(−imθ). This is exactly what a q-plate does [18], and is known
as the SAM to OAM conversion (STOC) phenomenon.
This result can be managed by introducing quarter-wave plates Q1 (oriented at
◦
45 ) and Q3 (oriented at −45◦ ) as shown in the device of Fig. 5. These wave-plates
transform the input and output beams accordingly in order to emulate the behaviour of
a q-plate [19], adding the desired phase modulation to circularly polarized orthogonal
components of the input field. Jones matrix of the device can be written now as
ˆ = Q(−45◦ ) · J(θ) · Q(45◦ )
J(θ)
=

− cos(mθ) − sin(mθ)
− sin(mθ) cos(mθ)

!

(8)

= exp(iπ)Jq (θ).
This matrix representation coincides with that of a q-plate (Jq ) with q = m/2, up to a
global phase factor [20].
With this scheme the OAM tuning is achieved by continuously changing the ratio
between intensity of left and right circularly polarized components of the input field,
i.e. its polarization ellipticity. This can be done by a configuration consisting of a linear
polarizer (LP) oriented at 45◦ followed by a quarter wave plate (Q0) with variable
angle. When Q0 is oriented at 0◦ input light results left circularly polarized, while
for a 90◦ orientation it results right circularly polarized, intermediate angles tune the
ellipticity of the input SoP, including linear polarization when Q0 is oriented at 45◦ . In
Fig. 6 we show the focused output beam for these three extreme cases: left circular
polarized input (l = 1), linearly polarized input (l = 0) and right circular polarized

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

8

input (l = −1), all intermediate l values are achieved with elliptic polarized inputs,
see Visualization 4 for a movie showing the full transition of the output SoP for this
scheme. In Visualization 5 we show a simulation about the motion of a dielectric sphere
affected by the resulting optical force field for left circularly polarized input light (l = 1),
focusing with a numerical aperture N A = 0.95. Now the force field shows cylindrical
symmetry, as can be seen in Fig. 4b, and the particle follows a uniform circular motion,
in contrast with the linear polarization case discussed earlier.
M
f
Q2

45°

L1

45°
f

LP

Q0 Q1

45°

-45°
BS

Q3

L2

Focal
plane

LCoS

Figure 5: Experimental setup proposed for arbitrary controlled OAM tuning. LP is
linear polarizer, Qs are quarter wave plates, Ls are convergent lenses, M is a mirror and
BS is a pair of beam-splitters. Orthogonal circular polarization components of the input
beam acquire helical phase profiles of opposite handedness, which are programmed onto
a phase only PA-LCoS.

Figure 6: OAM tuning with circular polarization basis. Top: SoP of the incident
light. Bottom: Intensity and polarization structure of the OAM tuned beam. Intensity
distribution remains, while polarization changes its structure. In Visualization 4 we
show the complete evolution of the output SoP.
Summarizing, we have proposed two simple schemes for OAM tuning using a
commercially available PA-LCoS, in which the resulting OAM is determined by the
input SoP, and shown its applicability by simulating the motion of a dielectric spherical
particle due to the OAM tuned beams generated, modeled as superposition of two

Orbital angular momentum tuning using a phase only parallel aligned LCoS display

9

Laguerre-Gaussian modes with orthogonal polarization states and opposite handedness
phase gradients. The principal advantages are the simplicity of the construction and the
flexibility given by the LCoS, which allows to change easily the addressed phase, without
requiring the fabrication of different elements for reaching higher values of OAM.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by UBACyT Grant No. 20020170100564BA, and ANPCYT
Grant No. PICT 2014/2432. M.V. holds a CONICET Fellowship.
References
[1] Allen L, Beijersbergen M W, Spreeuw R J C and Woerdman J P 1992 Phys. Rev. A 45 8185–8189
[2] Schmiegelow C and Schmidt-Kaler F 2012 The European Physical Journal D 66 157 ISSN 14346079
[3] Fürhapter S, Jesacher A, Bernet S and Ritsch-Marte M 2005 Opt. Express 13 689–694
[4] Thidé B, Elias II N M, Tamburini F, Mohammadi S M and Mendonça J T 2011 Applications of
Electromagnetic OAM in Astrophysics and Space Physics Studies (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd)
chap 9, pp 155–178 ISBN 9783527635368
[5] Novotny L and Hecht B 2012 Principles of Nano-Optics 2nd ed (Cambridge University Press)
[6] Bowman R W, Gibson G, Carberry D, Picco L, Miles M and Padgett M J 2011 Journal of Optics
13 044002
[7] Asavei T, Loke V L Y, Barbieri M, Nieminen T A, Heckenberg N R and Rubinsztein-Dunlop H
2009 New Journal of Physics 11 093021
[8] Yao A M and Padgett M J 2011 Adv. Opt. Photon. 3 161–204
[9] Schmitz C H J, Uhrig K, Spatz J P and Curtis J E 2006 Opt. Express 14 6604–6612
[10] Gutiérrez-Vega J C and López-Mariscal C 2007 Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics 10
015009
[11] Gecevičius M, Drevinskas R, Beresna M and Kazansky P G 2014 Applied Physics Letters 104
231110
[12] Pan Y, Gao X Z, Ren Z C, Wang X L, Tu C, Li Y and Wang H T 2016 Scientific Reports 6 29212
[13] Goldstein D 2003 Polarized Light, Revised and Expanded Optical engineering (CRC Press) ISBN
9780203911587
[14] Nieminen T A, Loke V L Y, Stilgoe A B, Knöner G, Brańczyk A M, Heckenberg N R and
Rubinsztein-Dunlop H 2007 Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics 9 S196–S203
[15] Roichman Y, Sun B, Roichman Y, Amato-Grill J and Grier D G 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(1)
013602
[16] Strogatz S H 2015 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 2nd ed (CRC Press)
[17] Dorn R, Quabis S and Leuchs G 2003 Journal of Modern Optics 50 1917–1926
[18] Marrucci L, Manzo C and Paparo D 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96(16) 163905
[19] Vergara M and Iemmi C 2019 Phys. Rev. A 100(5) 053812
[20] Moreno I, Sanchez-Lopez M M, Badham K, Davis J A and Cottrell D M 2016 Opt. Lett. 41
1305–1308

