Draft version November 11, 2019
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

arXiv:1911.02576v1 [astro-ph.GA] 6 Nov 2019

The Canada-France Imaging Survey: Reconstructing the Milky Way Star Formation History from its
White Dwarf Population
Nicholas J. Fantin,1, 2 Patrick Côté,2 Alan W. McConnachie,2 Pierre Bergeron,3 Jean-Charles Cuillandre,4
Stephen D. J. Gwyn,2 Rodrigo A. Ibata,5 Guillaume F. Thomas,2 Raymond G. Carlberg,6 Sébastien Fabbro,2
Misha Haywood,7 Ariane Lançon,8 Geraint F. Lewis,9 Khyati Malhan,10 Nicolas F. Martin,11, 12
Julio F. Navarro,1 Douglas Scott,13 and Else Starkenburg14
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, V8P 1A1, Canada
Research Council of Canada, Herzberg Astronomy & Astrophysics Research Centre, 5071 W. Saanich Rd, Victoria, BC, V9E
2E7, Canada
3 Département de Physique, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada
4 AIM, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Observatoire de Paris, PSL University,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
5 Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR 7550, F-67000 Strasbourg, France
6 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H4, Canada
7 GEPI, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research University, CNRS,Place Jules Janssen, 92190 Meudon, France
8 Observatoire Astronomique, 11 rue de l’Université, 67000 Strasbourg, France
9 Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics, A28, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
10 The Oskar Klein Centre for Cosmoparticle Physics, Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden
11 Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg, UMR 7550, F-67000 Strasbourg, France
12 Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie, Königstuhl 17, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
13 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
14 Leibniz Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
2 National

(Received August 19th, 2019; Revised November 11, 2019)

Submitted to ApJ
ABSTRACT
As the remnants of stars with initial masses . 8 M , white dwarfs contain valuable information on the
formation histories of stellar populations. In this paper, we use deep, high-quality, u-band photometry
from the Canada France Imaging Survey (CFIS), griz photometry from Pan-STARRS 1 (PS1), as well
as proper motions from Gaia DR2, to select 25,156 white dwarf candidates over ∼4500 deg2 using a
reduced proper motion diagram. We develop a new white dwarf population synthesis code that returns
mock observations of the Galactic field white dwarf population for a given star formation history, while
simultaneously taking into account the geometry of the Milky Way, survey parameters, and selection
effects. We use this model to derive the star formation histories of the thin disk, thick disk, and stellar
halo. Our results show that the Milky Way disk began forming stars (11.3 ± 0.5) Gyr ago, with a
peak rate of (8.8 ± 1.4) M yr−1 at (9.8 ± 0.4) Gyr, before a slow decline to a constant rate until
the present day — consistent with recent results suggesting a merging event with a satellite galaxy.
Studying the residuals between the data and best-fit model shows evidence for a slight increase in star
formation over the past 3 Gyr. We fit the local fraction of helium-atmosphere white dwarfs to be (21 ±
3) %. Incorporating this methodology with data from future wide-field surveys such as LSST, Euclid,
CASTOR, and WFIRST should provide an unprecedented view into the formation of the Milky Way
at its earliest epoch through its white dwarfs.
Corresponding author: Nicholas J. Fantin
nfantin@uvic.ca

2

Fantin et al.
Keywords: catalogs surveys — stars: luminosity function — stars: kinematics — stars: white dwarfs
— Galaxy: stellar content
1. INTRODUCTION

The formation and evolution of disk galaxies, and the
Milky Way (MW) in particular, has long been an important topic in astronomy since these galaxies dominate
star formation activity in the low-redshift Universe. Previous investigations into the formation and evolution of
MW-like galaxies have focused on the assembled mass
as a function of redshift (see, e.g, van Dokkum et al.
2013), or compared resolved stellar populations to theoretical isochrones in local galaxies such as Andromeda
(Ferguson et al. 2005; Brown et al. 2006). Within the
MW itself, much of the attention has been on the stellar
metallicity distribution since this, once combined with
a model for the gas infall rate, contains information on
the star formation rate (SFR) as a function of time (see,
e.g, Snaith et al. 2015; Haywood et al. 2018; Toyouchi
& Chiba 2018). Results from such Galactic chemical
evolution (GCE) models typically show a strong period
of initial star formation followed by a slowly decaying
trend towards the present day, features usually associated with a thick and thin disk, respectively.
The discovery of the dichotomy of the disk began with
Gilmore, & Reid (1983) who used star counts towards
the South Galactic Pole and found that the vertical
distribution was well described by two separate exponential profiles with different scale heights. Follow-up
studies have shown that the thick disk stars are more
alpha-rich, iron-poor, and have a larger velocity dispersion — evidence that they formed much earlier than
their thin disk counterparts (Norris et al. 1985; Eggen
1998). Within the past decade, a renewed emphasis has
been placed on the early formation of the MW’s disk.
The disk dichotomy has been questioned by Bovy et al.
(2012) who used mono-abundance populations to show
that each population could be described by a single exponential scale height. Haywood et al. (2016), however,
argued that the dip in the [α/Fe] distribution seen in
APOGEE can only be produced by two separate epochs
of star formation, and associates each epoch as belonging to the thin and thick disk respectively (Snaith et al.
2015; Haywood et al. 2018). Haywood et al. (2016) further argues that these two results are consistent if one
assumes that the scale height of the thick disk decreases
as a function of time so that the differences in structural parameters between the young thick disk and old
thin disk are minor. Such a decrease in the scale height,
from 800 pc to 340 pc, was found to match star counts in
SDSS and 2MASS by Robin et al. (2014), with a mean

scale height of 535 ± 50 pc. Further emphasis has been
placed on this transitional epoch with recent results by
Helmi et al. (2018) and Belokurov et al. (2018), who
show that this epoch of the MW may have played host
to a merger with at least one satellite galaxy, a scenario
that would likely play an important role in the formation
of the thick disk.
With a complete star formation history, the stellar
mass of each component can be estimated. Traditionally, star count models calibrated to the solar neighborhood have found that the thick disk contributes about
12% of the local mass (Jurić et al. 2008). However, a
recent study by Snaith et al. (2015) using the chemical
abundances of local F, G, and K-type stars concluded
that the thin and thick disk masses may be comparable.
This discrepancy likely arises due to the regions of the
MW which are probed by each survey. Many models use
data confined to the solar neighborhood, a location at
which the thin disk dominates, and thus extrapolating
local results to the entire disk becomes problematic.
While the star formation history is imprinted in the
chemical enrichment of the MW, stars also leave behind
another important tool for astronomers, white dwarfs.
White dwarfs form at the end of the asymptotic giant phase as the outer layers are ejected to expose the
degenerate carbon-oxygen core. Since these stars are
remnants of stars with initial masses less than 8 M ,
they contain valuable information regarding the formation history of stellar populations as a whole.
Since their evolution is well understood — the age is
primarily a function of temperature, luminosity, and atmospheric composition — white dwarfs have been used
in the past to estimate ages. These techniques have
been applied to various stellar populations, from globular clusters (see, e.g, Richer et al. 2006; Hansen et al.
2007; Bedin et al. 2009) to MW components (Kilic et al.
2017). The first such study of the MW’s disk was carried
out by Winget et al. (1987) who used the Luyten HalfSecond proper motion catalog to estimate an age of (9.3
± 2.0) Gyr for the Galactic disk, and (10.3 ± 2.2) Gyr
for the age of the Universe, where the age refers to the
onset of star formation. These early studies, however,
suffered from strong incompleteness and small number
statistics due to shallow photometric data. A more recent analysis by Kilic et al. (2017) used the white dwarf
luminosity function from Munn et al. (2017) to simultaneously derive the ages of the MW components, obtaining age measurements of (7.8 ± 0.4) Gyr for the thin

3

The Galactic Star Formation History

Figure 1. Left: Equatorial positions of thin disk stars within our model. Right: The model in Galactic coordinates. In both
panels, the shaded region represents the CFIS-u footprint as of the end of the 2018A semester.

disk and (9.7 ± 0.2) Gyr for the thick disk. Due to the
small number of halo white dwarfs in their sample, the
age of the halo was essentially unconstrained.
With a large enough sample, the complete star formation history of a stellar population can be determined
from white dwarfs in two ways. First, with accurate
distances one can calculate the luminosity, radius, and
effective temperature and convert this into a cooling age
(Giammichele et al. 2012). The total age of a white
dwarf can be found by adding the cooling age to the
progenitor age, which is found by converting the white
dwarf mass to a progenitor mass using the initial-to-final
mass relation (IFMR). Tremblay et al. (2014) applied
this method to the local (20 pc) sample and measured
the star formation history in the solar neighborhood.
Their results suggest a roughly constant SFR over the
past 10 Gyr, with a slight drop 5 Gyr ago (see their Figure 9). This method, however, is typically constrained
to small volumes given the distance uncertainties.
The second method is to invert the white dwarf luminosity function (WDLF). Noh & Scalo (1990) showed
that varying the functional form for the star formation
rate would leave imprints on the resulting WDLF, such
as the slope and turn-off. This method was used by Rowell (2013) to invert the SDSS WDLF assembled by Harris et al. (2006), and showed a resulting star formation
history composed of two broad peaks (at 2 and 9 Gyr)
separated by a significant dip. The advantage of using
this method is that the volume that can be probed is
considerably larger; the downside, however, is that volume and completeness corrections must be applied. The
recent advances made in wide-field astronomy present
an opportunity to increase the sampled volume, and the
combination of deep, multi-band photometry and accurate proper motions are ideal for selecting white dwarfs.
In this paper, we introduce a third technique: forward modeling. This involves simulating a sample of
white dwarfs given a star formation prescription. The

advantage of forward modeling is that complex systematics, like completeness, observational uncertainties, selection effects, and the structure of the MW can all be
accounted for. We use data from the Canada-France
Imaging Survey, Pan-STARRS 1, and Gaia DR2 to derive the SFH of the MW components using a new population synthesis code. Section 2 describes the dataset,
while Section 3 describes our white dwarf population
synthesis code. We present the results in Section 4, discuss their implications in Section 5, and summarize in
Section 6.

2. DATA

The photometric data used in this paper were acquired
as part of the Canada France Imaging Survey (CFIS;
Ibata et al. 2017) and the grizy Pan-STARRS 1 3π survey (PS1; Chambers et al. 2016). CFIS is an ongoing large-program at the Canada France Hawaii Telescope (CFHT) that aims to obtain 10,000 deg2 of uand 5,000 deg2 of r -band photometry to 5σ point source
depths of 24.2 and 24.85 AB mag, respectively. The survey is performed under excellent conditions, with a median u-band image quality of 0.00 78. This paper makes
use of the CFIS-u catalog, which covers ∼4,500 deg2 as
of the end of the 2018A semester. The footprint is highlighted in gray, in both equatorial and Galactic coordinates, as part of Figure 1.
The CFIS-u catalog was merged with PS1 grizy forced
photometry as described in Thomas et al. (2018). Given
that the PS1 and Gaia catalogs cover the whole sky as
seen from CFHT, our area is set by the CFIS-u footprint.
This catalog retains more than 98% of PS1 detections
within the magnitude range of interest. Stars are selected using the recommended star-galaxy classification
from Farrow et al. (2014): i PSF - i Kron < 0.05 mag.
We also merge our catalog with Gaia DR2 (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2018) in order to obtain proper motions.

4

Fantin et al.

Figure 2. Left: CFIS-PS1-Gaia reduced proper motion diagram (RPMD) showing all 24.5 million sources. White dwarfs for
this study were selected if they had inferred tangential velocities greater than 20 kms−1 (the region bound by the blue line)
Right: Color-color diagram showing the resulting white dwarf candidates selected from the RPMD. For reference, 0.6 M Hand He-atmosphere model tracks are plotted in red and cyan, respectively.

We apply the same astrometric quality cuts on the data
as presented in Gentile Fusillo et al. (2019),

astrometric sigma5d max < 1.5 or

(1)

(astrometric excess noise < 1
and parallax over error > 4
and sqrt(pmra2 + pmdec2 ) > 10 mas),
which removes objects with poor astrometric measurements. Specifically, astrometric sigma5d max represents the longest axis of the 5-d error ellipsoid, in
mas, and large values indicate that one of the astrometric parameters is poorly constrained. astrometric excess noise is a measure of the difference between the best-fit astrometric solution and the data,
with large values suggesting a poor astrometric solution.
Finally, parallax over error is the relation between
the parallax measurement and its associated error. The
limiting magnitude of Gaia (G = 20.7) represents the
primary limitation of our catalog, and the implications
of this are discussed in Section 5. Our CFIS-PS1-Gaia
catalog contains more than 21.5 million unique pointsources down to the Gaia limiting magnitude.
2.1. White Dwarf Selection

Using our combined catalog, we have constructed a
reduced proper motion diagram (RPMD) based on photometry from CFIS and PS1, and proper motions from
Gaia DR2, to separate white dwarfs from other point
sources. The reduced proper motion, H (Luyten 1922),
combines the apparent magnitude, m, and the proper
motion, µ, and can be used as a proxy for absolute magnitude, M, and tangential velocity, vt :
H = m + 5 log µ + 5
= M + 5 log vt − 3.379.

(2)

Owing to their intrinsic faintness, for a given temperature white dwarfs are well separated in the RPMD
from main-sequence stars with similar colors (see, e.g,
Harris et al. 2006; Rowell & Hambly 2011; Fantin et
al. 2017; Munn et al. 2017). Using model cooling
tracks we select white dwarfs with tangential velocities greater than 20 kms−1 as shown in the left-hand
panel of Figure 2. These synthetic magnitudes have
been calculated in the CFIS-u and PS1 grizy bands
for H- and He-atmosphere models using the procedure
described in Holberg & Bergeron (2006). The white
dwarf cooling sequences are similar to those described
in Fontaine et al. (2001) with (50/50) C/O-core compositions, MHe /M? = 10−2 , and MH /M? = 10−4 or 10−10

The Galactic Star Formation History

5

Figure 3. Observational uncertainties in (a) CFIS u, (b) PS1 g, (c) PS1 i, and (d) proper motions as a function of magnitude
in our white dwarf sample. The model, as described in Section 3, samples a Gaussian at each point with a mean (given by the
red line showing a polynomial fit) and standard deviation in order to obtain an uncertainty value for each mock white dwarf.

for H- and He-atmosphere white dwarfs, respectively 1 .
Our selection procedure identifies 25,156 white dwarf
candidates within the CFIS-u footprint. The resulting
sample, along with model H- and He-atmosphere tracks,
can be seen in color-color space in the right-hand panel
of Figure 2.
Previous selections using the RPMD have obtained
contamination fractions from non-white dwarfs (typically hot sdO, sdB, or cooler main-sequence stars) of
a few percent (e.g, Harris et al. 2006) at a velocity cut
of vt > 30 kms−1 , with the rate increasing for lower velocity cuts (Kilic et al. 2010). Given that Gaia DR2
1

See http://www.astro.umontreal.ca/∼bergeron/CoolingModels

has much better astrometry than previous studies, we
have chosen to lower our velocity cut to vt > 20 kms−1 .
Matching our objects to SIMBAD, we find 3688 spectroscopic matches, of which 3589 are white dwarfs. The remaining objects are a mix of hot subdwarfs (69 objects),
QSOs with spurious proper motion measurements (20
objects), and 10 miscellaneous objects including mainsequence stars. The resulting contamination rate is thus
at least ∼3%, a value which has been incorporated into
the results presented in Section 4.
The color-color diagram highlights the precise photometry of CFIS and PS1 and the ability to separate
DA (H-lines present) and DB (He-lines present) white
dwarfs between −0.6 < gPS − iPS < 0.0 mag. The
RPMD also highlights the precise astrometry of Gaia

6

Fantin et al.
codes. Prominent population synthesis codes, like the
Besançon model (Robin et al. 2003, 2014), add white
dwarfs given an observed local density, while Trilegal
(Girardi et al. 2005) has issues reproducing observations
of white dwarfs (Fantin et al. 2017). Thus, a model that
allows white dwarfs to form via the evolution of progenitor stars, as opposed to being added manually, allows
one to study various input parameters, such as the star
formation history, which can affect the resulting white
dwarf population. In this section, we describe our white
dwarf population synthesis code and detail our various
input assumptions about the MW.

3.1. Model Functions

Figure 4. The resulting completeness as a function of magnitude for our CFIS-PS1-Gaia sample in the CFIS u- (blue),
PS1 g- (green), and PS1 i-band (red) respectively. These
completeness functions were calculated assuming that the
CFIS-PS1 catalog is complete over the magnitude range of
Gaia DR2, which was shown to be true in Thomas et al.
(2018).

DR2, which results in a clean sequence of white dwarfs
in color-color space. In Figure 3 we present the observational uncertainties in both the photometry and astrometry as a function of magnitude for our white dwarf
sample, highlighting the depth of the CFIS-u band and
the precision of the Gaia DR2 proper motions.
2.2. Completeness
We calculate the completeness within our dataset by
comparing our CFIS-PS1-Gaia catalog to the CFIS-PS1
catalog. Thomas et al. (2018) showed the PS1 g-band is
complete to 22.0 mag, which is deeper than our sample
(see Figure 3) and thus we assume that the CFIS-PS1
dataset is complete over the magnitude range covered
by the Gaia survey. Our completeness curves for the
PS1 g- and i -bands, as well as the CFIS-u band, can be
seen in Figure 4.

3. MODELING THE MILKY WAY’S WHITE

DWARF POPULATION
While the MW’s white dwarf population contains important information regarding its evolutionary history, it
is generally not the focus of stellar population synthesis

We construct a synthetic model of the MW’s white
dwarf population in order to compare to our dataset. We
start by assuming a three-component Galaxy consisting
of a thin disk, a thick disk, and a stellar halo, with
density distributions given in Table 1. We assume a
double exponential profile in both R and z for the thin
and thick disk. We assume a scale length of 2.3 kpc
for both the thin and thick disk, and scale heights of
300 and 550 pc respectively, similar to the mean values
presented by Robin et al. (2014). For each component,
we generate stars at positions and masses given by the
assumed density distributions and Kroupa (2001) initialmass function (IMF).
Stars are spawned at Galactocentric radii (R) and
heights above the plane (z ) appropriate for the distributions shown in Table 1. The stars are evenly distributed
in the angular coordinate, with 0◦ representing the line
connecting the solar position in the plane to the Galactic center. The Galactocentric coordinates are then converted to RA and Dec, and a distance from the Sun is
calculated assuming the Sun is at a position of (R, θ,
z ) = (8340 pc, 0 pc, 17 pc) (Reid et al. 2014; Karim &
Mamajek 2017). Figure 1 shows the resulting equatorial (left) and Galactic (right) positions for the thin disk
with the CFIS-u footprint highlighted in gray.
The amount of time it will take each star to become a white dwarf, the progenitor lifetime, is calculated using the analytic stellar lifetimes from Hurley et
al. (2000). This functional form takes the initial mass
and the metallicity of each star and returns the lifetime
of the star. For our model, we assume solar metallicity
for the thin disk, [Fe/H] = −0.7 for the thick disk, and
[Fe/H] = −1.5 for the halo (Peng et al. 2013). Each star
is also assigned a birth date (its formation age) that is
randomly generated given the functional form for the

7

The Galactic Star Formation History
Table 1. Assumed Model Distributions for Each Component
ξ(M)

SFH

[Fe/H]

h Vφ i
(kms−1 )

σU
(kms−1 )

σV
(kms−1 )

σW
(kms−1 )

Kroupa

Skewed Gaussian

0.0

−12

33

15

15

hR

e−R/hR e−z/hz
= 2300 pc, hz = 300 pc

Kroupa

Skewed Gaussian

−0.7

−85

40

32

28

hR

e−R/hR e−z/hz
= 2300 pc, hz = 550 pc

Kroupa

Skewed Gaussian

−1.5

−226

131

106

85

Component

ρ(R, z)

Thin disk

Thick disk

r−2.44

Stellar halo

Note—The Solar position is assumed to be (R , θ , z ) = (8340 pc, 0, 17 pc)

SFR. We assume a skewed Gaussian star formation history for each component,

SFR(t) = ρ0

2
φ
σt



t−ξ
σt



 

t−ξ
Φ α
σt

(3)

where φ(t) is the standard normal probability distribution that is symmetric about the mean, ξ, and Φ(t) is
its cumulative distribution function. The skewness parameter is α, the standard deviation is given by σt , and
ρ0 is the space density.
A star will have formed a white dwarf if the lifetime
up to the end of the AGB phase is less than its formation age, with this difference being the white dwarf
cooling time. The white dwarfs are then given space velocities according to the distributions presented in Table 1. These solar position values were adopted from
Robin et al. (2017), who derived them by comparing
the Besançon model to kinematic data from RAVE and
Gaia DR1. These values are similar to those derived
by Rowell & Hambly (2011) using white dwarfs in the
SuperCOSMOS survey. We do not allow the velocities
to vary in R or z, as shown in Robin et al. (2017), since
our sample is local (see Section 4) and therefore this
gradient would have a minimal impact on our results.
We also do not allow our thin disk velocity dispersion to
vary with age, but instead take a mean value since the
small change would have little effect on a star’s position
in the RPMD. These velocities are converted to a proper
motion using the equations from Johnson & Soderblom
(1987).
The white dwarf mass, in solar masses, is calculated
from the initial progenitor mass using the IFMR from
Kalirai et al. (2008).

MWD = (0.109 ± 0.007)Mi + (0.394 ± 0.025)M . (4)

The final parameter needed to calculate the photometry of a white dwarf is its spectral type. We include
pure H- and He-atmosphere white dwarfs in our model,
and each white dwarf is designated as one or the other
given an input fraction, fHe . With the cooling age, white
dwarf mass, and type in hand, we determine the absolute magnitudes in the required bands using the white
dwarf cooling models as described in Section 2 and seen
in Figure 2. We then determine the reddening in each
band at the white dwarfs position using the extinction
coefficients and E(B−V) values from the Bayestar 3D
dust maps of (Green et al. 2015, 2018), before converting the model absolute magnitudes to apparent magnitudes. We then add experimental uncertainties based
on the observed relation between magnitude and error
in the given photometric bands and proper motion (see
Figure 3). Finally, completeness (see Figure 4) and selection effects (see Figure 2) are applied based on the
observations.
The model returns a catalog of simulated white dwarfs
within a given footprint. Catalog information includes positions, distances, masses, cooling ages, spectral types, proper motions, and apparent magnitudes
in the given photometric bands. Typical results can
be seen in Figure 5, which shows color-color diagrams
(left column) and RPMDs (right column) for young (top
row), intermediate-age (middle row) and old populations
(bottom row).
While the above description has been tailored for this
particular study, we note that the model can readily be
adapted for any future studies by modifying the bandpasses and survey parameters.

3.2. Fitting Method: Approximate Bayesian
Computation MCMC

8

Fantin et al.

Figure 5. Comparing three different realizations of the model with young ages (top row), intermediate ages (middle row),
and old ages (bottom row) using color-color diagrams (left column) and reduced proper motion diagrams (right column). As
the ages of each component increase, a larger number of white dwarfs at redder colors are visible due to the increased cooling
ages, resulting in lower temperatures.

We begin by parameterizing the SFH for each Galactic
component following equation 3. This results in four
parameters for each component: the mean, ξ, which we
will call the functional age, the scale, σt , the skewness
α, and the star formation rate. This results in a total
of 12 parameters. We also fit for the ratio between the

hydrogen and helium atmosphere white dwarfs, which
we call the He fraction, fHe . This fraction is assumed to
be equal for all three populations. This brings the total
number of parameters to 13.
We integrate a given SFH to determine the total stellar mass and select the corresponding number of stars

9

The Galactic Star Formation History
contained in each MW component. For each star, we
then generate a formation age given the SFH. We then
remove every star that does not fall within the CFIS
footprint and/or will not have formed a white dwarf at
the present day. The cooling age for those stars that remain is then calculated as being the difference between
the formation age and the progenitor lifetime.
With the cooling ages, white dwarf masses, and spectral type, we then calculate apparent magnitudes in the
CFIS and PS1 bands using the model cooling curves
described in Section 2. Observational uncertainties are
added given the relations shown in Figure 3. A photometric completeness correction is then made given the
curves presented in Figure 4.
Finally, we perform the same selection methods on
the model as we do on the data. We begin by applying
identical distributions in the Gaia parameters included
in equation 1 to our model white dwarfs before making
the same selection as presented in equation 1. Using the
proper motion we calculate the reduced proper motion
using equation 2 and select those stars whose tangential
velocity is greater than the 20 kms−1 curve (see Figure
2).
We use astroABC (Jennings & Madigan 2017),
a python based approximate Bayesian computation
(ABC) Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach in
order to calibrate our model. This so-called ‘likelihood
free’ method is useful in cases where a likelihood function is difficult to calculate, or unknown altogether. Unlike traditional MCMC methods used in astronomy (see,
e.g. emcee; Foreman-Mackey, et al. 2013), ABC MCMC
does not calculate an explicit likelihood but instead relies on forward modeling. Given a set of model parameters, a simulated dataset is produced and compared to
the data in order to either accept or reject the proposed
parameters. More specifically, if we draw parameters θ,
we accept these parameters if ρ(D − D∗ (θ)) < , where
ρ is the distance metric between the dataset, D, and the
simulated data given θ, D∗ (θ), and  is called the tolerance threshold. The distance metric used to compare
the data and the model is
ρ(Di − Di∗ (θ)) =

X (Di − D∗ (θ))2
i

i
2σi2

to perfectly simulate a dataset. On the other hand, if
 is too large, then the algorithm is sampling from the
prior. Thus, the choice of  determines how much of an
approximation the resulting PDFs are while minimizing
the required total computational time (Marjoram et al.
2003).
As described in Marjoram et al. (2003), ABC methods typically require lower-dimensional summary statistics, S(D), which are representative of the whole dataset
in order to reduce computational costs. This summary
statistic must encompass any required information contained within the data itself without neglecting anything
important. Similar to Mor et al. (2018), we use a combination of binned colors, magnitudes, and proper motions. Specifically, we compare our real and simulated
data using a 3-D histogram composed of a color-color
diagram (g-i, u-g), and the reduced proper motion, H.
This combination of colors and proper motions was chosen in order to encompass both age and SFR information
(colors), as well as the contributions from each component (apparent magnitudes and proper motions via H ).
Furthermore, the color-color diagram contains information regarding the He fraction in our sample, since they
are well separated due to the exquisite u-band photometry provided by CFIS (see Figure 2) Thus, in equation
5, i represents each bin in the histogram, and σ is the
sum in quadrature of the uncertainty in both the model
and data in each bin. For instances where the model predicts a star, but we do not observe one, we use substitute
Di +1 into equation 5 in order to penalize the model by
increasing the distance. We then run astroABC with
1000 particles to obtain the approximate PDFs for the
age, duration, and SFR for the three Galactic components, as well as the He fraction. We use uniform priors
for every variable, with the only constraint being that
the age of the components cannot exceed the age of the
Universe, which we set to 13.8 Gyr (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018), and that the scale parameters, σt , must
be greater than zero.
4. RESULTS AND COMPARISON TO THE

LITERATURE
.

(5)

The result at each step is a set of independent samples
below a generated tolerance threshold (Marjoram et al.
2003).
The algorithm starts off with a large threshold and
shrinks it at each step in order to approximate the PDF.
When this threshold is exactly zero, then one is sampling
directly from the posterior PDF; however, in that case,
the acceptance fraction declines sharply as it is difficult

The resulting corner plot containing the PDFs can be
seen in Figure 6. The results from our fit can be seen
in the bottom panels of Figure 7, which show a model
instance with the mean parameters as estimated by the
final step of the Markov chain (the central line in the
histograms from Figure 6). The top two panels show
the actual data for comparison. We are able to reproduce the thin and thick disk population quite well, although the halo parameters are much less constrained.
This is a result of the Gaia limiting magnitude since

10

Fantin et al.

Figure 6. Posterior distributions for the 13-dimensional parameter space sampled with astroABC. From left to right we show
the mean functional age (ξ, Gyr), star formation rate (SFR, M yr−1 ), standard deviation (σt ), and skew (α) for the thin disk,
thick disk, and halo. See equation 3 for the definition of each parameter. The final histogram shows the fraction of white dwarfs
with helium atmospheres, fHe .

the intrinsic faintness and scarcity of halo white dwarfs
results in very few appearing in the dataset. For reference, only 44 objects lie below the 200 kms−1 model
track in Figure 2, which is typically associated with the
Galactic halo. This sample is smaller than that obtained
with deeper SDSS photometry by (Munn et al. 2017),

which was used by Kilic et al. (2017) to obtain a halo
age of 12.5+1.4
−3.4 Gyr. A larger sample will be required to
better constrain the halo parameters — in particular,
a sample that includes objects beyond the turnover in
the halo luminosity function. This will require deeper
proper motion surveys, such as PS1 DR2, which will be

The Galactic Star Formation History

11

Figure 7. Comparing our best fit model (bottom panels) to the data (top panels) in both color-color (left column) and RPMD
(right column). The best fit ages are shows in the bottom right panel.

investigated in a future paper. Within the next decade,
upcoming imaging surveys such as WFIRST (Spergel
et al. 2015) and LSST (LSST Science Collaboration et
al. 2009) will provide proper motions to unprecedented
depths, allowing for a more comprehensive study of the
Galactic halo.
4.1. Our Sample, in the Context of the Milky Way

In order to properly compare with previous results,
we begin by showing the volume that is sampled by our
model. The resulting sight-lines in both R (the distance
from the center of the MW) and z (the distance from the
mid-plane) can be seen in the left-hand panel of Figure
8. The cyan dashed lines show heliocentric distances of
1, 2, and 3 kpc, respectively, showing that the vast majority of our sample lies within one kpc of the Sun. This

12

Fantin et al.

Figure 8. Left: Positions of our model white dwarfs (red) within the Milky Way (black). The concentric cyan rings represent
heliocentric distances of 1, 2, and 3 kpc respectively. Right: Heliocentric distance distributions of our model white dwarfs. Our
sample consists mainly of local white dwarfs, with 96% having a distance less than 1 kpc.

is confirmed in the right-hand panel which shows the
distance distributions of our model white dwarfs. The
result is that only 4% of white dwarfs in our sample lie
at distances greater than 1 kpc, with a median distance
of 388 pc. Given these values, we consider our sample
to be representative of the solar neighborhood, and not
necessarily the whole disk.
4.2. Star Formation History
Our resulting SFH, integrated over the entirety of each
component, can be seen in the left-hand panel of Figure 9, where we have sampled the resulting PDFs and
plotted the mean (black) and 1σ contours (gray). Our
results show an initial period of thick disk star formation, lasting 3 Gyr and peaking at (9.8 ± 0.3) Gyr. This
is followed by a nearly 1 Gyr decline in star formation
before finishing with a nearly constant SFR for the thin
disk at approximately 3.5 M yr−1 . Below, we present
a comparison between our SFH and those found in the
literature. We make note of a caveat to these comparisons, which is that we assume that each component is
defined by a unimodal SFH. Thus, if a given component
contains multiple bursts, we will fit the average through
the bursts (see Section 5 for further discussion).
The star formation and, in turn, the mass assembly, history of the MW has been an open question for
decades. With the increase in accurate distances in the
Solar neighborhood from surveys like Hipparcos (ESA
1997), the local SFH could be derived by comparing
the synthetic color-magnitude diagrams (CMD) to observations. This process was performed by Vergely et

al. (2002) using Hipparcos stars brighter than V = 8,
as well as Cignoni et al. (2006) who used all Hipparcos
stars within 80 pc. Both of their samples are dominated
by thin disk objects given their selection criteria, and
in turn, they show a slowly rising star formation until it hits a peak 2 Gyr ago. These SFHs can be seen
in the left-hand panel of Figure 10 as the red dashed
line and dotted cyan line respectively. In this figure, we
have scaled our star formation history and hence only
the shapes should be compared. We note that neither
SFH recovers a strong peak early-on in the formation of
the MW (the Cignoni et al. (2006) result has a slight
uptick in the 10−12 Gyr bin) and this may be a result
of their samples being dominated by younger thin disk
objects.
We also compare our SFH to that obtained by Rowell (2013) who implemented an algorithm to invert the
WDLF in order to derive the local star formation history. The resulting SFH, computed from the Harris et
al. (2006) WDLF, is shown as the dot-dashed green line
in the left-hand panel of Figure 10. Both SFHs are normalized, and given the varying units obtained by each
study, only a comparison of the shape is appropriate.
Both SFHs show two stages of star formation, however,
we do not see a recent peak 2−3 Gyr ago, and the peak
in our SFR attributed to the thick disk happens about
2 Gyr earlier. This is likely due to the larger volume
sampled by our CFIS-PS1-Gaia sample, which in turn
will allow us to better constrain this time-frame since
our sample will contain a larger fraction of thick disk
objects. It is worth noting that similarly a burst in

The Galactic Star Formation History

13

Figure 9. Left: Milky Way star formation rate as a function of lookback time. Right: The cumulative mass as a function of
lookback time with the contribution from the thin disk (dashed blue), thick disk (dotted green) and halo (double dot-dash red)
highlighted.

Figure 10. Left: Our star formation history (black) compared to Hipparcos results by Vergely et al. (2002) (dashed-red) and
Cignoni et al. (2006) (dotted-cyan). Also shown is the result of Rowell (2013), who inverted the white dwarf luminosity function
of Harris et al. (2006) (green). Right: Comparing our star formation history to results obtained via Galactic chemical evolution
models from Snaith et al. (2015) and Toyouchi & Chiba (2018). Due to the varying units presented by each study, the SFHs
have been normalized, and therefore only the shape should be compared.

the SFR at 600 Myr is seen in the luminosity function

of the local 40 pc white dwarf sample from Torres, &

14

Fantin et al.

Garcı́a-Berro (2016), but not in the deeper luminosity
function generated by Munn et al. (2017). Kilic et al.
(2017) concluded that this discrepancy is a result of the
local sample being confined to the mid-plane of the MW,
where most recent star formation occurs.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 10, we compare our
results to other SFHs found in the literature through
GCE models. Toyouchi & Chiba (2018) used an openbox model, allowing for the inflow and outflow of gas,
in order to reproduce the radial metallicity distribution
obtained using APOGEE data in Hayden et al. (2015).
This result was obtained using a sample of red-giant
stars with 3 < R < 15 kpc and |z| < 2 kpc, which is
a much larger volume than our sample. Their result
shows a rise in star formation beginning at 12 Gyr with
a peak at 9 Gyr. This is followed by a roughly constant
SFR to the present day. Our SFH matches the Toyouchi
& Chiba (2018) results quite well at recent and ancient
times but differs slightly at intermediate ages.
Also plotted are results by Snaith et al. (2015) who
compared their GCE model to a sample of abundances
acquired as part of the HARPS survey. They model the
MW disk with two components: an inner (R < 7 kpc)
closed-box and an outer (R > 9 kpc) component which
can accrete gas. Their resulting inner disk SFH shows a
two-phase formation scenario separated by a period of
inactivity lasting roughly one Gyr. A follow-up paper by
Haywood et al. (2018) showed that the inner disk model
is compatible with APOGEE data, and argued that the
gap could be caused by the formation of a bar.
Their inner and outer disk results have been plotted in
purple and orange, respectively, in Figure 10. Given the
relative nature of their presented star formation history,
we have scaled their SFH so that both periods associated with the thin disk are equal. The inner disk shows
an initial burst of star formation, which they attribute
to the thick disk, and ends with a relatively constant
SFR over the past 7 Gyr associated with the thin disk.
Comparing the general shape of their inner disk SFH,
an initial peak of SFH followed by a decline to a nearly
constant SFR, shows that the two models are consistent, however, we do not require a gap in our SFH. This
is likely because this is a feature of the inner disk, and
since the gap is thought to be a result of the formation
of a bar, it did not have a large effect on the local star
formation we measure.
Our results differ in terms of the SFH of the thick
disk, particularly at the earliest stages of the MW’s formation. This is likely a consequence of the large uncertainties in both models at the earliest epochs of the MW
and in particular the difficulty of detecting white dwarfs
with cooling ages exceeding 11 Gyr. This could also be

a result of our choice of scale height (See section 5), as
an increased scale height at these epochs would increase
our SFR.
Haywood et al. (2019) argue that the solar neighborhood is better described by the outer disk evolution,
given the enrichment history of the outer disk. In their
outer disk scenario, their simulation includes a single accretion event at 10 Gyr (and thus the SFR between 10
and 13.8 Gyr is unconstrained) and results in a consistent SFR over the past 10 Gyr, similar to the inner disk.
This is roughly consistent with our results, particularly
within the past 8 Gyr.
4.3. Component Masses
The right-hand panel of Figure 9 shows the cumulative mass of the MW as a function of time, again with
all 1000 particles shown in gray. This is done by integrating our SFH and density functions over the entire
MW. We measure a total stellar mass of (3.4 ± 0.6) ×
1010 M for our thin disk, thick disk, and stellar halo.
Also plotted is the result of Toyouchi & Chiba (2018)
which is consistent within uncertainties with our result.
Given the relative nature of the other star formation histories, we have chosen not to make a direct comparison
with the results plotted in Figure 10.
The mass of the MW’s stellar disk is an important astronomical property, and as such, has been extensively
studied. Our result is systematically lower than many
previous results. Recent mass models of the MW have
found a total disk mass between 3.6-5.5 × 1010 M (see,
e.g, Gerhard 2002; Flynn et al. 2006; McMillan 2011;
Bovy, & Rix 2013). It should be noted, however, that
these estimates are highly dependent on the model assumptions, including the scale length and scale height,
IMF, and whether or not a bulge/bar is included. Furthermore, it should be reiterated that our survey volume is rather small, and thus extrapolating our volume
to the entire disk will inevitably contain a systematic
uncertainty.
4.4. Local Stellar Density and White Dwarf Number
Density
Given the systematic uncertainties associated with extrapolating our result to the entire disk, a more appropriate comparison is likely with the local stellar density. The stellar density as calculated by our model
is (0.036 ± 0.004) M pc−3 for the thin disk, (4.5 ±
0.5) × 10−3 M pc−3 for the thick disk, and (3.2 ± 3.1)
× 10−6 M pc−3 for the halo. Our values agree with
Bovy (2017), who used Gaia DR1 to calculate a mainsequence stellar density of 0.040 ± 0.002 M pc−3 .
The resulting white dwarf densities are (4.8 ± 0.4) ×
10−3 pc−3 for the thin disk, (1.0 ± 0.2) × 10−3 pc−3

15

The Galactic Star Formation History
for the thick disk, and (6.3 ± 2.4) × 10−6 pc−3 for the
halo. This corresponds to a total white dwarf number
density of (5.8 ± 0.5) × 10−3 pc−3 . Our values are consistent with the estimates of (5.5 ± 0.1) × 10−3 pc−3
from Munn et al. (2017), and marginally higher than
results of 4.6 × 10−3 pc−3 from Harris et al. (2006), (4.8
± 0.4) × 10−3 pc−3 from Torres et al. (2019), and (2.81
± 0.52) × 10−3 pc−3 from Fantin et al. (2017).
Our resulting white dwarf contributions within the solar neighborhood break down to (83 ± 5) %, (17 ± 3) %,
and (0.11 ± 0.05) % from the thin disk, thick disk, and
stellar halo respectively. Rowell & Hambly (2011) constructed thin disk, thick disk, and halo luminosity functions using a statistical approach based on kinematics
and photometry from the SuperCOSMOS survey in order to obtain local fractions of 79, 16, and 5 percent, respectively. This result was consistent with Reid (2005)
who found that thick disk white dwarfs should comprise
roughly 20% of the local population. Our thick disk
fraction is marginally lower than the recent result by
Torres et al. (2019) who obtained fractional contributions of 74, 25, 1 % from the thin disk, thick disk, and
halo respectively.
4.5. Component Ages
The white dwarf luminosity function has been used as
a tool to calculate the ages of various populations within
the MW, including its field population. Our functional
ages, ξ (see Equation 3), for the thin disk and thick disk
+0.36
are 8.41+0.34
−0.35 Gyr and 9.78−0.33 Gyr, respectively. Since
the age can be defined as the onset of star formation, we
also present these values as (8.5 ± 0.3) Gyr for the thin
disk and (11.3 ± 0.3) Gyr for the thick disk.
The first age measurement using white dwarfs was preformed by Winget et al. (1987) who obtained an age
of (9.3 ± 2.0 Gyr for the Galactic disk. Following this,
Leggett et al. (1998) used spectroscopic data from a sample of 43 white dwarfs to obtain an age of (8 ± 1.5) Gyr
for the disk. Both of these samples were likely dominated by thin disk objects, and this is reflected in their
age measurements.
Our SFH is consistent with those derived from the
oldest open clusters, which are typically associated with
the thin disk. Bedin et al. (2005) and Garcı́a-Berro et al.
(2010) used the WDLF to determine an age of ∼8 Gyr
for NGC 6791, an open cluster with solar-like metallicity.
This cluster likely formed at the onset of thin disk star
formation given its age and metallicity.
Our thick disk age is consistent with metal-rich globular clusters, like 47 Tucanae, which have metallicities
comparable to thick disk field stars ([Fe/H] = −0.75).
Hansen et al. (2013) used Hubble Space Telescope pho-

tometry to observe the WDLF and obtain an age of (9.9
± 0.7) Gyr. In our star formation history, this would
place its formation near the peak of the thick disk star
formation period.
Kilic et al. (2017) used the WDLF presented by
Munn et al. (2017), who performed second epoch followup photometry within the SDSS footprint to calculate
proper motions and select their white dwarf sample.
The ages of our thin disk and thick disk are consistent
within the errors with their results of 7.4−8.2 Gyr and
9.5−9.9 Gyr.
Although less constrained than our disk ages, our resulting functional halo age is 10.92+1.26
−1.09 Gyr. This translates into an onset age of (12.3 ± 1.3) Gyr. This result
is consistent with metal-poor globular clusters associated with the stellar halo, which typically have ages of
11−13 Gyr. For example, Hansen et al. (2013) obtained
an age of (11.7 ± 0.3) Gyr for NGC 6397 and Bedin et
al. (2009) found an age of (11.6 ± 0.6) Gyr for M4, both
using the WDLF. Our result is also consistent with Kilic
et al. (2017), who presented an age of 12.5+1.4
−3.4 Gyr.
4.6. He Fraction
The resulting He fraction in our sample is (21 ± 3)%.
This is consistent with Bergeron et al. (2011), who fit
model atmospheres to a spectroscopic white dwarf sample from the Palomar Green Survey. They showed that
approximately 20% of white dwarfs with temperatures
below 20,000 K appeared to contain a helium atmosphere. This result was followed up by Genest-Beaulieu
& Bergeron (2019), who used SDSS spectra to show that
the fraction of DB stars increases at lower temperatures
(see their Figure 23). This fraction was found to be approximately 5% at temperatures greater than 20,000 K,
with an increase to 20−25% at 12,000 K. Using a sample
of local white dwarfs Limoges et al. (2015) also showed
that 25% of their sample was best described by models
containing a helium atmosphere.
Our measurement is also consistent with recent results from Kilic et al. (2018) who used a color-magnitude
diagram, generated using SDSS photometry and Gaia
DR2 astrometry, to obtain a DB fraction of 36 ± 2%
for a sample of white dwarfs within 100 pc. Since Heatmosphere white dwarfs are most pronounced at higher
temperatures their result was quoted within a region of
color-magnitude space encompassing the bifurcation of
DA and DB white dwarfs due to the increased strength
of the Balmer lines. In the temperature region, Heatmosphere white dwarfs are classified as type DB since
He I lines are present in their spectra. Applying the
same selection area, MuSDSS between 10 and 14 and
uSDSS - gSDSS between −0.4 and +0.6, to our CFIS and

16

Fantin et al.

Figure 11. Color-color diagram showing the data (left) and best-fit model (center) binned every 0.15 mags. The right-hand
panel shows the difference between the data and the model, color-coded by either an excess (blue) or deficit (red) within the
model. The black box shows the main location where the model contains a deficit of white dwarfs relative to the data, and these
objects have a mean formation age of (3.3 ± 1.8) Gyr. The dashed box represents the location where our model over-predicts
the number of white dwarfs, and these objects have a mean formation age of (5.8 ± 1.1) Gyr. This suggests a more bimodal
formation history, with a 50% increase in SFR near 3 Gyr and a 30% deficit at 6 Gyr.

PS1 model color-magnitude diagram produces a consistent DB fraction of 34 ± 3%.
5. DISCUSSION

As Figure 9 shows, our results suggest the star formation of the MW disk began (11.3 ± 0.3) Gyr ago. Following a brief period of halo formation, the thick disk
rapidly begins to form stars until it reaches a peak (9.8
± 0.3) Gyr ago. This period is followed by a decline in
thick disk star formation. The thin disk then begins to
form stars (8.5 ± 0.4) Gyr ago.
The transition between the thin and thick disk SFHs
was a fairly active period in the MW’s history. Recent
results by Helmi et al. (2018) and Belokurov et al. (2018)
provided evidence that this epoch was dominated by the
accretion of at least one satellite galaxy, and may have
contributed to the rapid transition between the thick
and thin disk. The resulting merger would have heated
up the existing stars to form a thick disk approximately
10 Gyr ago (Helmi et al. 2018). Given that a merger can
enhance the SFR for a short period before quenching (Di
Matteo et al. 2008), our results suggest that the merger
occurred shortly before our peak SFR at (9.8 ± 0.3) Gyr,
and before the onset of star formation in the thin disk.
Thus, this scenario is consistent with a merger triggering
the epoch of peak star formation in the Milky Way and
the start of star formation in what we now call the thin
disk.
In this section, we discuss the impact of our assumptions on these results, including our choice of star formation prescription, and discuss the next steps for this
study.

5.1. Effect of Star Formation Prescription
As shown in equation 3, we assume skewed Gaussian
functions for the three components, as allowing a skewness increases the degrees of freedom of the function.
In this sense, we have assumed unimodal functions for
the star formation histories, and we will inevitably fit
over any potential multimodal peaks in the star formation. Specifically, if the star formation history of a single
component is composed of multiple bursts, then we will
fit the average star formation throughout these periods
of increased and decreased star formation. To examine
this possibility, we have plotted the fractional residual
between the data and the best fit model in Figure 11.
Figure 11 shows a deficit of white dwarfs within the
solid black box and an excess of white dwarfs within
the dashed box. These areas represent mean formation
ages of (3.3 ± 1.8) Gyr and (5.8 ± 1.1) Gyr respectively.
This suggests that we are underestimating the star formation rate around 3 Gyr and overestimating at 6 Gyr
by roughly 50% and 30%, respectively. This is consistent with the results of Rowell (2013) and Vergely et
al. (2002), as shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 10,
who see an increase in star formation between 2 and
3 Gyr and a resulting decrease in the vicinity of 6 Gyr.
This result is also in line with the recent work by Mor et
al. (2019), who compared simulations of the Besançon
Galactic model with the colors, magnitudes, and parallaxes from Gaia DR2, which shows a burst of star
formation between 2 and 3 Gyr in the past. The slight
bimodality suggested by Figure 11 is, however, not seen
in the GCE models of Snaith et al. (2014) and Toyouchi

The Galactic Star Formation History
& Chiba (2018), as seen in the right-hand panel of Figure 10.
5.2. Effect of the Scale Height
In our model, we have assumed a three-component
Galaxy with constant scale heights. This assumption
will inevitably impact our SFH, as a decrease in the scale
height will result in a lower star formation rate. This is
because more stars will reside closer to the plane, and
will have a higher probability of passing our observational criteria.
Robin et al. (2014) found that the scale height for the
thick disk (described using a sech2 distribution) likely
contracted from 800 pc to 350 pc between 12 and 10 Gyr.
Given this scenario, our SFH would under-predict the
SFR while the scale height was greater than 550 pc and
over-predict while it was below this value. However,
given the relatively small distances of the vast majority
of our sample, the impact of deviating from our chosen
mean of 550 pc is minimal. Specifically, at the maximum
scale height of 800 pc we would need to produce 11%
more stars than at a scale height of 550 pc. Similarly,
at 350 pc we would produce 17% more stars than at
550 pc, reducing our SFR. These values are well within
our uncertainties seen in Figure 9.
A thick disk composed of a range of scale heights has
been suggested by recent results in order to explain the
dip in [α/Fe] seen in the APOGEE data (Bovy et al.
2012; Haywood et al. 2013, 2016). Given that we modeled a single scale height, adding further components
to our model would result in both scenarios described
above. The net result would be a flattening of the thick
disk SFH with a minimal decrease to the peak since the
total number of white dwarfs produced would need to
remain the same.
5.3. Effect of Metallicity
In our model, we have chosen to set a constant metallicity for each Galactic component. The metallicity of a
given star affects the pre-white dwarf lifetime through
the analytical lifetimes from Hurley et al. (2000). Therefore, changing the metallicity of a given star will change
its lifetime, and in turn its white dwarf cooling age.
Specifically, for a fixed initial mass, the progenitor lifetime will increase with increasing metallicity, which in
turn decreases the white dwarf cooling time. Tononi
et al. (2019) found that including a dispersion in the
metallicity provided a better fit to the 40 pc white dwarf
luminosity function. Adding a dispersion to our metallicity would add a dispersion to the progenitor ages,
which, through the cooling age, affects the photometry. If the dispersion is symmetric the effect would be

17

equal at all ages and thus not impact our results. We
have studied this effect in Figure 12, which shows the
fractional change in progenitor lifetime for a higher and
lower metallicity relative to our chosen values for the
thin and thick disk. While not perfectly symmetric, the
implementation of a constant dispersion would only systematically increase our ages by a few percent, which is
minimal relative to our uncertainties.
5.4. Effect of the IMF and IFMR
Ultimately, as with any population synthesis study,
our results are contingent on our assumptions. Assuming that the IMF is constant over time, changing our
IMF to, for example, a Salpeter or Chabrier will affect
the overall normalization, but not the shape of our SFH.
This is because much of the discrepancy between IMFs
is present at the low-mass end and the white dwarfs
currently present in the MW were formed by stars with
initial massed greater than 0.8−0.9 M , for which the
slope of the IMF is well constrained.
Changing the IFMR will impact the ages of the white
dwarfs, as the white dwarf cooling age is a strong function of the mass. As the IFMR is generally estimated
from empirical data, Gaia DR2 can be used to calculate the IFMR. Recent work by El-Badry et al. (2018),
who used spectroscopically confirmed DAs in wide binaries, has shown promise, however extending this work to
all white dwarfs has been challenging given the impact
of the atmospheric type on the resulting cooling age,
which requires spectroscopic follow-up. The results by
El-Badry et al. (2018) and Cummings et al. (2018) also
showed that much of the discrepancy between IFMRs
arises at high progenitor masses, for which there are
very few such stars in our observed sample (see their
Figure 3). While we note that there is no consensus
on an IFMR, changing the IFMR is likely to have the
highest impact on the SFH at old ages where the majority of old white dwarfs are formed from higher mass
progenitors.
In order to test this, we ran a simulation with the
semi-empirical IFMR derived by Cummings et al. (2018)
using the MIST isochrones from Choi et al. (2016) to
calculate the progenitor ages. The IFMR presented by
Cummings et al. (2018) produces systematically larger
white dwarf masses relative to the IFMR from Kalirai
et al. (2008), with typical differences being ∼0.05 M .
At a fixed SFH, or equivalently, fixed white dwarf cooling time, increasing the white dwarf mass will increase
the resulting temperature. The end result is that the
ages must increase to match the observed colors as these
white dwarfs will require more time to cool to equivalent temperatures, represented by the observed colors in

18

Fantin et al.

Figure 12. Fractional difference between the mean metallicity (black solid line) for the thin disk (left) and thick disk (right)
for a star with higher metallicity (dotted blue) and lower metallicity (dashed red) than the mean.

the two SFHs are roughly consistent, although the resulting thick disk functional age is ∼0.3 Gyr older than
the result with the Kalirai et al. (2008) IFMR seen in
Figure 9.
5.5. Effect of Atmospheric Composition

Figure 13. A comparison between the resulting star formation history using the IFMR from Kalirai et al. (2008)
(dashed line) and Cummings et al. (2018) (solid line). The
Cummings et al. (2018) IFMR returns systematically higher
masses (∼0.05 M ) which results in a 0.3 Gyr increase in the
age for the thick disk.

our model. The resulting SFH with the Cummings et
al. (2018) IFMR can be seen in Figure 13. The shape of

In our model, we assumed that white dwarfs have
one of two atmospheric compositions: pure-hydrogen
or pure-helium. In reality, white dwarfs with helium
dominant atmospheres typically contain some hydrogen
(Koester & Kepler 2015; Rolland et al. 2018). GenestBeaulieu & Bergeron (2019) showed that this additional
hydrogen impacts the photometric mass determinations
of helium-atmosphere white dwarfs, particularly at low
temperatures where the hydrogen abundance can increase due to convective mixing. Given that our model
obtains masses from the IFMR (and hence both populations have the same mass distribution), this issue
will not impact our results, however, a change in the
atmospheric composition will affect the rate of cooling
of the helium-atmosphere white dwarfs. As discussed
in Kilic et al. (2017), pure-helium and pure-hydrogen
white dwarfs take the same amount of time to cool to
roughly 5,000 K, however, hydrogen-atmosphere white
dwarfs begin to cool slower than their helium counterparts below 5,000 K. Specifically, for a 0.6 M white
dwarf with a pure-hydrogen atmosphere, it will take
∼1.5 Gyr longer to reach 4,000 K than if it had a purehelium atmosphere. At 0.8 M , this discrepancy rises to

The Galactic Star Formation History

19

Figure 14. Comparing the resulting white dwarf populations based on the Gaia magnitude limit (left columns; G = 20.7) and
the CFIS magnitude limit (right columns; u = 24.2). The fainter magnitude limit results in a 5−10× increase in halo white
dwarfs relative to the CFIS-PS1-Gaia sample.

∼2.5 Gyr. Within this temperature range, our resulting
model produces very few white dwarfs, and those which
pass our selection criteria have pure-hydrogen atmospheres. This is consistent with recent results suggesting that the majority of cool white dwarfs have nearly
pure-hydrogen atmospheres (Kowalski, & Saumon 2006;
Giammichele et al. 2012; Limoges et al. 2015; Bergeron

et al. 2019). The addition of mixed H/He atmospheres
may allow a few He-dominant white dwarfs to pass the
selection criteria by slowing down their cooling at this
epoch, however, this effect would be minimal given the
scarcity of objects in this region.
5.6. Model Improvements

20

Fantin et al.

A few straightforward improvements could be made to
our white dwarf population synthesis model in the future. The first would be the inclusion of binaries within
the model. Many main sequence+white dwarf binaries
would not pass our selection criteria given their colors,
which would increase the resulting star formation because the model would need to produce more stars to
match the data.
Binary evolution during previous stages of stellar evolution can also affect the evolution of white dwarfs.
Recent evidence presented by Kilic et al. (2018) suggests that there exists a population of white dwarfs that
formed through the merging of two main-sequence stars,
and that this population may account for as much as
15 − 25% of the field white dwarf population. This result is consistent with the theoretical predictions made
by Toonen et al. (2017) using the local 20 pc sample.
Single white dwarfs formed through merging events have
also been suggested by Liebert et al. (2005) to explain
the high-mass bump in the DA white dwarf mass distribution, but at a rate of 12−15%. This scenario will
not only affect the progenitor age, but also the cooling
age since higher mass white dwarfs cool more quickly
than their lower-mass counterparts. This will inevitably
affect the measured star formation history, however, further work will be needed to determine the exact contribution from this scenario.
Extremely low mass (ELM) white dwarfs (M <
0.3 M ) are also likely present within our dataset. These
white dwarfs cannot be formed through normal evolutionary channels and are thought to form as a result
of extreme mass-loss before the horizontal branch, leaving an exposed core composed primarily of helium (see,
e.g, Kilic et al. 2011; Sun & Arras 2018). Kepler et
al. (2007) found that this population could account for
as much as 10% of the total white dwarf population,
and they have been found in many white dwarf surveys
(Kleinman et al. 2013; Kepler et al. 2016, 2019). Recent
work by Pelisoli & Vos (2019) using Gaia DR2 suggests
a space density of 275 kpc−3 , which would result in only
a handful of objects within our sample.
5.7. Better Data: A Look Ahead
Finally, we reiterate the need for deeper proper motion surveys in order to constrain the properties of the
Galactic halo population. Future surveys like the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope, WFIRST, Euclid (Laureijs
et al. 2011), and CASTOR (Côté et al. 2012) will usher
in a new era in deep wide-field surveys that will uncover
thousands of halo white dwarf candidates.
In order to emphasize this point, we have run a simulation with the mean parameters acquired as part of

our fit to the depth of CFIS-u (u = 24.2). The resulting color-color diagram and RPMD can be seen in Figure 14, where the right-hand panel shows the simulation
with the CFIS magnitude limit and the left-hand panel
is the same as Figure 7. The resulting simulation with
the CFIS magnitude limit returns half an order of magnitude more white dwarfs, and the disparity is particularly noticeable in the thick disk and halo populations.
Specifically, we expect that our sample of halo objects
would increase by a factor of 5−10, and our thick disk
sample by a factor of three at the depth of the CFIS
observations. Given their importance in understanding
Galactic evolution, in particular the age of the halo via
the white dwarf luminosity function, upcoming surveys
such as LSST and WFIRST will provide an unprecedented look into the evolution of the Galactic inner halo
via its white dwarf population.
6. SUMMARY

In this paper, we have presented a newly developed
white dwarf population synthesis code and used it to determine the star formation history of the Galactic thin
disk, thick disk, and stellar halo using new exquisite uband data from CFIS. Our population synthesis model
takes MW geometry and extinction, as well as survey
parameters such as completeness, into account in order
to return a mock catalog of white dwarfs in the specified photometric bands. We use data from the CanadaFrance Imaging Survey (CFIS), Pan-STARRS 1 (PS1)
and Gaia DR2 to compare to our resulting simulations
with a given star formation history, which we have parameterized using skewed Gaussian functions. This sample was shown to be local to the solar neighborhood,
with a median distance of 388 pc. Our main results are
the following:
• The star formation history of the Milky Way
disk begins (11.3 ± 0.5) Gyr ago with the formation of the thick disk. The thick disk formed
stars for 3 Gyr and reached a maximum of (8.8 ±
1.4) M yr−1 at (9.8 ± 0.3) Gyr.
• The thick disk peak was followed by a decline in
the star formation for 1 Gyr before the thin disk
began forming stars at a roughly constant rate of
(3.5 ± 0.3) M yr−1 for the past 8 Gyr. The maximum star formation rate of the thin disk occurred
at (8.4 ± 0.3) Gyr.
• Although the star formation shape parameters
for the stellar halo are relatively poorly constrained, we find a mean age for the inner halo
of 10.9+1.3
−1.1 Gyr.

The Galactic Star Formation History
• Studying the residuals reveals variations from a
unimodal function, with an increase by as much
as 50% at (3.3 ± 1.8) Gyr and a decrease of 30%
at (5.8 ± 1.1) Gyr.
• The resulting mass of the thin disk, thick disk, and
stellar halo was found to be (3.4 ± 0.6) × 1010 M .
• The white dwarf space densities were found to be
(4.8 ± 0.4) × 10−3 pc−3 for the thin disk, (1.0
± 0.2) × 10−3 pc−3 for the thick disk, and (6.3
± 2.4) × 10−6 pc−3 for the halo. The fractional
contributions of the thin disk, thick disk, and halo
to the local white dwarf population were found to
be (83 ± 5) %, (17 ± 3) %, and (0.11 ± 0.05) %
respectively.
• We find a He-fraction of (21 ± 3) %. This is consistent with previous studies of the solar neighborhood.
Given the Gaia-imposed magnitude limit of our survey, our dataset is dominated by disk stars in the solar
neighborhood. Future deep proper motion surveys will
be needed to increase the sample of halo white dwarfs
in order to properly constrain its formation parameters.
Upcoming surveys, like Pan-STARRS1 DR2, the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope, as well as WFIRST, Euclid,
and CASTOR if they incorporate proper motions will
open a new window into the formation of our MW at its
earliest times.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the referee and all members of
the Canada-France Imaging Survey for their insightful
comments and contributions to this project.
This work was supported in part by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC). ES gratefully acknowledges funding by the
Emmy Noether program from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). NFM gratefully acknowledges support from the French National Research Agency (ANR)
funded project “Pristine” (ANR-18-CE31-0017) along

21

with funding from CNRS/INSU through the Programme
National Galaxies et Cosmologie.
This work is based on data obtained as part of the
Canada-France Imaging Survey, a CFHT large program of the National Research Council of Canada
and the French Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique. Based on observations obtained with
MegaPrime/MegaCam, a joint project of CFHT and
CEA Saclay, at the CanadaFranceHawaii Telescope
(CFHT) that is operated by the National Research
Council (NRC) of Canada, the Institut National des Science de lUnivers (INSU) of the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) of France, and the University of Hawaii. This research used the facilities of the
Canadian Astronomy Data Centre operated by the National Research Council of Canada with the support of
the Canadian Space Agency.
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys (PS1) and the PS1 public
science archive have been made possible through contributions by the Institute for Astronomy, the University
of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS Project Office, the MaxPlanck Society and its participating institutes, the Max
Planck Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching,
The Johns Hopkins University, Durham University, the
University of Edinburgh, the Queen’s University Belfast,
the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, the
Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
Incorporated, the National Central University of Taiwan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant No.
NNX08AR22G issued through the Planetary Science Division of the NASA Science Mission Directorate, the
National Science Foundation Grant No. AST-1238877,
the University of Maryland, Eotvos Lorand University
(ELTE), the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.
This work has made use of data from the European Space Agency (ESA) mission Gaia (https://www.
cosmos.esa.int/gaia), processed by the Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC, https://www.
cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dpac/consortium). Funding
for the DPAC has been provided by national institutions, in particular the institutions participating in the
Gaia Multilateral Agreement.

REFERENCES
Bedin, L. R., Salaris, M., Piotto, G., et al. 2005, ApJ, 624,
L45.

Bedin, L. R., Salaris, M., Piotto, G., et al. 2009, ApJ, 697,
965.

22

Fantin et al.

Belokurov, V., Erkal, D., Evans, N. W., et al. 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 611

Giammichele, N., Bergeron, P., & Dufour, P. 2012, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 199, 29.

Bergeron, P., Wesemael, F., Dufour, P., et al. 2011, ApJ,
737, 28.

Gilmore, G., & Reid, N. 1983, MNRAS, 202, 1025.

Bergeron, P., Dufour, P., Fontaine, G., et al. 2019, ApJ,
876, 67
Bovy, J., Rix, H.-W., & Hogg, D. W. 2012, ApJ, 751, 131.
Bovy, J., & Rix, H.-W. 2013, ApJ, 779, 115

Girardi, L., Groenewegen, M. A. T., Hatziminaoglou, E., et
al. 2005, A&A, 436, 895.
Green, G. M., Schlafly, E. F., Finkbeiner, D. P., et al. 2015,
ApJ, 810, 25.

Bovy, J. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1360

Green, G. M., Schlafly, E. F., Finkbeiner, D., et al. 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 651

Brown, T. M., Smith, E., Ferguson, H. C., et al. 2006, ApJ,
652, 323.

Hansen, B. M. S., Anderson, J., Brewer, J., et al. 2007,
ApJ, 671, 380

Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016,
ArXiv e-prints , arXiv:1612.05560.

Hansen, B. M. S., Kalirai, J. S., Anderson, J., et al. 2013,
Nature, 500, 51.

Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102

Harris, H. C., Munn, J. A., Kilic, M., et al. 2006, AJ, 131,
571

Cignoni, M., Degl’Innocenti, S., Prada Moroni, P. G., et al.
2006, A&A, 459, 783.
Côte, P., Scott, A., Balogh, M., et al. 2012, Space
Telescopes and Instrumentation 2012: Optical, Infrared,
and Millimeter Wave, 844215.

Hayden, M. R., Bovy, J., Holtzman, J. A., et al. 2015, ApJ,
808, 132.
Haywood, M., Di Matteo, P., Lehnert, M. D., et al. 2013,
A&A, 560, A109

Cummings, J. D., Kalirai, J. S., Tremblay, P.-E., et al.
2018, ApJ, 866, 21

Haywood, M., Lehnert, M. D., Di Matteo, P., et al. 2016,
A&A, 589, A66.

Di Matteo, P., Bournaud, F., Martig, M., et al. 2008, A&A,
492, 31

Haywood, M., Di Matteo, P., Lehnert, M., et al. 2018,
A&A, 618, A78.

Eggen, O. J. 1998, AJ, 115, 2397.

Haywood, M., Snaith, O. N., Lehnert, M. D., et al. 2019,
arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1903.03188.

El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., & Weisz, D. R. 2018, ApJ, 860,
L17
ESA 1997, ESA Special Publication.
Fantin, N. J., Côté, P., Hanes, D. A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 843,
53.
Farrow, D. J., Cole, S., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2014, MNRAS,
437, 748.
Ferguson, A. M. N., Johnson, R. A., Faria, D. C., et al.
2005, ApJ, 622, L109.
Flynn, C., Holmberg, J., Portinari, L., et al. 2006, MNRAS,
372, 1149.
Fontaine, G., Brassard, P., & Bergeron, P. 2001, PASP,
113, 409
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., et al. 2013,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
125, 306.
Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al.
2018, A&A, 616, A1.
Garcı́a-Berro, E., Torres, S., Althaus, L. G., et al. 2010,
Nature, 465, 194.
Genest-Beaulieu, C., & Bergeron, P. 2019, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1908.01728
Gentile Fusillo, N. P., Tremblay, P.-E., Gänsicke, B. T., et
al. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 4570
Gerhard, O. 2002, SSRv, 100, 129.

Helmi, A., Babusiaux, C., Koppelman, H. H., et al. 2018,
Nature, 563, 85.
Holberg, J. B., & Bergeron, P. 2006, AJ, 132, 1221
Hurley, J. R., Pols, O. R. & Tout, C. A. 2000, MNRAS,
315, 543.
Ibata, R. A., McConnachie, A., Cuillandre, J.-C., et al.
2017, ApJ, 848, 128.
Jennings, E., & Madigan, M. 2017, Astronomy and
Computing, 19, 16.
Johnson, D. R. H., & Soderblom, D. R. 1987, AJ, 93, 864
Jurić, M., Ivezić, Ž., Brooks, A., et al. 2008, ApJ, 673, 864.
Kalirai, J. S., Hansen, B. M. S., Kelson, D. D., et al. 2008,
ApJ, 676, 594.
Karim, M. T., & Mamajek, E. E. 2017, MNRAS, 465, 472.
Kepler, S. O., Kleinman, S. J., Nitta, A., et al. 2007,
MNRAS, 375, 1315.
Kepler, S. O., Pelisoli, I., Koester, D., et al. 2016, MNRAS,
455, 3413.
Kepler, S. O., Pelisoli, I., Koester, D., et al. 2019, MNRAS,
951.
Kilic, M., Leggett, S. K., Tremblay, P.-E., et al. 2010,
ApJS, 190, 77
Kilic, M., Brown, W. R., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2011,
ApJ, 727, 3.

The Galactic Star Formation History
Kilic, M., Munn, J. A., Harris, H. C., et al. 2017, ApJ, 837,
162.
Kilic, M., Hambly, N. C., Bergeron, P., et al. 2018,
MNRAS, 479, L113.
Kleinman, S. J., Kepler, S. O., Koester, D., et al. 2013, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 204, 5.
Koester, D., & Kepler, S. O. 2015, A&A, 583, A86
Kowalski, P. M., & Saumon, D. 2006, ApJL, 651, L137
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231.
Laureijs, R., Amiaux, J., Arduini, S., et al. 2011, arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:1110.3193.
Leggett, S. K., Ruiz, M. T., & Bergeron, P. 1998, ApJ, 497,
294.
Liebert, J., Bergeron, P., & Holberg, J. B. 2005, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 156, 47.
Limoges, M.-M., Bergeron, P., & Lépine, S. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 219, 19.
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al.
2009, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:0912.0201.
Luyten, W. J. 1922, Lick Observatory Bulletin, 336, 135.
Marjoram, P., Molitor, J., Plagnol, V., et al. 2003,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 100,
15324.
McMillan, P. J. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 2446.
Mor, R., Robin, A. C., Figueras, F., et al. 2018, A&A, 620,
A79.
Mor, R., Robin, A. C., Figueras, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 624,
L1.
Munn, J. A., Harris, H. C., von Hippel, T., et al. 2017, AJ,
153, 10.
Noh, H.-R., & Scalo, J. 1990, ApJ, 352, 605.
Norris, J., Bessell, M. S., & Pickles, A. J. 1985, ApJS, 58,
463.
Pelisoli, I., & Vos, J. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1907.03766
Peng, X., Du, C., Wu, Z., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 3165.
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al.
2018, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1807.06209.
Reid, I. N. 2005, Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 43, 247.

23

Reid, M. J., Menten, K. M., Brunthaler, A., et al. 2014,
ApJ, 783, 130.
Richer, H. B., Anderson, J., Brewer, J., et al. 2006, Science,
313, 936
Robin, A. C., Reylé, C., Derrière, S., et al. 2003, A&A, 409,
523.
Robin, A. C., Reylé, C., Fliri, J., et al. 2014, A&A, 569,
A13.
Robin, A. C., Bienaymé, O., Fernández-Trincado, J. G., et
al. 2017, A&A, 605, A1.
Rolland, B., Bergeron, P., & Fontaine, G. 2018, ApJ, 857,
56
Rowell, N., & Hambly, N. C. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 93.
Rowell, N. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 1549.
Snaith, O. N., Haywood, M., Di Matteo, P., et al. 2014,
ApJ, 781, L31.
Snaith, O., Haywood, M., Di Matteo, P., et al. 2015, A&A,
578, A87.
Sun, M., & Arras, P. 2018, ApJ, 858, 14.
Thomas, G. F., McConnachie, A. W., Ibata, R. A., et al.
2018, MNRAS, 481, 5223.
Tononi, J., Torres, S., Garcı́a-Berro, E., et al. 2019, A&A,
628, A52
Torres, S., & Garcı́a-Berro, E. 2016, A&A, 588, A35
Torres, S., Cantero, C., Rebassa-Mansergas, A., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 485, 5573
Toyouchi, D. & Chiba, M. 2018, ApJ, 855, 104.
Tremblay, P.-E., Kalirai, J. S., Soderblom, D. R., et al.
2014, ApJ, 791, 92.
van Dokkum, P. G., Leja, J., Nelson, E. J., et al. 2013,
ApJ, 771, L35.
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:1503.03757.
Toonen, S., Hollands, M., Gänsicke, B. T., et al. 2017,
A&A, 602, A16
Vergely, J.-L., Köppen, J., Egret, D., et al. 2002, A&A, 390,
917.
Winget, D. E., Hansen, C. J., Liebert, J., et al. 1987, ApJ,
315, L77.

