arXiv:1911.07208v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 17 Nov 2019

Signatures of Topological Superconductivity in
Bulk Insulating Topological Insulator
BiSbTe1.25Se1.75 in Proximity with
Superconducting NbSe2
Abhishek Banerjee1 , Ananthesh Sundaresh1 , R. Ganesan1 and P. S. Anil
Kumar1∗
1 Department

of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, India

E-mail: anil@iisc.ac.in
Abstract
The combination of superconductivity and spin-momentum locking at the interface between an s-wave superconductor and a three-dimensional topological insulator
(3D-TI) is predicted to generate exotic p-wave topological superconducting phases
that can host Majorana fermions. However, large bulk conductivities of previously
investigated 3D-TI samples and Fermi level mismatches between 3D bulk superconductors and 2D topological surface states have thwarted significant progress. Here we
employ bulk insulating topological insulators in proximity with two-dimensional superconductor NbSe2 assembled via Van der Waals epitaxy. Experimentally measured
differential conductance yields unusual features including a double-gap spectrum, an
intrinsic asymmetry that vanishes with small in-plane magnetic fields and differential
conductance ripples at biases significantly larger than the superconducting gap. We
explain our results on the basis of proximity induced superconductivity of topological

1

surface states, while also considering possibilities of topologically trivial superconductivity arising from Rashba-type surface states. Our work demonstrates the possibility
of obtaining p-wave superconductors by proximity effects on bulk insulating TIs.

Keywords: topological superconductivity, majorana fermions, proximity effect, topological
insulator, 2D superconductor, van der Waals heterostructure
Proximity effects between topological insulators and superconductors have attracted significant attention as potential sources of unconventional superconductivity. Right after the
discovery of three dimensional topological insulators 1–5 it became evident that inducing
superconductivity into two-dimensional surface states of 3D-TIs 2,6–8 could lead to p-wave
superconductivity, 9–12 where defects in the form of edges or vortices host Majorana fermion
states. In a different vein, it was also shown that inducing superconductivity into the ‘bulk’
of topological insulators could lead to 3D topological superconductors whose surfaces could
host surface Andreev bound states: essentially two dimensional analogues of linearly dispersing Majorana fermions. 13–17 Both these directions have been pursued vigorously with
encouraging results including purported demonstrations of surface Andreev bound states
in Cux Bi2 Se3 13,14 and similar materials, 18 proximity effects on 3D-TI/superconductor interfaces, 19–26 Majorana zero modes in vortex cores of Bi2 Te3 /NbSe2 27,28 heterostructure, chiral
1D Majorana modes in Nb/quantum anomalous Hall insulator heterostructures. 29 Yet, a
lot of these results remain ambiguous and can also be interpreted as consequences of more
trivial effects. Experimental platforms that can manifest clear indications of topological
superconductivity or Majorana fermions in TIs are therefore highly sought after.
One of the primary sources of such ambiguity is the large bulk conductivity in first generation topological insulators like Bi2 Se3 . Most experiments on topological proximity effects
have been performed on bulk conducting TIs, 19–28 and it is not clear whether the reported
effects have topological origin. To remove these ambiguities it is imperative to induce superconductivity into topological surface states of bulk insulating TIs, for instance of the
2

Bix Sb2−x Tey Se3−y class. Such TIs achieve almost fully surface state dominated conduction
and have sparked off a panoply of recent breakthroughs in condensed matter physics. 28,30–32
However, proximity effect between a superconductor and a bulk insulating topological insulator remains difficult to achieve. Reduced bulk carrier densities and large Fermi surface
mismatches between bulk three dimensional superconductors like Nb and intrinsically twodimensional topological surface states leads to weakly induced superconducting correlations.
The inherent lack of surface bonding sites because of the layered nature of these materials
may prevent strong chemical bonding with the superconductor, further exacerbating the
problem. This may explain recent results on Nb/BSTS interfaces where electron-electron
correlations rather than superconducting correlations appeared to dominate electrical transport. 33,34
Several things must therefore conspire for topological superconductivity to occur in bulk
insulating TIs: i) The host TI should be able to support large surface carrier density whilst
maintaining negligible bulk carrier density ii) The chemical identities of the TI and SC must
be similar to create a homogeneous interface that allows strong wave-function overlap on
either side iii) The Fermi surfaces on the SC and TI side should be well-matched to allow
momentum conserved tunneling of quasiparticles. To this end, we fabricate van der Waals
junctions between bulk-insulating topological insulator BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 (BSTS) and twodimensional s-wave superconductor NbSe2 and study their electrical transport properties.
The chemical similarity between NbSe2 and BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 , the intrinsic two-dimensional
Fermi surfaces of both materials and highly bulk insulating nature of BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 all
work in our favour. We unveil several signatures that are consistent with proximity induced
superconductivity of the topological surface states including a differential conductance spectrum featuring two superconducting gaps, an intrinsic conductance asymmetry that vanishes
when the induced superconductivity is quenched by an in-plane magnetic field and perhaps
most strikingly, ripple-like features in the differential conductance spectra at biases considerably larger than the superconducting gap that vanish when bulk superconductivity is

3

Figure 1: (a) Optical micrograph of a NbSe2 /BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 junction. Scale bar 5 µ-m.
(b) Resistance vs temperature showing surface dominated conduction (c) Magnetoresistance
measurements at different sample temperatures (d) 2D color plot showing resistance as a
function of magnetic field and temperature across the superconducting transition (d) R-vs-T
showing the superconducting transition at different magnetic fields
killed.

Results and Discussion
Device fabrication and zero bias electrical transport
BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 samples are obtained from the same crystal that has been used in our
previous works to demonstrate large surface state transport, vanishing bulk conductivity
and quantum Hall effects. 35,36 NbSe2 flakes are obtained from NbSe2 single crystals with
bulk Tc = 7.1K. Heterostructures of NbSe2 /BSTS are prepared using an all-dry van der
Waals transfer method. Subsequently, e-beam lithography followed by e-beam evaporation

4

of Cr/Au:10nm/100nm is used to define electrical contacts to the sample. Details of device
fabrication and single crystal characterization can be found in supplementary material section
A and B. Electrical transport experiments are performed using a low-frequency AC lock
in method. 10nA-20nA of AC bias currents are used throughout the experiments. For
differential conductance measurements, the DC bias is generated using a 16-bit digital-toanalog converter, and is added to the AC bias within a home-built setup. All measurements
reported here use a current biased scheme.
1(a) depicts the optical micrograph of a typical device. Of the total 5 electrical contact
lines, two contact the NbSe2 layer and one large contact pad connects with the BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 layer.
An extra pair of contact lines connect an adjoining NbSe2 layer that is electrically isolated
from the hetero-junction device, but can be used to calibrate the device temperature by
measuring its superconducting transition. A large area of overlap is maintained between the
BSTS and NbSe2 layers. Resistance versus temperature(R-T) measurement ( 1(b)) at zero
magnetic field shows characteristics of a typical bulk insulating topological insulator. For
T> 80K, R-T shows an insulating behavior originating from the gapped bulk states. The
low temperature range (5.6K < T < 80K) shows metallic transport arising from the topological surface states. For T< 5.6K we observe a sharp non-saturating increase in sample
resistance, indicating an onset of superconductivity. The rise in resistance indicates that our
samples are tuned into the so-called tunneling regime where Andreev reflection is suppressed
due to the high bulk resistivity of our samples. This is essential to our experiments, since the
tunneling regime allows an accurate measurement of the density of states at the NbSe2 /TI
interface.
Magnetoresistance measurements, depicted in 1(c), show a large zero-field resistance
peak at T=2K. With increase in magnetic field, the resistance peak is suppressed showing
negative magnetoresistance. This suppression continues till B∼3.5T after which positive
magnetoresistance arising from weak-anti-localization(WAL) of topological surface states
takes over. With increase in sample temperature, the negative MR peak gets suppressed, and

5

a positive MR dip due to WAL becomes dominant and persists till very large temperatures(T
' 30K). The suppression of the zero-field peak is clearly visible in the 2D resistance map
shown in 1(d). 1(e) shows a sequence of R-T measurements at different magnetic fields.
The zero field measurement depicts a strong resistance upturn for T≤ 5.6K. Note that
this temperature is lower than the transition temperature of bulk NbSe2 (Tc = 7.1K). At
larger magnetic fields, the resistance upturn is suppressed while the kink in R-T curves(at
T = 5.6K at B = 0T ) shifts towards lower temperatures, and becomes invisible at B' 3T .
The field scale of B= 3T roughly corresponds with the upper critical field Hc2 = 3.5T of
NbSe2 .
Differential conductance measurements
To probe the presence of proximity effects, we perform two-terminal differential conductance measurements employing a two-probe measurement scheme in a current biased
configuration as depicted in 1(a). The DC current biased differential conductance data are
converted to the DC voltage biased differential conductance data, by taking into account the
resistance of the un-proximitized BSTS layer not contacted by NbSe2 , that appears in series
with the BSTS/NbSe2 junction resistance. The large resistivity of our bulk insulating samples (3-7 kΩ/sq) makes this lead resistance an important parameter that must be accurately
estimated. Note that using a four-probe geometry cannot alleviate this problem since such
a configuration would only remove the Au-BSTS and Au-NbSe2 contact resistances (∼200500Ω) which are much smaller than the lead resistance provided by the un-proximitized
BSTS layer. We therefore resort to Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk(BTK) theory 37 using the
total lead resistance as a parameter to fit our experimental differential conductance data.
We relegate the details of BTK fitting to supplementary material section C. This produces
a lead resistance of Rl ' 4kΩ and the superconducting gap 2∆VA ' 2.4mV , which agrees
well with the superconducting gap of bulk NbSe2 , 2∆0 ' 2.2mV . The DC voltage bias
differential conductance data are obtained from the DC current biased differential conductance data (provided in supplementary material section I) by subtracting the voltage drop

6

Figure 2: (a) 2D color plot of differential conductance as a function of temperature and
source-drain DC voltage bias VSD (b) Normalized differential conductance G(2K)/G(10K)
showing a two-gap structure. The black and red dots track the evolution of coherencelike peak A1(A2) and B1(B2) respectively (c) Differential conductance ripples ∆1 and ∆2
that exist at biases larger than the superconducting gap. Black dots trace their evolution
with increasing temperature. (d) Evolution of the width and intensity of peak A1 with
increasing temperature (e) Evolution of position of the conductance dip at ∆1 with increasing
temperature.
across the contact resistance Rl , and also removing the contribution of Rl to the measured
differential conductance. We note that an error in estimation of the lead resistance Rl could
in-principle lead to an apparent shift in both the bias voltage and amplitude of various differential conductance features, resulting in possibly erroneous conclusions. However, our BTK

7

fitting procedure determines the amplitude and temperature dependence of the superconducting gap ∆0 of bulk NbSe2 with a high degree of accuracy (see supplementary material
Figure S3(k)), indicating reasonable internal self-consistency. Furthermore, the saturation
of BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 resistivity at low temperatures (T < 20K) as observed clearly in the nonsuperconducting region of the R-vs-T data depicted in 1(b) and 1(e), and in our previous
works, 35 indicates that the lead resistance does not vary significantly in the temperature
range of our interest (2K-7K), thereby minimizing the possibility of error in the estimation
of Rl . Nonetheless, since the estimation of Rl is a subtle issue, to aid the reader, we have
provided the raw differential conductance data as a function of the DC voltage bias, without
correcting for Rl in supplementary material section I.
The differential conductance data provides striking signatures of superconducting proximity effect as depicted in the 2D color plot of 2(a) where a strong zero bias conductance dip
and series of peak/dip features at finite biases are observed. To rule out non-superconducting
features,we follow the standard practice of normalizing the differential conductance data with
the spectra obtained at T = 10K just above the superconducting transition temperature of
NbSe2 , as depicted in 2(b). We draw attention to several important features in the differential conductance spectra, before discussing each of these aspects in detail.
i) First, the strong differential conductance dip at zero bias flanked by two sets of peaks
(A1, A2 and B1, B2) indicative of two superconducting gaps. Such double gap features have
been observed previously in several proximity effect studies. 23,24 While the larger gap (B1 and
B2) corresponds to electron tunneling into the unproximitised part of the superconductor
away from the TI/SC interface, the smaller gap is usually attributed to the inverse-proximity
effect wherein the region of the SC in contact with the TI has reduced superconducting
correlations. Equivalently, this gap can also be associated with electron tunneling into the
topological surface state which has now acquired a superconducting gap via the proximity
effect. With increasing sample temperature, the peak positions of A1(A2) and B1(B2)
show opposite behavior. While the gap at B1(B2) decreases, the gap at A1(A2) expands

8

as plotted in 2(d), while the intensities of both peaks reduce. In fact, for T >' 4.8K,
A1(A2) completely vanishes and appears to merge with B1(B2). This further supports the
proximity-induced origin of A1, in that it disappears well before B1 that corresponds to the
parent superconductor.
ii) Second, the dI-dV measurements show an intrinsic conductance asymmetry with respect to the sign of the DC bias voltage. The normalized conductance peak at A1 is considerably larger than its positive bias counterpart at A2. However, this asymmetry is less
evident for peaks B1 and B2. In fact, the asymmetry disappears with increasing temperature
and is roughly co-incident with the merger of peaks A1(A2) and B1(B2). For T ≥ 4.4K, the
asymmetry is completely absent.
iii) Third, we observe several differential conductance ripples comprising consecutive
dips and peaks at biases larger than the gap voltages. First, to ascertain whether these
features have a superconducting origin or not, we analyze the temperature dependencies
of the position of a pair of these dips with the strongest signature: ∆1 and its positive
bias counterpart ∆2 appearing at VSD ' ±4 − 5meV. These appear as the striking diplike features marked as white dashed lines in 2(a) and shown as ∆1 and ∆2 in 2(c).
With increasing temperature, the dip feature collapses ( 2(e)) and completely disappears at
T ' 6K indicating its superconducting origin. Such ripples have been previously reported
in superconductors showing multi-phonon effects like Pb 38 and correlated superconductors
with magnonic exictations. 39 However, since the parent superconductor NbSe2 shows no such
effects, we can rule out such explanations since superconductivity in our samples is proximity
induced. We point out that similar super-gap features were recently observed in junctions of
NbSe2 and bulk conducting Bi2 Se3 . 25 However, the authors did not focus on this effect and
provided no explanations for its origin.
Differential conductance under in-plane magnetic fields
We now explore how these features evolve upon the application of magnetic fields oriented
parallel to the plane of the sample. As depicted in 3(a), the superconducting gap persists

9

upto 8T, the largest magnetic field attainable in our system. However, an examination of
the normalized differential conductance G2K /G10K reveals that asymmetry between peaks
A1 and A2 that is observed at low magnetic fields is completely extinguished for B|| >' 5T .
In fact, notice how the entire dI-dV spectra that is highly asymmetric at B|| = 0T becomes
highly symmetric at B|| = 8T . Additionally, the super-gap ripples, indicated as ∆1 and ∆2
in 3(b)), also vanish with in-plane magnetic field and are completely suppressed at 5T as
shown in 3(d) for ∆1 . A critical value of B|| ' 5T also appears in the evolution of the zero
bias conductance(Gzb ) plotted in 3(c). With increasing magnetic field, Gzb rises sharply
until around 5T, and then almost saturates.
We interpret this evolution as arising from two different superconducting orders: the low
field differential conductance corresponds to a combination of tunneling into the proximity
induced topological surface state and the bulk superconductor NbSe2 . In general, increasing
in-plane magnetic fields causes depairing of Cooper pairs due to orbital motion, thereby
suppressing superconductivity. However, this effect is presumably stronger for the proximitized topological surface states, compared to two-dimensional NbSe2 where it is known that
Ising pairing between Cooper pairs causes superconductivity to survive at in-plane fields
much larger than that dictated by the Pauli susceptibility limit. 40 Therefore, while proximity induced superconductivity and its consequent features including differential conductance
asymmetry and super-gap ripples are suppressed completely by B|| = 5T , the superconductivity in the Ising paired NbSe2 survives and produces a symmetric differential conductance
spectrum as expected for an s-wave superconductor.
The asymmetry in dI-dV therefore appears to be associated with the proximity induced
superconducting order, rather than superconductivity of bulk NbSe2 . The asymmetric spectrum has a natural explanation as a consequence of the linear density of states of the Dirac
spectrum of topological surface states D(E) ∝ E. When a superconducting gap is induced
into the two-dimensional TSS, it retains its linear shape since the in-gap spectra must continuously match with the normal state spectra outside the gap. This is in contrast to bulk

10

Figure 3: (a) 2D color plot of normalized differential conductance G(2K)/G(10K) vs VSD as a
function of in-plane magnetic field. (b) Evolution of G(2K)/G(10K) showing the breakdown
of asymmetry with increasing in-plane magnetic field. The super-gap ripples at ∆1 and
∆2 marked as blue dots also disappear. (c) Zero bias conductance Gzb as a function of inplane magnetic field. (d) Evolution of bias position of dip at ∆1 with B|| . (e) Evolution of
normalized coherence peak intensity at A1 and A2 with B|| .
derived 2D Rashba type surface states that have finite mass and feature a constant density of
states. The coherence peaks(A1 and A2) arising from the proximitisation of the TSS therefore retain an intrinsic asymmetry that vanishes when the sample temperature or magnetic
field becomes large enough to close the TSS gap. Beyond such a temperature or magnetic
field, only symmetric features originating from NbSe2 are visible.
Differential conductance under perpendicular magnetic fields
Now we investigate differential conductance measurements in the presence of perpendicular magnetic fields as shown in 4(a). We observe that superconductivity is suppressed
11

at B ' 3.5T , detected as a change in the variation of the zero bias conductance dip with
magnetic field as seen in 4(a). (see also 1(c)). For 0 < B <' 3.5T , zero bias conductance is
enhanced, indicating destruction of superconducting order. Beyond this field, zero bias conductance gets suppressed as the sample enters into a regime where transport is dominated by
a competition between a negative correction to conductance arising from electron-electron(ee) interactions and a positive correction arising from weak-antilocalization (WAL). The WAL
effect is verified independently using magnetoresistance measurements presented in 1(c) and
(d). In topological insulators, these two corrections almost cancel each other out in zero magnetic field. In a finite magnetic field, the positive correction due to WAL is suppressed due to
broken time-reversal symmetry, thereby unmasking the negative conductance correction from
e-e interactions. The applied voltage bias acts like an effective temperature that weakens the
negative correction from e-e interactions, thereby leading to positive differential-conductance
as seen in 4(a) for B > 3.5T . With increasing magnetic field, the zero bias conductance
decreases as corrections from e-e interactions become more and more dominant. This distinction between superconductivity induced and e-e interaction induced differential conductance
spectra is notable, particularly because previous experiments on superconducting proximity
effects on bulk insulating TIs have been mired by strong differential conductance signals
arising from e-e interactions rather than superconducting correlations. 33,34
We now discuss the low-field measurements presented in 4(b). Specifically, we notice
several differential conductance ripples above the superconducting gap that persist and even
appear to get enhanced with small magnetic fields B < 0.2T . For larger fields, the ripples
become non-uniform and completely disappear before reaching B ' 2T . As we discussed
before, these ripples cannot be explained as a consequence of multi-photon effects or strong
correlations, none of which have been observed in extensive studies of NbSe2 . Extensive
experiments on the BSTS material class have also never revealed any signatures of magnetic
ordering or correlations. A more reasonable explanation could be offered by considering
the effects of low critical currents, as observed previously in point-contact spectroscopic

12

measurements. 41 It is possible that superconductivity induced into the topological surface
states is rather weak, with critical currents as small as Ic ' 1 − 3µA. Such a scenario
would lead to a differential conductance dip when the current through the device exceeded
the critical current, likely at a bias larger than the superconducting gap. However, this
cannot explain the observation of multiple dips in our data. Additionally, such small critical
currents are not consistent with disproportionately large magnetic fields(B ' 2T ) until which
the ripples survive.
An interesting explanation for this effect is obtained by considering multi-band Cooper
pairing between different states residing on the TI surface. As shown schematically in 4(c),
the topological surface states of a TI are usually accompanied by several closely spaced
bands. Such bands may arise due to defect induced resonances, 42 bulk 2D sub-bands coexisting with the surface states at the chemical potential or band-bending induced spatial
confinement of bulk states. 35,43 In the presence of induced superconducting order, multiple
gaps may open up at finite energies away from the superconducting gap due to electron-hole
mixing between the topological surface state and additional surface bands . To illustrate this
effect we first evaluate the spectrum of Bogoliubov quasiparticles in a thin TI slab consisting
of the topological surface state and a finite number of two-dimensional bulk bands, with the
four possible types of superconducting order ∆1,2,3,4 allowed by symmetry (see supplementary
material section E).
To aid clarity we first choose theoretically convenient parameters, before describing a realistic simulation of a BSTS/NbSe2 junction. In 4(d), we depict the spectral function A(E, k)
for an odd-parity ∆2 type superconducting order, showing the Majorana fermion butterfly
spectrum at zero energy. 16,44 These in-gap states are the so-called surface Andreev bound
states and essentially represent two-dimensional analogs of Majorana fermions. 15–17,44,45 Accompanying this, we observe several finite-energy gaps corresponding to crossings of the
topological surface states with the 2D bulk bands. The corresponding density of states
is plotted in 4(e) and shows several dips (marked by solid vertical lines) beyond the su-

13

Figure 4: (a) 2D color plot of differential conductance as a function of out-of-plane magnetic
field from 0T to 8T. (b) Low field(0T-2T) evolution of differential conductance spectrum
showing several ripples at super-gap biases marked by vertical solid lines (c) (Upper panel)
E-k band diagram of two surface confined states(SS1 and SS2) closely spaced in energy (Lower
panel) Electron-hole excitation spectrum(no superconducting gap) showing band-crossings
at the Fermi level and also at higher energies, indicative of interband Cooper pairing. (d)
Spectral function evaluated for a multi-band topological superconductivity in a thin slab
of a TI (e) Corresponding density of states showing mini-gaps at biases larger than the
superconducting gap.
perconducting gap (∆ ' 0.1eV). Most spectacularly, it can be shown that the finite bias
gaps appear only for those superconducting order symmetries that also lead to a Majorana
fermion mode at zero energy. This can be understood intuitively as a redistribution of spectral weight: level repulsion at higher energies pushes states into the gap, leading to the
zero energy Majorana modes. Therefore, Majorana zero modes in such systems are always
14

accompanied by mini-gaps at biases much larger than the primary superconducting gap.
Additionally, the superconducting origin of the peak-dip features associated with these finite
energy ripples may be gauged by evaluating their dependence on sample temperature. With
increasing sample temperature, not only is the depth of the peak-dip structure reduced due
to a reduction of the mini-gap amplitude, but also the voltage bias positions associated with
these features are drawn closer to zero energy. This happens because the 2D-sub band levels
which were originally pushed away to larger energies by level repulsion due to the primary
superconducting gap, are now drawn closer towards zero energy as the primary gap collapses.
This is demonstrated by detailed simulations of the peak-dip structure of the ripples with
decreasing values of superconducting gap amplitude provided in supplementary material section F. This effect is exactly what is observed experimentally in 2(c) and 2(e) where the
dip feature ∆1 moves towards zero energy by ' 1meV, which matches very well with the
primary superconducting gap amplitude ∆0 ' 1.1meV due to NbSe2 .
Further, as shown in 4(e), at zero energy the density of states shows a large superconducting gap, and a small dip exactly at zero bias. This is despite the presence of a 2D
Majorana mode and arises from the vanishing density of states of the linear spectrum of
Majorana modes at zero energy. 45 This is of course contrary to the general belief that a
Majorana mode must always lead to a conductance peak at zero bias. This is true only
in one dimension; in higher dimensions the zero mode generically leads to a conductance
dip and is therefore difficult to separate from conductance dips arising from non-topological
effects. 44,45 In such a scenario, the detection of superconducting conductance dips at large
biases may offer an alternate test for topological superconductivity.
We now perform a realistic simulation of a hetero-junction between NbSe2 and BSTS
and evaluate the spectrum of surface superconducting states. The work function of NbSe2
is φSC '5.6-5.9eV 46,47 whereas that for BSTS is φT I '5.0-5.1eV. 48 The large work-function
mismatch φSC − φT I '0.5-0.9eV between the two materials leads to p-type doping of BSTS
and forces the chemical potential of the BSTS layer to get pinned at the valence band

15

Figure 5: (a) Surface spectral function evaluated for a realistic interface between NbSe2 and
a 50 QL thick slab of BSTS. The red box depicts the 2D Majorana type surface Andreev
bound state. The white boxes depict the avoided crossings between the topological surface
state and bulk derived 2D sub-bands (e) Corresponding density of states showing oscillations
arising as a consequence of topological superconductivity.
maxima. To perform a realistic band-structure calculation for BSTS, we tune the model
parameters to fit the experimentally measured angle resolved photoemission spectrum of
BSTS obtained from our previous work (see supplementary material section H). In 5(a), we
depict the surface spectral function of a Nz =50 QL thick BSTS slab with an induced superconducting gap ∆ = 2.0meV . At zero energy, the butterfly spectrum arising from 2D surface
Majorana fermions is clearly observed (red box in 5(a)). Simultaneously, the avoided crossing between the topological surface state band and the bulk derived 2D sub-bands (marked
using white boxes in 5(a)) give rise to oscillations in the corresponding density of states
as shown in 5(b) at biases that are significantly larger than the induced superconducting
gap. The ripples observed in our calculations are separated by '2-3meV in energy, exactly
as observed in our experimentally measured differential conductance spectrum. Similar calculations are performed for BSTS slabs with thicknesses of Nz =20 QL and Nz =35 QL to
obtain qualitatively similar results, but with larger energy scales separating the super-gap
dI-dV ripples (see supplementary material section H). Qualitatively, the energy separation

16

of the ripples can be estimated from the energy spacing between bulk-derived 2D sub-bands.
In our experiments, the bulk bands originate from J = 1/2 Se(Te) p-type atomic orbitals,
which form the valence band of our system with an experimentally measured band-width
of ∆V B ' 200 meV 49 (see supplementary material section G). This results in a sub-band
spacing ∆SB = ∆V B /Nz ' 4meV for a 50 QL layer slab. This simple estimation is in close
agreement with the energy scale of 2-3meV derived from the Green’s function based density
of states calculations. The appearance of differential conductance ripples at large biases in
our experiments is therefore consistent with topological superconductivity in our samples.
Similar ripples observed in a recent experiment on Bi2 Se3 /NbSe2 25 junctions may also share
a similar origin.
While the appearance of super-gap ripples in the dI-dV spectrum strongly indicates the
onset of topological superconductivity, the lack of a simple analytical expression to derive
the positions of the ripples makes a direct comparison with experiments difficult. To enable
such a comparison, band-structure calculations to identify the locations of the topological
bands with respect to the trivial sub-bands will be required. Nonetheless, the mixing of the
topological surface states with bulk-derived bands is always accompanied by the appearance
of a 2D Majorana mode at zero energy making this a rather generic feature of topological
superconductivity. Combined with its rather striking experimental signature, namely, the
appearance of superconducting ripples at biases much larger than the superconducting gap
voltage, this method will serve as a litmus test for topological superconductivity for future
researchers.

Conclusions
In all, we have provided three distinct arguments in favour of an observation of topological
superconductivity in our samples: i) The appearance of a two-gap spectrum, the larger gap
associated with NbSe2 and the smaller arising from a proximity induced gap of the topologi-

17

cal surface states ii) An intrinsic asymmetry in the conductance spectrum that arises due to
the linear density of states of the topological surface state dispersion, and vanishes at temperatures and magnetic fields that destroy the proximity effect. iii) Differential conductance
rippples at biases larger than the superconducting gap voltage, that are explained as a consequence of multi-band electron-hole mixing when topologically non-trivial superconducting
order is induced. We propose that such features in differential conductance spectra can
provide unambiguous tests for topological superconductivity. Our work therefore establishes
the possibility of inducing superconductivity into the topological surface states of a bulk
insulating topological insulator. This work demonstrates the possibility of realizing p-wave
superconductivity at topological insulator/superconductor interfaces as originally envisaged
by Fu and Kane. 6

Methods
BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 single crystals are prepared using the modified Bridgman method. NbSe2 single
crystals are prepared using the chemical vapour transport method. Thin flakes of BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 and
NbSe2 are exfoliated using the scotch-tape method. Heterostructures of NbSe2 /BSTS are prepared using the all-dry van der Waals transfer technique. E-beam lithography followed by
e-beam evaporation of Cr/Au:10nm/100nm is used to define electrical contacts to the sample. Further details of device fabrication and single crystal characterization can be found
in supplementary material section A and B. Electrical transport experiments are performed
using a low-frequency AC lock in method. 10nA-20nA of AC bias currents are used throughout the experiments. For differential conductance measurements, the DC bias is generated
using a 16-bit digital-to-analog converter, and is added to the AC bias within a home-built
adder setup. All measurements reported here use a current biased scheme.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Diptiman Sen and Jainendra K. Jain for helpful and insightful discus-

18

sions. A.B. thanks MHRD, Govt. of India for support. A.S. thanks KVPY, Govt. of India
for support. P.S.A.K. thanks Nanomission, Department of Science and Technology, Govt.
of India for support. The authors thank NNFC and MNCF, Centre for Nano Science and
Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science Bangalore for fabrication and characterization
facilities.
Supporting Information Available
Supporting information contains details of sample fabrication and characterization, BlonderTinkham-Klapwijk fitting of differential conductance data, theoretical modeling of topological insulator/superconductor interfaces, and raw differential conductance data. This material
is available online at http://pubs.acs.org.

References
1. Hasan, M. Z.; Kane, C. L. Colloquium: Topological Insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010,
82, 3045.
2. Qi, X.-L.; Zhang, S.-C. Topological Insulators and Superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys.
2011, 83, 1057.
3. Chen, Y.; Analytis, J.; Chu, J.-H.; Liu, Z.; Mo, S.-K.; Qi, X.-L.; Zhang, H.; Lu, D.;
Dai, X.; Fang, Z.; Zhang, S. C.; Fisher, I.R.; Hussain, Z.; Shen, Z.-X. Experimental
Realization of a Three-Dimensional Topological Insulator, Bi2 Te3 . Science 2009, 325,
178.
4. Xia, Y.; Qian, D.; Hsieh, D.; Wray, L.; Pal, A.; Lin, H.; Bansil, A.; Grauer, D.; Hor, Y. S.;
Cava, R. J.; Hasan, M.Z. Observation of a Large Gap Topological Insulator Class With
a Single Dirac Cone on the Surface. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 398.
5. Hsieh, D.; Xia, Y.; Qian, D.; Wray, L.; Dil, J. H.; Meier, F.; Osterwalder, J.; Patthey, L.;
Checkelsky, J. G.; Ong, N. P.; Fedorov, A. V.; Lin, H.; Bansil, A.; Grauer, D.; Hor, Y. S.;
19

Cava, R.J.; Hasan, M. Z. A Tunable Topological Insulator in the Spin Helical Dirac
Transport Regime. Nature 2009, 460, 1101.
6. Fu, L.; Kane, C. L. Superconducting Proximity Effect and Majorana Fermions at the
Surface of a Topological Insulator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 096407.
7. Fu, L.; Kane, C. L. Probing Neutral Majorana Fermion Edge Modes with Charge Transport. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 216403.
8. Potter, A. C.; Fu, L. Anomalous Supercurrent from Majorana States in Topological
Insulator Josephson Junctions. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 88, 121109.
9. Volovik, G. Fermion Zero Modes on Vortices in Chiral Superconductors. J. Exp. Theor.
Phys 1999, 70, 609–614.
10. Senthil, T.; Fisher, M. P. Quasiparticle Localization in Superconductors with Spin-Orbit
Scattering. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61, 9690.
11. Read, N.; Green, D. Paired States of Fermions in Two Dimensions with Breaking of
Parity and Time-Reversal Symmetries and the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect. Phys.
Rev. B 2000, 61, 10267–10297.
12. Kitaev, A. Y. Unpaired Majorana Fermions in Quantum Wires. Physics-Uspekhi 2001,
44, 131.
13. Hor, Y. S.; Williams, A. J.; Checkelsky, J. G.; Roushan, P.; Seo, J.; Xu, Q.; Zandbergen, H. W.; Yazdani, A.; Ong, N. P.; Cava, R. J. Superconductivity in Cux Bi2 Se3 and its
Implications for Pairing in the Undoped Topological Insulator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010,
104, 057001.
14. Sasaki, S.; Kriener, M.; Segawa, K.; Yada, K.; Tanaka, Y.; Sato, M.; Ando, Y. Topological Superconductivity in Cux Bi2 Se3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 217001.

20

15. Fu, L.; Berg, E. Odd-Parity Topological Superconductors: Theory and Application to
Cux Bi2 Se3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 097001.
16. Hao, L.; Lee, T. Surface Spectral Function in the Superconducting State of a Topological
Insulator. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 83, 134516.
17. Nakosai, S.; Tanaka, Y.; Nagaosa, N. Topological Superconductivity in Bilayer Rashba
System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 147003.
18. Sasaki, S.; Ren, Z.; Taskin, A.; Segawa, K.; Fu, L.; Ando, Y. Odd-Parity Pairing and
Topological Superconductivity in a Strongly Spin-Orbit Coupled Semiconductor. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 217004.
19. Zhang, D.; Wang, J.; DaSilva, A. M.; Lee, J. S.; Gutierrez, H. R.; Chan, M. H. W.;
Jain, J.; Samarth, N. Superconducting Proximity Effect and Possible Evidence for Pearl
Vortices in a Candidate Topological Insulator. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 165120.
20. Williams, J. R.; Bestwick, A. J.; Gallagher, P.; Hong, S. S.; Cui, Y.; Bleich, A. S.;
Analytis, J. G.; Fisher, I. R.; Goldhaber-Gordon, D. Unconventional Josephson Effect
in Hybrid Superconductor-Topological Insulator Devices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109,
056803.
21. Veldhorst, M.; Snelder, M.; Hoek, M.; Gang, T.; Guduru, V.; Wang, X.; Zeitler, U.;
van der Wiel, W. G.; Golubov, A.; Hilgenkamp, H.; Brinkman, A. Josephson Supercurrent through a Topological Insulator Surface State. Nat. Mater. 2012, 11, 417.
22. Liu, H.-C.; He, H.-T.; Li, B.-K.; Liu, S.-G.; Lin He, Q.; Wang, G.; Sou, I.-K.; Wang, J.
Interface effect in Nb-Bi2 Te3 Hybrid Structure. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 152601.
23. Zareapour, P.; Hayat, A.; Zhao, S. Y. F.; Kreshchuk, M.; Jain, A.; Kwok, D. C.; Lee, N.;
Cheong, S.-W.; Xu, Z.; Yang, A.; Gu, G. D.; Jia, S.; Cava, R. J.; Burch, K. S. Proximity-

21

Induced High-Temperature Superconductivity in the Topological Insulators Bi2 Se3 and
Bi2 Te3 . Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 1056.
24. Yang, F.; Ding, Y.; Qu, F.; Shen, J.; Chen, J.; Wei, Z.; Ji, Z.; Liu, G.; Fan, J.; Yang, C.;
Xiang, T.; Lu, L. Proximity Effect at Superconducting Sn-Bi2 Se3 Interface. Phys. Rev.
B 2012, 85, 104508.
25. Li, H.; Zhou, T.; He, J.; Wang, H.-W.; Zhang, H.; Liu, H.-C.; Yi, Y.; Wu, C.; Law, K. T.;
He, H.; Wang, J. Origin of Bias-Independent Conductance Plateaus and Zero-Bias Conductance Peaks in Bi2 Se3 /NbSe2 Hybrid Structures. Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 075107.
26. Dai, W.; Richardella, A.; Du, R.; Zhao, W.; Liu, X.; Liu, C.; Huang, S.-H.; Sankar, R.;
Chou, F.; Samarth, N.; Li, Q. Proximity-Effect-Induced Superconducting Gap in
Topological Surface States–A Point Contact Spectroscopy Study of NbSe2 /Bi2 Se3
Superconductor-Topological Insulator Heterostructures. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 7631.
27. Xu, J.-P.; Wang, M.-X.; Liu, Z. L.; Ge, J.-F.; Yang, X.; Liu, C.; Xu, Z. A.; Guan, D.;
Gao, C. L.; Qian, D.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Q.H.; Zhang, F.C.; Xue, Q.K.; Jia, J.F. Experimental Detection of a Majorana Mode in the Core of a Magnetic Vortex inside a Topological
Insulator-Superconductor Bi2 Te3 /NbSe2 Heterostructure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114,
017001.
28. Sun, H.-H.; Zhang, K.-W.; Hu, L.-H.; Li, C.; Wang, G.-Y.; Ma, H.-Y.; Xu, Z.-A.; Gao, C.L.; Guan, D.-D.; Li, Y.-Y.; Liu, C.; Qian, D.; Zhou, Y.; Fu, L.; Li, S.C. ; Zhang, F.C.;
Jia, J.F. Majorana Zero Mode Detected with Spin Selective Andreev Reflection in the
Vortex of a Topological Superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 257003.
29. He, Q. L.; Pan, L.; Stern, A. L.; Burks, E. C.; Che, X.; Yin, G.; Wang, J.; Lian, B.;
Zhou, Q.; Choi, E. S.; Murata, K.; Kou, X.; Chen, Z.; Nie, T.; Shao, Q.; Fan, Y.;
Zhang, S.C.; Liu, K.; Xia, J.; Wang, K. L. Chiral Majorana Fermion Modes in a Quantum
Anomalous Hall Insulator–Superconductor Structure. Science 2017, 357, 294–299.
22

30. Chang, C.-Z.; Zhang, J.; Feng, X.; Shen, J.; Zhang, Z.; Guo, M.; Li, K.; Ou, Y.; Wei, P.;
Wang, L.-L.; Ji, Z.Q.; Feng, Y.; Ji, S.; Chen, X.; Jia, J.; Dai, X.; Fang, Z.; Zhang, S.
C.; He, K.; Wang, Y.; et al. Experimental Observation of the Quantum Anomalous Hall
Effect in a Magnetic Topological Insulator. Science 2013, 340, 167–170.
31. Mogi, M.; Kawamura, M.; Yoshimi, R.; Tsukazaki, A.; Kozuka, Y.; Shirakawa, N.; Takahashi, K.; Kawasaki, M.; Tokura, Y. A Magnetic Heterostructure of Topological Insulators as a Candidate for an Axion Insulator. Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 516–521.
32. Xu, Y.; Miotkowski, I.; Chen, Y. P. Quantum Transport of Two Species Dirac Fermions
in Dual-gated Three-dimensional Topological Insulators. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11434.
33. Stehno, M. P.; Hendrickx, N. W.; Snelder, M.; Scholten, T.; Huang, Y.; Golden, M. S.;
Brinkman, A. Conduction Spectroscopy of a Proximity Induced Superconducting Topological Insulator. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2017, 32, 094001.
34. Tikhonov, E.; Shovkun, D.; Snelder, M.; Stehno, M.; Huang, Y.; Golden, M.; Golubov, A. A.; Brinkman, A.; Khrapai, V. Andreev Reflection in an s-Type Superconductor
Proximized 3D Topological Insulator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 147001.
35. Banerjee, A.; Sundaresh, A.; Majhi, K.; Ganesan, R.; Anil Kumar, P.S. Accessing Rashba
States in Electrostatically Gated Topological Insulator Devices. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016,
109, 232408.
36. Banerjee, A.; Sundaresh, A.; Biswas, S.; Ganesan, R.; Sen, D.; Anil Kumar, P. S.
Quantized Transport in Topological Insulator npn Junctions. arXiv preprint 2018,
arXiv:1803.11367
37. Blonder, G.; Tinkham, M.; Klapwijk, T. Transition from Metallic to Tunneling Regimes
in Superconducting Microconstrictions: Excess Current, Charge Imbalance, and Supercurrent Conversion. Phys. Rev. B 1982, 25, 4515.

23

38. Rowell, J.; Chynoweth, A.; Phillips, J. Multiphonon Effects in Tunnelling Between Metals and Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1962, 9, 59.
39. Jourdan, M.; Huth, M.; Adrian, H. Superconductivity Mediated by Spin Fluctuations
in the Heavy-Fermion Compound UPd2 Al3 . Nature 1999, 398, 47.
40. Xi, X.; Wang, Z.; Zhao, W.; Park, J.-H.; Law, K. T.; Berger, H.; Forró, L.; Shan, J.;
Mak, K. F. Ising Pairing in Superconducting NbSe2 Atomic Layers. Nat. Phys. 2016,
12, 139.
41. Sheet, G.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Raychaudhuri, P. Role of Critical Current on the PointContact Andreev Reflection Spectra between a Normal Metal and a Superconductor.
Phys. Rev. B 2004, 69, 134507.
42. Xu, Y.; Chiu, J.; Miao, L.; He, H.; Alpichshev, Z.; Kapitulnik, A.; Biswas, R. R.;
Wray, L. A. Disorder Enabled Band Structure Engineering of a Topological Insulator
Surface. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 14081.
43. Lee, J.; Park, J.; Lee, J.-H.; Kim, J. S.; Lee, H.-J. Gate-tuned Differentiation of SurfaceConducting States in Bi1.5 Sb0.5 Te1.7 Se1.3 Topological-Insulator Thin Crystals. Phys. Rev.
B 2012, 86, 245321.
44. Hsieh, T. H.; Fu, L. Majorana Fermions and Exotic Surface Andreev Bound States in
Topological Superconductors: Application to Cux Bi2 Se3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108,
107005.
45. Sato, M.; Ando, Y. Topological Superconductors: A Review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2017, 80,
076501.
46. Liu, Y.; Stradins, P.; Wei, S.-H. Van der Waals Metal-Semiconductor Junction: Weak
Fermi Level Pinning Enables Effective Tuning of Schottky Barrier. Sci. Adv. 2016, 2,
e1600069.
24

47. Shimada, T.; Ohuchi, F. S.; Parkinson, B. A. Work Function and Photothreshold of
Layered Metal Dichalcogenides. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 1994, 33, 2696–2698.
48. Takane, D.; Souma, S.; Sato, T.; Takahashi, T.; Segawa, K.; Ando, Y. Work Function of
Bulk-Insulating Topological Insulator Bi2−x Sbx Te3−y Sey . Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 109,
091601.
49. Lohani, H.; Mishra, P.; Banerjee, A.; Majhi, K.; Ganesan, R.; Manju, U.; Topwal, D.;
Anil Kumar, P. S.; Sekhar, B. Band Structure of Topological Insulator BiSbTe1.25 Se1.75 .
Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 4567.

25

