Estimation of entropy measures for categorical variables with
spatial correlation
Linda Altieri, Daniela Cocchi, Giulia Roli

arXiv:1911.03685v1 [math.ST] 9 Nov 2019

Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Bologna, via Belle Arti, 41, 40126, Bologna, Italy.

Abstract: Entropy is a measure of heterogeneity widely used in applied sciences, often when data are collected over space. Recently, a number of approaches has been
proposed to include spatial information in entropy. The aim of entropy is to synthesize the observed data in a single, interpretable number. In other studies the objective
is, instead, to use data for entropy estimation; several proposals can be found in the
literature, which basically are corrections of the estimator based on substituting the
involved probabilities with proportions. In this case, independence is assumed and
spatial correlation is not considered. We propose a path for spatial entropy estimation: instead of correcting the global entropy estimator, we focus on improving the
estimation of its components, i.e. the probabilities, in order to account for spatial effects. Once probabilities are suitably evaluated, estimating entropy is straightforward
since it is a deterministic function of the distribution. Following a Bayesian approach,
we derive the posterior probabilities of a multinomial distribution for categorical variables, accounting for spatial correlation. A posterior distribution for entropy can be
obtained, which may be synthesized as wished and displayed as an entropy surface for
the area under study.
Keywords: entropy estimation, spatial entropy, categorical variables, correlated variables, spatial models

1

Introduction

Shannon’s entropy is a successful measure in many fields, as it is able to synthesize several concepts in a single number: entropy, information heterogeneity, surprise, contagion. The entropy of
a categorical variable X with I < ∞ outcomes is
I
X

!

1
,
H(X) =
log(p(xi )) log
p(xi )
i=1

(1)

where p(xi ) is the probability associated to the i-th outcome (Cover and Thomas, 2006). The flexibility of such index and its ability to describe any kind of data, including categorical variables,
motivates its diffusion across applied fields such as geography, ecology, biology and ladscape
studies. Often, such disciplines deal with spatial data, and the inclusion of spatial information in
1

entropy measures has been the target of intensive research (see, e.g., Batty, 1976, Leibovici, 2009,
Leibovici et al., 2014). In several case studies, the interest lies in describing and synthesizing what
is observed. This is usually not a simple task: large amounts of data require advanced computational tools, qualitative variables have limited possibilities, and, when data are georeferenced,
spatial correlation should be accounted for. When it comes to measuring the entropy of spatial
data, we suggest an approach proposed in Altieri et al. (2018), which allows to decompose entropy into a term quantifying the spatial information, and a second term quantifying the residual
heterogeneity.
In other cases, though, the aim lies in estimating the entropy of a phenomenon, i.e. in making inference rather than description. Under this perspective, a stochastic process is assumed to
generate the data according to an unknown probability function and an unknown entropy. One
realization of the process is observed and employed to estimate such entropy. The standard approach relies on the so-called ’plug-in’ estimator, presented in Paninski (2003), which substitutes
probabilities with observed relative frequencies in the computation of entropy:
I
X

!

1
b i )) log
,
log(p(x
p (X) =
b i)
p(x
i=1

c
H

(2)

b i ) = ni /n is the relative amount of observations of category i over n data. It is the nonwhere p(x
parametric as well as the maximum likelihood estimator (Paninski, 2003), and performs well when
I < ∞ is known (Antos and Kontoyiannis, 2001). For unknown or infinite I, (2) is known to be
biased; the most popular proposals at this regard consist of corrections of the plug-in estimator:
see, for example, the Miller-Madow (Miller, 1955) and the jack-knifed corrections (Efron and
Stein, 1981). Recently, Zhang (2012) proposed a non-parametric solution with faster decaying
bias and upper limit for the variance when I = ∞. Under a Bayesian framework, the most widely
known proposal is the NSB estimator (Nemenman et al., 2002), improved by Archer et al. (2014) as
regards the prior distribution. In all the above mentioned works, independence among realizations
is assumed. Other approaches, linked to machine learning methods, directly estimate entropy
relying on the availability of huge amounts of data (Hausser and Strimmer, 2009).
Two main limits concern entropy estimation. Firstly, the above mentioned proposals referring
to (2) focus on correcting or improving the performance of (2), while different perspectives might
be considered. Secondly, no study is available about estimating entropy for variables presenting
spatial association: the assumption of independence is never relaxed, while spatial entropy studies
do not consider inference.
In this paper, we take a different perspective to entropy estimation, which moves the focus
from the index itself to its components. As can be seen from (1), entropy is a deterministic function of the probability mass function (pmf) of the variable of interest. Therefore, once the pmf is
properly estimated, the subsequent steps are straightforward. In the case of categorical variables
following, e.g., a multinomial distribution, the crucial point is to estimate the distribution parameters. A Bayesian approach allows to derive the pmf of such distribution, and can be extended to
account for spatial correlation among categories. After obtaining a posterior distribution for the
parameters, the posterior distribution of entropy is also available as a transformation. Thus, a point

2

estimator of entropy can be, e.g., the mean of the posterior distribution of the transformation; credibility intervals and other syntheses may be obtained via the standard tools of Bayesian inference.
This approach can be used for non-spatial settings as well; in the spatial context, coherently with
standard procedures for variables linked to areal and point data, the estimation output is a smooth
spatial surface for the entropy over the area under study.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the methodology for Bayesian spatial
regression and shows how to obtain the posterior distribution and the Bayesian estimator of entropy.
Then, Section 3 assesses the performance of the proposed method on simulated data for different
spatial configurations. Lastly, Section 4 discusses the main results.

2

Bayesian spatial entropy estimation

For simplicity of presentation, we focus on the binary case. Let X be a binary variable with
x1 = 1 and x2 = 2; consider a series of n realizations indexed by u = 1, . . . , n, each carrying an
outcome xu ∈ {1, 2}. This may be thought of as a n-variate variable, or alternatively as a sequence
of variables X1 , . . . Xn , which are independent, given the distribution parameters and any effects
modelling them. For a generic Xu , the simplest model is:
Xu ∼ Ber(pu )
0

logit(pu ) = zu β

(3)

(4)

in absence of random effects, where zu are the covariates associated to the u-th unit.
To the aim of including spatial correlation, consider n realizations from a binary variable over
the two-dimensional space, where u = (x, y) identifies a unit via its spatial coordinates. Let us
consider the case of realizations over a regular lattice of size n = n1 × n2 , where u identifies each
cell centroid. The sequence X1 , . . . , Xn is now no longer independent, but spatially correlated. In
order to define the extent of the correlation for grid data, the notion of neighbourhood must be
introduced, linked to the assumption that occurrences at certain locations are influenced by what
happens at surrounding locations, i.e. their neighbours. The simplest way of representing a neighbourhood system is via an adjacency matrix: for n spatial units, A = {auu0 }u,u0 =1,...,n is a square
n × n matrix such that auu0 = 1 when unit u and unit u0 are neighbours, and auu0 = 0 otherwise;
in other words, auu0 = 1 if u0 ∈ N (u), the neighbourhood of area u, and diagonal elements are all
zero by default. In the remainder of the paper, the word ’adjacent’ is used accordingly to mean
’neighbouring’, even when this does not correspond to a topological contact. The most common
neighbourhood systems for grid data are the ’4 nearest neighbours’, i.e. a neighbourhood formed
by the 4 pixels sharing a border along the cardinal directions, and the ’12 nearest neighbours’, i.e.
two consequent pixels along each cardinal direction plus the four ones along the diagonals.
Auto-models provide a way of including spatial correlation: they construct a statistical model
that explains a response via the response values of its neighbours. It is thus developed by combining logistic regression model with autocorrelation effects. They were initially developed for

3

the analysis of plant competition experiments and then extended to spatial data in general. BESAG (1974) proposed to model spatial dependence among random variables directly (rather than
hierarchically) and conditionally (rather than jointly). The autologistic model for spatial data with
binary responses emphasises that the explanatory variables are the surrounding array variables
themselves; a joint Markov random field is imposed for the binary data. A recent variant of this
model, substituting Equation (4) with (5), is proposed by CARAGEA and Kaiser (2009):
logit(pu ) = z(u)0 β +

X

ηi (Xi − µi )

(5)

i∈N (u)

where η parametrizes dependence on the neighbourhood and, in the simplest case, z(u)0 β = β0
only includes an intercept. Parameter µi = exp(z(u)0 β)/(1 + exp(z(u)0 β)) represents the expected
probability of success in the situation of spatial independence.
An analogous and even more recent formulation of the model [REFERENCE], in absence of
covariate information, is
logit(pu ) = β0 + φu
φ ∼ M V Nn (0, Σ)

(6)

−1

Σ = [τ (D − ρA)]

where φ = (φ1 , . . . , φn )0 is a spatial effect with a structured covariance matrix Σ, which depends
on a precision parameter τ and a dependence parameter ρ ∈ [−1, 1] quantifying the strength and
type of the correlation between neighbouring units. A is the adjacency matrix reflecting the neighbourhood structure, and D is a diagonal matrix, where each element contains the row sums of
A.

2.1

Entropy estimation

The estimation of the parameters for Bayesian spatial logit regression models may proceed via
MCMC methods or the INLA approach. We exploit the latter (Rue et al., 2009) and obtain a
posterior distribution for the parameters of the probability of success for each grid cell. A synthesis,
such as the posterior mean, is chosen in order to obtain an estimate for pu over each cell. Such
estimate is used for the computation of a local estimated entropy value for each pixel:
!

!

1
1
c
+ (1 − p̂u ) log
.
H(X)
u = p̂u log
p̂u
1 − p̂u

(7)

This way, an entropy surface is obtained for estimating the process entropy, whose smoothness
may be tuned by the neighbourhood choice, or by the introduction of splines for the spatial effect.
Any other surface can be obtained following the same approach for different aims, e.g. for plotting
the entropy standard error or the desired credibility interval extremes.

4

0

0

1

2

2

4

3

4

6

5

8

Figure 1: Clustered scenario (left) and random scenario (right) - example with β0 = 0.32.

−0.5

0.0

0.5

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Figure 2: Posterior distributions for the model parameters, true values (vertical line) and 95%
credibility intervals (dashed vertical lines).

3

Simulation study

To the aim of assessing the performance of the proposed entropy estimator, we generate binary
data on a 40 × 40 grid under two spatial configurations: clustered and random. Figure 1 shows an
example of the generated datasets. The underlying model is model (6), with a 12 nearest neighbour
structure for A, τ = 0.1 and ρ = {0.99, 0.0001} for the two scenarios, respectively. For each
scenario, 200 datasets are generated with varying values for β0 so that the expectation of pu in a
situation of independence varies between 0.1 and 0.9; values for β0 differ across replicates but are
constant across scenarios, so that the proportion of pixels of each type is comparable.
Results show that fitting the model over the generated data leads to good estimates for the
pu s. For all scenarios, the estimated parameters are very close to the true ones, which are always
included within the 95% credibility intervals. An example is shown in Figure 2. The proposed
approach is able to produce good estimates for the probabilities of success, ensuring the goodness
of the estimates for spatial entropy, which is a function of such probabilities.
Obtaining the entropy surface proceeds as follows. First, the posterior distribution for each pu
is synthesized with the posterior mean. This way, for each scenario and replicate we obtain a single
number for p̂u on every cell. Then, an entropy value is computed over each cell following Equation
5

0.6
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Figure 3: Example of estimated entropy surface for the two scenarios.
(7) and a smooth spatial function is produced. An example shown in Figure 3, where values range
from 0 (dark areas in the figure) to log(2) (white areas). The clustered situation (left panel) shows
a smoothly varying surface. By comparing the left panels of Figure 1 and 3, one can see that the
entropy surface takes low values in areas where pixels are of the same type: white pixels in the topright part in Figure 1, and black pixels in the bottom-right part of Figure 1, correspond to the darker
areas of Figure 3 where entropy values are low. In the areas where white and black pixels mix,
the entropy surface tends to higher values (whiter areas in Figure 3). The random configuration
(right panel of Figure 3) has a constant entropy close to the maximum log(2); this is expected,
as there is no spatial correlation influencing the entropy surface in this scenario. Therefore, such
spatial functions properly estimates the entropy of the underlying spatial process. Thanks to the
availablity of the marginal posterior distribution of all parameters, any other useful information or
synthesis is straightforward to compute.

4

Concluding remarks

In this paper, we describe an approach to entropy estimation which starts from rigorous posterior
evaluation of its components, i.e. the probabilities. This way, we frame entropy within the theory
of Bayesian models for spatial data, thus assembling all the available results in this field.
Results from the simulation study enforce the validity of the approach in providing good estimates for the distribution parameters and, consequently, for entropy. The flexibility of the Bayesian
paradigm allows to synthesize the posterior distribution of entropy as wished, in order to answer
different potential questions.
Our procedure ensures realistic results, since, when the behaviour of a spatial process is under
study, the basic hypothesis is that it is not constant but smoothly varying over space. In the same
spirit, an appropriate spatial entropy measure is not a single number, rather it has to be allowed to
vary over space as a smooth function.

6

References
Altieri, L., D. Cocchi, and G. Roli (2018). A new approach to spatial entropy measures. Environmental and Ecological Statistics 25, 95–110.
Antos, A. and I. Kontoyiannis (2001). Convergence properties of functional estimates for discrete
distributions. Random structures and algorithms 19, 163–193.
Archer, E., I. M. Park, and J. W. Pillow (2014). Bayesian entropy estimation for countable discrete
distributions. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15, 2833–2868.
Batty, M. (1976). Entropy in spatial aggregation. Geographical Analysis 8, 1–21.
Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas (2006). Elements of Information Theory. Second Edition. Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Efron, B. and C. Stein (1981). The jackknife estimate of variance. Annals of statistics 9, 586–596.
Hausser, J. and K. Strimmer (2009). Entropy inference and the james-stein estimator, with application to nonlinear gene association networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research 10, 1469–
1484.
Leibovici, D. G. (2009). Defining spatial entropy from multivariate distributions of cooccurrences. Berlin, Springer: In K. S. Hornsby et al. (eds.): COSIT 2009, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 5756, pp 392-404.
Leibovici, D. G., C. Claramunt, D. LeGuyader, and D. Brosset (2014). Local and global spatiotemporal entropy indices based on distance ratios and co-occurrences distributions. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science 28(5), 1061–1084.
Miller, G. (1955). Note on the bias of information estimates. Glencoe, IL free press: In H. Quastler
(ed.) Information Theory in psychology II-B, pp. 95-100.
Nemenman, I., F. Shafee, and W. Bialek (2002). Entropy and inference, revisited. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press: In T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani (eds.) Advances in neural
information processing, 14.
Paninski, L. (2003). Estimation of entropy and mutual information. Journal of Neural Computation 15, 1191–1253.
Rue, H., S. Martino, and N. Chopin (2009). Approximate Bayesian inference for latent Gaussian
models using integrated nested Laplace approximations (with discussion). Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series B 71, 319–392.
Zhang, Z. (2012). Entropy estimation in Turing’s perspective. Journal of Neural Computation 24,
1368–1389.

7

