D RAFT VERSION J ULY 4, 2021
Typeset using LATEX default style in AASTeX61

PROBING CORONAL MAGNETIC FIELDS WITH SUNGRAZING COMETS: H I LYα FROM PICKUP IONS
J.C. R AYMOND 1

arXiv:1912.07282v1 [astro-ph.SR] 16 Dec 2019

1 Harvard-Smithsonian
2 INAF-Osservatorio

AND

S. G IORDANO 2

Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden St, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Astrofisico di Torino, via Osservatorio 20, I-10025, Pino Torinese, Italy

ABSTRACT
Observations of sungrazing comets can be used to probe the solar corona, to study the composition of the comets, and to
investigate the plasma processes that govern the interaction between the coronal plasma and cometary gas. UVCS observations
of the intensities and line profiles of H I Lyα trace the density, temperature and outflow speed of the corona. Analysis of H I
Lyα observations of comet C/2002 S2 showed a surprising split in the comet’s Lyα tail and an asymmetry of red-shifted and
blue-shifted emission across the tail axis. It was suggested that the velocity structure might result from a population of neutrals
produced by charge transfer between pickup ions and cometary neutrals. Here we present numerical simulations of the H I Lyα
intensity and velocity centroid for sungrazing comets under the assumptions that the magnetic field and solar wind are radial.
The models qualitatively reproduce the observations of Comet C/2002 S2 and potentially explain the split tail morphology that
was seen in C/2002 S2 and also C/2001 C2. They also match the observed red- and blue-shifts, though the solar wind velocity
needed to explain the blue-shift implies strong Doppler dimming and requires a higher outgassing rate to match the light curve.
However, the models do not match the observations in detail, and we discuss the remaining discrepancies and the uncertainties in
the model. We briefly discuss the implications for other UVCS comet observations and sungrazing comet observations with the
Metis coronagraph.
Keywords: comets:general — comets:individual:Comet C2002 S2 — ultraviolet:general — Sun:corona

2

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO
1. INTRODUCTION

The solar system contains a large number of sungrazing comets. Their perihelia lie just above the surface of the Sun, so very
few survive perihelion passage. Most belong to the Kreutz family, and those follow the same orbital path. More than 3000 Kreutz
sungrazers have been discovered, mostly by the Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) on the SOHO satellite.
Marsden (2005) reviews the history and orbital evolution of sungrazers, and a recent comprehensive review is given by Jones et
al.(2017).
Sungrazing comets are interesting in their own right, but they are also valuable probes of the corona and inner solar wind.
Remote sensing observations of the corona usually provide intensities integrated along the entire line of sight, from which one
derives the average properties of the corona. Observations of a sungrazing comet, on the other hand, can provide plasma properties
at points along the comet trajectory without the line of sight (LOS) averaging, acting as a probe of the corona. Observations of two
large sungrazers, C/2011 N3 and C/2011 W3 (Lovejoy), by the AIA instrument on SDO, have been used to infer coronal densities
and magnetic field directions (Schrijver et al.(2012), Bryans & Pesnell (2012), McCauley et al.(2013), Downs et al.(2013),
Raymond et al.(2014)).
The intensities and profiles of the Lyα tails of 5 sungrazers observed by the Ultraviolet Coronagraph Spectrometer (UVCS)
instrument on SOHO (Kohl et al.(1997), Kohl et al.(2006)) have been interpreted in terms of the densities, temperatures and
outflow speeds of the wind (Raymond et al.1998, Uzzo et al. 2001, Bemporad et al. 2005, Ciaravella et al. 2010, Giordano et
al.2015). However, Comet C/2002 S2 presented a surprising anomaly. Figures 1 and 2 show the intensity and velocity centroid
images of that comet reconstructed from the UVCS spectra (Giordano et al. 2015). The split tail observed at 8 R and the
asymmetric pattern of red-shift to the south and blue-shift to the north could not be understood in the context of the models then
available. The present paper explores that anomaly.
When water sublimates from the surface of the comet, UV light photodissociates the molecules, producing hydrogen atoms
that form a cloud that moves with the comet and expands at about 10 km s−1 . We will call these first generation neutrals. They
can scatter Lyα photons from the solar disk, but because they move at the speed of the comet, the absorption profile is shifted
away from the disk emission profile, and the scattered intensity is reduced by Doppler Dimming (Swings effect).
The 1st generation neutrals are subject to collisional ionization, photoionization and charge transfer with coronal protons, with
charge transfer generally dominating. The charge transfer produces a population of neutral H atoms with approximately the bulk
velocity and the thermal velocity distribution of the coronal protons, and we call these second generation neutrals. These neutrals
also scatter Lyα photons from the disk, and their larger line width and generally smaller flow speed reduce the effects of Doppler
dimming enough that this component dominates inside 10 R . The centroid shift of the Lyα profile is the LOS component of
the coronal (i.e., solar wind) velocity, and the profile width and the expansion rate of the cloud of 2nd generation neutrals are
governed by the thermal width of the coronal protons. The intensity of the 2nd generation emission drops off as the neutrals are
ionized, so the decay time gives the local electron density. If the local solar wind speed is comparable to the comet speed, an
angular offset between the comet trajectory and the axis of the cloud of 2nd generation neutrals can be used to infer the Vwind
(Bemporad et al.(2015)).
Ionization of the 1st generation neutrals (but not the 2nd ) produces pickup ions (PUIs). The 1st generation neutrals move with
the comet, and when they become ionized the velocity component perpendicular to the magnetic field becomes gyro motion
around the field line, while the parallel component is conserved. The gyro motion makes a ring beam in velocity space, which
is unstable and rapidly evolves to a bispherical shell in velocity space (Williams & Zank(1994), Isenberg & Lee(1996)). On a
somewhat longer time scale, the shell evolves into a Maxwellian, as seen in the oxygen ions in Comet C/2011 W3 (Lovejoy) by
Raymond et al.(2014). Pickup ion distributions have been measured in association with comets (Coates & Jones(2009)) and in
the ambient solar wind (Moebius et al.(1985), Gloeckler et al.(1993)).
Charge transfer between pickup ions and either 1st or 2nd generation neutrals produces a population of neutrals with approximately the same bulk velocity and random velocity distribution as the PUIs. That is to say that they move along the magnetic field
at a speed Vk = Vcom cosθ and have a random velocity V⊥ = Vcom sinθ, where Vcom is the comet speed and θ is the angle between the
comet velocity and the magnetic field. We call these third generation neutrals.
Figure 3 shows a schematic view of the 3 populations. The 1st generation can be seen as a spherical cloud around the comet, the
nd
2 as a broad conical structure whose axis lies between the comet velocity vector and the magnetic field, and the 3rd generation
as a narrower structure offset to the opposite side of the comet’s path. The diagram shows an image in the rest frame of the comet.
In the observer’s frame, the 3rd generation neutrals move at an angle to the positive X direction, as is seen for the striations in
Comet Lovejoy (Raymond et al (2014)).
The 3rd generation neutrals offer an explanation for the anomalies seen in the UVCS observations of comet C/2002 S2 (Giordano et al 2015). Giordano et al (2015) suggested that 3rd generation neutrals could account for both the split tail and the

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

3

Figure 1. Reconstructed H I Lyα intensity images of Comet C/2002 S2, observed on 18 September, 2002, as it crossed the UVCS slit at actual
distances 6.00 (left panel) and 8.00 R (right panel) from Sun center (projected heliocentric distances are 4.55 and 6.84 R , respectively
(Giordano et al (2015)). Initial and last UT times of the comet observation at each height are reported at the left and right image corners.

asymmetric line centroids, assuming that the blue-shift is the LOS component of the solar wind and the red-shift is the LOS
component of the parallel velocity component of the PUIs. However, they provided no quantitative models.
This paper presents a first attempt at a quantitative analysis of the effects of 3rd generation neutrals on the intensity and centroid
of the Lyα line. We present the model calculations in Section 2, results in Section 3 and comparisons with the observations of
C/2002 S2 in Section 4, along with some discussion of the approximations and applicable parameter ranges of the models.
Section 5 provides a summary and a description of how 3rd generation neutrals both complicate and enhance the analysis of
UVCS spectra and Metis Lyα images of sungrazing comets.
2. MODELS

We treat the comet as a test particle, which for our purposes means that the mass injected by the comet into the corona does not
strongly perturb the corona. If the outgassing rate is high, the comet can drive a bow shock through the coronal plasma (Gombosi
et al. 1996). Comet C/2011 Lovejoy with a mass loss rate of 1010 g/s near perihelion perturbed the magnetic structure of the
corona as indicated by motion of the striations seen in AIA 171 Å images after the comet’s passage (Raymond et al. 2014) and
by dramatic changes in the velocity centroids and shifts of the Lyα line (Raymond et al. 2018). More details are given in Jones
et al. (2017). Here we will consider smaller comets with correspondingly smaller outgassing rates.
Our model considers a comet moving through a uniform corona. It ejects neutral material at a rate Ṅ hydrogen atoms per
second and we follow the atoms as they scatter Lyα (including the effects of line scattering opacity for the 1st generation neutrals
and Doppler dimming for all the components) and undergo ionization and charge transfer reactions. The atoms interact with a
corona whose density, temperature and outflow speed are specified. The coronal outflow is taken to be parallel to the magnetic
field, and both are expected to be approximately radial between the streamer cusps at around 4 R and the Alfvén surface at
around 10 to 20 R where the field bends into a Parker spiral.
In the model the comet positions, R in solar radii, are derived from the observed positions, and the model parameters such as the
comet speed, Vcom , and the Earth-Sun-Comet angle, also called the phase angle, α, are known from the comet orbit. Moreover, the
angle between the comet trajectory and the magnetic field, θ, is known from the comet orbit if the field is radial. For comparison
with observations, α is also important, as it determines the projection of the 3D model onto the plane of the sky and the LOS
components of the velocities. The free model parameters are the cometary outgassing rate, Ṅ, the coronal proton density, n p ,
temperature, Tcor , and wind speed, Vwind . The magnetic field strength is not an important parameter in our models because the
structure is not perturbed by the comet. However, the strength of B does affect the loss of energy to Alfvén waves as the PUIs
scatter from a ring beam to bispherical shell distribution (Williams & Zank 1994, Raymond et al. 2010), but we will ignore that
complication here.
2.1. Atomic Rates
To compute the rate of Lyα scattering we precompute a lookup table of the number of photons scattered per second per H atom
as a function of the flow speed in the radial direction and thermal width, then scale by the dilution factor of the solar radiation
at the heliocentric height of the comet. For the integration over frequency and the illuminating disk, we use a calculation by
S. Cranmer (private communication). We use a Lyα disk intensity appropriate for solar minimum and increase it by a factor of
about 1.8 for solar maximum conditions. For 1st generation neutrals we include the opacity in the Lyα line using the outflow

4

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO
Table 1. Model parameters
Quantity

Value or Range

R

8.00 R

6.00 R

Vcom

218 km s−1

252 km s−1

α

31.40◦

38.88◦

θ

22.14◦

25.86◦

Ṅ

6×1027 to 3×1029 H s−1

np

2.5×103 to 6.0×104 cm−3

Vwind

50 to 400 km s−1

Tcor

6.0 and 6.2 log T

V1

10 km s−1

R: Comet heliocentric distance
Vcom : Comet speed
α: Phase angle
θ: Comet trajectory and the magnetic field angle
Ṅ: Cometary outgassing rate
n p : Coronal proton density
Vwind : Solar wind speed
Tcor : Coronal proton temperature
V1 : 1st generation outflow speed

speed of the 1st generation neutrals, V1 , for the Doppler width, and we reduce the scattering rate accordingly. V1 is determined by
the energy liberated during photodissociation of H2 O and OH, and ranges from about 8 to 24 km s−1 for the H atoms (Shimizu
(1991). For the opacity calculation, we assume that B is radial.
The ionization rate is given by
qion = n p qex + ne qi + q phot

(1)

where qex is the charge transfer rate coefficient, qi is the ionization rate coefficient for electron impact, q phot is the photoionization
rate, and n p and ne are the coronal proton and electron densities (we use the approximation n p = 0.83ne valid for solar coronal
plasma). The charge transfer rate is computed with the cross sections of Schultz et al. (2008) with the average velocity. The
effective speed for charge transfer between 1st or 2nd generation neutrals and coronal protons or PUIs is given by the sum in
quadrature of the relative bulk speed of the two components and the random (thermal) speeds of the two components. For
instance, the effective speed for charge transfer between 1st generation neutrals and coronal protons is given by
q
2 +V 2 +V 2
Ve f f = Vrel
(2)
T
1
where VT is the thermal speed of the coronal protons (computed as the most probable speed of protons at Tcor ) and Vrel is the bulk
speed of the coronal gas relative to the comet. V1 is the outflow speed of the 1st generation neutrals, which is small compared to
the other terms. We ignore charge transfer between 2nd generation neutrals and coronal protons, because that does not change
the number of 2nd generation neutrals or their speed distribution. For charge transfer between 3rd generation neutrals and coronal
protons, the effective speed for charge transfer becomes
q
2 +V 2 +V 2
Ve f f = Vrel
(3)
T
⊥
,
For the 3rd generation, the value of Vrel uses the parallel velocity component of the PUIs and the solar wind speed.
For collisional ionization, we use the ionization rate from Scholz & Walters (1991) at an electron temperature of log T = 6.2.
It varies by only 3% over the range log T=6.0-6.6. For photoionization, we scale the rate at 6.8 R from Raymond et al. (1998)

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

5

Figure 2. Reconstructed H I Lyα velocity centroid images of Comet C/2002 S2, observed on 18 September, 2002, as it crossed the UVCS
slit at actual distances 6.00 (left panel) and 8.00 R (right panel) from Sun center (projected heliocentric distances are 4.55 and 6.84 R ,
respectively (Giordano et al (2015)). Initial and last UT times of the comet observation at each height are reported at the left and right image
corners. labelgiordano9

with the dilution factor as a function of heliocentric distance. This is the value appropriate for solar minimum, and we increase it
by a factor of 2 for solar maximum conditions.
2.2. Physical Picture
The model uses a Cartesian grid, with the comet moving along the X-axis and the magnetic field in the XZ plane. The models
can then be rotated to give Doppler shifts and foreshortening for comparison with observations. Neutrals are generated at the
comet and followed as they scatter Lyα and undergo charge transfer until they become ionized or leave the simulation box. We
use analytic descriptions of the distributions of 1st and 2nd generation neutrals. PUIs are produced by ionization of 1st generation
neutrals (or by ionization of 3rd generation neutrals). 3rd generation neutrals are produced by charge transfer between PUIs and
1st or 2nd generation neutrals at each grid cell, and assumed to move in the direction of the magnetic field at Vk and to spread out
with a speed V⊥ .
We approximate the 1st generation distribution as a spherically symmetric outflow moving with the comet and expanding at a
constant speed, with an exponential cutoff due to ionization. Its density is
n1 (r) =

q
Ṅ
− ion r
e V1
2
4πr V1

(4)

where V1 is the initial outflow speed due mostly to the 8 to 24 km s−1 speeds of the H atoms ejected during photodissociation. At
high densities, the H atoms share some of their momentum with O atoms, so V1 can be smaller.
The 2nd generation neutrals form a conical structure whose axis lies between the comet trajectory and the solar wind direction.
The angle between the comet trajectory and the 2nd generation axis is given by
sin(β) = Vwind,⊥ /Vrel

(5)

where Vwind,⊥ is the solar wind speed component perpendicular to the comet trajectory. We approximate the 2nd generation
neutrals as a cone with a density falling off with distance from the axis based on a Gaussian distribution with the coronal thermal
speed VT . The tail fades away on a length scale Vrel /(qi + q phot ).
The pickup ions, and therefore the 3rd generation neutrals, form a structure that moves along the B field with Vk = Vcom sinθ.
Since Vk is less than Vcom and has a component perpendicular to the comet trajectory, the PUI structure appears to trail behind
the comet at an angle, displaced to the side opposite to that of the 2nd generation neutrals. Because the cloud of 1st generation
neutrals is fairly small owing to the relatively small V1 and the PUIs are tightly coupled to the field lines on which they form,
the main PUI structure is narrow. The 3rd generation neutrals, however, can cross field lines, and they have a randomly directed
velocity V⊥ , so the 3rd generation neutrals form a wider structure around the PUI field lines.
2.3. Numerical Approach
The comet moves across the model grid at one cell per time step. The 1st and 2nd generation densities are analytic functions
that move with the comet. At each time step the number of pickup ions generated at each point is computed from the density of

6

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO

1st generation neutrals and the total (ionization plus charge√
transfer) ionization rate, and the pickup ions are advected along the
magnetic field at Vk and allowed to diffuse along it at V⊥ / 3. They are assumed to be unable to move across field lines. The
densities of PUIs and 1st and 2nd generation neutrals are used to compute the formation rate of 3rd generation neutrals, and they
also advect along the field lines, but they are allowed to diffuse in 3 dimensions with a speed V⊥ .
Once the densities of the different components are known, the Lyα emissivity at each grid point is computed using the central
velocity and line width to compute the scattering rate considering Doppler Dimming and distance from the Sun. At each grid
point the 1st component emission is reduced by e−τ , where τ is the optical depth between the grid point and the Sun. The 2nd
and 3rd generation neutrals are Doppler shifted away from the 1st component, and they generally have much larger line widths,
so they are much less absorbed. Since the velocity centroid of each component is known, the average velocity of the scattered
photons is the weighted average of the velocities of the 3 components. For comparison with observations, we rotate the model to
the angle between the comet path and the line of sight, then integrate to produce a 2D projection.
Figure 4 shows a model for the parameters R=8.0 R , Vwind = 200 km s−1 and ne = 104 cm−3 , with θ = 23◦ . The intensity
images show a very bright spherical 1st component, a conical 2nd component and a 3rd component that juts off to one side.
2.4. Approximations and Limitations
We have computed approximate models to show the overall nature of the spatial and velocity structure of the Lyα emission
from a comet. We assume that the comet does not perturb the corona in a major way, such as inducing a bow shock like those
measured near larger comets (Gombos et al 19i96). One criterion is that the amount of mass produced by the comet be small
compared with the amount of coronal mass it interacts with. The former is just the outgassing rate. The amount of coronal mass
swept up per second is
Ṁ = 4πri2 µc n pVrel

(6)

where ri is the interaction length scale for ionization of cometary neutrals, V1 /qi , and µc is the mean weight of the coronal nuclei
(Jones et al., 2017). This gives a Ṅ < 1035V200 /n p for V1 = 10 km s−1 , where V200 is the comet speed in units of 200 km s−1 . This
is consistent with the parameter ranges of interest, but the next level of approximation would be very challenging. We defer it to
a future investigation because it would require at least an MHD code of the level of sophistication of the ones used by Gombosi
et al. (1996) and Jia et al.(2014).
Our assumption that the PUIs can be described by a shell in velocity space moving along the magnetic field at Vk is probably
reasonable for perpendicular geometries, but if θ < 45◦ streaming instabilities are likely to set in that would drive the PUI
distribution to a Maxwellian and couple it to the coronal plasma. We also assume a spherical shell in velocity space rather than
the bispherical shell predicted by theory, and we neglect the loss of energy from PUIs to Alfvén waves, which depends on the
Alfvén speed and θ.
Our method of advancing time does not allow 2nd generation neutrals to get ahead of the comet, which can happen in Vcom and
Vwind are small compared to VT . This is not too serious a problem for most parameters, because Vcom is large close to the Sun, and
Vwind becomes larger farther away from the Sun.
We also neglect the possible production of 4th and higher generation neutrals by subsequent charge transfer events. The
probability of such subsequent charge transfers increases with density, and therefore with Ṅ, so the assumption that the comet
does not disturb the corona may break down before the neglect of the 4th and higher generations becomes a serious problem.
Similarly, we neglect the loss of 1st and 2nd generation neutrals to charge transfer with PUIs, which can become important at high
Ṅ.
To address these limitations, we would probably need an MHD model that includes a neutral fluid, as in Jia et al. (2014), along
with a PUI fluid. The model from such a code would serve as the basis for a Monte Carlo calculation of the generation and
transport of the neutrals and a calculation of the scattering of Lyα.
3. MODEL RESULTS

Figure 4 shows the column density for the 3 neutral hydrogen populations from a typical model where the orbital path and the
wind direction both lie in the plane of the sky. This model assumed an angle between the comet’s path and the wind/magnetic
field direction of θ = 21.92◦ , an outgassing rate of 1029 s−1 , a coronal density of 104 cm−3 , a comet speed of 240 km s−1 and
wind speed of 200 km s−1 . The outflow speed from the comet is taken to be 10 km s−1 , and two proton coronal temperatures
are assumed: log Tcor =6.0 and log Tcor =6.2. The 1st generation neutrals form a spherical cloud centered on the nucleus, but the
emission is somewhat modified by the Lyα optical depth. The 2nd generation atoms form a cone whose axis lies between the
comet trajectory and the wind direction, and the 3rd generation forms a narrower tail on the other side of the comet’s path.

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

7

Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the 1st , 2nd and 3rd generation clouds. The 1st generation particles form a cloud, slowly expanding at V1 speed,
that moves with the comet. The 2nd generation is a cone that moves with the wind speed in the observer’s frame, or the relative speeds of the
wind and the comet in the comet frame, the 2nd generation cone expands at proton thermal speed, VT . The Pickup ions move along the B field
with the parallel component of the comet speed. The 3rd generation neutrals share the pickup ion velocity, but seen in the comet frame they are
rd
moving at cos2 (θ) times the comet speed along
√ the comet direction and sin(θ)cos(θ) in the perpendicular direction. The 3 generation cloud
diffuses along the B field at speed V3,e = V⊥ / 3.

We expect some simple approximate scalings for the total numbers of 1st , 2nd and 3rd generation neutrals, N1 , N2 and N3 .
The numbers of 1st and 2nd generation neutrals should scale as the outgassing rate times the ionization time, and therefore as
Ṅ/n p . The number of 3rd generation particles is proportional to the number of 1st generation neutrals times the number of PUIs
multiplied by the size of the interaction region. The coronal density drops out because it appears in both ionization time of the
3rd generation particles and in the size of the interaction region. From the numerical models we have approximately
N1 = 8 × 1031 Ṅ29 /n4

(7)

N2 = 6 × 1031 Ṅ29 /n4

(8)

2
N3 = 5 × 1030 Ṅ29
/V10
29

(9)
4

−3

Here Ṅ29 is the outgassing rate in units of 10 H atoms per second, n4 is the coronal density in units of 10 cm , and V10
is the outflow speed of the 1st generation neutrals in units of 10 km s−1 . These scalings break down at high outgassing rates

8

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO

Figure 4. Model of the neutral hydrogen densities integrated along the direction perpendicular to the comet trajectory from a comet at actual
distance 8.00 R moving along the X-axis. The 1st , 2nd and 3rd generation neutrals are shown in a frame of reference moving with the comet.
These model parameters are Ṅ = 1 × 1029 s−1 , a coronal density of 104 cm−3 , a wind speed of 200 km s−1 , and an angle between the comet
trajectory and the magnetic field of 22.14◦ , typical of Kreutz sungrazers in a radial magnetic field. The scale of these images is shown in solar
radii. The dashed lines show the radial direction and the arrows show the direction of the comet. The top panel show densities with coronal
proton temperature logTcor = 6.0, the bottom logTcor = 6.2.

when 3rd generation neutrals have a significant probability of experiencing another charge transfer and when the comet begins to
significantly modify the structure of the corona. The former occurs at about Ṅ29 ∼ 3, while the latter depends on both outgassing
rate and coronal density. There is also some dependence on Vrel , which enters the charge transfer rate, so the numbers above
should be taken as estimates at the factor of two level.
Different viewing angles affect the observed Lyα emission in a straightforward way. Because the comet’s motion, the wind
velocity and the bulk motion of the pickup ions all lie in the plane of the sky in the simulation, the Doppler velocities of all three
components are zero when viewed side-on. Figure 5 shows the total Lyα intensity and Doppler velocity, combining the emission
from the 3 populations, integrated along the line of sight for the same model when viewed from different phase angles, α = 30◦ ,
60◦ and 90◦ from the side-on view. The main tail due to 2nd generation neutrals is foreshortened, as is the angle between the
3rd generation tail and the Z-axis. The comet is moving away from the observer, giving a positive velocity for the 1st and 3rd
generation emission, while the solar wind is coming toward the observer, giving a blue-shift. The solar wind speed is taken to be
200 km s−1 . The predictions for the other angles can be obtained by rotation, so that the image might be flipped left to right or
red- and blue-shifts might be interchanged. The phase angle of the comet C/2002 S2 is computed from the orbital parameters,
then we rotate the model by and angle of 31.40◦ out of the plane of the sky before the integration along the line of sight to obtain
the total intensity and Doppler velocity 2D maps, finally we rotate the maps by 34◦ clockwise to put the comet at the solar latitude
as seen by UVCS. The maps obtained from the reference model of Figure 4 are shown in Figure 6.

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

9

The following figures illustrate the dependence of the Lyα emission on various parameters. All of them use a rotation of
31.40◦ out of the plane of the sky, and all start from the same reference parameters, varying one parameter at a time.
Figure 7 shows the effect of decreasing or increasing the outgassing rate by a factor of 3. The higher Ṅ model shows a more
prominent 3rd generation component, because of the number of 3rd generation neutrals scales as Ṅ 2 , as shown in equations 7
through 9.
Figure 8 shows models with wind speeds of 100 and 300 km s−1 . The speed of the wind has 3 effects. The faster wind makes
Doppler dimming of the 2nd generation neutrals more severe, reducing the brightness of the 2nd generation component relative
to the 1st and 3rd generations. It also lengthens the 2nd generation tail, reducing the opening angle of the 2nd generation tail. In
addition, the axis of the 2nd generation tail falls between the comet trajectory and the wind direction, and it is closer to the comet
trajectory at low wind speed and closer to the wind direction at high wind speed (Bemporad et al. 2015).
4. COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS

Comet C/2002 S2 was analyzed by Giordano et al., (2015). While the Lyα intensity maps reconstructed from the observation
sequences were similar to the Monte Carlo models described in the paper, the intensity map for the 8 R crossing showed a split
tail, with the southern side being much brighter (Fig. 1). Worse, the observed Lyα centroids were red-shifted on one side of the
tail and blue-shifted on the other (Fig. 2). Giordano et al., (2015) suggested that the asymmetric appearance and the velocities
could be explained if the blue-shifted emission arose from the 2nd generation neutrals and red-shifted emission from the 3rd
generation. In that case, the observed blue-shift is the LOS component of the solar wind speed and the red-shift is the LOS
component of the parallel velocity of the PUIs, Vk .
We compare our simulation with the UVCS observations of Comet C/2000 S2 at 6 R and 8 R in Lyα (Giordano et al.,
2015), attempting to match the brightness distribution and the Doppler shift asymmetry. The observation at 7 R does not show
as clear separation between red- and blue-shifted components. Figure 9 displays the model for the 6 R crossing. The model was
computed as described above, then rotated to give its appearance projected onto the plane of the sky for the time of observation,
and finally rotated 34 degrees to make the comet trajectory perpendicular to the UVCS slit, since that was the assumption used to
reconstruct the images in Giordano et al., (2015). Finally, the predicted intensity is calculated by averaging brightness in a 300
arcsec box for comparison with the UVCS observations.
4.1. Comparison at 6 R
UVCS observed comet C/2002 S2 at 6 R from 23:17 until 00:16 UT on 18/19 September, 2002. We assume the comet
position and velocity vector from the orbit as given in Giordano et al. (2015), and we take the magnetic field to be radial. That
ought to be a good approximation between the top of the closed field arcades at the streamer cusps, which are up to about 4 R
(Strachan et al 2002), and the Alfvén radius at 10 to 20 R (Zhao & Hoeksema, 2010, Deforest, Howard & McComas, 2014
, Tasnim et al., 2018). That assumption is critical because the angle between the comet trajectory and the field determines the
perpendicular and parallel velocities of the PUIs and 3rd generation neutrals. Moreover, the direction of the field determines the
LOS components of the 2nd and 3rd generation neutrals. The solar wind velocity is not independently known, but to the extent
that the comet orbit is reliable, we can take the agreement of the predicted and observed red-shifts of the 3rd generation emission
as some support for the assumption that the field is radial.
We assume a solar wind velocity parallel to the magnetic field with a magnitude of 175 km s−1 . This is much larger than the
value of 75 km s−1 inferred from the shape of the Lyα intensity image by Giordano et al. (2015), but we find that it is required
to match the observed blue-shift of 111 to 145 km s−1 . This large velocity implies strong Doppler dimming, so a much larger
mass loss rate, 1 × 1029 H per second, is needed to match the Lyα brightness. We have no independent measurement of the wind
velocity at this height, but Cho et al. (2018) give a range of about 130 to 430 km/s at 6 R based on white light observations.
The density chiefly controls falloff of the 2nd generation intensity; the simulation with a coronal proton density of 104 cm−3 , in
agreement with Giordano et al. (2015), agrees reasonably well with the data (Figure 9).
The assumed thermal velocity of 130 km s−1 enters the Doppler dimming and the opening angle of the 2nd generation emission.
This corresponds to a kinetic temperature of log T=6.0, however, the effective temperature including non-thermal (wave) motions
could be larger. Frazin, Cranmer & Kohl (2003) report a 1/e width of Lyα in a streamer at 5.1 R (their largest height) of about
155 km s−1 .
Another poorly known parameter is the outflow speed from the comet. We assume 10 km s−1 , though that is somewhat larger
than is generally assumed. The speed of the H atoms produced by photodissociation of H2 O ranges from about 8 to 24 km s−1 , but
some fraction of that speed is lost to interactions with O atoms. With smaller outflow speeds our simulation code does not resolve
the region where 1st generation neutrals and PUIs coexist. A smaller outflow speed would reduce the 1st generation intensity

10

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO

Figure 5. Intensity and velocity images of the reference model, comet at actual distance 8.00 R and proton temperature log T=6.0, seen from
angles of 30 degrees (top row), 60 degrees (middle row) and 90 degrees (bottom row). Blue and red in the righthand panels correspond to
blue-shifts and red-shifts as seen from Earth.

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

11

Figure 6. Intensity and velocity images of the density model shown in Figure 4 seen from an angle of 31.40◦ , the comet is at actual distance
8.00 R and proton temperature log T=6.0. The dashed lines show the radial direction and the arrows show the direction of the comet.

Figure 7. Intensity images of models with outgassing rates 3 times smaller (Ṅ = 3 × 1028 s−1 , left panel) and 3 times larger (Ṅ = 3 × 1029 s−1 ,
right panel) than the reference model. This illustrates the increase in relative intensity of the 3rd generation component with increase Ṅ. The
dashed lines show the radial direction and the arrows show the direction of the comet.

by increasing the optical depth of the neutral cloud formed by dissociation of water. It would also increase the number of 3rd
generation neutrals because the PUIs would be formed in a region of higher neutral density.
Finally, there is some uncertainty in the orbit. That will mainly affect the projection of the cloud of Lyα onto the plane of the
sky. In particular, a 10◦ to 15◦ error in the ascending node could significantly change the projected angle between the 2nd and 3rd
generation clouds.
Comparison of Figure 6 with Figures 1 and 2 shows that the models get one essential aspect right. The red-shifted 3rd generation
emission lies to the south and the blue-shifted 2nd generation to the north, and their velocities agree with the observations.
However, the models do not really resemble the data. The red-shifted 3rd generation emission appears as a short stub at a large
angle to the main body of the comet tail in the model, while in the observations it is longer, and it makes a small enough angle to
the main comet tail that it blends into the 2nd generation emission. Because the predicted 3rd generation emission is so spatially

12

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO

Figure 8. Intensity images of the model with wind velocities of 100 km s−1 (left panel) and 300 km s−1 (right panel). These models illustrate
decreased intensities of the 2nd generation neutrals at high velocity due to Doppler dimming, the longer and narrower 2nd generation component,
and the closer alignment of the 2nd generation to the wind direction. The dashed lines show the radial direction and the arrows show the direction
of the comet.

confined, it creates the strong peak for about hundred seconds when the comet crosses the slit, but the sharp peak is not resolved
in the observations because of the 120 second integration time of each exposure.
Figure 9 compares the Lyα intensity predicted by the model for 1st , 2nd and 3r d generation neutrals with the values observed
by Giordano et al. (2015), and they match the observed intensities quite well. The model parameters are different than those
derived by Giordano et al. (2015), who assumed a slower wind speed. The slower wind speed gives a good match to the opening
angle of the Lyα tail, which then requires a higher density to match the falloff with time. It now seems likely that the opening
angle of the tail is determined by the separation between 2nd and 3rd generation tails, and the 2nd generation tail is narrower than
we had thought, consistent with a faster solar wind. The faster wind speed also implies more severe Doppler dimming of the 2nd
generation emission, so our fit requires a higher outgassing rate of 1029 s−1 , as opposed to 1028 s−1 from the earlier Monte Carlo
simulation. The model in Figure 9 assumes a wind speed of 100 km s−1 , and a somewhat larger speed is needed to fully match
the observed blue shift.
Overall, it appears that the basic idea of the 3rd generation emission is correct, in that it explains the otherwise baffling redand blue-shifted emission from the south and north sides of the comet tail. Part of the discrepancy may be that the observations
missed some of the 1st and 3rd -generation emission, because the comet was already in the UVCS slit during the first exposure.
On the other hand, there is clearly something wrong with either the model parameters or with the basic physics in the model.
The parameter most closely related to the appearance of the 3rd generation emission as a stub nearly at a right angle to the
nd
2 generation emission is the angle between the comet trajectory and the magnetic field. When this angle is small, the PUIs
move along the field at nearly the speed of the comet, which then means that they almost move with the comet and occupy a
small interval relative to the comet before they are ionized. As described above, the angle is set by the comet trajectory and the
assumption that the field is radial. The extremely elongated orbit and the small perihelion distance of the Kreutz sungrazers imply
that the trajectory is not far from radial at 6 R , and the angle is 25.7 degrees. The magnetic field is expected to be close to
radial in a steady model, but it could be perturbed by a CME. LASCO C2 difference images show a 450 km s−1 west limb CME
at 08:30 UT and continuous low level activity in the SW quadrant, so it is possible that the field in 10-20◦ from radial. We note
that the LASCO images are dominated by plasma near the plane of the sky, while the comet was about 4 R away from the plane
of the sky, so the LASCO movies may not accurately reflect conditions near the comet.
4.2. Comparison at 8 R
UVCS observed the comet at 8 R from 21:31 until 22:22 UT on 18 September, 2002. The UVCS images at 8 R in Figures 1
and 2 show a split tail as well as red- and blue-shifts on the southern and northern sides of the tail. The blue-shifted northern
side is very faint, which is the expected result of Doppler dimming of the 2nd generation neutrals for a solar wind speed around
200 km s−1 . The split tail is also expected as a result of the angle between the 2nd and 3rd generation populations. However, the

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

13

observed brightness increases gradually over the course of about 15 minutes (Figure 5 of Giordano et al. 2015), while the models
predict a bright, short-lived 3rd generation peak followed by a slowly fading 2nd generation tail. The width of the tail during
even the first UVCS exposure suggests that the observations may have missed the passage of the nucleus and 1st generation cloud
across the slit, but that still would not explain the gradual brightening.
The models can easily match a 3rd generation tail brighter than the 2nd generation tail with a wind velocity high enough to give
strong Doppler dimming. However, the models predict a large angle between the two tails and a 3rd generation tail that is bright
for only a short time. This is at least partly due to our approximate treatment of the 3rd generation neutrals as discussed below.
4.3. Physical explanations for the discrepancies
There are three apparent aspects of the physics in the model that might be problematic; the assumption that the pickup ions do
not interact with the ambient medium, the assumption that we can ignore the effects of the comet on the ambient plasma and the
assumption that we can treat each species as a single fluid when computing the Doppler dimming.
We have assumed that the pickup ions form with parallel and perpendicular velocities determined by the angle between the
comet trajectory and the B field, and that Vk is conserved while V⊥ is scattered into a shell centered on Vk . This assumption receives some support from the AIA observations of Comet Lovejoy (Raymond et al (2014)), though the AIA observation indicated
that the shell in velocity space was quickly scattered into a Maxwellian. However, for the modest angle between the orbit and
the radial B field at 6 R , Vk is more than twice V⊥ , so that the PUIs may be subject to violent streaming instabilities. Those
instabilities can transfer momentum between the wind and the PUIs and they can heat both populations. They can also create
large amplitude fluctuations in the magnetic field, so that a range of Vk and V⊥ is present. Those effects will broaden the 3rd
generation tail, push it closer to the 2nd generation tail and make it longer. However, if the relative speed of the comet and the
wind is less than the Alfvén speed the turbulence may be weak, while if the interaction is too strong it will reduce the red-shift
vanish, in contradiction to the observations.
We have also assumed that the mass flow from the comet does not greatly perturb the wind. That assumption is likely to be
good for the relatively small Ṅ found by Giordano et al. (2015), but it is somewhat questionable for the higher value indicated
by our model. The interaction can decelerate the wind, which would make it difficult to explain the strong blue-shift observed.
On the other hand, we do not independently know the wind speed, and we might be observing a flow that has been decelerated.
If the perturbation is significant, a bow shock can form in the mass-loaded wind (Gombosi et al. 1996, Jia et al. 2014), and the
changes in velocity and temperature can be large. Dramatic shifts of more than 100 km s−1 in the velocity centroid and line width
can be seen at outgassing rates above 1030 s−1 in Comet Lovejoy (Raymond et al 2018).
The largest part of the discrepancy may be related to the perturbation of the wind by the comet. Behar et al. (2018a and 2018b)
used analytic and numerical models to study the interaction between the outflowing gas of comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko
and the solar wind. In that case, the Larmor radii of the ions are comparable to the size of the interaction region, and significant
electric fields arise. In the case of C2/2002 S2, even the Larmor radius of the O+ ions is only a percent or so of the size of the
interaction region, but the formation of 3rd generation neutrals is strongly biased toward small distances from the comet because
of the rapid density falloff. Behar et al. (2018b) showed that cometary ions are deflected in one direction and solar wind ions
in the other, which would tend to produce the split tail we observe and separate the 2nd and 3rd generation neutrals. In the case
of comet C/2002 S2, the main effect may be that the comet deflects the magnetic field. That both increases the angle between
the field and the wind and deflects the wind away from its radial flow. The former increases the perpendicular component of the
pickup ion velocity, reduces the parallel component, and produces a more elongated tail in the direction of the comet motion,
producing a red-shifted component more like that observed. The latter changes the angle between the solar wind and the LOS,
decreasing the wind speed needed to match the observed LOS component. That helps with severe Doppler dimming expected
from the observed blue-shift if an unperturbed radial flow is assumed, and it therefore, reduces the required outgassing rate.
Finally, we have computed the Doppler dimming under the assumption that each component can be characterized by a
Maxwellian velocity distribution or a shell in velocity space with a given width and centroid. This is a reasonable approach
if there is no correlation between velocity and position, but it can break down for a non-interacting cloud of expanding neutrals.
In particular, the 3rd generation neutrals have a substantial velocity component toward the Sun and a somewhat narrower velocity
width. Atoms that have relatively small velocities toward the Sun will stretch farther along the tail of the comet, and they will also
experience relatively weak Doppler dimming. This coupling of the velocity and Lyα emission may explain the gradual intensity
rise in the 8 R observation, since the H atoms farther behind the comet scatter Lyα photons from the disk very effectively, while
H atoms that remain close to the comet experience stronger Doppler dimming.
5. SUMMARY

14

R AYMOND AND G IORDANO

Figure 9. Comparison of the Lyα light curve of Comet C/2002 S2 at actual distance 6.00 R from Giordano et al., (2015) (black dots with
error bars) with predicted emission for the best fitting 3 generation model determined with an outgassing rate Ṅ = 1 × 1029 H per second,
coronal density n p = 1 × 104 cm−3 and wind speed Vwind =100 km s−1 . There is some uncertainty in the outgassing rate because of undertainty
in the photoionization rate due to solar activity.

A 3rd generation of neutral H atoms formed by charge transfer of PUIs with cometary neutrals seems to basically explain the
red-shifted Lyα emission from one side of the tail of comet C/2002 S2, while the blue-shift of the northern part of the Lyα can
be understood as the LOS component of the 2nd generation neutrals moving at the solar wind speed. The existence of both 2nd
and 3rd generation neutrals moving in different directions along the magnetic field lines can also explain the split tail observed at
8R .
Our models do not match the observations in detail in that they predict too large an angle between the 2nd and 3rd generation
tails, too short a 2nd generation tail, and no gradual increase in the 2nd generation brightness. This may be partly due to incorrect
parameter choices, such as the assumption that the magnetic field is radial, but it is probably also due to our approximate treatment
of each generation of neutrals as a single velocity distribution independent of position. To remedy the latter problem, we will
need a kinetic simulation like that of Giordano et al. (2015) that includes the 3rd generation.
In any case, it is clear that the total emission of comet C/2002 S2 is dominated by the 3rd generation neutrals at 8 R , so the
models used for other comets would not apply and parameters derived from those models should not be trusted. On the other
hand, the emission from that comet at 6 R is dominated by the 2nd generation. Parameters derived from the earlier models
should in principle be valid, though in this case, the earlier model assumed a wind speed too small to explain the observed
Doppler velocity.
We note that an asymmetric, split tail in comet C/2001 C2 at 4.98 R was interpreted by Bemporad et al., (2005) in terms of
fragments of a larger body that had not yet separated very far. That observation may well be amenable to interpretation in terms
of 2nd and 3rd generation neutrals. Figure 6 of Bemporad et al., (2005) shows evidence for changes in the Lyα line profile with
time, which would support that interpretation.
The Metis instrument on the Solar Orbiter spacecraft will provide Lyα images of comets, and Bemporad et al., (2015) have
discussed how those images can be used to derive the density, temperature an outflow speed of the solar wind. The presence of
3rd generation neutrals both complicates the interpretation and presents the opportunity to extract further information from the
images. In advantageous cases where the 2nd and 3rd generation are clearly resolved, it will be possible to learn more about the
magnetic field direction and the outflow speed. In unfavorable cases where the components are projected on top of each other, it
may make the interpretation more ambiguous.

C ORONAL M AGNETIC F IELDS FROM S UNGRAZING C OMETS

15

Overall, our models prove the concept that a 3rd generation of neutrals produced from PUIs can explain the morphology and
velocity structure of comet C/2002 S2, but more sophisticated models are required to match the observations in detail and to
extract more reliable physical parameters for the comet and the solar wind. In particular, while it may be possible to include
the perturbation of the wind and magnetic field to some extent in simple models like those presented here, a model that includes
MHD and perhaps ion kinetic effects is probably needed.
This work was supported by the NASA LWS program under ROSES NNH13ZDA001N. It benefited greatly from the workshop
on near-Sun comets at the International Space Science Institute in Bern, Switzerland led by G. Jones.

Facilities: SOHO (UVCS)
REFERENCES
Behar, E., Nilsson, H., Henri, P., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, 21
Behar, E., Tabone, B., Saillenfest, M., et al. 2018, A&A, 620, 35
Bemporad, A., Poletto, G., Raymond, J.C., Biesecker, D., Marsden,
B., Lamy, P., Ko, Y.-K., and Uzzo, M. 2005, ApJ, 620, 523
Bemporad, A., Poletto, G., Raymond, J.C. & Giordano, S. 2007,
P&SS, 55, 1021
Bemporad, A., Giordano, S., Raymond, J.C. & Knight, M.M. 2015,
Adv. Sp. Res., 56, 2288
Biesecker, D., Lamy, P., St. Cyr, O.C., Llebaria, A. & Howard,
R.A. 2002, Icar, 157, 323
Bryans, P. & Pesnell, W.D. 2012, ApJ, 760, 18
Cho, I.-H., Moon, Y.-J., Narkariakov, V.M., et al. 2018, arxiv,
1806.08540
Ciaravella, A., Raymond, J.C. & Giordano, S. 2010, ApJL, 713,
L69
Coates, A.J. & Jones, G.H. 2009, P&SS, 57, 1175
Deforest, C.E., Howard, T.A. & McComas, D.J. 2014, ApJ, 787,
124
Downs, C., Linker, J.A., Mikić, Z., Riley, P., Schrijver, C.J. &
Saint-Hilaire, P. 2013, Science, 340, 1196
Frazin, R.A., Cranmer, S.R. & Kohl, J.L. 2003, ApJ, 597, 1145
Giordano, S., Raymond, J.C., Lamy, P., Uzzo, M. & Dobrzycka, D.
2015, ApJ, 798, 4
Gloeckler, G., et al. 1993, Science, 261, 70
Gombosi, T.I., Dezeeuw, D.L., Häberl, R.M. & Powell, K.G. 1996,
JGR, 101, 15233
Isenberg, P.A. & Lee, M.A. 1996, JGR, 101, 11055
Jia, Y.-D., Russell, C.T., Liu, W. & Shou, Y.S. 2014, ApJ, 796, 42
Jones, G.H. et al. 2018, SSRv, 214, 20
Kohl, J.L., et al. 1997, Sol. Phys. 175, 613
Kohl, J.L„ Noci, G., Cranmer, s.R. & Raymond, J.C. 2006, Astron.
Astrophys. Rev., 13, 31
Knight, M.M., A’Hearn, M.F., Biesecker, D.A., Faury, G.,
Hamilton, D.P., Lamy, P. & Llebaria, A. 2010, AJ, 139, 926

Marsden, B.G. 2005, Ann. Revs. A&A, 43, 75
McCauley, P., Saar, S.H., Raymond, J.C., Ko, Y.-K. &
Saint-Hilaire, P. 2013, ApJ, 768, 161
Moebius, E., Hovestadt, D., Paschmann, G. & Gloeckler, G. 1985,
Nature, 318, 426
Povich, M.S., Raymond, J.C., Jones, G.H., Uzzo, M., Ko, Y.-K.,
Feldman, P.D., Smith, P.L., Marsden, B.G., Wood, T.N. 2003,
Science, 301, 1949
Raymond, J.C., et al. 1998, ApJ, 508, 410
Raymond, J.C., Winkler, P.F., Blair, W.P., Lee, J.-J. & Park, S.
2010, ApJ, 712, 901
Raymond, J.C., McCauley, P.I., Cranmer, S.R. D̂owns, C. 2014,
ApJ, 788, 152
Raymond, J.C., Downs, C., Knight, M., Battams, K., Giordano, S.
& Rosati, R. 2018, ApJ, 858, 19
Scholz, T.T. & Walters, H.R.J. 1991, ApJ, 380, 302
Schrijver, C.J., Brown, J.C., Battams, K., Saint-Hilaire, P., Liu, W.,
Hudson, H. & Pesnell, W.D. 2012, Science, 335, 324
Schultz, D.R., Krstic, P.S., Lee, T.G. & Raymond, J.C. 2008, ApJ,
678, 950
Shimizu, M. 1991, in Comets in the post-Halley era. Vol. 2, ed. R.
J. Newburn, et al. (Dordrecht: Kluwer), 897
Strachan, L., Suleiman, R., Panasyuk, A.V., Biesecker, D.A. &
Kohl, J.L. 2002, ApJ, 571, 1008
Tasnim, S., Cairns, I.H. & Wheatland, M.S. 2018, JGRA, 123,
1061
Uzzo, M., Raymond, J.C., Biesecker, D., Marsden, B., Wood, C.,
Ko, Y.-K., and Wu, R. 2001, ApJ, 558, 403
Williams, L.L. & Zank, G.P. 1994, JGR, 99, 19229
Zhao, X. & Hoeksema, J.T. 2010, Sol.Phys., 266, 379

