EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to
Nuclear Physics
being an account of the recent TNP19 meeting held in Padova.
L. Fortunato1,2 , C.E. Alonso3,4 , J.M. Arias3,4 , J. Casal1,2 , K. Hagino5,6,7 , J.A. Lay3,4 , E.G. Lanza8,9 , S.M. Lenzi1,2 ,
J. Lubian10 , T. Oishi11 , and F. Pérez-Bernal12,4

arXiv:1912.03932v1 [nucl-th] 9 Dec 2019

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Dip. Fisica e Astronomia “G. Galilei”, Univ. Padova, Padova, Italy
I.N.F.N. Sez. di Padova, via Marzolo, 8, I-35131 Padova, Italy
Dep. de Fı́sica Atómica, Molecular y Nuclear, Univ. Sevilla, Spain
Instituto Interuniversitario Carlos I de Fı́sica Teórica y Computacional (iC1), Apdo. 1065, E-41080 Sevilla, Spain
Department of Physics, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan
Research Center for Electron Photon Science, Tohoku University, 1-2-1 Mikamine, Sendai 982-0826, Japan
Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
I.N.F.N. - Sezione di Catania, via S. Sofia 64, I-95123 Catania, Italy
Dipartimento di Fisica e di Astronomia “Ettore Majorana”, Univ. Catania, Italy
Instituto de Fı́sica, Universidade Federal Fluminense, 24210-340, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Bijenička c. 32, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
Depto. de Ciencias Integradas y Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Fı́sica, Matemáticas y Computación (CEAFMC), Universidad de Huelva, 21071 Huelva, Spain.
Received: date / Revised version: date
Abstract. We give an account of the main achievements of the scientific career of Andrea Vitturi so far,
that have recently been discussed during the workshop “Theoretical Nuclear Physics in Padova” on the
occasion of his retirement from full professor at the University of Padova. He has oftentimes been the driving force behind numerous contributions to nuclear structure and nuclear reactions that are here reviewed:
giant resonances, pairing correlations, collective modes, algebraic models, inelastic excitations, electromagnetic response, break-up and transfer reactions, coupled-channel formalism, clustering, subbarrier fusion
processes, etc. Among these topics several inspirational works and ideas can be found that we would like
to highlight.
PACS. PACS-key discribing text of that key – PACS-key discribing text of that key

This manuscript serves two scopes. On one hand, it
is an account of some of the topics discussed in the recent workshop “Theoretical Nuclear Physics in Padova:
a meeting in honor of Prof. Andrea Vitturi”[1] that was
held in Padova on May 20 and 21 2019 on occasion of his
retirement. On the other, the organizers and participants
felt the duty to summarize in this review paper his extensive scientific production, beyond what was discussed
at the meeting, because it spans a broad range of topics
in low energy nuclear physics, trying to highlight several
fruitful ideas and to shed new light on some less known
papers that most certainly deserve further recognition.

from Bologna1 . Physics at the University of Padova also
has a very ancient tradition, in fact Galileo Galilei, the tuscanian proposer of the scientific method, inventor of the
telescope, discoverer of several laws of Nature and one of
the fathers of modern physics (together with Kepler, Newton and many others), had been a professor in Padova for
18 years. More modernly, Nuclear Physics has represented
a major asset of cutting edge research at the University of
Padova, supported in this by the establishment in 1968,
very close to Padova, of the Legnaro National Laborato-

1

1 Alma mater and vita in brief
Padova is the seat of one of the most ancient universities in
the world, founded in 1222 by a group of scholars leaving

According to Wikipedia, where several historical references
are collected, Padova is the 5th oldest university in continuous
operation, after Bologna, Oxford, Salamanca and Cambridge.
The counting raises to 8th if one includes institutions that have
been closed.

2

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

Fig. 1. Prof. Andrea Vitturi and logo of the conference organized in Fiera di Primiero in 2007, featuring the Palazzo delle
Miniere, i.e. the location of the event (Artist: Max Art).

shape phase transitions on the other side and the intersections of these topics with pairing and transfer reactions.
He has been appointed as visiting scientist or visiting
professor in several prestigious institutions, the University
of Seville, Oak Ridge National Laboratories, the University Paris Sud at Orsay, the University of Tsukuba, the
UFF in Rio de Janeiro and the ECT* in Trento, just to
name a few. He has also been the driving force behind
a very successful series of biannual meetings, called “Selected topics in Nuclear and Atomic physics”, the first
editions of which were organized in Varenna, a beautiful
spot on the Como lake, and then, from 1999, moved to
Fiera di Primiero, a wonderful little hamlet among the
Dolomite mountains in northern Italy.
1.1 Paper’s organization

ries, one of four Labs of the Italian National Institute of
Nuclear Physics (I.N.F.N.)2 .
Andrea Vitturi was born in Farra di Soligo, province
of Treviso, in 1949 and studied physics at the University
of Padova, culminating in a degree thesis with honours in
1972 under the supervision of Claudio Villi with Franco
Zardi as co-supervisor. The latter had been a researcher
in theoretical nuclear physics for the local branch of the
I.N.F.N. and collaborated closely with Andrea Vitturi in
the first part of his scientific career, especially on the formal theory of nuclear resonances and on Glauber theory.
The first publication on the latter subject came in 1977
on the journal “Lettere al Nuovo Cimento” [2] with title “Analysis of 1.37 GeV alpha-12C Elastic Scattering in
Terms of a Modified Eikonal Multiple-Scattering Theory”.
He then spent a few years, from 1977 to 1979, as a
Research Associate at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen, where the local school of nuclear theory was very
prominent, working in particular with Aage Winther, Ricardo Broglia and several younger colleagues of about the
same age, who then became long-standing collaborators
and friends. He specialized in reaction theory, heavy-ion
physics, coupled-channel calculations, inelastic excitations
and transfer reactions on one side and in nuclear structure,
in particular in the newly formulated theory that connects
pairing interaction and collective models.
He then returned to Italy as a research staff member at the University of Padova from 1981 to 1987 and
he became associate professor at the University of Trento
(Italy) in 1988, where he studied collective modes of motion, giant resonances and algebraic models. He moved
to Padova in 1991 and became full professor of nuclear
physics in 2001. He has had several students, visitors and
collaborators and, among other tasks, served as director
of the Ph.D. School in Physics and as head of the theory group for a few years. He has also been Chairman of
the Program Advisory Committee at the LNL in Legnaro.
While in Padova he focused in processes involving nuclei
far from the stability valley on one side and in quantum
2

The others being located in Catania, Frascati and Gran
Sasso.

Vitturi’s scientific production has been copious and varied,
more than 200 items according to citation databases [3, 4],
ranging on such a large number of topics that the inclusion
of several coauthors has been necessary both to share the
load and to render justice to it without leaving behind any
important topic.
We have tried to summarize the papers where new
ideas or new solutions to given problems are proposed.
Sometimes the developments in these papers have proven
crucial to their respective sub-fields and sometimes they
only partially have got the recognition that they would
deserve. Despite the fact that alphabetically he is very
often at the end of the list of authors, Vitturi’s humble
attitude often prevented him from taking full credit of
the fact that he has frequently been the driving force beyond many developments. Therefore this paper aims also
at shedding new light on older works and set them in
the right perspective. Notwithstanding the traditional division into nuclear structure and nuclear reactions will
be used here for the sake of organizing the material in
a logical way, the philosophy of Andrea Vitturi and many
of his collaborators has always been that these two aspects are strongly intertwined and they must be viewed as
two faces of the same coin: we cannot investigate nuclear
structure properties without subjecting the nuclear system to some kind of process that ultimately necessitates of
a proper description of its dynamics. This has been a constant Streben in the scientific works of Andrea Vitturi. He
has made a lifelong effort to warn his peers about the fact
that, when trying to extract structure properties, such as
transition probabilities or matrix elements, from reaction
cross-sections, one might fall into silly blunders. The pitfall, very often, is the too optimistic separation of reaction
cross-section into factors that separate the reaction part
from the structure part. Under certain conditions this separation can be achieved, while in general, care should be
taken by assessing the proper conditions that allow, for example, the extraction of multipole strength functions from
inelastic cross-sections or two-particle transition strengths
from transfer cross-sections.
Without respecting the chronological order, we will
discuss studies on quadrupole collectivity and quantum

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

shape phase transitions in Sect. 2 and 3. Then, we will
discuss Giant Resonances in Sect. 4 and Giant Pairing Vibrations in Sect. 5 Two-neutron pairing correlations will
be discussed in Sect. 8 and then we will move to onedimensional structure and reaction models (Sect. 6) and
treat the correlations of two fermions in the continuum
in Sect. 7, 10 and 11. Sect. 9 will be devoted to various aspects of structure and dynamics of two-neutron
transfer reactions. Sect. 12 will summarize studies on the
eikonal approximation in treating direct reactions at intermediate energies. The relevance of low-lying continuum
in photo-excitation processes and in break-up reactions at
low-energy will be discussed in Sect. 13 as well as studies
related to clustering. Subbarrier fusion reactions and fusion of clusterized systems at astrophysical energies will
be treated in Sect. 14 and 14.1 respectively.

2 Quadrupole collective model
This is a very complex topic and we do not attempt a
systematic summary of all its ramifications, we will limit
ourselves to highlight the contributions that came from
the groups in Padova and in Seville, where Andrea Vitturi gave a very important contribution. The quadrupole
degree of freedom is one of the most important collective modes of motion of nuclei, it consists of vibrations
and rotations of an ellipsoidally deformed shape around
an equilibrium configuration (that might be spherical or
already deformed).

2.1 Solutions of the Bohr hamiltonian
After the inception of the critical point symmetries E(5)
and X(5) by Francesco Iachello [5, 6] the field of applications of the Bohr hamiltonian to study collective quadrupole spectra of even-even nuclei got a new boost. The
Bohr-Mottelson model describes the most important mode
of motion of nuclei at low energy, that consists in rotations and vibrations of the quadrupole deformed nuclear
surface. Andrea Vitturi has been very active in this field
and stimulated new developments from his students. This
led to two exact solutions of the Bohr hamiltonian with
a gamma-independent Coulomb and a Kratzer potential
that can be condensed in the following expression:
V (β) =

A
B
+ 2
β
β

(1)

where the Coulomb potential can be recovered by setting
B = 0. This potential [7], once plugged into the fivedimensional Schrödinger equation for the Bohr hamiltonian leads to a separable exact solution. The nice feature is that the eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be written exactly in a very compact fashion in terms of special functions that can be used as bases for diagonalization of more complex problems. These two exact solutions
are part of a small club of exact models, together with

3

Bohr-and-Mottelson’s harmonic oscillator potential, Elliott’s Davidson potential and Iachello’s square-well E(5)
potentials. This field of studies then exploded, much beyond the purest intentions of the authors of these solutions, generating a plethora of models and solutions schemes. In a subsequent paper [8], that was drawing the approximate separation of variables from the X(5) model of
Iachello, the Bohr hamiltonian was solved with Coulomb
and Kratzer potentials in β plus an harmonic oscillator in
the γ variable, namely
V (γ) = cγ 2 /2 .

(2)

As an example of application, we give in Fig. 2 the twoparameter fit of the Kratzer potential plus gamma-soft
harmonic oscillator to the low-lying energy spectrum of
234
U. The ground state band as well as the gamma- and
beta-bands are excellently fitted with such a simple model,
and allow for reliable predictions. We are confining ourselves here to the works where Andrea Vitturi has given a
direct contribution. The history of exact and approximate
solutions of the Bohr hamiltonian is partly summarized in
several review papers (cfr. [9], [10], [11] and [12]) and the
innumerable applications to spectroscopy are still flourishing today. We do not attempt to cover the whole issue
and we refer the reader to the specialized literature, and
clearly this means leaving aside important developments
in this field, developed by several groups around the world.
One case of particular interest [13] is the numerical solution of the quartic potential V (β) = Aβ 4 that is what
one expects from IBM and coherent states for the critical
point along a phase transition connecting the spherical
U(5) regime and the axially deformed SU(3) limit. The
authors of [13] showed that the ratio R4/2 is equal to 2.09
in this case, quite different from the prediction of the E(5)
model, that is 2.20. In Fig. 3 the lowest part of the energy spectrum for such a potential is shown. States are labelled by quantum numbers ξ, τ and L associated with the
γ−independent symmetry. This spectrum is qualitatively
quite similar to the E(5) case, but important differences
are seen not only in the energies, but also in the transition
rates.
The advantage of choosing the square well in the E(5)
model is clearly that it is amenable to exact solution, but
the quartic solution is possibly closer to the true behaviour
of a second order phase transition from spherical to deformed phases (Landau-type potential). A more general
version of this potential containing quadratic, quartic as
well as cubic terms, has been applied also to the X(5)
candidate nucleus 138 Gd [14] and in other studies. Other
extensions with higher powers in β have been worked out
in Ref. [15, 16].

3 Quantum Phase Transitions in IBM and
IBFM
This topic runs in parallel with the previous one, the main
difference being that the quadrupole degree of freedom is
explored within algebraic models such as the Interacting

4

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

Fig. 2. Comparison between the calculated and experimental spectra of 234 U, ground-state band and one-phonon β− and
γ−vibrations. The theoretical predictions are obtained with the choice B = 393.7415 and c = 41.5629 in Eq. (1) and (2). From
Ref. [8].

Boson Model for even-even systems [17] and the Interacting Boson-Fermion Model for odd-even systems [18].
These approaches based on symmetry and Lie algebras
allow for in-depth connection of the algebraic interacting boson models with the collective models. In addition,
during recent years the Padova-Sevilla collaboration has
worked together in the study of structural phase shape
transitions in IBM and IBFM in relation to the so-called
critical point symmetries [5, 6, 19]. The reader that is unfamiliar with the basics of this topic might find an elementary introduction in Ref. [20], where the jargon and main
ideas are explained.

3.1 Connection of the IBM and IBFM to the collective
model by using the intrinsic frame formalism

The traditional approach to connect the algebraic IBM
and IBFM models with the more traditional geometrical
collective models has been through the intrinsic state formalism [21]. This formalism allows to extract a potential
energy surface from a given Hamiltonian as depending on
shape variables. It is a variational method in which one
proposes an intrinsic state for the system that depends on
a few parameters that have to be determined by minimizing the expectation value of the corresponding Hamiltonian in the intrinsic state. Within the IBM, the intrinsic
state for the ground state band for an even-even nucleus

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

5

Fig. 3. Energy spectrum of a quartic potential, β 4 . Quantum numbers ξ and τ are given, together with spin-parity J π . The
+
numbers close to arrows are B(E2) values relative to the 2+
1 → 01 transition that is normalized to 100. Figure taken from Ref.
[13].

is written as a boson condensate of the form
|Φgs (β, γ)i = √

1
[Γ † (β, γ)]NB |0i,
NB ! gs

(3)

where NB is the boson number, |0i is the boson vacuum
†
(β, γ),
and the ground state boson creation operator, Γgs
is
1

β
[s† + β cos γd†0 + √ sin γ(d†2 + d†−2 )].
2
1+
(4)
The potential energy surface for the ground state is obtained by calculating the expectation value of the appropriate boson Hamiltonian, HB , in the intrinsic state (3)
†
Γgs
(β, γ) = p

β2

Egs (β, γ) = hΦgs (β, γ)|HB |Φgs (β, γ)i.

(5)

The variational parameters β and γ play a similar role to
the ones of the intrinsic collective shape variables in the
Bohr Hamiltonian.
Intrinsic frame states for the mixed boson-fermion systems can be constructed by coupling the odd single-particle
states to the intrinsic states of the even core. The lowest
states of the odd nucleus are expected to originate from
the above mentioned coupling to the intrinsic ground-state
|Φgs (β, γ)i. To obtain them, one should first construct the
coupled states
|ΨjK (β, γ)i = |Φgs (β, γ)i ⊗ |jKi

(6)

and then diagonalize the total boson-fermion Hamiltonian
in this basis, giving a set of energy eigenvalues En (β, γ),
where n is an index to count solutions in the odd-even system. In the present case, for an angular momentum j, the

possible magnetic components are denoted by K. Therefore there are 2j +1 different states that are restricted due
to the symmetry K ↔ −K.
Using this formalism with the appropriate extensions,
the Padova-Sevilla collaboration has studied many different aspects of the even-even and odd-even systems and
the relationships of these algebraic models with the traditional geometric models. This has been a long-standing
and very fruitful collaboration and we just mention some
results obtained in these studies, referring the reader to
the specialized literature for more details:
1. even-even O(6) ↔ γ−unstable: quadrupole moments,
E2 transitions and transition densities in the O(6) limit
of the interacting boson model were studied within a
formalism based on the intrinsic frame [22, 23]
2. odd-even systems: within the framework of an intrinsic frame formalism both axially symmetric and triaxial situations were discussed. The role of Bose-Fermi
symmetries and their interpretation in terms of shape
variables were studied. Also the structure of β and γ
excitations in odd-even systems was investigated [24].
3. octupole deformations and coupling dipole modes to
quadrupole deformations: an intrinsic frame analysis
of octupole deformed nuclei in the SU(3) limit of the
extended Interacting Boson Model was presented. Excited bands associated with nuclei exhibiting permanent octupole deformation were studied, as well as the
behavior of in-band and intra-band transitions. The
coupling of an odd particle to an even core with these
characteristics was also discussed [25]. In similar spirit,
the coupling of the high-lying dipole mode to the lowlying quadrupole modes for the case of deformed γunstable nuclei was studied [26].

6

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

4. cranking: a self-consistent cranking formalism based
on the interacting boson model intrinsic wave function
was developed. Explicit formulae were obtained for the
energies and moments of inertia of the ground-state
rotational band as a power expansion in the rotational
frequency [27].
5. two-phonon states: a general study of excitations up to
two-phonon states was carried out using the intrinsicstate formalism of the Interacting Boson Model (IBM).
Spectra and transitions for the different dynamical symmetries were analyzed and the correspondence with
states in the laboratory frame was established [28].
6. mixed symmetry states and α−transfer: within the
neutron-proton interacting boson model the population of mixed-symmetry states via alpha transfer processes was studied. Closed expressions were deduced in
the case of the limiting Uπ+ν (5) and SUπ+ν (3) symmetries. It was found that the population of the lowest
mixed symmetry 2+ state, vanishing along the Nπ =
Nν line, depends on the number of active bosons and
it is normally smaller than the lowest fully symmetric
2+ state [29].
7. triaxiality: an extension of the Interacting Boson Model
that includes the cubic (Q̂ × Q̂ × Q̂)(0) term was proposed. The potential energy surface for the cubic quadrupole interaction was explicitly calculated within the
coherent state formalism using the complete (χ−dependent) expression for the quadrupole operator. The
Q-cubic term was found to depend on the asymmetry
deformation parameter γ in a combination of cos (3γ)
and cos2 (3γ) terms, thereby allowing for minima in
the triaxial region (0o < γ0 < 60o ) of the parameter
space [30]. A similar form of cubic terms inducing triaxiality, based on d operators, were introduced in the
IBM by Heyde and collaborators [31].

3.2 Shape phase transitions in the IBM and the IBFM

coupled to an even-even boson core3 that undergoes
a phase transition from spherical U(5) to γ-unstable
O(6) situation was considered [34].
3. two-particle transfer as a tool to detect shape phase
transitions: the evolution of the transfer spectroscopic
intensities as a possible signature of shape-phase transitions was investigated. The study was carried out
considering chains of even-even nuclei displaying changes
in shape, such as from sphericity to axial-symmetric
deformed or from sphericity to deformed γ−unstable
nuclei. The evolution of the structure of these nuclei
was described in terms of the interacting boson model.
Simple formulae were given using the intrinsic-frame
formalism [35].
4. odd-nuclei and critical point symmetries in IBFM: several different aspects connected with shape phase transitions in nuclei and the possible occurrence of dynamical symmetries at the critical points including multiorbit symmetries have been investigated. The phase transition in odd nuclei when the underlying even-even core
nuclei experiment transitions between two dynamical
symmetries of the types U (5) → O(6), U (5) → SU (3)
and SU (3) → O(6) → SU (3) were studied. The odd
particle was assumed to be moving in different single particle orbitals [36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41]. At the critical point in the phase transition spherical−γ-unstable
for odd-even nuclei, an analytic multi-orbit solution to
the corresponding Bohr Hamiltonian, called E(5/12),
was worked out [42].
As an example of the obtained results for odd-even systems in the vicinity of the critical point in the even nuclei,
we discuss briefly the case of the transition from vibrational behaviour to the gamma-unstable regime (characterized within the collective Bohr hamiltonian by the E(5)
critical point symmetry). Along this line, a simple parameterization for the hamiltonian of the even-even system is
used, namely
HB = (1 − c) n̂d −

With the introduction of the idea of critical point symmetries by Iachello in early 2000 [5, 6], a new field of research concerning critical point symmetries started and
this reopened the way to studies on structural phase transitions in Nuclear Physics. The works of the collaboration
including Andrea Vitturi in this field can be summarized
as follows:
1. even-even U (5) → O(6) critical point vs. E(5): the differences between the E(5) critical point introduced by
Iachello within the collective model [5] and the equivalent critical point in the IBM [32] have been critically
discussed. In addition, the validity of the intrinsic state
formalism for transitional IBM regions [33] was tested.
2. one-particle spectroscopic intensities in γ−unstable systems: the evolution of one-particle spectroscopic factors as a possible signature of shape phase transitions
was investigated. The study was done by describing the
odd systems in terms of the Interacting Boson Fermion
Model. The particular case of an odd j=3/2 particle

c
Q̂B · Q̂B ,
4N

(7)

that is often called the consistent Q hamiltonian [43],
where
X
n̂d =
d†µ dµ ,
(8)
µ

˜ (2) ,
Q̂B = (s† × d˜ + d† × s̃ + χ d† × d)

(9)

and N is the total number of bosons. With the choice χ =
0 this hamiltonian produces a transition between spherical
and γ−unstable phases, the critical point being obtained
for c = N/(2(N − 1)). The spectrum at the critical point
is qualitatively similar to the one obtained with the E(5)
model in solution of the Bohr hamiltonian. Similarly, one
can describe the corresponding phase transitions in the
3

It is well-known (Bayman-Silverberger) that the coupling
of a γ-unstable core with a j = 3/2 orbits leads to a supersymmetric situation, i.e. it can be described with a Lie superalgebra.

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

U(5)

12.07.19

5th Workshop on Shape-Phase
Transitions

7

O(6)

12

Fig. 4. Example of a j = 9/2 particle coupled to a even-even core undergoing the transition from spherical to deformed
γ−unstable shapes. For more details see text.

neighbouring odd nuclei. This is formally obtained in the
Interacting Boson Fermion Model (IBFM) by a bosonfermion hamiltonian of the type
H = HB + HF + VBF ,

(10)

where
HF + VBF =

X
j

j a†j · aj − 2

c
Q̂B · q̂F .
4N

(11)

j are the single particle energies, and q̂F is the fermion
quadrupole operator. With the choice χ = 0 for the boson quadrupole operator one can describe, by varying the
mixing parameter c, the transition from sphericity to deformed gamma-instability. In Fig. 4 the odd particle is assumed to be moving in the single particle orbital j = 9/2.
In the left panel of the upper part, the path followed when
changing c is plotted. Note that we have written E(5) in
the diagram as a reference, but this is not the IBM critical point as shown in Ref. [32]. All the other panels in the
upper part are the energy surfaces for the even-even core

for different c−values. The critical point is at c = 0.625 as
shown in the lower left panels. The lower right panel gives
the behavior of the single particle states: (1) ≡ K = ±9/2,
(2) ≡ K = ±7/2, (3) ≡ K = ±5/2, (4) ≡ K = ±3/2,
(5) ≡ K = ±1/2. The line (0) corresponds to the behavior of the ground state energy for the even-even core.
The various components of the single-particle odd state
are driven to the prolate or oblate side at different values
of the control parameter, depending on the value of K and
the preferential alignment of angular momenta.

4 Giant Resonances
Giant resonances are a universal feature of the spectrum
of nuclei, arising in photo-absorption, inelastic scattering,
charge-exchange and other processes. They are collective
mode of oscillation of the nucleus as a whole, excited either by the electromagnetic field or by the strong force,
and they can be seen in a fluid dynamics picture, but of a
different kind with respect to surface oscillations described

8

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

in the previous sections. Microscopically, they are understood as a coherent superposition of particle-hole excitations in a shell-model picture of the nucleus. Andrea Vitturi has specialized in the field of giant resonances while at
Copenhagen, describing the optimal conditions for exciting this mode [44, 45] and continued in Trento and Padova,
where he investigated also aspects related to excitation of
double and multiphonon giant resonances [46, 47] and to
new phenomena arising in neutron-rich nuclei (to be discussed in the next section).

moves the isoscalar strength to lower energies until the
peak at lower energy becomes stronger than the one corresponding to the isoscalar Giant Dipole Resonance (ISGDR).
The nature of the different states and the effect of the
neutron excess are best evidenced by looking at the transition densities of these states. In the case of the dipole, the
proton and neutron components of the transition densities
are in phase inside the nucleus while at the nuclear surface the neutrons give practically the only contribution,
and therefore isoscalar and isovector transition densities
are of comparable radial dependence and magnitude, see
fig. 7. One therefore should expect that these states, due
4.1 Giant and pigmy resonances
to their mixing of isoscalar and isovector character, will
During recent years considerable interest has been focused respond in an equivalent way to isoscalar and isovector
on the study of the effect of neutron excess on the collec- heavy-ion probes that are only sensitive to the surface[54,
tive properties of neutron-rich nuclei. Due to the pres- 55].
This has been shown by many experiments using the
ence of the so-called neutron skin one would expect an
(α, α0 γ) reactions as well as other isoscalar probes like
enhanced mixing of the isoscalar and isovector modes4 .
17
O[52]. Experiments performed on the same nuclei with
To investigate this point, microscopic calculations for
0
Oxygen and Calcium isotopes, based on spherical Hartree- the (γ, γ ) reaction reveal an interesting property of the
low-lying dipole states: the states belonging to the lower
Fock model with Skyrme SGII interaction have been performed[48,
49]. The collective excitations of these nuclei were deter- part of the PDR energy region are excited by both isoscalar
mined in the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), using and isovector probes, while the states lying in the high enthe full residual interaction. The strength distributions for ergy part are excited only by the electromagnetic probe.
the dipole mode were calculated for multipole operators This clear separation of the PDR energy range in two regions is generally referred to as the splitting of the PDR.
of the form
This result is achieved by comparing the reduced elecZ
N
tromagnetic transition probability B(E1) with the inelaseN X
eZ X
(EM )
O1M =
rp Y1M (r̂p ) −
rn Y1M (r̂n ) (12) tic cross section measured with isoscalar probes. However,
A p=1
A n=1
while the Coulomb inelastic cross section and the B(E1)
are proportional, the relationship between the isoscalar refor the electromagnetic dipole and
sponse and the inelastic excitation cross section due to an
isoscalar probe it is not so evident. In Ref. [56], semiclasA
X
5
(IS)
sical cross section calculations have been performed that
3
2
O1M =
(r1 − < r > ri )Y1M (r̂i )
(13)
reproduce the global feature of the reduction of the experi3
i=1
mental cross section at higher excitation energy compared
for the 3~ω dipole mode of isoscalar nature. The analytic to the isovector channel, confirming the structural splitform of the operator in the second equation above avoids ting of the low-lying E1 strength.
The isospin mixing of the low-lying dipole states has
the spurious center of mass motion.
These calculations have shown that as soon as the neu- strong consequences in the excitation process especially
tron number increases, some strength appears at low en- when an isoscalar probe is used. One of the most imporergies in the dipole strength distribution, well below the tant ingredients entering in the calculation of the inelastic
cross section is the radial form factor which contains the
dipole giant resonance.
This can be seen in fig. 5, where the isovector response structure effects and depends on the various model emobtained in a HF + RPA calculation with the SGII Skyrme ployed for the description of the inner structure of the
interaction are plotted. The strength appearing at low nuclei. In ref. [57] it has been shown that the form factor
energy, carrying few per cent of the isovector EWSR, is constructed via a double folding procedure are very senpresent in many nuclei far from the stability line and it has sitive to the shape of the transition densities employed,
been associated to the possible existence of another mode especially in the region around the nuclear surface which
of new nature: the Pygmy Dipole Resonance (PDR)[50, is the region explored in such nuclear reactions. There51,52, 53]. In fig. 6 the isoscalar response is shown for the fore, the choice of a transition density which describes
same Calcium isotopes of fig. 5, in this case the strength all the details of the state taken into consideration is of
has been averaged with a Lorentzian function with a width paramount importance.
of 2 MeV. The isoscalar response shows a behaviour similar to the isovector one, even though a peak is present also
for nuclei with N=Z. The increasing number of neutron 5 Giant Pairing Vibrations
4

These are modes of motion in which the proton and neutron
fluids oscillate in phase or out-of-phase, respectively.

The Giant Pairing Vibration (GPV) is an elusive collective
mode of motion of nuclei, that is connected with the fields

16

2

2

B(E1) (e fm )

10
10

1

10

0

10

28

O

O

−1

10.0 of the 20.0
0.0
10.0
20.0 to Nuclear
30.0 Physics
L. Fortunato et 0.0
al.: An overview
scientific contribution
of
Andrea Vitturi

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

2

2

B(E1) (e fm )

E (MeV)

10

40

Ca

48

Ca

60

Ca

70

Ca

−1

10

2

10

1

10

0

10

9

E (MeV)

−1

0.0

10.0

20.0

0.0

10.0

E (MeV)

20.0

30.0

E (MeV)

Fig. 5. Isovector dipole response obtained in HF+RPA for a sequence of a Calcium isotopes.
400.0
40

Ca

48

Ca

60

Ca

70

Ca

200.0
100.0

2

6

−1

dB(E1)/dE (e fm MeV )

300.0

0.0
2500.0
2000.0
1500.0
1000.0
500.0
0.0
0.0

10.0

20.0
30.0
E (MeV)

40.0

0.0

10.0

20.0
30.0
E (MeV)

40.0

50.0

Fig. 6. Averaged isoscalar dipole response obtained in HF+RPA for a sequence of a Calcium isotopes.

of giant resonances (from which it draws the first part of
the name) and of pairing interactions in nuclei. It was predicted long ago [58] in a collective model created by analogy with the Bohr-Mottelson quadrupole hamiltonian, but
for the monopole degree of freedom. The Bés hamiltonian [59], as it is called, describes the quantized pairing
oscillations and rotations in an abstract two-dimensional
gauge space. In a polar parameterization this space can
be described by two variables, the radial variable α that
plays the role of pairing collective variable, controlling the
extent of ”deformation” in this space and a gauge angle
φ. The Bés hamiltonian is a fruitful model that allows
to explore two limits, depending on the shape of a collective potential V (α), that might range from harmonic
oscillator with a minimum in α = 0, describing ”normal
nuclei” or ”spherical in gauge space”, around which pairing vibrations might occur, to potentials with a minimum

for α > 0, describing ”superfluid nuclei” or ”deformed
in gauge space” around which one expects a pairing rotational spectrum to occur. The spectra we are talking
about include the monopole states around the 0+ ground
state of an even-even nucleus, including a chain of neighbouring even-even nuclei that differ by an even amount
of particles from the initial nucleus. The occurrence of a
sort of harmonic scheme around 208 Pb was pointed out by
Bohr and Mottelson [60]. Pairing rotations are instead associated with superfluid beahviour, and in bewteen these
extremes one has also a critical point solution of the Bés
hamiltonian that gives rise to interesting speculations [61].
Instead of opting for collective approaches, one might
also look at microscopic models, in which the addition or
removal mode are described in terms of particle-particle
or hole-hole operators tensorially coupled to zero spin,
[a† a† ]00 and [aa]00 that create or destroy a monopole pair

10

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

the subject of several investigations aimed at finding an
explanation of -the reason why several experimental cam68
paigns in the1
’70’s and more recently failed to observe the
1
Ni
ll
GPV in heavyGDR
nuclei with (t, p) reactions. In Ref. [69], a
0.2
0.1
particle-particle RPA approach was used for tin and lead
nuclei, with the aim of calculating the pairing strengths
βp of ground- and excited 0+ states, in which the GPV
0.1
is identified as the collective state (large βp ) within the
0
group of excited level with 2 quanta of excitation around
an energy of about 2~ω. These model structure calcula0
tion, however imperfect, have been merged with reactions
-0.1
p
calculations, employing either a standard projectile, like
n
14
C, or an exotic weakly-bound nucleus, namely 6 He. The
-0.1
IS
intuition
of Andrea Vitturi and Hugo Sofia has been that
IV
the
weakly-bound
nature of this light Borromean nucleus,
-0.2
-0.2
implies an optimum Q-value that will favour the popula0 2 4 6 8 10
0 2 tion4 of monopole
6 8 modes
10 at around the GPV energy, der (fm)
r
(fm)
pressing instead the population of the ground state, a fact
that is impossible to obtain with conventional beams of
Fig. 7. Proton (dashed black) and neutron (dot-dashed well bound projectiles or with triton beams (See Fig. 8).
red) radial transition densities for the pygmy dipole state at This study and subsequent additions based on the same
E=10.41 MeV of the 68 Ni isotope. The microscopic transi- idea [70] led to a reconsideration of the optimal experimention densities have been obtained by a HF plus RPA calcutal conditions that must be sought to effectively prove the
lation with an SGII interaction. The isovector (solid black)
existence of the GPV. Finally after more than 40 years of
and isoscalar (solid green) transition densities are also shown.
efforts, the first serious hints of having achieved this have
been obtained by the MAGNEX group at the Laboratori
Nazionali del Sud in Catania [71]. Measurements of differrespectively. These can be plugged into a particle-particle ential cross section in two-neutron transfer reactions with
Random Phase Approximation framework [62, 59, 63, 64], 18 O impinging on 14 C and 15 C have shown clear signawhere it is possible to calculate pair transfer transition tures of an excited monopole mode (L = 0) with high coldensities that are a way to characterize the amount of lective character at about the energy predicted by simple
pairing correlations in each state (pp-RPA). Performing a formulas. The excitation spectrum for 14 C and the anguBCS transformation on top of RPA calculations allows for lar distribution of the proposed GPV state are shown in
an extension to superfluid systems. In this case addition Fig. 9. This important study suggests that the expected
and removal modes cannot be calculated separately, but similarity between p-h states in giant resonances and the
the X and Y coefficients should be sought in the solution corresponding p-p or h-h collective GPV states, far from
of the dispersion equation.
being just a formal analogy, approximately holds true, deThe history of the search for this mode of motion is spite the GPV being far less accessible to experimental
nicely collected in two recent papers [65, 66], where the investigation. In evaluating the transfer probability and
connections with collective models and with microscopic quantal corrections, the contribution of Andrea Vitturi
models that make use of second quantization are explored has been very important [72]. The elusive appearance of
and where the links of these studies with two-neutron the GPV mode in reactions with light nuclei was further
transfer reactions are summarized. An early review of these investigated in Ref. [73], where the role of low-angular
topics, that has the merit of giving detailed explanations momentum orbitals and the Q-value mismatch are emthat are hard to find elsewhere, was edited by Andrea Vit- phasized.
turi, Carlos Dasso and joined many collaborators in the
proceedings of a meeting promoted by the Italian Physical Society (Società Italiana di Fisica, SIF) held at the
6 One-dimensional models for structure and
Villa Monastero in Varenna (Como lake district, Italy)
in 1987 [67]. The contribution of Andrea Vitturi to this reactions
field has been very important, especially in collaboration
with Hugo Sofia, showing that the number non conserv- In the spirit of understanding all the ingredients of physiing nature of this mode implies that it can be observed cal models, before attempting application to real systems,
in reactions that allow for a transfer or an exchange back Andrea Vitturi suggested to work on the line of research
and forth of nucleons and that the properties of these re- of one-dimensional models for structure and reactions of
actions depend not only on the structure properties of weakly-bound and borromean nuclei. The previous expethe mode itself, but also, and heavily, on the dynami- rience of one of the authors (F.P.B.) in dealing with a
cal variables associated with bombarding energy, choice of pseudostate approach to continuum discretization with a
target-projectile combinations [68] and especially on the Transformed Harmonic Oscillator basis was first applied
reaction Q-value. This last point, in particular, has been to 1D problems [74] and later to 3D problems [75]. The
2

-1

r x δρ (fm )

0.2

0.3

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

11

Fig. 8. Comparison of calculated DWBA differential cross-sections to ground and excited states of 210 Pb and 118 Sn (calculated
in a ppRPA approach, addition mode) in two-neutron transfer reactions with conventional beams (lower panels) and weaklybound nuclei (upper panels). The excitation of the GPV mode is favoured in the latter case, Adapted from Ref. [69].

1D model was instrumental for grasping the subtle features that arise from the coupling of a weakly-bound quantum system with the continuum. The model was a onedimensional three-body model, inspired to Ref. [76], that
consisted on two valence unbound neutrons interacting
with a Woods-Saxon potential core with completely filled
bound levels. In this approach the two nucleons, with coordinates x1 and x2 , are bound because they interact with
each other via a density-dependent contact residual interaction Vint (x1 , x2 ) of the type

Vint (x1 , x2 ) = −VRI

ρ[(x1 + x2 )/2]
ρ0

p
δ(x1 − x2 ), (14)

where VRI , p, and ρ0 are free parameters while ρ(x) is
the matter density of the Nb occupied bound states of the
PNb −1 ∗
core, namely ρ(x) = i=0
ψi (x)ψi (x).
The work on the dynamics of this model, with the
extremely valuable participation of Kouichi Hagino and
Hiro Sagawa, gave as a result the publication of an article
where the effect of dineutron correlation on breakup processes were studied by subjecting them to the influence of
a time-dependent one-body external field [77]. This work
also influenced the subsequent work of Oishi and collaborators, summarized in section 7.
The work in collaboration with Andrea Vitturi continued, resulting in several contributions to congresses and

meetings and later it was extended to Laura Moschini, one
of Vitturi’s graduate students, who in her PhD thesis and
the subsequent publications, studied the aforementioned
model in a systematic and exhaustive way, comparing the
outcome of different methods of discretizing the continuum with pseudostates and the pros and cons of each of
them [78]. Direct reactions, such as elastic and inelastic
excitations [79], transfer and breakup can be studied in
this model [80, 81], that contains most of the features encountered in real systems and allows for a number of interesting speculations about the reaction mechanisms. For
example, the transfer of two particles is clearly enhanced
in collision processes and the ability of several models to
give accurate results can be tested against exact solutions
in the 1D formalism.
The solution of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation can be compared with coupled-channel formalism with
and without the inclusion of the continuum, thus allowing
for a quantitative evaluation of the effectiveness of each
approach. A review of these studies is given in Ref. [82].

7 Correlations of two fermions in the
continuum
Pairing correlation is one of the most curious phenomena
of multi-fermion systems, including atomic nuclei. This

12

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

Fig. 9. Energy spectrum for the reaction 12 C(18 O,16 O)14 C showing a peak at about 16.9 MeV of excitation energy. The angular
distribution for this peak shows an oscillatory pattern that indicates monopole character, according to the analysis discussed
in Fig. 3 and in the Supplementary material of Ref. [71]. Figure remastered from Ref. [71].

correlation plays an essential role not only in static systems, but also in dynamical phenomena. One example of
these phenomena is two-nucleon radioactive emission [83,
84], where a pair of proton or neutron is emitted by the
quantum-tunneling effect. Key ingredients of this process
include (i) the pairing correlation, (ii) Pauli principle, and
(iii) time-dependent dynamics in the continuum region.
For a proper description of the two-nucleon emission, one
should simultaneously consider these ingredients in the
system of interest. For this purpose, time-dependent (TD)
multi-particle models provide a suitable solution, see Ref.
[85] and references therein.
In this section, we introduce the basic idea and formalism of TD model. We also review the results of TD
calculation applied to the two-fermion (2F) tunneling in
one-dimension [85], where the physical properties of twonucleon radioactivity can be characterized.

7.1 Time-dependent calculations
Quantum-mechanical dynamics is an essential concept to
understand various phenomena of the nuclear and subatomic physics. Those are generally described by the timedependent Schrödinger equation,
i~

∂
|ψ(t)i = Ĥ |ψ(t)i ,
∂t

(15)

where Ĥ is the total Hamiltonian corresponding to the
system of interest. For simplicity, the Hamiltonian Ĥ is

assumed to be static in the following. Also, in this subsection, the specific form of Ĥ is not specified, in order to
keep the formalism very general.
Employing the eigenstates of Ĥ as basis, namely Ĥ |Ei =
E |Ei, allows to write an arbitrary state |ψ0 i as an expansion
Z
|ψ0 i = µ(E) |Ei dE,
(16)
where {µ(E)} ∈ C are the expansion coefficients. Thus,
2
|µ(E)| indeed corresponds to the energy spectrum. Assuming |ψ0 i as the initial state, the time-evolution of this
state can be found by
Z
|ψ(t)i = e−itĤ/~ |ψ0 i = µ(E)e−itE/~ |Ei dE. (17)
The survival coefficient, β(t), is determined as the overlap
between the initial and the present states. That is,
β(t) ≡ hψ0 | ψ(t)i
Z
Z
D
E
= dE 0 µ(E 0 ) dEµ(E) E 0 e−itE/~ E
Z
2
= dE |µ(E)| e−itE/~ ,
(18)
where the notation hE 0 | Ei = δ(E 0 − E) was used. From
Eq. (18), one can read that the survival coefficient is given
by the Fourier transformation of the energy spectrum.
This is nothing but the “Krylov-Fock theorem” [86]. From
β(t), the survival probability Psurv (t) is also determined
as
2
Psurv (t) = |β(t)| ,
(19)

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

which physically corresponds to the decaying rule of this
meta-stable state.
In many cases of nuclear radioactive processes, the decaying rule can be well approximated by an exponential
function:
Psurv (t) ∼
(20)
= e−t/τ ,
where τ is the lifetime of the meta-stable state. From Eqs.
(18) and (19), the corresponding spectrum to this exponential decay can be found in terms of the Breit-Wigner
(BW) profile. That is,
2

|µ(E)| =

1
(Γ0 /2)
,
π (E − E0 )2 + (Γ0 /2)2

|ψ0 i =

Γ0
eia(E)
|Ei dE,
2π (E0 − iΓ0 /2) − E

(22)


where eia(E) with a(E) ∈ R are arbitrary phase-factors.
The width Γ0 is related to the lifetime, τ = ~/Γ0 . The
central energy E0 , on the other hand, corresponds to the
experimental Q value of the process of interest.
7.2 Application to two-fermion tunneling
In Ref. [85], the TD calculation has been applied to the
one-dimensional system, which consists of two fermions
and one core (daughter) nucleus. Fig. 10 visually displays
this system. This three-body system can be a good testing
field to discuss the 2F emission, where the core nucleus
works as the source of the potential barrier VC (x). Thus,
the corresponding Hamiltonian reads
Ĥ = ĥ(1) + ĥ(2) + v12 (x1 − x2 ),
~2 d2
h(i) = −
+ VC (xi ),
2m dx2i

x2

m
x1

x

Fig. 10. One-dimensional three-body model utilized in Ref.
[85]. The core nucleus is assumed to be infinitely heavy.

(21)

or equivalently,
Z r

mC→∞

13

(23)

where m is the single-fermion mass. For the core nucleus,
an infinitely-heavy mass is assumed.
For the pairing correlation of the emitted fermions, in
Ref. [85], the short-range attraction v12 (x1 − x2 ) is employed. The core-fermion potential VC (xi ), on the other
side, includes the repulsive-barrier and the attractive-well
terms, consistently to the realistic radioactive systems. See
Fig. 11 for a schematic picture of VC (x). For numerical calculations, continuum states
P are discretized. Thus, Eq. (16)
is modified as |ψ0 i = i µi |Ei i, where the eigen-energy
Ei is obtained by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian within
the box-discretized model space.
In order to fix the initial state |ψ0 i, the confiningpotential procedure has been utilized in Ref. [85]. Namely,
at t = 0, the wave function of two fermions is solved so
as to be localized inside the potential barrier. Figure 11
schematically shows this situation.
By monitoring the time evolution of the 2F state, remarkable features of the 2F-tunneling process have been
found [85], that is here summarized:

– Pairing-dependence of the tunneling probability or decaying lifetime. Starting from the confined 2F state,
the survival probability Psurv (t) is indeed well approximated by the exponential function as in Eq. (20).
Furthermore, as long as in the weak-pairing region,
the mean lifetime τ is extended when the attractive
pairing is switched on. This means that the tunneling
probability via the potential barrier can be reduced
by the pairing attraction. This result can be explained
from the kinematics. Because of the attractive pairing,
the 2F-energy level is decreased. This lower 2F energy
with respect to the fixed barrier height then leads to a
smaller tunneling probability.
– Correlated emission. When the total spin of 2F is coupled to zero (S12 = 0), with the attractive-pairing
force, there can be a spatially-localized component of
the 2F-wave function during the tunneling process. Or
intuitively, two fermions are promoted to (i) move to
the same direction, and (ii) be emitted at the same
time. This is a typical product of the pairing correlation in the continuum. Note also that the similar localization has been predicted for the bound systems, as
the dinucleon correlation [87]. On the other side, when
the pairing correlation is switched off, the so-called sequential emission becomes the dominant process: only
one fermion is emitted whereas the other one is left
inside the potential.
– Total-spin dependence. In the S12 = 0 case, the 2F
emission can be affected by the pairing correlation as
mentioned above. On the other side, when two fermions
are coupled to S12 = 1, the pairing effect vanishes:
the results with and without the pairing force are not
changed when S12 = 1. Furthermore, the S12 = 1 emission can be faster than the S12 = 0 emission, even if
the effective barrier height is the same. This total-spin
dependence is indeed a product of the Pauli principle,
which gives the additional constraint on the spatial
part of the wave function.

Note that there have been other TD calculations performed for the three-dimensional 2F tunneling [88], where
similar conclusions are obtained. Further developments of
TD calculation are expected to lead to a deeper knowledge
of the multi-fermion dynamics and of pairing correlation
in the continuum.

14

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

VC(x)

x
Fig. 11. Two fermions confined inside the potential VC (x) at
t = 0.

8 Two-neutron pairing correlations
Closely tied with the previous topic is the role the role of
the pairing correlations in two-neutron transfer reactions
[89,72]. Of course one-dimensional models are nice tools,
but ultimately one wants a full three-dimensional picture
of the pairing correlations and of the transfer mechanims.
Vitturi has investigated several aspects of the delicate interplay between correlations and dynamics, in collaboration with many, some of which are collected in the following sections.
In this connection, Vitturi’s contribution to the problem of dineutron correlation should be emphasized. The
dineutron correlation is a spatial correlation due to the
pairing, with which two neutrons inside a nucleus are
strongly localized in space. It has attracted lots of attention in recent years in connection to exotic nuclei [90].
It should be emphasized that the paper by Vitturi, together with Catara, Insolia, and Maglione [91], was the
first one which pointed out that the dineutron correlation
is caused by admixtures of a few single-particle orbits with
opposite parity. Fig. 12 shows the two-particle density,
obtained with simple harmonic oscillator wave functions,
as a function of the relative distance between two neutrons, r = r 1 − r 2 , where r 1 and r 2 are the coordinates of
each neutrons, and the center of mass of the two neutrons,
R = (r 1 + r 2 )/2. This figure clearly shows that the twoparticle density is well localized in the small r region, if
two configurations with single-particles orbits with opposite parities, namely (0h11/2 )2 and (0i13/2 )2 , are mixed in
the wave function, whereas the pure configurations lead to
an extended density distribution. Such surface clustering
of two-neutrons due to the dineutron correlation plays an
important role in two-neutron transfer reactions [92, 93,
94], which are discussed in the next section.

9 Two-neutron transfer mechanism
Two-neutron transfer cross sections are the probe par excellence for testing pairing correlations in nuclei. Ground
state to ground state A X(p,t)A+2 X or A X(t,p)A+2 X cross

sections are enhanced by the presence of pairing with respect to the case of pure configurations of two nucleons in
single-particle orbitals. From the structure point of view,
pairing produces a coherent admixture of different configurations in the ground state, while higher lying 0+ states
are non-collective with respect to the pairing operator.
During the transfer reaction to the ground state, all these
configurations contribute constructively to the total transfer cross section, thus producing the expected enhancement.
On the other hand, one would like this probe to be sensitive to each contribution, i.e. to the spectroscopic factor
for each configuration. One has one datum versus multiple
different possibilities. In a large open shell, one can easily have five or six components. The same enhancement
could be obtained in principle with different mixing of the
different contributions. It is known that certain orbitals
contribute less than others to the transfer cross section
since the two neutrons barely couple to a 0s state in the
relative motion coordinate. However, this will only help in
very few cases. On top of that, one has to face other uncertainties like the optical potentials needed to calculate
total cross sections.
In order to overcome this issue, the idea was to complement (p,t) and (t,p) cross sections with two-neutron transfer with heavier probes. Ratio between the cross section to
the ground state and to the first excited 0+ states of 112 Sn,
32
Mg, and 68 Ni were studied in [95] using (t,p), (18 O,16 O),
and (14 C,12 C) reactions. The original calculations in [95]
were done including only the simultaneous transfer of the
neutrons in Zero Range Distorted Wave Born Approximation (DWBA) for (t,p), performed with DWUCK [96],
and in second-order perturbation theory along a semiclassical trajectory for the heavier probes, done with the code
TFF [97].
By comparing the results with the different probes applied to the first nucleus of interest, 112 Sn, one finds an
interesting selectivity with respect to the alignment of the
spin and the angular momentum of each neutron. In order
to illustrate this effect, Fig. 13 shows the cross sections for
(t,p), (18 O,16 O), and (14 C,12 C) reactions assuming different pure configurations for the structure of 112 Sn. Three
different pure configurations were chosen: one with zero
orbital angular momentum, (s1/2 )2 , one with the spin and
angular momentum aligned (d5/2 )2 , and the final one with
spin and angular momentum antialigned (d3/2 )2 . The first
important thing to notice is that total cross sections obtained for (t,p) barely change from one configuration to
the other. Neutrons in the triton are initially in a s−wave
and thus they are not sensitive to the alignment of the
spin in their final configuration after the reaction. However, those neutrons with an aligned initial configuration
give a larger cross section when the final configuration is
antialigned and vice-versa. One can see in Fig. 13 that
14
C gives a higher cross section when the configuration in
112
Sn is aligned, (d5/2 )2 , whereas 18 O gives a higher cross
section for the antialigned one, (d3/2 )2 .
These configurations will be mixed in the actual total experimental cross section, but the enhancement pro-

mber of maxima equal to the orbital angular momentum
spin
number
antum
I, in the case of antiparallel
= I —2 ), and equal to 3+1, in the case of parallel spin

= I+ ,
1

)—

The situation

few components one will obtain a more pronounced effe
As an example, in Fig. 2(c) is displayed the probability d
tribution associated with the fictitious wave function

1/J2(Oh 2 )a+ I/J2(Oi 2 )p
the mixing of
L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

changes when we introduce

10

00

R(fm)

0

R(fm)

0

10

R (fm)

I

I

—

10

10

15

10-

0-

—
—
')Oi
)Oh

+

«/2)
&s/~)

c)

a)

11

. 13

FIG. 2. Contour plots of the probability distribution I'(r, R) for the pure configurations (a) (Oh 2 )0 and (b) (Oi 2 )0, respectively.
Fig. 12. Two-particle densities as a function of the relative distance, r, and the center of mass coordinate, R, of two particles
wave
function with simple harmonic oscillator wave functions, assuming particular configurations indicated
the mixed
case of
ers to the inside
a nucleus.
These
are obtained
in the figure. Taken from Ref. [91].
(Oi

2

)2p+

(Oh

2

)p2

.

r more details see caption to Fig. (1).

Fig. 13. Comparison of (t,p), (18 O, 16 O), and (14 C,12 C) total two-neutron transfer cross sections for different independent
particle configurations of the two neutrons in 112 Sn.

duced for the three probes will be completely different.
Such difference will give information about the relative
weight of aligned and antialigned configurations, i. e. the
spectroscopic factors for the nucleus of interest. Moreover,
within the same reaction one can often measure also the
total cross section to the first excited state of the target.
The ratio between the cross section to the first 0+ excited state and the ground state will be sensitive to this
microscopic information, thus being qualitatively different
for each probe. The added value of looking at the ratios

is that the dependence on the optical potentials will be
reduced.

In Fig. 14, we show the ratio between the total cross
section to the first 0+ excited state and the ground state
for the 66 Ni(t,p)68 Ni case. This ratio varies with the parameter α which is proportional to the mixing of 0p-0h
and 2p-2h configurations. More precisely the model wavefunctions of the ground state and first excited state used
here are of the form

16

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics
66

68

phase transitions in nuclei. As shown in [101, 102], the total two-neutron transfer cross sections along an isotopic
chain varies strongly when a shape-phase transition is
passed. At present, some of us, in collaboration with A.
Vitturi, are currently investigating two-neutron transfer
processes as a tool to distinguish between standard shapephase transitions (i.e. first or second order phase transitions occuring in systems as a function of a certain control
parameter) and situations where the phase transition is
driven by shape coexistence [103, 104].

Ni(t,p) Ni

0.2
Pure configuration

σexc/σg.s.

0.15
Zero Range DWBA

0.1

0.05

nd

2 Order DWBA

Experiment

10 Pairing in the continuum

0
0.5

0.6

0.7

2

0.8

0.9

1

α

Fig. 14. Ratio between the total cross section to the first 0+
excited state and to the ground state for the 66 Ni(t, p)68 Ni twoneutron transfer as a function of α2 . The results around 1 are
quite independent on the particular scheme used to calculate
cross-sections.

2
−2
| 0+
i
gs i = α | 0i + β | (g9/2 ) (p1/2 )

|

0+
exc i

2

= −β | 0i + α | (g9/2 ) (p1/2 )

−2

(24)
i

(25)

where | 0i corresponds to the filling of the four lowest
major neutron shells. So, α will be one if N = 40 at
68
Ni is a magic number. To test how robust this observable is, the ratio in Zero Range [96] and in full second
order DWBA [122] has been calculated, which includes finite range successive, simultaneous and non-orthogonality
terms. This latter calculation was performed with the code
FRESCO [98]. We see in Fig. 14 that both calculations will
give raise to the same conclusion even though they can
give very different values for each cross section. In this
case, this ratio is only compatible with the experimental
one [99, 100] 5 , for a large value of α2 ≈ 0.95 showing that
it is very close to a shell closure situation. An α2 ≈ 0.7
is also consistent with the experimental data. This alternative could be ruled out if one could compare with the
experimental ratio for the (14 C,12 C) case. The antialigned
neutrons in the Carbon probe will give a very small cross
section going to the p1/2 orbit compared to the g9/2 one,
giving rise to a very different dependence of the ratio on
the mixing coefficient α2 .
In conclusion, these ratios are very robust observables
which help to constrain the microscopic information of the
nuclei of interest. In addition, the combination of different
probes, light versus heavy projectiles, allows to disentangle different possibilities.
Another interesting case where two-neutron transfer
process could be of the utmost importance is that of shape5

In the recent Ref. [100], a more elaborate mixing of different
configurations is proposed to explain the angular distribution.

Regarding pairing in Nuclear Physics, an interesting open
problem deals with the complications arising in its treatment and behaviour in the continuum. Traditionally, studies of pairing have been done having in mind heavy stable
nuclei. In this region of the Segr Chart, the neutron separation threshold is large so that the main single particle
states contributing to the pairing are strongly bound.
The development of radioactive ion beam facilities all
around the world are opening access to a great deal of information on regions of isotopes closer to the neutron drip
line at larger masses than ever before. These new isotopes
present the same fingerprints of pairing as in stable nuclei, but now the single particle states involved are weakly
bound or directly unbound, i.e. in the continuum.
Therefore, a proper treatment of the continuum is compulsory for future studies of pairing close to the drip line.
To this end, the standard BCS approach fails to reproduce
the spatial asymptotic properties of the ground state of the
nuclei studied. It produces an unphysical gas of neutrons
surrounding the nucleus [105]. This problem has pushed
the community toward more complex models like HartreeFock-Bogoliubov (HFB) [62], Gamow Shell Model (GSM)
[106] or the Configuration-Space Monte Carlo (CSMC)
method [107]. However, the hardness and complexity of
such calculations prevents from systematic calculations to
study the sensitivity of pairing to the particular structure
of the continuum or to the proximity of the Fermi level to
the neutron separation threshold.
One of the few existing approaches to solve the problem of BCS in the continuum is the use of the continuum Single Particle Level Densities (CSPLD) by R. Id
Betan and collaborators [108]. A different approach has
been proposed that relies on discretizing the continuum
with the use of a Transformed Harmonic Oscillator (THO)
basis [109]. The combined versatility of the THO basis
and the BCS approach allowed to study the behaviour of
the pairing in the presence of resonances or weakly bound
states and the evolution of different properties of the nuclei
when making the system less and less bound. At the same
time the results from Ref. [108] were also reproduced.
The main result found in [109] was an enhancement of
the occupation of the low-lying continuum when a weakly
bound single particle state is present. This occupation is
not exclusive of s−waves like in halo nuclei but it occurs
in the same total and orbital angular momenta as the
weakly bound state. In Ref. [109] it was shown that this

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

162
occupation increases as long as the bound state becomes
less and less bound. This effect was already seen in a more
complex HFB calculation [110], but the lack of flexibility
made it difficult to study the nature of this occupation
more in depth.

17

A. Virturi, C. H. Dasso / Elastic transfer

11 Dynamics of two-neutron transfer
reactions
The transfer reactions are known to have a high selectivity. For this reason, they can be used to obtain spectroscopic information of the interacting nuclei. The oneparticle transfer reaction put in evidence the single-particle
component of the nuclear wave functions. The two-particle
transfers, on the other hand, are usually used to study the
particle correlation between the two transferred particles.
One crucial point, in this case, is to answer the question if
these two particles are transferred sequentially (one after
the other), or at the same time (in a one-step process).
The transfer of heavier particles (like tritons, α particles,
etc) is connected with the cluster components of the wave
functions. These components are usually relevant in nuclei
that are multiple of the α particle, like, 8 Be, 12 C, 16 O, etc.
or close to that. Reviews and textbooks on this line have
been published [72, 111, 112, 113].
The transfer reactions are also an essential method
of production of new nuclear species. A good example of
this is the production of some radioactive beams as a secondary beam in the reactions 9 Be(7 Li,6 He), 9 Be(7 Li,8 Li),
3
He(6 Li,8 B), and many others.
One important class of transfer reactions that has obtained special attention is the elastic transfer. In this reaction, the initial and final partitions are identical, and this
might come as a result of elastic scattering or multiple
(at least two) back-and-forth transfer processes. The final nuclei are indistinguishable. This makes a necessity to
sum the amplitudes of both processes coherently, i.e. the
theoretical cross sections are calculated by considering
dσ
∝ |Tscatt (θ) + Ttr (π − θ)|2 ,
dΩ

(26)

1

I

I

1

I

0
where Tscatt and Ttr correspond to the amplitudes of the
8 cm
elastic scattering and elastic transfer channels, respectively.
This is a very convenient reaction for studying the strucFig. 2. Calculated elastic angular distributions
for the reaction I60 + I80 at different bo
tural characteristics of some nuclei. The reason is that one Fig. 15. Comparison of the elastic scattering angular districompared
withforthe
‘). The
dashed
curves (dashed
give theline)
result
obtained fo
usually needs the spectroscopic
amplitudes
twoexperimental
(pro- butionsdata
considering
pure
elastic reaction
and the
interference
between
elastic
transfer
(full correspon
jectile and target) overlaps in
order to derive
scattering
with the
the transfer
deep optical
potential
given
in and
ref.elastic
‘), while
theprocesses
solid lines
reaction cross section. In the elastic transfer, these two line). Figure was taken from Ref. [114].
of the parity-dependent
term. Details on the single-particle
transfer form factors a
overlaps coincide, and this simplifies the structure calcuspectroscopic
amplitudes
used in the calculation
can be found in tab
lations, once the interference of the elastic and
transfer
amplitudes is considered. The interference of the two con- ELab = 24, 28, and 32 MeV. The dashed line corresponds
tributions can give rise to oscillatory patterns, that might to the results when only the elastic scattering amplitude is
be significant depending onform
the considered
to determine
When the elastic
transfer
factors bombarding
introducedused in
ref. “). dσ/dσ
This R .picture
exploits
theam-identificat
energy and angle. This behavior has been confirmed by plitude is included (full line) a strong oscillatory pattern
12
18
experiments, as for example pair
in the transition
C + 13 C anddensity
O + iswhose
observed magnitude
at backward angles.
resultto
wasthe
alsovariation
can The
be same
related
16
O reactions at low energy [114]. In Fig. 15 the effect of shown for the 12 C + 13 C reaction. Recently studied exfunction
of particle
number.
The
relevant
scale
the interference of the elasticdensity
scattering as
and a
elastic
trans- amples
of the elastic
and elastic
transfer
interference
are is here
18
16
16
18
16
18
fer amplitudes is shown forthe
the pair-deformation
O + O reaction at parameter
the two-neutron&,,
transfer
reactions
O( analogous
O, O) O
which
playsof the
role
3 0 " SO" 9 0 " 1 2 0 " 1 5 0 " 1 8 0 "

tion length p in the case of surface modes. This quantity gives a
collective character attained by the correlated
superposition
of tw
two-hole configurations
that build up the pair mode.
Following the prescription
worked out in sect. 2 and making use of

18

in reasonable agreement with the corresponding shell-model
component for that overlap. This procedure was applied also
here. The resulting spectroscopic amplitude for the overlap
of the ground states of the 64 Ni and 66 Ni nuclei was found
0.71. For the <64 Ni0+ |66 Ni2+ > overlap, it was found 0.37.
The shell-model values from Table II for the corresponding
L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution
of Andrea
to Nuclear
Physics
overlaps are
0.90 andVitturi
0.22. This
shows that
the extreme cluster

[115] and 9 Be(7 Be, 9 Be)7 Be [116], and the alpha transfer
reaction 16 O(12 C, 16 O)12 C [117].
In the case of the two-neutron transfer mentioned above,
one important question to understand the details of the
dynamic of the nuclear reaction is whether the two neutrons are transferred in one step or two steps. We emphasize that we are concerned with the transfer process itself.
So, the projectile or the target might be excited before
the transfer process occurs, and we are not considering
this process as one of the steps. The two-neutron transfer were extensively used in the past using the (t, p) reactions. The reaction was quite simple in this case due to the
simplicity of the projectile overlaps that involves a small
model space to describe the wave functions of the projectile and the ejectile. At present, this kind of reactions
is prohibited in several labs due to safety reasons related
to tritium. A natural candidate to study the two-neutron
rearrangement is the (18 O,16 O) reaction because the 18 O
can, to a good approximation, be considered as an inert
16
O core plus two neutrons, mainly in the spd shell. This
kind of reactions is a powerful tool to study the effect of
pairing correlation in the two-neutron transfers reactions.
Various recent studies on the effect of pairing correlations in two-neutron transfer reactions to the ground,
as well as, to some excited states of the residual nuclei
have been performed: 12,13 C(18 O, 16 O)14,15 C [118, 71, 119],
16
O(18 O, 16 O)18 O [115], 28 Si(18 O, 16 O)30 Si [120], 64 Ni(18 O,
16
O)66 Ni [121], and 206 Pb(18 O, 16 O)208 Pb [124]. In all
of these studies a finite-range coupled reaction channel
method was used to calculate the direct two-neutron reactions, while the two-step coupled channel Born approximation was used for the two-step processes. To determine
the spectroscopic amplitudes extensive shell model calculations were performed in most of the cases. For Nickel
isotopes Interacting Boson Model-2 (for even isotopes)
and Interacting Boson Fermion Model (for odd isotopes)
structure calculations were also performed. These works
concluded that the one-step (direct) two-neutron transfer prevails over the two-step (or sequential) processes for
the light systems [118, 119, 115], showing the relevance of
the pairing correlations in the two-neutron transfer in this
case. For the reaction of medium-light 28 Si and medium
mass target 64 Ni, a strong competition between the pairing and collective residual interaction was observed. For
the ground state of 66 Ni (that is almost spherical, and
consequently with low collectivity) a predominance of the
direct two-neutron transfer was observed, while for the
first excited states of 66 Ni, as well as for the ground states
and several excited states of 30 Si, that has stronger degree
of collectivity, the two-step process dominates the reaction
mechanism.
The results for the 64 Ni(18 O,16 O)66 Ni [121] are shown
in Fig. 16 where various versions of the Interacting Boson
Model were used to derive the spectroscopic amplitudes
needed in coupled channel calculations. It is important to
notice that in all these calculations it was not necessary
to use any unhappiness factor [122, 123] to describe the
correct order of magnitude as it was often the case in the
past for certain (t, p) transfer reactions.

64

Ni1.345

64

Ni1.345

65

Nig.s(5

65

Nig.s(5

65

Nig.s(5

65

Nig.s(5

65

Ni0.063

65

Ni0.063

65

Ni0.063

65

Ni0.063

65

Ni0.310

65

Ni0.310

65

Ni0.310

65

Ni0.310

65

Ni0.693

65

Ni0.693

7. Comparisonofof
theexperimental
experiment angular
distribution
with
Fig. FIG.
16. Comparison
the
angular
distributions
the independent
coordinate
and two-step
DWBA
for
with
one- (full line)
and two-step
(dashed
line)calculations
transfer the64
model
Ni(18 O,16using
O)66 Ni.spectroscopic
The spectroscopic
amplitudes
from
the reaction
oretical
cross section
amplitudes
derived
spectro
Tables
VII,
VIII,
and
IX
were
used.
from Interacting Boson Model calculations. Figure taken from
Ref. [121].
044612-9

In the case of the heavier system, the two-neutron
transfer reaction 206 Pb(18 O,16 O)208 Pb is dominated by
the two-step process, showing that the effect of pairing
correlations in two-neutron transfer reactions depends not
only on the structure of the reacting nuclei, but also on
their masses.

12 Direct reactions at intermediate energies
in the eikonal approximation
12.1 Applications based on the Glauber model
Nuclear reactions induced by heavy ions at intermediate
energies give rise to a variety of phenomena, such as elastic
and inelastic scattering, transfer and charge-exchange reactions. While at low bombarding energies, the scattering
process and the internal degrees of freedom of the colliding nuclei are strongly mingled, they can be decoupled
in reactions induced by light ions at high energy. One
of the research lines conducted by Andrea Vitturi and
collaborators was based on the description of these reactions in a microscopic approach. The theoretical model
is a simplified version of the multiple scattering theory of

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

Goldberger-Watson, originally deduced by Glauber [125].
In the optical limit of this model, nucleus-nucleus processes are microscopically described in terms of nucleonnucleon collisions and each partial wave phase shift is obtained considering straight-line trajectories [126]. Andrea
Vitturi and Francesco Zardi successfully modified this formalism to the description of the elastic scattering at intermediate energies between heavy nuclei [127] by replacing
the straight line by the Rutherford trajectory that takes
into account the strong Coulomb repulsion when heavy
ions are involved. The relative motion is reliably described
in the eikonal approximation in terms of a phase shift
derived from elementary interactions and nuclear densities, taken from the current phenomenology with no fitting
procedure. In particular, there is no ambiguity associated
with the choice of an optical potential. The agreement of
these calculations with the experimental data was very
successful and encouraged them to extend the model to
the description of other nuclear reactions.
In Ref. [128] the formalism was derived for inelastic
scattering processes. Two different approaches were explored. The “standard” one considered that the target
is excited in projectile-nucleon collisions where contributions from multiple scattering processes are preliminary
summed to produce the projectile-nucleon elastic scattering amplitudes. Alternatively, the authors introduced a
fully microscopical approach where the inelastic process
is produced by single nucleon-nucleon collisions. In this
case, the inelastic transition amplitudes were obtained by
integrating the nuclear densities and transition densities
together with the experimental nucleon-nucleon scattering
amplitudes. With no free parameters at all, they succeeded
to describe a large variety of elastic and inelastic reactions
at intermediate energies (30-350 MeV/A) [129].
The ensuing extension of the formalism to processes
that involve several coupled channels is very interesting.
The method, introduced in Ref. [130], avoids several difficulties of multi-scattering theories, in particular, the low
convergence of the series. Indeed, the set of coupled equations for the S-matrix elements are replaced by simple
matrix relations that involve the basic ingredients of the
Glauber model, i.e. the densities and transition densities
and the nucleon-nucleon scattering amplitude. In some
particular cases the summed series led to analytic expressions. Mutual excitation processes, such as chargeexchange reactions can be studied as an extension of this
method. In ref. [131] the formalism has been developed
and applied to charge-exchange reactions between 50 and
140 MeV/A. The overall agreement of the quantities calculated within this approximation with the available data
was very good, in spite of the many complications that
might be hidden in the fact that the cross sections arise
from the coherent contribution of many different components both in the nuclear transition densities and in the
nucleon-nucleon interaction.
Reactions that involve the transfer of nucleons at intermediate energy between heavy ions have also been studied
with the Glauber model. In a first work, multi-pair transfer processes have been addressed. Combining a macro-

19

scopic approach for the pairing structure part with the
sudden limit of the eikonal approximation for the description of the scattering process, quantitative predictions for
multi-pair transfer cross sections at different bombarding energies were obtained [132]. In a second work, onenucleon transfer reactions were addressed in a Glauberlike approach and compared with exact finite-range distorted wave approximation calculations. A better agreement with data was observed for the former [133]. These
results are reported in Fig. 17 for reactions induced by 12 C
on 208 Pb (a neutron and a proton transfer respectively).
While in heavy-ion reactions at energies around the
Coulomb barrier both nuclear and Coulomb excitations
are treated on the same footing, this was not the case at
high energies, where the studies concentrated on one or the
other process. To put in evidence the interference between
the two interactions, a new formalism has been developed,
based on the eikonal approximation, that allows to treat
both processes from a unified perspective [134].
In conclusion, in these pioneering works A. Vitturi and
collaborators have shown the reliability of formalisms à
la Glauber for the description of a large variety of reactions between heavy ions at intermediate energies in a
parameter-free approach.

13 Low-lying strength and clustering in
weakly bound nuclei
The advent of nuclear reactions with radioactive beams
has triggered a significant focus on the exotic properties
of nuclei close to (or even beyond) the drip-lines [135].
The small binding energy of light neutron-rich systems,
such as 11 Li or 12 Be, was soon associated to the abnormal
density distribution of the valence neutrons extending way
outside the mean field generated by the remaining core
and gave rise to the very concept of nuclear halo [136, 137].
Studies along these lines evidenced unusual concentrations
of strength appearing at low excitation energies in photoexcitation or break-up processes (e.g., [138]).
The pioneering work of Catara, Dasso and Vitturi [139]
addressed the multipole response of weakly bound nuclei,
shedding light on the origin of this low-lying component
and clearing the path for experimental and theoretical developments up to date. They showed that changes in the
binding energy for weakly bound systems not only shift
the maxima in the low-lying multipole response, but have
also important consequences for the total strength, a fact
reflected by energy-weighted sum rules [140]. This was
not associated to the excitation of resonant states, but
rather to an optimal matching between non-resonant continuum states and the weakly bound orbitals. Moreover,
their analysis concluded that this low-lying strength does
not come at the expense of the usual response at higher
energies, so the mechanism involves an increase of the total strength available. It is now widely accepted that a
smaller binding energy in loosely bound nuclei produces
larger concentrations of multipole strength just above the
continuum threshold. This feature is illustrated in Fig. 18

in Fig. 3. When account is taken of the error bars on the
experimental data points, and the ambiguities introduced
by the lack of perfect agreement between the shapes of

20

Oi„g, (v)

0.78

Ojxs)2 (v)

1.42

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

'"pb("c, 11C)209pb

3

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

20spb(12C 11B)209B
102

I

-

4 l 5/2

Oi

10
10

N

g

10 =

:

Ohg/2

l l/2

101

r
r r

~ ~

L

r

10

'0 101

0 10

f

+T

0

g7] 2

10'

~r

10

1

FIG. 3. Angular
100

«

for single-neutron a
onto a
Pb target,
MeV
and 793
C
8
(deg)
8
(deg)
6nal single-particle
curve. The experime
12
208
Fig. 17. Angular distributions for the single-neutron
and single-proton transfer
reactions induced209B
at 480 MeV.
[2,3j. Each c
208pb(16O
15N) by C on Pb Refs.
20spb(16O 15O) 209pb
Taken from ref. [133].
I
multiplied
1
by a scale
10
lprrrr Irrrr rrrr rrrr
=
-Oi
are given in Table I
O~ls/Z
I

I

I

0

I

2

I

I

I

'I

I

4

I

I

100

I

I

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

~

I

I

I

I

I
I

I

I

I

I

I I

I I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I I I I

I

and has actual implications for nuclear reactions with exloo
otic beams.
In connection with breakup cross sections for halo nuOi
clei being generally dominated
ll/2 by the low-lying dipole
10a simple analytic description of the
m
strength, in Ref. [140]
low-lying E1 distribution and total strength was derived
for the case of weakly 0bound systems comprising a com,
pact core plus one valence nucleon. The model considered pure single-particle transitions from the halo weakly
bound state to continuum
~ 10-' states described as plane waves
(for neutrons) or Coulomb functions (for protons). For
example, the E1 distribution in the case of initial s-wave
neutrons into p-wave continuum was given by
10
√
3/2
dB(E1)
3~2 (Zeff e)2 Eb Ec
=-1
,
(27)
dE
µπ 2
(Eb + Ec )4
(s→p)1 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8
and the total strength,
(deg)
I

B(E1) =

I I

I

I I

~

I

I

I I I

I I I I I

I I I

3~2 (Zeff e)2 1
,
16π
µEb

~

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I I I I

(28)

where Zeff = −Z/A, µ is the reduced core + neutron mass,
and Eb and Ec are the energies of the bound state and
continuum states, respectively. These simple expressions
imply that the total strength is indeed approximately proportional to the inverse of the binding energy of the halo
neutron and that the maximum of the B(E1) distribution
shifts to lower energies for a smaller binding energy. A particular example in the case of 19 C (18 C + n) is illustrated
in Fig. 19. In the case of proton halos, Coulomb correc-

I

10

10

—100
(

~l

1P

10

-1'

Il »
rrlrr Irl,quadrupole
II I»» l, »r
1018.IrEnergy-weighted
Fig.
strength for transitions
0
I
2
3
4
5 into
6 the p-wave continuum
from a 2p weakly bound orbital
for three different 8binding
energies 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 MeV. The
(deg3
peaks shift towards higher energies, while the total strength
decreases, as the binding energy increases. Figure adapted from
Ref. [139] with the authors’ permission.
~

~

I

I

~

I

r

tions indicated a more gradual change. Similar conclusions
were drawn by other studies (e.g., [141]).
These ideas, originally devised for weakly bound nuclei
characterized by single nucleon halos, were naturally extended to systems composed by loosely bound clusters. In
Refs. [142, 143,144], for instance, a dicluster model was developed to describe the electromagnetic response leading

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

Fig. 19. Total E1 strength in 19 C for transitions from a 2s
bound orbital to the continuum, as a function of Eb . Solid:
“exact” calculation using wave-functions from a Woods-Saxon
potential. Dashed: analytic formula Eq. (28). The horizontal
line is the experimental B(E1) value, corresponding here to
Eb ∼ 0.53 MeV. The inset shows the E1 distribution at that
precise energy, whose maximum is at Ec = 3/5Eb according to
Eq. (27). Figure from Ref. [140] with the authors’ permission.

to cluster-cluster dissociation of the A = 7 isobars 7 Li and
7
Be. They showed that, in the case of weakly bound systems where the breakup is dominated by dissociation into
two clusters of similar size, the main contribution comes
from the nuclear quadrupole mechanism, since the dipole
excitation is much smaller. Few-body models considering
three or more clusters explicitly have followed over the
years. Vitturi and collaborators have also been involved in
three-body models to study multipole excitations, e.g., the
study of the electric response of the halo nucleus 6 He [145]
and, more recently, 22 C [146]. Their results confirm, in accord with the vast literature on the subject, that the effect
of the binding energy on the low-lying strength discussed
in Ref. [139] applies also for systems comprising a compact
core and several valence particles.
Also in the context of few-body models and clustering,
the description of 12 C as three α particles has gained renewed attention due to the success of algebraic approaches
in predicting and describing experimental spectra [147].
Vitturi and collaborators have recently focused on this
matter, in particular studying selection rules for electromagnetic transitions [148] and their link to inelastic excitation and breakup [149]. Work along this line is ongoing
and will be the subject of future research.

14 Heavy-ion sub-barrier fusion reactions
In heavy-ion fusion reactions at energies around the Coulomb barrier, it has been well recognized that inelastic
excitations to low-lying collective states as well as several
transfer processes lead to a large enhancement of fusion
cross sections relative to the prediction of a simple potential model [150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155]. A natural question

21

Fig. 20. Fusion cross sections for the 11 Be+208 Pb reaction as
a function of the incident energy in the center of mass frame.
The solid and the dashed lines are the complete fusion (CF)
and the total (i.e., the complete + the incomplete fusion) fusion
cross sections, respectively, obtained with the coupled-channels
calculations which include the breakup channels of the 11 Be
nucleus. The dotted line shows the fusion cross sections in the
absence of the couplings. A redrawn of Fig. 2(a) in Ref. [160].

then arises concerning how the breakup channel, which
is important in weakly-bound nuclei, influences subbarrier fusion cross sections. One may naively think that the
breakup channel reduces fusion cross sections, since a part
of the incident flux is lost due to the breakup process. This
idea was put forward by Hussein et al. [156] as well as by
Takigawa et al. [157]. They computed fusion cross sections
as,
π X
(0)
σfus (E) = 2
(2l + 1)(1 − Pbu (E, l))Pfus (E, l), (29)
k
l

where E is the incident energy in the center of mass frame
(0)
and k is the corresponding wave number. Pfus and Pbu are
the penetrability of the Coulomb barrier in the absence
of the breakup channel and the breakup probability for
the partial wave l, respectively. That is, the authors of
Refs. [156, 157] took into account, through the factor of
1 − Pbu , the loss of flux due to the imaginary part of the
dynamical polarization potential (DPP) for the breakup
process. Naturally, the fusion cross sections are hindered
in this formula as compared to the case with no breakup
channel, that is, Pbu = 0.
Andrea Vitturi, together with Carlos Dasso, pointed
out that this naive picture does not hold [158]. To this end,
they used a simple two-level model, in which the breakup
channel is represented as a single effective channel (see also
Ref. [159]), and estimated the probability for the complete
fusion as the penetrability for the entrance channel. The
resultant cross sections clearly showed an enhancement
of fusion cross sections, rather than a hindrance, as compared to the no-coupling calculation. An interpretation
for this result is that the coupling to the breakup channel
dynamically lowers the Coulomb barrier, increasing the

22

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

penetrability. That is, the DPP due to the breakup channel has both the real and the imaginary parts, and thus
(0)
the probability Pfus (E, l) in Eq. (29) has to be modified
to Pfus (E, l) by taking into account the real part of the
DPP.
Subsequently, this calculation was further extended to
a more realistic treatment for the breakup, done in collaboration of Andrea Vitturi with Kouichi Hagino, Carlos Dasso, and Silvia Lenzi [160]. To this end, they discretized the continuum states in bins of energy and associated with each bin the coupling form factor corresponding
to its central energy. The coupling form factors, both for
the nuclear and the Coulomb parts, were evaluated microscopically using the core+neutron model, which took into
account the weak bound nature of a projectile nucleus.
The continuum-continuum couplings were not taken into
account. As in Ref. [158], the complete (incomplete) fusion was identified as those flux penetrating the Coulomb
barrier in the entrance channel (the breakup channels).
Notice that this calculation yields only the lower bound
of the complete fusion, since both of the breakup fragments may be absorbed by the target nucleus when the
breakup takes place inside the barrier, contributing to the
complete fusion.
The result for the 11 Be+208 Pb reaction is shown in
Fig. 20. The solid and the dashed lines show the results
for the complete and the total fusion cross sections, respectively, while the dotted line shows the result in the
no-coupling limit. One can clearly see that the cross sections for complete fusion are enhanced at energies below
the barrier while they are hindered at above barrier energies, as compared to the no-coupling case shown by the
dotted line. It is evident that these are due to the real and
the imaginary parts of DPP, respectively. The continuumcontinuum couplings would reduce the degree of enhancement of complete fusion cross sections at subbarrier energies [161], but one could still expect some enhancement at
energies well below the Coulomb barrier.
In this connection, Andrea Vitturi has made important contributions to the field as shown in two short papers with Carlos Dasso and Manuel Lozano published in
Phys. Rev. A [162, 163]. In the first paper [162], they discussed the role of a closed channel in multi-channel penetrabilities. One may have thought that a closed channel
is kinematically forbidden and thus does not affect physical processes. Of course, this is not the case, since virtual
excitations to a closed channel is still possible, which may
affect significantly e.g., a barrier penetrability. Using a
simple two-level model, they explicitly demonstrated that
the penetrability is enhanced by the channel coupling effects, even when the second channel is closed. This result
can actually be interpreted in terms of barrier distribution
[150] such that the coupling leads to a splitting of the barrier, yielding a lower barrier than the uncoupled one, irrespective to the value of the incident energy. In the second
paper [163], they discussed the applicability of the adiabatic approximation, which is valid when the energy of an
excited channel is large. In this approximation, the channel coupling effect leads to a renormalization of potential

Fig. 21. Potential barriers for 6 Li + 6 Li fusion, where the
cluster structure (α+d) as been taken into consideration (see
the inset for explanation of the coordinates).

[150, 164]. They pointed out that the applicability of the
adiabatic approximation depends not only on the energy
of the excited state but also on the coupling strength.
That is, for a finite excitation energy, the adiabatic approximation may break down if the coupling strength is
large. The same conclusion can be obtained also by evaluating a correction factor to the adiabatic approximation
[164, 165]. We point out that these conclusions of the two
papers of Andrea Vitturi are considerably important when
one discusses astrophysical fusion reactions.
14.1 Fusion at astrophysical energies in light
clusterized systems
A recent work that was initially proposed by C.A.Bertulani
and C.Spitaleri and finished with the contribution of the
Padova group [166] treats the problem of fusion at astrophysical energies for light clusterized nuclei. At the temperatures at which fusion occurs in stars, the fusion rate
is enhanced by the presence of a gas of electrons in the
stellar plasma, that shows significant deviations with respect to the fusion cross-section measured in laboratory
experiments, leading to the necessity to include an effective screening potential. A reason for the so-called electron screening problem [167, 168], that has been a longstanding issue in this field, has been traditionally attributed
to atomic properties, but a comprehensive theory was not
yet available. In Ref. [166], the reason for the anomalous
values of the effective screening potential was attributed
to nuclear clustering phenomena, that might severely affect the fusion cross-sections in reactions involving light
nuclei. In a WKB approach, the tunneling probability can
be calculated as
P = e−2G
(30)
where the Gamow factor depends on the potential between
target and projectile. Giving a clusterized substructure to

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

one of the nuclei involved (or to both) leads to potential of
a composite nature that depend not only on the distance
but also on the relative orientation of the clusters. This
implies that the Gamow factor
√
Z
2m b p
0
0
G(E, θ, θ , φ ) =
Vtot (r, θ, θ0 , φ0 ) − E dr (31)
~
a
has a dependence on the angles that generates strong
changes in the probability as depicted in Fig. 21, where
the coordinate system and potential are given in the case
of a dicluster nucleus impinging on another dicluster nucleus (6 Li on 6 Li in this case). Here a and b are inversion
points of classical motion.
The Coulomb barrier is suppressed and shifted by the
presence of clusters and polarization and this fact must be
taken into account when modeling the interaction between
light nuclei in the fusion process as it certainly has profound implications on the barrier penetrability and fusion
rates.

15 Authors contributions
All the authors were involved in the preparation of the
manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the
final manuscript. We thank M. Böyükata for preparation
of Fig. 4.

References
1. ”Theoretical Nuclear Physics in Padova: a meeting in honor
of Prof. Andrea Vitturi”, TNP19, https://agenda.infn.
it/event/17720/, last retrieved 10/07/2019.
2. A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Lett.Nuovo Cim. 20 (1977), 640
3. Nuclear Science Reference (NSR) database https://www.
nndc.bnl.gov/nsr/, retrieved 09/05/2019.
4. Scopus, (2019) Elsevier B.V. https://www.scopus.com/,
retrived 20/06/2019.
5. F. Iachello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3580 (2000)
6. F. Iachello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 052502 (2001)
7. L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, J.Phys.G 29, 1341 (2003)
8. L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, J.Phys.G 30, 627-636 (2004)
9. L. Fortunato, Eur.Phys.J. A 26, Supplement 1, 1 (2005)
10. P. Buganu, L. Fortunato, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 43
093003 (2016)
11. R.F. Casten, Nature Physics, Vol. 2 (2006), 811-820
12. P. Cejnar, J, Jolie, R.F. Casten, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 (2010)
2155-2212
13. J.M. Arias, C.E. Alonso, A. Vitturi, J.E. Garcia-Ramos,
J. Dukelsky, A. Frank, Phys.Rev. C 68, 041302 (2003)
14. M.G. Procter et al., J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 381 (2012) 012062
15. D.Bonatsos,
D.Lenis,
N.Minkov,
P.P.Raychev,
P.A.Terziev, Phys.Rev. C69, 014302 (2004)
16. D.Bonatsos,
D.Lenis,
N.Minkov,
P.P.Raychev,
P.A.Terziev, Phys.Rev. C69, 044316 (2004).
17. F. Iachello, A. Arima, The Interacting Boson Model, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987).
18. F. Iachello, P. Van Isacker, The Interacting Boson-Fermion
Model, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991).

23

19. F. Iachello, Physical Review Letter 91, (2003) 132502.
20. L. Fortunato, EuroPhys. News 40-2 (2009) 27-31
21. J.N. Ginocchio, M.W. Kirson, Nuclear Physics A350,
(1980) 31.
22. C.E. Alonso, M. Lozano, C.H. Dasso, A. Vitturi, Physics
Letters B212, (1988) 1.
23. C.E. Alonso, M. Lozano, C.H. Dasso, A. Vitturi, Nuclear
Physics A492, (1989) 275.
24. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, F. Iachello, A. Vitturi, Nuclear
Physics A539, (1992) 59.
25. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, A. Frank, H. Sofia, S. Lenzi, A.
Vitturi, Nuclear Physics A586, (1995) 100.
26. C.E. Alonso, M.V. Andrés, J.M. Arias, E.G. Lanza, A.
Vitturi, Nuclear Physics A679, (2001) 359.
27. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, H. Sofia, A. Vitturi, Nuclear
Physics A604, (1996) 53.
28. J.E. Garcı́a–Ramos, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, A. Vitturi,
P. Van Isacker, Nuclear Physics A637, (1998) 529.
29. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, N. Pietralla, A.
Vitturi, Physical Review C78, (2008) 017301.
30. L. Fortunato, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, J.E. Garcı́a-Ramos,
A. Vitturi, Physical Review C84, (2011) 014326.
31. K. Heyde, P. Van Isacker, M. Waroquier, J. Moreau Phys.
Rev. C 29, 1420 (1984)
32. J.M. Arias, C.E Alonso, A. Vitturi, J.E. Garcı́a-Ramos, J.
Dukelsky, A. Frank, Physical Review C68, (2003) 041302(R).
33. I. Inci, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi,
Physical Review C80, (2009) 034321.
34. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, A. Vitturi, Physical Review C74,
(2006) 027301.
35. R. Fossion, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Physical Review C76, (2007) 014316.
36. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Physical
Review C72, (2005) 061302(R).
37. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, A. Vitturi, Physical Review C75,
(2007) 064316.
38. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Physical
Review C79, (2009) 014306, 1-6.
39. M. Böyükata, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A.
Vitturi, Physical Review C82, (2010) 014317.
40. L. Fortunato, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, M. Böyükata, A.
Vitturi, International Journal of Modern Physics E20, (2011)
207.
41. M. Böyükata, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A.
Vitturi, Journal of Physics: Conference Series (IOP) 580,
(2015) 012047.
42. C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, A. Vitturi, Physical Review Letters 98, (2007) 052501.
43. R.F. Casten (Ed.), Algebraic Approaches to Nuclear Structure, Contemporary Concepts in Physics, Vol. 6 (1993), Hardwood Academic Publisher Gmbh, Chur, Switzerland.
44. R.A. Broglia, G. Pollarolo, A. Vitturi, A. Winther, C.H.
Dasso, H. Esbensen, Phys. Lett. B 89 (1), (1979), 22-25
45. R.A. Broglia, C.H. Dasso, H. Esbensen, A. Vitturi, A.
Winther, Nucl. Phys. A 345, Issue 1, (1980), 263-277
46. F. Catara, Ph. Chomaz, A. Vitturi, Nucl. Phys. A 471 (34),
(1987), 661-672
47. C.H. Dasso, L. Fortunato, E.G. Lanza, A. Vitturi, Nucl.
Phys. A 724, (12), (2003), 85-98
48. F. Catara, E.G. Lanza, M.A. Nagarajan, A. Vitturi, Nucl.
Phys. A 614 (1997) 86.
49. F. Catara, E.G. Lanza, M.A. Nagarajan, A. Vitturi, Nucl.
Phys. A 624 (1997) 449.

24

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics

50. N. Paar, D. Vretenar, E. Khan, G. Colò, Rep. Prog. Phys.
70, 691 (2007).
51. D. Savran, T. Aumann, A. Zilges, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys.
70 (2013) 210.
52. A. Bracco, F.C.L. Crespi, E.G. Lanza, Eur. Phys. J. A 51,
(2015) 99.
53. A. Bracco, E.G. Lanza, A. Tamii, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys.
106 (2019) 360.
54. E.G. Lanza, A. Vitturi, M.V. Andrés, F. Catara, D. Gambacurta, Phys. Rev. C 84, (2011) 064602.
55. A. Vitturi, E.G. Lanza, M.V. Andrés, F. Catara, D. Gambacurta, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.267 012006 (2011)
56. E.G. Lanza, A. Vitturi, E. Litvinova, D. Savran, Phys.
Rev. C 89, (2014) 041601(R).
57. E.G. Lanza, A. Vitturi, M.V. Andrés, Phys. Rev. 91,
(2015) 054607.
58. R.A. Broglia, D. Bés, Phys. Lett. B 69, 129133 (1977)
59. D.R. Bés, R.A. Broglia, R.P.J. Perazzo, K. Kumar, Nucl.
Phys. A 143 (1970) 1
60. A. Bohr, B.R. Mottelson, Nuclear Structure, World Scientific Pub Co. Inc. (1998)
61. R.M. Clark, A.O. Macchiavelli, L. Fortunato, R. Krucken,
Phys.Rev.Lett. 96, 032501 (2006)
62. P. Ring and P. Schuck, The Nuclear Many-Body Problem
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980).
63. D.R. Bes and R.A. Broglia Phys. Rev. C 3 (1971) 2349
64. J.P. Vary and J.N. Ginocchio, Nucl. Phys. A166 (1971)
479
65. P.F. Bortignon, R.A. Broglia, Eur.Phys.J. A 52 (2016) 280
66. M. Assié, C.H. Dasso, R.J. Liotta, A.O. Macchiavelli, A.
Vitturi, Eur.Phys.J. A (2019)
67. C.H. Dasso, A. Vitturi (Eds.), Collective Aspects in
Pair-Transfer Phenomena, Conference Proceedings, Vol. 18
(1988), ISBN 88-7794-024-7
68. C.H. Dasso, H.M. Sofia, A. Vitturi, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.
580 (2015) 012018
69. L. Fortunato, W. von Oertzen, H.M. Sofia, A. Vitturi,
Eur.Phys.J. A 14 (2002) 37
70. L. Fortunato, Yad.Fiz. 66, 1491 (2003); Phys.Atomic Nuclei 66 (2003) 1445
71. F. Cappuzzello, D. Carbone, M. Cavallaro, M. Bond, C.
Agodi, F. Azaiez, A. Bonaccorso, A. Cunsolo, L. Fortunato,
A. Foti, S. Franchoo, E. Khan, R. Linares, J. Lubian, J. A.
Scarpaci, A. Vitturi, Nature Communications vol. 6 (2015)
6743
72. W. von Oertzen, A. Vitturi, Rep.Prog.Phys. 64 (2001)
1247
73. M. Laskin, R.F. Casten, A.O. Macchiavelli, R.M. Clark,
D. Bucurescu Phys. Rev. C 93, 034321 (2016)
74. F. Pérez-Bernal, I. Martel, J.M. Arias, J. Gómez-Camacho,
Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 052111
75. A.M. Moro, F. Pérez-Bernal, J.M. Arias, J. GómezCamacho. Phys. Rev. C 73 (2006) 044612
76. G.F. Bertsch, H. Esbensen. Ann. Phys. 209 (2) (1991)
327-363
77. K. Hagino, A. Vitturi, F. Pérez-Bernal, H Sagawa. J. Phys.
G: Nucl. and Part. Phys. 38(1) (2010) 015105
78. L. Moschini, F. Pérez-Bernal, A. Vitturi. J. Phys. G: Nucl.
and Part. Phys. 43(4) (2016) 045112
79. S. Landowne, A. Vitturi, Treatise on heavy-ion science,
Vol. 1, edited by D. Allan Bromley, Plenum Press; New York,
NY (USA) (1985) 355-460

80. A. Vitturi, L. Moschini, K. Hagino, A. Moro, AIP Conference Proceedings 1681 (2015) 060001
81. L. Moschini, A. Vitturi, A.M. Moro, Journal of Physics:
Conf. Series 981 (2018) 012004
82. A. Vitturi, in Nuclear theory (eds. M. Gaidarov, N.
Minkov, Heron Press, Sofia), Vol. 36 (2017)
83. L.V. Grigorenko, Phys. Part. and Nucl. 40, (2009) 674
84. M. Pfützner, M. Karny, L.V. Grigorenko, K. Riisager, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 84, (2012) 567
85. T. Oishi, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, J. Phys. G 45, (2018)
105101
86. V.I. Kukulin, V.M. Krasnopolsky, J. Horác̆ek, Theory of
Resonances: Principles and Applications (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1989)
87. K. Hagino, A. Vitturi, F. Perez-Bernal, H. Sagawa, J.
Phys. (London) G 38, (2011) 015105
88. T. Oishi, K. Hagino, H. Sagawa, Phys. Rev. C 90, (2014)
034303
89. P. Lotti, F. Cazzola, P.F. Bortignon, R.A .Broglia, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C 40 (1989) 17911797
90. K. Hagino, H. Sagawa, Phys. Rev. C72, (2005) 044321.
91. F. Catara, A. Insolia, E. Maglione, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev.
C29, (1984) 1091.
92. D.R. Bes, P. Lotti, E. Maglione, A. Vitturi, Phys. Lett.
169B, (1986) 5.
93. P. Lotti, E. Maglione, F. Catara, A. Insolia, Europhys.
Lett. 6, (1988) 125.
94. A. Insolia, R.J. Liotta, E. Maglione, J. Phys. G15, (1989)
1249.
95. J.A. Lay, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Phys.Rev. C 89 034618
(2014)
96. P.D. Kunz, Zero-range DWBA code DWUCK (unpublished).
97. L. Fortunato et al. Computation 5(3) (2017) 36.
98. I.J. Thompson, Coupled Channels Methods for Nuclear
Physics, Computer Physics Reports, 7 (1988) pp 167 - 212.
99. R. Raabe et al., experiment at ISOLDE (private communication).
100. F. Flavigny, et al., Phys.Rev. C 99 (2019) 054332
101. R. Fossion, C.E. Alonso, J.M. Arias, L. Fortunato, A.
Vitturi, Phys.Rev. C 76 (2007) 014316
102. Y. Zhang, F. Iachello, Phys.Rev. C 95 (2017) 034306
103. A. Vitturi, L. Fortunato, I. Inci, J.A.Lay, J. Phys.: Conf.
Proc. 23 (2018) 012013
104. J.A. Lay, A. Vitturi, L. Fortunato, Y. Tsunoda, T. Togashi, T. Otsuka, Submitted to Phys. Rev., arXiv:1905.12976
105. J. Dobaczewski, W. Nazarewicz, T.R. Werner, J.F.
Berger, C.R. Chinn, J. Decharge, Phys.Rev. C53 (1996) 2809
106. N. Michel, W. Nazarewicz, M. Ploszajczak, K. Bennaceur,
Phys.Rev.Lett. 89 (2002) 042502.
107. N. Cerf, O. Martin, Phys. Rev. C 47 (1993) 2610
108. R. Id Betan, Phys. Rev. C 85, 064309
109. J.A. Lay, C.E. Alonso, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi,
J.Phys.(London) G43 (2016) 085103
110. M. Grasso, N. Sandulescu, V.G. Nguyen, R.J. Liotta,
Phys.Rev. C64 (2001) 064321
111. G. Potel, A. Idini, F. Barranco, E. Vigezzi, R.A. Broglia,
Rep. Prog. Phys. 76, (2013) 106301.
112. S. Kahana, A.J. Baltz, Advances in Nuclear Physics, Vol.
9 (Springer, Berlin, 1977).
113. G. R. Satchler, Direct Nuclear Reactions (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1983).
114. A. Vitturi, C. Dasso, Nucl. Phys. A 458, (1986) 157.

L. Fortunato et al.: An overview of the scientific contribution of Andrea Vitturi to Nuclear Physics
115. M.J. Ermamatov, F. Cappuzzello, J. Lubian, M. Cubero,
C. Agodi, D. Carbone, M. Cavallaro, J.L. Ferreira, A. Foti,
V.N. Garcia, A. Gargano, J.A. Lay, S.M. Lenzi, R. Linares,
G. Santagati, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C 94, (2016) 024610.
116. U. Umbelino, K.C.C. Pires, R. Lichtenthäler, V. Scarduelli, G.A. Scotton, A. Lépine-Szily, V. Guimarães, J. Lubian, B. Paes, J.L. Ferreira, M. A. G. Alvarez, J.M.B. Shorto,
S. Appannababu, M. Assunção, R. P. Condori, V. Morcelle,
Phys. Rev. C 99, (2019) 064617.
117. J.L. Ferreira, J. Lubian, R. Linares, M.J. Ermamatov, H.
Yépez-Martı́nez, P.O.Hess, Eur. Phys. J. A 55, (2019) 94.
118. M. Cavallaro, et al., Phys. Rev. C 88, (2013) 054601.
119. D. Carbone, J.L. Ferreira, F. Cappuzzello, J. Lubian, C.
Agodi, M. Cavallaro, A. Foti, A. Gargano, S.M. Lenzi, R.
Linares, G. Santagati, Phys. Rev. C 95, (2017) 034603.
120. E.N. Cardozo, J. Lubian, R. Linares, F. Cappuzzello, D.
Carbone, M. Cavallaro, J.L. Ferreira, A. Gargano, B.Paes,
G. Santagati, Phys. Rev. C 97, (2018) 06461.
121. B. Paes, G. Santagati, R.M. Vsevolodovna, F. Cappuzzello, D. Carbone, E. N. Cardozo, M. Cavallaro, H.
Garcia-Tecocoatzi, A. Gargano, J.L. Ferreira, S.MLenzi, R.
Linares, E. Santopinto, A. Vitturi, J. Lubian, Phys. Rev. C
96 (2017) 044612.
122. I.J. Thompson, Ch. 34 in Fifty Years of Nuclear BCS:
Pairing in Finite Systems, Ed. R.A. Broglia, V. Zelevinsky,
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. (2013)
123. J.S. Vaagen and K. Kumar, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys. 5(9)
(1979), 1211
124. A. Parmar, Sonika, B.J. Roy, V. Jha, U.K. Pal, T. Sinha,
S.K. Pandit, V.V. Parkar, K. Ramachandran, K. Mahata,
S.Santra, A.K. Mohanty, Nucl. Phys. A 940, (2015) 167.
125. R.J. Glauber, High Energy Collisions Theory, Lectures In
Theoretical Physics (Interscience,NewYork,1959),p.315
126. J. Chauvin, D. Lebrun, A. Lounis, M. Buenerd, Phys.
Rev. C 28, (1983) 1970.
127. A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Phys. Rev. C 36, (1986) 1404.
128. S.M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Phys. Rev. C 38, (1988)
2086.
129. S.M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Phys. Rev. C 40, (1989)
2114.
130. S.M. Lenzi, F. Zardi, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C 42, (1990)
2079.
131. E.E. Maqueda, S.M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Phys.
Rev. C 59, (1999) 2297.
132. S.M. Lenzi, F. Zardi, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C 44, (1991)
2670.
133. B.F. Bayman, S.M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, F. Zardi, Phys. Rev.
C 50, (1994) 2096.
134. F. Zardi, S.M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C 49, (1994)
1635.
135. P.G. Hansen, J.A. Tostevin, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.
53, (2003) 219
136. I. Tanihata, H. Hamagaki, O. Hashimoto, Y. Shida, N.
Yoshikawa, K. Sugimoto, O. Yamakawa, T. Kobayashi, N.
Takahashi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, (1985) 2676
137. I. Tanihata, H. Savajols, R. Kanungo, Prog. Part. Nucl.
Phys. 68, (2013) 215
138. K. Ieki, D. Sackett, A. Galonsky, C.A. Bertulani, J.J.
Kruse, W.G. Lynch, D.J. Morrissey, N.A. Orr, H. Schulz,
B.M. Sherrill, A. Sustich, J.A. Winger, F. Deak, A. Horvath,
A. Kiss, Z. Seres, J.J. Kolata, R.E. Warner, D.L. Humphrey,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 730

25

139. F. Catara, C. H. Dasso, A.Vitturi, Nucl. Phys. A602,
(1996) 181
140. M.A. Nagarajan, S. M. Lenzi, A. Vitturi, Eur. Phys. J.
A24, (2005) 63
141. C. Forssen, N.B. Shul’gina, M.V. Zhukov, Phys. Lett.
B549, (2002) 79
142. L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Eur. Phys. J. A26, (2005) 33
143. A. Mason, R. Chatterjee, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Int.
J. Mod. Phys. E17, (2008) 2310
144. A. Mason, R. Chatterjee, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, Eur.
Phys. J. A39, (2009) 107
145. J. Singh, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, R. Chatterjee, Eur.
Phys. J. A52, (2016) 209
146. J. Singh, W. Horiuchi, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, FewBody Syst 60:50 (2019)
147. D.J. Marin-Lambarri, R. Bijker, M. Freer, M. Gai, Tz.
Kokalova, D.J. Parker, C. Wheldon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
(2014) 012502
148. G. Stellin, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi, J. Phys. G43, (2016)
085104
149. A. Vitturi, J. Casal, L. Fortunato, E.G. Lanza, AIP Conference Proceedings 2150 (2019) 040006
150. K. Hagino, N. Takigawa, Prog. Theo. Phys. 128, (2012)
1061.
151. R. Kumar, J.A. Lay, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C92, (2015)
054604.
152. C.H. Dasso, J. Fernandez-Niello, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev.
C55, (1997) 2112.
153. J.A. Christley, M.A. Nagarajan, A. Vitturi, Nucl. Phys.
A591, (1995) 341.
154. F. Catara, C.H. Dasso, A. Vitturi J. Phys. G15, (1989)
L191.
155. M. Lozano, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C35, (1987) 367.
156. M.S. Hussein, M.P. Pato, L F. Canto, R. Donangelo,
Phys. Rev. C46, (1992) 377.
157. N. Takigawa, M. Kuratani, H. Sagawa, Phys. Rev. C47,
(1993) R2470.
158. C.H. Dasso, A.Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C50, (1994) R12.
159. R. Kumar, J.A. Lay, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. C89, (2014)
027601.
160. K. Hagino, A. Vitturi, C.H. Dasso, S.M. Lenzi, Phys.Rev.
C61, (2000) 037602.
161. A. Diaz-Torres, I.J. Thompson, Phys. Rev. C65, (2002)
024606.
162. C.H. Dasso, M. Lozano, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. A44,
(1991) 4743.
163. C.H. Dasso, M. Lozano, A. Vitturi, Phys. Rev. A45,
(1992) 6899.
164. N. Takigawa, K. Hagino, M. Abe, A.B. Balentekin, Phys.
Rev. C49, (1994) 2630.
165. N. Takigawa, K. Hagino, M. Abe, Phys. Rev. C51, (1995)
187.
166. C. Spitaleri, C.A. Bertulani, L. Fortunato, A. Vitturi,
Physics Letters B 755 (2016) 275278
167. H.J. Assenbaum, K. Langanke, C. Rolfs, Z. Phys. A 327
(1987) 461
168. K. Langanke, in Nuclei in the Cosmos, Graduate Text in
Contemporary Physics, edited by Heinz Oberhummer (1991)
Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

