1

A fungal mycelium templates the growth of aragonite needles
Achiya Livnea, Sylwia Carolina Mijowskaa, Iryna Polishchuka, Wilson
Mashikoaneb, Alexander Katsmana and Boaz Pokroya*
a

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of
Technology, Technion City, 3200003 Haifa, Israel. E-mail: bpokroy@technion.ac.il
b

European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France

Keywords: biomineralization by fungi, needle-fiber calcite, pseudo-hexagonal aragonite,
crystal growth, organic/inorganic templating

Fungi live within diverse environments and survive well under extreme conditions that are
usually beyond the tolerance of most other organisms. In different environments fungi are
known to induce precipitation of a wide range of minerals. Various species of fungi have
been shown to facilitate calcium carbonate mineralization. Here, inspired by examples of
needle-fiber calcite formed via fungus-induced biomineralization typically observed in
soils and sediments, we utilized inactivated fungus to synthetically induce precipitation of
CaCO3 needles. To our knowledge, the feasibility of growing aragonitic needles within
fungal mycelium in vitro has not been previously demonstrated. The needles we obtained
were curved, displayed hexagonal facets, and demonstrated high-aspect ratios close to 60.
The size and shape of these synthetic needles matched those of the mycelium of the natural
fungus. Utilizing high-resolution characterization techniques, we studied the morphology
and the micro- and nanostructures of the aragonitic needles. Our findings showed that even
inactivated fungal mycelium, if present in the crystallization environment, can serve as a
template for the formation of high-aspect ratio fibers and can stabilize metastable
polymorphs.

2

1 Introduction
Biomineralization is a widespread phenomenon through which minerals are formed by
living organisms1,2. Biomineralization is observed in all five kingdoms of life, with a large
variety of biominerals formed specifically in the Fungi kingdom3–9. Since the biominerals
produced by a specific fungus differ according to the environment, they are classified as
biologically induced6. Fungi exist in diverse environments and can survive well even in
extreme conditions in which other organisms cannot7. They play an important role in the
formation of soil, and have a significant role in geochemical processes which shape our
planet for millions of years3,6,7. An interesting mineral attributed to biomineralization of
fungi is needle-fiber calcite. First discovered and named ‘moonmilk’ in 155510, its origin
has been debated over the last 50 years. Whereas in the early publications its origin was
considered to be inorganic11, the currently common hypothesis―supported by the size,
diameter and branching of the needles12–15―is that it originates from mineralization in
fungal mycelium. This hypothesis has not been validated, however, since needle-fiber
calcite has never been reproduced in vitro and has been found in nature only in its final
form.
There are several studies in which CaCO3 minerals have been grown synthetically in the
presence of fungi. The resulting precipitates were composed mainly of calcite with some
vaterite16. No documentation of aragonite precipitation in the presence of fungi is available,
although this biomineral is common in other organisms17,18. Aragonite crystals usually
grow with needle morphology along the <111> crystallographic direction. Over the years,
various synthetic routes have been developed to control the polymorph of the precipitated

3

CaCO3. Parameters such as reactant concentration19, temperature20, high Mg/Ca ratio21 and
surfactant usage22 can lead to the formation of aragonite and influence the aspect ratio of
the needles23. More complex methods, such as growing aragonite on single-crystal
substrates24 or via confinement in small membranes25, offer better control over polymorph
selectivity and morphology. In the plastics and the paper industries, CaCO3 is used as a
filler to enhance mechanical properties and to whiten the final products26. In the oil industry
CaCO3 is added as a bridging agent to the drilling fluids to increase density27. In all of these
industrial cases there is a demand for stronger and denser materials, which would favor
aragonite needles over calcite needles28,29.
In this study, we present a novel bioinspired approach to the synthesis of high-aspect ratio,
curved aragonite needles with pseudo-hexagonal morphology. We employed the principles
of biomineralization of fungi to grow aragonite in vitro. We utilized mycelium, the flexible
and branched high surface-area structure of the fungal cells, as a template for aragonite
precipitation. Since the crystallization process related to needle-fiber calcite is known to
progress slowly at ambient temperature, we employed hydrothermal conditions to
accelerate it. We compared the morphology of the synthesized needles with that of the
fungal hyphae (tubular cells). Based on the hypothesis that if the crystals grow within these
tubular cells which serve as a template, their morphologies would be akin. To further
investigate our hypothesis, we aimed to verify the role of the hyphal morphology in needle
growth by destroying the hyphal cells via sonication prior to growing the crystals.

4

2 Results & discussion
The first stage of this research was to culture the Trametes versicolor fungus (see
Experimental section). In brief, T. versicolor was grown in the form of spheres (Fig. S1),
which were then inactivated and sterilized by washing in ethanol and soaking them in it for
24 hours in order to inactivate and sterilize them. Next, T. versicolor spheres were added
to 50 ml of 0.015 M CaCl2 solution, to which 50 ml of 0.015 M Na2CO3 was then added.
The mixture was poured into a beaker and stirred for 10 minutes, and then immediately
transferred into an autoclave preheated to 134 °C. As a first control experiment the same
procedure was performed, but in the absence of fungus.
As an outcome of the synthesis that occurred after autoclaving of the T. versicolor mixture
for 2 hours at 2.5 bars, we observed curved needles exhibiting pseudo-hexagonal
morphologies (Fig. 1a). In the control sample, where no fungus was present, only
rhombohedral crystals typical for calcite were formed (Fig. 1b). Needles formed in the
presence of the fungus were 1.5−5 µm thick, and up to 200 µm long. Their aspect ratio was
at least 1:40 and reached >1:100. Branching of needles (Fig. 1a) resembling mycelium
structure supported our hypothesis of their fungal origin. Hyphal diameter ranged from 1.5
to 5 µm and corresponded to needle thickness (Fig. 1c). High-resolution synchrotron
powder diffraction, which we performed to determine the phase compositions of the
obtained crystals, revealed that in the control experiment only calcite was formed, whereas
in the presence of fungus the major phase upon precipitation was aragonite, with small
amounts of calcite and vaterite (see Fig. 1e). Quantitative Rietveld refinement performed
on the full X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that the phase composition in the

5

presence of T. versicolor comprised 68.6 wt% of aragonite, 15.5 wt% of calcite and 15.9
wt% of vaterite (see Table S1).
In order to verify that the pseudo-hexagonal fibers comprising the major part of the sample
were indeed aragonite, we used a focused ion beam (FIB) to prepare two cross-sectional
lamellae, one perpendicular and the other parallel to the needle axis, for analysis by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 2a, d and Fig. S2).
Electron diffraction on TEM confirmed that the needles were composed of aragonite
oriented along the <001> direction, while the pseudo-hexagonal facets were along < 010>
(Fig. 2c and f). Dark field (DF) TEM imaging (Fig. 2b) revealed that the horizontal lamella
was composed of several grains with varying contrast, indicating that the needle was not a
single crystal but rather a textured polycrystal composed of a number of columnar grains.
The various grains were all oriented along the <001> direction, yet were slightly rotated
relative to each other along that axis. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) taken from
the areas marked with red circles in Fig. 2b demonstrated the same diffraction pattern,
which matched that of aragonite with a [001] zone axis (ZA) (Fig. 2c). SAED results for
the longitudinal lamella (Fig. 2d, e and f) showed that the area marked with a red circle in
Fig. 2e matched the diffraction pattern of aragonite with a [010] ZA, orthogonal to the
<001> direction of growth. DF-TEM imaging of the longitudinal cross section also
revealed a polycrystalline nature (Fig. 2e).
Aragonite that forms in geological arenas, or by induced mineralization, typically presents
a needle-like morphology, but no preferential orientated and its cross-sectional morphology
is not hexagonal

30

. The source of the pseudo-hexagonal morphology of our aragonite

orthorhombic lattice was the (a)-(b) plane, with a (b)/(a) ratio close to √3. This is why the

6

morphology of the crystals, when growing along the <001> direction, appeared
hexagonal31. Since the growth direction of the aragonite columnar grains in our case was
<001> the horizontal cross section was parallel to the (a)-(b) plane, and therefore displayed
pseudo-hexagonal morphology.
Comparison of these results to those of the first control experiment clearly showed that the
precipitation of calcium carbonate was strongly affected by the presence or absence of
fungal mycelium. This was evident from the different calcium carbonate polymorph
induced in its presence, as well as from the high-aspect ratio and the orientation of the
needle morphology obtained. Studies by Gadd et al.4,6,7 on the formation of secondary
minerals by fungi showed that fungi are involved in the formation of diverse biominerals
and are known to affect the precipitates’ morphology and composition4,6,32. Fungi were also
shown to induce precipitation from solutions containing metal ions such as Zn2+, Pb2+ and
Cu2+ 33, and it was therefore suggested that the cell wall of the fungus might serve as a
nucleation template for precipitates34. In our case, it is reasonable to assume that the
aragonitic needle formation was indeed initiated in a similar manner via sorption of Ca2+
ions on the fungus cell wall. We should stress here that the morphology of the obtained
needles resembles that of the needle-fiber calcite found in nature, whose origin is still under
debate but has been suggested to derive from fungi-assisted mineralization. To further
investigate whether the growth of the aragonitic needles had indeed occurred within the
fungal mycelium, we performed a second control experiment in which we exposed the
inactivated fungus to high-frequency ultrasound waves for 30 minutes, with resulting
disruption of the mycelium cells35 and destruction of their tubular structure. After

7

sonication of the mycelium in the CaCl2 solution, the same process as that in the original
experiment was allowed to continue.
When we performed the precipitation experiment in the presence of sonified mycelium, all
of the resulting precipitates were rhombohedrally shaped, as in the first control (Fig. 1d).
Furthermore, no needles were found, and synchrotron XRD combined with quantitative
Rietveld analysis revealed that the major phase was calcite (94.3 wt%) and the rest was
vaterite (5.7 wt%) (see Fig. S3). These findings confirmed the cardinal role of fungal
hyphae in the templated formation of aragonite needles.
To further support the conclusion that growth of the aragonitic fibers was templated within
the confinement of the fungal hyphae, we compared the actual morphology (diameter and
length) of these cells with those of the aragonitic fibers formed. To this end, we subjected
the fungal hyphae to crytical point drying in order to maintain their biological morphology
without distortions, and then coated them with alumina via atomic layer deposition (ALD).
The latter procedure added mechanical strength to the cells without changing their
morphology, and allowed imaging by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) similar to that
performed on biofilms36. Using ALD, we were able to deposit thin films with conformal
coatings of nanometric thickness, even on objects with aspect ratios of up to 1:1000. The
morphology of the coated fungal hyphae was indeed similar to that of the aragonitic fibers
with respect to length, diameter, and even branching (Fig. 1c). These results clearly
indicated that the aragonite grows within the fungal hyphae tubes, thus leading to the
formation of needles with high-aspect ratios. We noticed that the crystallization which
occurred under the conditions used here proceeded via an amorphous phase. This was also
demonstrated previously, when it was reported that fast mixing of ….M is undertaken. It

8

seems likely that the amorphous precursor, which is stable only for a short time because it
lacks an additional stabilizer (such as magnesium or soluble organics), becomes stabilized
within the confinement of the mycelium microtubes. It was clearly shown elsewhere that
microconfinement stabilizes amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC)

25

. In this study the

crystallization occurred under the hydrothermal conditions in which it was immediately
placed. In our first control experiment, where no mycelium was present, the ACC was not
stabilized and crystallized very rapidly to calcite. As to why our experimental setup yielded
aragonite, we propose a synergistic effect of confinement, organic templating and
temperature. Confinement within a synthetic membrane has been shown to induce
aragonite, but in that case the pore diameter was only ≈ 25 nm25. Here we added a third
control experiment performed under hydrothermal conditions, in which the fungal hyphae
were replaced by a synthetic membrane with micron-sized pores (of the same order as the
mycelium pore diameter). Here too there was no formation of aragonite, but only of calcite.
Taken together, the different control experiments clearly demonstrated that crystallization
of aragonite or needle-like crystals cannot be induced solely by the effect of temperature,
micron-sized confinement, or disrupted mycelium, but only by the synergistic action of all
of these effects.
Whether the ACC crystallization occurred by direct transformation from ACC or
via dissolution-reprecipitation is unknown. We suggest that a hydrated ACC precursor,
when stabilized within confined mycelium microtubes, may indeed transform to different
calcium carbonate polymorphs via the dissolution-reprecipitation mechanism. Both calcite
and aragonite may nucleate heterogeneously on the inner walls of the organic microtubes.
Calcite is thermodynamically more stable than aragonite, but the kinetics of nucleation

9

(incubation time and nucleation rates) for calcite and aragonite are concurrent and can
differ markedly at different temperatures. At room temperature calcite nucleates faster,
while increasing the temperature to 100 C favors aragonite nucleation [ref]. As shown by
Munemoto and Fukushi [ref], the incubation time for aragonite nucleation, A, from
dissolved monohydrocalcite at temperatures between 10 and 50 C can be approximated
by the dependence:
ln  A 

13000
 32 ,
T

(1)

which corresponds to an apparent nucleation activation energy of ≈ 108 kJ/mol. Dissolved
monohydrocalcite can be considered as hydrated ACC. At room temperature, from eq. (1)
we obtain A ≈ 2105 seconds. Estimation of incubation time at 100 C from eq. (1) yields
≈ 17 seconds, while at 134C (as in our experiments) it decreases strongly to ≈ 1 second.
It should be noted that the formation of calcite in this study was inhibited by the addition
of Mg-stabilized ACC.
The apparent activation energy of nucleation is a complex parameter that includes a
thermodynamic barrier (work done in formation) of the critical nucleus) and an effective
kinetic barrier (arising from desolvation) of solute ions, activation energy for the
attachment of ions to the critical nucleus, and structural rearrangements). Kawano et al.
[ref] constructed precipitation diagrams for the three calcium carbonate polymorphs
(calcite, aragonite and vaterite) showing which of these phases is the first to precipitate
from a solution under a given condition. To explain why aragonite formation was favored
at 50−80 C, they suggested that the surface energy of aragonite decreases with temperature
according to the relation γA = γA0 -a(T – 298), where γA0= 150 mJ/m2 and a = 8 mJm−2K−1,

10

while surface energies of calcite and vaterite remain constant with temperature. However,
such an assumption is difficult to justify. Moreover, extensive calcite formation (while
there was no aragonite formation) in our experiments with the sonified mycelium at 134C
contradicted this hypothesis. In our opinion, the formation of calcite and the absence of
aragonite during high-temperature crystallization in the absence of tubular mycelium cells
can be explained by the absence of an intermediate stabilized and hydrated ACC. In such
a case, calcite is crystallized directly from the supersaturated solution. On the other hand,
nucleation of crystalline calcium carbonate is known to be heterogeneous, and to be
controlled by the electrostatic interaction between the hydrated calcium ions and the
substrate (ref). Our calculations supporting this suggestion can be seen in Supplementary
Materials. Based on these calculations it was apparent that the nucleation of aragonite in
our case was kinetically much more favorable, despite the higher thermodynamic stability
of calcite.

3 Conclusion
Here we demonstrated for the first time the feasibility of growing aragonite needles within
inactivated cells of fungal hyphae in vitro. Our results clearly showed that aragonite needles
are formed by the synergistic effect of confinement, organic templating and crystallization
temperature. Notably, this study demonstrated the potentially important role played by
mycelium organics in fungus-induced biomineralization, and it also strengthened the
notion that needle-fiber calcite originates from fungi. Further investigation may be helpful
in developing a novel approach to control crystal formation that is both simple and cheap.
The present study, our first in this field of research, was performed with CaCO3 minerals,
but the findings might possibly be extended to other engineering materials as well. This

11

may lead in turn to utilization of fungal cells or fungi-inspired surfaces as organic templates
for crystal growth.

4 Experimental
4.1 Growth of fungus
The fungus Treametes versicolor (kindly supplied in its original form by Prof. S.P. Wasser)
from the Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology of Haifa University was
grown on agar substrate. Standard malt extract agar (30 g malt extract, 10 g peptone and
15 g agar per 1 L of deionized (DI) water was sterilized by autoclaving at 120 °C for 45
min, poured into 90-mm Petri dishes and cooled to room temperature while covered with
lids inside a sterile biological hood. A piece (1×1 cm) of living fungus on agar was attached
to the center of each Petri dish, the lids were re-sterilized by flame, and the Petri dishes
were sealed with parafilm and kept in an incubator at 25 °C for 7 days, by which time the
whole agar surface in each dish was covered by the fungus. A standard growth solution (15
g D-glucose, 2.5 g peptone, 3 g yeast extract, 1 g KH2PO4, 0.2 g K2HPO4 and 0.5 g MgSO4
per 1 L of DI water) was prepared in 50-ml Erlenmeyer flasks, and after full dissolution
the pH was set to 5.5 using NaOH and HCl. Each flask was closed with a cellulose stopper,
covered with aluminum foil, autoclaved at 120 °C for 45 min, and then placed under the
biological hood and allowed to cool to room temperature. From each Petri dish, five slices
of T. versicolor (an area of 5×1 mm at the depth of the Petri dish) were transferred to an
Erlenmeyer flask, and the neck and cellulose stopper of each flask were sterilized by flame.
The system was sealed and kept for 3 weeks in an incubator at 25 °C, during which time

12

the flasks were continuously shaken at 120 rpm on an orbital shaker. By the end of that
time the fungus had grown into spheres of ≈ 1 cm diameter.
4.2 Establishment of hydrothermal conditions
Each T. versicolor sphere was washed in AR-grade ethanol and soaked in it for 24 h to
inactivate the fungus and remove any organic compounds. Each sphere was then
transferred into a 150-ml beaker containing a solution of 50 mL CaCl2 (0.015 M) and was
stirred for 10 min. To this was added a 50-ml solution of Na2CO3 (0.015 M) from a 100ml beaker, and the mixture was immediately placed in an autoclave preheated to 134 °C,
and kept there for 2 h at 134 °C and 2.5 bars. The solution was then filtered through
Whatman paper no. 5 and air-dried for 24 h. A first control experiment was performed
under identical hydrothermal conditions at all stages of preparation, but with no fungus
added to the system.
To verify that the aragonite needle’s morphology is determined by the fungal tubes, we
produced a sonicated sample by exposing mycelium’s tubular cells to high-frequency
ultrasound waves for 30 min in order to explode the cells and thereby destroying the
mycelium’s tubular structure. After sonication, we continued to subject it to the same
process as that used for the original (unsonicated) sample.
Fitting of the needles to cells of the fungus required the use of fungal cells in their original
form, not cells that had collapsed under vacuum. We used critical point drying and atomic
layer deposition (ALD) to achieve a well-preserved mycelium structure. The T. versicolor
spheres were moved to ethanol AR and shaken on an orbital shaker at 120 rpm for 3 days.
The ethanol was then replaced with fresh ethanol, and shaking was continued for 4 more

13

days. The clean and water-dry fungus was then placed in the chamber of a critical point
dryer, in which CO2 under pressure was substituted for ethanol in several cycles. Upon full
substitution, the temperature and pressure reached the CO2 critical point, and the CO2 was
vaporized. The critical point-dried fungus was then subjected to Al2O3 deposition in an
ALD chamber (SUNALETM 200 reactor, Picosun, Finland). Since we were using organic
materials as a template we needed to work at relatively low temperatures, and accordingly
kept the growth temperature at 80 °C. Trimethylaluminum (TMA; 97% pure) was used as
an aluminum precursor and water vapor as the oxidizer. To maintain the reactor pressure at
10 hPa we used a N2 carrier gas flow (99.999% pure) of 300 cm3min−1. The sources of
TMA and H2O were kept at room temperature. N2 flow rates during TMA/H2O fill and
purge periods were 100 cm3min−1. Stop flow mode consisting of 350 cycles was used for
the run.
4.3 Sample preparation
The solution was filtered through Whatman filter paper no. 5. The powder was air-dried
for 24 h. We produced SEM samples by placing powder onto conductive carbon tape on a
SEM sample holder. Samples were carbon-coated twice. Powders for X-ray diffraction
(XRD) were not grinded. TEM samples were produced by the use of a FIB. From the SEM
samples we cut two lamellar cross sections, one horizontal and the other longitudinal.
4.4 Characterization
SEM images were obtained with a Zeiss Ultra plus high-resolution SEM (HRSEM). Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) measurements were obtained using the same SEM at
10 keV. XRD measurements were carried out at the ESRF (European Synchrotron

14

Radiation Facility) in Grenoble, dedicated beamline ID22. Wavelength was 0.4000 Å, with
a scan rate of 4 degrees. min−1. For TEM measurements on the horizontal cross section we
used the FEI Titan Themis Cubed G2 at 300 keV, and for TEM measurements on the
longitudinal cross section we used the FEI Tecnai T20 at 200 keV.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. S.P. Wasser from the Department of Evolutionary and Environmental
Biology, Haifa University, for donating the fungus species used for these experiments and
teaching us how to grow it in our lab. The diffraction experiments were performed on
beamline ID22 at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France.
Notes and references
1.

A. Heinz, S. W. Lowenstam, On Biomineralization. Oxford University Press
Oxford, England 1989.

2.

E. Königsberger, L. Königsberger, Biomineralization : Medical Aspects of
Solubility, Wiley, Cornwall, England 2006.

3.

E. Hoffland, T. W. Kuyper, H. Wallander, Front Ecol Environ. 2004, 2, 258.

4.

G. M. Gadd, Microbiology. 2010, 156, 609.

5.

E. P. Burford, S. Hillier, G. M. Gadd, Geomicrobiol J. 2006, 23, 599.

6.

G. M. Gadd, Y. J. Rhee, K. Stephenson, Z. Wei, Environ Microbiol Rep. 2012, 4,
270.

7.

G. M. Gadd, Mycol Res. 2007, 111, 3.

8.

M. Oggerin, F. Tornos, N. Rodríguez, C. del Moral, M. Sánchez-Román, R. Amils,
Environ Microbiol. 2013, 15, 2228.

9.

E. P. Verrecchia, in Microbial Sediments, ed. R. E. Riding, S. M. Awramic,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg 2000, 9, 68-75.

10.

K Gessner, Lucernae. 1555

11.

P. J. Noel, J Sediment Petrol. 1972, 42, 817.

12.

S. Bindschedler, L. Millière, G. Cailleau, D. Job, E. P. Verrecchia, Geomicrobiol J.
2012, 29, 301.

15

13.

L. Milliere, O. Hasinger, S. Bindschedler, G. Cailleau, J. E. Spangenberg, E. P.
Verrecchia, Geoderma. 2011, 161, 74.

14.

E. P. Verrecchia, K. E. Ver, J Sediment Res. 1994, 64, 650.

15.

G. Cailleau, E. P. Verrecchia, O. Braissant, L. Emmanuel, Sedimentology. 2009,
56, 1858.

16.

A. Ahmad, D. Rautaray, M. Sastry, Adv Funct Mater. 2004, 14, 1075.

17.

J. Sun, B. Bhushan, RSC Adv. 2012, 2, 7617.

18.

B. Pokroy, J. S. Fieramosca, R. B. Von Dreele, A. N. Fitch, E. N. Caspi, E.
Zolotoyabko, chem. mater. 2007, 19, 3244.

19.

D. Chakrabarty, S. Mahapatra, J Mater Chem. 1999, 9, 2953.

20.

J. W. Ahn, C. Ramakrishna, T. Thenepalli, J. H. Huh, J Korean Ceram Soc. 2016,
53, 222.

21.

Y. Kitano, Bull Chem Soc Japan. 1962, 35, 1973.

22.

F. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Zhao, Q. Shen, Y. Su, D. Wang, Chem Commun. 2010, 46, 4607.

23.

C. Ramakrishna, T. Thenepalli, J. W. Ahn, Korean Chem Eng Res. 2017, 55, 443.

24.

B. Pokroy, E. Zolotoyabko, Chem Comm. 2005, 0, 2140.

25.

M. Zeng, Y. Y. Kim, C. Anduix-Canto, C. Fronterac, D. Laundyd, N. Kapur, H. K.
Christensonb, F. C. Meldrum, Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2018, 115, 7670.

26.

R. Myers, The 100 most important chemical compounds, Greenwood Press.
London, 2007.

27.

W.C. Lyons, G.J. Plisga, Standard Handbook of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Engineering, Elsevier, Oxford, England 2006.

28.

T. Thenepalli, A. Y. Jun, C. Han, C. Ramakrishna, J. W. Ahn, Korean J. Chem.
Eng. 2015, 32, 1009.

29.

M. He, B. U. Cho, J. M. Won, Carbohyd. Polym. 2016 136, 820.

30.

J. W. Anthony, R. A. Bideaux, K. W. Bladh, M. C. Nichols, Handbook of
Mineralogy, Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, USA, 2003.

31.

W. L. Bragg, Proc R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci. 1924, 105, 16.

32.

Y. J. Rhee, S. Hillier, H. Pendlowski, G. M. Gadd, Chemosphere. 2014, 113, 17.

33.

G. Bayramoǧlu, S. Bektaş, M. Y. Arica, J Hazard Mater. 2003, 101, 285.

34.

E. Fourest, J. C. Roux, 1992, 37, 399.

35.

D. cheng, S. k. Sharma, A. Mudhoo, Handbook on Applications of Ultrasound,
CRC Press, Florida, USA, 2012.

16

36.

A. K. Epstein, B. Pokroy, A. Seminara, J. Aizenberg, Proc Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2011, 108, 995.

37.

J. L. Wray, F. Daniels, J. Am. Chem. Soc.1957, 79, 2031.

38.

T. Munemoto, K. Fukushi, J. Mineral. Petrol. Sci. 2008, 103, 345.

39.

J. Kawano, N. Shimobayashi, A. Miyake, M. Kitamura, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter, 2009, 21, 425102.

40.

H. Wang, V. Alfredsson, J. Tropsch, R. Ettl, T. Nylander, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2013, 5, 4035.

17

b

a

10μm

10μm

d

c

O Al
C

10μm

30μm

e

Fig. 1. Characterization of CaCO3 crystals mineralized with and without fungus. (a)
SEM image of control crystals obtained under hydrothermal conditions in the absence
of fungus. Rhombohedral calcite crystals are the main precipitate. (b) SEM image of
the crystals obtained in the presence of T. versicolor fungus under the same conditions.
Curved aragonite needles with hexagonal facets are formed. Needle thickness ranges
from 1.5 to 5 μm. (c) SEM image of T. versicolor mycelium coated with alumina.
Hyphal thickness ranges from 1.5 to 5 μm. Inset shows the EDS spectrum taken from
the area marked in yellow and confirming that the tubes are covered by Al2O3. (d) SEM
image of crystals obtained when the fungus was sonicated prior to the synthesis. No
precipitation of aragonite needles is observed. (e) XRD patterns of the control sample
(without fungus) and of the sample grown in the presence of fungus. Control crystals
show a pattern of the pure calcite (black line). In the presence of fungus aragonite and
vaterite phases are observed (blue line).

18

a

d

10μm

1μm

b

e

1
2

1μm

1μm

f

c
2

1

ZA [001]
ZA [010]

Fig. 2. TEM results obtained from horizontal and from longitudinal lamellae of a needle. (a)
SEM image shows a needle’s hexagonal shape. The red rectangle marks a horizontal cross
section cut with a FIB. (b) Dark-field TEM image of the horizontal lamella. The varying
contrast indicates that the needle is polycrystalline. Red circles mark areas of selected area
electron diffraction (SAED). (c) SAED of the horizontal cross section from both 1 and 2 (left
and right respectively), fits to aragonite with zone axis [001]. (d) SEM image of a curved
hexagonal needle; the red rectangle marks the longitudinal cross section. (e) Dark-field TEM
image of the longitudinal lamella. The varying contrast indicates that it is not a single crystal.
Red circles mark the areas of SAED. (f) SAED of the longitudinal cross section. The diffraction
matches that of aragonite with zone axis [010].

