Assessment of the MERS-CoV epidemic situation in the Middle East region
Chiara Poletto1,2,3, Camille Pelat4,5, Daniel Levy-Bruhl6, Yazdan Yazdanpanah4,5,7, PierreYves Boelle1,2, Vittoria Colizza1,2,3
1Inserm,

U707, Paris, France
Univ Paris 06, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR S 707, Paris, France
3Institute for Scientific Interchange (ISI), Turin, Italy
4ATIP/Avenir Inserm, U738, Paris, France
5Univ Paris 07, Faculté de Médecine Bichat, Paris, France
6Institut de Veille Sanitaire (InVS), St Maurice Cedex, 94415, France
7 Service des Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard
2UPMC

Correspondence to : VC (vittoria.colizza@inserm.fr)

The appearance of a novel coronavirus named Middle East (ME) Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) has raised global public health concerns regarding the current
situation and its future evolution. Here we propose an integrative maximum likelihood analysis
of both cluster data in the ME region and importations in Europe to assess transmission scenario
and incidence of sporadic infections. Our approach is based on a spatial-transmission model
integrating mobility data worldwide and allows for variations in the zoonotic/environmental
transmission and underascertainment. Maximum likelihood estimates for the ME region indicate
the occurrence of a subcritical epidemic (
, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.30–0.77)
associated with a 0.28 (95% CI 0.12–0.85) daily rate of sporadic introductions. Infections in the
region appear to be mainly dominated by zoonotic/environmental transmissions, with possible
underascertainment (95% CI of estimated to observed sporadic cases in the range 1.03–7.32).
No time evolution of the situation emerges. Analyses of flight passenger data from the region
indicate areas at high risk of importation. While dismissing an immediate threat for global health
security, this analysis provides a baseline scenario for future reference and updates, suggests
reinforced surveillance to limit underascertainment, and calls for increased alertness in highrisk areas worldwide.

1

Introduction
As of August 31, 2013, a total of 108 laboratory confirmed cases of human infection with the
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have been reported to the World
Health Organization (WHO) [1]. Since the emergence of the virus, a rapid coordinated response
has been put in place to confront the novel epidemic emergency, through the identification and
sequencing of the virus [2], the enhancement of surveillance systems, the provision of updated
information on the situation and of technical guidance for the clinical management of probable
infections [3-7], the identification of the possible virus reservoir [8]. There are still many
uncertainties about various aspects of the outbreak, including a possible extension of the
reservoir to other hosts, its full geographic extent, the path of transmission of the infection to
humans and the associated risk. All these aspects call for heightened surveillance, enhanced
investigations and the development and application of epidemiological methods to assess the
current epidemic situation and determine its potential to spread efficiently in human population
and to widely circulate at a global scale.
In such situation, statistical, mathematical and computational methods allow estimating key
epidemiological parameters from available data, under various assumptions and accounting for
the many uncertainties. The reproductive number, i.e. the average number of secondary cases
generated by a primary case, is a key summary measure of the transmissibility of an emerging
infection. A first estimation of the MERS-CoV reproductive number was based on the analysis of
cluster-size data with assumed cluster partition in terms of transmission trees, highlighting the
similarity of current MERS-CoV situation to the prepandemic stage of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak [9]. Next to transmissibility, an additional important
aspect characterizing the epidemic remains unknown, i.e. the incidence of infection. Observed
cases may indeed only represent a proportion of the current epidemic, with a majority of
infections going undetected because of mild illness or asymptomatic infection. This aspect also
has further relevant implications for the correct estimation of other important overall statistics
(e.g. the severity of the virus) and of the risk of importation of cases in other regions of the
world. Limited data may also hide important changes in the virus transmissibility related, e.g., to
viral adaptations to humans that may alter its pandemic potential, thus presenting an additional
challenge for the situation assessment.
Here we present an innovative integrative maximum likelihood approach to describe the current
epidemic situation in the Middle East (ME) region and fill these gaps in current knowledge. We
synthesize evidence from multiple sources of information: sizes of clusters of cases, traffic data,
and imported cases outside the ME region. Methods used account for the limited information
available and reporting inaccuracies. Our aim is to complete early findings on MERS-CoV
epidemic by focusing on the virus transmissibility from human-to-human, its possible changes in

2

time, the expected number of cases in the region, and the public health threat for other
geographical areas based on case importation.
Methods
Analytic overview. The integrative approach we use is based on a combined maximum
likelihood analysis to jointly estimate the reproductive number

and the daily rate

of

sporadic introduction of the virus in the population through zoonotic/environmental
transmissions [10]. The integrative approach builds on two aspects of the currently reported
outbreak – the distribution of cluster sizes, providing information on

(Method 1), and the

number of imported cases in countries out of the source region providing information on

and

based on the fit of a stochastic spatial metapopulation model integrating aviation data
worldwide (Method 2).
Method 1. We considered laboratory-confirmed cases in the ME region (Jordan, Qatar, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates) reported to WHO as of August 31, 2013 [1] (Table 1). We
estimated the reproductive number using the cluster sizes distribution. Several distributions can
be used that correspond to different hypotheses regarding the number of secondary cases
distribution (offspring distribution) [11]. In particular we considered a Poisson offspring
distribution accounting for no overdispersion around a common mean [12] and a geometric
offspring distribution assuming a constant rate of transmission during an exponentially
distributed infectious period [13].
As cluster sizes may be biased downwards by incomplete observation, we allowed for
uncertainty by assuming that each case in a cluster would go unobserved with probability pcl
during investigation (

representing no missed cases). This corresponds to the following

distribution for reported cluster sizes:
(
where
∑

|

)

is the observed size of the cluster,
(

| )

∑

(

| )( )

(

(

)

|

)

its real size (

,
),

(1)
(

|

)

, and ( | ) is the offspring distribution discussed above.

Eventually, the likelihood was computed as
) over a bi-dimensional grid of {

(

{ })

(∑

) ∏

(

|

} values.

We performed a sensitivity analysis by considering: (i) the complete Jordan cluster including 8
more cases (size=10) identified through a retrospective serology study carried out on 124
individuals [4,14]; (ii) all laboratory-confirmed cases (108) reported worldwide to WHO [1]; (iii)
laboratory-confirmed cases in the ME region up to May 31, 2013 [1]. The corresponding cluster
size data are reported in Table 1.

3

Method 2. Due to large concern around the ongoing outbreak and enhanced surveillance
following the WHO guidelines for patients returning from the affected area, the detection of
probable cases imported in countries out of the ME region is expected to be more complete than
in the source region where primary cases may have gone undetected. Another source of
information to estimate the reproductive number, discounting possible notification/surveillance
biases in the source region, is therefore provided by the importation of cases in newly affected
countries [15,16]. We thus modify and extend a method already used for the estimation of the
seasonal transmission potential of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic based on the calibration of a global
epidemic and mobility model (GLEAM) [17,18] to the chronology data of the pandemic invasion
[16], by accounting for the different transmission scenarios in the MERS-CoV source region. The
method concurrently allows the estimation of the incidence of infection from sporadic cases in
the region, and therefore provides a measure of possible underascertainment of cases.
GLEAM is based on a spatially structured metapopulation approach comprising 3,362
subpopulations in 220 countries in the world coupled through mobility connections. The model
is informed with high-resolution demographic data for 6 billion individuals and multi-scale
mobility data including the full air traffic database from the International Air Transport
Association (IATA) and short-range ground mobility obtained from national commuting data
[18]. The infection dynamics takes place within each subpopulation and assumes a modified
SEIR compartmentalization (susceptible, exposed, infectious, recovered individuals) [19] to
account for different transmission scenarios in the ME region [10]: (i) introduction of sporadic
infections from zoonotic/environmental transmission with a daily rate

and a uniform spatial

distribution in the source region; (ii) modified human-to-human transmissibility with respect to
standard homogeneous mixing in all subpopulations of the model to allow for large variations in
the number of secondary cases produced by a given primary case. Epidemiological parameters
for the compartmental model were based on the estimates obtained from the analysis of the
outbreak data including 22 cases at a health-care facility in Al-Ahsa in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia [6], namely average latency period of 5.2 days and generation time of 7.6 days.
The daily rate

of sporadic cases emergence in the ME region and the reproductive number

are the free parameters of the model. For each set of values of these two parameters, GLEAM
allows the generation of stochastic numerical realizations of the MERS-CoV outbreak simulating
the local epidemic in the source region and the possibility of international dissemination
through mobility processes entirely based on real data. We thus generate with a Monte Carlo
procedure the probability distribution

( ) of the number

of imported MERS-CoV cases in

country out of the seed region as of August 31, 2013 (
point (

stochastic realizations for each

) of the space of parameters). Being all independent importation events, we can

define a likelihood function

(

{ })

∏

( ), where

is the empirically observed
4

number of imported cases per country (see schematic example in Figure 1). We further restrict
our analysis to countries of Western Europe, to focus on a region where respiratory diseases
surveillance is homogeneous and with a high sensitivity to detect importations. These data
consisted therefore in:

in the United Kingdom, Germany, France and Italy, and

for

all other countries in the Western European region (Figure 1). We estimated the log-likelihood
over a bi-dimensional grid of (

) values and used bivariate linear interpolation over a

refined grid.
Given the unknown geographical extension of the source of the MERS-CoV infection in the ME
region and its reservoir, we performed a sensitivity analysis by considering: (i) an extended
definition of source region to neighboring countries, thus additionally including Bahrain, Iraq,
Iran, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Palestinian territories, Syria, and Yemen (extended source
region), based on travel recommendations [20]; (ii) a restricted source region localized only in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, i.e. the country in the ME region that reported the largest number
of cases; (iii) a variation in the time of the initial emergence of the virus with transmission to
humans, assuming that sporadic cases may be introduced up to two months before the known
initial cases (Jordan cluster, April 2012 [4]), to allow for lack of identification or detection prior
to the Jordan cluster.
Integrative approach combining Methods 1 & 2. Methods 1 and 2 were jointly combined in
the

following
|{ } { })

(

integrated
(

|{ })

(

likelihood

function:

|{ }), owing to the independence of the two

observed processes (cluster sizes and importations). Maximum likelihood estimates were
computed
(

)

over
(

the
(

3-dimensional
)

(

grid

(

)

and

the

deviance

)) was used to measure distance from the best fit.

Associated confidence intervals were obtained by profiling the deviance in the 3D space [21]. It
is important to note that such estimates cannot be derived from the maximum likelihood
analysis of each Method considered separately, nor conditionally one to the other, and the full
computation of (

|{ } { }) needs to be considered. In this respect, our integrative

approach represents a substantial advance with respect to prior work based on the analysis of
cluster data only [9].
Air traffic data analysis. We additionally analyzed the air traffic data integrated into GLEAM to
evaluate the traffic capacity of the airports in the ME region and to assess the importation risk of
the countries belonging to other regions than Western Europe.
Results

5

The integrated analysis led to a

value equal to 0.50 (95% CI 0.30–0.77) and daily rate

of

MERS-CoV introductions into the human population in the ME region equal to 0.28 (0.12–0.85)
(Table 2). These best estimates were obtained considering a geometric offspring distribution,
yielding higher maximum likelihood values in the analysis. The corresponding best estimate for
uncertainty in the cluster distribution suggests a consistent fraction of cases missed in cluster
investigations (

=0.35, 95% CI 0–0.85), but little impact of inaccuracies in reported cluster size

on the estimates of the other parameters.
The estimated daily rate
value (

of sporadic cases in the ME region can be compared to the observed

), computed based on 60 sporadic cases reported between April 2012 and

August 31, 2013 in the region, including 43 sporadic cases and 13 cluster index cases in the ME
region (assuming that each cluster is originated by a single index case), as well as 4 laboratoryconfirmed imported cases out of the region [1,3,5]. This yields that the true number of cases
from zoonotic/environmental transmission might be between 1.03– and 7.32–fold the observed
number.
Our estimates are very robust against the addition of cases out of the ME region to the
distribution of clusters sizes (

0.50, 0.31–0.77; no change for

). An increase in , though

with limited change in the associated confidence interval, is obtained if we include the full
Jordan cluster of April 2012 by considering also cases retrospectively confirmed by serology
(

0.65, 0.34–0.80); no variations are obtained in the confidence interval of the estimated daily

rate of sporadic cases in the region (Table 2).
Similar results for the reproductive number are obtained when we consider variations in the
geographic definition of the MERS-CoV source region. Extending it to its neighboring countries
does not affect the estimated basic reproductive number and associated confidence interval
(

0.50, 0.31–0.76), but lowers the value of the daily rate of sporadic cases (

0.14, 0.05–

0.38). If we assume that the source region is instead restricted to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, a
substantial increase in

is obtained (4.73, 2.32–15.37), with increase in the reproductive

number and unaltered confidence interval (
No variation in

0.60, 0.30–0.76).

was observed in testing a different hypothesis on the offspring distribution,

whereas an increase for the best estimate of

was found (0.69 in the Poisson case vs. 0.50 in the

baseline, with similar CIs, Table 2).
Larger CIs but no significant variation in the parameters’ estimates were observed by
considering empirical data up to the end of May (Table 2).
Analyses of traffic data expose large traffic fluxes towards the continents of Asia, Europe and
Africa (Figure 3) from the ME region. In addition to 6 neighboring countries of the ME region, 7
were found in South Asia that belong to the set of the first 20 countries with highest traffic from

6

the ME region, 5 in Europe (among which the 4 countries reporting importation of cases from
the affected area), and 2 in Africa.
Discussion
Results of our integrative modeling approach suggest the occurrence of a subcritical MERS-CoV
epidemic in the ME region, as quantified by a reproductive number smaller than 1. The outbreak
is not able to generate a self-sustaining epidemic in humans, and sporadic cases from
zoonotic/environmental transmission are expected to represent a large fraction of the total size
of the epidemic.
The estimated confidence interval for the reproductive number is found to be very stable across
changes in the data interpretation. In all cases, considering data up to August 31, we found that
it is highly unlikely (<5% probability) to have a MERS-CoV outbreak with

above 0.80 or below

0.30. The variation of the best estimate from the baseline case ( =0.50) to the various scenarios
explored as sensitivity analysis (up to =0.69) is explained by the presence of a large region in
the parameter space (

) where the likelihood function shows small variation around its

maximum value (darker red area in Figure 2). This is likely induced by the limited data available
not allowing us to narrow down the confidence intervals of the estimates.
The analysis based on the integration of two independent methods allows us to provide an
estimate for the daily rate of introductions of MERS-CoV infections in human population in the
ME region, in addition to the estimate for the reproductive number. The estimated 95% CI in the
baseline scenario (0.12–0.85) compared to the observed value (0.116) suggests a negligible to
significant underascertainment rate for zoonotic/environmental transmissions (1.03–7.32 times
the reported sporadic cases), indicating that notified sporadic cases likely represent a
substantial proportion of the total, but improved surveillance in the region including serological
surveys around cases is needed. Since evidence for mild illness, as well as for a wide spectrum of
clinical disease, was observed [3,6], our findings are compatible with an underascertainment
rate for zoonotic/environmental transmissions that may be due to a selection bias towards more
severe cases, where patients having mild illnesses or asymptomatic infections may go
undetected [22].
Our estimates for the reproductive number are consistent with the results of Ref. [9] – the only
study to date reporting results on interhuman transmissibility – thus further confirming the
robustness of our epidemic assessment. Our work presents however substantial differences in
the methodology and in its achievable predictions that we discuss in the following.
One major difference is that our integrative approach also allows the quantification of sporadic
cases underascertainment through the estimate of the rate of introduction of sporadic cases in
the ME region, combined with the estimate for the reproductive number. In [9], daily

7

introductions are simply calculated on the basis of the two assumed scenarios for the
transmission trees, i.e. from the assumed number of index cases among the reported data. Our
procedure instead makes no assumption on the completeness of reported data, or on the local
transmission trees, and relies on alternative data sources (case importations) to estimate the
number of sporadic cases in the region.
The cluster data analysis of Method 1 relies on the assumption that each cluster is the result of
human-to-human transmission starting from a single index case. While we allow for uncertainty
in case detection in the close contact investigation, we do not consider the possibility of coexposure of epidemiologically linked cases to the same source of zoonotic/environmental
infection, differently from [9]. In absence of any knowledge about the virus path of infection to
humans and with insufficient data from epidemiological investigations to reliably reconstruct
transmission trees within clusters, we chose a worst-case assumption for the transmissibility of
the virus. This may lead to overestimating the reproductive number, however not affecting our
conclusion on the subcritical nature of the current MERS-CoV epidemic. In addition, such
assumption does not affect our analysis based on case importations (Method 2) that aims to
estimate the size of the epidemic in the affected region, in that it assumes no knowledge on the
local

transmissions,

independently

of

their

type

(whether

human-to-human

or

zoonotic/environmental).
We considered the cluster analysis (Method 1) restricted to the ME region as we assumed a
rather homogeneous implementation of control measures around cases that may be different
from the one put in place in affected countries experiencing importation of cases, mainly due to
the additional available knowledge of travel history associated to imported cases. The extension
of the analysis to all MERS-CoV clusters of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO did not
alter our estimates.
The spatial component of our approach represents another difference with previous work. If we
assume that the source of MERS-CoV infection is restricted to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
where the majority of cases has been observed, our estimates indicate that a much larger
number of sporadic cases in the area would be needed to sustain the observed importation of
cases in Western Europe (4.73 daily introductions of sporadic cases vs. 0.28 in the baseline). The
biggest airports, handling the vast majority of the international air traffic of the region, are
indeed mainly localized in the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, and Jordan (panel A of Figure 3).
This strongly reduces the traffic capacity of the ME region, as well as the corresponding
likelihood of exporting cases out of the region, once the restricted hypothesis on the seeding
area is considered. An analysis based on cluster data only would remain unchanged and would
not be able to detect important variations in the epidemic size estimation. This result further
indicates the relevance of air travel in the epidemic assessment and therefore the need for an

8

integrative approach also based on mobility and space. It also implies that improving the
knowledge of the geographic extent of the seed region is critical, along with the identification of
the virus’ path of transmission to humans.
Changes in time of countries’ public health actions for surveillance and control of the MERS-CoV
epidemic certainly occurred in response to the increasingly available emerging evidence and the
higher awareness of the disease, however data is too scarce to provide estimates of the
reproductive number ( ) as a function of time. Here we assumed a constant

for the period

under study, with the underlying assumption of a constant and homogeneous implementation of
intervention measures in the region.
Other possible factors leading to variations of the current situation may be pathogen- and hostsrelated. Evolution of the MERS-CoV virus to adapt to humans and reach sustainable and efficient
human-to-human transmission represents a potential future scenario, as it happened for SARS
[23]. We tested for possible variations of

and

estimates by comparing two different points

in time (end of May and end of August 2013) and found no significant change, except for a
reduction of the CIs following a larger dataset available for the estimation. Given the available
data, this result seems to indicate that no variation in the rate of introductions and in the
transmissibility of the virus has occurred in the last 3 months that may point to differences in
the transmission to humans or to viral adaptations to human hosts. On the other hand, if
compared to the reported number of sporadic cases at the two dates, our

estimates are in

favor of an increase in sporadic case ascertainment as the estimated underascertainment rate
has decreased in this time period from 2.2–17.5 considering notified laboratory-confirmed cases
up to May 31 to 1.03–7.32 up to August 31. Further data to update the integrative approach will
contribute to provide a continuous assessment of the outbreak in case an evolving situation is
suspected.
Other events that are related to human movements and mixing may as well alter the assessed
scenario. Vast international mass gatherings to be taking place in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
the upcoming months are expected to bring large number of pilgrims to the affected area, with
increased rates of local mixing that may favor the transmission of the virus, followed by a
potential amplification of its international dissemination due to the return of pilgrims to their
own countries [24]. It should be noted however that the Hajj 2012 occurred with an ongoing
MERS-CoV outbreak in the ME region, and that MERS-CoV was absent among French pilgrims
screened prior to returning to France after their participation to the pilgrimage [25]. Similarly,
no increase in case notification occurred following the Umra pilgrimage in July 2013. Additional
studies in travelers next to enhanced local surveillance in the region and guidance to local
authorities would help to assess and control possible changes in the virus transmission with
respect to last year’s experience [26].

9

Air travel clearly represents the main mean for global spatial spread of infectious disease
epidemics in the modern world, as it was previously experienced with SARS and the 2009 H1N1
pandemic [15,16,27-29]. Besides seasonal variations due to specific events (e.g. mass
gatherings) or in/out flows of expats for seasonal jobs, a potential emerging pandemic in the ME
area would constitute a very high risk for considerably rapid and wide international spread. The
ME area indeed covers a central role in connecting different regions of the world and has
witnessed a dramatic increase of traffic growth in the last decade (153% of relative increase in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 2002-2011, 240% in Jordan, 408% in Qatar, 512% in the United
Arab Emirates, against a global relative increase of 168%) [30]. Analysis of the air traffic data
integrated into GLEAM shows that large fluctuations are observed in the repartition of travel
flows on direct connections out of the ME region, suggesting that other countries than the ones
already affected are at high risk of MERS-CoV importation through infected passengers, in
particular in the Southern regions of Asia (Figure 3). Similar results were also reported in Ref.
[24]. Should the outbreak evolve in a self-sustained epidemic, such risk assessment analyses
cannot rely on travel data only and would require the full integration of the air travel data with
an epidemic model, as in GLEAM, to explicitly simulate the evolving epidemic, estimate
importation likelihood [28] and provide predictions for future stages of the epidemic [16,31].
With a subcritical epidemic in the ME region associated with a large potential for international
dissemination, priority for the epidemic control should be given to the identification of the
transmission of infection to humans to limit sporadic cases, to the reduction of human-to-human
transmission through rapid case identification and isolation, and to the enhancement of
surveillance systems in those countries that are at a higher risk of importation because of travel
flows to/from the affected area.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank J-C Desenclos and S Deuffic-Burban for useful interactions and
comments.
Funding statement
This work is partly supported by the ERC Ideas contract no. ERC-2007-Stg204863 (EpiFor) to
ChP and VC; the EC-Health contract no. 278433 (PREDEMICS) to ChP and VC; the ANR contract
no. ANR-12-MONU-0018 (HARMSFLU) to DLB and VC. The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

10

References
1. World Health Organization (WHO), Global Alert and Response (GAR), Coronavirus
infections,
available
at:
http://www.who.int/csr/disease/coronavirus_infections/en/index.html
2. Corman V, Eckerle I, Bleicker T, Zaki A, Landt O, Eschbach-Bludau M, et al. Detection
of a novel human coronavirus by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Euro Surveill. 2012; 17: 20285
3. Health Protection Agency (HPA) UK Novel Coronavirus Investigation team Evidence
of person-to-person transmission within a family cluster of novel coronavirus
infections, United Kingdom. Euro Surveill. 2013; 18: 20427
4. Hijawi B, Abdallat M, Sayaydeh A, Alqasrawi S, Haddadin A, Jaarour N, et al. Novel
coronavirus infections in Jordan, April 2012: epidemiological findings from a
retrospective investigation. East. Mediterr. Health J. 2013; 19: S12-S18.
5. Guery B, Poissy J, el Mansouf L, Sejourne C, Ettahar N, Lemaire X, et al. Clinical
features and viral diagnosis of two cases of infection with Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus: a report of nosocomial transmission. Lancet. 2013; 381:
2265-2272
6. Assiri A, McGeer A, Perl T, Price CS, Al Rabeaah AA, Derek MD, et al. Hospital outbreak
of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. N Engl J Med. 2013 ;
DOI:10.1056/NEJMoa1306742
7. Buchholz U, Muller MA, Nitsche A, Sanewski A, Wevering N, Bauer_Balci T, et al.
Contact investigation of a case of human novel coronavirus infection treated in a
German hospital, October-November 2012. Euro Surveill. 2013; 18: 2
8. Memish ZA, Mishra N, Olival KJ, Fagbo SF, Kapoor V, Epstein JH, et al. Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus in bats, Saudi Arabia. Emerg Infect Dis [Internet].
2013; Nov. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1911.131172
9. Breban R, Riou J, Fontanet A. Interhuman transmissibility of Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus: estimation of pandemic risk. The Lancet. 2013; DOI:
10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61492-0
10. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid Risk Assessment: Severe
respiratory disease associated with Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV). May 17, 2013.
11. Farrington CP, Kanaan MN, Gay NJ. Branching process models for surveillance of
infectious diseases controlled by mass vaccination. Biostatistics 2003; 4: 279-295
12. De Serres G, Gay NJ, Farrington CP Epidemiology of transmissible diseases after
elimination. Am J Epidemiol. 2000; 151: 1039-1048
13. Ferguson NM, Fraser C, Donnelly CA, Ghani AC, Anderson RM. Public health risk from
the avian H5N1 influenza epidemic. Science. 2004; 304: 968-969
14. MERS-COV - EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN (31): Jordan, retrospective case
identification, WHO, request for information" (Author: PROMED-Mail)
15. Fraser C, Donnelly CA, Cauchemez S, Hanage WP, Van Kerkhove MD, Hollingsworth
TD, et al. Pandemic potential of a strain of influenza A(H1N1): early findings. Science.
2009; 324: 1557.
16. Balcan D, Hu H, Gonçalves B, Bajardi P, Poletto C, Ramasco JJ, et al. Seasonal
transmission potential and activity peaks of the new influenza A(H1N1): a Monte
Carlo likelihood analysis based on human mobility. BMC Med. 2009; 7: 45.
17. Colizza V, Barrat A, Barthelemy M, Valleron A-J, Vespignani A Modeling the
Worldwide Spread of Pandemic Influenza: Baseline Case and Containment
Interventions, PLoS Medicine. 2007; 4: e13
18. Balcan D, Colizza V, Gonçalves B, Hu H, Ramasco JJ, Vespignani A. Multiscale mobility
networks and the large scale spreading of infectious diseases, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2009; 106: 21484-21489
19. Anderson RM, May RM. Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and Control.
11

Oxford University Press, Oxford; 1992.
20. Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), A Novel Coronavirus Called "MERSCoV" in the Arabian Peninsula, updated July 26, 2013, footnote:
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/watch/coronavirus-saudi-arabiaqatar#footnote
21. Venzon D, Moolgavkar A. A method for computing profile-likelihood based
confidence intervals. Applied Statistics. 1988; 37: 87-94.
22. World Health Organization (WHO), Global Alert and Response (GAR), MERS-CoV
update
–
as
of
26
June
2013,
available
at:
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2013_06_26/en/index.html
23. Holmes KV. Adaptation of SARS coronavirus to humans. Science. 2005; 309: 1822–23.
24. Khan K, Sears J, Hu VW, Brownstein JS, Hay S, et al. Potential for the International
Spread of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome in Association with Mass Gatherings in
Saudi
Arabia.
PLOS
Currents
Outbreaks.
2013;
DOI:
10.1371/currents.outbreaks.a7b70897ac2fa4f79b59f90d24c860b8.
25. Gautret P, Charrel R, Belhouchat K, Drali T, Benkouiten S, Nougairede A, et al. Lack of
nasal carriage of novel corona virus (HCoV-EMC) in French Hajj pilgrims returning
from the Hajj 2012, despite a high rate of respiratory symptoms. Clin Microbiol
Infect. 2013; 19:E315
26. World Health Organization, International travel and Health, World-travel advice on
MERS-CoV
for
pilgrimages,
25
July
2013;
available
at:
http://www.who.int/ith/updates/20130725/en/index.html
27. Hufnagel L, Brockmann D, Geisel T. Forecast and control of epidemics in a globalized
world. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004; 101:15124.
28. Colizza V, Barrat A, Barthelemy M, Vespignani A. Predictability and epidemic
pathways in global outbreaks of infectious diseases: the SARS case study. BMC
Medicine. 2007; 5: 34.
29. Khan K, Arino J, Hu W, Raposo P, Sears J, Calderon F, et al. Spread of a Novel Influenza
A (H1N1) Virus via Global Airline Transportation. New England Journal of Medicine.
2009; 361: 212-214.
30. International Civil Aviation Organization and Civil Aviation Statistics of the World,
statistics available at: http://data.worldbank.org
31. M Tizzoni, P Bajardi, C Poletto, JJ Ramasco, D Balcan, Gonçalves B, et al. Real-time
numerical forecast of global epidemic spreading: case study of 2009 A/H1N1pdm.
BMC Med. 2012; 10:165.

12

Tables
Table 1. Cluster size data.
size of cluster

baseline (all labconfirmed cases in
the ME region)

considering the full
Jordan April 2012
cluster (including
probable cases)

considering all labconfirmed cases
worldwide

considering data up
to May 31, 2013

sporadic case
2
3
5
10
22

42
8
2
2
1

42
7
2
2
1
1

44
10
4
2
1

16
2
1
_
_
1

Table 2. Best estimate values for the reproductive number and the daily rate
of sporadic
cases emergence due to zoonotic/environmental transmissions (and corresponding 95% CI).
Results for the baseline and for the scenarios of the sensitivity analysis are obtained assuming a
geometric offspring distribution for the analysis of cluster data and for the best estimate of the
uncertainty parameter, . The last line refers to the baseline scenario considering a Poisson
offspring distribution for the analysis of cluster data.

baseline

0.5 (0.30–0.77)

0.28 (0.12–0.85)

considering the full Jordan April 2012 cluster (including
probable cases)

0.65 (0.34–0.80)

0.28 (0.12–0.83)

considering the extended source region

0.50 (0.31–0.76)

0.14 (0.05–0.38) a

considering the restricted source region (limited to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia)

0.60 (0.30–0.76)

4.73 (2.32–15.37) a

considering data up to May 31, 2013

0.54 (0.34–0.90)

0.43 (0.12–0.95)

0.69 (0.34–0.79)

0.28 (0.12–00.71)

considering a Poisson offspring distribution
a to

be comparable with the other estimates, this value has been rescaled to take into account the change of population
size of the seed region; it thus represents the daily rate of sporadic cases scaled to the ME region.

13

Figures

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the integrative maximum likelihood approach.
Method 1 (bottom circle) is based on the maximum likelihood analysis of cluster size
distribution obtained from laboratory-confirmed cases in the ME region (countries in red in the
zoomed area). Method 2 (top panel) is based on the maximum likelihood analysis on data on
case importations in countries in Western Europe, as schematically indicated on the map. For
each point in the parameter space (
) we run 4,000 stochastic GLEAM simulations from the
same initial conditions and parameterized as described in the main text. With each run
providing the simulated number of imported cases for a given country , we can compare the
resulting simulated probability distribution of with the observed value for that country and
compute a likelihood function for all countries in Western Europe.

14

Figure 2. Heatmap of deviance values vs. reproductive number and daily rate
of
(
)) using
sporadic cases. Deviance was calculated as (
)
(
(
)
the profiled log likelihood (for each pair (
in cluster size
), the uncertainty parameter
distribution maximizing the log-likelihood was chosen). Vertical and horizontal dashed lines
show the maximum likelihood values for and
, respectively. Solid white curves contour the
deviance-based confidence regions of levels 95%, 99%, and 99.9%. The 95% profiled confidence
intervals for and
are highlighted in bold on the axes.

15

Figure 3. Air traffic capacity of the MERS-CoV source region and its international
destinations. Airports in the MERS-CoV source region (Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Qatar, United Arab
Emirates) are represented with a circle proportional to the daily traffic they handle (panel A).
Their international traffic, out of the region, is broken down by continent of destination (panel
B). Breakdown by country for the first 20 countries with highest traffic from the ME region:
India (11.7%), Bahrain (8.7%), Pakistan (8.6%), United Kingdom (8.4%), Oman (5.8%), Egypt
(5.2%), Kuwait (4.3%), Iran (3.6%), Germany (3.5%), Lebanon (2.9%), Bangladesh (2.8%),
Thailand (2.5%), Sri Lanka (2.3%), Singapore (2.1%), Syria (2.0%), France (2.0%), Kenya
(1.6%), Italy (1.5%), Malaysia (1.4%), Switzerland (1.4%). Statistics are obtained from the IATA
air traffic data integrated into the model GLEAM [18].

16

