Testing Case Number of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China with
Newcomb-Benford Law
Junyi Zhang∗

arXiv:2002.05695v1 [physics.soc-ph] 13 Feb 2020

Department of Physics, Princeton University,
Princeton 08544, New Jersey, USA.
(Dated: February 14, 2020)

Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 bursted out about two months ago in Wuhan has caused the death
of more than a thousand people. China is fighting hard against the epidemics with the helps from
all over the world. On the other hand, there appear to be doubts on the reported case number.
In this article, we propose a test of the reported case number of coronavirus disease 2019 in China
with Newcomb-Benford law. We find a p-value of 92.8% in favour that the cumulative case numbers
abide by the Newcomb-Benford law. Even though the reported case number can be lower than
the real number of affected people due to various reasons, this test does not seem to indicate the
detection of frauds.

∗

junyiz@princeton.edu.

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19), first observed in mid December 2019 in Wuhan
China, has hitherto (as reported by Feb. 12, 2020) caused 45, 171 confirmed cases among
which 44730 are in China and 1115 deaths among which 1 is outside of China [1]. World
Health Organization declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international
concern [2].
China is facing the huge challenges of providing timely health care for the patients and
preventing further spread of COVID19. Although many countries and individuals provide
various supports to China for fighting against the virus, hospitals, especially those in small
counties outside Wuhan, are still short of biomedical equipment and other necessary supplies.
A severe impact on Chinese economy is also expected due to the outbreak of the disease.
If the spread of COVID19 was not controlled effectively due to its high basic reproduction
number R0 and long incubation period, there might be a worse impact world wide.
At the same time, the case number reported by the Chinese government has been questioned in worry of the government intentionally hiding the real situation. In this article,
we provide a quantitative analysis on the data of the COVID19 reported. A test of frauds
with Newcomb-Benford law has been implemented to examine the data of the reported case
numbers of COVID19 in China. We find a p-value of 92.8% in favour that the cumulative
case numbers of COVID19 in China abide by the Newcomb-Benford law. Therefore this
test does not seem to indicate the detection of frauds. Nevertheless, it is not conclusive the
reported case number precisely reflects the current situations. The details of the hypothesis
and testing will be shown in Sec. II. Further discussion is presented in Sec. III.

II.

HYPOTHESIS AND TESTING

The skewed distribution of the significant digits was discovered by Newcomb [3] and latter
advanced by Benford [4]. They found that the frequencies of the first significant digits d of
the numbers in some statistics follow the distribution


1
,
PN B (d) = log10 1 +
d

(1)

which is now often referred to as Newcomb-Benford Law (NBL). One may refer to Ref. 5
for historical developments and and applications of NBL. Not all the distributions obey
2

the NBL. There are ones known to obey NBL exactly, e.g., Fibonacci numbers, factorials,
powers of 2 and exponential growth process [5, 8–10], while others known not to obey NBL
e.g., square roots and reciprocals [11] An interesting application is to detect the frauds in
financial activities even though no general theory proved NBL should hold [5–7].

FIG. 1. COVID19 Cumulative Case Number.

We examine the cumulative case numbers of COVID19 of 31 province-level divisions
from 15 Jan. 2020 to 10 Feb. 2020. The data used were from wikipedia, “Timeline of
the 2019–20 Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in February 2020”. The cumulative case numbers
were obtained from “Tab. New Confirmed Cases of Coronavirus in Mainland China by
Province-Level Divisions” [12] by adding the numbers according to the time order. Fig. 1
shows the total cumulative case number and the cumulative case number in Hubei province
versus time from 15 Jan. 2020 to 10 Feb. 2020 in a semilog plot.
3

For the first 15 days, the total cumulative case number increases exponentially, which is
not surprising according to simple models of epidemics. The slop of the more recent total
cumulative case number in the semilog plot however decreases. This transition around 30
Jan. seems to agree with the incubation period counting from 20-23 Jan. when several districts in China declared highest level emergency status for the epidemics, particularly when
Wuhan was closed. However, it is not conclusive that COVID19 has bee controlled and the
total cumulative case number tends to saturate. It is also possible that the total cumulative
case number is still increasing exponentially but with a smaller rate. The decreasing of
the rate may be due to the emergent isolation strategy and better protections (everyone
wearing face masks). Nevertheless due to the limit medical resources, many suspected cases
remained to be confirmed and people with extraordinary long incubation period are still
potential sources for the further expansion. Convection of the population after the Chinese
New Year might worsen the situation and cause another explosion.
To the best knowledge of the author there are no general theories prove that the statistics
of the epidemics like COVID19 should obey the NBL. It will be interesting to test if the any
statistics follows NBL. It naturally has the potential applications as to detect frauds in the
statistics of the epidemics. A reasonable expectation might be the cumulative case numbers
that follows the NBL, as it seems to grow exponentially particularly at the beginning stage.
We count the frequency of the first significant of COVID19 according to province-level divisions. Although the first few cases in each division might have contaminate the virus from
Hubei Province, the spread afterwords within the division may be considered independent
development but following the same propagation law of COVID19. The inter-province convection of the population was suppressed significantly due to the Chinese New Year vacation
and isolation policy after 24 Jan.
We propose the null hypothesis (H0 ): the cumulative case numbers of COVID19 obey
the NBL. Fig. 2 shows both the theoretical distribution of the NBL according to Eq. 1 (with
blue circles) and the empirical distribution of the first significant figure of the reported
cumulative case numbers (with red cross). To the first sight, they seem to agree quite well.
To quantify the agreement between the empirical distribution and the hypothetical distribution, we may consider the more general hypothesis (H00 ) as follows. Suppose the cumulative case numbers of COVID19 follows the distribution Ψ in the absence of fraud but
Φ otherwise and the probability of the frauds is measured by τ . Then the hypothetical
4

FIG. 2. Newcomb-Benford Law.

distribution Π should be interpolated by the distribution with and without frauds [5], i.e.,
Π = (1 − τ )Ψ + τ Φ.

(2)

Then the hypothesis H0 is nothing but the special case of H00 with τ = 0, i.e., in the absence
of the frauds, the cumulative case numbers of COVID19 obey the NBL.
One of the simplest statistics to test the agreement of Π and PN B can be chosen as

2
X N (d) − Ntot PN B (d)
V =
,
(3)
N
tot PN B (d)
d
where N (d) is the counting of figure d as the first significant digit among Ntot cumulative case
numbers. When Ntot → ∞, V is subjected to the χ2ν distribution, where ν = 9×10k−1 −1 [7],
k = 1.
It easy to calculate V directly according to Eq. 3, we find V = 3.10 and the corresponding
p-value is 92.8%. Therefore, we conclude that the test is in favour of the null hypothesis H0
5

that the cumulative case numbers of COVID19 obey the NBL. If we assume that it is hard
to fabricate data closely following the NBL [7], we may conclude we did not detect frauds
according to this test with the NBL.

III.

DISCUSSION

In our hypothesis and testing, we showed that NBL holds for the cumulative case number
of COVID19, nevertheless, same as in the case of financial activities, there are no general
theory predicting the NBL [5–7]. For checking the agreement with the NBL, similar tests
may be applied to other epidemics like the flus (HxNy), SARS etc. It deserve to notice
that, COVID19 seems still in its expanding stage with exponential scaling, and we know the
exponential grow process satisfies the NBL, while it still remains to be tested in the NBL is
valid when epidemics are no longer in the initial exponentially growing stage.
We have in total 628 data point for the statistics. This is not a big sample set. Simple
χ2 -test may be subjected to large fluctuations. More advanced tests, like the KolmogorovSmirnov test or the Kuiper test may be used instead.
It seems quite reasonable to accept the null hypothesis H0 that the cumulative case
numbers of COVID19 obey the NBL. Taking this as an assumption we may apply the NBL
to detect frauds in epidemic statistics. Further more, we do not think frauds are detected
from the cumulative case numbers of COVID19. Nevertheless, it does not mean that the
reported cumulative case numbers precisely reflect the current situation exactly, particularly
in Hubei Province. Due to the lack of medical equipment and resources, many suspected
cases remain to be confirmed; some people showing syndromes may not even be counted
as suspected cases yet. Therefore the statistical data can be biased. Unfortunately, two
exponential grow process differing by a multiplicative constant, both abide by the NBL.
This test with the NBL cannot tell if there are systematic fraction of patients not being
included properly.

IV.

FINAL REMARKS

The Earth is our common home of human beings and other creatures in nature. Our
technologies of transportation has advanced unprecedentedly over the last centuries, it also
6

brings more and more possibilities of quick and wide spread of the epidemics. We should
stand together, help each other facing the crisis of the epidemics no matter of race, gender
or religion. Spring cannot be far behind.

[1] World Health Organization, WHO Coronavirus disease 2019 Situation Report 23, Feb.
2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200212-sitrep-23-ncov.pdf?sfvrsn=41e9fb78_2).
[2] World Health Organization, WHO Coronavirus disease 2019 Situation Report 11, Jan.
2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200131-sitrep-11-ncov.pdf?sfvrsn=de7c0f7_4).
[3] S. Newcomb, Note on the frequency of use of the different digits in natural numbers, Am. J.
Math., 4, 39 (1881).
[4] F. Benford, The law of anomalous numbers, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc., 78, 551 (1938).
[5] S. J. Miller, Benford’s Law: Theory and Applications, Chapter 1: A quick introduction to
Benford’s law, Princeton University Press (2015).
[6] W. K. T. Cho and B. J. Gaines, Breaking the (Benford) law: statistical fraud detection in
campaign finance, Am. Stat., 61, 218 (2007).
[7] A. Cerioli et al., Newcomb-Benford law and the detection of frauds in international trade,
PNAS, 116, 106 (2019).
[8] L. C. Washington, Benford’s Law for Fibonacci and Lucas Numbers, The Fibonacci Quarterly,
19, 175 (1981).
[9] R. L. Duncan, An Application of Uniform Distribution to the Fibonacci Numbers, The Fibonacci Quarterly, 5, 137 (1981).
[10] P. B. Sarkar, An Observation on the Significant Digits of Binomial Coefficients and Factorials,
Sankhya B, 35, 363 (1973).
[11] R. Raimi, The first digit problem, Am. Math. Monthly, 83, 521 (1976).
[12] Wikipedia, Timeline of the 2019–20 Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in February 2020, 12
Feb. 2020 (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_the_2019\OT1\textendash20_
Wuhan_coronavirus_outbreak_in_February_2020).

7

