Original: March 22, 2020
Updates on March 24, 26, 28, 2020

VERA_Epidemiology – White Paper 1:
Using VERA to explain the impact of social distancing
on the spread of COVID-19
William Broniec, Sungeun An, Spencer Rugaber & Ashok K. Goel
Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30307, USA

Abstract. COVID-19 continues to spread across the country and around the world. Current strategies
for managing the spread of COVID-19 include social distancing. We present VERA, an interactive
AI tool, that first enables users to specify conceptual models of the impact of social distancing on the
spread of COVID-19. Then, VERA automatically spawns agent-based simulations from the
conceptual models, and, given a data set, automatically fills in the values of the simulation parameters
from the data. Next, the user can view the simulation results, and, if needed, revise the simulation
parameters and run another experimental trial, or build an alternative conceptual model. We describe
the use VERA to develop a SIR model for the spread of COVID-19 and its relationship with
healthcare capacity.

1. Introduction
Newspaper articles in recent weeks have been filled with stories about the spread of COVID-19
across the country and around the world. As the virus continues to spread, various countries are
both searching for pharmaceutical mechanisms to combat the disease (such as vaccines and cures)
and adopting social strategies for preventing or mitigating its spread (such as social distancing).
The mix of mitigation strategies seems to vary among countries depending on factors such as
demographics, culture, technology, economic resources, healthcare capacity, and leadership
(McCurry, Ratcliffe & Davidson 2020).
On March 14, 2020, Washington Post published an influential article describing how different
levels of social distancing may affect the spread of the virus using simple agent-based simulations
(Stevens 2020). Figure 1 illustrates the effect. The curve in red shows a rapid increase and decrease
in the spread of the virus in a relatively short time period if no precautions are taken. The curve in
yellow shows a slower increase and decrease in a relatively longer period if social distancing is
practiced. The idea is that a country may adopt a social distancing strategy to “flatten the curve”
so that the healthcare capacity of the country is not overwhelmed. Since then, several other studies
have established this point more firmly, including a detailed study from Imperial College of
London (Ferguson et al. 2020).

In this article, we describe VERA_Epidemiology (or just VERA for short), an interactive AI
tool that enables users to build conceptual models of the impact of social distancing on COVID19. Unlike some of the other simulations, VERA enables the user to explicitly specify the
conceptual model in a visual language and automatically spawns agent-based simulations from the
conceptual models. Given a set of data, VERA automatically extracts initial values for the
simulation parameters from the dataset, and it also affords the user to interactively revise the
parameter values. The user can view the simulation results, and, if needed, revise the simulation
parameters and run another experimental trial, or build an alternative conceptual model. We
demonstrate the model development process through comparative models of the impact of social
distancing using the Johns Hopkins University dataset (CSSEGISandData, 2020).

Figure 1: The effect of social distancing on the spread of COVID-19. Flattening the curve helps
keep the number of people infected with the virus within the range of the healthcare capacity.
(Adapted from Stevens 2020, published in The Washington Post on March 14, 2020.)
We describe the use of VERA to develop a SIR model for the spread of COVID-19 and its
relationship with healthcare capacity. The results show gradual “flattening of the curve” as
increasingly intense social distancing strategies are implemented. More importantly, VERA acts
like a virtual laboratory to conduct “what if” experiments with different SIR models without
requiring any knowledge of mathematical equations or computer programming.

2. An Illustrative Example of Modeling the Spread of COVID-19 Using VERA
The Virtual Experimentation Research Assistant (VERA) is a web application that enables users
to construct conceptual models of complex systems and run model simulations. The original
VERA system operated in the domain of ecological systems and has been extensively used for
learning and education in ecology (An et al. 2018; http://vera.cc.gatech.edu). The VERA system
described here is an adaptation of the original VERA for ecological modeling.
We illustrate the use of VERA to create three models that form a series of increasingly intense
social distancing policies (see Figure 2). We use two parameters to control the levels of social
distancing: interaction probability and adoption/transmission interval. These two parameters are
incrementally increased from Model 1 to Model 3 to increase the interaction probability while the
COVID-19 spread component itself remains intact.

Figure 2. Three models with increasing levels of social distancing.
2.1 Conceptual Modeling
VERA uses conceptual models to enable users to visually express the components and
relationships of a system. Figure 3 illustrates a screenshot from VERA’s editor for constructing
conceptual models in epidemiology. The left panel contains a palette for adding different types of
components to the model. The grid panel in the center is where the conceptual model is assembled.
The right panel depicts model parameters and their initial values for the simulation of the
conceptual model. Note the visual nature of the conceptual models in VERA. The conceptual
models in Figure 2 illustrate an interaction between social distancing and COVID-19 cases.

Figure 3: Conceptual modeling in VERA
2.2 Simulation Parameters
VERA translates qualitative conceptual models into quantitative values and equations to generate
agent-based simulations. VERA currently uses the following parameters specific to epidemiology:
starting count, duration, adoption/transmission count, adoption/transmission onset, and
adoption/transmission interval. VERA facilitates describing the simulation parameter values in
two ways. First, VERA enables users to import data from external sources and then uses machine
learning techniques for abstracting initial simulation parameter values from the data. Second, it
enables users to interactively set the parameter values.
Table 1 shows increasing the interaction probability and the adoption /transmission interval
parameters to represent the increasing level of social distancing. The values of the simulation
parameters of the COVID-19 Cases component in Figure 4 were automatically filled in by applying
machine learning techniques on the imported dataset (CSSEGISandData, 2020).

Table 1: Increasing the interaction probability and the adoption /transmission interval
parameters to represent increasing level of social distancing.

Interaction
Probability
Interval

Light Social
Distancing
0.5
12

Moderate Social
Distancing
0.71
25

Intense Social
Distancing
0.84
28

Figure 4: The simulation parameters of the COVID-19 CASES components.
2.3 Simulation Results
VERA uses an off-the-shelf agent-based simulation system called NetLogo
(http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/). Running the simulation enables the user to observe the
evolution of the system variables over time and iterate through the generate-evaluate-revise loop.
Figure 5 shows the simulation results generated from the model in Figure 4 using different
parameter values, as indicated in Table 1. The first model shows one future progression where the
rate spikes early, but there is a sharp decline. This can be compared to South Korea’s handling of
COVID-19 spread, where medical technology and mass screenings drastically limited the spread.
The primary concern here is the capacity of the healthcare system, where demand can easily exceed
supply. The next graph shows a model of moderate social distancing. In this case, the peak occurs
later, does not reach as high, and stretches the pandemic out for a longer period. Such approaches
are straining the healthcare capacity of many European nations now and may not be enough. The
final model shows the results of intense social distancing on infection rates. These strong lifestyle
changes drastically reduce the number of potential avenues for disease spread, and the resulting
spread of infections occurs much slower, providing time, resources, and planning for a society to
operate in the times of a pandemic.

1.Light Prevention

2.Moderate Prevention

3.Intense Prevention

Figure 5: The simulation results of Models 1-3 (top to bottom).

3. The SIR Model of COVID-19 Spread in VERA
Now that we have illustrated the core techniques in VERA, we describe the use of VERA develop
the SIR model for understanding the relationship between social distancing and the spread of
COVID-19. The SIR model (Kermak & McKendrick 1927) is a commonly used mathematical

model to understand the spread of infectious diseases. We show just how important adjusting
behavior can be in shaping the outcome of a pandemic. The strain on the healthcare infrastructure
has sweeping consequences—reduced availability of resources prevents some people from
receiving adequate treatment, and even those with conditions other than COVID-19 will still see
negative impacts as these resources become scarcer.
3.1 Conceptual Modeling
The conceptual model in Figure 5 illustrates the SIR model of disease spread. The conceptual
model consists of three components that each represent a number of individuals—the susceptible,
the infected, and the recovered—as well as the healthcare capacity. The susceptible population
becomes the infected population, and the infected population becomes the recovered population.

Figure 5: The SIR conceptual model in VERA
3.2 Simulation Parameters
For the SIR model, we use a different set of parameters than for the simple model described in the
previous section. The susceptible, infected and recovered components have starting populations
as the simulation parameter. The healthcare capacity component has capacity as the simulation
parameter. The Become relationship has two simulation parameters: Average contacts per day per
person and Transmission Likelihood. The Recover relationship has Average recovery time
parameter (see Table 2 for description).
Table 2: The Simulation Parameters of Become and Recover Relationships.
Relationship

Simulation Parameter
Average contacts per day
per person

Become
Transmission Likelihood
Recover

Average recovery time

Description
Describes how many people the average person is
coming in contact with on a given day in this
simulation.
Describes the probability of the disease transferring
from an infected person to a susceptible person that
they have come in contact with.
Describes how long it takes in average to recover from
the disease.

3.3 Simulation Results
Figure 6 shows the simulation results on a sample population of 10,000 people with two different
Average contacts per day per person. The first model (top) shows the simulation results with 16
Average contacts per day per person. The red series corresponds to the number of infected
individuals, and it exceeds the healthcare capacity of the system very early under these conditions.
The second model (bottom) shows the simulation results with 12 Average contacts per day per
person. Reducing the Average contacts per day per person hypothetically suggest that people are
reducing social contact somewhat, but not substantially. Compared to the prior graph, the peak is
closer to 7,000 than 8,000, and healthcare capacity is exceeded after 20 days in the simulation,
rather than around 15 days—a step in a positive direction. The users can experiment with other
values of Average contacts per day per person until they find a scenario where infections do not
exceed healthcare capacity.

Figure 6: Simulation Results with 16 Average contacts per day per person (top) and 12 Average
contacts per day per person (bottom).

4. Reflections
In this article, we used VERA to develop SIR models for the spread of COVID-19. These models
not only express the impact of social distancing on the spread of the disease but also the
management of the impact of the disease on the healthcare capacity. We note, however, that VERA
supports conceptual modeling, not mathematical modeling, and that its models are more
explanatory of general patterns than predictive of specific outcomes.
VERA (1) enables the user to explicitly specify the conceptual model in a visual language, (2)
automatically spawns agent-based simulations from the conceptual models, (3) automatically
extracts initial values for the simulation parameters from a given dataset, and (4) supports the user
through the whole cycle of model generation, evaluation and revision. Thus, VERA provides a
virtual laboratory: the user can try out a variety of conceptual models and simulation parameters,
and conduct "what if" virtual experiments. We posit that this has significant implications for
learning and education, for example, informal learning by the citizens of the world.

Acknowledgements: We thank Preethi Sethumadhavan for her contributions to this work. The
development of the original version of VERA for ecological modeling was supported by an NSF
BigData grant. We thank Robert Bates (Veloxicity), Dr. Jennifer Hammock (Encyclopedia of Life,
Smithsonian Institution), and Dr. Emily Weigel and Brady Young (School of Biological Sciences,
Georgia Tech) for their contributions to the original VERA project.

References
1. An, S., Bates, R., Hammock J., Rugaber, S., & Goel, A. (2018) VERA: Popularizing Science through
AI. In Procs.AIED-18, 31-35.
2. CSSEGISandData (2020) Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Cases, provided by JHU CSSE. GitHub
repository, Available at: https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19 (Accessed: 20 March 2020).
3. Fergsuon, N., et al. (2020) Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19
mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team. 16 March 2020. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.25561/77482
4. Kermack, W., & McKendrick, A. (1927). A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. In
Procs. Royal Society A. 115(772): 700–721.
5. McCurry, J., Ratcliffe, R., & Davidson, H. (2020) Mass testing, alerts and big fines: the strategies used
in Asia to slow coronavirus. The Guardian, 11 March, 2020. Available at:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/11/mass-testing-alerts-and-big-fines-the-strategiesused-in-asia-to-slow-coronavirus (Accessed: 16 March 2020).
6. Stevens (2020) ‘Why outbreaks like Coronavirus spread exponentially, and how to “flatten the curve”’
The
Washington
Post,
14
March,
2020.
Available
at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/world/coronasimulator/?fbclid=IwAR0IMOdT6hPnTboN4Wd8CJqsoGHMuKYHm2zXCrCEauJvGVeomtfaSfSu
YX8.

