Nonlinear Dyn
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-020-05862-6

(0123456789().,-volV)
( 01234567
89().,-volV)

ORIGINAL PAPER

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19
outbreak: comparing the dynamics in the 29 provinces
in China and in the rest of the world
Ke Wu . Didier Darcet . Qian Wang . Didier Sornette

Received: 26 April 2020 / Accepted: 29 July 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract Started in Wuhan, China, the COVID-19
has been spreading all over the world. We calibrate
the logistic growth model, the generalized logistic
growth model, the generalized Richards model and
the generalized growth model to the reported number
of infected cases for the whole of China, 29 provinces
in China, and 33 countries and regions that have been
or are undergoing major outbreaks. We dissect the
development of the epidemics in China and the
impact of the drastic control measures both at the
aggregate level and within each province. We
Electronic supplementary material The online
version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071020-05862-6) contains supplementary material, which
is available to authorized users.
K. Wu · Q. Wang · D. Sornette (&)
Institute of Risk Analysis, Prediction and Management
(Risks-X), Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary
Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology
(SUSTech), Shenzhen, China
e-mail: dsornette@ethz.ch
K. Wu · Q. Wang · D. Sornette
Department of Management, Technology and Economics
(D-MTEC), Chair of Entrepreneurial Risks, ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland
D. Darcet
Gavekal Intelligence Software, Nice, France
Q. Wang
Department of Banking and Finance, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

quantitatively document four phases of the outbreak
in China with a detailed analysis on the heterogeneous situations across provinces. The extreme
containment measures implemented by China were
very effective with some instructive variations across
provinces. Borrowing from the experience of China,
we made scenario projections on the development of
the outbreak in other countries. We identified that
outbreaks in 14 countries (mostly in western Europe)
have ended, while resurgences of cases have been
identified in several among them. The modeling
results clearly show longer after-peak trajectories in
western countries, in contrast to most provinces in
China where the after-peak trajectory is characterized
by a much faster decay. We identified three groups of
countries in different level of outbreak progress, and
provide informative implications for the current
global pandemic.
Keywords Novel coronavirus (COVID-19) ·
Logistic growing · Epidemic modeling ·
Prediction

1 Introduction
Starting from Hubei province in China, the novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) has been spreading all
over the world after 2 months of outbreak in China.
Facing uncertainty and irresolution in December
2019 and the first half of January 2020, China then

123

K. Wu et al.

responded efficiently and massively to this new
disease outbreak by implementing unprecedented
containment measures to the whole country, including lockdown of the whole province of Hubei and
putting most of other provinces in de facto quarantine
mode. Since March 2020, one and a half month after
the national battle against the COVID-19 epidemic,
China has managed to contain the virus transmission
within the country, with new daily confirmed cases in
mainland China excluding Hubei in the single digit
range, and with just double digit numbers in Hubei.
In contrast, many other countries have had fast
increasing numbers of confirmed cases since March
2020, which leads to a resurgence in China due to the
imported cases from overseas. On March 11, the
World Health Organization (WHO) declared the
coronavirus outbreak as a global pandemic. As of
July 24, there are more than 15.5 million cases
confirmed in more than 210 countries and territories,
with 5.5 million active cases and approximately 640
thousand deaths.
For an epidemic to develop, three key ingredients
are necessary: (1) source: pathogens and their reservoirs; (2) susceptible persons with a way for the virus
to enter the body; (3) transmission: a path or
mechanism by which viruses moved to other susceptible persons. Numerous mechanistic models based
on the classical SIR model and its extensions have
been utilized to study the COVID-19 epidemic.
Within such a multi-agent framework, one can detail
different attributes among countries, including the
demographics, climate, population density, healthcare systems, government interference, etc., which
will affect the three key ingredients of the epidemic
mentioned above. There is a large amount of the
literature using this framework studying the past
major epidemics [1–6] as well as the current COVID19 outbreak in different regions and countries [7–11].
Notably, using such a framework, a report from Neil
Ferguson at Imperial College London [12] projected
future scenarios with different government strategies,
which had a large impact on subsequent government
policies.
The numerous underlying assumptions of this kind
of models vary from one model to another, leading to
a huge amount of publications presenting many types
of results. These mechanistic models are useful in
understanding the effect of different factors on the
transmission process; however, they are highly

123

sensitive to the assumptions on the many often subtle
microscopic processes. Giving an illusion of precision, mechanistic models are sometimes quite fragile
and require an in-depth understanding of the dominating processes, which are likely to be missing in the
confusion of an ongoing pandemics, with often
inconsistent and unreliable statistics and studies
performed under strong time pressure. There is thus
space for simpler and, we argue, more robust
phenomenological models, which have low complexity but enjoy robustness. This is the power of coarsegraining, a well-known robust strategy to model
complex system [13–15].
Sophisticated statistical models including machine
learning techniques have also been utilized to study
and predict the development of outbreaks in different
regions. For example, Gourieroux and Jasiak used
time-varying Markov process to analyze the COVID19 data [16]; Matthew Ekum and Adeyinka Ogunsanya used hierarchical polynomial regression
models to predict transmission of COVID-19 at
global level [17]. These methods could potentially
provide good prediction results without detailed
assumptions of underlying process; however, it is
sometimes difficult to interpret the results and
understand the fundamental dynamics.
In this paper, we focus on using phenomenological
models without detailed microscopic foundations, but
which have the advantage of allowing simple
calibrations to the empirical reported data and
providing transparent interpretations. Phenomenological approaches for modeling disease spread are
particularly suitable when significant uncertainty
clouds the epidemiology of an infectious disease,
including the potential contribution of multiple
transmission pathways [18]. In these situations,
phenomenological models provide a starting point
for generating early estimates of the transmission
potential and generating short-term forecasts of
epidemic trajectory and predictions of the final
epidemic size [18].
We employ the classical logistic growth model,
the generalized logistic model (GLM), the generalized Richards model (GRM) and the generalized
growth model (GGM), which have been successfully
applied to describe previous epidemics [18–22]. All
these models have some limitations and are only
applicable in some stages of the outbreak, or when
enough data points are available to allow for

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

sufficiently stable calibration. For example, an epidemic follows an exponential or quasi-exponential
growth at an early stage (following the law of
proportional growth with multiplier equal to the basic
reproduction number R0), qualifying the generalized
growth model as more suitable in the initial regime.
Then, the growth rate decays as fewer susceptible
people are available for infection and countermeasures are introduced to hinder the transmission of the
virus, so the logistic type of models is better in this
later stage.
Our analysis dissects the development of the
epidemics in China and the impact of the drastic
control measures both at the aggregate level and
within each province. Borrowing from the experience
of China, we analyze the development of the outbreak
in other countries. Our study employs simple models
to quantitatively document the effects of the Chinese
containment measures against the SARS-CoV-2
virus, and provide informative implications for the
current global pandemic. The quantitative analysis
allows estimating the progress of the outbreak in
different countries, differentiating between those that
are at a quite advanced stage and close to the end of
the epidemics from those that are still in the middle of
it. This is useful for scientific colleagues and decision
makers to understand the different dynamics and
status of countries and regions in a simple way.
The paper is structured as follows: In Sect. 2 and 3,
we explain the data and the models in detail. In
Sect. 4 and 5, we calibrate different models to the
reported number of infected cases in the COVID-19
epidemics from January 19 to March 10 for the whole
of China and 29 provinces in mainland China. Then,
in Sect. 6, we perform a similar modeling exercise on
other countries that have been or are undergoing
major outbreaks of this virus. We discuss several
limitations of our methods in Sect. 7 and then
conclude in Sect. 8.

2 Data

issue of underreporting at the early stage and also
data inconsistency during mid-February due to a
change of classification guidelines. For the provinces
other than Hubei, the data are consistent except for
one special event on February 20 concerning the data
coming from several prisons.
We do not include the Chinese domestic data after
March 10 because we conclude that the major
outbreak between January and March was contained
and finished. Although there have been resurgences
of cases after mid-March due to imported cases from
overseas countries, it is another transmission dynamics compared with the January–March major
outbreak, and the risk of another round of epidemic
is low given the continuing containment measures
and massive testing programs [23].
For data in other countries, the source is the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
(ECDC) [24], which is updated every day at 1 pm
CET, reflecting data collected up to 6:00 and 10:00
CET. Note that the cases of the Diamond Princess
cruise are excluded from Japan, following the WHO
standard.
2.2 Data adjustment
On February 20, for the first time, infected cases in
the Chinese prison system were reported, including
271 cases from Hubei, 207 cases from Shandong, 34
cases from Zhejiang. These cases were concealed
before this announcement because the prison system
was not within the coverage of each provincial health
commission system. Given that the prison system is
relatively independent and the cases are limited, we
remove these cases in our data for the modeling
analysis to ensure consistency.
2.3 Migration data
The population travels from Hubei and Wuhan to
other provinces from January 1 to January 23 are
retrieved from the Baidu Migration Map (http://
qianxi.baidu.com).

2.1 Confirmed cases
We focus on the daily data of confirmed cases. For
data from mainland China, the data source is national
and provincial heath commission. We exclude the
epicenter province, Hubei, which had a significant

3 Method
At an early stage of the outbreak, an exponential or
generalized exponential model can be used to

123

K. Wu et al.

describe the data, which is intuitive and easy to
calibrate. This has been employed to describe the
initial processes of the epidemic in many cases,
including influenza, Ebola, foot-and-mouth disease,
HIV/AIDS, plague, measles, smallpox [20] and also
COVID-19 [25]. The generalized growth model
(GGM) that we consider is defined as:
dC ðtÞ
¼ rC p ðtÞ;
dt

●

●

Generalized Logistic model (GLM):

123

Generalized Richards model (GRM):

 

dC ðtÞ
C ðt Þ a
¼ r ½ C ðt Þ p 1 
dt
K

ð3Þ

●

ð4Þ

ð1Þ

where CðtÞ represents the cumulative number of
confirmed cases at time t, p 2 ½0; 1 is an exponent
that allows the model to capture different growth
profiles including the constant incidence (p ¼ 0), subexponential growth (0\p\1) and exponential
growth (p ¼ 1). In the case of exponential growth,
the solution is CðtÞ ¼ C0 ert , where r is the growth
rate and C0 is the initial number of confirmed cases at
the time when the count starts. For
the
 0\p\1,

rt b
solution of Eq. (1)
is
C
ð
t
Þ
¼
C
1
þ
,
where
0
A
C01p
1
b ¼ 1p
and A ¼ 1p
, so that r controls the characteristic time scale of the dynamics. Essentially, the
(quasi) exponential model provides an upper bound
for future scenarios by assuming that the outbreak
continues to grow following the same process as in
the past.
However, an outbreak will slow down and reach
its limit with decaying transmission rate in the end,
resulting in the growth pattern departing from the
(sub-)exponential path as the cumulative number of
cases approaches its inflection point and the daily
incidence curve approaches its maximum. Then, a
logistic type model could have a better performance.
In fact, the exponential model and the classical
logistic model are the first- and second-order approximations to the growth phase of an epidemic curve
produced by the standard Kermack–McKendrick SIR
model [26, 27]. To account for subtle differences in
the dynamics of different stages of an epidemic, we
use three types of logistic models to describe the
outbreak beyond the early growth stage:
Classical Logistic growing model:


dC ðtÞ
C ðt Þ
¼ rC ðtÞ 1 
dt
K



dC ðtÞ
C ðt Þ
p
¼ rC ðtÞ 1 
dt
K

ð2Þ

These three models all include two common
parameters: a generalized growth rate r setting the
typical time scale of the epidemic growth process and
the final capacity K, which is the asymptotic total
number of infections over the whole epidemics. In the
generalized logistic model, one additional parameter
p 2 ½0; 1 is introduced on top of the classical logistic
model to capture different growth profiles, similar to
the generalized growth model (1). In the generalized
Richards model, the exponent a is introduced to
measure the deviation from the symmetric S-shaped
dynamics of the simple logistic curve. The GRM
recovers the original Richards model [28] for p ¼ 1,
and reduces to the classical logistic model (2) for
a ¼ 1 and p ¼ 1. Therefore, the GRM is more
pertinent when calibrating data from a region that
has entered the after-peak stage, to better describe the
after-peak trajectory that may have deviated from the
classical logistic decay due, for instance, to various
containment measures. However, this more flexible
model leads to more unstable calibrations if used on
early stage data.
For the calibrations performed here, we use the
standard Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to solve
the nonlinear least square optimization for the
incidence curve. This is achieved
 by searching
 for
^
^
^
^
the set of parameters H ¼ h1 ; h2 ; . . .; hm that
minimizes
the
sum
of
squared
errors
PT
2
t¼1 ðct  f ðt; HÞÞ , where f ðt; HÞ is the model
solution and ct is the observed data. For the fitting
of the classical logistic growth function, we free the
initial point C0 and allow it to be one of the 3
parameters Hlog i ¼ ðC0 ; K; r Þ to be calibrated, as the
early stage growth does not follow a logistic growth.
However, for the fitting of the remaining three
models, C0 is fixed at the empirical value. To
estimate the uncertainty of our model estimates, we
use a bootstrap approach with a negative binomial
error structure NBðlt ; r2t ), where lt and r2t are the
mean and variance of the distribution at time t,

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

estimated from the empirical data. Concretely, we
employ the following bootstrap step to simulate
S ¼ 500 time series:
Step 1 Search for
 the set of parameters
^ ¼ h^1 ; h^2 ; . . .; h^m that minimizes the sum of
H
P
squared errors Tt¼1 ðct  f ðt; HÞÞ2 .
Step
Each
simulated
time
series

2
^ ; i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; S is generated by assuming
fi t; H
a negative binomial error structure as NBðlt ; r2t ),


^Þ
f ðt;H
^
and
r2t ¼ T
where
lt ¼ f t; H
PT ðcl f ðl;H^ ÞÞ2
; t ¼ 1; 2; . . .; T. Thus, the probal¼1
ci
bility
of
success

1
2
PT ðcl f ðl;H^ ÞÞ
pt ¼ 1  rl2t ¼ 1  T
in a
l¼1
ci
t

classical negative binomial distribution is the same
across t.
Step 3 For each simulated time series, the param^ i ; i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; S is estimated as in Step 1.
eter set H
Thus, the empirical distribution, correlations and
confidence intervals of the parameters and the
^
model

solution can be extracted from Hi and

^ i , where i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; S.
fi t; H
In the next section, we apply the most flexible
model, the generalized Richards model (GRM), to
study the 29 provinces in China where the outbreak is
at the end. The GRM has four free parameters
(HGRM ¼ ðK; r; p; a)) and is able to characterize the
different epidemic patterns developed in the 29
provinces. We also fit the classical logistic model to
the daily incidence data as a comparison with the
GRM, and a simple exponential decay model to the
growth rate of cumulative confirmed cases to provide
another perspective.
In Sect. 6, we apply the four models (Eqs. 1–4) to
various countries and regions to identify their
epidemic progress and potential future scenarios.
Logistic type models tend to underestimate the final
capacity K and thus could serve as lower bounds of
the future scenarios [29, 30]. The classical logistic
model is the least flexible one among the three and
usually provides the lowest estimate of the final
capacity, because it fails to account for (1) the supexponential growth which could be captured by the
GLM; (2) the potential slow abating of the epidemic
which could be captured by the GRM. Both factors
will increase the estimated final total confirmed

numbers and they both require more data to calibrate.
The performance of more flexible models increases as
more data (especially data after the inflection point of
the cumulative number) become available for calibration. Given the above, we define three scenarios
that can be described by these four models. The
positive scenario is defined by the model with the
second lowest predicted final total confirmed cases
K among the three Logistic models, and the medium
scenario is described by the model with the highest
predicted final total deaths among the three Logistic
models. It is important to note that both positive and
medium scenarios could underestimate largely the
final capacity, especially at the early stage of the
epidemics. The negative scenario is described by the
generalized growth model, which should only
describe the early stage of the epidemic outbreak
and is therefore least reliable for countries in the
more mature stage as it does not include a finite
population capacity.

4 Analysis at the global and provincial level
for China (excluding Hubei)
4.1 Analysis at the aggregate level of mainland
China (excluding Hubei)
As of March 10, 2020, there were in total 13,172
infected cases reported in the 30 provinces in
mainland China outside Hubei. The initially impressive rising statistics have given place to a tapering
associated with the limited capacity for transmission,
exogenous control measure, and so on. In Fig. 1, the
trajectory of the total confirmed cases, the daily
increase of confirmed cases and the daily growth rate
of confirmed cases in whole China excluding Hubei
province are presented. The fits with the generalized
Richards model and with the classical logistic growth
model are shown in red and blue lines, respectively,
in the upper, middle and lower left panel, with the
data up to March 1, 2020. In the lower left panel of
Fig. 1, the daily empirical growth rate
ðt Þ
r ðtÞ ¼ log CCðt1
Þ of the confirmed cases is plotted in
log scale against time. We can observe two exponential decay regimes of the growth rate with two
different decay parameters before and after February
14, 2020. The green line is the fitted linear regression
line (of the logarithm of the growth rate as a function

123

K. Wu et al.

Fig. 1 Time dependence of the total number of confirmed
cases (upper panel), the daily number of new confirmed cases
(middle panel), and the daily growth rate of confirmed cases
(lower panel) in the mainland China excluding Hubei province
until March 1, 2020. The empirical data are marked by the
empty circles. The blue and red lines in the upper, middle and
lower left panels show the fits with the logistic growth model
and generalized Richards model (GRM) respectively. For the
GRM, we also show the fits using data ending 20, 15, 10,
5 days earlier than March 1, 2020, as lighter red lines in the
upper and middle panel. This demonstrates the consistency and

robustness of the fits. The lower left panel shows the daily
growth rate of the confirmed cases in log scale against time.
The green and cyan straight lines show the linear regression of
the logarithm of the growth rate as a function of time for the
period of January 25 to February 14, and the period of February
15 to March 1, respectively. The lower right panel is the daily
growth rate of the confirmed cases in linear scale against the
cumulative number of confirmed cases. The red and green lines
are the linear fits for the period of January 19 to February 1,
and the period of February 2 to March 1, respectively

of time) for the data from January 25 to February 14,
2020, yielding an exponential decay parameter equal
to −0.157 per day (95% CI: (−0.164, −0.150)). This
indicates that after the lockdown of Wuhan city on
January 23 and the top-level health emergency
activated in most provinces on January 25, the
transmission in provinces outside Hubei has been
contained with a relatively fast exponential decay of
the growth rate from a value starting at more than
100% to around 2% on February 14. Then, starting

February 15, 3 weeks after a series of extreme
controlling measures, the growth rate is found to
decay with a faster rate with a decay parameter equal
to −0.277 per day (95% CI: (−0.313, −0.241)).
This second regime is plotted as the cyan line in
the lower left panel of Fig. 1. The green and cyan
straight lines show the linear regression of the
logarithm of the growth rate as a function of time
for the period of January 25 to February 14, and the
period of February 15 to March 1, respectively. The

123

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

asymptotic exponential decay of the growth rate can
be justified theoretically from the generalized
Richards model (4) by expanding it in the neighborhood where C converges to K. Introducing the change
of variable CðtÞ ¼ K ð1  eðtÞÞ, and keeping all terms
up to first order in eðtÞ, Eq. (4) yields
dðtÞ
¼ ceðtÞ
dt

with

c ¼ raK p1 :

ð5Þ

This gives


1 dC ðtÞ
0 cect
¼
¼ c 0 ect þ ½0 ect 2 þ ½0 ect 3 þ    ;
ct
C dt
1  0 e

ð6Þ
where e0 is a constant of integration determined from
matching this asymptotic solution with the nonasymptotic dynamics far from the asymptote. Thus,
the leading behavior of the growth rate at long times
is C1 dCdðt tÞ =c0 ect , which is exponential decaying as
shown in the lower left panel of Fig. 1. Using
expression (5) for c as a function of the 4 parameters
r; a; K and p given in the inset of the top panel of
Fig. 1, we get c ¼ 0:21 for mainland China excluding
Hubei, which is bracketed by the two fitted values
0.17 and 0.28 of the exponential decay given in the
inset of the lower left panel of Fig. 1.
In the lower right panel of Fig. 1, the empirical
growth rate r ðtÞ is plotted in linear scale against the
cumulative number of confirmed cases. The red and
green lines are the linear regressed lines for the full
period and for the period after February 1, 2020,
respectively. We can see that the standard logistic
growth cannot capture the full trajectory until February 1. After February 1, the linear fit is good,
qualifying the simple logistic equation (p=1 and α=
1), with growth rate r estimated as 0.25 for the slope,
which is compatible with the value determined from
the calibration over the full data set shown in the top
two panels of Fig. 1.
Figure 2a demonstrates the sensitivity of the
calibration of the GRM to the end date of the data
by presenting six sets of results for six end dates.
Specifically, the data on the daily number of new
confirmed case are assumed to be available until 23
January, 28 January, 2 February, 7 February, 12
February, 17 February, i.e., 30, 25, 20, 15, 10 and
5 days before February 22 were presented. For each
of the six data sets, we generated 500 simulations of
dCðtÞ based on the best fit parameters using parametric
dt

bootstrap with a negative binomial error structure, as
in prior studies [20]. Each of these 500 simulations
constitutes a plausible scenario for the daily number
of new confirmed cases, which is compatible with the
data and GRM. The dispersion among these 500
scenarios provides a measure of stability of the fits,
and their range of values gives an estimation of the
confidence intervals. The first conclusion is the nonsurprising large range of scenarios obtained when
using data before the inflection point, which, however, encompass the realized data. We observe a
tendency for early scenarios to predict a much faster
and larger number of new cases than observed, which
could be expected in the absence of strong containment control. With more data, the scenarios become
more accurate, especially when using realized data
after the peak, and probably account well for the
impact of the containment measures that modified the
dynamics of the epidemic spreading. This is confirmed again in Fig. 2b, which presents the
convergences of the four parameters of the GRM.
The confidence intervals decrease significantly once
the data are available after the inflection point.
4.2 Analysis at the provincial level (29
provinces) of mainland China (excluding
Hubei)
As of March 1, 2020, the daily increase of the number
of confirmed cases in China excluding Hubei
province has decreased to less than 10 cases per
day. The preceding one-month extreme quarantine
measures thus seem to have been very effective from
an aggregate perspective, although there is a resurgence of cases since mid-March due to imported
cases from overseas countries. At this time, it is
worthwhile to take a closer look at the provincial
level to study the effectiveness of measures in each
province. The supplementary material presents figures similar to Fig. 1 for each of the 29 provinces in
mainland China, and a table presenting some useful
statistics for each province and the values of the fitted
parameters of the generalized Richards model, logistic growth model and the exponential decay exponent
of the growth rate. Tibet is excluded as it only has 1
confirmed case as of March 10. This analysis at the
29 provinces allows us to identify four phases in the
development of the epidemic outbreak in mainland
China.

123

K. Wu et al.
Fig. 2 a Daily number of
new observed confirmed
cases for mainland China
excluding Hubei (black
circles) compared with 500
scenarios built by
parametric bootstrap with a
negative binomial error
structure on the GRM
model with best fit
parameters determined on
the data up to the time
indicated by the vertical
dashed line. The last time
used in the calibration is,
respectively, 5, 10, 15, 20,
25, 30 days before February
22, 2020 from bottom to
top. The red continuous line
is the best fitted line, and
the two dashed red curves
delineate the 95%
confidence interval
extracted from the 500
scenarios. The six panels
correspond each to a
different end date, shown as
the sub-title of each panel,
at which the data have been
calibrated with the GRM
model. b Convergence of
the four parameters from
the GRM simulations
shown in a. The error bars
indicate the 80% prediction
intervals. (Color
figure online)

123

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics
●

●

●

Phase I (January 19–January 24, 6 days): early
stage outbreak The data mainly reflect the
situation before January 20, when no measures
were implemented, or they were of limited scope.
On January 19, Guangdong became the first
province to declare a confirmed case outside
Hubei in mainland China [22]. On January 20,
with the speech of President Xi, all provinces
started to react. As of January 24, 28 provinces
reported confirmed cases with daily growth rates
of confirmed cases ranging from 50% to more
than 100%.
Phase II (January 25–February 1, 8 days) fast
growth phase approaching the peak of the
incidence curve (inﬂection point of the cumulative
number) The data start to reflect the measures
implemented in the later days of Phase I and in
Phase II. In this phase, the government measures
against the outbreak have been escalated, marked
by the lockdown of Wuhan on January 23, the
top-level public health emergency state declared
by 20+provinces by January 25, and the standing
committee meeting on January 25, the first day of
the Chinese New Year, organized by President
Xi, to deploy the forces for the battle against the
virus outbreak. In this phase, the growth rate of
the number of confirmed cases in all provinces
declined from 50 to 10%+, with an exponentially
decay rate of 0.157 for the aggregated data. At the
provincial level, some provinces failed to see a
continuous decrease in the growth rate and
witnessed the incidence grow at a constant rate
for a few days, implying exponential growth of
the confirmed cases. These provinces include
Jiangxi (~40% until January 30), Heilongjiang (~
25% until February 5), Beijing (~15% until
February 3), Shanghai (~20% until January 30),
Yunnan (~75% until January 27), Hainan (~10%
until February 5), Guizhou (~25% until February
1), Jilin (~30% until February 3). Some other
provinces managed to decrease the growth rate
exponentially during this period. As of February
1, 15 provinces had reached the peak of the
incidence curve, indicating the effectiveness of
the extreme measures, and most provinces started
to be in control of the epidemics.
Phase III (February 2–February 14, 13 days) slow
growth phase approaching the end of the outbreak
In this period, all provinces continued to

●

implement their strict measures, striving to bring
the epidemics to an end. The growth rate of the
number of confirmed cases declined exponentially with similar rates as in Phase II, pushing
down the growth rate from 10 to 1%. In phase III,
all provinces have passed the peak of the
incidence curve, which allows us to obtain precise
scenarios for the dynamics of the end of the
outbreak from the model fits (Fig. 2). As of
February 14, 23 out of 30 provinces have less
than 10 new cases per day.
Phase IV (February 15–8 March) the end of the
outbreak Starting February 15, the exponential
decay of the growth rate at the aggregate level has
switched to an even faster decay with parameter
of 0.277 (Fig. 1). As of February 17, 1 week after
normal work being allowed to resume in most
provinces, 22 provinces have a growth rate
smaller than 1%. As of February 21, 28 provinces
have achieved 5-day average growth rates smaller
than 1%.

5 Analysis of the development of the epidemic
and heterogeneous Chinese provincial responses
5.1 Quantification of the initial reactions
and ramping up of control measures
On January 19, Guangdong was the first province to
report a confirmed infected patient outside Hubei. On
January 20, 14 provinces reported their own first case.
During January 21–23, another 14 provinces reported
their first cases. If we determine the peak of the
outbreak from the 5 days moving average of the
incidence curve, then there are 15 provinces taking 7–
11 days from their first case to their peak, 9 provinces
taking 12–15 days and 6 provinces taking more than
15 days. If we define the end of the outbreak as the
day when the 5 days moving average of the growth
rate becomes smaller than 1%, then 7 provinces spent
8–12 days from the peak to the end, 7 provinces spent
13–16 days, 13 provinces spent 17–20 days and 2
provinces spent 21–22 days. For the six provinces
that have the longest duration from the start of their
outbreak to the peak (more than 15 days), it took 8–
13 days for them to see the end of the outbreak
(Fig. 3). This means that these 6 provinces were able

123

K. Wu et al.
Fig. 3 Inverse relationship
found across the 29 Chinese
provinces between the
number of days from peak
to the end and the duration
from start to the peak of the
epidemics. Here, the end of
the outbreak is defined
operationally as the day
when the 5 days moving
average of the growth rate
becomes smaller than 1%

to control the local transmissions of the imported
cases quite well, so that the secondary transmissions
were limited. In contrast, 20 provinces took 28–
31 days from the start to the end of the outbreak.
Thus, those provinces that seem to have responded
sluggishly during the early phase of the epidemics
seem to have ramped up aggressively their countermeasures to achieve good results.
5.2 Diagnostic of the efficiency of control
measures from the exponential decay
of the growth rate of infected cases
The 10 most infected provinces (Guangdong, Henan,
Zhejiang, Hunan, Anhui, Jiangxi, Shandong, Jiangsu,
Chongqing, Sichuan) have done quite well in controlling the transmission, as indicated by the fact that
their daily growth rates follow well-defined exponential decays, with all of their R2 larger than 90%.
This exponential decay continued for all ten provinces until the situation was completely under
control during February 15–18, when the daily
incidence was at near zero or a single-digit number.
Eight out of these ten provinces have an exponential
decay exponent of the growth rate ranging from 0.142
to 0.173, similar to what is observed at the national
average level (0.157). Note that this exponential
decay can be inferred from the generalized Richards
model, as we noted in Eqs. (5) and (6) in Sect. 4.1.

123

5.3 Zhejiang and Henan exemplary developments
Zhejiang and Henan are the second and third most
infected provinces but have the fastest decaying
speed of the incidence growth rate (exponential decay
exponent for Zhejiang: 0.223, Hunan: 0.186) among
the most infected provinces. This is consistent with
the fast and strong control measures enforced by both
provincial governments, which have been praised a
lot on Chinese social network [31, 32]. As one of the
most active economies in China and one of the top
provinces receiving travelers from Wuhan around the
Lunar New Year [33], Zhejiang was the first province
launching the top-level public health emergency on
January 23, and implemented strong immediate
measures, such as closing off all villages in some
cities. The fitted curves from the GRM and logistic
growth models indicate a peak of the incidence curve
on January 31, which is the earliest time among top
infected provinces. Similarly, Henan Province, as the
neighbor province of Hubei and one of the most
populated provinces in China, announced the suspension of passenger bus to and from Wuhan at the
end of December 2019. In early January 2020, Henan
implemented a series of actions including suspending
poultry trading, setting up return spots at the village
entrances for people from Hubei, listing designated
hospitals for COVID-19 starting as early as January
17, and so on [32]. These actions were the first to be
implemented among all provinces.

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

5.4 Heterogeneity of the development
of the epidemic and responses across various
provinces
Less infected provinces exhibit a larger variance in
the decaying process of the growth rate. However, we
also see good examples like Shanghai, Fujian and
Shanxi, which were able to reduce the growth rate
consistently with a low variance. These provinces
benefited from experience obtained in the fight
against the 2003 SARS outbreak or enjoy richer
local medical resources [34]. This enabled the
government to identify as many infected/suspected
cases as possible in order to contain continuously the
local transmissions. Bad examples include Heilongjiang, Jilin, Tianjin, Gansu, which is consistent
with the analysis of [34].
Most provinces have a small parameter of p in the
GRM [see Eq. (4)] and an exponent α large than 1,
indicating that China was successful in containing the
outbreak as sub-exponential growing process (p\1),
with a faster than logistic decay (α[1) in most
provinces, except Guangdong, Zhejiang, Jiangxi,
Sichuan, Heilongjiang, Fujian, Yunnan and Gansu.
However, these exceptional provinces are due to various
reasons, which may not necessarily be the ineffective
measures. The large p and small α in Guangdong and
Zhejiang are likely due to their high population densities
and highly mobile populations in mega-cities, which are
factors known to largely contribute to the fast transmission of viruses. Jiangxi, Sichuan, Fujian, Yunnan and
Gansu all had a fast growth phase before February 1, but
were successful in controlling the subsequent development of the epidemics. The fast growth phase in
Heilongjiang lasted a bit longer than the abovementioned provinces, due to the occurrence of numerous
local transmissions. Heilongjiang is the northernmost
province in China, so it is far from Hubei and does not
have a large number of migrating people from Hubei.
However, compared with other provinces, it has a high
statistic of both the confirmed cases and the case fatality
rate (2.7% as of March 10), which has been criticized a
lot by the Chinese social network.

level of early contamination from Hubei province as the
epicenter of the outbreak. To support this proposition, the
upper panel of Fig. 4 plots the estimated C0 as a function
of the migration index from Hubei and Wuhan to each
province. The migration index is calculated as equal to
25% of the population migrating from Hubei (excluding
Wuhan) plus 75% of the population migrating from
Wuhan, given that Wuhan was the epicenter and the risks
from the Hubei region excluding Wuhan are lower. One
can observe a clear positive correlation between the
estimated C0 and the migration index. The lower panel of
Fig. 4 shows an even stronger correlation between the
total number of cases recorded on March 6 and the travel
index, expressing that a strong start of the epidemics
predicts a larger number of cases, which is augmented by
infections resulting from migrations out of the epidemic
epicenter.

5.5 Initial and total confirmed numbers
of infected cases correlated with travel index

6 Analysis of the epidemic in various countries

The initial value C0 of the logistic equation could be used
as an indicator of the early number of cases, reflecting the

Based on the phenomenological models presented
above, we have been publishing daily forecasts for

Fig. 4 Upper panel: estimated C0 for the logistic growth
model versus travel index from Hubei and Wuhan. Lower
panel: total confirmed cases versus travel index from Hubei
and Wuhan. The Pearson correlation between C0 and the
migration index is 0.65 (p\103 ), and the correlation between
the cumulative number of confirmed cases and the migration
index is 0.82 (p\104 )

123

K. Wu et al.

the number of COVID-19 confirmed cases in various
countries/regions in the world since March 23. Four
months after our first daily report, the outbreaks in
most European countries have come to an end and the
epicenter has shifted to the USA, South Hemisphere
countries and other developing countries. In this
section, with the four models (Eqs. 1–4) and the
resulting three scenarios we specified in Sect. 3, we
first present the model outputs for countries with an
ended first outbreak wave. We report that they have
significantly different parameters compared to China.
Then, we present the latest status of the countries in
the middle of their outbreak and discuss the performance of our models.
6.1 Countries with a matured outbreak
As of July 24, Europe (including Russia) has
cumulatively 3.06 million confirmed cases with a
growth rate of 0.5–1% per day, gradually decreased
from more than 5% 2 months ago. The outbreak in
Europe started in February from Italy, France and
Spain and then spread to the whole Europe. The first
wave of outbreaks has ended in most West European
countries, which started to ease their lockdowns in
late April. However, the rising numbers of cases in
the East European countries (especially Russia) and
the resurgences of cases in the West European
countries since June have kept the daily number of
confirmed cases in Europe approximately flat after
May.
As of July 24, the USA has cumulatively 4.03
million confirmed cases with a daily growth rate of
around 2%, increased from 1% a month ago. The first
wave of outbreaks in the USA was concentrating in
New York with a national lockdown from March to
late April. However, with the pressure from people in
several states and from President Trump, the USA
reopened since May. The ease of lockdowns and the
street demonstrations associated with the BLM (“black
lives matter”) movement where large numbers of
people gather have contributed to a second wave of
outbreaks across the whole country, with the daily new
cases of the USA keeping breaking records. The
epicenter of this second wave of the outbreak has
shifted from New York to several states such as
Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, California and Florida.
Although the flexible four-parameter generalized
Richards model (GRM) can capture the slow decay of

123

the after-peak trajectory in an epidemic, it cannot
characterize the second wave dynamics by construction. Therefore, we use June 5 as the cutoff date for
the data used in the exercise of model fitting to
Europe as a whole and to 14 countries that have
ended their first waves. These countries are the USA,
11 west European countries (the UK, Spain, Italy,
Germany, France, Austria, Belgium, Netherlands,
Ireland, Portugal and Switzerland) and two Asian
countries (Japan and Turkey). Among these 14
countries, a second wave of outbreak has started in
the USA and Japan. Resurgences of cases are
identified in several countries including Spain, Germany, France, Austria, Portugal, Switzerland and
Turkey.
Figure 5 presents the daily confirmed cases of
Europe and of 14 countries fitted with the best two
models among the four models. In contrast to the
results from most provinces in China in the after-peak
stage, all West European countries have a small
estimated parameter α in the generalized Richards
model, indicating a slow decay of the after-peak
trajectory. This is possibly because the full lockdown
in most West European countries was implemented
when the virus transmissions have already started
among local communities. The heterogeneous stage
of the outbreaks and the resurgences of cases in some
countries (e.g., Spain, German, France, Austria,
Portugal, Switzerland) also contribute to a slow
decay of Europe as a whole, which is in an
approximate plateau over the past month. In contrast,
the extreme lockdown and containment measures in
China were implemented at the beginning of the
outbreak and were maintained strictly through the
whole period of the outbreak with centralized management, contributing to the fast decay of the
outbreak in the after-peak stage.
The resurgences of cases and a second wave
happening in the USA and various countries show
that the risk of new outbreaks is not negligible. The
antibody tests performed in various countries and
regions [35] also show that the herd immunity level
in the crowd is not yet sufficient to prevent another
outbreak.
6.2 Countries in the middle of their outbreaks
In Table 1, we report the latest confirmed cases per
million population and the estimated outbreak

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics
Fig. 5 Daily confirmed
cases of Europe and of 14
countries with the best two
models among the four
models (1)–(4). The
empirical data are indicated
by empty circles. The blue,
red and green lines with the
error bars show the fits with
the logistic growth model,
generalized Richards model
(GRM), and generalized
logistic model (GLM),
respectively. The error bars
indicate 80% prediction
intervals. Data are plotted
every 3 days. The vertical
line indicates the date (June
5) up to when the data are
fed to the model. (Color
figure online)

123

K. Wu et al.
Table 1 Current confirmed cases per million population and estimated outbreak progress in positive and medium scenarios (July 24
confirmed cases divided by the estimated total final confirmed cases in positive and medium scenario)

Chile
Canada
Afghanistan
Qatar

Confirmed per million
population (July 24)

Outbreak progress
in positive scenario

Outbreak progress
in medium scenario

18,087

99.4%

98.3%

(60.2%, 100.0%)

(53.1%, 100.0%)

3040

98.9%

97.2%

(95.2%, 100.0%)

(93.9%, 100.0%)

967

96.9%

96.4%

(91.5%, 100.0%)

(90.4%, 100.0%)

96.5%

95.6%

(94.4%, 98.4%)

(93.3%, 97.8%)

38,913

Belarus

7031

94.0%

91.6%

(92.0%, 96.3%)

(89.5%, 93.8%)

Pakistan

1274

95.8%
(92.6%, 98.8%)

88.2%
(85.2%, 91.2%)

Russia

5503

80.4%

77.1%

(75.9%, 84.7%)

(73.6%, 80.9%)

73.8%

72.5%

(68.5%, 79.1%)

(65.7%, 79.6%)

89.9%

71.4%

(85.4%, 93.7%)

(67.3%, 75.4%)

7735

90.5%

53.7%

(82.5%, 99.8%)

(38.7%, 65.5%)

10,920

54.2%

49.6%

(36.8%, 79.6%)

(38.6%, 97.2%)

30.0%

26.9%

(8.5%, 47.7%)

(8.4%, 77.4%)

2938

35.1%

23.9%

Israel

6527

(27.6%, 42.3%)
100.0%

(14.0%, 45.7%)
Not reliable

India

952

Peru
Saudi Arabia
Sweden
Brazil
Argentina
Mexico

11,601
7727

3189

(23.1%, 100.0%)

Dominican Republic
Philippines
Iran

78.0%

23.0%

(17.7%, 100.0%)

(14.3%, 31.7%)

5421

Not reliable

Not reliable

698

Not reliable

Not reliable

3472

Not reliable

Not reliable

The ranking is in terms of outbreak progress in medium scenario (fourth column from left). Numbers in brackets are 80% confidence
intervals. As positive scenarios predict a smaller final number of total infected cases, the outbreak progress is thus larger in the
positive scenario

progress in the positive and medium scenarios for
various countries including Chile, Canada, Afghanistan, Qatar, Belarus, Pakistan, Russia, Peru, Saudi
Arabia, Brazil, Argentina, Sweden, Mexico, Israel,
India, Dominican Republic, Philippines and Iran. The
outbreak progress is defined as the latest confirmed

123

cases divided by the estimated final total confirmed
case, either in the positive or the medium scenario. In
Fig. 6, the daily confirmed cases of these 18 countries
are shown together with the best two models among
the four models (1)–(4). Figure 7 presents the
ensemble distribution of the estimated final total

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics
Fig. 6 a Daily confirmed
cases of 10 countries with
the best two models among
the four models (1)–(4). The
empirical data are indicated
by empty circles. The blue,
red and green lines with the
error bars show the fits with
the logistic growth model,
generalized Richards model
(GRM) and generalized
logistic model (GLM),
respectively. The error bars
indicate 80% prediction
intervals. Data are plotted
every 3 days. The vertical
line indicates the date (July
24) up to when the data are
fed to the model. b Daily
confirmed cases of 8
countries with the best two
models among the four
models (1)–(4). The
empirical data are indicated
by empty circles. The blue,
red and green lines with the
error bars show the fits with
the logistic growth model,
generalized Richards model
(GRM) and generalized
logistic model (GLM),
respectively. The error bars
indicate 80% prediction
intervals. Data are plotted
every 3 days. The vertical
line indicates the date (July
24) up to when the data are
fed to the model. (Color
figure online)

confirmed cases per million population obtained by
aggregating the positive and medium scenarios. The
distributions obtained on June 6, 2020, are plotted on
the right side of each violin plot in gray, while the
distributions obtained on July 24 are plotted on the
left side in cyan.
Among them, the most matured group of countries
includes Chile, Canada, Afghanistan, Qatar and
Belarus, which have strong signs that their inflection
points have been passed with an outbreak progress
larger than 90% in the medium scenario. The next
group of countries includes Pakistan, Russia, Peru

and Saudi Arabia, which are less matured with
outbreak progress in the range 60–90% in the
medium scenario. They have developed signs of
passing their inflection points, but may reverse to
their previous exponential growth if there is a second
wave of outbreak. All these countries have their
distributions of final confirmed cases converged,
indicating the reliability of the future projected
scenarios.
The least mature group of countries are Sweden,
Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Israel, India, Dominican
Republic, Philippines and Iran. Sweden, Israel,

123

K. Wu et al.
Fig. 6 continued

Philippines and Iran are experiencing a second
outbreak, while Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, India
and Dominican Republic are still in the exponential
growth stage, indicating highly uncertain future
projections. As shown in Fig. 7, their ensemble
distributions of final confirmed cases are non-converged or highly dispersed.
As discussed before, our models are unable to
characterize the second wave dynamics by construction. Thus, the results concerning the predictions for
countries experiencing a second wave are not reliable.
Note that the logistic type models are usually useful in
understanding the short-term dynamics over a horizon
of a few days, while may tend to underestimate longterm results due to the change of the fundamental
dynamics resulting from government interventions, a
second wave of outbreaks or other factors. This is
shown by large shifts between the obtained distributions between June 5 and July 24 in Fig. 7. Thus, the

123

estimated outbreak progress serves both as a lower
bound for future developments and as an indication of
what to expect of the evolution dynamics of the
epidemics. To have a view of the performance of
short-term predictions, we present the latest 7-day
prediction errors for the total number of confirmed
cases in Fig. 8, based on positive and medium
scenarios. One can see that our 7-day predictions
based on the data up to July 17 are correct with narrow
prediction intervals in all matured countries. Our 7-day
predictions, however, underestimate the realized values in immature countries including India, Argentina
and Israel. Until May 24, 2020, we have uploaded a
daily update of our projections and an analysis of
forecasting errors online [36]. Thereafter, we shifted to
a weekly update until July 3, we have now discontinued it as the epidemics have entered second waves and
other regimes highly dependent on country specific
characteristics.

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

Fig. 7 Violin plot of the distributions of the final total number
of confirmed cases per million derived by combining the
distributions of the positive and medium scenarios. The left
side of each violin in cyan shows distributions obtained on July
24, while the right side of each violin in gray shows
distributions obtained on June 5. The model setup in the

negative scenario does not incorporate a maximum saturation
number and thus cannot be used. The yellow dots indicate the
median prediction for the combined distribution, while the
green and red dots indicate the median of the positive and of
the medium scenarios, respectively. (Color figure online)

Fig. 8 7-day prediction
error of the forecast
performed on July 17 for
the total number of deaths
for various countries/
regions. The horizontal line
corresponds to the empirical
data on July 24. The error
bars are 80% prediction
intervals, and the middle
dots are the median
predictions based on the
predictions from the
positive and medium
scenarios. A negative value
corresponds to a prediction
that underestimated the true
realized value

7 Discussion on the limitation of the method
In this paper, we only apply the models to the number
of confirmed cases, which is largely subject to a
number of extraneous variations among countries
such as case definition, testing capacity, testing
protocol and reporting system. It is important to note
that there is a significant limitation in using this

statistic to estimate the true situation of the outbreak
in a country, and we lay out four major variables
here:
●

Case deﬁnition Different countries employ different definitions of a confirmed COVID-19 case,
and the definition also changes over the time. For
example, China’s national health commission

123

K. Wu et al.

●

●

●

issued seven versions of a case definition for
COVID-19 between 15 January and 3 March, and
a recent study found each of the first four changes
increased the proportion of cases detected and
counted by factors between 2.8 and 7.1 [37].
Testing capacity The number of confirmed cases
is usually determined by testing, which is biased
toward severe cases in some countries like
France. In contrast, the testing is aimed at a
larger group in some other countries implementing massive testing programs, such as South
Korea and Iceland. Based on antibody tests
performed on the general population, several
reports show that the actual number of infected
people is much larger than the reported value
[38, 39].
Testing protocol The testing protocols and accuracy may also have a large impact on the results.
Depending on the testing protocols used, in some
instances, false positive results have been
obtained. In other words, someone without the
disease tested positive, probably because they
were infected with some other coronavirus. There
have been several reports raising this issue [40].
On the other hand, false negative results may also
exist and seem to be more prevalent than false
positives.
Reporting system and time Data also rely on the
efficiency of the reporting system. Tests are
conducted sequentially over time, and the
reported data may be adjusted afterward. They
do not represent a snapshot of a day in time. For
instance, the Netherlands National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment clearly states
that some of the positive results are only reported
one or a few days later and there might be
corrections for the past data, so the numbers from
a few days ago are sometimes adjusted [41].

Therefore, the real number of cases in the population is likely to be many multiples higher than those
computed from confirmed tests, and the number of
confirmed cases can only reflect the real situation of
the outbreak to some degree. This may also partly
explain that the Logistic model fails to capture the
growth dynamics at the early stage in most provinces
in China, as shown in Sect. 5, likely due to the
potential underreporting at the beginning.

123

Moreover, factors like heterogeneous demographics, government response, people’s fundamental
health situations in different countries could lead to
significantly different susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2.
Numerous evidences are showing that the main
vulnerable group in this COVID-19 pandemic is the
older population or people with preexisting chronic
diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes and with obesity [42–45]. The
discipline and distanciation culture in some Asian
countries may also have contributed to the low
number of confirmed cases there. All these factors
affect the susceptibility of individuals and the transmission networks, which are not easy to handle in a
microscopic model.
Therefore our top-down approach could be useful
in quantifying and understanding the current status of
the outbreak progress and making short-term predictions, while they tend to underestimate the final
confirmed numbers in the long term, which has a
higher uncertainty. Thus, the three Logistic type
models could only provide a lower bound for the
future scenarios. As more data become available, we
anticipate a more accurate picture of the final
numbers, as showed, for instance, by the converged
ensemble distributions in Austria and Switzerland
with small variance. As a last remark, even if the true
number of cases is a multiple of the reported number
of confirmed cases, as long as the multiple does not
vary too much for a given country, our analysis
remains pertinent to ascertain the outbreak progress
and nature of the epidemic dynamics.

8 Conclusion
In this paper, we calibrated the logistic growth model,
the generalized logistic growth model, the generalized growth model and the generalized Richards
model to the reported number of confirmed cases in
the Covid-19 epidemics from January 19 to March 10
for the whole of China and for the 29 provinces in
China. This has allowed us to draw some lessons
useful to interpret the results of a similar modeling
exercise performed on other countries, which are at
less advanced stages of their outbreaks. Our analysis
dissects the development of the epidemics in China
and the impact of the drastic control measures both at
the aggregate level and within each province. We

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics

documented four phases: I—early stage outbreak
(January 19–January 24, 6 days), II—fast growth
phase approaching the peak of the incidence curve
(January 25–February 1, 8 days), III—slow growth
phase approaching the end of the outbreak (February
2–February 14, 13 days) and IV—the end of the
outbreak (February 15–8 March). We quantified the
initial reactions and ramping up of control measures
on the dynamics of the epidemics and unearthed an
inverse relationship between the number of days from
peak to the quasi-end and the duration from start to
the peak of the epidemic among the 29 analyzed
Chinese provinces. We identified the signatures of the
dynamic for the exemplary developments in Zhejiang
and Henan provinces and the heterogeneity of the
development of the epidemic and responses across
various other provinces. We found a strong correlation between the initial and total confirmed numbers
of infected cases and travel index quantifying the
mobility between provinces.
For countries that are in the middle of their
outbreak, we constructed three scenarios to make
future projections. We demonstrated that outbreaks in
14 countries (mostly in West Europe) have ended,
while resurgences of cases are identified in several
countries. The estimated parameters from the GRM
are compared with the Chinese data, showing that
European countries had much slower after-peak
trajectories, possibly due to the earlier and stricter
containment measures in China. We found that 5
countries (Chile, Canada, Afghanistan, Qatar and
Belarus) have entered into the final stage of the
epidemic, while countries in the South Hemisphere
and developing areas (Brazil, Argentina, Sweden,
Mexico, Israel, India, Dominican Republic, Philippines and Iran) are still at an early stage of the
outbreaks as of July 24, 2020. The USA, Israel,
Philippines, Iran and several other countries are
experiencing a significant second wave of outbreak,
which is out of the scope of our models. We use
ensemble distributions based on bootstrapping simulations to demonstrate the convergences and
uncertainties of our scenario-based predictions. Our
quantitative analysis allows estimating the progress
of the outbreak in different countries, differentiating
between those that are at a quite advanced stage and
close to the end of the epidemics from those that are
still in the middle of it. This is useful for scientific
colleagues and decision makers to understand the

different dynamics and status of countries and regions
in a simple and transparent way.

Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology Zurich. We benefitted from
many stimulating discussions and exchanges with Michael
Schatz, Peter Cauwels, Dmitry Chernov, Euan Mearns,
Pengcheng Li and Yixuan Zhang.
Authors’ contributions KW and DS designed the research.
KW and QW performed the data analysis. All authors wrote,
read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding

No funding information is applicable.

Availability of data and material The datasets generated
and analyzed during the current study are available in the
Github repository, https://github.com/kezida/covid-19-logisticpaper.

Code availability

Code is available upon request.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest
conflict of interest.

The authors declare that they have no

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The
images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Dye, C., Gay, N.: Modeling the SARS epidemic. Science
300(5627), 1884–1885 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1126/sci
ence.1086925
2. Laguzet, L., Turinici, G.: Individual vaccination as Nash
equilibrium in a SIR model with application to the 2009–
2010 influenza A (H1N1) epidemic in France. Bull. Math.
Biol. 77(10), 1955–1984 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11538-015-0111-7

123

K. Wu et al.
3. Zhao, Z., Calderón, J., Xu, C., Zhao, G., Fenn, D., Sornette, D., Crane, R., Hui, P.M., Johnson, N.F.: Effect of
social group dynamics on contagion. Phys. Rev. E 81(5),
056107 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.81.
056107
4. Lekone, P.E., Finkenstädt, B.F.: Statistical inference in a
stochastic epidemic SEIR model with control intervention:
Ebola as a case study. Biometrics 62(4), 1170–1177
(2006). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0420.2006.00609.x
5. Smieszek, T., Balmer, M., Hattendorf, J., Axhausen, K.W.,
Zinsstag, J., Scholz, R.W.: Reconstructing the 2003/2004
H3N2 influenza epidemic in Switzerland with a spatially
explicit, individual-based model. BMC Infect. Dis. 11(1),
115 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2334-11-115
6. Chang, S.L., Piraveenan, M., Pattison, P., Prokopenko, M.:
Game theoretic modelling of infectious disease dynamics
and intervention methods: a review. J. Biol. Dyn. 14(1),
57–89 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1080/17513758.2020.
1720322
7. Chang, S.L., Harding, N., Zachreson, C., Cliff, O.M.,
Prokopenko, M.: Modelling Transmission and Control of
the COVID-19 Pandemic in Australia (2020). arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10218
8. Prem, K., Liu, Y., Russell, T.W., Kucharski, A.J., Eggo, R.
M., Davies, N., Flasche, S., Clifford, S., Pearson, C.A.B.,
Munday, J.D., Abbott, S., Gibbs, H., Rosello, A., Quilty, B.
J., Jombart, T., Sun, F., Diamond, C., Gimma, A., van
Zandvoort, K., Funk, S., Jarvis, C.I., Edmunds, W.J.,
Bosse, N.I., Hellewell, J., Jit, M., Klepac, P.: The effect of
control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of
the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a modelling
study. Lancet Publ. Health (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2468-2667(20)30073-6
9. Hou, C., Chen, J., Zhou, Y., Hua, L., Yuan, J., He, S., Guo,
Y., Zhang, S., Jia, Q., Zhao, C., Zhang, J., Xu, G., Jia, E.:
The effectiveness of quarantine of Wuhan city against the
Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): a well-mixed
SEIR model analysis. J. Med. Virol. (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1002/jmv.25827
10. Boldog, P., Tekeli, T., Vizi, Z., Dénes, A., Bartha, F.A.,
Röst, G.: Risk assessment of novel coronavirus COVID-19
outbreaks outside China. J. Clin. Med. 9(2), 571 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020571
11. Rocklöv, J., Sjödin, H., Wilder-Smith, A.: COVID-19
outbreak on the Diamond Princess cruise ship: estimating
the epidemic potential and effectiveness of public health
countermeasures. J. Travel Med. (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1093/jtm/taaa030
12. Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N.,
Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A.,
Cucunuba Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A.,
Dorigatti, I., Fu, H., Gaythorpe, K., Green, W., Hamlet, A.,
Hinsley, W., Okell, L.C., van Elsland, S., Thompson, H.,
Verity, R., Volz, E., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Walker, P.G.,
Walters, C., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Donnelly, C.A.,
Riley, S., Ghani., A.C.: Report 9: impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality
and healthcare demand (2020). https://doi.org/10.25561/
77482
13. Sornette, D.: Predictability of catastrophic events: material
rupture, earthquakes, turbulence, financial crashes, and

123

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

human birth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99(suppl 1), 2522–2529
(2002). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.022581999
Sornette, D.: Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences:
Chaos, Fractals, Selforganization and Disorder: Concepts
and Tools. Springer, Berlin (2006)
Israeli, N., Goldenfeld, N.: Computational irreducibility
and the predictability of complex physical systems. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 92(7), 074105 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.92.074105
Gourieroux, C., Jasiak, J.: Time Varying Markov Process
with Partially Observed Aggregate Data; An Application to
Coronavirus (2020). arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04500
Ekum, M., Ogunsanya, A.: Application of hierarchical
polynomial regression models to predict transmission of
COVID-19 at global level. Int. J. Clin. Biostat. Biom. 6,
027 (2020)
Chowell, G., Hincapie-Palacio, D., Ospina, J., Pell, B.,
Tariq, A., Dahal, S., Moghadas, S., Smirnova, A., Simonsen, L., Viboud, C.: Using phenomenological models to
characterize transmissibility and forecast patterns and final
Burden of Zika epidemics. PLoS Curr. (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1371/currents.outbreaks.
f14b2217c902f453d9320a43a35b9583
Chowell, G.: Fitting dynamic models to epidemic outbreaks with quantified uncertainty: a primer for parameter
uncertainty, identifiability, and forecasts. Infect. Dis.
Model. 2(3), 379–398 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
idm.2017.08.001
Viboud, C., Simonsen, L., Chowell, G.: A generalizedgrowth model to characterize the early ascending phase of
infectious disease outbreaks. Epidemics 15, 27–37 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2016.01.002
Chowell, G., Tariq, A., Hyman, J.M.: A novel sub-epidemic modeling framework for short-term forecasting
epidemic waves. BMC Med. 17(1), 1–18 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1406-6
Chowell, G., Luo, R., Sun, K., Roosa, K., Tariq, A.,
Viboud, C.: Real-time forecasting of epidemic trajectories
using computational dynamic ensembles. Epidemics. 30,
100379 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2019.
100379
Beaubien, J.: China Enters The Next Phase of Its COVID19 Outbreak: Suppression (2020). https://www.npr.
org/sections/goatsandsoda/2020/04/03/826140766/chinaenters-the-next-phase-of-its-covid-19-outbreak-suppres
sion. Accessed 24 Apr 2020
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
(ECDC): Situation update worldwide (2020). https://www.
ecdc.europa.eu/en/geographical-distribution-2019-ncovcases. Accessed 24 Apr 2020
Remuzzi, A., Remuzzi, G.: COVID-19 and Italy: what
next? Lancet 395(10231), 1225–1228 (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30627-9
Ma, J., Dushoff, J., Bolker, B.M., Earn, D.J.: Estimating
initial epidemic growth rates. Bull. Math. Biol. 76(1), 245–
260 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-013-9918-2
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: A contribution to the
mathematical theory of epidemics. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser.
A Contain. Pap. Math. Phys. Character 115(772), 700–721
(1927). https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1927.0118

Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak: comparing the dynamics
28. Richards, F.J.: A flexible growth function for empirical
use. J. Exp. Bot. 10(2), 290–301 (1959). https://doi.org/10.
1093/jxb/10.2.290
29. Neher, D.A., Campbell, C.L.: Underestimation of disease
progress rates with the logistic, monomolecular, and
gompertz models when maximum disease intensity is less
than 100 percent. Phytopathology 82(8), 811–814 (1992)
30. Pell, B., Kuang, Y., Viboud, C., Chowell, G.: Using phenomenological models for forecasting the 2015 Ebola
challenge. Epidemics 22, 62–70 (2018)
31. Tian, Y.: The Tough Time Through the Chinese New Year
(in Chinese: 既过年关,也过难关) (2020). https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20200125183422/http://www.xin
huanet.com/politics/2020-01/25/c_1125501347.htm.
Accessed 25 Jan 2020
32. He, X.: How Strong is Henan in Preventing and Controling
COVID-19? (2020) (in Chinese: 防控肺炎病毒,”硬核”河
南究竟有多硬核?). http://www.nbd.com.cn/articles/202001-25/1402907.html. Accessed 25 Jan 2020
33. Lai, S., Bogoch, I.I., Watts, A., Khan, K., Li, Z., Tatem, A.:
Preliminary Risk Analysis of 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Spread Within and Beyond China (2020). https://www.
pentapostagma.gr/sites/default/files/2020-02/worldpopcoronavirus-spread-risk-analysis-v1-25jan.pdf. Accessed
25 Feb 2020
34. Ying, S., Li, F., Geng, X., Li, Z., Du, X., Chen, H., Chen,
S., Zhang, M., Shao, Z., Wu, Y., Syeda, M.Z., Yan, F.,
Che, L., Zhang, B., Lou, J., Wang, S., Chen, Z., Li, W.,
Shen, Y., Chen, Z., Shen, H.: Spread and Control of
COVID-19 in China and Their Associations with Population Movement, Public Health Emergency Measures, and
Medical Resources. medRxiv, 2020.2002.2024.20027623
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.24.20027623
35. Jarlov, H.: Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Screening (2020).
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
17Tf1Ln9VuE5ovpnhLRBJH-33L5KRaiB3Nh
vaiF3hWC0/edit#gid=0. Accessed 18 Jul 2020
36. Chair of Entrepreneurial Risks, E.Z.: COVID-19 Daily
Report (2020). https://er.ethz.ch/Covid-19/Dailyforecasts.
html
37. Tsang, T.K., Wu, P., Lin, Y., Lau, E.H., Leung, G.M.,
Cowling, B.J.: Effect of changing case definitions for
COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission
parameters in mainland China: a modelling study. Lancet
Publ. Health (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667
(20)30089-X
38. Bendavid, E., Mulaney, B., Sood, N., Shah, S., Ling, E.,
Bromley-Dulfano, R., Lai, C., Weissberg, Z., Saavedra, R.,
Tedrow, J., Tversky, D., Bogan, A., Kupiec, T., Eichner,
D., Gupta, R., Ioannidis, J., Bhattacharya, J.: COVID-19
Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County, California.
medRxiv,
2020.2004.2014.20062463
(2020).
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20062463

39. Streeck, H., Hartmann, G., Exner, M., Schmid, M.: Preliminary Results and Conclusions of the COVID-19 Case
Cluster Study (Gangelt municipality) (in Germany: Vorläufiges Ergebnis und Schlussfolgerungen der COVID-19
Case-ClusterStudy (Gemeinde Gangelt)) (2020). https://
www.land.nrw/sites/default/files/asset/document/zwischen
ergebnis_covid19_case_study_gangelt_0.pdf. Accessed 23
Apr 2020
40. Deeks JJ, D.J., Takwoingi Y, Davenport C, Spijker R,
Taylor-Phillips S, Adriano A, Beese S, Dretzke J, Ferrante
di Ruffano L, Harris IM, Price MJ, Dittrich S, Emperador
D, Hooft L, Leeflang MMG, Van den Bruel A: Antibody
tests for identification of current and past infection with
SARS-CoV-2. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2020(6), Art.
No.: CD013652 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
cd013652
41. Environment, T.N.N.I.f.P.H.a.t.: Development of COVID19 in Graphs (2020). https://www.rivm.nl/coronaviruscovid-19/grafieken. Accessed 23 Apr 2020
42. Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., Xiang,
J., Wang, Y., Song, B., Gu, X., Guan, L., Wei, Y., Li, H.,
Wu, X., Xu, J., Tu, S., Zhang, Y., Chen, H., Cao, B.:
Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult
inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395(10229), 1054–1062 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3
43. Richardson, S., Hirsch, J.S., Narasimhan, M., Crawford, J.
M., McGinn, T., Davidson, K.W., Consortium, a.t.N.C.-R.:
Presenting Characteristics, Comorbidities, and Outcomes
Among 5700 Patients Hospitalized With COVID-19 in the
New York City Area. JAMA (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1001/jama.2020.6775
44. Wang, D., Hu, B., Hu, C., Zhu, F., Liu, X., Zhang, J.,
Wang, B., Xiang, H., Cheng, Z., Xiong, Y., Zhao, Y., Li,
Y., Wang, X., Peng, Z.: Clinical Characteristics of 138
Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 323(11),
1061–1069 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.
1585
45. Guan, W.-J., Ni, Z.-Y., Hu, Y., Liang, W.-H., Ou, C.-Q.,
He, J.-X., Liu, L., Shan, H., Lei, C.-L., Hui, D.S.C., Du, B.,
Li, L.-J., Zeng, G., Yuen, K.-Y., Chen, R.-C., Tang, C.-L.,
Wang, T., Chen, P.-Y., Xiang, J., Li, S.-Y., Wang, J.-L.,
Liang, Z.-J., Peng, Y.-X., Wei, L., Liu, Y., Hu, Y.-H.,
Peng, P., Wang, J.-M., Liu, J.-Y., Chen, Z., Li, G., Zheng,
Z.-J., Qiu, S.-Q., Luo, J., Ye, C.-J., Zhu, S.-Y., Zhong, N.S.: Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in
China. N. Engl. J. Med. 382(18), 1708–1720 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2002032
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

123

