Advertisers Jump on Coronavirus Bandwagon:
Politics, News, and Business
Yelena Mejova and Kyriaki Kalimeri
ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy
yelenamejova,kkalimeri@acm.org

arXiv:2003.00923v1 [cs.SI] 2 Mar 2020

ABSTRACT

In the age of social media, disasters and epidemics usher not
only a devastation and affliction in the physical world, but
also prompt a deluge of information, opinions, prognoses and
advice to billions of internet users. The coronavirus epidemic
of 2019-2020, or COVID-19, is no exception, with the World
Health Organization warning of a possible ‘infodemic’ of fake
news. In this study, we examine the alternative narratives
around the coronavirus outbreak through advertisements promoted on Facebook, the largest social media platform in the
US. Using the new Facebook Ads Library, we discover advertisers from public health and non-profit sectors, alongside
those from news media, politics, and business, incorporating
coronavirus into their messaging and agenda. We find the virus
used in political attacks, donation solicitations, business promotion, stock market advice, and animal rights campaigning.
Among these, we find several instances of possible misinformation, ranging from bioweapons conspiracy theories to
unverifiable claims by politicians. As we make the dataset
available to the community, we hope the advertising domain
will become an important part of quality control for public
health communication and public discourse in general.
INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus disease COVID-19 started in December 2019
in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei, China. At the time of the
data collection for this paper on February 20, 2020, over 72
thousand cases have been recorded in China, including over
1,870 deaths, and around 700 people, mostly travellers, were
diagnosed in the rest of the world [48]. Although the number of cases detected outside China remains much smaller
than inside, the world’s media and public attention remain focused on the ongoing developments. Prompted by a whirlwind
of mainstream and social media coverage, the World Health
Organization (WHO) has warned of a possible ‘infodemic’ –
incorrect or malicious information being spread quickly and
to a wide audience1 , while major social media platforms have
1 https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-51497800

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UNDER REVIEW
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN TBD.
DOI: TBD

pledged to use their networks third-party fact-checkers to ensure quality of information available to the public2 . Adapted
to the agendas of various actors, the narrative around the epidemic is largely fragmented. Such fragmentation competes
and sometimes contradicts, the fact-based educational messaging of the public health organizations.
Despite the best efforts of fact-checking organizations, the
coronavirus outbreak has been taken up by social and political movements as an opportunity to communicate their
messages. Outside China, xenophobic attacks have increased
against businesses and individuals of Asian origin, prompting
public statements from political leaders condemning racism3 .
Further, unscrupulous parties are taking to the social media
platforms to promote dubious claims of remedies and cures4 ,
while politicians are propagating conspiracy theories about the
origins of the epidemic5 . Adapted to the agendas of various
actors, the narrative around the epidemic is largely fragmented.
Such fragmentation competes and sometimes contradicts, the
fact-based educational messaging of the public health organizations.
In this work, we examine a novel dataset of advertisements
posted to Facebook at the time of the epidemic’s beginning in
order to answer the following questions:
• How is Facebook advertisement used as a platform for
conversation around coronavirus?
• What alternative narratives are present around coronavirus
outside public health messaging? Is this messaging emotionally provoking?
• Finally, do the alternative narratives contain possible misinformation?
The resource we use is the Facebook Ads Library, which
was launched by Facebook in March 20196 as a way for the
public to “learn more about ads related to politics or issues
2 https://about.fb.com/news/2020/01/coronavirus/
3 https://www.economist.com/china/2020/02/17/
the-coronavirus-spreads-racism-against-and-among-ethnic-\
chinese
4 https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/
health-environment/article/3049261/
garlic-cant-keep-coronavirus-bay-neither-will
5 https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/17/business/media/
coronavirus-tom-cotton-china.html
6 https://about.fb.com/news/2019/03/
a-better-way-to-learn-about-ads/

that have run on Facebook or Instagram”. Accessible through
Facebook Ads Library API7 , it provides the title and text of the
advertisement, the ID of the Facebook page and funding entity.
Alongside these basic descriptors, it shows a demographic
distribution of users reached by the ad in terms of age groups
and genders, as well as a range of funds spent on the campaign.
The data is available for the US, EU countries, and a handful
of others, including Brazil, Israel, and Ukraine.
We find a variety of advertisers invoking the epidemic, from
public health and non-profit organizations updating their audience on the latest news and soliciting donations, to political
and business entities coopting the threat of epidemic to their
messaging and profit. Coinciding with the Democratic primary
season in the US, the virus is often mentioned in association
with political figures – both in support and in opposition. Despite Facebook’s near-ubiquitous reach across the US, these
ads often target very specific demographics and locales, especially favoring California, New York and Texas. Furthermore,
we find a range of possible erroneous information within these
ads, ranging from conspiracy theories about bioweapons, to
milder claims of political mismanagement and misunderstanding. However, as the situation develops, more will be known
about the veracity of some of the content we discovered. Thus,
we make the full dataset, along with the manual labels, available to the research community, in accordance with the Terms
of Service of Facebook.
Findings of this study have wide implications for public health
messaging. As we discover, there is a strong competition for
the audience and the framing around the epidemic on the side
of politics and news, potentially supplanting or contradicting
the messages public health organizations may promote. Employing the epidemic as a tool for political attacks may distract
the audience from more useful information, and encourage
anxiety. We hope this case study spurs more research into
a holistic analysis of public perception of health crises, and
encourages collaboration between social media platforms and
public health organizations.
RELATED WORKS

Advertising is the lifeblood of the majority of internet giants
such as Google and Facebook – two companies that accounted
the for nearly 20% of global advertising spending in 20168 .
Marketing research shows that consumers have a positive attitude toward social media advertising [5], though moderated by
the relevance of the ad and existing perception of the company
[2], as well as informativeness and creativity [29]. Among the
most popular social media platforms, advertising on Facebook
has been shown to evoke engagement and social sharing [46].
Having a potential reach of 2.50 billion monthly active users
(MAU) as of December 20199 , it is not surprising that Facebook (and its other property, Instagram) has become a destination for businesses, non-profits, and politicians. Recently, the

company has come under criticism for allowing political advertising of questionable quality on its platform10 . In response,
the platform has published an Ad Library, accessible to the
researchers and watchdogs to monitor advertising related to
social issues. After initial reports of bugs in the API provided
by Facebook to access the information in bulk [39], the library
has become a valuable resource for watchdogs of political
communication [17, 31]. However, it has not yet been used
in a systematic study of the relationship between such public
messaging and public health attitudes.
Beyond advertising in particular, social media in general has
been a popular venue for public health campaigning, spanning
efforts in smoking cessation [15], organ donor registration
[8], and sexual health promotion [7]. Although it is not clear
that increased online engagement results in desired health behaviors, research in commercial sphere shows a relationship
between engagement with Facebook and sales [6, 26]. To
encourage engagement, public health campaigns strive for an
engaging experience, as the campaigns with a clear call to
action have an opportunity to quantify the impact of the message (such as signing up for future contacts), or encourage the
community to propagate the message (in best scenario having
it go “viral”, i.e. very popular) [18]. To encourage wider sharing, campaigns may personalize the messages to individuals or
demographic groups [35] or use highly engaged “seed” users
who promote the content in their immediate social network [44,
22]. However, unlike in traditional advertising, sponsorships,
partnerships and use of persons of authority may hurt engagement, whereas partnering with celebrities and sportspeople
results in increased likes and shares [24]. This trend can be
attributed to a variety of reasons: perceived credibility associated with success, social acceptance, and confirmation bias,
all provide positive reinforcement for people to follow health
advice of celebrities, possibly propagating harmful behaviors
and beliefs [23].
Public perception of health issues has long been entangled
with the opinions expressed by celebrities and politicians.
Historically, celebrity “health narratives” resulted in a “coconstruction of meaning”, allowing the audience to participate
in the experience of a health event and reflect on its significance in their own lives [4]. However, many perceptions may
happen subconsciously. For example, a recent study showed
that children who saw influencers with unhealthy snacks had
significantly increased overall food intake, with no accompanying positive response to seeing them with healthy snacks
[10]. The popularization of social media and the expansion of
authority and celebrity have brought informal signals about
health and medicine to a vast number of internet users – to
their possible detriment.
Early on, information available on Internet has been shown
to be problematic, with a wide variability in the quality of
health-related information [42, 16]. The openness and scale
of social media makes it especially susceptible to harmful
information, such as YouTube videos promoting tobacco to

7 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/api
8 https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/may/02/
google-and-facebook-bring-in-one-fifth-of-global-ad-revenue
9 https://zephoria.com/top-15-valuable-facebook-statistics/

10 https://techcrunch.com/2020/01/09/

facebook-wont-ban-political-ads-prefers-to-keep-screwing-\
democracy

consumers [28], Twitter posts sowing doubt about the safety
of vaccination [32], and Flickr communities “supporting” its
members in maintaining anorexic behaviors [49]. Especially
during epidemics, social media allows a rapid spread of rumors
and misinformation. To track such content, a hybrid approach
has been proposed wherein expert knowledge is combined
with citizen science and machine learning. Such pipelines
have been proposed for the 2014 Ebola [19] and 2016 Zika
[14, 20, 11] outbreaks. Resources such as HealthMap11 and
AIDR12 attempt to streamline the processing of news, social
media, and medical reports to build an up-to-date model of
an ongoing crisis [25, 40]. However, little has been done in
understanding advertisement plays in public health communication during an epidemic. Although social media websites
are attempting to apply quality control to the ads on their
platforms, such as Facebook down-ranking ads mentioning
“vaccine hoaxes”13 , until now it has been difficult to examine
the quality of information posted via such paid channels. In
this study, we examine the case of the 2019-2020 coronavirus
epidemic via a newly available window into advertising on the
Facebook platform.
DATA

We begin by querying Facebook Ads Library API on February
20, 2020 with the keywords “coronavirus” and ”covid-19”,
collecting all available ads (ongoing or finished), from all
available countries. The fields returned by the API include
the numerical ad identifier, span of the time in which the
ad is shown, a range indicating money spent on the ad, a
range of “impressions” the ad received, ID and name of the
Facebook Page posting the ad, and the name of the funding
entity of the campaign. Furthermore, the viewership is broken
down into gender (3) and age (7) buckets, as well as country
regions such as states in the USA. Note that the purpose of this
Library is to expose ads Facebook deems relevant to “social
issues, elections or politics”, which likely do not encompass
all advertising from the public health domain. Thus, we focus
on the mentions of the epidemic in alternative domains.
In total, we collect 923 ads from 34 countries. However, only a
few countries had a substantial number of ads. Figure 1 shows
the number of ads active per day for the countries which have
have at least 10 ads in total. We find that the majority of
captured advertising came from the United States, having 359
ads in our dataset, followed by Italy at 228, and India at 64.
The first advertisement we find is in the United States on
January 13, a news report on the emergence of a new strain of
coronavirus in China.
In this study, we focus on the advertisements originating from
the United States, as this makes possible an examination of a
cohesive picture of public health attitudes, as well as political
context in which the ads were placed. However, we make the
full dataset available to the research community, under the
Terms of Service of Facebook14 .
11 https://healthmap.org/en/
12 http://aidr.qcri.org/
13 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/mar/07/

facebook-anti-vaxx-vaccine-hoax-ads
14 https://developers.facebook.com/policy/

Figure 1: Number of active ads per day for countries having at least 10 ads in the dataset.
RESULTS
Advertisers

We begin by examining the 78 distinct Facebook Pages which
have posted advertisements in the span of our dataset. We
manually examine the link to their pages, as provided by the
API, and note their category, as stated on the page, number
of likes, and self-description, if one is provided by the page
authors. We then use open coding in order to classify the
pages into public health (6%), non-profit (16%), news (26%),
political (26%), business (12%), and personal (5%), with the
rest of categories accounting for 9% of the advertisers. Coding result was examined by all authors and uncertain cases
were decided jointly. The most difficult distinction proved
to be between news and political, as most such pages posted
politically-relevant news, thus only pages representing a political figure or party were classified as political. Also note the
small contribution of public health to the dataset. It is possible the Library selection criteria Facebook applies to the ads
simply does not match that of most public health campaigns,
and a more varied resource is necessary to fully capture them.
Thus, we focus on the non-public health campaigns.
Figure 2 shows the pages in a co-occurrence network such
that each node is a Facebook page posting an advertisement
and an edge is the Jaccard similarity between the text of all
of their ads in our dataset. To clean the text, we remove
URLs, special characters and stopwords, and lemmatize the
remaining words. For visual clarity, we threshold Jaccard
similarity at 0.05. The nodes are colored by the category of
the page. We use Gephi force-directed layout ForceAtlas 2
[9] which positions nodes which are strongly connected closer
together. We notice a cluster of non-profit organizations (green
nodes) in lower right, which include UNICEF, Melinda Gates
Foundation, and several animal rights organizations. Note that
highly specialized animal rights organization United Poultry
Concerns is disconnected from this group, as they use highly
specific language in reference to the treatment of birds. The
rest of the network shows a mixing of news (blue) and politics
(green), which is expected, given most news pages are highly
political. Areas of specializations are seen in the clusters
of business pages (yellow) in bottom left and candidates for
political office (red) in upper left, as well as two educational
institutions (green and grey) in upper right. Overall, the pages

Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

News and News
Kahn4Congress

Rush University System for Health

Independent Women's Forum
Independent Women's Voice

MASS Action
Revolutionary Socialists for Bernie
MedPage Today

personal 1

John Catsimatidis
Railroaders for Joe Biden 2020

Florida Phoenix News

Liberty Tee Shop

Punching Bag Media - Conservative News

SmartNews
Ritesh Tandon for Congress

Portside

Reform Austin

Eyeless on Campus
Konni Burton

ISRAEL21c

Advancing Native Missions

The Texan
FloridaPolitics

Pacific Research Institute

Give2Asia

Fulcrum News

personal 2
People's World

LifeSiteNews.com
Naomi Ishisaka Social Justice Journalism
Michael Coudrey

personal 3
4Patriots

National Nurses United

Jeff Jackson

The Published Reporter

personal 4

Healthy Habits

Christopher Pape - Ameriprise Financial Advisor
Pennsylvania Medical Society
Lindy Li

BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina

TrueCoverage

Project HOPE

Brut

Mask The Virus

UNICEF USA

Action Takers

Melinda Gates

Global Health Technologies Coalition

Paul Bettencourt

US Healthcare Options

Garner Financial

Docs 4 Patient Care Foundation

Team Mike 2020

David Kosmecki, NMLS 265365

United Poultry Concerns

Texas Southern eMPA Program

American Medical Association (AMA)

News Flash LA

Maverick Doctor

AARP

Tsinghua University

Front Page Live

Global Citizen
UCOMMBlog

Jeffrey A. Sites for Congress
Watercooler Politics

Care2

Animal Matters

American Tortoise Rescue

Jeff Jiang For Minnesota Senate

The Better Than Borowitz Report
The Chai Center - Dix Hills, NY Jewish Center

Stansberry Research

Figure 2: Network of pages, linked using Jaccard similarity of ad text at threshold 0.05. Node colors: red - politics, blue news, light green - non-profit, dark green - public health, yellow - business, pink - personal. Force-directed Gephi layout
Force Atlas 2.

Figure 3: Number of active ads per day per page category.

form a well-connected giant connected component, with few
pages excluded, indicating that the language used in the ads is
largely similar.
Next, we turn to the sizes of the advertising campaigns. Figure
3 shows the number of ads active in a day by for each page
category. We find the most active to be non-profit pages, followed by news, and political ads. However, the number of impressions can vary greatly between different campaigns. The
volume of non-profit pages jumps especially around February

5 when the first coronavirus case is reported in US15 . In Figure 4 we show the total expenditures (left), total impressions
attained (center), and dollars per impression (center) by top
pages in our dataset. As both expenditures and impressions
come as ranges (such as 200-299 USD for 30,000-34,999
impressions), we take the average of min and max of each
range, and sum up these averages for all ads posted by the
page. Pages spending the most on their campaigns are American Medical Association (association of physicians), National
Nurses United (labor union), Melinda Gates (philanthropic
foundation), and Team Mike 2020 (Presidential election campaign for Michael Bloomberg). These expenditures are also
associated with some of the highest audience reaches, as can
be seen from the plot on the right. The advertisement with the
highest expenditure is from National Nurses United, urging
viewers to take a “coronavirus preparedness survey”, asking
whether their “employers must be prepared for coronavirus”16 .
Yet another advertisement with high viewership and cost is
by American Medical Association linking to a story of a US
clinic that cared for patients infected with the coronavirus17 .
We observe that most visible ads were not providing basic
information about coronavirus. Combining the two measures,
15 https://kwwl.com/2020/02/05/breaking-first-case-of-\

coronavirus-confirmed-in-wisconsin/
16 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?id=634538270626582
17 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?id=2456170821379373

(a) Investment in USD

(b) Impressions

(c) Investment per Impression

Figure 4: Top pages by expenditures (left) and impressions (center) and dollars spent per impression (right).

(a) Public Health

(b) Non-Profit

(c) News

(d) Political

(f) Public Health

(g) Non-Profit

(h) News

(i) Political

(e) Business

(j) Business

Figure 5: Demographic and geographic targeting. From right to left: public health, non-profit, news, political, business.
in Figure 4 (right) we show the dollar per impression spent.
We observe that the highest such ratio reaches 700 USD per
impression. This may be due to the actual numbers being
closer to the lower end of the range than the average, which is
what we employ.
Audience Targeting

Along with expenditure figures for each ad, the Library provides a breakdown of the audience reached in terms of demographics (age and gender) and geography (at the state level).
In attempt to reduce the effect of one advertiser posting many
ads on the category statistics, we first aggregate the demographic distributions of ads for each page, and aggregate this
distribution per category. The resulting demographic and the
geographic targeting distributions for public health, non-profit,
news, politics, and business are shown in Figure 5. Both public
health and non-profit pages reach more women then men, and
the latter – more women of age 65 and over. Public health
campaigns, on the other hand, reach younger men. The gender
is more balanced for business, political, and news, however
all seem to reach older women more than men. It is unclear
whether these distributions are attributable to the conscious
targeting on the part of advertisers, or due to the peculiarities
of their existing audiences. We discuss the extent to which
targeting can be tracked in Discussion section.

Examining the geographical targeting visible in maps of Figure
5, we find state-specific focus, which often falls on California,
Texas, New York, Oregon, Florida, and others. Note that
although some political pages concern political candidates
from particular states, most other pages are geography neutral.
This focus on a few states indicates purposeful geo-targeting
of audiences throughout the advertising campaigns for all
categories of pages. Thus we would discourage the use of this
Ad Library to make country-wide assertions, and pay special
attention to the targeted populations. Note that, although
the ads in this dataset are supposed to be from the US, we
detected several cases of audiences reached from other regions,
including Scotland, England, New South Wales, and Puerto
Rico.
Narrative & Emotion

Further, we examine the language used in the ads from these
categories. To do this, we consider the difference between
the probability distribution (i.e. language model) of words
occurring in ads of particular category and overall probability
of their occurrence in the entire dataset. Table 1 lists 20 most
distinguishing words for each of the major categories based on
this probability difference, starting from most distinguishing
ones (the score itself is not included for brevity and clarity
of presentation). We observe words relevant to each of the
category, such as the emphasis on science and response in

Public Health
podcast, public, illness, gross, science, time, care, response,
treate, variety, laregly, uninforme, range, relati, info, pame,
uninformed, raghavendra, pamed, honest
Non-profit
read, health, animal, global, wildlife, sell, vaccine, market, human, emergency, feature, healthy, highlight, breakthrough, year, turtle, pet, decade, traditional, remedy
News
source, newsandnews, case, base, fact, curate, risk, selection, student, spread, fibberlip, contract, add, state, proper,
alternative, expertly, factual, clean, googlenews
Politics
cut, support, survey, campaign, local, listen, military, hack,
online, economy, student, project, send, social, affect, theft,
business, finally, indictment, personnel
Business
week, stock, market, investor, politician, lie, concern, quarter, fourth, cover, term, development, economic, sign, number, rise, impact, insurance, medical, continue

Figure 6: Example advertisements mentioning coronavirus from political domain.

Table 1: Top 20 distinguishing words for each category.
public health domain, animals and wildlife in non-profit, stock
market in business, support and campaigns in politics, and
emphasis on particular cases and facts in news.
Despite the most funded public health-related campaign being
a personal account of a doctor dealing with the disease (as discussed in the earlier section), the rest are informational articles
about the currently known facts about the virus and its spread.
The two main emphases of non-profit ads are donation drives
and animal welfare, with some of the most seen ads coming
from Melinda Gates (private charitable foundation) and Care2
(online community encouraging “green lifestyle”). Most business ads come from financial advisors and insurers, who focus
on the performance of the markets and whether one’s insurance plan would cover coronavirus. A notable exception is
a page dubbed Mask the Virus advertising masks that would
“prevent the spread of coronavirus”18 . The webpage provides
no description of the business, and the Facebook page was
created in Jan 30, 2020 – we discuss it at greater length in the
next section. General preparedness is also promoted by a page
4Patriots (established on Jul 20, 2014), which encourages its
audience to “STOCK UP HERE”19 .
The political ads come from both sides of the US political
divide, such as those criticizing or supporting the US President Donald Trump (examples of such posts are in Figure
6). As at the same time, the US is participating in primaries
wherein Democratic party is choosing a contestant for US
Presidential Election. Thus, ads both pro and anti several contenders also appear, mentioning Bernie Sanders, Joe Biden,
Pete Buttigieg, and Michael Bloomberg, with the latter having
the ad with highest impressions at over 800,000. Yet other
18 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?id=531005304180280
19 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?id=196433268175469

Figure 7: Mean emotions (with 95% confidence intervals)
by category.
notable campaigns come from ISRAEL21c, an organization
aiming to “inform the world about 21st century Israel” (only
such country-wide organization in our dataset), and National
Nurses United, a workers union. Finally, not only US politics
are mentioned: criticism of China’s handling of the communications around the outbreak often takes form of the story of Li
Wenliang, who was one of the first doctors to raise awareness
of the new disease, and who later died of the same20 .
Similar critique can be found in the ads of the news pages,
however mostly the articles provide general overview of the
situation, and notify public of new cases. As mentioned before,
some are politically charged, and have some of the themes
mentioned in political sphere. Other articles provide commentary on social impact of the situation, such as anti-asian racism
and raising awareness of possible misinformation surrounding the topic. In the following section, we delve deeper into
potential misinformation found in our dataset.
Lastly, we compute emotional connotation of the words used
in the ads of these pages, shown in Figure 7. We employed
the DepecheMood++ lexicon [3], which provides fine-grained
emotion analysis for seven basic emotions, fear, amusement,
anger, annoyance, happiness, inspiration, and sadness. As for
the narrative analysis, we lemmatised the message of every
20 https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?id=616556205810779

advertisement and calculated the average emotion per message
according to the lexicon. In this way we avoid introducing
biases due to the varied lengths of the messages.
We observe the highest levels of emotion “afraid”, as would be
expected considering the subject matter. News and non-profit
ads are especially high on this emotion compared to the others.
Interestingly, second most prevalent emotion is “inspired”,
with public health and non-profit showing the highest levels,
possibly due to evocative messages during donation drives. As
expected, “happy” is the least detected emotion.
Misinformation

During annotation of the ads, we examine the text and material to which the ad links in terms of potentially erroneous
material, guided by ongoing news coverage of misinformation
on mainstream news sources, fact checking sources such as
Snopes and corresponding article on Wikipedia21 , as at the
time of writing no comprehensive list has been provided by
the public health authorities22 . Out of 359 ads, we find 16 ads
which have mentioned possible erroneous information, or if
we consider only ads with distinct text, 8 out of 152 unique
ads (5.3%) coming mostly from categories of politics, business, and news. Also, 5 ads were debunking erroneous claims.
Below, we expand on some of this content.
Perhaps the most egregious post is shown if Figure 8 (upper
left), wherein the advertiser mentions “bioweapons”, “martial law”, “FEMA camps”, “hot tea and lemon killing corona
virus”, and “no need for extra vaccines”. As the page was
created on Feb 6, 2020, it is possible that the account is a troll
created specifically for posting content about this epidemic. A
less obvious example is shown in Figure 8 (upper right), which
links to an article stating ambiguously that “there have also
been suggestions that the virus may have escaped from a PeopleâĂŹs Liberation Army Biowarfare unit”, a claim that has
been circulating on Daily Mail23 and Washington Times24 , and
which the research lab is denying25 . Yet less contentious, but
more politicized potentially erroneous information comes from
the claim by US President Donald Trump that “as the weather
starts to warm and the virus hopefully becomes weaker, and
then gone” (see Figure 8 (lower left)). Although the claim has
some grounding in the behavior of known viruses, it is still
unclear how the new strain will behave26 . Interestingly, the
claim was mentioned both by news pages (simply reporting
the claim), and by politically-inclined pages such as “Team
Mike 2020”, disparaging the statement. Note that beyond
21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misinformation_related_to_

the_2019%E2%80%9320_coronavirus_outbreak
22 We

welcome a re-examination of ads in this dataset at a later time,
when more is known about various coronavirus claims, and will make
the data available for the research community.

23 https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-7922379/

Chinas-lab-studying-SARS-Ebola-Wuhan-outbreaks-center.
html
24 https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2020/jan/26/
coronavirus-link-china-biowarfare-program-possible/
25 https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3050872/
chinese-research-lab-denies-rumours-links-first-coronavirus
26 https://www.factcheck.org/2020/02/
will-the-new-coronavirus-go-away-in-april/

Figure 8: Example advertisements mentioning coronavirus and possible misinformation.

(a) News

(b) Politics

Figure 9: Demographic breakdown of impressions of ads
having possible misinformation in news and political categories.
questionable information relating to coronavirus specifically,
we detected instances of unrelated political claims and accusations captured in the political ads (though it is outside the
scope of this paper to verify political statements).
On the business side, we found a page created on Jan 30, 2020
to be advertising face masks (Figure 8 (lower right)). Neither
the Facebook page or the website the ad links to provide any
medical certification of the sellers of the masks, or disclose
from where the business is originating27 . The webpage claims
these are “Anti-Virus Masks”, and lists several versions with
optional N95 and N99 activated carbon filters (which are able
to filter at least 95% of particles in the air, when mask has a
tight fit). Due to limited information provided, it is difficult
to determine whether these would achieve the fit necessary
for protection, or whether they comply with the standards set
27 https://maskthevirus.com/

by CDC for respirators28 . This is also the page having most
reach outside the US. Finally, we find other topics susceptible
to rumors being connected to the ongoing epidemic, such
as by page “Maverick Doctor” linking GuillainâĂŞBarrÃl’
syndrome (GBS) to vaccination, even though there is a greater
risk of getting GBS after getting a flu29 .
As can be seen from the above examples, there is a range
of possible misinformation on the Facebook’s advertising
platform. We refer to the research community to determine
whether some of these claims are intentional dis-information,
and as the crisis develops we will better understand the veracity of some of the claims. Meanwhile, we observe the myriad
contexts in which the topic of coronavirus is used outside public health messaging: clear fear-mongering, political attacks,
and conducting business. Although in our dataset, we find
that these ads are not promoted widely by their posters, with
all but one having expenditure in the range of 0-99 USD (the
other being in 100-199 USD). Interestingly, the ads having
possible misinformation in news and political categories have
a distinct demographic targeting, as seen in Figure 9. While
news reaches age groups more evenly (except for spike for
females in 55-64 age range), political ads seem to target the
older generation, with highest viewership in over 65 age range.
Finally, we check whether the emotional content in these advertisements is different from the rest of the dataset, and we
find no statistical significance, which may indicate that misinformation indeed “sounds” like the rest of the content, or that
we simply do not have enough data to make this assessment at
this point.
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

At the time of data collection there were fewer than 15 cases
in the United States, not counting those repatriated from other
parts of the world. However, we find over 300 advertisements
in a span of a month speaking about the epidemic, and potentially reaching millions of people. Many ad campaigns started
even before February 5, when the first case was discovered in
Wisconsin. Despite few cases, US was the most active country
in the dataset. However note that many of worst affected countries in Asia are not represented in the Facebook Ads Library,
so a direct comparison with them cannot be made.
Findings in this work have several implications for public
health communication. Much of information provided by the
news-related ads in our dataset have echoed the latest information provided by major public health organizations such as US
Center for Disease Control30 . These include information on
the latest cases, travel advisories, and steps people can take
to protect themselves. Some even provide links to surveys,
possibly using the advertising platform as a recruitment tool
for estimating awareness (although it is possible the surveys
are simply meant to attract attention). Thus, Facebook advertising may be a useful way to propagate the message through
alternative sources and collect data on readership.
28 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/

However, we find most advertising campaigns having extremely narrow targeting, especially geographically. Although
our sample of public health campaigns is limited by Facebook’s selection of ads to make available through the library,
those that we find cover a small geographic locale. The situation is similar to ads from other categories. In fact, the
targeting of public health and non-profit categories does not
favor older men who have the highest mortality from COVID1931 . Personalized messaging has been studied in public health
literature, such as for improving HIV/AIDS medication adherence [13] and smoking cessation [34, 12], but the application
of such messaging must be coordinated among the agencies
to achieve a consistent message and a thorough coverage of
the population. Moreover, the reach and personalization of
Facebook for public health messaging can be used to reach
underserved populations [33, 27], supplementing traditional
means such as physical billboards and rural outreach programs
[36].
Another concern stems from the competition alternative narratives present to the messaging by public health organizations.
The adage “if it bleeds, it leads” [43] encourages news and
media providers to focus on the negative and sensationalize
potentially vague and uncertain knowledge about an evolving
epidemic. We find that fear was the most detected emotion in
ads of non-profit and news pages. Historically, epidemics such
as AIDS in 1980s and 1990s [21], SARS in the early 2000s
[41], and Ebola in 2014 [37] tended to become associated
with specific minorities and countries, with people putting the
blame of the disease on the “other”. In the case of COVID-19,
the source of the virus prompted sinophobia32 , though we only
find calls against racism in our dataset.
Beside the competition for the narrative, the news, political,
business and other entities are competing for the views and
clicks of the audience with the public health organizations,
who may not have as many resources to bid up the price. For
instance, we find numerous mentions of coronavirus in association with US politicians, some of which are top spenders in
our dataset. Unlike in, for example, China during SARS epidemic that prompted a “renews sense of patriotism” through
narrative of self-sacrifice [30], in the US COVID-19 seems to
be adopted as a weapon in the ongoing partisan struggle, especially in a US Presidential election year. A similar weaponization of the epidemic narrative occurred in Africa during the
Ebola epidemic, resulting in several deaths [47]. Although
it is difficult to achieve a comprehensive political message
during a crisis, the extent of panic amongst the public, as well
as the stability of world markets, depends not only on public
health institutions, but on the leaders who have far-reaching
platforms.
Finally, among the advertisements in our dataset, we find about
5% to contain possible erroneous information. Ranging from
accusations of using bioweapons to questioning correctness
of comparisons to other viruses, the reasons for such content
may be diverse. However, we do not find the posters of these

respirator-use-faq.html
29 https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/concerns/

31 https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/20/health/

guillain-barre-syndrome.html
30 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/summary.html

32 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-51456056

coronavirus-men-women.html

ads to be investing much money, although some achieve up to
15,000 and more impressions. It is also concerning that, based
on our sentiment analysis, these messages may “feel” similar
to the other content about coronavirus. Unfortunately, despite
Facebook’s collaboration with a myriad of fact-checking institutions, it is possible that small campaigns like this are not
popular enough to warrant examination. The design of fully
and partially automated tools to detect early appearance of
“fake news” and misinformation is becoming a hot research
topic [1, 20, 38, 45], but it is imperative to use them within a
larger public health communication strategy, guided by subject
matter experts, and enforced by both governments and social
media platforms.
The above conclusions must be taken with several limitations
in mind. First and foremost, we are aware of the fluidity of
the ongoing situation. In the light of new findings and developments, some of the annotations provided in this work may
change. Thus, we will make the annotated dataset available
to the research community33 . Secondly, Facebook Ads Library was not created for monitoring public health messaging
– this is why this study focuses on the alternative narratives. It
would be extremely helpful if the social media platforms were
to collaborate more closely with public health researchers, so
that a full picture of the discourse may be examined. An increased worldwide coverage would also allow the tracking of
pandemics across different parts of the world (recall currently
the Library covers EU countries, US, and a handful of others).
However, even if we were to attain information on all advertising happening on Facebook and Instagram, this will capture
by far not all internet users, and only a fraction of people in the
US. Internet, as well as traditional media, present a plethora of
alternative communication channels, and more studies must be
conducted to capture the full scope of communication related
to public health, and its possible impacts.
Privacy. As potentially any Facebook page may have an advertising campaign, it is possible that not only large companies
and agencies, but also individuals will be captured in the Library, and in our own dataset we find several pages we labeled
as “personal”. Note that although we will make the data available in accordance with the Facebook’s Terms of Service, we
have chosen not to anonymize the Facebook pages other than
those labeled as personal, since it is important to understand
the sources of ad content, Also, all information in this dataset
is freely available via Ads Library website (we even provide
links to some of the ads). However, we call upon the research
community to establish privacy standards for the collection,
reporting, and sharing of advertising data, and we hope this
study will spur the conversation in the research field.

33 Please contact the first author, as Facebook Terms of Service require

a signing of agreement before data can be shared. For more see
https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/api/.

REFERENCES

[1] Taruna Agrawal, Rahul Gupta, and Shrikanth Narayanan.
2017. Multimodal detection of fake social media use
through a fusion of classification and pairwise ranking
systems. In 2017 25th European Signal Processing
Conference (EUSIPCO). IEEE, 1045–1049.
[2] Ali Abdallah Alalwan, Nripendra P Rana, Yogesh K
Dwivedi, and Raed Algharabat. 2017. Social media in
marketing: A review and analysis of the existing
literature. Telematics and Informatics 34, 7 (2017),
1177–1190.
[3] Oscar Araque, Lorenzo Gatti, Jacopo Staiano, and
Marco Guerini. 2019. Depechemood++: a bilingual
emotion lexicon built through simple yet powerful
techniques. IEEE transactions on affective computing
(2019).
[4] Christina S Beck, Stellina MA Chapman, and Nathaniel
Simmons. 2015. Celebrity health narratives and the
public health. McFarland.
[5] Henry Boateng and Abednego Feehi Okoe. 2015.
ConsumersâĂŹ attitude towards social media
advertising and their behavioural response. Journal of
Research in Interactive Marketing (2015).
[6] Malte Brettel, Jens-Christian Reich, Jose M Gavilanes,
and Tessa C Flatten. 2015. What drives advertising
success on Facebook? An advertising-effectiveness
model: Measuring the effects on sales of âĂIJLikesâĂİ
and other social-network stimuli. Journal of Advertising
Research 55, 2 (2015), 162–175.
[7] Sheana S Bull, Deborah K Levine, Sandra R Black,
Sarah J Schmiege, and John Santelli. 2012. Social
media–delivered sexual health intervention: a cluster
randomized controlled trial. American journal of
preventive medicine 43, 5 (2012), 467–474.
[8] Andrew M Cameron, Allan B Massie, Charles E
Alexander, B Stewart, Robert A Montgomery, NR
Benavides, GD Fleming, and Dorry L Segev. 2013.
Social media and organ donor registration: the Facebook
effect. American Journal of Transplantation 13, 8
(2013), 2059–2065.
[9] Ken Cherven. 2013. Network graph analysis and
visualization with Gephi. Packt Publishing Ltd.
[10] Anna E Coates, Charlotte A Hardman, Jason CG
Halford, Paul Christiansen, and Emma J Boyland. 2019.
Social media influencer marketing and childrenâĂŹs
food intake: a randomized trial. Pediatrics 143, 4 (2019),
e20182554.
[11] Ashlynn R Daughton and Michael J Paul. 2019.
Identifying protective health behaviors on Twitter:
observational study of travel advisories and Zika virus.
Journal of medical Internet research 21, 5 (2019),
e13090.

[12] Ashok Deb, Anuja Majmundar, Sungyong Seo, Akira
Matsui, Rajat Tandon, Shen Yan, Jon-Patrick Allem, and
Emilio Ferrara. 2018. Social Bots for Online Public
Health Interventions. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining (ASONAM). IEEE, 1–4.
[13] Nadia Dowshen, Lisa M Kuhns, Amy Johnson,
Brian James Holoyda, and Robert Garofalo. 2012.
Improving adherence to antiretroviral therapy for youth
living with HIV/AIDS: a pilot study using personalized,
interactive, daily text message reminders. Journal of
medical Internet research 14, 2 (2012), e51.
[14] Mark Dredze, David A Broniatowski, and Karen M
Hilyard. 2016. Zika vaccine misconceptions: A social
media analysis. Vaccine 34 (2016), 3441–3442.
[15] Jennifer C Duke, Heather Hansen, Annice E Kim,
Laurel Curry, and Jane Allen. 2014. The use of social
media by state tobacco control programs to promote
smoking cessation: a cross-sectional study. Journal of
medical Internet research 16, 7 (2014), e169.
[16] Christopher J Dy, Samuel A Taylor, Ronak M Patel,
Alison Kitay, Timothy R Roberts, and Aaron Daluiski.
2012. The effect of search term on the quality and
accuracy of online information regarding distal radius
fractures. Journal of Hand Surgery 37, 9 (2012),
1881–1887.
[17] Will Fischer. 2019. Facebook confirms Donald Trump
can lie in ads, but he can’t curse. Business Insider
(2019). https://www.businessinsider.com/

Marbeth Ferguson, Gerry McElwee, Miriam McCarthy,
and others. 2017. Tweet for behavior change: using
social media for the dissemination of public health
messages. JMIR public health and surveillance 3, 1
(2017), e14.
[23] Steven J Hoffman and Charlie Tan. 2015. Biological,
psychological and social processes that explain
celebritiesâĂŹ influence on patientsâĂŹ health-related
behaviors. Archives of Public Health 73, 1 (2015), 3.
[24] James Kite, Bridget C Foley, Anne C Grunseit, and
Becky Freeman. 2016. Please like me: Facebook and
public health communication. PloS one 11, 9 (2016).
[25] MUG Kraemer, N Golding, D Bisanzio, S Bhatt, DM
Pigott, SE Ray, OJ Brady, JS Brownstein, NR Faria,
DAT Cummings, and others. 2019. Utilizing general
human movement models to predict the spread of
emerging infectious diseases in resource poor settings.
Scientific reports 9, 1 (2019), 1–11.
[26] V Kumar, Vikram Bhaskaran, Rohan Mirchandani, and
Milap Shah. 2013. Practice prize winnerâĂŤcreating a
measurable social media marketing strategy: increasing
the value and ROI of intangibles and tangibles for hokey
pokey. Marketing Science 32, 2 (2013), 194–212.
[27] Karine Latulippe, Christine Hamel, and Dominique
Giroux. 2017. Social health inequalities and eHealth: a
literature review with qualitative synthesis of theoretical
and empirical studies. Journal of medical Internet
research 19, 4 (2017), e136.

[28] Annie YS Lau, Elia Gabarron, Luis Fernandez-Luque,
trump-can-lie-in-facebook-ads-but-no-profanity-cursing-2019-10?
and Manuel Armayones. 2012. Social media in health IR=T
[18] Becky Freeman, Sofia Potente, Vanessa Rock, and
Jacqueline McIver. 2015. Social media campaigns that
make a difference: what can public health learn from the
corporate sector and other social change marketers.
Public Health Res Pract 25, 2 (2015), e2521517.
[19] Isaac Chun-Hai Fung, King-Wa Fu, Chung-Hong Chan,
Benedict Shing Bun Chan, Chi-Ngai Cheung, Thomas
Abraham, and Zion Tsz Ho Tse. 2016. Social media’s
initial reaction to information and misinformation on
Ebola, August 2014: facts and rumors. Public Health
Reports 131, 3 (2016), 461–473.
[20] Amira Ghenai and Yelena Mejova. 2017. Catching Zika
Fever: Application of Crowdsourcing and Machine
Learning for Tracking Health Misinformation on Twitter.
In Proceedings - 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Healthcare Informatics, ICHI 2017. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICHI.2017.58

[21] Gregg Gonsalves and Peter Staley. 2014. Panic,
paranoia, and public healthâĂŤthe AIDS epidemic’s
lessons for Ebola. New England Journal of Medicine
371, 25 (2014), 2348–2349.
[22] Aisling Gough, Ruth F Hunter, Oluwaseun Ajao, Anna
Jurek, Gary McKeown, Jun Hong, Eimear Barrett,

what are the safety concerns for health consumers?
Health Information Management Journal 41, 2 (2012),
30–35.
[29] Jieun Lee and Ilyoo B Hong. 2016. Predicting positive
user responses to social media advertising: The roles of
emotional appeal, informativeness, and creativity.
International Journal of Information Management 36, 3
(2016), 360–373.
[30] Xing Lu. 2008. Construction of nationalism and political
legitimacy through rhetoric of the anti-SARS campaign.
The social construction of SARS: Studies of a health
communication crisis 30 (2008), 109.
[31] Anthony B. Masters. 2020. Were 88% of Conservative
ads âĂŸmisleadingâĂŹ? Medium (2020).
https://medium.com/@theintersectuk/
were-88-of-conservative-ads-misleading-ca70a379ce08

[32] Tanushree Mitra, Scott Counts, and James W
Pennebaker. 2016. Understanding Anti-Vaccination
Attitudes in Social Media. In ICWSM. 269–278.
[33] Enid Montague and Jennifer Perchonok. 2012. Health
and wellness technology use by historically underserved
health consumers: systematic review. Journal of medical
Internet research 14, 3 (2012), e78.

[34] Felix Naughton, James Jamison, and Stephen Sutton.
2013. Attitudes towards SMS text message smoking
cessation support: a qualitative study of pregnant
smokers. Health education research 28, 5 (2013),
911–922.
[35] Seth M Noar, Nancy Grant Harrington, Stephanie K
Van Stee, and Rosalie Shemanski Aldrich. 2011.
Tailored health communication to change lifestyle
behaviors. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine 5, 2
(2011), 112–122.
[36] Stephen J OâĂŹConnor. 2017. Improving health and
wellness in medically underserved communities:
insights, innovations, and applications. (2017).
[37] Wendy E Parmet and Michael S Sinha. 2017. A panic
foretold: Ebola in the United States. Critical Public
Health 27, 1 (2017), 148–155.
[38] Meet Rajdev and Kyumin Lee. 2015. Fake and spam
messages: Detecting misinformation during natural
disasters on social media. In 2015 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence and
Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT), Vol. 1. IEEE,
17–20.
[39] Matthew Rosenberg. 2019. Ad Tool Facebook Built to
Fight Disinformation DoesnâĂŹt Work as Advertised.
New York Times (2019). https://www.nytimes.com/2019/
07/25/technology/facebook-ad-library.html

[40] Koustav Rudra, Ashish Sharma, Niloy Ganguly, and
Muhammad Imran. 2017. Classifying information from
microblogs during epidemics. In Proceedings of the
2017 international conference on digital health.
104–108.
[41] Richard Schabas. 2003. SARS: prudence, not panic.
Cmaj 168, 11 (2003), 1432–1434.

[42] Katja Schmidt and Edzard Ernst. 2004. Assessing
websites on complementary and alternative medicine for
cancer. Annals of Oncology 15, 5 (2004), 733–742.
[43] Deborah Serani. 2008. If it bleeds, it leads. The clinical
implications of fear-based programming in news media.
Psychotherapy and Psychoanalysis 24, 4 (2008),
240–250.
[44] Michael Stefanone, Ashley E Anker, Melanie Evans,
and Thomas Hugh Feeley. 2012. Click to âĂIJlikeâĂİ
organ donation: the use of online media to promote
organ donor registration. Progress in Transplantation 22,
2 (2012), 168–174.
[45] Michela Del Vicario, Walter Quattrociocchi, Antonio
Scala, and Fabiana Zollo. 2019. Polarization and fake
news: Early warning of potential misinformation targets.
ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB) 13, 2 (2019),
1–22.
[46] Hilde AM Voorveld, Guda van Noort, Daniël G
Muntinga, and Fred Bronner. 2018. Engagement with
social media and social media advertising: The
differentiating role of platform type. Journal of
advertising 47, 1 (2018), 38–54.
[47] Annie Wilkinson and Melissa Leach. 2015. Briefing:
Ebola–myths, realities, and structural violence. African
Affairs 114, 454 (2015), 136–148.
[48] World Health Organization. 2020. Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report - 29. WHO (18 2
2020). https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/
coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200218-sitrep-29-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=6262de9e_2

[49] Elad Yom-Tov, Luis Fernandez-Luque, Ingmar Weber,
and Steven P Crain. 2012. Pro-anorexia and
pro-recovery photo sharing: a tale of two warring tribes.
Journal of medical Internet research 14, 6 (2012).

