arXiv:2003.11159v1 [cs.SI] 25 Mar 2020

What is the people posting about symptoms
related to Coronavirus in Bogota, Colombia
Josimar Edinson Chire Saire

Roberto C. Navarro

Institute of Mathematics and
Computer Science (ICMC)
University of São Paulo (USP)
São Carlos, SP, Brazil
jecs89@usp.br

Faculty of Biossitemas
University of ABC
SP, Brazil
roberto.navarro@ufabc.br

Abstract—During the last months, there is an increasing alarm
about a new mutation of coronavirus, covid-19 coined by World
Health Organization(WHO) with an impact in many areas:
economy, health, politics and others. This situation was declared
a pandemic by WHO, because of the fast expansion over many
countries. At the same time, people is using Social Networks
to express what they think, feel or experiment, so this people
are Social Sensors and helps to analyze what is happening in
their city. The objective of this paper is analyze the publications
of Colombian people living in Bogota with a radius of 50 km
using Text Mining techniques from symptomatology approach.
The results support the understanding of the spread in Colombia
related to symptoms of covid19.
Index Terms—Natural Language Processing, Text Mining,
Symptomatology, Coronavirus, Covid-19

I. I NTRODUCTION
The impact of the epidemics of coronavirus 2019 (COVID19) in a globalized world and with more communication
tools allows instantaneous communication and in many cases
without verification of the source of the information that it
shows may have contraventions for society [1].
For another place, the infoveillance for through the use
Twitter (www.twitter.com) can be useful for longitudinal text
mining and analysis to allow the analysis of some conditions
of the epidemiology in real time as previously described in
2009 by Chew in the H1N1 pandemic [2]
Meanwhile, public health professionals have a increasingly
need to establish a feedback loop and monitor real-time online
public response and insights during emergency situations to
examine the effectiveness of knowledge translation strategies
and adapt future communications and educational campaigns
to help the population face this pandemic [3].
The dissemination of information can strongly influence
people’s behavior and alter the effectiveness of countermeasures implemented by governments. In this regard, models to
predict the spread of the virus are beginning to monitor the
behavioral response of the population with respect to public
health interventions and the communication dynamics behind
content consumption [4].
During the last weeks, a big interest about Coronavirus
started because of one infection located in Wu-han city in

China,the epidemic scale of the recently emerged novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China, has increased rapidly, with cases
arising across China and other countries and regions. using a
transmission model, it was estimate of 81008 cases and the
wuhan city have 21022 (11090-33490) total infections in 1 to
22 January [5].
In relation to Colombia, the first case was registered in
Bogota, Colombia. A girl of 19-year-old who returned to
Bogota 26 February from Milan, Italy. The woman was
recovering at her place of residence. Before this, the young
woman was placed in quarantine at her place of residence,
with constant medical supervision, and after approximately 10
days it was confirmed that she had overcome the virus and was
no longer infected with covid-19. The mayor pointed out that
”contagion to her relatives was also avoided” [6]. Regarding
the incidence of COVID-19, it is estimated that by March 18,
2020 in Colombia there are 93 and 2 died according to the
record of the Colombian Secretary of Health [7].
The objective of this article is to describe the epidemiological impact of COVID-19 on press publications for 7
days before describing the first case of COVID-19 in Bogota,
Colombia. With this, it is intended to describe the publications
on twitter associated with the signs of the coronavirus with the
advance of the pandemic and the persistence of the people of
Bogota in this regard. This paper follows the next organization: section 2 explains the methodology for the experiments,
section 3 presents results and analysis. Section 4 states the
conclusions and section 5 introduces recommendations for
studies related.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
The present work performs experiments with source data
from Twitter with Natural Language Processing and Data
Mining(Text Mining) following the next steps:
•
•
•
•

Gather the relevant terms to search on Twitter
Build the query for Twitter and collect data
Pre-processing data to eliminate words with no relevance(stopwords)
Visualization

A. Gather Relevant Terms
Following the next papers [8], [9] were extracted the next
terms and translated to Spanish:
• ’fiebre’,’tos’,’gripe’,’estornudar’,’contagio’,’garganta’
• ’dolor cabeza’,’dificultad respirar’,’congestion
nasal’,’mialgia’
• ’produccion esputo’, ’hipoxemia’, ’fatiga’
B. Build the Query and collect data
The extraction of tweets is through Twitter API, with the
next parameters:
• date: from 29-12-2019 to 14-03-2020
• terms: the words about symptoms in the previous subsection
• geolocalization: the capital of Colombia is Bogota(4.6,74.083333)
• language: Spanish
• radius: around 50 km

Analyzing the previous, a concentration of the dates is
around 2010, 2011 then the age of this account is greater than 6
years. So, if fake users wants to post false information, usually
the age of the account could be less than 1 year.
B. How often people post and where did they start?
Considering the window for this analysis was from 29-122019 to 14-03-2020, there was an expectation of recovering
posts for every day but people was not posting about it during
the previous date of 08-03-2020. The graphic Fig. 2 shows an
increasing number of post during the last days.

C. Preprocessing Data
•
•
•
•
•

Change format of datatime to year-month-day
Eliminate alphanumeric symbols
Uppercase to lowercase
Eliminate words with size less or equal than 3
Add some exceptions

D. Visualization
•
•
•

The date of user account creation
Tweets per day to analyze the increasing number of posts
Cloud of words to analyze the most frequent terms
involved per day
III. R ESULTS

The next graphics present the results of the experiments and
answer many questions to understand the phenomenon over the
population.
A. What about the veracity of the posts?

Fig. 2. Tweets during the last seven days

C. What is the people posting about Covid19 symptoms?
After preprocessing tweets and remove stopwords, the predominant words from 2020-03-08 to 2020-03-14 are: dolor,
cabeza, ivanduque, coronavirus, uribi, fiebre, contagio, manos,
gripe, evitar, estornudar taken from the cloud of words in
Fig.3.
Then then most frequent words introduces topics related
symptoms(health), besides the graphic shows interest on politics.
D. How is the progress of covid19 in Colombia?
Finally, the image 4 shows the actual increase of infection
in Colombia from the start of March, and there is a natural
correlation between the increasing number of post per day and
the number of infections.

Nowadays, many users are posting their ideas using Social
Networks and there is no control over the veracity of the
information. For this reason, one field related to this is the date
of the creation of the accounts, this information is presented
in Fig. 1

Fig. 4. Number of infections in Colombia

Fig. 1. Data User Creation

This preliminar analysis helps to understand what is happening in the population in Bogota and this data can be
useful to analyze others aspects, phenomenon from different
approaches: Economy, Sociology, etc.

Fig. 3. Cloud of Words following the histogram of words

IV. C ONCLUSIONS
A Text Mining approach helps to visualyze what is happening about symptoms of covid19 in Bogota. The relevance
of the topic for the people, the increasing number of post,
the most relevant terms for day and how the previous ones
are naturally correlated to the number of infected people in
Colombia.
V. R ECOMMENDATIONS
API Twitter has a limitation of seven days then if you need
to collect data, you must set the range of time. Preprocessing
step is necessary because the people posts with any rule on
mind.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Sun, J. Chen, and C. Viboud, “Early epidemiological analysis of
the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak based on crowdsourced data: a
population-level observational study,” The Lancet Digital Health, 2020.
[2] C. Chew and G. Eysenbach, “Pandemics in the age of twitter: content
analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak,” PloS one, vol. 5, no.
11, 2010.
[3] V. K. Jain and S. Kumar, “An effective approach to track levels of
influenza-a (h1n1) pandemic in india using twitter,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 70, pp. 801–807, 2015.
[4] J. Shaman, A. Karspeck, W. Yang, J. Tamerius, and M. Lipsitch,
“Realtime influenza forecasts during the 2012–2013 season,” Nature
communications, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[5] J. M. Read, J. R. Bridgen, D. A. Cummings, A. Ho, and C. P. Jewell,
“Novel coronavirus 2019-ncov: early estimation of epidemiological
parameters and epidemic predictions,” medRxiv, 2020.
[6] Semana, ““Ya el primer caso de coronavirus en Bogota fue superado”: Claudia Lopez,” library Catalog: www.semana.com. [Online]. Available: https://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/coronavirusprimercaso-de-covid-19-en-bogota-fue-superado/657012
[7] E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, “An interactive web-based dashboard
to track covid-19 in real time,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[8] Y. Dong, X. Mo, Y. Hu, X. Qi, F. Jiang, Z. Jiang, and S. Tong,
“Epidemiological characteristics of 2143 pediatric patients with 2019
coronavirus disease in china,” Pediatrics, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2020/03/16/peds.20200702
[9] V. Jain and J.-M. Yuan, “Systematic review and metaanalysis
of
predictive
symptoms
and
comorbidities
for
severe
covid-19
infection,”
medRxiv,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/03/16/2020.03.15.20035360

