Exploring the Eﬀects of COVID-19 Containment Policies on
Crime: An Empirical Analysis of the Short-term Aftermath in
Los Angeles
Forthcoming at American Journal of Criminal Justice
Gian Maria Campedelli†,1
†
1

arXiv:2003.11021v3 [stat.OT] 6 Oct 2020

2

Alberto Aziani2,3

Serena Favarin2,3

Corresponding Author: gianmaria.campedelli@unitn.it

University of Trento — Department of Sociology and Social Research, Trento (Italy)

Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore — Department of Political and Social Sciences, Milan (Italy)
3

Transcrime - Joint Research Centre on Transnational Crime, Milan (Italy)
1st October 2020

Abstract
This work investigates whether and how COVID-19 containment policies had an immediate impact
on crime trends in Los Angeles. The analysis is conducted using Bayesian structural time-series and
focuses on nine crime categories and on the overall crime count, daily monitored from January 1st
2017 to March 28th 2020. We concentrate on two post-intervention time windows—from March
4th to March 16th and from March 4th to March 28th 2020—to dynamically assess the short-term
eﬀects of mild and strict policies. In Los Angeles, overall crime has signiﬁcantly decreased, as well
as robbery, shoplifting, theft, and battery. No signiﬁcant eﬀect has been detected for vehicle theft,
burglary, assault with a deadly weapon, intimate partner assault, and homicide. Results suggest that,
in the ﬁrst weeks after the interventions are put in place, social distancing impacts more directly on
instrumental and less serious crimes. Policy implications are also discussed.
Keywords: Coronavirus; Bayesian Modelling; Social Distancing; Urban Crime; Causal Impact; Time-Series; Routine Activity Theory; Crime Pattern Theory

1

Introduction
In the ﬁrst months of 2020, California was one of the ﬁrst States to be aﬀected by the spread of
a new virus belonging to the coronavirus family, named Sars-CoV-2. On March 4th , six cases of
COVID-19 were conﬁrmed in Los Angeles County rising the total number of cases for the county
up to seven. Following this, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and the Department of
Public Health declared a health emergency. From that moment on, the Los Angeles population had
been invited to adopt simple social distancing strategies that limit their exposure to others—e.g.,
remaining home when sick—and to prepare for the possibility of more signiﬁcant social distancing requirements. The institutional intervention started to become stronger on March 16th , with
the prohibition of all events comprising ﬁfty or more attendees. On March 19th, the California
Department of Public Health further reinforced the containment strategy by ordering all individuals living in the State to stay at home (County of Los Angeles, 2020).
Distancing measures simultaneously aﬀect the daily routines and the social interactions of
millions of people. Daily commuters are forced to spend their days at home; household members
share the same living spaces throughout the entire day; people can connect to their peers only
telematically. Yet, the impact of the lock-down policies, and of the virus itself, outreach the alteration of people’s everyday routines and social relations. In the medium term, the losses due to the
slowdown of the economic system may transform into higher unemployment and destitution for
many. The scale of social distancing and lock-down policies adopted to mitigate the deadly consequences of the COVID-19 constitutes an unprecedented instrument to investigate contemporary
societies and the short-term changes in crime trends.
Despite the rapidly growing attention of scientists to the consequences on crime of the COVID19 public health emergency, examinations of the impact on diﬀerent types of crimes of milder
and stricter policies remain underdeveloped. Moreover, our understanding of how well certain
theoretical frameworks provide support in explaining immediate changes in the occurrence of
diﬀerent crimes in response to the pandemic is limited. This work attempts to address these gaps
by investigating the extent to which measures taken to contain COVID-19 impact on nine crime
categories, and on the overall crime count, in the city of Los Angeles in the immediate aftermath of
their promulgation. Speciﬁcally, we concentrate on a set of primarily instrumental crimes, namely
burglary, theft, shoplifting, robbery, and vehicle theft and on more ‘expressive’ oﬀenses, namely
battery (simple assault), intimate partner assault, assault with a deadly weapon, and homicide.1
1

We rely on the categorization provided by Cohn and Rotton (2003), who state that that “Expressive crime in-

volves [...] violence that is not directed at the acquisition of anything tangible or designed to accomplish anything
speciﬁc other than the violent outcome itself. Assaults, disorders, and domestic violence are examples of expressive
crime. Instrumental crime [...] involves behavior that has a speciﬁc tangible goal, such as the acquisition of property.
Predatory crimes, such as theft, burglary, and robbery, are examples of instrumental crime” (Cohn and Rotton, 2003,
p. 252). Some authors have argued that also assault and domestic violence–and within it, intimate partner assault–are
goal-oriented because, through the commission of these crimes, oﬀenders seek to gain control over another person or
assert their identity (Tedeschi and Felson, 1994). We agree that all crimes can have a certain extent of rationality. Still,

2

The signiﬁcance of this work consists in the importance of investigating whether and how
these major societal modiﬁcations to the lives of millions of people inﬂuence the occurrence of
diﬀerent crimes and to reason on which criminological theories are better suited to explain crime
trends during this peculiar short period. Speciﬁcally, it is relevant to understand what types of
crime, if any, are most inﬂuenced by the forced modiﬁcation of everyday habits and behaviors and
why. We do so by exploiting the discontinuity introduced by the adoption of the social distancing requirements in Los Angeles County—more than 10 million residents—in response to the
local and public health emergency caused by the spread of the COVID-19. In particular, we use a
Bayesian statistical framework to derive counterfactual scenarios and estimate the causal impact
of such policies, showing its potential for criminological research.
Implications of the results obtained are numerous because of the extent of the changes introduced by these policies and the novelty of the research approach proposed. The analysis is
intended to verify what happened immediately after the introduction of the containment policies
in order to better understand the latest evolution of urban crimes thus providing police with indications regarding new threats and patterns in criminal activity in the immediate aftermath of
the pandemic. Similar reasoning could be applied to other global shocks that have great impact
on daily routines of people (e.g., hurricane) and change the opportunity structure for oﬀenders.
Minimizing uncertainty in the face of emerging or persistent crime patterns will support eﬀective
an response to these challenges.
The paper develops around the following structure. Section 1 highlights the gap of knowledge addressed by this study and frames it within the criminological theoretical debate. Section
2 justiﬁes the use of the COVID-19 emergency to answer our research question and outlines the
methodology adopted and the data used for the analyses. Relying on two post-intervention time
windows (the ﬁrst one considering daily data points from March 4th to March 16th , the second
one including all data points from March 4th to March 28th ), the study dynamically compares
the eﬀects of milder containment policies prompted during the ﬁrst two weeks of March with
stricter measures put in place in the second half of the month. This design provides an informative framework in which to assess the evolution of the eﬀects as a result of policy tightening in the
immediate aftermath. Section 3 presents the statistical outcomes for the selected crime categories
and the overall number of crimes in the city of Los Angeles. Finally, section 4 and section 5 review
the most important results of the analyses, focusing on their theoretical interpretations and the
most important policy implications entailed by the study.
as argued by Cohn and Rotton (2003), some crimes are more instrumental than others. As an example, “[a]lthough
robbery is more commonly classiﬁed as a violent crime, the violence involved is usually subservient and instrumental
to the goal of taking another person’s property” (Cohn and Rotton, 2003, p. 359).

3

1
1.1

Research Background
Related Work

Late modern history has been marked by the outbreak of several pandemics. In 1918, the socalled “Spanish Flu” infected about 27% of the world’s population for an almost three-year period,
with death estimates ranging from 17 to 50 million globally (Taubenberger and Morens, 2006).
In 1957, the “Asian Flu” led to a total of 1.1 million deaths worldwide. In 1968, the A/H3N2
inﬂuenza shocked the world, causing about 1 million deaths in total. In 2002, the SARS emerged
in China. During the period of infection, between November 2002 and July 2003, there were 8,098
reported cases of COVID-19 and 774 deaths. In 2009 the “Swine Flu” emerged from the United
States and spread quickly around the world with an estimate of about 61 million cases in the
United States alone. These public health emergencies modiﬁed and inﬂuenced many components
of human society. Researchers investigated these changes from diﬀerent standpoints. The interest
of criminologists in pandemics is, instead, more recent as it mainly emerged in reaction to the
spread of COVID-19.
Apart from a few studies focusing on the relation between SARS and suicides in Hong Kong
(Chan et al., 2006; Cheung et al., 2008), research on crime and deviance is emerging only now
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Ashby (2020) used seasonal auto-regressive integrated
moving average models to analyze trends in serious assaults (in public places and residences), burglaries (residential and non-residential), vehicle thefts in 16 large American cities. The analyses
indicated no statistically signiﬁcant changes in serious assaults. In some cities, Ashby (2020) observed signiﬁcant reductions in residential burglaries, but only minor changes in non-residential
burglaries. Theft of motor vehicles also decreased in certain cities, while results are mixed when
considering thefts from motor vehicles. Mohler et al. (2020) analyzed the counts of calls for service in Indianapolis and Los Angeles. The authors performed regressions in which they included
an indicator for treatment–i.e., the period after the introduction of shelter in place orders–testing
for diﬀerences in means of calls for six crimes in the period January 2 to March 16, 2020, which
acted as baseline scenario. The results indicate a signiﬁcant decrease in burglaries, robberies, and
vandalism in Los Angeles and a signiﬁcant increase in calls for service for domestic violence in
both cities. Domestic violence is the focus also of the studies by Piquero et al. (2020) and by Leslie
and Wilson (2020). Piquero et al. (2020) identiﬁed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in domestic
violence in the ﬁrst two weeks after the lockdown; yet, they also observed a subsequent decrease.
Focusing on a sample of 15 metropolitan areas, Leslie and Wilson (2020) found that social distancing measures were associated with a 10% increase in domestic violence service calls and observed
that the increase might be actually higher due to underreporting.
Despite the importance of the topic, and the growing number of available studies, scientists
have not yet answered many questions related to the possible eﬀects of quarantine, social distancing, and self-isolation on crime and deviant behaviors. In particular, on the one hand, the

4

short-term eﬀect on crime of social-distancing policies characterized by diﬀerent intensities on
diﬀerent types of crimes, from more instrumental ones–e.g., burglary–to more expressive and serious ones–e.g., homicide–is still to be determined. Few studies presented some results for Los
Angeles (i.e., Ashby (2020); Mohler et al. (2020)), but they considered partially diﬀerent crimes,
partially diﬀerent time frames, used diﬀerent data (i.e., calls for service), and exploited diﬀerent
statistical methods (i.e., SARIMA model, regressions) compared to the analysis we are presenting
here (i.e., nine categories of recorded crimes analyzed using Bayesian structural time-series models). The triangulation and comparison of diﬀerent results are fundamental, given the novelty of
the topic. At the same time, this analysis is the occasion to (indirectly) investigate the explanatory
power of theories of crime as routine activity (Cohen and Felson, 1979), crime pattern theories
(Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984) and general strain theory (Agnew, 1992) in the aftermath
of such a major change in social interactions like the one due to the introduction of COVID-19
containment measures.

1.2

Theoretical Framework and Hypotheses

Routine activity (Cohen and Felson, 1979) and crime pattern theories (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984) stress that how the characteristics and interactions of individual-level activities command the spatial and temporal distribution of oﬀending and victimization. On assuming these
notions, members of a community can be modeled as potential oﬀenders, potential victims, and
potential guardians who move and interact in a socio-geographical space. Starting from these
premises, routine activity theory postulates that oﬀenders and victims–or targets–usually meet
during everyday non-criminal activities (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984). Behavioral decisions then determine how the various agents react to each other’s presence and actions. Crime
occurs in the context of the everyday routines as the three factors mentioned above converge in
space and time: a motivated oﬀender, a victim or potential target, and the absence of a capable
guardian (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984).
Today, many criminological studies, especially those on ‘volume’ and urban crimes, rely on
ideas emerging from theories that focus on situations and opportunities as triggers of crime (Cohen and Felson, 1979; Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984, 1995; Clarke, 1995, 2009; Wortley
et al., 2008). Because of the strong attention that these theories give to ordinary interaction in geographical and social space, we also rely on them to formulate our hypotheses on the short-term
impact of the COVID-19-related social distancing measures. On the other hand, general strain
theory postulates that stress generator factors like limited freedom of movement, strict physical
and social isolation, in addition to economic uncertainty and concerns, may push youths, and
people in general, to be more prone to commit crimes. These factors may introduce new negative stimuli while simultaneously removing positive ones thus generating negative feelings such
as disappointment, depression, fear, and anger (Agnew, 1992).
Overall, public measures intended to contain the spread of the virus cause people to spend
5

more time at home and lose the density of social interactions. Accordingly, crime opportunities
and places where crimes occur are likely to change from past observations and experiences. These
changes can be particularly signiﬁcant in the immediate aftermath of the health emergency. Under
mild policies–i.e., from March 4th to March 16th –we expect a contraction in most urban crimes as
the density of targets reduces in many areas of the city (Angel, 1968). We hypothesize crime reduction will be strong in crime generators areas, by which we mean “particular areas to which large
numbers of people are attracted for reasons unrelated to any particular level of criminal motivation they might have or to any particular crime they might end up committing” (Brantingham and
Brantingham, 1995, p. 7). In Los Angeles, typical examples include the Hollywood entertainment
district, the ﬁnancial district with its high concentration of oﬃces, and the famous Staple Center.
Also ﬂows of people to some crime attractor areas will be reduced because people have to avoid
concentrating in bars, nightclubs, or shopping malls, but also in high-intensity drug traﬃcking
and prostitution areas.
To various extents, we foresee a reduction in the number of batteries, assaults with deadly
weapons, homicides, robberies, burglaries, shoplifting, thefts, and stolen vehicles as a consequence
of a reduced interaction of people in the urban environment. Based on routine activity and crime
pattern theories, we hypothesize that shoplifting diminishes the most. The reduction in the number of open shops and the limitations on the number of entrances–only a certain amount of people
are allowed to be simultaneously in the shops depending on the premises’ square meters–reduce
the opportunities for crime by simultaneously increasing the guardianship and reducing the exposure of targets to potential oﬀenders.
Routine activity (Cohen and Felson, 1979) and crime pattern theories (Brantingham and Brantingham, 1984) suggest that stricter social distancing policies–i.e., the period from March 16th to
March 28th –should have a stronger impact on the crimes considered than mild policies. This is
due to the further reduction in movement and social interaction induced by the reinforcement
of social distancing measures. At the same time, the prolonged stay-at-home order may trigger
increases in types of crimes in the medium- and eventually long-term as eﬀects of the increased
stress to which people are exposed. While according to the general strain theory all types of crime
may be inﬂuenced by this dynamic (Agnew, 2001), in line with the ﬁndings of Schoepfer and Piquero (2006), expressive crimes are more likely to be directly inﬂuenced by the increased strain
that people experience. Finally, diﬀerently from the other crimes considered, intimate partner
assaults are likely to increase. Patriarchy and gender inequality are often considered to be the
root causes of intimate partner violence; yet, situational determinants are also recognized as inﬂuencing this form of crime (Wilkinson and Hamerschlag, 2005). As a consequence of the spread
of COVID-19, couples–including dysfunctional ones–spend more time together in their homes
with a reduced presence of possible informal guardians like relatives and acquaintances, two factors that may lead to an increase in violence outbreaks (Hayes, 2018). At the same time, the strain
caused by the pandemic makes people more likely to respond with anger to confrontations and
to be less concerned about hurting others thus possibly boosting violent crimes (Agnew, 2001;
6

Broidy, 2001), both in the period under mild policies and even more in that under stricter ones.

2
2.1

Analytical Framework
Methodology

Evaluating the causal link and impact of certain policies is a crucial aspect of research and practice. Criminologists working on diﬀerent topics have long attempted to assess the extent to which
public interventions aimed at reducing crime are actually eﬀective in fulﬁlling their mission. The
standard for assessing the causal impact of a certain intervention is represented by Randomized
Controlled Trials (RCT) (Rubin, 1974). However, this research design is often unfeasible due to issues related to ﬁnancial costs, ethics or practical obstacles–e.g., complex regulatory requirements.
While Pearl (2009) demonstrates that post-facto observational studies cannot provide evidence of
causal inference due to the potential presence of confounding factors, several quasi-experimental
alternatives have been proposed to overcome the diﬃculty of running RCT in certain scientiﬁc
ﬁelds. Among these methods are interrupted time series. Interrupted time series have gained
popularity in sociology and criminology, and they have been applied to several diﬀerent research
problems (Biglan et al., 2000; Humphreys et al., 2013; Pridemore et al., 2013, 2014; Humphreys
et al., 2017). This method makes it possible to assess the eﬀect of a certain policy by analyzing
the change in the level and slope of the time series after an intervention has been applied, compared to the structure of the temporal dynamic before the intervention. More recently, scientists
have developed a framework for evaluating the causal inﬂuence of a certain intervention relying
on Bayesian statistics. Following this later evolution, this work investigates the eﬀect of social
distancing and related measures in the attempt to contain COVID-19 on criminal trends in Los
Angeles using Bayesian structural time-series (BSTS) models (Brodersen et al., 2015). Speciﬁcally,
we apply a method relying on diﬀusion regression state-space which predicts a counterfactual
trend in a synthetic control that would have occurred in a virtual counterfactual scenario with no
intervention–thus, in a scenario where no containment policies are promulgated. This approach
allows us to quantify the short-term impact and statistical signiﬁcance of the containment policies
on our variable of interest, namely the number of crimes over time. BSTS are state-space models
speciﬁcally deﬁned by two equations. The ﬁrst, i.e. the observation equation, being:
yt = ZtT αt + εt

(1)

where yt is a scalar observation, Zt is the d-dimensional output vector and εt ∼ N (0, σt2 ) and εt is
a scalar observation error with noise variance σt . The observation equation connects the observed
data yt to a latent d-dimensional state vector αt . The second, equation, instead is the state equation,
which reads:
αt+1 = Tt αt + Rt ηt

7

(2)

where Tt is a d × d transition matrix, R is a d × q control matrix, ηt is a q-dimensional systems
error with a q × q state diﬀusion matrix Qt such that ηt ∼ Nt (0, Qt ). This second equation
speciﬁcally governs the dynamic change of the state vector αt through time. The inferential dimension in the model comprises three components. First, draws of the model parameters θ and
the state vector α (given y1:n , i.e. the observed data in the training period) are simulated. Second,
the model uses posterior simulations to simulate from p(ỹn+1:m | y1:n ), which is the posterior
predictive distribution, with ỹn+1:m as the counterfactual time series and y1:n as the observed
time series before the intervention. Third, using posterior predictive samples, the model compute
the posterior distribution of the point-wise impact yt − ỹt for each time unit t.
The Bayesian framework in which the model is embedded allows ﬂexibility and inferential
power, enabling the method to eﬀectively estimate the cumulative diﬀerence between the actual
data and a counterfactual scenario. The proposed modeling architecture, through the comparison
between a univariate and a multivariate model (which includes two covariates, i.e., daily temperature and presence of holidays) and the exploitation of a long timeframe, controls the risk of excluding relevant patterns that may not be speciﬁcally related to the pandemic and avoid the risk of
ignoring long-term dynamics, a pitfall that would lead to biased estimates. Moreover, the weekly
component embedded in the estimation technique preserves the inherent seasonal component
often exhibited by criminal activity.
Concerning the implementation part, we have relied on the CausalImpact package available
in R. Each model has been ﬁt by only considering a single target time-series mapping the trend of
crime categories in the time window under consideration at a time. The package does not allow
to simultaneously model multiple target variables and, having included a crime series as the target
one and all the others as covariates would have contradicted the requirement to only consider covariates that are not inﬂuenced by the interventions. Each model included a seasonal component:
characterizing weekly seasonality (number of seasons set equal to 7 with season duration equal to
1, i.e., one day). This allowed to account for the well-known seasonal oscillations of crime over
the days of a week (with temperature as a covariate being able to control higher-level seasonal
components). , We performed our analyses by including weekly seasonal terms to account for
weekly variations in crime trends. By doing so, it was possible to consider also possible seasonal
variations that do not directly depend on temperature-related mechanisms, but instead relate to
routine activities of people and places during social occurrences (e.g. school closure) (Andresen
and Malleson, 2013). Furthermore, to obtain accurate estimates for each model a total of 1,000
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samples are drawn. Finally, the prior of each model, expressed in terms standard deviation of the Gaussian random walk at the local level, has been kept
equal to 0.1 as suggested by the authors of the package in absence of ground truth. The value represents a good compromise between a high standard deviation that would assume that the variations
in the signal are all explained by the intervention and a very small standard deviation that imposes

8

that such variations are instead solely due to high noise in the data.2

2.2

Time Frame

Exploiting this analytical strategy, we separately analyze the period up to March 16th to test the effect of milder containment policies (the ﬁrst post-intervention time window goes from March 4th
to March 16th ) and up to March 28th to test the eﬀect of the introduction of stricter containment
policies (the second post-intervention time window goes from March 4th to March 28th ).3 These
two post-intervention time-windows enable us to obtain a more comprehensive and inherently
dynamic description of the reality. In fact, given the progressive tightening of imposed restrictions, avoiding a comparative analysis of the evolution of the eﬀects over diﬀerent weeks would
somewhat oversimplify and overly aggregate our statistical estimates. Conversely, the possibility
to observe the evolution of the eﬀects helps in assessing the strength of a trend, anticipating the
likely developments and better explaining its behavior by framing it in our theories of reference.
Figure 1 presents the data on people’s mobility (driving, transit and walking) in the city of Los Angeles from January 1st 2020 to April 15th 2020 and shows how in the ﬁrst post-intervention time
window the mobility has already started to reduce compared to the previous months. This trend
deﬁnitively continued after March 16th when stricter policies were implemented.4 Our interest is
to understand changes in the crime patterns in the immediate aftermath of the health emergency
to assess and analyze shot-term dynamics. Indeed, in the medium- and long-run other factors
might play a more central role in explaining the changes in crime trends (e.g., unemployment,
social riots).

2.3

Data

To conduct our analysis, we ﬁrst drew upon the (Los Angeles Open Data portal). Unlike prior
studies that analyzed the counts of calls for service in Los Angeles (e.g., Mohler et al. (2020)), we
used data on crime reported in the city. Exploiting the website API, we accessed two diﬀerent
datasets on crimes reported by the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD). The ﬁrst one comprised all crime incidents reported from 2017 to 2019. The second one referred to all the crimes
reported from January 1st to March 30th 2020. The two datasets contain detailed daily observations regarding each reported crime with information on the type of oﬀense–organized in 140
2
3

The R code used to perform the analyses here presented is publicly available in a dedicated repository at Link.
The two post-intervention time windows considered are not mutually exclusive. The ﬁrst one includes the days

between the 4th of March to the 16th of March and the second one considers the days between the 4th of March to the
28th of March. The second time window includes the ﬁrst one. Our interest is to map the evolution of the policies and
their inﬂuence on crime trends given that policy eﬀects in this context are cumulative rather than mutually exclusive.
The focus of our analysis is not to compare two diﬀerent time period of post intervention in order to understand, for
example, if mild policies are better than harsh policies, but to assess the eﬀect of those policies on crime over time.
4
The mobility trends in Los Angeles are also conﬁrmed by other studies that used other data to analyze trends in
commuting and general mobility (e.g., data provided by Cuebiq) (Klein et al., 2020; Ruiz-Euler et al., 2020).

9

Figure 1: Mobility trends in the city of Los Angeles, January 1st 2020 – April 15th 2020. Source:
Mobility Trends Reports, Apple (2020)
crime categories–the age, gender, and descendants of the victim (if any), the type of weapon (if
any), and the location of the occurrence.

10

Dataset
2017-2019

First Day Considered

N of Observations

2017-01-01

685,615
47,252

2020-onwards

2020-01-01

(updated at 2020-03-30,
includes data up to 2020-03-28)
732,867

Merged

2017-01-01

(updated at 2020-03-30
includes data up to 2020-03-28)

Table 1: Number of Observations and Starting Point per Dataset
For the purpose of the present work, we only relied on the reported date of crime occurrence
and on the oﬀense categories as meaningful sources of information to analyze city-wide criminal
trends. A brief description of the three datasets (1. the one comprising crimes from 2017 to 2019;
2. the one with oﬀenses up to March 2020; 3. the merged one used in the models) is provided
in Table 1. We extracted the crime categories of interest and we then grouped observations by
daily counts, obtaining separated time series for each crime category. While our models focus on
the post-intervention period from March 4th to March 28th , we lastly accessed data on April 7th,
thus ensuring that a larger number of crime reports that were not possibly included in the dataset
in their ﬁrst week after occurrence were actually imputed by the LAPD soon thereafter. Figure
2 displays the number of observations per crime category in the period from January 1st 2017 to
March 28th 2020. Thefts are the most frequent crimes, followed by battery and stolen vehicles.
Homicide is by far the least prevalent oﬀense in the sample but, trivially, the most serious one.
Furthermore, to get controls we have used two additional datasets. The ﬁrst one is an openaccess dataset provided by the governmental site of the National Centers for Environmental Information (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov) with data on minimum, average and maximum temperature
daily registered at the Los Angeles Airport in the timeframe of interest. The second one is a publicly available dataset containing American holidays.
The literature has long found relationships between temperature and variation in crime trends
(Cohn, 1990; Field, 1992) and between festivities and holidays and criminal temporal clustering
(Cohn and Rotton, 2003; Towers et al., 2018). It is worth specifying that we do not seek to establish
any connection between the theories that we exploit to frame the present research problem and
the selected covariates. These covariates have to be interpreted as diagnostic measures aimed at
testing the reliability of the statistical estimates obtained in the univariate models. Temperature
and holidays play a role in smoothing and controlling the potential presence of noise in the signals
of criminal trends (especially given the relevant duration of the time frame under consideration).
We hence construct alternative models with covariates to ensure that the estimates obtained with
no controls are not biased due to the exclusion of relevant confounders.
As required by the method, these two covariates have not been aﬀected by the policies under
scrutiny. This is trivial in the case of average temperature, while holidays may be aﬀected in the
future if restrictions are prolonged for months. Yet, in the period under analysis, dates of hol11

80000
60000
40000
20000

Stolen
Vehicle

Homicides

Theft

Shoplift.

Robbery

Intim.
Asslt.

Burglary

Battery

Assault
with D.W.

0

N (2017/01/01−2020/03/28)

Figure 2: Number of Observations per Crime Category
idays were not changed because of the pandemic. The method adopted generally recommends
using more than two controls to evaluate the eﬀect of an intervention on the response time series.
However, we can assume that no other daily predictor of crime has been strongly inﬂuenced by
the containment policies during the period analyzed. Diﬀerently from other studies on the topic,
the use of time series spanning 39 months was made to reduce the potential biases arising from
the exclusion of hidden trend dynamics, preserving the seasonality and long-term dependencies
of crime. Table 2 reports the main descriptive statistics for the time series that are part of the
analysis.

3

Results

This section presents the results on the causal impact of the policy interventions starting on March
4th per each oﬀense type and for the overall number of crimes. For each crime, the same analytical
structure is provided. We ran two diﬀerent models. The ﬁrst one was a univariate model that only
considers the time series of interest without controls. The second model integrates two covariates
to control for spurious eﬀects and unobservable dynamics. At the same time, the two models were
performed on two time-windows; the ﬁrst capturing the impact of mild policies (from March 4th to
March 16th ), the second including also the ﬁrst weeks in which stricter policies entered into force
(from March 4th to March 28th ). Figure 3 shows the time series of the crimes considered; while,
12

Min

1st Q

Median

Mean

St. Dev.

3rd Q

Max

254.00

570.00

628.00

619.00

69.80

669.00

796.00

Assault (with Deadly Weapon)

6.00

24.00

29.00

29.44

7.53

34.00

61.00

Battery

15.00

46.00

52.00

52.15

9.51

58.00

93.00

Burglary

13.00

31.00

38.00

38.70

9.96

45.00

93.00

Variable
All Crimes

Homicide

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.72

0.00

1.00

5.00

Intimate Partner Assault

10.00

36.00

41.00

41.60

8.84

47.00

78.00

Robbery

7.00

20.00

24.00

24.23

5.85

28.00

48.00

Shoplifting

2.00

15.00

18.00

18.00

4.92

21.00

33.00

Theft

19.00

52.00

62.50

61.72

13.3

61.72

71.00

Stolen Vehicle

19.00

40.00

46.50

46.74

9.39

52.00

88.00

Holiday

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.16

0.00

1.00

Max Temperature

52.00

69.00

76.00

75.84

9.20

82.00

108.00

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of the Considered Time Series
to facilitate the reading of the results and summarize the statistical outcomes of the models, Table
3 presents all the statistical results (full statistical outcomes are available in the Supplementary

25
80 20
60
40
3
2

Theft

300

500

Overall

700 0

1

Homicide

4

520

Stolen Vehicle

60

100 5

15

Shoplifting

50
30
10
20 40 60 80

Battery
Burglary

20 40 60 80
70

Intimate Ag.

50
30
10

Robbery

10

30

Assault w/DW

Materials, from Table A1 to A10).

2017

2018

2019

2020

2017

2018

Date

2019
Date

Figure 3: Time Series of Considered Crimes

13

2020

First post intervention
time window

Crime Type

Assaults D.W.
Battery (Simple Assault)
Burglary
Intimate Partner Assault
Robbery
Shoplifting
Theft
Stolen Vehicles
Homicides
Overall Crimes

(March 4th – March 16th )
Univariate
With Covariates

Second post intervention
time window
(March 4th – March 28th )
Univariate
With Covariates

-2.98%

-1.5%

-11%**

-6.3% (6%)

[-19%, 13%]

[-18%, 13%]

[-23%, 2.8%]

[-18%, 5.5%]

-0.6%

0.78%

-11%**

-7.6%**

[-12%, 11%]

[-9.2%, 11%]

[-21%, -0.99%]

[-16%, 0.39%]

0.89%

-0.58%

-4.8%

-7.3%*

[-14%, 15%]

[-14%, 11%]

[-15%, 5.5%]

[-17%, 3.3%]

-4%

-2.5%

-0.28%

3.3%

[-16%, 6.4%]

[-13%, 8.6%]

[-11%, -11%]

[-5.6%, -12%]

-24%***

-23%***

-21%***

-19%***

[-38%, -8.5%]

[-38%, -8.7%]

[-33%, -9.3%]

[-30%, -8.7%]

-14%***

-15%***

-31%***

-32%****

[-30%, 2.4%]

[-30%, 0.34%]

[-42%, -20%]

[-43%, -21%]

-9.1%**

-9.6%**

-24%***

-25%***

[-19%, 0.57%]

[-19%, -1%]

[-31%, -17%]

[-31%, -18%]

1%

0.06%

1.5%

-0.12%

[-9.4%, 11%]

[-10%, 9.9%]

[-6.5%, 9.6%]

[-7.4%, 7.5%]

-15%

-10%

-28%

-24%

[-88%, 57%]

[-84%, 59%]

[-79%, 25%]

[-76%, 31%]

-5.6%***

-5.4%**

-15%***

-14%***

[-10%, -1.5%]

[-9.5%, -1%]

[-18%, -11%]

[-17%, -11%]

Table 3: Model Results - Relative Cumulative Eﬀect per Each Crime (95% C.I. Between Parentheses)
Assault with Deadly Weapons
Concerning assaults with deadly weapons,5 both the univariate and the multivariate models, for
both time windows, i.e. up to March 16th and up to March 28th , do not show any statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of the containment policies. Although all the models report negative coeﬃcients,
indicating a reduction in the trend in absolute and relative terms, the posterior probability of a
causal eﬀect is, respectively, 64% and 52% for the ﬁrst time window and 94% and 85% for the second
time window. The results provided by the models referring to the second time window–especially
for the univariate one–are much closer to a statistically signiﬁcant outcome, suggesting a diﬀerent eﬀect when stringent policies are introduced. Consequently, it is possible that this negative
eﬀect will show statistically signiﬁcant results in the case of prolonged or even more stringent
containment measures.
Table A1 reports the outcomes of the analysis.
5

Assault with Deadly Weapons corresponds to crimes labelled as Assault with Deadly Weapon, Aggravated Assault

by the LAPD. According to the California Penal Code 245(a)(1), an assault with a deadly weapon occurs when an
individual wrongfully attacks a victim with an object that can seriously injure or even inﬂict death.

14

Battery and Simple Assault
The occurrence of batteries6 is aﬀected by strict policies, while it is not so by loose ones. Up
to March 16th , containment policies do not seem to have resulted in a reduction of battery and
simple assaults. Conversely, if we consider the introduction of more stringent measures of social
distancing, it is possible to observe a statistically signiﬁcant reduction of this crime. The models
considering crimes recorded until March 28th show a relative eﬀect of -11.0% in the univariate
model and of -7.6% in the multivariate one. The posterior probability of a causal eﬀect is, respectively, 98% and 96% indicating statistically signiﬁcant outcomes for both models (full results are
available in Table A2).
Burglaries
For what concerns burglaries,7 the policies to contain the spread of COVID-19 have not produced
any signiﬁcant eﬀect in the ﬁrst four weeks from their introduction. Although we expected a
slight decrease in their overall occurrence, given the extensive agreement over the fact that burglars prefer to target unoccupied homes (Shover, 1991; Mustaine, 1997; Tseloni et al., 2002) and
the consequent increased guardianship enforced by people staying at home due to the pandemic,
statistical outcomes do not corroborate our hypothesis. In the ﬁrst time window, the eﬀects are
minimal and the results of the two models diverge in their directions. The univariate model shows
an increase of 0.89% with respect to the predicted value in the absence of an intervention, while
the multivariate displays an eﬀect equal to -0.58%, with posterior probabilities respectively being
56% and 50%. The models performed up to March 28th show a non-signiﬁcant reduction of burglaries in the city with a higher posterior probability for both the univariate and the multivariate
models–respectively, 80% and 91%–compared to the other time-frame analyzed. Full results can
be found in Table A3.
6

Although Battery and Simple Assault are coded as a single type of oﬀense one in the original database under the

crime category BATTERY - SIMPLE ASSAULT, California assault law, disciplined by Penal Code 240PC, provides two
distinct deﬁnitions for battery and assault. A simple assault is the attempt to use force or violence against someone
else, while battery is the actual use of force or violence against one or more individuals.
7
In California, according to the Penal Code, burglary is deﬁned as the act of entering any structure, room, or
locked vehicle with the intention to commit a theft or a felony. Furthermore, an individual can be considered guilty of
burglary even if the intended crime, once entered, is never been committed. Our initial hypothesis is that containment
policies should have a clear impact on this crime category as people encouraged or forced to stay in their houses
increase guardianship, thus reducing the chance for an individual to enter a property without being noticed.

15

Intimate Partner Assault
COVID-19-containment policies, we hypothesize, could cause intimate partner assaults8 to increase as a consequence of individuals spending longer time at home in a potentially stressful
situation. Instead, results suggest that the policies adopted have not prompted any immediate
signiﬁcant change in intimate partner assaults. The models considering the days from March 4th
to March 16th as period of intervention show non-signiﬁcant negative eﬀects (-4.0% and -2.5%).
The univariate model considering the entire period identiﬁes a small non-signiﬁcant negative effect (-0.28%). Finally, the multivariate model indicates an increase in intimate assaults due to the
policies (+3.3%); but this increase is not statistically signiﬁcant. The explanation for the absence
of a clear and signiﬁcant signal in the post-intervention period may be connected to the fact that
dynamics of this crime are complex and the forced cohabitation of partners is not an immediate
trigger of violence within the household. While in the case of shoplifting, for example, the closure of shops has a direct impact on the thefts within the shops themselves, in the case of intimate
partner violence the increase may be delayed as tensions intensify.
Robbery
Robbery9 shows a signiﬁcant change in the post-intervention period. This applies to both the
univariate and the multivariate cases for both the temporal windows selected. In the univariate
case, the relative eﬀect is estimated as a reduction of 24% in robberies, with a cumulative total
of 202 criminal events against a predicted 266 in a non-intervention scenario in the ﬁrst time
window. In the second time window, the estimated eﬀect is a reduction of 21%, with a cumulative
total of 439 robberies against a predicted 533 in a non-intervention scenario (See Table A5 in the
Supplementary Materials for the Absolute Eﬀect). In the multivariate case, the eﬀects are slightly
reduced in both the time frames; being respectively, -23% and -19%. The magnitude of the eﬀects
is thus high. The posterior probability is 99.7% and 99.8%, respectively, for the univariate and
multivariate models up to March 16th and 99.7% and 99.8% for the models up to March 28th .
8

To analyze intimate partner assaults, we have combined both simple and aggravated assaults–Intimate Partner -

Aggravated Assault” and “Intimate Partner - Simple Assault— in the original database by LAPD. These two oﬀenses
fall within the broader set of domestic violence crimes, which includes other forms of within-family violence–e.g.,
parents being violent against their children. The California Penal Code deﬁnes an intimate partner as a current or
former spouse, a ﬁancé, a co-parent of a child, a person with whom the perpetrator had a dating relationship or a
person with whom the perpetrator lives.
9
Section 211 of the California Penal Code deﬁnes robbery as the act of taking personal property from someone
else, against the targeted victim’s will, using force or fear. Robberies are classiﬁed as felonies. Data on robberies
correspond to Robbery in the original database compiled by the LAPD.

16

Shoplifting
The statistical outcomes of the models referring to shoplifting10 indicate a signiﬁcant reduction
after the introduction of the state of the emergency in Los Angeles. The results hold for all models.
In the ﬁrst time window analyzed, 189 shoplifting cases were registered, signiﬁcantly fewer than
the cumulative numbers of occurrences predicted by the virtual scenarios with no intervention:
220 for the univariate and 223 in the multivariate cases (Table A6 in the Supplementary Materials).
In the models up to March 28th , against cumulative predicted values of 462 and 471 in a scenario
without intervention, 320 shoplifts were recorded by the LAPD. This indicates an estimated relative reduction of 14% in the univariate case, and a 15% reduction in the multivariate one in the
period with mild policies. With the introduction of stricter policies, the relative reduction is 31%
in the univariate case, and 32% in the multivariate one. The probability of the eﬀects being a causal
consequence of the policies is 95.6% and 97.2% for the ﬁrst time window and 99.7% and 99.9% for
the second time window, providing strong statistical evidence.
Theft
In line with what we found for robbery and shoplifting, thefts11 also appear to be aﬀected by the
application of the COVID-19-related containment measures. All models show a statistically signiﬁcant reduction of thefts. In the ﬁrst analyzed window, the models report a 9.1% decrease in the
univariate case (signiﬁcant at the 96.7% level) and a 9.6% reduction in the multivariate one (signiﬁcant at the 98.3%). In the second window considered (up to March 28th ), the models estimate a 21%
decrease in the univariate case (signiﬁcant at the 99.7%) and a 25% reduction in the multivariate
case (signiﬁcant at the 99.9%).
10

According to the California Penal Code 459.5, shoplifting is the oﬀense of entering a commercial establishment

during business regular hours, with the intent of committing a theft crime worth $950 or less, regardless of the actual
completion of the theft. This crime is identiﬁed as Shoplifting-Petty Theft ($950 & Under) in the LAPD’s database. In
the present work, we have also considered shoplifting grand-thefts, related to attempted thefts of property worth
more than 950$–i.e., Shoplifting-Grand Theft ($950.01 & Over) in the original dataset.
11
For the purpose of this study, we have combined in the general category “Theft” both petty thefts–i.e., Theft
Plain-Petty ($950 & Under) –and grand thefts–i.e., Theft-Grand ($950.01 & Over) Excpt, Guns, Fowl, Livestk, Prod. The
California Penal Code deﬁnes petty theft as the act of stealing–or wrongfully taking–an object belonging to someone
else when the value of the property is equal to $950 or less. Grand theft, instead, is a more serious oﬀense and pertains
to acts in which the property has a value higher than 950$.

17

Stolen Vehicles
The policies have not had any signiﬁcant eﬀect on vehicle thefts.12 Indeed, the relative eﬀects are
not only not signiﬁcant, but also small for all models: 1.0% and 1.5% in the univariate cases, 0.06%
and -0.12% in the multivariate ones. There are diﬀerent possible (complementary) explanations
for this ﬁnding. On the one hand, while at home, a car owner may be an ineﬀective guardian of
her/his own car. On the other hand, because the theft of cars is often related to their immediate
use (Cherbonneau and Wright, 2011), the slowdown of productive and social activities–including
other crimes–may mean that oﬀenders have less need to steal a vehicle. The combination of these
dynamics, which are pushing in opposite directions, might explain the absence of a clear impact
of social distancing policies on stolen vehicles in Los Angeles.
Homicides
Overall, COVID-19 containment policies do not show any statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on homicides13 in the short aftermath of their deployment. In neither of the two selected temporal windows do the models detect a suﬃcient statistically strong variation in the trend. Nonetheless,
compared to the ﬁrst batch of data–up to March 16th –the models also considering the strict policies point in a two-fold direction. First, the relative eﬀect has increased, ranging from -15% to -28%
according to the univariate model and from -10% to -24% according to the multivariate speciﬁcation. Second, the posterior tail-area probability p has decreased, thus increasing the posterior
probability of a causal eﬀect, which ranged from 67% and 63% in the ﬁrst batch of results, to 86%
and 80%.
Overall Crimes
Finally, we considered all reported crimes in the two selected temporal windows under analysis;
this aggregated variable also accounts for all those oﬀenses that go beyond the categories previously considered. Figure 4 displays the evolution of the post intervention relative marginal eﬀect
in the two considered time windows, for all crimes and model types. In particular, the graph represents the percent changes in crime between our synthetic control, which we set at zero, and the
actual registered crimes. Our empirical results indicate a signiﬁcant decrease in the overall crime
12

Stolen vehicles refers to two diﬀerent oﬀenses, namely grand theft auto and the unlawful taking or driving of a

vehicle. The main diﬀerence between the two oﬀenses pertains to the duration of the crime itself. If, for instance, a
person steals a car with the intent to keep it, this is often considered grand theft auto. Conversely, if the oﬀender aims
at using the car for a ride–or, in any case, for a short timeframe–the act is usually considered as the unlawful taking
or driving of a vehicle. The original database compiled by the LAPD provides a single crime category: Vehicle - Stolen.
13
The categoryHomicides comprises those crimes which are disciplined by California’s Homicide Laws and corresponds to the Criminal Homicide crime category in the original database. A person committing a homicide can
be prosecuted in several ways depending on the characteristics of the action. Among these are ﬁrst-degree murder,
second-degree murder, capital murder, voluntary manslaughter, involuntary manslaughter and vehicular manslaughter. Notably, homicides are the most serious oﬀenses among those considered in this study–and the least common.

18

occurrence in the ﬁrst weeks after the introduction of social distancing measures compared to the
virtual counterfactual scenario with no intervention. In particular, the models focusing on the
mild policies period show a reduction of 5.6% and 5.4% of overall crimes in the univariate and
multivariate cases, respectively. In the models considering the longer time-window when strict
policies were also considered, instead, the decrease reaches -15% and -14% in the two cases. The
posterior probability of a causal eﬀect is equal to 99.4% and 98.5% for the ﬁrst temporal window
and 99.7% and 99.8% for the second temporal window, showing a high level of signiﬁcance.
Assault
w. DW

Battery

Burglary

Intimate
P. Agg.

Robbery

Shoplifting

Theft

Stolen
Veh.

Homicide

Overall

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

3/16 3/28

60
40

0

Univariate

Post−Intervention Relative Marginal Effect (%)

20

−20
−40
−60
−80
60
40
20

Multivariate

0

−20
−40
−60
−80

Model Type
Significance

<95%

>95%

Figure 4: Graphical Summary of Model Results (with 95% Conﬁdence Intervals)
When focusing on all reported crimes, the results are in line with those seen for robbery,
shoplifting, theft, and battery. Nonetheless, the cumulated count of these crimes cannot explain
on its own the overall decrease given the numerosity of other crimes. As such, these ﬁndings suggest that, potentially, most crimes have diminished in the considered short-term period leading
to a general reduction of crime in the entire city of Los Angeles. In turn, this result indicates that,
besides the categories chosen for this study, further work is needed to disentangle mechanisms
related to single oﬀenses or crime categories.

19

4

Discussion & Conclusion

In line with our hypotheses, the statistical results show that robberies, thefts, and shoplifting had
a statistically signiﬁcant reduction already in the post-intervention period up to March 16th , when
only mild policies were applied. Robbery recorded the single largest decrease (-23%/-24% depending on the statistical speciﬁcations). Mohler et al. (2020), applying a diﬀerent statistical strategy
on diﬀerent data and concentrating on a partially diﬀerent time frame, also observed a significant reduction in robberies in Los Angeles in the immediate aftermath of the introduction of
social-distancing measures. After robberies, shoplifting (-14%/-15%) and thefts (-9.1%/-9.6%) are
the crime categories for which the diﬀerences between the observed data and the virtual scenario
are the strongest. Overall crimes also signiﬁcantly declined (-5.4%/-5.6%). Theft, robbery and
shoplifting are oﬀenses involving a direct act targeting a property, thus making it likely that common underlying principles govern the similar decreasing trends of these crimes. These reductions
can be explained in light of the reduction of social interactions as people avoid public spaces and
spend more time at home as well as by closure of public places and the presence of quotas on the
number of entries into shops and malls. In turn, this leads to a reduction in criminal opportunities and to an increase in guardianship. Coherently with the ideas emerging from routine activity theory (Cohen and Felson, 1979) and crime pattern theory (Brantingham and Brantingham,
1984), most crime reductions are larger after the introduction of stricter containment policies,
which further reduce criminal opportunities while increasing informal guardianship. The models considering the entire period up to March 28th show a signiﬁcant reduction for shoplifting
(-31%/-32%), thefts (-24%/-25%), robberies (-21%/-19%), and for overall crimes (-15%/-14%). In
addition, battery (-11%/7.6%) also started to show a signiﬁcant decrease after the adoption of strict
distancing policies.
Contrarily, the models did not detect any signiﬁcant change in the trends of homicides, assaults with a deadly weapon, intimate partner assaults, but also of burglaries and stolen vehicles.
Previous studies have listed several stressors speciﬁcally emerging during quarantines comprising
the duration of the quarantine itself, the fear of infection, frustration and boredom, and inadequate supply of basic commodities, services, and information (Brooks et al., 2020). In addition,
families under ﬁnancial and psychological stress as a result of the pandemic, increased their alcohol use at home (Colbert et al., 2020). This might also increase the occurrence of violent and
expressive crimes since there is a strong relationship between the use and abuse of alcohol and
violence (Parker and Auerhahn, 1998). In line with these evidence on the negative psychological
outcomes of quarantine, our statistical results suggest that besides reduction of opportunities and
change in social life, increased strain is likely to have a leading role in explaining crime dynamics
immediately after the introduction of social distancing measures. In this perspective, the lack of
signiﬁcant variations in the trends of the aforementioned crimes might be interpreted as the result
of a combined eﬀect of a partial reduction in situational and opportunistic triggers of crime, on
the one hand, and worsening of the balance between positive and negative psychological stimuli
20

on the other.
In light of this, intimate partner assault warrants some further considerations. Firstly, intimate
partner assault is a crime which is strongly related to strain dynamics (Eriksson and Mazerolle,
2013; Piquero et al., 2020). Secondly, crime factors pertaining to routine activity theory and crime
pattern theory and factors pertaining to general strain theory all suggest an increase in intimate
partner assaults. It is not so for other considered crimes, with the partial exception of vehicle
theft. Nonetheless, we do not observe any statistically signiﬁcant increase in the count of intimate
partner assaults. By contrast, Mohler et al. (2020), in their study, saw signiﬁcant increases in domestic violence calls for service in Los Angeles. In this regard, to be noted is that many of such
calls concern domestic disturbances without a physical assault (MacDonald et al., 2003; Mohler
et al., 2020).
More in general, our analysis suggests that containment policies in the immediate aftermath
have had a stronger impact on more instrumental crimes compared to crimes for which expressive motivations are more relevant. Similarly, more serious oﬀenses appear to be less inﬂuenced by
social-distancing measures. The combination of motivation and seriousness identiﬁes two macro
classes of crimes, which may help the interpretation of the eﬀects of containment policies. More
instrumental/less serious crimes are strongly inﬂuenced by the reduction of social interactions
and the sudden modiﬁcation of everyday habits. While routine activity theory and crime pattern
theory seem to be a powerful tool to interpret changes in this ﬁrst class of criminal behaviors, they
are less eﬀective in capturing the dynamics of more expressive/more serious crimes whose interpretation needs to be integrated with a broader set of factors (Hayward, 2007). Strong motivation,
low self-control and criminal opportunities are concurrent causes in the explanation of crime
commitment in the aftermath of the policy introduction, but the combination of these causes is
not equal for all crime types (Longshore and Turner, 1998). It appears that strong motivation
and low self-control are more likely to play a central role in more serious crimes, whereas criminal opportunities do so in triggering less serious oﬀenses. In this regard, the strain theory of
crime (Agnew, 1992) may act as complementary interpretative framework to the rational choice
approach, explaining the emerging trends also in light of the sudden ampliﬁcation of stressors
resulting from COVID-19 containment measures. Future studies may investigate these dynamic
more in depth by exploiting a panel approach and by identifying variables capable of representing
the diﬀerent theories we exploited in our interpretative framework.
Finally, burglaries and vehicle thefts appear to fall outside this reasoning and possibly nullify
it. Yet, as previously said, these are crime categories which unify diﬀerent actual criminal dynamics. Burglaries can be residential or non-residential; separating the two may shed light on distinct
opposite processes, as residential burglaries are expected to decrease, while non-residential ones
to increase as a byproduct of diﬀerent dynamics in guardianship. In support of this, Ashby (2020),
who could separate residential and non-residential burglaries in Los Angeles, observes–at least
during some weeks–signiﬁcant changes with respect to both residential and non-residential burglaries. It is thus important to mention again that our results capture short-term dynamics within
21

an open time-frame that will likely extend over several weeks ahead, thus potentially leading to
new patterns. Furthermore, we may have witnessed, especially in relation to the period up to
March 16th , a mixed dynamic combining both the eﬀect of the mild policies and the fear of contagion. Fear of contagion has probably played a role in reshaping people’s individual and collective
behavior (Brooks et al., 2020), even before the second half of March when stronger measures were
adopted. This process, directly impacting on the density and frequency of social contacts, has
potentially fostered the eﬀect of the policy recommendations on crime.
In addition, social distance restrictions may have also inﬂuenced the reporting rate of criminal
oﬀenses. People avoid spending time outside their homes, and this may reduce their willingness
or ability to go to the police to report a crime. In the case of Los Angeles, problems related to
a reduction of crime reporting are mitigated by the possibility to report a crime using an online
form for speciﬁc crimes (e.g., theft or theft from vehicles) or calling a dedicated number. Moreover, while underreporting issues may aﬀect the count of all the crimes considered, the crimes for
which we do not observe any signiﬁcant change–with the important exception of intimate partner violence–are the ones that are more likely to be reported–i.e., homicide, assaults with deadly
weapons, stolen vehicle, and burglary. These factors help to reduce possible biases due to increases
in underreporting.
By contrast, the dynamics related to the lack of–or impossibility to–reporting may especially
inﬂuence the count of intimate partner assaults. Indeed, the cohabitation of victim and oﬀender
may make it diﬃcult for the victim to report the oﬀense to the police. Nevertheless, since neighbors are likewise at home, they are also better able to exert partial guardianship on the episodes of
intimate partner violence that are happening in their surroundings and call the police. In this regard, studies have demonstrated that neighbors can play a role in reporting abuses (Paquin, 1994).
In addition, scholars have shown that informal actors (e.g., family, friends, and neighbors) are often approached by the victims of intimate partner violence because they are proximal and may
be able to intervene before, during, and after the violent event (McCart et al., 2010; Wee et al.,
2016). Related to this, the police attention to urban crimes may have diminished due to the need
to enforce social distancing measures, thus partially countering the crime mitigating eﬀect driven
by looser social interactions. However, the reduction of police capabilities is likely to have only a
only marginal eﬀect on intimate partner assaults, which are serious crimes that often takes place
in a private environment.
Additional caution should be adopted in interpreting the results obtained. As the extant criminological literature indicates, crime clusters in time and space, meaning that its spatio-temporal
distribution is not random (Doran and Lees, 2005; Grubesic and Mack, 2008; Mohler et al., 2011;
Weisburd, 2015). Therefore, there are very few reasons to think that this patterned nature will
entirely change because of containment measures. Future work will hence need to investigate
the potential heterogeneity of policy eﬀects across diﬀerent areas of the same city, also analyzing
the potential correlates of diverging trends in terms environmental and socio-economic factors.
Furthermore, according to anecdotal evidence, police were asked to limit or stop making low22

level arrests to manage jail crowding and narrow down the spread of the virus in prisons. These
changes in police practice could have inﬂuenced crime trends and we could expect a downward
bias for the estimates of less serious crimes (e.g., shoplifting). The same downward bias cannot
be foreseen for homicide or intimate partner assaults that are not low-level crimes, but serious
oﬀences instead. An opposite trend that could have aﬀected crime rates in the opposite direction
in the period under analysis is the early release of prisoners in order to contrast the spread of
coronavirus within prisons. The early release of prisoners could potentially lead to an increase in
crime rates due to recidivist behaviors of former inmates. The two mechanisms described here
go in opposite directions (decrease vs increase in crime trends), therefore they potentially tend to
overall balance themselves.

5

Policy Propositions

This work has outlined how COVID-19 containment policies have inﬂuenced criminal trends
in the city of Los Angeles already in the ﬁrst weeks after their introduction. Policy implications
emerge from these analyses. First, studying criminal dynamics in this anomalous time should help
in creating protective measures for the most vulnerable subjects inﬂuenced by these changes, including homeless people, women and children. Homeless people, for instance, could experience an
increase in the likelihood of becoming victims of crimes, as a consequence of lower guardianship
and social control. Furthermore, as people are likely to suﬀer more stress in this period thus being
more prone to commit certain crimes, including violent ones, it might be worth empowering remote contact points, facilitating distance reporting to make it easier for victims, who cannot freely
move, to connect with the police. Distance reporting, for instance, could include text messaging
services to reduce the risk of being stopped or heard by the abusive member of a household.
Finally, as crime takes new forms and dynamics, law enforcement agencies will be required
to modify or re-deﬁne resource allocation for the new priorities. The task, especially in highly
populated and heterogeneous cities like Los Angeles, can be herculean. In fact, while many police departments and other institutions in the United States have tailored their actions based on
predictive policing software, these models can suddenly become of little help. Depending on the
extent to which these policies will force crime to change–beyond mere temporal trends–predictive
models built on millions of past observations may no longer be informative. This situation thus
urges alternative predictive tools that can take into account disruptions of social life as the triggers of new criminal risks, prompting data-driven strategies to re-assess criminal patterns and
countering strategies.

Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

23

Funding
The authors did not receive any funding for the present work.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Jay Aronson, Laura Dugan, Marco Dugato, Gary LaFree, Clarissa Manning, Cecilia Meneghini, Riccardo Milani, James Prieger and two anonymous referees for their
precious feedback and comments on previous versions of this manuscript.

24

References
County of Los Angeles,
and

Gatherings,

Public Health Issues Order to Prohibit Group Events
2020.

URL:

https://lacounty.gov/covid19-news/

public-health-issues-order-to-prohibit-group-events/, library Catalog:

la-

county.gov Section: COVID-19 Newsroom.
E. G. Cohn, J. Rotton,

Even criminals take a holiday:

crimes on major and minor holidays,

Instrumental and expressive

Journal of Criminal Justice 31 (2003) 351–360.

URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047235203000291.
doi:10.1016/S0047-2352(03)00029-1.
J. T. Tedeschi, R. B. Felson, Violence, aggression, and coercive actions., American Psychological Association, Washington, 1994. URL: http://content.apa.org/books/10160-000.
doi:10.1037/10160-000.
J. K. Taubenberger, D. M. Morens,

1918 Inﬂuenza: the Mother of All Pandemics -

Volume 12, Number 1—January 2006 - Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC
(2006). URL: https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/1/05-0979_article. doi:10.
3201/eid1201.050979.
S. M. S. Chan, F. K. H. Chiu, C. W. L. Lam, P. Y. V. Leung, Y. Conwell, Elderly suicide and the 2003
SARS epidemic in Hong Kong, International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 21 (2006) 113–118.
URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/gps.1432. doi:10.1002/gps.1432.
Y. T. Cheung, P. H. Chau, P. S. F. Yip, A revisit on older adults suicides and Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) epidemic in Hong Kong, International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 23
(2008) 1231–1238. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/gps.2056. doi:10.1002/gps.
2056.
M. P. J. Ashby,

Initial evidence on the relationship between the coronavirus pandemic and

crime in the United States, Crime Science 9 (2020) 6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40163-020-00117-6. doi:10.1186/s40163-020-00117-6.
G. O. Mohler, A. L. Bertozzi, J. Carter, M. B. Short, D. Sledge, G. E. Tita, C. D.
Uchida, P. J. Brantingham,

Impact of social distancing during COVID-19 pandemic on

crime in Los Angeles and Indianapolis,

Journal of Criminal Justice 68 (2020) 101692.

URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047235220301860.
doi:10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2020.101692.
A. R. Piquero, J. R. Riddell, S. A. Bishopp, C. Narvey, J. A. Reid, N. L. Piquero, Staying Home,
Staying Safe? A Short-Term Analysis of COVID-19 on Dallas Domestic Violence, Amer-

25

ican Journal of Criminal Justice 45 (2020) 601–635. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12103-020-09531-7. doi:10.1007/s12103-020-09531-7.
E. Leslie, R. Wilson, Sheltering in Place and Domestic Violence: Evidence from Calls for Service during COVID-19, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3600646, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, 2020. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3600646. doi:10.
2139/ssrn.3600646.
L. E. Cohen, M. Felson, Social Change and Crime Rate Trends: A Routine Activity Approach,
American Sociological Review 44 (1979) 588–608. URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/
2094589. doi:10.2307/2094589, publisher: [American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc.].
P. J. Brantingham, P. L. Brantingham, Patterns in crime, Macmillan, New York, 1984.
R. Agnew,

Foundation for a General Strain Theory of Crime and Delinquency*,

Crimi-

nology 30 (1992) 47–88. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/
j.1745-9125.1992.tb01093.x. doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.1992.tb01093.x, _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1745-9125.1992.tb01093.x.
P. L. Brantingham, P. J. Brantingham, Criminality of place, European Journal on Criminal Policy
and Research 3 (1995) 5–26. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02242925. doi:10.1007/
BF02242925.
R. V. Clarke, Situational Crime Prevention, Crime and Justice 19 (1995) 91–150. URL: https://
www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/449230. doi:10.1086/449230, publisher: The University of Chicago Press.
R. V. Clarke, Situational Crime Prevention: Theoretical Background and Current Practice, in:
M. D. Krohn, A. J. Lizotte, G. P. Hall (Eds.), Handbook on Crime and Deviance, Springer
New York, New York, NY, 2009, pp. 259–276. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-1-4419-0245-0_14. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-0245-0_14, series Title: Handbooks
of Sociology and Social Research.
R. K. Wortley, L. G. Mazerolle, S. Rombouts, Environmental Criminology and Crime Analysis,
Routledge, 2008. Google-Books-ID: 8U8ObTP81QsC.
R. Agnew, Building on the Foundation of General Strain Theory: Specifying the Types of Strain
Most Likely to Lead to Crime and Delinquency:, Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
(2001). URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0022427801038004001.
doi:10.1177/0022427801038004001, publisher: Sage Publications.

26

A. Schoepfer, A. R. Piquero, Self-Control, Moral Beliefs, and Criminal Activity, Deviant Behavior 27 (2006) 51–71. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/016396290968326. doi:10.1080/
016396290968326, publisher: Routledge _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/016396290968326.
D. L. Wilkinson, S. J. Hamerschlag, Situational determinants in intimate partner violence, Aggression and Violent Behavior 10 (2005) 333–361. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2004.05.001, place:
Netherlands Publisher: Elsevier Science.
L. M. Broidy,
URL:

A Test of General Strain Theory*,

Criminology 39 (2001) 9–36.

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-9125.

2001.tb00915.x.

doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.2001.tb00915.x,

_eprint:

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2001.tb00915.x.
D. B. Rubin, Estimating causal eﬀects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies., Journal of Educational Psychology 66 (1974) 688–701. URL: http://content.apa.org/
journals/edu/66/5/688. doi:10.1037/h0037350.
J. Pearl, Causal inference in statistics: An overview, Statistics Surveys 3 (2009) 96–146. URL:
https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ssu/1255440554. doi:10.1214/09-SS057, publisher: The author, under a Creative Commons Attribution License.
A. Biglan, D. Ary, A. C. Wagenaar, The Value of Interrupted Time-Series Experiments for Community Intervention Research, Prevention Science 1 (2000) 31–49. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1023/A:1010024016308. doi:10.1023/A:1010024016308.
D. K. Humphreys, M. P. Eisner, D. J. Wiebe,

Evaluating the Impact of Flexible Alcohol

Trading Hours on Violence: An Interrupted Time Series Analysis,

PLoS ONE 8 (2013)

e55581. URL: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055581. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0055581.
W. A. Pridemore, M. B. Chamlin, E. Andreev, Reduction in Male Suicide Mortality Following
the 2006 Russian Alcohol Policy: An Interrupted Time Series Analysis, American Journal of
Public Health 103 (2013) 2021–2026. URL: https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/
abs/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301405. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2013.301405, publisher: American
Public Health Association.
W. A. Pridemore, M. B. Chamlin, M. T. Kaylen, E. Andreev, The Eﬀects of the 2006 Russian Alcohol Policy on Alcohol-Related Mortality: An Interrupted Time Series Analysis, Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research 38 (2014) 257–266. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1111/acer.12256. doi:10.1111/acer.12256.
D. K. Humphreys, A. Gasparrini, D. J. Wiebe,

Evaluating the Impact of Florida’s “Stand

Your Ground” Self-defense Law on Homicide and Suicide by Firearm: An Interrupted
27

Time Series Study,

JAMA Internal Medicine 177 (2017) 44. URL: http://archinte.

jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.6811.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.6811.
K. H. Brodersen, F. Gallusser, J. Koehler, N. Remy, S. L. Scott,
using Bayesian structural time-series models,

Inferring causal impact

The Annals of Applied Statistics 9 (2015)

247–274. URL: https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.aoas/1430226092. doi:10.1214/
14-AOAS788, publisher: Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
M. A. Andresen, N. Malleson, Crime seasonality and its variations across space, Applied Geography 43 (2013) 25–35. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0143622813001410. doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.06.007.
B. Klein, T. LaRocky, S. McCabey, L. Torresy, F. Privitera, B. Lake, M. U. Kraemer, J. S. Brownstein, D. Lazer, T. Eliassi-Rad, Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility in major
metropolitan areas in the United States during the COVID-19 outbreak, preprint, 2020.
A. Ruiz-Euler, F. Privitera, D. Giuﬀrida, B. Lake, I. Zara, Mobility Patterns and Income Distribution
in Times of Crisis: U.S. Urban Centers During the COVID-19 Pandemic, preprint, 2020. URL:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3572324.
E. G. Cohn,

Weather and Crime,

The British Journal of Criminology 30 (1990) 51–

64. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/30/1/51/523870. doi:10.1093/
oxfordjournals.bjc.a047980, publisher: Oxford Academic.
S. Field, The Eﬀect of Temperature on Crime, The British Journal of Criminology 32 (1992) 340–
351. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/32/3/340/319313. doi:10.1093/
oxfordjournals.bjc.a048222, publisher: Oxford Academic.
S. Towers, S. Chen, A. Malik, D. Ebert, Factors inﬂuencing temporal patterns in crime in a
large American city: A predictive analytics perspective, PLoS ONE 13 (2018). URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6200217/. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0205151.
N. Shover, Burglary, Crime and Justice 14 (1991) 73–113. URL: http://www.journals.
uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/449184.
E. E. Mustaine, Victimization risks and routine activities: A theoretical examination using a
gender-speciﬁc and domain-speciﬁc model, American Journal of Criminal Justice 22 (1997)
41. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02887340.
A. Tseloni, D. R. Osborn, A. Trickett, K. Pease, Modelling Property Crime Using the British
Crime Survey: What Have We Learnt?,

British Journal of Criminology 42 (2002) 109–

128. URL: https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/
28

modelling-property-crime-using-the-british-crime-survey-what-have-we-learnt(59a9122
.html. doi:10.1093/bjc/42.1.109.
M. Cherbonneau, R. Wright, Auto Theft, in: M. H. Tonry (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Crime and Public Policy, Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 191–222. Google-Books-ID: ZcYVDAAAQBAJ.
S. K. Brooks, R. K. Webster, L. E. Smith, L. Woodland, S. Wessely, N. Greenberg, G. J. Rubin, The
psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence, The
Lancet 395 (2020) 912–920. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0140673620304608. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8.
S. Colbert, C. Wilkinson, L. Thornton, R. Richmond, COVID-19 and alcohol in Australia: Industry
changes and public health impacts, Drug and Alcohol Review (2020). URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7300689/. doi:10.1111/dar.13092.
R. N. Parker, K. Auerhahn,

Alcohol, Drugs, and Violence,

Annual Review of Sociology

24 (1998) 291–311. URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.24.1.291. doi:10.
1146/annurev.soc.24.1.291, _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.24.1.291.
L. Eriksson, P. Mazerolle, A general strain theory of intimate partner homicide, Aggression and
Violent Behavior 18 (2013) 462–470. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1359178913000554. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2013.07.002.
J. M. MacDonald, P. W. Manz, G. P. Alpert, R. G. Dunham, Police use of force: examining the relationship between calls for service and the balance of police force and suspect resistance, Journal
of Criminal Justice 31 (2003) 119–127. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0047235202002192. doi:10.1016/S0047-2352(02)00219-2.
K. Hayward,

Situational Crime Prevention and its Discontents:

Theory versus the ‘Culture of Now’,
232–250.

URL:

Rational Choice

Social Policy & Administration 41 (2007)

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.

1467-9515.2007.00550.x.

doi:10.1111/j.1467-9515.2007.00550.x,

_eprint:

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1467-9515.2007.00550.x.
D. Longshore, S. Turner, Self-Control and Criminal Opportunity: Cross-Sectional Test of the
General Theory of Crime, Criminal Justice and Behavior 25 (1998) 81–98. URL: https://
doi.org/10.1177/0093854898025001005. doi:10.1177/0093854898025001005, publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.
G. W. Paquin,

A Statewide Survey of Reactions to Neighbors’ Domestic Violence,

Jour-

nal of Interpersonal Violence 9 (1994) 493–502. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/

29

088626094009004004. doi:10.1177/088626094009004004, publisher: SAGE Publications
Inc.
M. R. McCart, D. W. Smith, G. K. Sawyer,
A review of the empirical literature,

Help seeking among victims of crime:

Journal of Traumatic Stress 23 (2010) 198–

206. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jts.20509. doi:10.
1002/jts.20509, _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jts.20509.
S. Wee, M.-J. Todd, M. Oshiro, E. Greene, V. Frye,

Modiﬁers of Neighbors’ Bystander In-

tervention in Intimate Partner Violence: A Concept Mapping Study,

Violence and Gen-

der 3 (2016) 55–63. URL: https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/vio.2015.0012.
doi:10.1089/vio.2015.0012, publisher: Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers.
B. J. Doran, B. G. Lees,

Investigating the Spatiotemporal Links Between Disor-

der, Crime, and the Fear of Crime,
URL:

The Professional Geographer 57 (2005) 1–12.

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.0033-0124.2005.

00454.x. doi:10.1111/j.0033-0124.2005.00454.x, publisher:

Routledge _eprint:

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.0033-0124.2005.00454.x.
T. H. Grubesic, E. A. Mack, Spatio-Temporal Interaction of Urban Crime, Journal of Quantitative Criminology 24 (2008) 285–306. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s10940-008-9047-5. doi:10.1007/s10940-008-9047-5.
G. O. Mohler, M. B. Short, P. J. Brantingham, F. P. Schoenberg, G. E. Tita, Self-Exciting Point Process Modeling of Crime, Journal of the American Statistical Association 106 (2011) 100–108.
URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1198/jasa.2011.ap09546. doi:10.
1198/jasa.2011.ap09546.
D. Weisburd, The Law of Crime Concentration and the Criminology of Place, Criminology
53 (2015) 133–157. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/1745-9125.12070. doi:10.
1111/1745-9125.12070.

30

Supplementary Materials
Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Avg.
Actual

With Cov.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

26

317

26

317

Prediction (S.D.)

27 (2.2)

327 (26.9)

27 (2.2)

327 (27.1)

95% C.I.

[23,32]

[275,379]

[23,31]

[274, 374]

-0.79 (2.2)

-9.50 (26.9)

-0.41 (2.3)

-4.89 (27.1)

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)
95% C.I.

[-5.1, 3.5]

[-61.6, 42.2]

[-4.7, 3.6]

[-56.9, 43.1]

-2.98% (8.2%)

-2.98% (8.2%)

-1.5% (8.4%)

-1.5% (8.4%)

[-19%, 13%]

[-19%, 13%]

[-18%, 13%]

[-18%, 13%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.36409

0.48134

64%

52%

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

24

604

24

604

Prediction (S.D.)

27 (1.8)

675 (45.7)

26 (1.5)

644 (38.4)

95% C.I.

[23, 30]

[585, 760]

[23, 29]

[568, 718]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-2.9 (1.8)

-71.3 (45.7)

-1.6 (1.5)

-40.4 (38.4)

95% C.I.

[-6.2, 0.76]

[-155.6, 19.00]

[-4.6, 1.4]

[-114.2, 35.6]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-11% (6.8%)

-11% (6.8%)

-6.3% (6%)

-6.3% (6%)

95% C.I.

[-23%, 2.8%]

[-23%, 2.8%]

[-18%, 5.5%]

[-18%, 5.5%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.0625

0.14801

94%

85%

Table A1: Causal Impact Analysis - Assaults with Deadly Weapons

31

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate

With Cov.

Average

Cumulative

Average

Cumulative

50

597

50

597

Prediction (S.D.)

50 (2.9)

601 (34.4)

49 (2.7)

592 (32.5)

95% C.I.

[44, 56]

[533, 668]

[44, 54]

[530, 652]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-0.3 (2.9)

-3.6 (34.4)

0.39 (2.7)

4.62 (32.5)

95% C.I.

[-5.9, 5.3]

[-71.2, 64.1]

[-4.5, 5.6]

[-54.5, 66.7]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-0.6% (5.7%)

-0.6% (5.7%)

0.78% (5.5%)

0.78% (5.5%)

95% C.I.

[-12%, 11%]

[-12%, 11%]

[-9.2%, 11%]

[-9.2%, 11%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.41895
58%

0.40672
59%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

45

1116

45

1116

Prediction (S.D.)

50 (2.5)

1256 (63.1)

48 (2)

1207 (50)

95% C.I.

[45, 55]

[1128, 1380]

[44, 52]

[1111, 1307]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-5.6 (2.5)

-139.7 (63.1)

-3.7 (2)

-91.3 (50)

95% C.I.

[-11, -0.5]

[-264, -12.4]

[-7.6, 0.19]

[-191.1, 4.74]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-11% (5%)

-11% (5%)

-7.6% (4.1%)

-7.6% (4.1%)

[-21%, -0.99%]

[-21%, -0.99%]

[-16%, 0.39%]

[-16%, 0.39%]

Actual

95% C.I.
Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.02486

0.03534

98%

96%

Table A2: Causal Impact Analysis - Battery and Simple Assault

32

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Average
Actual

Cumulative

With Cov.
Average

Cumulative

34

406

34

406

Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.

34 (2.4)
[29, 38]

402 (29.2)
[345, 461]

34 (2.5)
[30, 39]

408 (29.6)
[359, 465]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

0.3 (2.4)

3.6 (29.2)

-0.2 (2.5)

-2.4 (29.6)

95% C.I.

[-4.6, 5.1]

[-54.9, 60.8]

[-4.9, 3.9]

[-59.2, 46.6]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

0.89% (7.2%)

0.89% (7.2%)

-0.58% (7.2%)

-0.58% (7.2%)

95% C.I.

[-14%, 15%]

[-14%, 15%]

[-14%, 11%]

[-14%, 11%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.44173

0.49627

56%

50%

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

33

816

33

816

Prediction (S.D.)

34 (1.9)

858 (46.3)

35 (1.8)

881 (46.1)

95% C.I.

[31, 38]

[769, 948]

[31, 39]

[787, 966]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-1.7 (1.9)

-41.6 (46.3)

-2.6 (1.8)

-64.5 (46.1)

Actual

95% C.I.

[-5.3, 1.9]

[-131.7, 47.1]

[-6, 1.2]

[-150, 29.3]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-4.8% (5.4%)

-4.8% (5.4%)

-7.3% (5.2%)

-7.3% (5.2%)

95% C.I.

[-15%, 5.5%]

[-15%, 5.5%]

[-17%, 3.3%]

[-17%, 3.3%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.19832

0.09328

80%

91%

Table A3: Causal Impact Analysis - Burglary

33

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Average
Actual

With Cov.

Cumulative

Average

Cumulative

38

454

38

454

Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.

39 (2.3)
[35, 44]

473 (27.5)
[424, 529]

39 (2.1)
[34, 43]

466 (25.3)
[414, 512]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-1.6 (2.3)

-18.8 (27.5)

-0.96 (2.1)

-11.52 (25.3)

95% C.I.

[-6.3, 2.5]

[-75.4, 30.3]

[-4.9, 3.4]

[-58.4, 40.2]

-4% (5.8%)

-4% (5.8%)

-2.5% (5.4%)

-2.5% (5.4%)

[-16%, 6.4%]

[-16%, 6.4%]

[-13%, 8.6%]

[-13%, 8.6%]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.24535

0.37313

75%

63%

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

39

969

39

969

Prediction (S.D.)

39 (2.2)

972 (56.0)

38 (1.7)

938 (41.7)

95% C.I.

[34, 43]

[860, 1071]

[34, 41]

[855, 1021]

-0.11 (2.2)

-2.68 (56.0)

1.2 (1.7)

30.9 (41.7)

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

[-4.1, 4.4]

[-102.3, 109.3]

[-2.1, 4.5]

[-52.1, 113.7]

-0.28% (5.8%)

-0.28% (5.8%)

3.3% (4.4%)

3.3% (4.4%)

[-11%, 11%]

[-11%, 11%]

[-5.6%, 12%]

[-5.6%, 12%]

0.48324

0.22015

52%

78%

Table A4: Causal Impact Analysis - Intimate Partner Assault

34

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

17

202

17

202

22 (1.7)
[19, 25]

266 (20.5)
[225, 304]

22 (1.6)
[19, 25]

262 (19.5)
[225, 302]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-5.3 (1.7)

-63.6 (20.5)

-5 (1.6)

-60 (19.5)

95% C.I.

[-8.5, -1.9]

[-101.8, -22.6]

[-8.3, -1.9]

[-100.1, -22.8]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-24% (7.7%)

-24% (7.7%)

-23% (7.5%)

-23% (7.5%)

95% C.I.

[-38%, -8.5%]

[-38%, -8.5%]

[-38%, -8.7%]

[-38%, -8.7%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.00333

0.00208

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.67%

99.79%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

18

439

18

439

Prediction (S.D.)

22 (1.3)

553 (32.8)

22 (1.2)

545 (30.4)

95% C.I.

[20, 25]

[490, 619]

[19, 24]

[486, 604]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-4.6 (1.3)

-114.2 (32.8)

-4.3 (1.2)

-106.3 (30.4)

95% C.I.

[-7.2, -2.1]

[-180.5, -51.3]

[-6.6, -1.9]

[-165.4, -47.4]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-21% (5.9%)

-21% (5.9%)

-19% (5.6%)

-19% (5.6%)

95% C.I.

[-33%, -9.3%]

[-33%, -9.3%]

[-30%, -8.7%]

[-30%, -8.7%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.00298

0.00218

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.70%

99.78%

Table A5: Causal Impact Analysis - Robbery

35

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

16

189

16

189

Prediction (S.D.)

18 (1.5)

220 (18.2)

19 (1.5)

223 (17.7)

95% C.I.

[15, 21]

[184, 255]

[16, 21]

[188, 256]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-2.6 (1.5)

-31.1 (18.2)

-2.8 (1.5)

-34.1 (17.7)

95% C.I.

[-5.5, 0.44]

[-66.3, 5.30]

[-5.6, 0.064]

[-67.4, 0.766]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-14% (8.3%)

-14% (8.3%)

-15% (7.9%)

-15% (7.9%)

95% C.I.

[-30%, 2.4%]

[-30%, 2.4%]

[-30%, 0.34%]

[-30%, 0.34%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.04353

0.02808

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

95.64%

97.19%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

13

320

13

320

18 (1)

462 (26)

19 (1)

471 (26)

95% C.I.

[16, 21]

[412, 513]

[17, 21]

[421, 521]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-5.7 (1)

-142.0 (26)

-6.1 (1)

-151.5 (26)

95% C.I.

[-7.7, -3.7]

[-193.4, -92.0]

[-8, -4.1]

[-201, -101.3]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-31% (5.6%)

-31% (5.6%)

-32% (5.5%)

-32% (5.5%)

95% C.I.

[-42%, -20%]

[-42%, -20%]

[-43%, -21%]

[-43%, -21%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.00348

0.001

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.65%

99.90%

Table A6: Causal Impact Analysis - Shoplifting

36

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

55

662

55

662

Prediction (S.D.)

61 (2.9)

728 (35.3)

61 (2.8)

732 (33.2)

95% C.I.

[55, 66]

[658, 797]

[56, 67]

[670, 801]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-5.5 (2.9)

-66.1 (35.3)

-5.8 (2.8)

-70.0 (33.2)

95% C.I.

[-11, 0.34]

[-135, 4.13]

[-12, -0.64]

[-139, -7.67]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-9.1% (4.8%)

-9.1% (4.8%)

-9.6% (4.5%)

-9.6% (4.5%)

95% C.I.

[-19%, 0.57%]

[-19%, 0.57%]

[-19%, -1%]

[-19%, -1%]

Actual

Posterior tail-area probability p:
Posterior prob. of a causal eﬀect:

0.0333
96.67%

0.01663
98.33%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

47

1175

47

1175

Prediction (S.D.)

62 (2.2)

1548 (56.2)

62 (2.1)

1557 (53.4)

95% C.I.

[58, 66]

[1444, 1651]

[58, 66]

[1453, 1658]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-15 (2.2)

-373 (56.2)

-15 (2.1)

-382 (53.4)

95% C.I.

[-19, -11]

[-476, -269]

[-19, -11]

[-483, -278]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-24% (3.6%)

-24% (3.6%)

-25% (3.4%)

-25% (3.4%)

95% C.I.

[-31%, -17%]

[-31%, -17%]

[-31%, -18%]

[-31%, -18%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.0035

0.00109

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.65%

99.89%

Table A7: Causal Impact Analysis - Thefts

37

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

45

536

45

536

44 (2.4)
[40, 49]

530 (28.6)
[477, 586]

45 (2.4)
[40, 49]

536 (28.8)
[483, 591]

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

0.46 (2.4)

5.55 (28.6)

0.029 (2.4)

0.343 (28.8)

95% C.I.

[-4.2, 4.9]

[-49.8, 58.8]

[-4.6, 4.4]

[-55.1, 52.8]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

1% (5.4%)

1% (5.4%)

0.064% (5.4%)

0.064% (5.4%)

[-9.4%, 11%]

[-9.4%, 11%]

[-10%, 9.9%]

[-10%, 9.9%]

95% C.I.
Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.41646

0.48507

58%

51%

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

46

1140

46

1140

45 (2)

1123 (49)

46 (1.7)

1141 (43.3)

[41, 49]

[1032, 1214]

[42, 49]

[1054, 1225]

0.67 (2)

16.84 (49)

-0.055 (1.7)

-1.369 (43.3)

[-2.9, 4.3]

[-73.6, 107.8]

[-3.4, 3.4]

[-85.0, 86.2]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

1.5% (4.4%)

1.5% (4.4%)

-0.12% (3.8%)

-0.12% (3.8%)

95% C.I.

[-6.5%, 9.6%]

[-6.5%, 9.6%]

[-7.4%, 7.5%]

[-7.4%, 7.5%]

95% C.I.

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.37151

0.49896

63%

50%

Table A8: Causal Impact Analysis - Stolen Vehicles

38

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

0.62

8.00

0.62

8.00

Prediction (S.D.)

0.72 (0.26)

9.38 (3.36)

0.69 (0.25)

8.94 (3.28)

95% C.I.

[0.21, 1.3]

[2.69, 16.3]

[0.21, 1.2]

[2.73, 15.5]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-0.11 (0.26)

-1.38 (3.36)

-0.072 (0.25)

-0.935 (3.28)

95% C.I.

[-0.64, 0.41]

[-8.28, 5.31]

[-0.58, 0.41]

[-7.48, 5.27]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-15% (36%)

-15% (36%)

-10% (37%)

-10% (37%)

95% C.I.

[-88%, 57%]

[-88%, 57%]

[-84%, 59%]

[-84%, 59%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.326
67%

0.37437
63%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

0.52

13.00

0.52

13.00

Prediction (S.D.)

0.72 (0.19)

18.11 (4.83)

0.69 (0.19)

17.14 (4.84)

95% C.I.

[0.34, 1.1]

[8.39, 27.3]

[0.31, 1]

[7.71, 26]

Actual

Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

-0.2 (0.19)

-5.1 (4.83)

-0.17 (0.19)

-4.14 (4.84)

95% C.I.

[-0.57, 0.18]

[-14.34, 4.61]

[-0.52, 0.21]

[-13.04, 5.29]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-28% (27%)

-28% (27%)

-24% (28%)

-24% (28%)

95% C.I.

[-79%, 25%]

[-79%, 25%]

[-76%, 31%]

[-76%, 31%]

Post. tail-area prob. p:
Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

0.13814

0.2012

86%

80%

Table A9: Causal Impact Analysis - Homicides

39

Daily crime counts up to March 16th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

558

6700

558

6700

592 (14)
[567, 620]

7098 (165)
[6805, 7441]

590 (13)
[564, 615]

7086 (152)
[6772, 7376]

-33 (14)

-398 (165)

-32 (13)

-386 (152)

[-62, -8.8]

[-741, -105.1]

[-56, -6]

[-676, -72]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-5.6% (2.3%)

-5.6% (2.3%)

-5.4% (2.1%)

-5.4% (2.1%)

95% C.I.

[-10%, -1.5%]

[-10%, -1.5%]

[-9.5%, -1%]

[-9.5%, -1%]

95% C.I.

Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.00555

0.01493

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.44%

98.51%

Daily crime counts up to March 28th
Univariate
Actual
Prediction (S.D.)
95% C.I.
Absolute Eﬀect (S.D.)

With Cov.

Avg.

Cum.

Avg.

Cum.

513

12829

513

12829

600 (12)

1123 (49)

596 (9)

14899 (224)

[580, 624]

[14490, 15600]

[580, 614]

[14500, 15341]

-87 (12)

-2182 (300)

-83 (9)

-2070 (224)

95% C.I.

[-111, -66]

[-2771, -1661]

[-100, -67]

[-2512, -1671]

Relative Eﬀect (S.D.)

-15% (2%)

-15% (2%)

-14% (1.5%)

-14% (1.5%)

[-18%, -11%]

[-18%, -11%]

[-17%, -11%]

[-17%, -11%]

95% C.I.
Post. tail-area prob. p:

0.00279

0.00208

Post. prob. causal eﬀect:

99.72%

99.79%

Table A10: Causal Impact Analysis - Overall Crimes

40

