A simple Stochastic SIR model for COVID-19 Infection Dynamics
for Karnataka after interventions – Learning from European Trends

arXiv:2003.11920v3 [q-bio.PE] 16 Apr 2020

14th April 2020

Ashutosh Simha

R. Venkatesha Prasad

Sujay Narayana

Department of Software Science
Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia
ashutosh.iisc@gmail.com

Delft University of Technology
Delft, the Netherlands
rvprasad@acm.org

Delft University of Technology
Delft, the Netherlands
sujaynarayana@gmail.com

Abstract—In this short note we model the region-wise trends
of the evolution to COVID-19 infections using a stochastic SIR
model. The SIR dynamics are expressed using Itô-stochastic
differential equations. We first derive the parameters of the model
from the available daily data from European regions based on a
0 0
x -days1 history of infections, recoveries and deaths. The derived
parameters have been aggregated to project future trends for the
Indian subcontinent, which is currently at an early stage in the
infection cycle. The projections are meant to serve as a guideline
for strategizing the socio-political counter measures to mitigate
COVID-19. This article considers the latest data for Europe and
India.

the growth rate of infections. This is done in order to provide
insights for selective quarantining and lockdowns.
II. S TOCHASTIC SIR MODEL
The evolution of COVID-19 infections in each region, has
been modeled via the stochastic susceptible-infected-recovered
(SIR) model [1] which is given as,

I. I NTRODUCTION
COVID-19 has brought misery to many regions in the world,
especially in Europe. However, it has just taken off in other
parts of the world. The remaining regions, including India
hosts huge population approximately more than 50% of the
world population. There is an eminent danger and most of
these population are under the poverty-line or the countries
do not have huge resources for medical interventions for
affected patients. The options are limited – either go for herd
immunity which can backfire and it is too risky or lockdown
and restrict the population from moving around. Thus we try
to factor in the percentage of population allowed to move
around (some are essential services and some not obeying
the orders) and assuming the mobility factors appropriately2 ,
we try to predict what can happen during the lockdown. We
specifically take Italian case for Karnataka because of the
population resemblance.
The dynamics governing the evolution of the COVID-19
infections have been modeled using a stochastic differential
equation SIR model [1]. The parameters of this model have
been initially optimized for a set of European regions, individually. An aggregate of these parameters have then been
used for projecting the future trends for the Indian region,
specifically for Karnataka state. Multiple projections have been
generated by varying the exposure factor Ef that influences
1 To find the value of 0 x0 , please look at the graphs. This is because, this
article is constantly being updated with new data every 2-3 days.
2 For example, we assume that a person is mobile only around (60 x 20) km2
area, which is approximately 10% of the area of Karnataka. Such assumption
which on the surface looks admissible

dS(t)

= −Ef βS(t)C(t)dt

dC(t)

=

dR(t)

= γC(t)dt − σC(t)dWt ,


Ef βS(t)C(t) − γC(t) dt + σC(t)dWt

C(0)

= C0 , S(0) = S0

S(0)

= Ptotal − R(0) − C(0).

(1)

(2)

Model states
t is a daily-time parameter.
C(t) denotes the number of active infections at time t.
S(t) denotes the total susceptible population at time t.
R(t) denotes the total number of recoveries and deaths
at time t.
5) dC(t), dS(t), dR(t) denotes the change in the states at
time t.
6) dWt is an incremental Weiner process (Brownian motion), which models the randomness in the evolution.
7) Ef ∈ [0, 1] which multiplies β is the exposure factor
which models the interventions to subdue infection
spread, such as lockdowns, quarantining, and preventive
measures.
1)
2)
3)
4)

Model parameters
•

•

Growth rate: the constant β denotes the growth rate,
which factors the rise in the number of infections, due to
interactions between susceptible and infected population.
This parameter is a lumped constants which is meant
to account for: (a) the population size, (b) reproduction
number R0 of COVID-19, and (c) exposure-factor (which
depends on mobility, precautionary measures, etc.).
γ is the rate of outcomes, i.e., the rate at which the
infections are neutralized, which may be due to recovery

TABLE I: Model parameters assumed. These numbers are
slightly pessimistic.
Region
Germany

Ptotal
8.28 × 107

β
4.6 × 10−9

Spain
France
Italy
India

4.67 × 107
6.7 × 107
6.055 × 107
133.92 × 107

7.5 × 10−9
4.4 × 10−9
4.5 × 10−9
1.75 × 10−10

•

•

γ
0.005(1 − 28),
0.045(29 − 39)
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.02

σ
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.025
0.01

or death. It is assumed that recovered persons would not
spread the infections again (at least for a window of a
month).
σ is a parameter used to model the stochasticity or
randomness in the evolution, which may cause local
deviations from the typical (exponential) trends.
Ptotal is the population of the region, C0 and S0 are
initial number of infections and susceptible individuals.

Fig. 1: SIR model for Germany. Day 1 = 24th Feb 2020.
Interventions after day 26 resulted in Ef = 0.28

III. PARAMETERS BASED ON E UROPEAN TRENDS
The parameters of the SIR model were optimized based on
the data obtained for different European regions and India. The
criterion for optimization was to simultaneously minimize the
square integral error, terminal error and terminal rate error,
between the actual data and daily samples of the simulated
data. Further, because we have data for more number of days
for European countries, we try to use the parameters from
those countries and appropriate it on the Indian data which is
for lesser number of days. The assumption is that India may
be in the catch game (which, of course, we do not want) if the
behaviour of people is taken to be similar. We have to base
our predictions based on some gross assumptions under the
given circumstances.
Note: We have taken the Italian and German data 4 days
earlier than France and Spain in order to reflect the earlier
trend before their respective lockdown conditions. This will
enable us to simulate for various levels of lockdown percentages (exposure factor).

Fig. 2: SIR model for Spain. Day 1 = 28th Feb 2020.
Interventions after day 23 resulted in Ef = 0.45

V. P ROJECTIONS FOR I NDIA
A. Nationwide projection

IV. S IMULATION RESULTS
The SIR model has been simulated and the parameters
have been optimized based on the infection trends obtained
for European countries and India (after 15th March, when
the infections started to show an exponential trend). The
stochastic differential equations have been simulated using the
Euler-Maruyama numerical integration method [2]. We present
below how our model follows the statistics from various
European countries.

The SIR model has been simulated beyond the ‘x0 -days
of considered data for India, with parameters averaged over
the European regions considered above, as well as with the
parameters obtained for the Indian region. This is done in
order to demonstrate the possible growth of infections in India,
based on the current trend so far (which is an optimistic
case), or based on the European trend (which is the case to
be prepared for). The exposure factor Ef has been varied to
scale down the rate of infections β. This factor illustrates the
additional reduction in mobility due to state-wide lock-down
and quarantining measures, which are essential for maintaining
new infections within reasonable limits. For India we have two
sets, (i) using the available data only from India and (ii) taking

Fig. 3: SIR model for France. Day 1 = 28th Feb 2020.
Interventions after day 21 resulted in Ef = 0.6

Fig. 5: SIR model for India. Day 1 = 15th March 2020.
Intervention: day 8 to day 15; Ef = 0.6, day 15 to day 22;
Ef = 0.6 (lockdown violations), day 22 onwards Ef = 0.6.
Projections are done from day 23 onwards (when the
parameters were fixed) in order to assess the validity of the
model. This figure will be continuously updated.

Fig. 4: SIR model for Italy. Day 1 = 24th Feb 2020.
Interventions after day 19 resulted in Ef = 0.45
the model parameters from considered European countries and
projecting on Indian case.
Note: We have four graphs in each set. For example, when
we use Ef = 1, that means there is no lockdown. When we use
Ef = 0.5 exposure half of the country/state is in lockdown.
This is to show the gravity of the situation if the lockdown is
not respected.
B. Karnataka Projections
The average European parameters have been used to project
the future trends for the state of Karnataka. The initial number
of infections is assumed taken as 113 (3rd April) to account for
additional unreported or undetected infections, over reported
ones. We have made the assumption here that lockdown is in
place and we have taken varied percentage of people obeying
the rules.

Fig. 6: Projections for India with varying rates of exposure
using Indian parameters. Since we already have the data for
previous days, our prediction was from the Day-1 = 3rd
April.
Let us summarize very briefly what we observe.
• Below 25% exposure required for avoiding exponential
growth for Karnataka, as well as for India using both
Indian parameters and averaged European parameters.
• Fig.9 suggests the inevitable need for an Extended lockdow period for several months for Karnataka, or until
a vaccine is available.
• By ‘lockdown’ we mean restricted mixing i.e. fewer
susceptible individuals s(t) interact with fewer infected
individuals c(t), thereby introducing a reduction in the

Fig. 7: Projections for India with varying rates of exposure
using Average European parameters. Since we already have
the data for previous days, our prediction was from the
Day-1 = 3rd April.

Fig. 8: Projections for Karnataka with varying rates of
exposure using averaged European parameters. Initial active
infections taken as 113 as on 3rd April. The random
fluctuations are dominant in the fourth quadrant, due to
lower Ef .

•

factor Ef in the dynamics.
Note: The previous version of this draft uploaded on arxiv
on 29th march (v2) predicted a total number of 10080
active infections in India, 30 days from 15th of March
(See Fig.8 of v2 of [3]). As on 14th April, the number of
recorded active infections is 9872. The number of active
infections on 29th March was 902.
VI. VARYING L OCKDOWN S CHEDULES

The usual tendency is to relax a bit when the situation is
under control to address the economic issues. However in the

Fig. 9: Projections for Karnataka for 365 days with varying
interventions using European average parameters.

case of COVID-19, we can not do that because we would be
just postponing the issues. This we can see in the Figs 10 to
16. To understand what can happen if the lockdown is relaxed
by 50% for sometime and again the lockdown is imposed. For
example, we close all the schools, restaurants and theaters and
allow only workers to move out. This idea looks like a good
compromise since essential work and people having difficulties
because of lockdown can carryout their work. Further, only
50% of the population are allowed. To understand such a
situation, we simulated the ON-OFF model with 50% duty
cycle.
Simulations are done by varying Ef over time, in order to
understand the infection response to time varying lockdown
schedules over 6 months for Karnataka. Note that a lower
Ef could also indicate a mobile society, but with appropriate
preventive measures, not just purely lockdown.
The various response curves have been plotted to serve as
a guideline for selecting a particular lockdown schedule, or
a mix of schedules, such that the infections are minimized
simultaneously with the socio-economic losses incurred due
to the lockdown. However, consistently the data shows that
the effect of such a relaxation will only to shift the peaking
and it does not help in any ways except getting a few months
for preparation initially. We know that considering the scales
for India we will not be able to handle even after six months
the numbers that we see from the simulations. The trend is
that after low infections over initial cycles, the infections
will fluctuate with large magnitude. This method could be
adopted if good medical support can be guaranteed. A similar
simulation can be found in [4]. Our results Figs 10 to 16 are
for Karnataka with initial condition of 113 infections on 3rd
of April 2020.
Thus the only concrete step is to lockdown till we localize
the cases with 99.999% accuracy and then allow people to
cautiously start resuming their work.

Fig. 10: For Karnataka with initial condition of 113
infections on 3rd of April 2020. 95% Lockdown for two
weeks and 50% relaxation (for example schools are closed
throughout, essential businesses are open).

Fig. 12: 4 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

Fig. 13: 5 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

Fig. 11: 3 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

VII. C ONCLUSIONS
This is a continuous work in which we are trying to find the
model parameters everyday and project the possible scenarios,
by varying the exposure factor for the rate of infection, as a
result of evolving levels of quarantining. While this is not a
completely verifiable projection, the model parameters look
quite consistent, however they may reflect an over estimation
of the projected number of infections in order to compensate
for the unreported or undetected infections. Thus, we may take
the numbers in this note to be a guide for further action by
the law enforcing authorities.
R EFERENCES
[1] Maki, Yoshihiro, and Hideo Hirose. ”Infectious disease spread analysis
using stochastic differential equations for SIR model.” 2013 4th Interna-

tional Conference on Intelligent Systems, Modelling and Simulation. IEEE,
2013.
[2] Kloeden, P. E., and Pearson, R. A. (1977). The numerical solution of
stochastic differential equations. The ANZIAM Journal, 20(1), 8-12.
[3] Simha, Ashutosh, R. Venkatesha Prasad, and Sujay Narayana. ”A simple
Stochastic SIR model for COVID 19 Infection Dynamics for Karnataka:
Learning from Europe.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11920 (2020), v2(29th
march).
[4] [Online] Gideon Lichfield. ”We’re not going back to normal.”
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/03/17/905264/coronaviruspandemic-social-distancing-18-months/ [accessed on 15th April 2020]

Fig. 14: 6 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

Fig. 17: 6 weeks cycle for one year.

Fig. 15: 7 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

Fig. 18: 4 weeks cycle for one year.

Fig. 16: 8 weeks cycle similar to Fig.10.

