Genomics-guided molecular maps of coronavirus targets in human cells: a path toward
the repurposing of existing drugs to mitigate the pandemic
Gennadi V. Glinsky1
1

Institute of Engineering in Medicine

University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. MC 0435
La Jolla, CA 92093-0435, USA
Correspondence: gglinskii@ucsd.edu
Web: http://iem.ucsd.edu/people/profiles/guennadi-v-glinskii.html

Running title: Genomics-guided mitigation maps for coronavirus pandemic
Key words: SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus; genomics; mitigation approaches; drugs & medicinal
substances repurposing

Abstract
Human genes required for SARS-CoV-2 entry into human cells, ACE2 and FURIN, were
employed as baits to build genomics-guided maps of up-stream regulatory elements, their
expression and functions in human body, including pathophysiologically-relevant cell types.
Genes acting as repressors and activators of the ACE2 and FURIN genes were identified based
on the analyses of gene silencing and overexpression experiments as well as relevant
transgenic mouse models. Panels of repressors (VDR; GATA5; SFTPC; HIF1a) and activators
(HMGA2; INSIG1) were then employed to identify existing drugs that could be repurposed to
mitigate the coronavirus infection. Present analyses identify Vitamin D and Quercetin as
promising pandemic mitigation agents. Gene expression profiles of Vitamin D and Quercetin
activities and their established safety records as over-the-counter medicinal substances suggest
that they may represent viable candidates for further assessment and considerations of their
potential as coronavirus pandemic mitigation agents. Notably, gene set enrichment analyses
and expression profiling experiments identify multiple drugs, most notably testosterone,
dexamethasone, and doxorubicin, smoking, and many disease conditions that appear to act as
putative coronavirus infection-promoting agents. Discordant patterns of Testosterone versus
Estradiol impacts on SCARS-CoV-2 targets suggest a plausible molecular explanation of the
apparently higher male mortality during coronavirus pandemic.

Introduction
Coronavirus pandemic 2020 caused by the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 virus is rapidly
entering the most dangerous acute phase of its evolution in the United States. Absence of the
vaccine and lack of efficient targeted therapeutic approaches emphasizes the urgent need for
identification of candidate pandemic mitigation agents among existing drugs and medicinal
substances.
SARS-CoV-2 virus was discovered in December 2019 and shortly thereafter it was
isolated and sequenced (Zhou et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020). Recent analyses of the structure,
function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein revealed the key role of the
ACE2 and FURIN genes in facilitating the high-affinity binding of viral particles and their entry
into human cells (Walls et al., 2020). The efficient invasion of host cells by the SARS-CoV-2 is
further enhanced by the presence of the unexpected furin cleavage site, which is cleaved during
the biosynthesis (Walls et al., 2020). This novel feature distinguishes the previously known
SARS-CoV and the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 viruses and possibly contributes to the
expansion of the cellular tropism of the SARS-CoV-2 (Walls et al., 2020). Collectively, these
observations identified protein products of the human genes ACE2 and FURIN as the highaffinity receptor (ACE2) and invasion-promoting protease (FURIN) acting as the principal
mediators of the SARS-CoV-2 invasion into human cells.
In this contribution, genomic screens were performed employing the ACE2 and FURIN
genes as baits to build genomics-guided human tissues-tailored maps of up-stream regulatory
elements, their expression and functions. To identify the high-priority list of potential candidate
mitigation agents, the validation analyses were performed using gene silencing and
overexpression experiments as well as relevant transgenic mouse models with the emphasis on
pathophysiologically-relevant cell types. Panels of repressors (VDR; GATA5; SFTPC) and
activators (HMGA2; INSIG1) of the ACE2 and FURIN expression were identified and then

employed to identify existing drugs and medicinal substances that could be repurposed to
ameliorate the outcomes of the coronavirus infection. Two of the most promising candidate
mitigation agents, namely Vitamin D and Quercetin, manifest gene expression-altering activities
and have established safety records as over-the-counter medicinal substances that seem
sufficient for further assessment and considerations of their potential utility for amelioration of
the clinical course of coronavirus pandemic. Unexpectedly, present analyses revealed
discordant patterns of Testosterone versus Estradiol impacts on SCARS-CoV-2 targets with the
former manifesting the potential coronavirus infection-promoting activities, which is consistent
with the apparently higher male mortality across all age groups during the coronavirus
pandemic.
Results
Gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA) of genomic features associated with the ACE2 and
FURIN genes
One of the goals of this work was to identify human genes implicated in regulatory cross-talks
affecting expression and functions of the ACE2 and FURIN genes to build a model of genomic
regulatory interactions potentially affecting the SCARS-CoV-2 coronavirus infection. To this end,
GSEA were carried out using the ACE2 and FURIN genes as baits applied to a broad spectrum
of genomic databases reflecting the current state of knowledge regarding the structural,
functional, regulatory, and pathophysiological features that could be statistically linked to these
genes. Expression profiling experiments and GSEA revealed ubiquitous patterns of both ACE2
and FURIN genes across human tissues (Supplemental Figure S1) with notable examples of
high expression of the FURIN gene in the lung (second-ranked tissue in the GTEX database)
and testis being identified as the top-ranked ACE2-expressing tissue. In addition to the human
lung tagged by the ACE2 expression in the ACRHS4 Human Tissues database search, other
noteworthy significantly enriched records are the Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMC),

Natural Killer Cells and Macrophages tagged by the FURIN expression (Supplemental Figure
S1).
GSEA of the virus perturbations’ data sets among Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
records of up-regulated genes identified the SARS-CoV challenge at 96 hrs (GSE47960) as the
most significantly enriched record (Supplemental Figure S2) tagged by expression of both ACE2
and FURIN in human airway epithelial cells. These observations suggest that coronavirus
infection triggers the increased expression of both ACE2 and FURIN genes 4 days after the
initial encounter with host cells (Figure 1; Supplemental Figure S2). These findings were
corroborated by the increased FURIN expression documented in the PBMC of patients with
severe acute respiratory syndrome (Figure 1; Supplemental Figure S1; Reghunathan et al.,
2005). It would be of interest to investigate whether this potentially infection-promoting effect on
expression of the host genes in virus-targeted cells is mediated by the virus-induced release of
the biologically-active molecules with the paracrine mode of actions such as interleukins and
cytokines.
GSEA identified numerous significantly enriched records of common human disorders
manifesting up-regulation of either ACE or FURIN genes (Supplemental Figure S3), which is
consistent with the clinical observations that individuals with underlying health conditions are
more likely to have clinically severe and lethal coronavirus infection. Similarly, exploration of the
DisGeNET database of human disorders highlighted multiple disease states’ records
manifesting altered expression of either ACE2 of FURIN genes (Supplemental Figure S3).
Cigarette smoking appears to significantly increase the ACE2 expression in human large airway
epithelial cells (Supplemental Figure S3), indicating that cigarette smoking should be considered
as a potential coronavirus infection-promoting agent.

Figure 1. Effects of viral challenges on expression of the ACE2 and FURIN genes.
a. Gene Set Enrichment analyses of the Virus Perturbations from GEO focused on upregulated genes.
b.

Increased FURIN expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of patients
with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).

Gene Ontology (GO) analyses revealed that ACE2 and FURIN genes are associated
with the largely non-overlapping records of GO Biological Processes, GO Molecular Functions,
and GO Cellular Components (Supplemental Figure S4). The common significantly enriched
records are Viral Life Cycle (GO Biological Process 2018); Peptidase activity (acting on L-amino
acid peptides) and Endopeptidase activity (GO Molecular Function 2018); Membrane raft (GO
Cellular Component 2018); Meprin A complex and Retrotrasposon nucleocapsid (Jensen
Compartments).
Identifications of the enriched records of transcription factor-binding sites affecting the
ACE2 and FURIN expression
GSEA of the enriched records of transcription factors’ binding sites (TFBS) using
ENCODE TF ChIP-seq 2015 and ChEA 2016 databases revealed predominantly distinct
patterns of TFBS associated with the ACE2 and FURIN genes (Supplemental Figure S5).
Common TFBS shared by both ACE2 and FURIN genes are FOS, JUND, EP300 (ENCODE TF
ChIP-seq 2015) and GATA1, GATA2, RUNX1, FOXA1, HNF4A (ChIP-seq 2015). Consistent
with these findings, non-overlapping profiles of significantly enriched records associated with
either ACE2 or FURIN genes were observed of pathways (BioPlanet 2019 database), proteinprotein interactions (PPI) hub proteins (PPI Hub Proteins database), and drugs affecting ACE2
and FURIN expression (Drug Signatures Database, DSigDB), indicating that regulatory
mechanisms governing the expression and activities of the ACE2 and FURIN genes are
predominantly discordant (Supplemental Figure S5).
Next, the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was interrogated to gauge the
effects on ACE2 and FURIN expression of transcription factors having TFBS associated with
their promoters. There are multiple relevant GEO records reporting the activation effects of the
JNK1/c-FOS pathway on ACE2 and FURIN expression as well as the activation effects of
FURIN depletion on expression of the Fos, Jun, Jund, and Junb genes (Supplemental Figure

S5). Conversely, c-Jun inhibition (effect of the dominant negative c-Jun) or c-Jun depletion (cJun knockout) has resulted in decreased expression of the FURIN gene (Supplemental Figure
S5). The summary of these observations is reported in the Figure 2.
Similarly, there are several reports indicating that depletion of either Hnf4a or Runx1 in
mouse cells and RUNX1 in human cells decreases the ACE2 and FURIN expression
(Supplemental Figure S6). Conversely, FURIN depletion enhances expression of the Runx1 and
Foxa1 genes in murine T cells (Supplemental Figure S6). In contrast, FURIN depletion
decreases expression of the Hnf4a gene, while Hnf4a depletion decreases the FURIN gene
expression (Supplemental Figure S6). The summary of these observations is reported in the
Figure 2.
Identification of the VDR and HIF1a genes as putative repressors of the ACE2 expression
Next GSEA of genomic databases were performed to identify the potential activators and
repressors of the ACE2 and FURIN genes. Analysis of the ARCHS4 transcription factors’ coexpression database identified the VDR genes that co-expressed with both ACE2 and FURIN
genes in human tissues (Supplemental Figure S7). Other significantly enriched records manifest
non-overlapping patterns of co-expression with either ACE2 of FURIN genes. The GTEX
expression profile of the VDR gene in human tissues revealed the ubiquitous pattern of
expression and placed the VDR expression in human lungs in the top quartile (Supplemental
Figure S7). Analysis of gene expression profiling experiments of wild type and vitamin D
receptor (Vdr) knockout primary bone marrow-derived macrophages reported by Helming et al.
(2005) demonstrate increased expression of the ACE2 gene in the VDR knockout cells
(Supplemental Figure S7) implicating the product of the VDR gene as the putative repressor of
the ACE2 expression. Consistent with this hypothesis, Vitamin D appears to inhibit the ACE2
expression in human bronchial smooth muscle cells (Supplemental Figure S7).

Figure 2. Pathways and genes affecting the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 virus-related
host targets.
a. JNK1/c-FOS pathway-associated activation of the ACE2 and FURIN expression may trigger
the auto-regulatory negative feed-back loop of the FURIN-mediated repression of the
expression of JUN, JUNB, JUND, and c-FOS genes.
b. RUNX1 pathway-associated activation of the ACE2 and FURIN expression may trigger the
auto-regulatory negative feed-back loop of the FURIN-mediated repression of
the RUNX1 gene expression
c. HNF4a pathway-associated activation of the ACE2 and FURIN expression may trigger the
auto-regulatory positive feed-back loop of the FURIN-mediated activation of
the HNF4a expression.

Notably, examinations of direct and reciprocal effects of the VDR gene and Vitamin D
administration on expression of the JNK1/c-FOS pathway genes revealed the expression
profiles consistent with the potential therapeutic utility of the Vitamin D administration and
activation of the VDR gene expression (Supplemental Figure S7). Analyses of direct and
reciprocal effects of the VDR gene and Vitamin D administration on the HNF4a expression
revealed that HNF4a depletion in human and murine cells inhibits the VDR gene expression,
while the Vdr gene depletion increases the Hnf4a expression (Supplemental Figure S7). These

result are consistent with the hypothesis stating that Vitamin D administration and activation of
the VDR gene expression may have mitigating effects on the coronavirus infection. The
summary of these findings is reported in the Figure 3.
GSEA of the Transcription Factor’s Perturbations Followed by Expression database and
GEO Gene Perturbations database focused on up-regulated genes identified HIF1a and
POU5F1 gene products as putative repressors of the ACE2 and FURIN expression
(Supplemental Figure S8). These findings were corroborated by observations that HIF1a
overexpression in human embryonic kidney cells significantly inhibits the ACE2 expression
(Supplemental Figure S8). Notably, Vitamin D significantly increases expression of the HIF1a
gene in human bronchial smooth muscle cells (Supplemental Figure S8), suggesting that VDR
and HIF1A genes may cooperate as repressors of the ACE2 expression.
GSEA identify Estradiol and Quercetin as putative candidate coronavirus infection
mitigation agents.
GSEA of the Drug Perturbations from GEO database focused on down-regulated genes
identified Estradiol and Quercetin among the top significantly enriched records (Supplemental
Figure S9). Estradiol appears to affect both FURIN and ACE2 expression, while Quercetin
seems to target the ACE2 expression. Consistently, GSEA of the Ligand Perturbations from
GEO focused on down-regulated genes identified five of Estradiol administration records (50%)
among top ten significantly enriched ligand perturbations records (Supplemental Figure S9).

Figure 3. Effects of the VDR gene and Vitamin D on pathways and genes affecting the
newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 virus-related host targets.
a. JNK1/c-FOS pathway-associated activation of the ACE2 and FURIN expression may
trigger the auto-regulatory negative feed-back loop of the FURIN-mediated repression of
the expression of JUN, JUNB, JUND, and c-FOS genes.
b. HNF4a pathway-associated activation of the ACE2 and FURIN expression may trigger
the auto-regulatory positive feed-back loop of the FURIN-mediated activation of
the HNF4a expression.

GSEA of the Drug Perturbations from GEO database focused on up-regulated genes indicated
that doxorubicin, imatinib, and bleomycin may act as potential coronavirus infection-promoting
agents (data not shown). Collectively, these observations provide the initial evidence supporting
the hypothesis that both Estradiol and Quercetin may function as potential candidate
coronavirus infection mitigation agents.
Consistent with this hypothesis, interrogation of the GEO records revealed that
Quercetin appears to inhibit expression of several potential coronavirus infection-promoting
genes: c-FOS expression in human and rat cells (Supplemental Figure S9); Runx1 expression
in rat cells (Supplemental Figure S9); HNF4a expression in human cells (Supplemental Figure
S9). However, Quercetin administration appears to increase c-Fos expression in cultured rat
cardiomyocytes (Supplementary Figure S9).
Confirmation of the Estradiol and Quercetin activities as potential candidate coronavirus
infection mitigation agents.
Results of GSEA suggest that both Estradiol and Quercetin appear to exhibit biological activities
consistent with the activity of medicinal compounds expected to mitigate the coronavirus
infection. Next, manual curation of the GEO data sets has been carried out to identify further
experimental evidence supporting this hypothesis. Administration of Estradiol appears to inhibit
ACE2 and/or FURIN expression in rat, mouse, and human cells (Supplemental Figure S10) and
the effects of Estradiol seem to be mediated by the estrogen receptor beta. In agreement with
the hypothesis on potential therapeutic utility of the Quercetin, administration of Quercetin has
resulted in significantly decreased expression of the ACE2 gene during differentiation of human
intestinal cells (Supplemental Figure S10).

However, Estradiol administration appears to manifest the cell type-specific effects on cFOS expression (Supplemental Figure S10). For example, it decreases the c-FOS expression in
endometrium of Macaca mulatta while it increases c-FOS expression in the mouse uterus
(Supplemental Figure S10). These observations indicate that any definitive conclusions
regarding the potential clinical utility of identified herein potential coronavirus infection mitigating
agents should be made only after appropriately designed and carefully executed preclinical
studies and randomized clinical trials. In contrast to the Estradiol, which exhibit evidence of both
putative coronavirus infection-mitigating actions and coronavirus infection-promoting activities,
administration of Testosterone appears to manifest more clearly-defined patterns of altered
gene expression consistent with Testosterone being identified as the potential coronavirus
infection-promoting agent (Supplemental Figure S11).
Potential mechanisms affecting gene expression inferred from transgenic mouse models
and observed in pathophysiologically and therapeutically relevant mouse and human
cells.
Taken into considerations that the effects of potential coronavirus infection mitigation agents
often manifest cell type-specific patterns of gene expression changes, next the manual curation
of the GEO gene expression profiles were carried out to identify the relevant host genetic
targets and putative mitigation agents. These analyses identified several candidate repressors
(VDR; GATA5; SFTC; HIF1a) and activators (INSIG1; HMGA2) of the ACE2 and FURIN
expression (Supplemental Figure S12). Notably, the effects on gene expression of the
administration of either Vitamin D or Quercetin appear consistent with their definition as putative
coronavirus infection mitigation agents (Supplemental Figure S12). The summary of these
observations is presented in the Figure 4. The conclusion regarding the findings of cell typespecific effects on gene expression of putative coronavirus infection mitigating agents remains
valid and examples of the potential negative effects of drugs on the ACE2 expression are

reported in the Supplemental Figure S12). For example, the HIF1a expression is significantly
increased in murine alveolar type I cells deficient in sterol-response element-binding proteins
inhibitor Insig1 (Supplemental Figure S6). These data indicate that the INSIG1 gene product,
which appears to function as activator of the ACE2 expression, may function as the inhibitor of
the HIF1a expression, thus interfering with the HIF1a-mediated ACE2 repression in specific cell
types. Additional examples of the potential positive and negative effects on gene expression
inferred from transgenic mouse models are reported in the Supplemental Figure S13.
Conclusion
The main motivation of this work was to identify human genes implicated in regulatory crosstalks affecting expression and functions of the ACE2 and FURIN genes to build a model of
genomic regulatory interactions potentially affecting the SCARS-CoV-2 coronavirus infection. A
panel of genes acting as activators and/or repressor of the ACE2 and/or FURIN expression then
could be employed to search for existing drugs and medicinal substances that, based on their
mechanisms of activities, could be defined as the candidate coronavirus infection mitigation
agents. After experimental and clinical validation, these existing drugs could be utilized to
ameliorate the clinical severity of the pandemic.

Figure 4. Effects of the VDR gene, Vitamin D, and Quercetin on pathways and genes
affecting the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 virus-related host targets.
a. Effects of the VDR gene, Vitamin D, and Quercetin on repressors of the ACE
expression.
b. Effects of the VDR gene, Vitamin D, and Quercetin on activators of the ACE expression.

c. Effects of the VDR gene, Vitamin D, and Quercetin on repressors of the ACE expression
reflecting GATA5 inhibitory effects on SFTPC expression in the mouse lungs.
d. Effects of the VDR gene, Vitamin D, and Quercetin on activators of the ACE expression
reflecting the cell type-specific effects of Vitamin D and Quercetin: Vitamin D-induced
activation of the INSIG1 expression in human bronchial smooth muscle cells and
Quercetin-induced activation of the INSIG1 expression in human intestinal cells.

This knowledge could also be exploited in an ongoing effort to discover novel targeted
therapeutics tailored to block the SCARS-CoV-2 infection.
One of the important findings documented herein is that identified medicinal compounds
with potential coronavirus infection-mitigating effects also appear to induce cell type-specific
patterns of gene expression alterations. Therefore, based on all observations reported in this
contribution, it has been concluded that any definitive recommendations regarding the potential
clinical utility of identified herein potential coronavirus infection mitigating agents, namely
Vitamin D and Quercetin, should be made only after appropriately designed and carefully
executed preclinical studies and randomized clinical trials.
Present analyses highlighted the major uncertainty regarding the outcomes of the
current pandemic associated with the potential of the SCARS-CoV-2 virus for the expansion of
the cellular tropism (Walls et al., 2020) based on access to genetically vulnerable host cells due
to nearly ubiquitous expression of the ACE2 and FURIN genes in the human body. Particularly
dangerous seems the potential ability of the the SCARS-CoV-2 virus to infect the immune cells.
Taken together with predominantly cell type-specific patterns of expression of genetic
repressors and activators of the ACE2 and FURIN expression it may complicate the
development of universally effective therapeutics. The availability of many genetically-relevant
transgenic mouse models, in particular, the Furin null mice, should be regarded as a
considerable advantage for preclinical development of drug candidates tailored to target the
coronavirus infection. Specifically, the potential therapeutic utility of the highly selective (Ki, 600

pm) intrinsically-specific FURIN inhibitor (a1-antitrypsin Portland (a1-PDX); Jean et al., 1998)
should be tested in the immediate future.
Methods
Data source and analytical protocols
All data analyzed in this study were obtained from the publicly available sources. Gene set
enrichment analyses (GSEA) were carried-out using the Enrichr bioinformatics platform, which
enables the interrogation of nearly 200,000 gene sets from more than 100 gene set libraries.
The Enrichr API (January 2020 through March 2020 releases) (Chen et al., 2013; Kuleshov et
al., 2016) was used to test genes linked to the ACE2 and FURIN genes (or other genes of
interest) for significant enrichment in numerous functional categories. In all tables and plots
(unless stated otherwise), in addition to the nominal p values and adjusted p values, the
“combined score” calculated by Enrichr is reported, which is a product of the significance
estimate and the magnitude of enrichment (combined score c = log(p) * z, where p is the
Fisher’s exact test p-value and z is the z-score deviation from the expected rank). Validation of
the GSEA findings were carried-out employing the computational retrievals and manual
curations of the gene expression profiles of the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.
Statistical Analyses of the Publicly Available Datasets
All statistical analyses of the publicly available genomic datasets, including error rate estimates,
background and technical noise measurements and filtering, feature peak calling, feature
selection, assignments of genomic coordinates to the corresponding builds of the reference
human genome, and data visualization, were performed exactly as reported in the original
publications (Glinsky, 2015-2020; Glinsky and Barakat, 2019; Glinsky et al., 2019; Guffanti et
al., 2018) and associated references linked to the corresponding data visualization tracks
(http://genome.ucsc.edu/). Any modifications or new elements of statistical analyses are
described in the corresponding sections of the Results. Statistical significance of the Pearson

correlation coefficients was determined using GraphPad Prism version 6.00 software. Both
nominal and Bonferroni adjusted p values were estimated. The statistical significance between
the mean values was estimated using the Student T-test. The significance of the differences in
the numbers of events between the groups was calculated using two-sided Fisher’s exact and
Chi-square test, and the significance of the overlap between the events was determined using
the hypergeometric distribution test (Tavazoie et al., 1999).
Supplemental Information
Supplemental information includes Supplemental Figures S1-S13. Supplemental information is
available upon request.
Author Contributions
This is a single author contribution. All elements of this work, including the conception of ideas,
formulation, and development of concepts, execution of experiments, analysis of data, and
writing of the paper, were performed by the author.
Acknowledgements
This work was made possible by the open public access policies of major grant funding
agencies and international genomic databases and the willingness of many investigators
worldwide to share their primary research data. This work was supported in part by the
OncoScar, Inc.

References
Chen EY, Tan CM, Kou Y, Duan Q, Wang Z, Meirelles GV, Clark NR, Ma'ayan A. 2013. Enrichr:
interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics 14,
128. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-128.

Glinsky GV. 2015. Transposable elements and DNA methylation create in embryonic stem cells
human-specific regulatory sequences associated with distal enhancers and non-coding RNAs.
Genome Biol Evol 7: 1432-1454.

Glinsky GV. 2016. Mechanistically distinct pathways of divergent regulatory DNA creation
contribute to evolution of human-specific genomic regulatory networks driving phenotypic
divergence of Homo sapiens. Genome Biol Evol 8:2774-88.

Glinsky GV. 2016. Activation of endogenous human stem cell-associated retroviruses (SCARs)
and therapy-resistant phenotypes of malignant tumors. Cancer Lett 376:347-359.

Glinsky GV. 2016. Single cell genomics reveals activation signatures of endogenous SCAR's
networks in aneuploid human embryos and clinically intractable malignant tumors. Cancer Lett
381:176-93.

Glinsky GV. 2017. Human-specific features of pluripotency regulatory networks link NANOG
with fetal and adult brain development. BioRxiv.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/06/19/022913; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/022913.

Glinsky GV. 2018. Contribution of transposable elements and distal enhancers to evolution of
human-specific features of interphase chromatin architecture in embryonic stem cells.
Chromosome Res. 2018. 26: 61-84.

Glinsky G, Durruthy-Durruthy J, Wossidlo M, Grow EJ, Weirather JL, Au KF, Wysocka J,
Sebastiano V. 2018. Single cell expression analysis of primate-specific retroviruses-derived
HPAT lincRNAs in viable human blastocysts identifies embryonic cells co-expressing genetic
markers of multiple lineages. Heliyon 4: e00667. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e00667.
eCollection 2018 Jun. PMID: 30003161.

Glinsky GV, Barakat TS. 2019. The evolution of Great Apes has shaped the functional
enhancers' landscape in human embryonic stem cells. 37:101456. PMID: 31100635. DOI:
10.1016/j.scr.2019.101456

Glinsky GV. 2020. A catalogue of 59,732 human-specific regulatory sequences reveals unique
to human regulatory patterns associated with virus-interacting proteins, pluripotency and brain
development. DNA and Cell Biology, 2020; 39: 126-143. doi: 10.1089/dna.2019.4988.

Guffanti G, Bartlett A, Klengel T, Klengel C, Hunter R, Glinsky G, Macciardi F. 2018. Novel
bioinformatics approach identifies transcriptional profiles of lineage-specific transposable
elements at distinct loci in the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Mol Biol Evol. 35: 24352453. PMID: 30053206. PMCID: PMC6188555. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msy143.

Helming L, Böse J, Ehrchen J, Schiebe S, Frahm T, Geffers R, Probst-Kepper M, Balling R,
Lengeling A. 1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 is a potent suppressor of interferon gammamediated macrophage activation. Blood. 2005; 106: 4351-8.
Jean F, Stella K, Thomas L, Liu G, Xiang Y, Reason AJ, Thomas G. alpha1-Antitrypsin
Portland, a bioengineered serpin highly selective for furin: application as an antipathogenic
agent. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:7293–7298.
Kuleshov MV, Jones MR, Rouillard AD, Fernandez NF, Duan Q, Wang Z, Koplev S, Jenkins SL,
Jagodnik KM, Lachmann A, McDermott MG, Monteiro CD, Gundersen GW, Ma'ayan A. Enrichr:
a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server 2016 update. Nucleic Acids
Research. 2016; gkw377.

Reghunathan R, Jayapal M, Hsu LY, Chng HH, Tai D, Leung BP, Melendez AJ. Expression
profile of immune response genes in patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. BMC
Immunol. 2005; 6:2.

Tavazoie, S., Hughes, J.D., Campbell, M.J., Cho, R.J., and Church, GM. Systematic
determination of genetic network architecture. Nat Genet 1999; 22, 281–285.

Walls AC, Park YJ, Tortorici MA, Wall A, McGuire AT, Veesler D. Structure, function, and
antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell. 2020. pii: S0092-8674(20)30262-2. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058. [Epub ahead of print]
Zhou, P., Yang, X.L., Wang, X.G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang,
C.L., et al. (2020). A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat
origin. Nature. Published online February 3, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.
Zhu, N., Zhang, D., Wang, W., Li, X., Yang, B., Song, J., Zhao, X., Huang, B., Shi, W., Lu, R., et
al. (2020). A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med.
382, 727–733.

