Mobile phone data and COVID-19:
Missing an opportunity?
Nuria Oliver 1,2, Emmanuel Letouzé2,3, Harald Sterly 4, Sébastien Delataille 5, Marco De Nadai6,
Bruno Lepri2,6, Renaud Lambiotte7, Richard Benjamins 8,9, Ciro Cattuto10,11, Vittoria Colizza12,
Nicolas de Cordes13, Samuel P. Fraiberger14, Till Koebe2,15, Sune Lehmann16, Juan Murillo 17, Alex
Pentland 18, Phuong N Pham2,19, Frédéric Pivetta20, Albert Ali Salah2,21, Jari Saramäki22, Samuel V.
Scarpino23, Michele Tizzoni11, Stefaan Verhulst24, Patrick Vinck2,19, 25

March 26, 2020

ELLIS, the European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems
Data-Pop Alliance (USA, Colombia, Mexico, Senegal and Spain)
3
OPAL Project
4
University of Vienna, Austria
5
Rosa, Belgium
6
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
7
University of Oxford, UK
8
Telefonica, Spain
9
OdiseIA, Spain
10
University of Turin, Turin, Italy
11
ISI Foundation, Italy
12
INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Pierre Louis Institute of Epidemiology and Public Health, Paris, France
13
Orange Group, France
14
World Bank, Washington DC, USA
15
Freie University, Berlin, Germany
16
Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark
17
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, Madrid, Spain
18
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
19
Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
20
Dalberg Data Insights, Belgium
21
Utrecht University, The Netherlands
22
Aalto University, Finland
23
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
24
The GovLab, New York University, USA
25
Corresponding author: pvinck@hsph.harvard.edu
1
2

1/16

Abstract
This paper describes how mobile phone data can guide government and public health
authorities in determining the best course of action to control the COVID-19
pandemic and in assessing the effectiveness of control measures such as physical
distancing. It identifies key gaps and reasons why this kind of data is only scarcely
used, although their value in similar epidemics has proven in a number of use cases.
It presents ways to overcome these gaps and key recommendations for urgent action,
most notably the establishment of mixed expert groups on national and regional
level, and the inclusion and support of governments and public authorities early on.
It is authored by a group of experienced data scientists, epidemiologists,
demographers and representatives of mobile network operators who jointly put their
work at the service of the global effort to combat the COVID-19 pandemic.

1. Introduction
The Coronavirus disease 2019-2020 pandemic (COVID-19) poses unprecedented challenges for
governments and societies around the world [Anderson et al., 2020]. In addition to medical measures,
non-pharmaceutical measures have proven to be critical for delaying and containing the spread of
the virus [Chinazzi et al., 2020; Ferguson et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2020; Di
Domenico et al., 2020]. This includes (aggressive) testing and tracing, bans on large gatherings,
school and university closures, international and domestic mobility restrictions and physical
isolation, up to total lockdowns of regions and countries. However, effective and rapid decisionmaking during all stages of the pandemic requires reliable and timely data not only about infections,
but also about human behavior, especially on mobility and physical co-presence of people.
Seminal work on human mobility has shown that mobile phone data can assist the modeling
of the geographical spread of epidemics [Bengtsson et al., 2015; Finger et al., 2016; Tizzoni et al.,
2014; Wesolowski et al., 2012; Wesolowski et al., 2015]. Thus, researchers and governments have
started to collaborate with private companies, most notably mobile network operators, to estimate
and visualize the effectiveness of control measures. In China, Baidu data has been used to evaluate
how the lockdown of Wuhan affected the spread of the virus [Kraemer et al., 2020; Lai et al., 2020].
In Italy, researchers and local governments are collaborating to estimate the effectiveness of travel
restrictions [Pepe et al., 2020; adnkronos, 2020]. European authorities (including Austria, Belgium,
Germany, Italy, France, and Spain) are working with researchers and mobile network operators to
understand the compliance and impact of the social distancing measures put in effect to combat the
COVID-19 pandemic and to identify and predict potential hotspots of the disease [El País 2020; The
Verge 2020]. Using the city of Boston, United States, as a test case, researchers aggregated location
data from over 180 apps to enable precise measurements of social distancing on a day-by-day basis,

2/16

and project in great detail the effects of different policies on the spread of COVID-19 [Martin-Calvò
et al., 2020].
However, there is currently hardly any coordination or information exchange between these
national or even regional initiatives, as also highlighted by Buckee et al. in a letter to Science [Buckee
et al., 2020]. Although ad-hoc mechanisms can be effectively (but not easily) developed at the local
or national level, regional or even global collaborations seem all but impossible given the number of
actors, the range of interests and priorities, the variety of legislations concerned, and the need to
protect civil liberties. The global scale and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic highlight the need for
a more harmonized or coordinated approach.
In the following sections, we outline in what ways and how mobile phone data can help to
better target and design measures to contain and slow the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. We
identify the key reasons why this is not happening on a much broader scale, and we give
recommendations on how to make mobile phone data work against the virus.

2. How can mobile phone data help to tackle the COVID-19
pandemic?
The use of mobile phone data into analytical efforts to control the COVID-19 pandemic can offer a
critical contribution to four broad areas of investigations:
•

Situational awareness would benefit from increased access to previously unavailable
population estimates and mobility information to enable stakeholders across sectors
better understand COVID-19 trends and geographic distribution.

•

Cause-and-effect use cases can help stakeholders identify the key drivers and
consequences of implementing different measures to contain the spread of COVID-19.
They aim to establish which variables make a difference for a problem and whether
further issues might be caused.

•

Prediction tasks would leverage real-time population counts and mobility data to enable
new predictive capabilities and allow stakeholders to assess future risks, needs, and
opportunities.

•

Impact assessment aims to determine which, whether, and how various interventions
affect the spread of COVID-19 and requires data to identify the obstacles hampering
the achievement of certain objectives or the success of particular interventions.

3/16

Situational awareness
●

●

Cause-and-effect

What are the most common mobility

●

flows within and between COVID-

success

affected cities and regions?

approaches?

Which

areas

are

spreading

the

●

epidemics acting as origin nodes in a
●

social

distancing

How do local mobility patterns impact
Are

business’

social

distancing

placed under mobility restrictions?

recommendations resulting in more

Are people continuing to travel or

workers working from home?

congregate after social distancing and

●

travel restrictions were put into place?
●

of

the burden on the medical system?

mobility network, and thus could be
●

What are variables that determine the

In what sectors are people working
most from home?

Are there hotspots at higher risk of

●

What are the social and economic

contamination (due to a higher level of

consequences of movement restriction

mobility,

measures?

higher

concentration

of

population)?
●

What are the key entry points,
locations

and

movements

of

roamers/tourists?
Prediction
●

Impact

How are certain human mobility

●

patterns likely to affect the spread of

human mobility behavior and likely

coronavirus? And what is the likely

disease transmission?

spread of COVID-19, based on existing
disease

models

and

●

up-to-date

●

What is the potential of various
restriction measures to avert infection

mobility data?
●

How have travel restrictions impacted

cases and save lives?

What are the likely effects of mobility

●

What is the effect of mandatory social

restrictions on children’s education

distancing measures, including closure

outcomes?

of schools?

What are likely to be the economic

●

How has the dissemination of public

consequences of restricted mobility for

safety

information

and

voluntary

businesses?

guidance impacted human mobility
behavior and disease spread?
Table 1: Examples of questions by areas of investigation

4/16

Mobile phone data in different epidemiological phases
The importance and relevance of these areas of inquiry differ at various stages of the outbreak, but
mobile phone data provide value throughout the epidemiological cycle, as shown in Fig.1.

Figure 1: Pandemic intervals as defined by the US Center for Disease Control [CDC 2014]
•

In the early recognition and initiation phase of the pandemic, the focus is on
situational analysis and the fast detection of infected cases and their contacts. Research
has shown that quarantine measures of infected individuals and their family members,
combined with surveillance and standard testing procedures, are effective as control
measures in the early stages of the pandemic [Koo et al, 2020]. Individual mobility and
contact data offer information about infected individuals, their locations and social
network. Contact data can be collected through mobile apps [Dong et al., 2019; Ferretti
et al., 2020], interviews, surveys, voluntary sharing of data, or by accessing individual
mobile phone data, which presents serious ethical and legal concerns.

•

During the acceleration phase, when community transmission reaches exponential
levels, the focus is on interventions for containment, which typically involve social
contact and mobility restrictions. Aggregated mobile phone data is here crucial to assess
the efficacy of implemented policies through the monitoring of mobility between and
within affected municipalities. Mobility information also contributes to the building of

5/16

more accurate epidemiological models that can explain and anticipate the spread of the
disease, as shown for Influenza A (H1N1) outbreak [Balcan et al., 2009]. These models,
in turn, can inform the mobilization of resources (e.g. respirators, intensive care units).
•

Finally, during the deceleration and preparation phases, as the peak of infections is
reached, restrictions will likely be lifted. Continued situational monitoring will be
important as the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to come in waves [Ferguson et al.
2020, see Fig. 2]. Near real-time data on mobility and hotspots will be important to
understand how lifting and re-establishing various measures translate into behavior,
especially to find the optimal combination of measures at the right time (e.g. general
mobility restrictions, school closures, banning of large gatherings), and to balance these
restrictions with aspects of economic vitality. After the pandemic has subsided, mobile
data will be helpful for post-hoc analysis of the impact of different interventions on the
progression of the disease, and cost-benefit analysis of mobility restrictions. The
experience may also help design technology such as the Korean app (Corona 100m) to
help people re-starting a (careful) social life without too much stress and further
minimizing the spread of a disease. Along this line, researchers at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and other collaborators are working on Private Kit: Safe Paths
[Barbar et al., 2020], a free open-source and privacy-first contact-tracing technology
that provides individuals with information on their interaction with diagnosed COVID19 carriers.

Fig 2: Illustration of outbreaks (orange curve) and adaptive triggering (blue curve) of suppression
strategies. [Ferguson et al. 2020: 12]

3. Specific metrics for data-supported decisions
Mobile phone traces can be exploited to infer human mobility and social interactions. Researchers
have used various types of mobile network data (e.g. Call Details Records, x Data Records and
passive records), GPS and mobile application data. Some of this data, such as CDRs, are collected

6/16

by mobile network operators for billing reasons, and each record contains information about the time
and (approximate) geographical location of customers' interactions with the phone. Other data
consists of very accurate geographic information that can be collected at a large scale by smartphone
applications (Walle 2020), however often with limited coverage in developing countries and raising
complex questions around privacy and civil liberties.
We here identify some examples of aggregated metrics that can be computed from such data
sources:
•

Origin-destination (OD) matrices are especially useful in the first epidemiological
phases, where the focus is to assess the mobility of people. Researchers can compute the
number of people that move from two different areas daily, which is assumed to be a
proxy of human mobility. The areas might be identified as municipalities, provinces or
even regions. They could be compared to a reference period in order to assess the
reduction in mobility and could inform spatially explicit disease transmission models to
evaluate the potential benefit of such reductions. They are also useful to monitor the
impact of different social and mobility contention measures and to identify regions where
the measures might not be effective or followed by the population.

•

Dwell estimations and hotspots are estimates of particularly high concentration of
people in an area, which can be favorable to the transmission of the virus. These metrics
are typically constructed within a municipality by dividing the city into grids or
neighborhoods [Louail et al., 2014]. The estimated number of people in each geographical
unit can be computed with different time granularities (e.g. 15’, 60’, 24h).

•

Amount of time spent at home, at work, other are estimates of the individual
percentage of time spent at home/work/other location, which can be useful to assess
the local aversion to countermeasures adopted by governments. The home and work
locations need to be computed in a period of time prior to the deployment of mobility
restrictions measures. The percentage of time spent in each location needs to be
computed from stationary points, thus excluding people that move. Variations of the
time spent on different locations is generally computed on an individual basis, and then
spatially aggregated.

•

Contact matrices estimate the number and intensity of the face-to-face interactions
people have in a day. They are typically computed by age-groups, and they showed to
be extremely useful to assess and determine the decrease of the reproduction number of
the virus [Zhang et al., 2020]. However, it is still challenging to estimate face-to-face
interactions from co-location data [Génois and Barrat 2018].

Although there is still little information about the age-specific susceptibility to COVID-19
infection, it is clear that age is an important risk factor for COVID-19 severity. We highlight,

7/16

therefore, the importance of estimating the metrics mentioned above by age groups [Zhang et al.,
2020].

4. Why is the use of mobile phone data not widespread, or a
standard, in tackling epidemics?
At present, there is still a scarce strategic use of mobile phone data for tackling the COVID-19
pandemic. Although local alliances are starting to be formed, an internationally concerted action is
still missing.
In the past, notably in the Ebola outbreak of 2014-2016, several pilot or one-off activities
have been initiated. However, there was no transition to “business as usual” in terms of standardized
procedures to leverage mobile phone data or establish mechanisms for ‘data readiness’ in the country
contexts [The Economist 2014, McDonald, 2016]. Technology has evolved (e.g. OPAL, Flowkit, also
commercial products), high-level meetings have been held (e.g. the European Commission’s B2G
Data Sharing high-level expert group), data analysis and sharing showed promising results, but the
use of metrics derived from mobile phone data by governments and local authorities is almost non-

existent [Maxmen, 2019]. Why does this gap persist despite technical progress?
We identify the following five reasons:
•

Capacity, awareness and digital mindset of governments and public authorities:
Public authorities frequently lack the capacity, both for processing information that
often is complex and requires multidisciplinary expertise (e.g. mixing location and health
data, specialized modeling), as well as for establishing the necessary interdisciplinary
teams and collaborations. Also, many government units are understaffed and sometimes
also lack technological equipment. During the COVID-19 pandemic, most authorities
are overwhelmed by the multiplicity and simultaneity of requests; as they have never
been confronted with such a crisis, there are few predefined procedures and guides, so
targeted and preventive action is quickly abandoned for mass actions. Finally, many
public authorities and decision-makers are not aware of the value that mobile phone
data would provide for decision making and are often used to make decisions without
knowing the full facts and under conditions of uncertainty.

•

Access to data: Most companies, including mobile network operators, tend to be very
reluctant to make data available --- even aggregated and anonymized --- to researchers
and/or governments. Apart from data protection issues, such data are also seen and
used as commercial assets, thus limiting the potential use for humanitarian goals if there
are no sustainable models to support operational systems. One should also be aware
that not all mobile network operators in the world are equal in terms of data maturity.

8/16

Some are actively sharing data as a business, while others have hardly started to collect
and use data.
•

Concerns about privacy and data protection. Governments in China, South Korea,
Israel and elsewhere have openly accessed and used personal mobile phone data for
tracking individual movements and for notifying individuals. However, in other regions,
such as in Europe, both national and regional legal regulations limit such use (especially
the European Union law on data protection and privacy known as the General Data
Protection Regulation - GDPR). Furthermore, around the world, public opinion surveys,
social media and a broad range of civil society actors including consumer groups and
human rights organizations have raised legitimate concerns around the ethics, potential
loss of privacy and long-term impact on civil liberties resulting from the use of individual
mobile data to monitor COVID-19 and send personalized notifications to citizens.

•

Researchers and domain experts tend to define the scope and direction of analytical
problems from their perspective and not necessarily from the perspective of
governments’ needs. Critical decisions have to be taken, while key results are often
published in scientific journals and in jargon that are not easily accessible to ‘outsiders’,
including government workers and policy makers.

•

There is little to no preparedness for immediate and rapid action. On country levels,
there are too few latent/‘standing’ mixed teams, composed of a) representatives of
governments and public authorities, b) mobile network operators, c) different topic
experts (virologists, epidemiologists, data analysts); and there are no procedures and
protocols predefined.

5. From words to deeds: A call to action to fight COVID-19
To effectively build the best, most up to date, most relevant, and actionable knowledge, we call on
governments, mobile network operators and researchers to form mixed teams:
•

Governments should be aware of the value of information and knowledge that can be
derived from mobile phone data analysis, especially for sensible targeting and monitoring
the necessary measures to contain the pandemic. They should enable and leverage the
fair and responsible provision/use of aggregated and anonymized data for this purpose.

•

Mobile network operators should take their social responsibility and the vital role that
they can play in tackling the pandemic. They should reach out to governments and the
research community.

•

Researchers and domain experts (e.g. virologists, epidemiologists, demographers, data
scientists, computer scientists and computational social scientists) should acknowledge
interdisciplinarity and context specificities and sensitivities. They need to include
governments and public authorities early on and throughout their efforts to identify the

9/16

most relevant questions and knowledge needs. Creating multi-disciplinary interinstitutional teams is of paramount importance.
The following principles would significantly improve the effectiveness of these mixed teams:
•

Include governments. Relevant government and public authorities should be involved early,
and researchers need to build upon their knowledge systems and need for information. One
key challenge is to make insights actionable―how can findings such as propagation maps
finally be utilized (e.g. for setting quarantine zones, informing local governments, targeting
communication). At the same time, expectations must be realistic: decisions on measures
should be based on facts, but are in the end, always political decisions.

•

Liaise with data protection authorities and civil liberties advocates early on,
transparently, and have quick iteration cycles with them. Consider creating an ethics and
privacy advisory committees to oversee and provide feedback on the projects. This ensures
that privacy is maintained and raises potential user acceptance. It is possible to make use
of aggregated mobile phone data in line with even the relatively strict European regulations
(GDPR). Earlier initiatives have established principles and methods for sharing data or
indicators without endangering any personal information and build privacy-preserving
solutions that use only incentives to manage behavior [Buckee et al., 2018; de Montjoye et
al., 2018; Oliver et al., 2019]. The early inclusion of the data protection authority in Belgium
(see box) has led to the publishing of a statement by the European Data Protection Board
on how to process mobile phone data in the fight against COVID-19 [EDPB 2020]. Even
while acknowledging the value of mobile phone data, the urgency of the situation should
not lead to losses of data privacy and other civil liberties that might become permanent
after the pandemic. In this regard, the donation of data for good (e.g. the MIT app) and
the direct and limited (in time and scope) sharing of aggregated data by mobile network
operators with (democratic) governments and researchers seems to be less problematic than
the use of individual location data commercially acquired, brought together and analyzed
by commercial enterprises. More generally, any emergency data system set to monitor
COVID-19 and beyond must follow a balanced and well-articulated set of data policies and
guidelines and be subjected to risk assessments.

•

Exchange internationally, with other domain experts, but also with other initiatives and
groups; share findings quickly ― there will be time for peer-reviewed publications later.
Especially in countries with weaker health systems, the targeting and effectiveness of non-

pharmaceutical interventions might make a big difference. This might also imply that
relevant findings are translated from English to other relevant languages.
•

Prepare for all stages of the pandemic. For later stages of the pandemic, and for the
future, a minimum level of “preparedness” for immediate and rapid action is needed. On
country levels, there will be a need of ‘standing’ mixed teams; basic agreements and legal

10/16

prescriptions should be in place, procedures and protocols predefined (also for “appropriate
anonymization and aggregation protocols” [Buckee et al., 2018]).
Finally, in addition to (horizontal) international exchange, we also need international
approaches that are coordinated by supranational bodies. National initiatives might help to a certain
extent but will not be sufficient in the long run. A global pandemic necessitates globally or at least
regionally coordinated work. Here, promising approaches are emerging: the EU Commission has on
23.03.2020 called upon European mobile network operators to hand over anonymized and aggregated
data to the Commission to track virus spread and determine priority areas for medical supplies
[Politico 2020], while other coordination initiatives are emerging in Africa, Latin America and the
Mena-Region. It will be important for such initiatives to link up, share knowledge and collaborate.

11/16

Belgium: “Data Against Corona” taskforce.
On March 13th 2020, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Telecom and Privacy kicked-off
a “Data Against Corona” taskforce that gathered four types of actors: i) representatives from
the ministries, ii) data providers such as Mobile Network Operators and Sciensano (i.e. the
national health data provider), iii) an operational team of experts (e.g. data science, spatial
epidemiology, digital entrepreneurs), and iv) privacy and ethics committees.
The goal of the taskforce was to flatten the curve of the epidemic, by combining
location and epidemiological data, for targeted use cases (e.g. the Minister of Health needs to
monitor the reduction in mobility following national confinement measures, needs to predict
where the virus is likely to propagate to allocate resources). The Minister of Health’s teams
prioritized the issues that would be most helpful, and the task force then collected and analyzed
the relevant data and formulated the results as actionable information.
To effectively support public authorities, the taskforce was built on these success
factors: 1) A clear mandate from the government, with active participation from the cabinets; 2)
a centralized, multi-disciplinary team that had proven experience from other epidemics (e.g.
Ebola, Zika) and could leverage their models in an agile manner; 3) a legal and technical
framework that guarantees privacy rights are preserved (the Belgian Data Protection Authority
pre-authorized the analyses to be done before data processing activities even have begun); and
4) feedback loops where public authorities continuously ranked the use cases by importance,
confirmed which information needed to be provided daily, and linked the results with other task
forces supporting the national crisis cell (e.g. resource allocation taskforce).
In the Belgian example, public authorities took a “privacy-first” approach: use cases
were ranked on effectiveness and privacy impact. From the resulting matrix, the taskforce
prioritized a first wave of use cases based on anonymized and aggregated output. The taskforce
monitored the evolution of the disease closely and prepared the grounds for use cases that
require a stronger trade-off of effectiveness over privacy (i.e. data processing of higher
granularity data).
A similar task force was created in Spain on March 23rd, starting with a pilot in the
Valencian region, to be further extended to the rest of the territory.

12/16

6. References
Adnkronos (2020): Coronavirus, Lombardia monitora celle telefoniche. Online news, published
17/03/2020, https://www.adnkronos.com/fatti/cronaca/2020/03/17/coronaviruslombardia-monitora-celle-telefoniche_7Ubs2OOMKGGSygaYEpLezO.html
Anderson, RM., Heesterbeek, H., Klikenberg, D., Hollingsworth, D. (2020). How will country-based

mitigation measures influence the course of the Covid-19 epidemic. Lancet. 395 (10228):
931-934. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30567-5
Balcan, D., Hu, H., Goncalves, B., Bajardi, P., Poletto, C., Ramasco, JJ., Paolotti, D., Perra, N.,
Tizzoni, M., Van den Broeck, W., Colizza, V., and Vespignani, A. (2009). Seasonal

transmission potential and activity peaks of the new influenza A(H1N1): a Monte Carlo
likelihood analysis based on human mobility. BMC Medicine, 7(45).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-7-45
Barbar, R., Beaudry, R., Benedetti, F.M., Clough, A., Das, R., Gupta, R., Jain, K., Kanaparti, R.,
Kanaparti, S., Kapa, S., Keegan, C., Louisy, K., Nadeau, G., Nuzzo, A., Penrod, S.,
Rajaee, Y., Raskar, R., Schunemann, I., Singh, A., Storm, G., Vepakomma, P., Vilcans,
K., and Werner, J. (2020). Apps gone rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an epidemic.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nwOR4drE3YdkCkyy_HBd6giQPPhLEkRc/view
Bengtsson, L., Gaudart, J., Lu, X., Moore, S., Wetter, E., Sallah, K., Rebaudet, S., and Piarroux,
P. (2015). Using mobile phone data to predict the spatial spread of cholera. Scientific
Reports, 5, 8923, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08923
Buckee, CO, Chan, J, Crosas, M., Dominici, F., Gasser, U., Grad, YH, Grenfell, B., Halloran, MH,
Kraemer, MUG, Lipsitch, M, Metcalf, CJE, Meyers, LA, Perkins, TA, Santillana, M,
Scarpino, SV, Viboud, C, Wesolowski, A, Schroeder, A (2020). Aggregated mobility data

could help fight COVID-19. Science. eabb8021, DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb8021
Buckee CO, Cardenas MIE, Corpuz J, et al (2018): Productive disruption: opportunities and

challenges for innovation in infectious disease surveillance. BMJ Global Health
2018;3:e000538. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000538
CDC (2014): Updated Preparedness and Response Framework for Influenza Pandemics. Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 63 / No. 6,
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr6306.pdf
Chinazzi, M., Davis, JT, Ajelli, M., Gioannini, C., Litvinova, M., Merler, S., Pastore y Pionnti, A.,
Mu, K., Rossi, L., Sun, K., Viboud, C., Xiong, X., Yu, H., Halloran, ME, Longini, IA, and
Vespignani, A. (2020). The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel

coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. Science. doi: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9757
Di Domenico, L., Pullano, G., Coletti, P, Hens, N., Colizza, V. Expected impact of school closure

and telework to mitigate COVID-19 epidemic in France. https://www.epicx-

1/16

lab.com/uploads/9/6/9/4/9694133/inserm_covid-19-school-closure-frenchregions_20200313.pdf
Dong, W, Guan, T, Lepri, B, Qiao, C (2019). PocketCare: Tracking the flu with mobile phones

using partial observations of proximity and symptoms. In Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable, and Ubiquitous Technologies, n. 41,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3328912
El País (2020): Valencia prepara un proyecto pionero con datos de móviles para trazar el

movimiento del coronavirus, online news 20/03/2020: https://elpais.com/tecnologia/202003-19/valencia-prepara-un-proyecto-pionero-con-datos-de-moviles-para-trazar-elmovimiento-del-coronavirus.html
EDPB (2020): Statement on the processing of personal data in the context of the COVID-19

outbreak. Adopted on 19 March 2020.
https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/news/edpb_statement_2020_processingpers
onaldataandcovid-19_en.pdf
Ferguson, NM., Laydon, D., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S.,
Boonyasiri, A., Cucunubá, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A., Dorigatti, I., Fu, H.,
Gaythorpe, K., Green, W., Hamlet, A., Hinsley, W., Okell, LC., van Elsland, S.,
Thompson, H., Verity, R., Volz, E., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Walker, PGT., Walters, C.,
Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Donnelly, CA., Riley, S., Ghani, AC. (2020). Impact of non-

pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare
demand. https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gidafellowships/Imperial-College-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf
Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Bonsall, D.G., and Fraser, C. (2020).
Quantifying dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests that epidemic control is
feasible through instantaneous digital contact tracing. MedRxiv preprint doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.08.20032946
Finger, F., Genolet, T., Mari, L., Constantin de Magny, G., Magloire Manga, N., Rinaldo, A.
Bertuzzo, E. (2016) Mobile phone data highlights the role of mass gatherings in the

spreading of cholera outbreaks. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 113: 6421-6426
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522305113
Génois, M, and Barrat, A. (2018). Can co-location be used as a proxy for face-to-face contacts?

EPJ Data Science 7: 11. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-018-0140-1
Koo, J.R., Cook, A.R., Park, M., Sun, Y., Sun, H., Tao Lim, J., Tam, C. and Dickens, B. (2020).

Interventions to mitigate early spread of SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore, Lacet Infect Dis, Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30190-0
Kraemer, M.U.G., Yang, C.-H., Gutierrez, B., Wu, C.-H., Klein, B., Pigott, D.M., open COVID-19
data working group, du Plessis, L., Faria, N.R., Li, R., Hanage, W.P., Brownstein, J.S.,
Layan, M., Vespignani, A., Tian, H., Dye, C., Cauchemez, S., Pybus, O.G., and Scarpino,

2/16

S.V. (2020). The effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID-19

epidemic in China. Science. doi: 10.1126/science.abb4218
Lai, S., Ruktanonchai, N.W., Zhou, L., Prosper, O., Luo, W., Floyd, J.R., Wesolowski, A., Zhang,
C., Du, X., Yu, H., and Tatem, A.J. (2020). Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions for

containing the COVID-19 outbreak: an observational and modelling study.
https://www.worldpop.org/events/COVID_NPI
Letouzé, E., Oliver, N. (2019). “Sharing is Caring. Four key requirements for sustainable private

data sharing”. Discussion paper, DataPopAlliance & Vodafone Institute,
http://datapopalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/DPA_VFI-SHARING-ISCARING.pdf
Louail, T, Lenormand, M, García Cantú, O, Picornell, M, Herranz, R, Frias-Martinez, E,
Ramasco, JJ, Barthelemy, M (2014). From mobile phone data to the spatial structure of

cities. Scientific Reports 4, 5276 doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep05276
Maxmen, A. (2019). Can tracking people through phone-call data improve lives? Nature 569: 614617 doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-01679-5
Martìn-Calvo, D., Aleta, A., Pentland, A., Moreno, Y., and Moro, E. (2020). Effectiveness of social
distancing strategies for protecting a community from a pandemic with a data driven
contact network based on census and real-world mobility data. Working paper,
https://covid-19-sds.github.io
McDonald, S. (2016): Ebola: A Big Data Disaster. Privacy, Property, and the Law of Disaster

Experimentation. Centre for Internet and Society Papers 2016.01, https://github.com/cisindia/papers/raw/master/CIS_Papers_2016.01_Sean-McDonald.pdf
de Montjoye, Y.-A., Gambs, S., Blondel, V., Canright, G., de Cordes, N., Deletaille, S., EngøMonsen, K., Garcia-Herranz, M., Kendall, J., Kerry, C., Krings, G., Letouzé, E., LuengoOroz, M., Oliver, N., Rocher, L., Rutherford, A., Smoreda, Z., Steele, J., Wetter, E.,
Pentland, A., and Bengtsson, L. (2018). On the privacy-conscientious use of mobile phone

data. Scientific Data, 5: 180286. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.286
Pepe, E., Bajardi, P., Gauvin, L., Privitera, F., Cattuto, C., and Tizzoni, M. (2020). COVID-19

outbreak response: first assessment of mobility changes in Italy following lockdown.
https://covid19mm.github.io/in-progress/2020/03/13/first-report-assessment.html
Politico (2020): Commission tells carriers to hand over mobile data to coronavirus fight. Online

news article, 24/03/2020: https://www.politico.eu/pro/european-commission-mobilephone-data-thierry-breton-coronaviruscovid19/?utm_source=POLITICO.EU&utm_campaign=fbf5cd1cc5EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2020_03_23_10_23&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_10959e
deb5-fbf5cd1cc5-190474345
The Economist (2014): Ebola and big data - Waiting on hold. Online news article, Oct 27th 2014,
https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2014/10/27/waiting-on-hold

3/16

The Verge (2020): Governments around the world are increasingly using location data to manage

the coronavirus. Online news article, Mar 23rd, 2020,
https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/23/21190700/eu-mobile-carriers-customer-datacoronavirus-south-korea-taiwan-privacy
Tian, H., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Wu, C.-H., Chen, B., Kraemer, M.U.G., Li, B., Cai, J., Xu, B., Yang,
Q., Wang, B., Yang, P., Cui, Y., Song, Y., Zheng, P., Wang, Q., Bjornstad, O.N., Yang,
R., Grenfell, B.T., Pybus, O.G., and Dye, C. (2020). The impact of transmission control

measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. MedRxiv preprint
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.30.20019844
Tizzoni, M., Bajardi, P., Decuyper, A., Kon Kam King, G., Schneider, CM, Blondel, V., Smoreda,
Z., Gonzalez, MC, Colizza, V. (2014). On the use of mobility proxies for modeling

epidemics. PloS Computational Biology: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003716
Walle, T. (2020). The Unacast Social Distancing Scoreboard. Blogpost,
https://www.unacast.com/post/the-unacast-social-distancing-scoreboard
Wang, H., Wang, Y., Walker, P.G.T., Walters, C., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Donnelly, C.A.,
Riley, S., and Ghani, A.C. (2020). Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to

reduce COVID- 19 mortality and healthcare demand.
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gidafellowships/Imperial-College-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf
Wesolowski, A., Eagle, N., Tatem, AJ., Smith, DL., Noor, AM., Snow, RW., Buckee, CO. (2012).

Quantifying the impact of human mobility on malaria. Science, 338 (6104): 267-270,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1223467
Wesolowski, A., Qureshi, T., Boni, M.F., Sundsøy, P.R., Johansson, M.A., Rasheed, S.B., EngøMonsen, K., and Buckee, C.O. (2015). Impact of human mobility on the emergence of

dengue epidemics in Pakistan. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 112 (38): 11887-11892.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1504964112
Zhang, J., Litvinova, M., Liang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, W., Zhao, S., Wu, Q., Merler, S., Viboud,
C., Vespignani, A., Ajelli, M., and Yu, H. (2020). Age profile of susceptibility, mixing, and

social distancing shape the dynamics of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak in
China MedRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.19.20039107

4/16

