Covid-19 Tweeting in English: Gender Differences
Mike Thelwall, School of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Wolverhampton,
UK.
Email: m.thelwall@wlv.ac.uk. Orcid: 0000-0001-6065-205X
Saheeda Thelwall, Institute of Health, University of Wolverhampton, UK.
Email: s.thelwall@wlv.ac.uk Orcid: 0000-0002-0333-399X
At the start of 2020, COVID-19 became the most urgent threat to global public health.
Uniquely in recent times, governments have imposed partly voluntary, partly compulsory
restrictions on the population to slow the spread of the virus. In this context, public attitudes
and behaviors are vitally important for reducing the death rate. Analyzing tweets about the
disease may therefore give insights into public reactions that may help guide public
information campaigns. This article analyses 3,038,026 English tweets about COVID-19 from
March 10 to 23, 2020. It focuses on one relevant aspect of public reaction: gender differences.
The results show that females are more likely to tweet about the virus in the context of family,
social distancing and healthcare whereas males are more likely to tweet about sports
cancellations, the global spread of the virus and political reactions. Thus, women seem to be
taking a disproportionate share of the responsibility for directly keeping the population safe.
The detailed results may be useful to inform public information announcements and to help
understand the spread of the virus. For example, failure to impose a sporting bans whilst
encouraging social distancing may send mixed messages to males.

Introduction
COVID-19 is, at the time of writing, a major global threat to public health (e.g., Lipsitch,
Swerdlow, & Finelli, 2020). Public actions are critically important in slowing the spread of the
virus and therefore reducing the death rate due to the volume of critically ill patients needing
simultaneous care, such as by running out of ventilators. Governments around the world have
reacted by announcing mandatory actions, such as shutting restaurants and the normal
functioning of schools, and by giving strongly recommended or mandatory advice to the
public for personal hygiene and social distancing to slow the spread of the virus. The extent
to which the population follows expert health advice is expected to have a substantial impact
on the death rate from the virus. If social distancing is widely ignored or misunderstood, for
example, then national healthcare facilities will not be able to give all critically ill patients the
care that they need to survive. It is therefore vitally important to assess how the public is
reacting to the crisis and one way (amongst many) of investigating this is through social media
posts, including tweets (e.g., Cinelli, Quattrociocchi, Galeazzi, et al., 2020), and one important
potential arena of difference (amongst many) is gender.
Twitter is a natural platform for public information sharing in many countries,
including all large English-speaking nations. Although less popular than Facebook, its
advantage for research is that it is typically fully public and researchers can therefore access
its contents. Moreover, Twitter gives free use of an Applications Programming Interface (API)
for automatically harvesting recent (up to a week old) tweets matching keyword searches,
making it a practical source of data about public reactions to tweets. A disadvantage is that
Twitter users’ demographics do not match those of the population. In the USA, about 23% of
adults use the site, behind Facebook (71%) and Instagram (38%), but ahead of WhatsApp

(18%) and Reddit (13%) (Schaeffer, 2019). Moreover, older people (and more at risk from
COVID-19) are be less likely to use Twitter, men are slightly more likely to use it (50% female
within a 52% female population) but adopters tend to be richer and more educated in the
USA (Smith & Wojcik, 2019). There are also finer-grained differences, such as political
variations between users and non-users (Smith, Hughes, Remy, & Shah, 2020). Nevertheless,
analyzing tweets may give some quick large-scale insights into public reactions to COVID-19.
This study focuses on gender differences in reactions to COVID-19 on Twitter. Since
public safety measures must be adhered to by the entire population to be maximally effective,
any gender differences in responses may point to weaknesses in public communications
about the seriousness of the outbreak. This information may help with the creation of new
messages targeting males or females more effectively. In addition, understanding gender
differences may help modelling epidemiologists to create more accurate models of the spread
of the disease. The current paper therefore analyses two weeks (March 10-23, 2020) of
tweeting in English about COVID-19 from the perspective of gender differences in responses.
Although the virus is a global pandemic, the focus on English is for pragmatic methodology
reasons and similar research in other languages is encouraged (and supported by the free
software at http://mozdeh.wlv.ac.uk).

Methods
The research design was to collect English-language tweets matching a set of queries related
to Covid-19 over two weeks and to identify words used more by males than females, using
these to point to aspects of gender difference in tweeting about the virus. A word frequency
method is useful for gender comparisons because it gives statistically significant evidence in
a transparent fashion. In contrast, content analysis or thematic analysis are unlikely to
discover fine-grained gender differences and cluster-based methods, such as topic modelling,
can be changed by small alterations in the data, and so are not robust. Topic modelling is also
not able to give as fine-grained gender difference information as word frequency
comparisons. Word frequency analysis therefore fills a gap in comparison to other methods.
The following queries were used to identify different common ways of referring to the
disease: coronavirus; “corona virus”; COVID-19; COVID19. These were submitted to Twitter
at the maximum speed allowed by the free Twitter API from 10 to 23 March 2020, obtaining
3,038,026 tweets after eliminating duplicates (including multiple retweets) and near
duplicates (tweets identical apart from @usernames and #hashtags). The tweets were
collected and analyzed with the free software Mozdeh (http://mozdeh.wlv.ac.uk).
Twitter does not record user genders, but it is possible to guess male and female
genders (only) from their display name if it starts with a first name. A list of gendered first
names was used to match the first part of Twitter display names. This list was US-based, since
the USA is the major English-language user of Twitter and its population has international
ethnic origins, so its names probably reflect to some extent the names in other anglophone
countries. The list was derived from the 1990 US census (top 10000 names) and
supplemented by GenderApi.com (names with at least 100 US records). Names were included
as female (respectively, male) from either source if at least 90% of people with the name were
female (respectively, male). Twitter names (display names, rather than usernames) were split
at the first space or non-alphanumeric character, first digit, or first camel case transition from
lowercase to uppercase (e.g., MikeThelwall). The 90% threshold was chosen to give a high
degree of certainty that the user was male. The method is imperfect because Twitter
usernames may be informal or not reflect a person’s name (e.g., CricketFan938624), or based

on a relatively gender-neutral name (e.g., Sam, Pat) or a rare name, including names from
small ethnic minorities in the USA. Nevertheless, the first name procedure splits a set of
tweets into three groups: (a) likely to be male-authored; (b) likely to be female-authored; (c)
unknown. Comparing (a) with (b) gives an indication of likely gender differences overall. Visual
inspection of the most active users in the data suggests that most bot and corporate tweets
are assigned to the unknown gender set.
Gender differences in topics were identified by a word frequency comparison method
to identify words more used by either males or females, using the following procedure. For
each word, the proportion of female-authored tweets containing the word was compared to
the proportion of male-authored tweets containing the word using a 2x2 chi-square test for
the table: [[Female tweets with word, Female tweets without word],[Male tweets with word,
Male tweets without word]]. A statistically significant chi-squared value (3.841 for p=0.05)
gives evidence to reject the null hypothesis of no gender difference in use of the word.
Because the test is repeated for every word and there are 1,372,497 words, this procedure
would almost certainly produce tens of thousands of false positives due to the number of
tests. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) was used to correct
for this. It is a familywise error rate correction procedure that ensures that the probability of
incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis in any test is below a threshold value. For extra
power, words that were too rare to trigger a statistically significant result, even they were
only used by males (or females) were not tested. This chisquared/Benjamini-Hochberg
approach for detecting gender differences in term frequencies has previously been used for
academic abstracts (Thelwall, Bailey, Makita, Sud, & Madalli, 2019; Thelwall, Bailey, Tobin, &
Bradshaw, 2019), Reddit posts (Thelwall & Stuart, 2019) and YouTube comments (Thelwall,
2018). The procedure was repeated three times, for p=0.05, p=0.01, and p=0.001, recording
the highest significance level for each word.
The above procedure was also applied to each day separately to determine the
statistically significantly gendered terms for each day (i.e., 14 additional sets of tests). This
extra step was taken because a word that is gendered on a single day seems likely to be less
relevant to Covid-19 than a word that is gendered on multiple days. For example, a one-day
gendered term might relate to a news event that was affected by Covid-19 (e.g., a sporting
event cancellation) but this might not be important to the ongoing discussion of the virus. The
threshold for including a term was set at (the equivalent of) more than two highly statistically
significant days. Allocating one star to significance at p=0.05, two for p=0.01 and three for
p=0.001, the threshold requirement was a total of at least seven stars over the fourteen days.
This threshold gave a total of 102 terms out of the 339 that were statistically significantly
gendered on at least one day.
Each word judged statistically significantly gendered (either overall, or on multiple
days) reflects one or more underlying gender differences in motivations for tweeting or a
gender difference in language styles. Each term’s underlying causes can be inferred by reading
a random sample of tweets containing the term, known as the Key Word In Context (KWIC)
method (Luhn, 1960). For example, the term league was associated with tweets discussing
the full or partial closure of various sporting competitions or facilities. Gender differences in
this word therefore suggest that males were more likely to tweet that league-based sport was
affected by COVID-19 restrictions. The word contexts varied from obvious (e.g., #jantacurfew)
to obscure (e.g., it). In particular, many pronouns were female associated, reflecting a peoplefocus rather than a topic, and definite and indefinite articles were male-associated, reflecting
an information focus rather than a specific topic. In cases where the context of a term was

unclear from reading ten randomly selected tweets (using the random sort option in
Mozdeh), a word association analysis was run on the term to identify top associating terms
to give additional insights into its main use contexts.
The words were manually grouped into themes for each gender to highlight the main
types of gender difference.

Results
The main themes identified in the tweets are summarized below by gender. The complete list
of terms and raw tweet counts associated with them are available on FigShare
(https:doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12026625).

Male-oriented themes
Male-authored tweets about COVID-19 were about twice as likely as females to discuss
sports, typically in the context of speculation about, or announcements of, events or
competitions being cancelled (Figure 1). Whilst this is relatively peripheral to the disease,
males were also substantially more likely to mention, or take issue with, political figures or
government, particularly within India (Figure 2). Males were also more likely to tweet about
the economy (terms: economy, market; not graphed).

Figure 1. Sport-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Figure 2. Politics-related terms with gender differences in usage.
The epidemiology of the virus (Figure 3), including its geographic spread (Figure 4),
was another male topic. Both relate to sharing news about the spread and extent of the virus.

Figure 3. Epidemiology-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Figure 4. Geography-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Female-oriented themes
Female-oriented themes seemed to focus on the first and second lines of defense against the
virus. The key theme of social distancing is moderately female-oriented (Figure 5), in the
sense that females were more likely to use the #socialdistancing hashtag and the need to stay
at home as far as possible. Partly related to social distancing but also to lockdowns, females
were more likely to mention family members (Figure 6) and to use all pronouns (Figure 7).
Pronouns were typically used for a mix of purposes but tweets with pronouns or family
members seemed more likely to discuss concrete actions or practical implications for the
tweeter and the people that they know. Thus, all three themes have a practical and personal
orientation. Females were also more likely to tweet about education (terms: school, student,
teacher; not graphed), presumably due to its impact on themselves or their family.

Figure 5. Social distancing-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Figure 6. Family -related terms with gender differences in usage.

Figure 7. Pronouns with gender differences in usage.
Females were also more likely to discuss healthcare issues (Figure 8). These tweets were less
focused on immediate practical issues but on the main line of defense against the virus,
should the practical steps fail. Related to this, females were also more likely to express
gratitude to healthcare workers and others (terms not graphed) and anxiety (see below).

Figure 8. Healthcare-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Mixed gender
Two broad themes were mixed gender in the sense of some terms being male-associated and
others being female-associated. Males were more likely to discuss the virus as a war whereas
females were more likely to mention their anxiety about its effects (Fig 9). The war metaphor
is a way of generalizing the situation as well as perhaps for males glamorizing actions against
it, or emphasizing the seriousness of the issue. Thus, war metaphors could be an indirect way
of expressing anxiety.

Figure 9. Fight or worry-related terms with gender differences in usage.
There were mixed gender differences in discussions of curfews (Figure 10). Whilst males were
more likely to announce the existence of a curfew, females were more likely to discuss its
practical impacts.

Figure 10. Curfew-related terms with gender differences in usage.

Discussion
This quick analysis of gender differences in English tweeting about COVID-19 has several
limitations. In addition to the issues discussed above, another important aspect is that Twitter
does not report the geographic location of the tweets and so the data has unknown origins.
In particular, if some countries have an unusually high proportion of active tweeters of one
gender, then this could translate into tweets about that country statistically significantly
associating with that gender with the tests used above.
The results are broadly consistent with previous research into gender differences in
language use, including on social media, and gender differences in interests. The primary

contribution here is therefore to so show which gender differences translate to COVID-19 on
Twitter, rather than finding new gender differences.
The greater male interest in sport in many countries is widely known (e.g., Plaza,
Boiché, Brunel, & Ruchaud, 2017), and males also seem to discuss politics more (or at least
more directly: Bode, 2017). The greater female focus on caring (65% of family caregivers are
female in the USA: Family Caregiver Alliance, 2019), and family (Parker, Horowitz, & Rohal,
2015) has also been found before. In terms of language use, females have often been found
to use personal pronouns more in some types of text (Argamon, Koppel, Fine, & Shimoni,
2003).

Conclusions
Although these conclusions are drawn from statistical tests on big data from Twitter,
inferences from the results are tentative due to the processing limitations above that could
not be addressed and the lack of evidence connecting offline actions to the content of tweets.
Thus, for example, the greater female tendency to tweet about families does not prove that
females were more concerned about the welfare of their families due to COVID-19, although
this is a plausible explanation. Thus, the conclusions should be treated similarly to those of
purely qualitative research: as evidence-based ideas but not proof of those ideas.
The substantially greater focus of males on sport in tweets about COVID-19 might be
taken as evidence that males were less serious about the disease in the initial stages.
Irrespective of whether this is true, sport was an important factor in the reaction to COVID19 for many males. A policy-related suggestion from this is that cancelling sporting events
may be particularly effective in communicating to males the seriousness of a situation. For
example, if the population is told to socially distance but allowed to attend mass sporting
events on the basis that an alternative (watching the event in crowded pubs or bars) is more
dangerous then this may send mixed messages since crowded sporting events clearly involve
close proximity with large numbers of strangers. Thus, any relaxation of bans on sporting
events should be considered very carefully in the future, in countries where they are in place,
and sporting bans should be considered in other countries as an important component of
social distancing strategies, both for the spreading risk and the message sent to (mainly)
males.
The results are consistent with, but do not prove, that women are at the forefront of
actions to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Public health messages might therefore need to
be particularly careful that core messages are transmitted effectively to women in media that
they consume so that social distancing is fully understood by as many as possible so that it
can be carried out as effectively as possible.

References
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J., & Shimoni, A. R. (2003). Gender, genre, and writing style in
formal written texts. Text, 23(3), 321-346.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological), 57(1), 289-300.
Bode, L. (2017). Closing the gap: Gender parity in political engagement on social media.
Information, Communication & Society, 20(4), 587-603.

Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W., Galeazzi, A., Valensise, C. M., Brugnoli, E., Schmidt, A. L., &
Scala, A. (2020). The covid-19 social media infodemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004.
Family
Caregiver
Alliance
(2020).
Caregiver
Statistics:
Demographics.
https://www.caregiver.org/caregiver-statistics-demographics
Lipsitch, M., Swerdlow, D. L., & Finelli, L. (2020). Defining the epidemiology of Covid-19 studies needed. New England Journal of Medicine. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp2002125
Luhn, H. P. (1960). Key word‐in‐context index for technical literature (kwic index). American
Documentation, 11(4), 288-295.
Parker, K. Horowitz, J., & Rohal, M. (2015). Parenting in America: Outlook, worries, aspirations
are strongly linked to financial situation. https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/2015/12/2015-12-17_parenting-in-america_FINAL.pdf
Plaza, M., Boiché, J., Brunel, L., & Ruchaud, F. (2017). Sport = male… But not all sports:
Investigating the gender stereotypes of sport activities at the explicit and implicit levels.
Sex Roles, 76(3-4), 202-217.
Schaeffer, K. (2019). U.S. has changed in key ways in the past decade, from tech use to
demographics.
Pew
Research
Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2019/12/20/key-ways-us-changed-in-past-decade/
Smith, A., Hughes, A., Remy, E. & Shah, S. (2020). Democrats on Twitter more liberal, less
focused on compromise than those not on the platform. Pew Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/02/03/democrats-on-twitter-moreliberal-less-focused-on-compromise-than-those-not-on-the-platform/
Smith, A. & Wojcik, S. (2019). 10 facts about Americans and Twitter. Pew Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/08/02/10-facts-about-americans-andtwitter/
Thelwall, M., Bailey, C., Makita, M., Sud, P., & Madalli, D. P. (2019). Gender and research
publishing in India: Uniformly high inequality? Journal of Informetrics, 13(1), 118-131.
Thelwall, M., Bailey, C., Tobin, C. & Bradshaw, N. (2019). Gender differences in research areas,
methods and topics: Can people and thing orientations explain the results? Journal of
Informetrics, 13(1), 149-169.
Thelwall, M., & Stuart, E. (2019). She's Reddit: A source of statistically significant gendered
interest information? Information Processing & Management, 56(4), 1543-1558.
Thelwall, M. (2018). Can museums find male or female audiences online with YouTube? Aslib
Journal of Information Management, 70(5), 481-497.

