Estimating Uncertainty and Interpretability in
Deep Learning for Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Detection

arXiv:2003.10769v2 [eess.IV] 27 Mar 2020

Biraja Ghoshal1 and Allan Tucker1
Brunel University London, Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom
biraja.ghoshal@brunel.ac.uk
https://www.brunel.ac.uk/computer-science

Abstract. Deep Learning has achieved state of the art performance in
medical imaging. However, these methods for disease detection focus exclusively on improving the accuracy of classification or predictions without
quantifying uncertainty in a decision. Knowing how much confidence there
is in a computer-based medical diagnosis is essential for gaining clinicians’
trust in the technology and therefore improve treatment. Today, the 2019
Coronavirus (COVID-19) infections are a major healthcare challenge
around the world. Detecting COVID-19 in X-ray images is crucial for
diagnosis, assessment and treatment. However, diagnostic uncertainty in
a report is a challenging yet inevitable task for radiologists. In this paper,
we investigate how Dropweights based Bayesian Convolutional Neural
Networks (BCNN) can estimate uncertainty in Deep Learning solutions to
improve the diagnostic performance of the human-machine combination
using publicly available COVID-19 chest X-ray dataset and show that
the uncertainty in prediction is strongly correlated with the accuracy of
the prediction. We believe that the availability of uncertainty-aware deep
learning will enable a wider adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in a
clinical setting.
Keywords: Bayesian Deep Learning, Predictive Entropy, Uncertainty
Estimation, Dropweights, COVID-19

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Learning has achieved state of the art performance, similar
to that of human experts in solving classification tasks in computer vision from
lung disease classification, metastasis detection for breast cancer, skin lesion
classification, identifying diabetic retinopathy, attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), Alzheimer’s disease and improving reconstruction for MRI,
PET/CT imaging. However, despite the promising results, deep learning for
classification tasks lacks the ability to say “I don’t know” in an ambiguous or
unknown case. Hence, it is critical to estimate uncertainty in medical imaging as
an additional insight to point predictions to improve the reliability in making
decisions.

2

B. Ghoshal et al.

Dealing with Coronavirus (COVID-19) is one of the major healthcare challenges around the world today. COVID-19 represents a new strain of Coronavirus
and presumably representing a mutation of other Coronaviruses [16].
The existing infrastructure (e.g. limited image data sources with expert
labelled data set) for the detection of COVID-19 positive patients is insufficient
and manual detection is time-consuming. With the increase in global incidences,
it is expected that a Deep learning based solution will soon be developed and
combined with clinical practices to provide cost-effective, accurate and easily
performed automated detection of COVID-19 to aid the screening process.
However, despite remarkable performance, deep learning models tend to
make overconfident predictions. Our objective is not to achieve state-of-the-art
performance, but rather to evaluate the usefulness of estimating uncertainty
approximating Bayesian Convolutional Neural Networks (BCNN) with Dropweights to improve the diagnostic performance of combined human-machine
[8,10]. This is crucial in differentiating COVID-19 patients from those without
the disease, where the cost of an error is very high. Thus, in order to avoid
COVID-19 misdiagnoses [15], it is necessary to estimate uncertainty in a model’s
predictions.
In this paper, we investigate how Monte-Carlo Dropweights (MC Dropweights)
Bayesian convolutional neural networks can estimate uncertainty in Deep Learning
to improve the diagnostic performance of human-machine decisions, using publicly
available COVID-19 chest X-ray datasets, and show that the estimated uncertainty
in prediction has a strong correlation with classification accuracy, thus enabling
the identification of false predictions or unknown cases.

2

Related Research

Estimating uncertainty in deep neural networks is a challenging and unsolved
problem. There are many measures to estimate uncertainty such as softmax
variance, expected entropy, mutual information, predictive entropy and averaging
predictions over multiple models.
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN) provides a natural framework for modelling
uncertainty [3]. However, BNN methods are intractable in computing the posterior
of a network’s parameters. The most used approach to estimate uncertainty
in deep learning try to place distributions over each of the network’s weight
parameters [3] of a model.
There are many methods proposed for quantifying uncertainty or confidence estimates approximated by Monte-Carlo Dropout, including Laplace approximation,
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, stochastic gradient MCMC variants such as Langevin Dynamics, Hamiltonian methods, including Multiplicative
Normalizing Flows, Stochastic Batch Normalization, Maximum Softmax Probability, Heteroscedastic Classifier, and Learned Confidence Estimates including
Deep Ensembles [7].

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

3

3

Approximate Bayesian Convolutional Neural Networks
(BCNN) and Model Uncertainty

Given dataset X = {x1 , x2 . . . xN } and the corresponding labels Y = {y1 , y2 . . . yN }
where X ∈ Rd is a d-dimensional input vector and Y ∈ {1 . . . C} with yi ∈
{1 . . . C}, given C class label, a set of independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) training samples size N {xi , yi } for i = 1 to N , the objective is to find a
function f : X → Y using weights of neural net parameters w as close as possible
to the original function that has generated the outputs Ŷ . The principled predictive distribution of an unknown label ŷ of a test input data x̂ by marginalizing
the parameters:
Z
p(ŷ|x̂, X , Y) = P (ŷ|x̂, w)P (w|X, Y, x̂)dw
(1)
Unfortunately, finding the posterior distribution p(w|X, Y ) is often computationally intractable. Recently, Gal [7] proved that a gradient-based optimization
procedure on the dropout neural network is equivalent to a specific variational
approximation on a Bayesian neural network. Following Gal [7], Ghoshal et al. [9]
also showed similar results for neural networks with MC-Dropweights. The model
uncertainty is approximated by averaging stochastic feed forward Monte Carlo
(MC) sampling during inference. At test time, the unseen samples are passed
through the network before the Softmax predictions are analyzed.
Practically, the expectation of ŷ is called the predictive mean of the model.
The predictive mean µpred over the MC iterations is then used as the final
prediction on the test sample:
µpred ≈

T
1X
p(ŷ|x̂, X , Y)
T t=1

(2)

For each test sample x̂, the class with the largest predictive mean µpred is
selected as the output prediction and the variance is the predictive uncertainty.
3.1

Uncertainty Estimation in Classification

In order for COVID-19 detection to be meaningful, tolerance must typically be
much tighter. Based on the input X-ray image, a network can be certain with
high or low confidence about its decision, indicated by the predictive posterior
distribution.
However predictive uncertainty in deep learning actually results from two
separate forms of uncertainty [6]:
1. Epistemic uncertainty or Model uncertainty accounts for uncertainty in the
model parameters as it does not take all of the aspects of the data into
account or the lack of training data. Epistemic uncertainty associated with
the model reduces as the training data size increases.

4

B. Ghoshal et al.

2. Aleatoric uncertainty accounts for noise inherent in the observations due to
class overlap, label noise, homoscedastic and heteroscedastic noise, which
cannot be reduced even if more data were to be collected. In X-ray imaging,
this can be caused by sensor noise due to random distribution of photons
during scan acquisition.
Traditionally, it has been difficult to implement model validation under
epistemic uncertainty. Thus, we estimate epistemic uncertainty to obtain model
uncertainty in deep learning prediction for chest radiograph diagnosis for COVID19. One of the measure of model uncertainty is predictive entropy H of the
predictive distribution:
X
H(ŷ|x̂, X , Y) = −
p(ŷ = c|x̂, X , Y) log p(ŷ = c|x̂, X , Y)
(3)
C

where C ranges over all class labels. In general, the range of the obtained
uncertainty values depend on datasets, network architectures, number of MC
sampling, etc. Therefore, we normalise estimated uncertainty to report our results
and facilitate the comparison across various sets and configurations.
Our analysis involved a comparison of two variational-dropweights based
uncertainty measures, Predictive Entropy (PH) and Bayesian Active Learning by
Disagreement (BALD)[13,17], in their application to COVID-19 image classification.
The second uncertainty measure, Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement
(BALD), is based on mutual information that maximise the mutual information
between model posterior density function and predictions density function approximated at as the difference between the entropy of the predictive distribution
and the mean entropy of predictions across samples:
M I [ŷi , w|x̂i , X, Y] ≈ H [ŷi |x̂i , X, Y ] − E [H [ŷi |x̂i w]]

(4)

, with w the model parameters.
Test points that maximise mutual information are points over which the
model is uncertain on average, but there are model parameters that produce
erroneous predictions with a high confidence. This is equivalent to points with
high variance in the input to the softmax layer (the logits). Thus, each stochastic
forward pass through the model would have the highest probability assigned to
a different class. It is expected from BALD measures epistemic uncertainty of
the model, so it would not return a high value if there is aleoratic uncertainty
present.
3.2

Relationship between the Accuracy and Uncertainty

The true error is the difference between estimated values and actual values. In
order to assess the quality of predictive uncertainty, we leveraged Spearman’s
correlation coefficient between Predictive Entropy (PH) and Bayesian Active
Learning by Disagreement (BALD). We quantified the predictive accuracy by

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

5

1-Wasserstein distance (WD) to measure how much the estimated uncertainty
correlates with the true errors [2,14]. The Wasserstein distance for the real data
distribution Pr and the generated data distribution Pg is mathematically defined
as the greatest lower bound (infimum) for any transport plan (i.e. the cost for
the cheapest plan):
W (Pr , Pg ) =

inf
γ∼Π(Pr ,Pg )

E(x,y)∼γ [kx − yk]

(5)

, Π(Pr , Pg ) is the set of all possible joint probability distributions γ(x, y) whose
marginals are respectively Pr and Pg . However, the equation (5) for the Wasserstein distance is intractable. Using the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality, [2] simplified the calculation to
W (Pr , Pg ) =

1
K

sup Ex∼Pr [f (x)] − Ex∼Pg [f (x)]

(6)

kf kL ≤K

, where sup (supremum) is the opposite of inf (infimum); sup is the least upper
bound and f is a 1-Lipschitz continuous functions {fw }w∈W , parameterized by w
and the K-Lipschitz constraint |f (x1 ) − f (x2 )| ≤ K|x1 − x2 |. The error function
can be configured as measuring the 1 - Wasserstein distance between Pr and Pg .
E(Pr , Pg ) = W (Pr , Pg ) = max Ex∼Pr [fw (x)] − Ez∼Pr (z) [fw (gθ (z))]
w∈W

(7)

The advantage of Wasserstein distance (WD) is that it can reflect the distance
of two non-overlapping or little overlapping distributions.

4

Dataset

Radiologists frequently use X-ray images to detect lung inflammation, enlarged
lymph nodes or pneumonia. Once the COVID-19 virus is inside the body, it
begins infecting epithelial cells lining the lung. We can use X-rays to analyse
the health of a patient’s lungs. Analysis of X-ray requires an expert and takes
significant time.
4.1

Data Preparation

We have selected 68 Posterior-Anterior (PA) X-ray images of lungs with COVID19 cases from Dr. Joseph Cohen’s Github repository [5]. We augmented the dataset
with Kaggle’s Chest X-Ray Images (Pneumonia) from healthy patients, a total
of 5941 PA chest radiography images across 4 classes (Normal: 1583, Bacterial
Pneumonia: 2786, non-COVID-19 Viral Pneumonia: 1504, and COVID-19: 68).

6

5

B. Ghoshal et al.

Experiment

Instead of training a very deep model from scratch on a small dataset, we decided
to run this experiment in a transfer learning setting, where we used a pretrained ResNet50V2 model [12] and acquired data only to fine-tune the original
model. This is very suitable when the data is abound for an auxiliary domain,
but very limited labelled data is available for the domain of experiment. We
introduced fully connected layers on top of the ResNet50V2 convolutional base.
Dropweights followed by a softmax activated layer is applied to the network as
an approximation to the Gaussian Process (GP) and to cast it as an approximate
Bayesian inference, in the fully connected layer to estimate meaningful model
uncertainty. The softmax layer outputs the probability distribution over each
possible class label.
We resized all images to 224 x 224 pixels (using a bicubic interpolation over
4 x 4 pixel neighbourhood). The images were standardised using the mean and
standard deviation values of the X-ray dataset. We split the whole dataset into
80% - 20% between training and testing sets. Real-time data augmentation was
also applied, leveraging Keras ImageDataGenerator during training, to prevent
overfitting and enhance the learning capability of the model. Training images were
ZCA whitened, rotated 20 degree, randomly flipped horizontally and vertically,
scaled outward and inward, shifted, and sheared. The Adam optimiser was used
with a learning rate of 1e-5 with decay factor of 0.2. All our experiments were
run for 25 epochs and batch size was set to 8. Dropweights with rates of {0.1,
0.3, and 0.5} were added to a fully-connected layer. We monitored the validation
accuracy after every epoch and saved the model with the best accuracy on the
validation dataset. During test time, Dropweights were active and Monte Carlo
sampling was performed by feeding the input image with MC-samples {10, 25
and 50} through the Bayesian Deep Residual Neural Networks.
5.1

Asymmetric Cost Function

The cost of falsely diagnosing of COVID-19, when a patient does not have it (i.e.
a false positive result) may be much lower than not detecting a COVID-19 case,
when it is present (i.e. a false negative result). Our goal is to avoid any false
negative detection, even if it means that some false positives are incurred.
The asymmetric cost of making mistakes is captured by a utility function [4]
such as class weights which dictates optimal predictions while to approximate
the true posterior over the weights. In order to address this asymmetric cost of
making mistakes, we have defined utility function (α) in maximising the expected
utility. So the weighted cross-entropy loss function is defined as:
L≈

C
1 X
αc ∗ p(ŷ = ci |w, x̂)
C c=1

(8)

, where αc is the corresponding weight for each class, c, in the cross-entropy
loss. The above equation dictates optimal predictions to approximate the true

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

7

posterior over the weights. The highest weight {Normal: 2; Bacterial: 2; Viral:
1; COVID-19: 50} is assigned for an image which is misdiagnosed as being
non-COVID-19 infected when ground truth is true with low uncertainty.

6
6.1

Results and Discussions
Uncertainty-Aware Prediction Performance of the Bayesian
Models

Most of COVID-19 cases’ chest X-rays show bilateral pulmonary infiltrates with
distinctive appearances. The below Figure 1 shows the distribution of predictive
uncertainty values for all test X-Ray images, grouped by correct (in green) and
erroneous (in red) predictions. The class with the highest softmax output for
predictive distribution mean is considered as the prediction and the predictive
entropy of the output distributions (measured as in Equation (3)) as the estimated
epistemic uncertainty. Based on the input image, a network can be certain with
high or low confidence about its decision, indicated by the predictive posterior
distribution. The wider the output posterior distributions, the less confident is
the model in it’s prediction. This is because the uncertainty in weight space
captured by the posterior is incorporated into the predictive uncertainty, giving
us a way to model to say “I don’t know”.

Fig. 1. Example input images with uncertainty and the corresponding predictive distributions generated by Bayesian DNN. Figure 1(a) shows a correctly classified image
where the model is highly certain about its prediction (PH=0.0086). Whereas, figure
1(b) shows a miss-classified image where the model is uncertain (PH=0.55332) and
wider posterior distributions.

8

6.2

B. Ghoshal et al.

Bayesian Models Performance

On average, Bayesian ResNet50V2 model based inference improves the detection
accuracy of the standard ResNet50V2 model in our sample dataset based solely
on X-ray images. Figure 2 confusion matrix summarizes the prediction accuracy
of our implemented models.

Fig. 2. Confusion Matrix

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

6.3

9

Bayesian Model Uncertainty

We measured the epistemic uncertainty associated with the predictive probabilities
of the deep learning model by keeping dropweights on during test time. Figure 3
below shows Kernel Density Estimation with a Gaussian kernel is used to plot
the output posterior distributions for all X-Rays test images, grouped by correct
and erroneous predictions with variation of dropwights rate p for 50 MC samples
of stochastic feed forward. The table below shows the effect of variation of the
dropweights rate, p, to the uncertainty measures.

Fig. 3. Distribution of estimated predictive uncertainty for all test samples grouped by
correct and erroneous predictions.

It shows that the estimated uncertainty is higher for erroneous predictions.
Therefore, uncertainty information provides as an additional insight to point
prediction to refer the uncertain images to radiologists for further investigation
[14], which improves the overall prediction performance.
Figure 4 shows the effect of variation of the Dropweights rate p to the
uncertainty measures (PH and BALD). The results suggest, that predictive
entropy as a measure of uncertainty is a better measure for uncertainty and
should be considered over BALD. Regardless of values for the number of MC
samples and Dropweights rate, we can observe a higher uncertainty for incorrect
classification. MC dropweights for uncertainty estimation can usually be used in
every image classifier to improve prediction accuracy of man–machine combination
via uncertainty-aware referral with the additional computational load cost of
performing multiple forward passes.

10

B. Ghoshal et al.

Fig. 4. Quality of Uncertainty measure in Covid-19 Chest X-Ray Detection [14]

6.4

The relation between uncertainty and predictive accuracy

The table 1 in below shows that there is strong correlation between predictive
entropy and the prediction error.
Spearmans’s
Dropweights
Dropweights
Dropweights

Correlation
Rate:0.5
Rate:0.3
Rate:0.1

Predictive Entropy BALD
0.9951
0.8754
0.9968
0.8873
0.9952
0.8980

The figure 5 below shows the correlation between estimated uncertainty from
PH and BALD and the error of prediction with variation of the Dropweights rate
P . The above results show strong correlation with ρ = 0.99 between entropy of
the probabilities as a measure of the epistemic uncertainty and prediction errors.
Our experiments show that the prediction uncertainty correlates with accuracy,
thus enabling the identification of false predictions or unknown cases.

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

11

Fig. 5. Correlation between estimated predictive entropy as a measure of Uncertainty
and Accuracy in prediction [14]

6.5

Performance improvement via Uncertainty-Aware COVID-19
Classification and Referral

We performed predictions for all COVID-19 test images and sorted the predictions
by their associated predictive uncertainty (PH). We then referred predictions
based on the various levels of uncertainty for further diagnosis and measured
the accuracy of the predictions (threshold at 0.5) for the remaining cases. We
observed in the figure 6, the prediction accuracy increases with the fraction of
referred images. Note that only non-referred images are considered to compute
predictive accuracy. We have also observed the same behaviour in prediction
accuracy for increasing levels of model uncertainty.

Fig. 6. The classification accuracy as a function of the tolerated normalized model
uncertainty

Simulating a control experiment, we compared with randomly selected images,
that is without using uncertainty in prediction (figure 7).
For a beginner radiologist performance (i.e. 60% prediction accuracy), solely
relying on deep learning models will result in a more accurate prediction on
overall diagnosis. However, for an experienced radiologist (i.e. 80% accuracy),
the combined performance reaches almost 90% when rejecting either almost 40%
of the most uncertain samples or samples with Hnorm >= 0.4. For less than 2%
decisions referred for further inspections, there is a 95% confidence interval of
the two non-overlapping scenarios. Hence, estimated uncertainty provides as an

12

B. Ghoshal et al.

Fig. 7. The classification accuracy as a function of the retained data

additional insight to point prediction performance to improve the reliability of
the automated system.

7

Visualizing Uncertainty and Interpretability

Deep learning models often been accused of being "black boxes", so they need
to be precise, interpretable and the uncertainty in predictions must be well
understood. Reliable estimated uncertainty alongside the visualisation of distinct
features, as an additional insight to point prediction, will improve the ease of
understanding in deep learning, resulting in a more informed decision-making
process. We qualitatively compare in figure 8, the saliency maps [1] produced
by various state-of-the-art methods e.g.Class Activation Map (CAM), Guided
Backpropagation and Guided Gradient CAM and Gradients.

Fig. 8. Saliency Map using various methods

Estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning for COVID-19 Detection

8

13

Conclusion and Future work

In this work, Bayesian Deep Learning classifier has been trained using transfer
learning method on COVID-19 X-Ray images to estimate model uncertainty.
Our experiment has shown a strong correlation between model uncertainty and
accuracy of prediction. The estimated uncertainty in deep learning yields more
reliable prediction, which can alert radiologists on false predictions, which will
increase the acceptance of deep learning into clinical practice in disease detection.
With this Bayesian Deep Learning based classification, studies correlating
with multi "omics" dataset [11], and treatment responses could further reveal
insights about imaging markers and findings towards improved diagnosis and
treatment for Covid-19.

References
1. Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Muelly, M., Goodfellow, I., Hardt, M., Kim, B.: Sanity
checks for saliency maps. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
pp. 9505–9515 (2018)
2. Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., Bottou, L.: Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.07875 (2017)
3. Blundell, C., Cornebise, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., Wierstra, D.: Weight uncertainty in
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1613–1622 (2015)
4. Cobb, A.D., Roberts, S.J., Gal, Y.: Loss-calibrated approximate inference in bayesian
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03901 (2018)
5. Cohen, J.P.: Open database of covid-19 cases (2020), https://github.com/
ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset
6. Depeweg, S., Hernández-Lobato, J.M., Doshi-Velez, F., Udluft, S.: Decomposition
of uncertainty in bayesian deep learning for efficient and risk-sensitive learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.07283 (2017)
7. Gal, Y.: Uncertainty in deep learning. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge (2016)
8. Ghoshal, B., Lindskog, C., Tucker, A.: Estimating uncertainty in deep learning
for reporting confidence: An application on cell type prediction in testes based on
proteomics. In: International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis. Springer
(2020)
9. Ghoshal, B., Tucker, A.: Estimating uncertainty in deep learning for reporting
confidence to clinicians in medical image segmentation and diseases detection.
Computational Intelligence 1(1) (2019)
10. Ghoshal, B., Tucker, A., Sanghera, B., Wong, W.: Estimating uncertainty in deep
learning for reporting confidence to clinicians in medical image segmentation and
diseases detection. Computational Intelligence - Special Issue on Foundations of
Biomedical (Big) Data Science 1 (2019)
11. Gozes, O., Frid-Adar, M., Greenspan, H., Browning, P.D., Zhang, H., Ji, W.,
Bernheim, A., Siegel, E.: Rapid ai development cycle for the coronavirus (covid-19)
pandemic: Initial results for automated detection & patient monitoring using deep
learning ct image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05037 (2020)
12. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Identity mappings in deep residual networks.
In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 630–645. Springer (2016)

14

B. Ghoshal et al.

13. Houlsby, N.: Efficient Bayesian active learning and matrix modelling. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge (2014)
14. Laves, M.H., Ihler, S., Ortmaier, T., Kahrs, L.A.: Quantifying the uncertainty of
deep learning-based computer-aided diagnosis for patient safety. Current Directions
in Biomedical Engineering 5(1), 223–226 (2019)
15. Li, Y., Xia, L.: Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): Role of chest ct in diagnosis
and management. American Journal of Roentgenology pp. 1–7 (2020)
16. Shan+, F., Gao+, Y., Wang, J., Shi, W., Shi, N., Han, M., Xue, Z., Shen, D., Shi,
Y.: Lung infection quantification of covid-19 in ct images with deep learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.04655 (2020)
17. Smith, L., Gal, Y.: Understanding measures of uncertainty for adversarial example
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08533 (2018)

