The modelling of COVID19 pathways sheds light on mechanisms, opportunities and on
controversial interpretations of medical treatments. v2
Maria Luisa Chiusano
Department of Agricultural Sciences, University Federico II of Naples
Correspondence to: chiusano@unina.it
Abstract
The new coronavirus (2019-nCoV or SARS-CoV2), inducing the current pandemic disease (COVID19) and causing pneumoniae in humans, is dramatically increasing in epidemic scale since its first
appearance in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.
The first infection from epidemic coronaviruses in 2003 fostered the spread of an overwhelming
amount of related scientific efforts. The manifold aspects that have been raised, as well as their
redundancy offer precious information that has been underexploited and needs to be critically reevaluated, appropriately used and offered to the whole community, from scientists, to medical
doctors, stakeholders and common people. These efforts will favour a holistic view on the
comprehension, prevention and development of strategies (pharmacological, clinical etc) as well as
common intervention against the new coronavirus spreading.
Here we describe a model that emerged from our analysis that was focused on the Renin Angiotensin
System (RAS) and the possible routes linking it to the viral infection. because the infection is
mediated by the viral receptor on human cell membranes Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE2),
which is a key component in RAS signalling. The model depicts the main pathways determining the
disease and the molecular framework for its establishment, and can help to shed light on mechanisms
involved in the infection. It promptly gives an answer to some of the controversial, and still open,
issues concerning predisposing conditions and medical treatments that protect from or favour the
severity of the disease (such as the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs/sartans), or to the sex related biases
in the affected population. The model highlights novel opportunities for further investigations,
diagnosis and appropriate intervention to understand and fight COVID19.
Introduction
In the past two decades, coronaviruses have caused three epidemic diseases: COVID-191, the severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)2, the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)3.
They are enveloped viruses with a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome (26–32 kb) from
sequence analysis revealed a high sequence similarity among the coronaviruses causing the COVID19, SARS, and MERS1. Because of the high similarity with SARS coronavirus, usually termed SARSCoV, the 2019nCov is also named SARS-CoV-2. The high similarity also favours the understanding
of many aspects related of the infection in the human body thanks to knowledge derived from
scientific experiments and studies performed on previously human infecting “relatives” of SARSCoV24, which are also causing severe acute respiratory stress.
The genome of SARS-CoV-2 contains at least ten open reading frames (ORFs) useful to viral
replication and transcription and coding for structural proteins. Specifically, four main structural
proteins have been recognized which are: spike (S), envelope (E), nucleocapsid (N) and membrane
(M) proteins. The spike protein plays a critical role to start the viral infection.
Cell entry of SARS-CoVs
S proteins of coronaviruses are large membrane linked glycoproteins that are responsible both for
binding to receptors on host cells and for membrane fusion2. The S proteins are organized by the S1
and S2 domains, which are respectively similar to the S1 and S2 domains in both human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and influenza proteins. The S1 domain of all characterized
coronaviruses, SARS-CoV and SARS-Cov2 included, mediates the initial high-affinity association
with their receptors5. Experimental analyses proved that Sars-CoV2 does not use known coronavirus

receptors, such as aminopeptidase N (APN) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4). SARS-CoV-2,
instead, it requires the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to enter cells1. This was clearly
shown for SARS-CoV5. Studies on the African green monkey kidney cell line Vero E6, which permits
viral replication, highlighted the mechanisms of association of the S1 domain of SARS-CoV with
human cell receptors. The authors confirmed that a soluble form of ACE2, but not of the related
enzyme termed ACE, blocked association of the S1 domain with Vero E6 cells, and also that antiACE2, but not anti-ACE antibodies blocked viral replication in Vero E6 cells.
The role of ACE2 as a functional receptor for SARS-CoV was recently confirmed also for SARSCoV21,4. It was demonstrated that also SARS-CoV2, as well as SARS-CoV, use endosomal cysteine
proteases cathepsin B and L (CatB/L) and the transmembrane serine protease TMPRSS2 for S protein
priming in cell lines, a step required for viral entry into the cell.4 TMPRSS2 had previously been
revealed as a host cell factor that is critical for entry in the cells and not for viral replication, affecting
the S protein at the cell surface and inducing virus-plasma membrane fusion6. Furthermore, lysosometropic reagents, like E64D, which inhibits CatB/L, failed to completely inhibit SARS-CoV2, as well
as SARS-CoV, entry in the cells. Indeed, the entry full inhibition also needed TMPRSS2 inhibitors
(like camostat mesylate)4. This concurrent action had been previously shown to be required for robust
blockade of SARS-CoV7.
Tissue distribution of viral receptors
Host susceptibility to SARS -CoV2 infection is primarily determined by the affinity between the viral
S1 binding site (Receptor Binding Site, RBD) and host ACE2, and this determines the initial viral
attachment step8. Moreover, since the bind of ACE2 to the S1 domain of S proteins should require
the priming of the S protein at the cell surface to induce virus-plasma membrane fusion for viral
entry4, the copresence of both molecule should be investigated to determine the possible occurrence
of the infection in the cells.
ACE2 appeared to have a restricted distribution in human tissues, being initially reported to be
expressed mainly in the heart, kidney, and testis. 9,10 Interestingly, remarkable findings since 200411
revealed the surface expression of ACE2 on lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes of the small
intestine, as well as in arterial and venous endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells in all
organs studied, explaining the relationship with SARS coronavirus infection. Together with the
presence of ACE2 in vascular endothelium, these results highlighted possible routes of entry for the
SARS‐CoV. Recently, single-cell transcriptomes showed the presence of ACE2 RNA (here indicated
as ace2) in type II alveolar cells of lung, esophagus upper and stratified epithelial cells, absorptive
enterocytes from ileum and colon, cholangiocytes, myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells,
and bladder urothelial cells, suggesting that those organs could be considered as potential high risk
for 2019-nCoV infection. In particular, presence of ACE2 was revealed also in the mucosa of the oral
cavity, being highly enriched in epithelial cells. Moreover, the research highlighted that among
different oral sites, ACE2 expression was higher in tongue than buccal and gingival tissues. Here we
also investigated the expression pattern of TMPRSS2 from public biological databases,
[https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000184012-TMPRSS2/tissue]. This analysis revealed that
protein and mRNAs are not typically present in lung in physiological condition. Nevertheless, it is
interesting to note, that TMPRSS2 expression correlates with SARS-CoV infection in the upper lobe
of the lung6. The protein is almost present also in paratyroids and salivary glands, while the mRNA
expression is detected in lung, salivary gland and in the tongue. These findings further indicate that
the mucosa of the oral cavity may be a potentially high risk route for the starting of the infection12.
It is worthy to mention in this context that chatepsins, that can also contribute to the internalization
of the virus4, are stimulated by cytokines, key proteins in the inflammatory response. Interleukin 6
(IL-6) leads a relevant increase in cathepsin L, whereas TGF-beta1 decreases the amount of cathepsin
L, at both mRNA and protein levels, proving that the cytokines IL-6 and TGF-beta 1 modulate
cathepsin gene expression.13 Remarkably, IL6 and not TGF-beta1 appear to by overproduced in
COVID-19 patients14,15.

Viral infection provokes a cytokine storm in infected patients.
Public data from documented computed tomography (CT) and radiography imaging from COVID19
infected patients [https://www.sirm.org/category/senza-categoria/covid-19/] highlight that a cytokine
storm-syndrome rather than the virus itself could be the cause of severe lung injuries and death.16
A cytokine storm is an overproduction of cytokines and an accumulation of immune cells that is often
associated with lung inflammation and fluid buildup, and that can lead to respiratory distress and
mortality. Moreover, it is widely known (information also available from Wikipedia) that the
principal symptoms of a cytokine storm are high fever, fatigue and nausea, which correspond to the
principal
ones
from
COVID19
infected
patients
[https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-symptoms/].
Cytokines are proteins produced and secreted by a broad range of cells, including immune cells and
endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and various stromal cells in response to varied stimuli. They act as
chemical messengers and are released from cells in contact with the stimulus, a pathogen, affecting
the actions of other cells by binding to receptors on their surface. Over the past two decades, much
has been learned about the diagnosis and treatment of cytokine storm syndromes even for intervention
in SARS17 and MERS18. The development of biological therapies for a variety of rheumatic,
oncologic, and other conditions, offered novel approaches to treating the immune response, going
beyond a not targeted immune suppression by corticosteroids or other relatively non-selective
immune suppressants. As an example, recently, a number of specific anti-cytokine approaches have
proven effective in treating a variety of cytokine storm syndromes, including those triggered by
coronaviruses. Data are becoming available from cytokine content in patients affected by COVID19
as they are from patients involved in previous pandemic infections.19,20, This reveals the intricate
patterning of gene expression associated to the inflammatory status and the possible side effect from
untargeted treatments. 17
The RAS signalling
Although its relevance for the SARS-CoVs infection, ACE29,10 was first discovered for its role as a
transmembrane exopeptidase that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin II (ANG-II) to angiotensin
(1-7) , a vasodilator21,22. Angiotensin II (ANGII) is a peptide hormone that can bind the type 1
angiotensin II receptor (AT1), giving place to a number of effects that result in vasoconstriction and,
therefore, in increased blood pressure. ANGII also stimulates the release of aldosterone from
the adrenal cortex in the kidney to promote sodium retention. ANGII is produced from the
Angiotensin I by the transmembrane protein angiotensin-converting enzyme, or ACE (ACE1), that
was discovered in 195623. ACE2 may also convert angiotensin I to angiotensin (1–9)10, which has a
prothrombotic activity24.
The RAS system acts as a homeostatic regulator of blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte balance, and
vascular resistance, as well as of the function of several organs, with a fundamental role in both health
and disease. The complexity of the whole system is complicated by its systemic and local tissuespecificity, which includes a wide range of molecules with different biological actions (including the
alternative Ang II receptor, the angiotensin type 2 receptor (AT2r), the Mas-related G-protein–
coupled receptor, other metabolites, like aldosterone, Ang III, Ang IV, etc.).25 In a more simplistic
way, it is conventional to consider the ACE-ANGII-AT1r and the ACE2-ANG(1-7) pathways as the
two main axes representing the Renin Angiotensin System signalling (RAS signalling)26.
ACE2 in diseases
The discovery of an enzyme that cleaves the vasoactive peptide ANGII soon highlighted its possible
role in the treatment of hypertension, attracting attention also for pharmacological applications.
Several observations and experimental evidence suggested the beneficial role of ACE2 in diseases
and cardiovascular disfunctions27,21. ACE2 is also essential for the expression of neutral amino acid
transporters, influencing the composition of the gut microbiota28. ACE2 is shown to increase in a

number of pathologies, including myocardial infarction24 , atherosclerosis29, renal diseases30,31 and
diabetes32,33, liver cirrhosis34. inflammatory lung injuries35,36 and, in these studies, the general
protective role of the enzyme when inhibiting the ANGI-ACE-ANGII axis of RAS is discussed.37
The overwhelming scientific production in the field also reports on the spread role of ACE2 increase
as anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant agent, in several tissues, lungs38, liver39,40, in
neuroprotection41, and also in atherosclerosis, cerebral ischemia, obesity, chronic kidney disease, and
asthma. Indeed, it induces cytokins depletion, antiproliferative effects, anti-fibrosis and antihypertrophy effects42, addressing its key action and its role as target for therapies in inflammatory
diseases.26,43,44,45,46
ACE2 has been considered as protecting from predisposition to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS)47, as also demonstrated in SARS-CoV infection, where its decrease, due to the interaction
with the virus, favours the syndrome48. This indicates that a reduction in pulmonary ACE2 activity
also contributes to the pathogenesis of lung inflammation, accompanied by the expression of cytokins
that cooperate with the direct effects of viral infection. As an example among the many, the loss of
ACE2 function in mouse shows the release of proinflammatory chemokines, such as C-X-C motif
chemokine 5 (CXCL5), macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP2), C-X-C motif chemokine 1
(KC), and TNF-α from airway epithelia, increased neutrophil infiltration, and exaggerated lung
inflammation and injury38. Interesting, smog and nicotins also favour lung inflammation increasing
ACE activity and, therefore, affecting ACE2 functionality.49
ACE2 in medical treatments
The need to reduce the negative effects of the ACE-ANGII-AT1r axis, launched a series of therapeutic
approaches aiming to amplify the ACE2-Ang(1–7) axis. ACE inhibitors, AT1R blockers and
mineralocorticoid receptor blockers (MRB), pioglitazone and ibuprofen50 included, are reported to
have direct effects on suppression of the ACE-Ang II-AT1R axis, often increasing ACE2 and Ang
(1–7) significantly21, in contrast with the inhibitory effects on the ACE2-ANG(1-7) axis by glucocorticoids51. On the other hand, other substances are usually considered dangerous in some treatments
for their negative effects on ACE2 levels.
The discovery of the role of ACE2 as the membrane receptor of SARS-CoVs and SARS-CoV2, raises
controversial opinions concerning the effect of medical treatments in facilitating virus infection in
human body. Because of the comorbidity of COVID19 with several diseases, like hypertension and
diabetes52, conventional pharmacological treatments are also under consideration. Hypotheses have
been therefore put forward, especially from social media, to suggest potential adverse effects of
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-i) or Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs or
Sartans), in COVID-2019, because of their action on the RAS pathway. This also provoked justified
alarmed recommendations from different Scientific Societies53 that underlined the lack of evidence
against ACE-i or ARB medication (http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2). However, scientific
evidence concerning the effects of pharmacological treatments acting on the RAS signalling system
are available from animals24,54,55,56 and also from human tissues treatments46. This is the reason why
a careful analysis on previous results can now help to clarify possible relationships of these medical
treatments in predisposing to COVID19.

The model
This effort aimed to depict the main pathways determining the infection of SARS-CoV19 in the
human body and the molecular framework for its establishment. The molecular model that emerged
represents the RAS signalling system components and the possible links with SARS-CoV19
infection, mediated by the transmembrane protein ACE21 (ACE2m) (Figure 1). Documented (solid
lines) as well as hypothetical edges (dashed lines) in the network inferred from the public available
scientific research are reported. The effects of ACE2 shedding55 and/or internalization56 which are
mediated by AT1r, one of the two receptor of Angotensin II, are also shown. ACE2 shedding is

determined by the cleavage of its ectodomain and its release in the plasma55, producing free ACE2
(ACE2p). The alternative route represents ACE2 internalization56, where the ectodomain is supposed
to be imported into the cell, inhibiting its functioning outside of the membrane, and producing what
is here indicated as the internalized ACE2 (ACE2i). Both processes are reported to be mediated by
AT1r when not blocked with ARBs. In case of AT1r blockage, eventually by pharmacological
treatments, these two routes are not working (Figure 2, panels b and c).
The model also includes the S-priming, which is required for the entry of SARS-CoV19 in human
cells4, and the action described for cytokins IL6 and TGF beta 1 in favouring or limiting the
intracellular production of cathepsins, respectively3. The model represents the documented role of
ACE2 levels in triggering the anti-inflammatory response, in case of high expression, or in inhibiting
it42,38. The possible connections with lung severe damages are also shown47.
The data
In figure 2, we summarize the effects of treatments on RAS molecules resulting from experimental
studies on animal24,54 and on human tissues57. Molecules levels in terms of concentration or activity
are reported in Table 1.
Ishyiama et al.
2004
losartan/omesartan

Ferrario et al.
2005
lisinopril

ACE2

Koka et al.
2007

losartan

Combined

ANGII

losartan

UP

UP

DOWN

UP

UP

Control-l

DOWN

UP

UP

DOWN

Control-l

ace2

UP

UP

ACE

ace

Control-l

Control-l

Control-l

Control-l

UP

DOWN

ANGII

UP

DOWN

UP

DOWN

UP

UP

Table 1. Summary of results from exposure to ANGII and to ARBs and/or ACE inhibitors.24,54,57
Control-l are results comparable to the control. High (UP) and low (DOWN) levels based on the specific
experimental measure are indicated.

Interestingly, the results here reported highlight that the treatments with sartans alone, or in
combination with ACE inhibitors determine high activity of ACE2, while treatments with ACE
inhibitors determine no changes in ACE2 activity.
Colours in Figure 2 highlight the differential levels of the molecules (black: corresponding to the
control or not reported; red: high; blue: low). Solid red lines indicate the favoured routes that emerge
in case of SARS-CoV19 presence. The possible pathways (red routes) are inferred based on molecule
concentrations in the respective condition. In green boxes, clinical parameters to be collected and
further investigated for disease progress monitoring, since their value could be affected when the viral
infection is occurring. As an example, the monitoring of ANG(1-7) and ANG-II levels could reveal
the activity of ACE2 in the RAS signalling pathways, together with ACE2p levels. CoV19/ACE2p
(ACE2p in the plasma bound to virus) levels could further depict the extent of virus upload. As a
result, high risk and low risk medical treatments as well as the disease development could be traced
appropriately timely configuring individual predisposition and progress of clinical conditions.
The clinical evidence
This study was inspired and confirmed by one COVID19 case in Naples.

Sixty three years old man, under therapy for hypertension, treated with Reaptan (ACE-inhibitor). The
dosage was set for an overweight man (105kg). The man was on diet during the last year till he
reached 80Kg, while under the same medical treatment. Showing weakness, his dosage was reduced
a couple of days before he discovered to be positive for COVID-19. When declared positive, the man
was suggested to change his treatment using only Valsartan (Courtesy from Direct Personal
Communication). During the disease, he manifested mild fever and nausea. The man fully recovered
in 10 days and is now waiting for negative confirmatory tests.
Hypothesis
The long term, overdosage, ACE-inhibitor treatment limited the SARS-CoV2 virulence in the single
case patient here reported for two main reasons, which are clearly depicted by the model. First, the
virus attack was hampered by the reduced ACE2 availability known to be triggered by the medical
treatment54, that provoked a decrease of the number of viral S-domain receptors (ACE2m) on cell
membranes, therefore limiting the viral entry in cells. Second, in case shedding55 would have
occurred, favoured by the availability of AT1r which is not blocked by other medical treatments,
ACE2m is cleaved and released in the form of a soluble molecule (ACEp), thus increasing the amount
of circulating SARS-COV2 receptor domain in the plasma. Because SARS-CoV2 replication can be
blocked by soluble forms of ACE21, we hypothesize that ACE2p in plasma sequesters SARS-CoV2
and reduces the probability of viral internalization in human cells, conferring the additional protection
from the viral infection. Proactive compounds based on the administering to individuals of free ACE2
as a medical treatment have already been proposed for limiting viral cellular invasion58,44.
Hence, prolonged exclusive use of ACE-inhibitors and avoidance of AT1r blockade by ARBs
(Sartans), that could be exerted by a combine treatment, could have provided a higher protection
from the virus invasion for this patient. The later administering of medical treatments based on
sartans, that was inappropriately suggested, fortunately did not affect a milder progress of the
disease that favoured a successful recovery. This was highly probable due to an initial limited viral
infection because of lack of ACE2 cell receptors conferred by the overdosage treatment based on
ACE-inhibitors.
Monitoring of free ACE2p or of soluble ACE2 bound to viruses (ACE2v), together with ANG-II and
ANG(1-7) levels and aldosterone in positive patients, can be the appropriate clinical trial that could
further support the proposed hypothesis and be associated to current screening and monitoring for
disease predisposition testing.
Unfortunately, the patient could not at all be monitored based on these parameters because of the
emergency status in Italy.
Discussion
Many information to fight COVID19 can be inferred from the scientific efforts and public biological
databases thanks to studies on previous epidemic coronaviruses.
The main effort here was to exploit this knowledge to define the SARS-CoV2 pathways when
infecting the human body and the molecular bases for considering risk factors related to specific
treatments.
Our molecular model elucidates the relationships between the RAS signalling and the SARS-CoV
infection, including additional routes that can be inferred based on scientific evidence. The levels of
the involved molecules were estimated considering six different experiments related to treatments for
hypertension in both animals24,54,55,56 and human tissues treatments46. These results, when associated
with the model, highlight infection risk prone and protective medical interventions. In the case of
ARBs (Sartans) and ACE inhibitor treatments, the model reveals that ARBs alone, or in combined
treatments, that confer an increased ACE2 activity on the cell membranes, results in higher risk for
viral infection. In contrast, ACE-inhibitors (when not combined with ARBs) appear to exert a twoway protective role, decreasing ACE2m on cell membranes and increasing ACE2p in the plasma,
thus offering a possible alternative to medical treatments for hypertension. One evidence from a
positive fast recovering patient is surely not enough to prove our hypothesis, but it was the evidence

that inspired it, and this should encourage clinical trials and appropriate statistics that are still lacking
and are urgently required. We are suggesting, as an example, the monitoring of RAS metabolites or
of free or virus bound-ACE2 in the plasma, that could provide crucial information to answer questions
on disease predisposition, on its progress and on mechanisms that are affected by the viral infection.
Such approaches could be associated with the screening, the diagnostic, the monitoring and will
surely highlight novel opportunities: as an example, in confirming the administering efficacy of
ACE2 or ACE2-like molecules to prevent viral invasion in the organism. This data would also provide
further evidence to convince the mainstream beliefs on the evidence here shown, for those who hardly
accept model driven knowledge. The good news is that there are alternatives for hypertension
treatments, and suitable medical guideline could be fast adopted based on recommendations of the
pertinent medical societies.
Attention should also focus on monitoring COVID19 propensities for the other diseases or treatments
that trigger ACE2 increase, therefore predisposing to the critical progress of the viral
infection.24,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36 In parallel, careful studies should also consider COVID19 progress in
cases in which a decreased ACE2 content occurs, ARDS included.47,48 Beyond being supportive for
the presented model, these studies could also reveal additional pathways of infection, expanding
current knowledge and paving the way to novel investigations. Low ACE2 levels, in principle,
depress the risk of a viral invasion since the depletion of viral receptor binding sites; on the other
hand, one should keep in consideration that such predispositions were indeed revealed in occurrence
of injuries triggered by the negative action on the ACE2-ANG(1-7) axis of the RAS signalling. Some
questions therefore arise: who will play the major role in the viral attack? The decrease in viral
receptor binding site, the presence of preceding injuries, or the medical care that was provided to
overcome the injuries and the poor ACE2 content?
The World Health Organization communicated that the SARS typically attacks the lungs in three
phases:
viral
replication,
immune
hyper-reactivity,
and
pulmonary
destruction
[https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2020/02/here-is-what-coronavirus-does-to-thebody/]. Scientific evidence, however, highlights that the distribution of the SARS-CoVs receptor
(ACE2), does not strictly correlate with SARS-CoVs cell tropism in lungs. Expression patterns
distribution in different organs and tissues of molecules triggering the viral entry9,10,11 revealed that
the virus could enter the cells through the tongue12, thanks to the co-presence of ACE2 and of
proteases favouring the S-priming, triggering the initial immune response. The release of specific
cytokines such as IL6 could also cooperate to the S-priming4,13. Remarkably, IL6 and not TGF-beta1
appears to be overproduced in COVID-19 patients14,15. The evidence that the inflammatory response
could also contribute to the viral entry highlights an intriguing cooperative mechanism and an
alarming scenario on the viral mechanisms of infection and on its evolution.
The spreading of the infection to the lung cells could be through the vascular system, modulated by
patient predisposition (i.e. ACE2 levels on cell membranes along the vascular endothelium)11 and by
the individual capability to mount the appropriate immune response. The initial lung disturb,
presumably due to viral destruction of lung infected cilia cells, like in SARS, produce necrotic cells
shed onto the luminal surface of the epithelium, contributing to a less reactive tissue response.59
The critical development of the disease depends on further additional conditions. Predisposing effects
eventually due to previous injuries or inflammatory status, or to preceding pharmacological
treatments, or to erroneous pharmacological treatments at the initial stage of infection50,21, could
facilitate the virus fast spreading, accompanied by an advantageous environment emerging from the
side effects caused by its infection (for example ACE2 depletion with further injuries and increased
inflammation). The starting infection in the mouth and the secondary attack in the lungs via the
vascular transportation is also suggested by evidence of the early bilateral lung injuries, highlighted
by computational tomography and radiography images.
The acute severe pneumonia is the result of both a depletion of ACE2 content on cell membranes,
noticeable creating damages, and a delayed mounting of the adaptive immune response60,
contributing to alveoli engulfment due to an excessive innate response. This could furthermore justify

the emergency from aged population, that could mount a slower response, putatively because of the
reduced leukocytes levels. Subsequent organ failure could be facilitated by an initial higher ACE2m
content in many key tissues9,10,11, then depleted by the viral attack. Organ failure is also triggered by
the infection mediated increase of dangerous components from the ACE-ANGII axis of the RAS
signalling, with consequent cascades of events that cause typical effects like cardiovascular and
kidney injuries. Kidney has a high content of ACE2 in physiological conditions and the
renin/aldosterone branch can be the part of the RAS system playing a role in the organ failure, also
linking aldosterone levels to disease propensity. This also explains why men are more disease prone
than women61, as it comes evident from the number of death on number of cases per sex (male: 4.7%;
female: 2.8%), as reported in the disease statistics on March 23, 2020
[https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sex-demographics/].
All concurrent events to be added to the severe cytokine storm that is damaging the lung tissues
causing hypoxia.
Hypoxia is the main aspect today faced during the emergency in the hospitals. The medical
intervention against the cytokines storm to reduce the acute respiratory distress syndrome need to be
carefully targeted to avoid immune depression and consequent infection by secondary pathogens,
although the immune depression is not a predisposing factor for this disease. Attention should also
be focused on avoiding medical treatments that could increase ACE2m content with the aim to
decrease inflammation50,21.
All the relevant molecular connections are elucidated in the proposed model, accompanied, by the
depicting of the possible routes for the infection, based on scientific evidence and the analysis of the
expression pattern per tissue of the main proteins involved in the viral entry from public biological
databases.
What this research is also teaching is that, although a severe pandemy was expected, useful
information was available, possible preparative actions were suggested at least since 200562, we were
not ready!
One example comes from the evidence that the infection is connected with the RAS signalling and
that there is still lack of appropriate trials to investigate on hypertension parameters for risk
assessment and disease progress monitoring. The lack of public digitalized data from diagnostics in
the hospitals, and from the medical surveillance at home, on COVID19 positive patients that do not
manifest a severe disease is also evident. Shared tools for diagnostics and coordinated intervention
should be fixed soon. The emergency must be faced with proper instruments.
What can we do now?
While working to fight the disease with vaccine development and adopting new or re-purposed
antiviral medicines to limit the virus attack, we must also use all the knowledge at our disposal to
treat those patients most at risk of dying, collecting other data for further understanding the disease.
This includes primarily to urgently implement evidence-based and science driven approaches that
could efficiently accompany those who are on the front line in the hospitals and are facing the
emergency. The implementation of diagnostics methods, medical treatments and tools based on the
monitoring of the individual clinical conditions, and the set-up of appropriate intervention for targeted
groups of patients, should profit of a joint action with a proactive scientific community and the
support of stakeholders.
We really hope that this alerting will be foster these actions.
Additional information
In Table 2 we report the take home messages that were gained from the presented analysis COVID19.
The model is presented in a dedicated website in the framework of “LETS’BE: let’s be ready!”, a
transdisciplinary initiative to make scientific knowledge understandable and accessible to the
interested community, to be conscious for the current fight and be prepared for the next.
For further information and possible interest in giving a contribution, please subscribe to
http://bigdatainhealth.org/LETSBE.

v2: this version does not include Table 1 of the previous version which was copied from
http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2.
Acknowledgments
I wish to acknowledge:
the positive COVID19 patient in Naples that kindly provided information useful to inspire the work.
He is still waiting for the test to confirm complete recovery, because of the emergency focused on
more urgent issues. It would have been of interest to have a time course monitoring of clinical
parameters from him during the disease and soon after, for more understanding;
Dr. Antonino Chiusano (radiologist) for useful explanations on data from public radiography images.
Dr. Antonio Scala (physicist) for his warm support and for useful suggestions;
Dr. Clementina Sansone (biologist) for the evening she spent for a scientific discussion on viruses;
Prof. Stefano Mazzoleni for inspiring in me my model based approach for understanding biology.
I wish to apologize with my family, for my absence, although being at home because of SARSCoV2. Hoping that my full day effort in these days will be never for them.
Reference
1

Zhou P, Yang X-L, Wang X-G, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin. 270 | Nat | 2012; 579. DOI:10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.

2

Rota PA, Oberste MS, Monroe SS, et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with
severe acute respiratory syndrome. Science (80- ) 2003; 300: 1394–9.

3

Moh Zaki A, Van Boheemen S, Bestebroer TM, Osterhaus ADME, Fouchier RAM. Isolation of a Novel
Coronavirus from a Man with Pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. NEJM.org N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 1814–
34.

4

Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor Article SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry
Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 2020;
181: 1–10.

5

Li W, Moore MJ, Vasllieva N, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the
SARS coronavirus. Nature 2003; 426: 450–4.

6

Matsuyama S, Nagata N, Shirato K, Kawase M, Takeda M, Taguchi F. Efficient Activation of the
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Spike Protein by the Transmembrane Protease
TMPRSS2. J Virol 2010; 84: 12658–64.

7

Kawase M, Shirato K, Van Der Hoek L, Taguchi F, Matsuyama S. Simultaneous Treatment of Human
Bronchial Epithelial Cells with Serine and Cysteine Protease Inhibitors Prevents Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Entry. 2012; 86: 6537–45.

8

Wan Y, Shang J, Graham R, Baric RS, Li F. Receptor recognition by novel coronavirus from Wuhan: 2
An analysis based on decade-long structural studies of SARS 3 4 Downloaded from. 2020.
DOI:10.1128/JVI.00127-20.

9

Tipnis SR, Hooper NM, Hyde R, Karran E, Christie G, Turner AJ. A human homolog of angiotensinconverting enzyme: Cloning and functional expression as a captopril-insensitive carboxypeptidase. J
Biol Chem 2000; 275: 33238–43.

10

Donoghue M, Hsieh F, Baronas E, et al. A novel angiotensin-converting enzyme-related
carboxypeptidase (ACE2) converts angiotensin I to angiotensin 1-9. Circ Res 2000; 87.
DOI:10.1161/01.res.87.5.e1.

11

Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis MLC, Lely AT, Navis GJ, van Goor H. Tissue distribution of ACE2

protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS
pathogenesis. J Pathol 2004; 203: 631–7.
12

Xu H, Zhong L, Deng J, et al. High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the epithelial cells of
oral mucosa. Int J Oral Sci 2020; 12: 8.

13

Gerber A, Welte T, Ansorge S, Bühling F. Expression of cathepsins B and L in human lung epithelial
cells is regulated by cytokines. In: Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. Springer, Boston,
MA, 2000: 287–92.

14

Chen X, Zhao B, Qu Y, et al. Detectable serum SARS-CoV-2 viral load (RNAaemia) is closely associated
with drastically elevated interleukin 6 (IL-6) level in critically ill COVID-19 patients.
DOI:10.1101/2020.02.29.20029520.

15

Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020; 395: 497–506.

16

Coronavirus: Cytokine storm syndrome treatments for Covid-19 patients may cut death rates - Vox.
https://www.vox.com/2020/3/12/21176783/coronavirus-covid-19-deaths-china-treatmentcytokine-storm-syndrome (accessed March 17, 2020).

17

Huang KJ, Su IJ, Theron M, et al. An interferon-γ-related cytokine storm in SARS patients. J Med Virol
2005; 75: 185–94.

18

Kim ES, Choe PG, Park WB, et al. Clinical progression and cytokine profiles of middle east respiratory
syndrome coronavirus infection. J Korean Med Sci 2016; 31: 1717–25.

19

Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall RS, Manson JJ. COVID-19: consider cytokine
storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet 2020; 0. DOI:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30628-0.

20

Thevarajan I, Nguyen THO, Koutsakos M, et al. Breadth of concomitant immune responses prior to
patient recovery: a case report of non-severe COVID-19. Nat Med 2020; : 1–3.

21

Keidar S, Kaplan M, Gamliel-Lazarovich A. ACE2 of the heart: From angiotensin I to angiotensin (1-7).
Cardiovasc. Res. 2007; 73: 463–9.

22

Santos RAS, Sampaio WO, Alzamora AC, et al. The ACE2/Angiotensin-(1-7)/Mas axis of the reninangiotensin system: Focus on Angiotensin-(1-7). Physiol. Rev. 2018; 98: 505–53.

23

SKEGGS LT, KAHN JR, SHUMWAY NP. The preparation and function of the hypertensin-converting
enzyme. J Exp Med 1956; 103: 295–9.

24

Ishiyama Y, Gallagher PE, Averill DB, Tallant EA, Brosnihan KB, Ferrario CM. Upregulation of
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 after Myocardial Infarction by Blockade of Angiotensin II
Receptors. Hypertension 2004; 43: 970–6.

25

Nicklin Ang-(1-7) Is a Biased AT1R Agonist 1343. DOI:10.1073/pnas.1432869100.

26

Tikellis C, Thomas MC. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) Is a Key Modulator of the Renin
Angiotensin System in Health and Disease. Int J Pept 2012; 2012. DOI:10.1155/2012/256294.

27

Crackower MA, Sarao R, Oliveira-dos-Santos AJ, Da Costa J, Zhang L. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
2 is an essential regulator of heart function. Nature 2002; 417: 822–8.

28

Perlot T, Penninger JM. ACE2 - From the renin-angiotensin system to gut microbiota and
malnutrition. Microbes Infect. 2013; 15: 866–73.

29

Zulli A, Hare DL, Buxton BF, Black MJ. High dietary methionine plus cholesterol exacerbates
atherosclerosis formation in the left main coronary artery of rabbits. Atherosclerosis 2004; 176: 83–
9.

30

Lely AT, Hamming I, van Goor H, Navis GJ. Renal ACE2 expression in human kidney disease. J Pathol
2004; 204: 587–93.

31

Soler MJ, Wysocki J, Ye M, Lloveras J, Kanwar Y, Batlle D. ACE2 inhibition worsens glomerular injury
in association with increased ACE expression in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Kidney Int
2007; 72: 614–23.

32

Ye M, Wysocki J, William J, Soler MJ, Cokic I, Batlle D. Glomerular localization and expression of
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and angiotensin-converting enzyme: Implications for albuminuria
in diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 17: 3067–75.

33

Batlle D, Soler MJ, Ye M. ACE2 and diabetes: ACE of ACEs? Diabetes. 2010; 59: 2994–6.

34

Paizis G, Tikellis C, Cooper ME, et al. Chronic liver injury in rats and humans upregulates the novel
enzyme angiotensin converting enzyme 2. Gut 2005; 54: 1790–6.

35

Marshall RP, Gohlke P, Chambers RC, et al. Angiotensin II and the fibroproliferative response to
acute lung injury. Am J Physiol - Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2004; 286. DOI:10.1152/ajplung.00313.2002.

36

Morrell NW, Morris KG, Stenmark KR. Role of angiotensin-converting enzyme and angiotensin II in
development of hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Am J Physiol - Hear Circ Physiol 1995; 269.
DOI:10.1152/ajpheart.1995.269.4.h1186.

37

Li XC, Zhang J, Zhuo JL. The vasoprotective axes of the renin-angiotensin system: physiological
relevance and therapeutic implications in cardiovascular, hypertensive and kidney diseases
Graphical abstract HHS Public Access. DOI:10.1016/j.phrs.2017.06.005.

38

Sodhi CP, Wohlford-Lenane C, Yamaguchi Y, et al. Attenuation of pulmonary ACE2 activity impairs
inactivation of des-arg9 bradykinin/BKB1R axis and facilitates LPS-induced neutrophil infiltration. Am
J Physiol - Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2018; 314: L17–31.

39

Shim KY, Eom YW, Kim MY, Kang SH, Baik SK. Role of the renin-angiotensin system in hepatic fibrosis
and portal hypertension. Korean J. Intern. Med. 2018; 33: 453–61.

40

Ahmadian E, Pennefather PS, Eftekhari A, Heidari R, Eghbal MA. Role of renin-angiotensin system in
liver diseases: an outline on the potential therapeutic points of intervention. Expert Rev.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2016; 10: 1279–88.

41

Bennion DM, Haltigan E, Regenhardt RW, Steckelings UM, Sumners C. Neuroprotective Mechanisms
of the ACE2–Angiotensin-(1-7)–Mas Axis in Stroke. Curr. Hypertens. Rep. 2015; 17.
DOI:10.1007/s11906-014-0512-2.

42

Rodrigues Prestes TR, Rocha NP, Miranda AS, Teixeira AL, Simoes-e-Silva AC. The Anti-Inflammatory
Potential of ACE2/Angiotensin-(1-7)/Mas Receptor Axis: Evidence from Basic and Clinical Research.
Curr Drug Targets 2017; 18. DOI:10.2174/1389450117666160727142401.

43

Ingelfinger JR. ACE2: a new target for prevention of diabetic nephropathy? J Am Soc Nephrol 2006;
17: 2957–9.

44

Batlle D, Wysocki J, Satchell K. Soluble angiotensin-converting enzyme 2: a potential approach for
coronavirus infection therapy? Clin Sci 2020; 134: 543–5.

45

Lieben L. Alport syndrome: ACE2 administration slows kidney damage. 2017. DOI:10.1016/j.

46

Koka V, Huang XR, Chung ACK, et al. Angiotensin II Up-Regulates Angiotensin I-Converting Enzyme
(ACE), but Down-Regulates ACE2 via the AT1-ERK/p38 MAP Kinase Pathway. Am J Pathol 2008; 172:
1174–83.

47

Imai Y, Kuba K, Rao S, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protects from severe acute lung
failure. Nature 2005; 436: 112–6.

48

Drosten C, Günther S, Preiser W, et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe
acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1967–76.

49

Oakes JM, Fuchs RM, Gardner JD, Lazartigues E, Yue X. Nicotine and the renin-angiotensin system.
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2018; 315: R895–906.

50

Qiao W, Wang C, Chen B, et al. Ibuprofen Attenuates Cardiac Fibrosis in Streptozotocin-Induced
Diabetic Rats. Cardiology 2015; 131: 97–106.

51

Ghadhanfar E, Alsalem A, Al-Kandari S, Naser J, Babiker F, Al-Bader M. The role of ACE2, angiotensin(1-7) and Mas1 receptor axis in glucocorticoid-induced intrauterine growth restriction. Reprod Biol
Endocrinol 2017; 15. DOI:10.1186/s12958-017-0316-8.

52

Fang L, Karakiulakis G, Roth M. Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased
risk for COVID-19 infection? Lancet Respir 2020. DOI:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30116-8.

53

Position Statement of the ESC Council on Hypertension on ACE-Inhibitors and Angi.
https://www.escardio.org/Councils/Council-on-Hypertension-(CHT)/News/position-statement-ofthe-esc-council-on-hypertension-on-ace-inhibitors-and-ang (accessed March 16, 2020).

54

Ferrario CM, Jessup J, Chappell MC, et al. Effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition and
angiotensin II receptor blockers on cardiac angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. Circulation 2005; 111:
2605–10.

55

Patel VB, Clarke N, Wang Z, et al. Angiotensin II induced proteolytic cleavage of myocardial ACE2 is
mediated by TACE/ADAM-17: A positive feedback mechanism in the RAS. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2014; 66:
167–76.

56

Deshotels MR, Xia H, Sriramula S, Lazartigues E, Filipeanu CM. Angiotensin II mediates angiotensin
converting enzyme type 2 internalization and degradation through an Angiotensin II type I receptordependent mechanism. Hypertension 2014; 64: 1368–75.

57

Koka V, Huang XR, Chung ACK, Wang W, Truong LD, Lan HY. Angiotensin II Up-Regulates Angiotensin
I-Converting Enzyme (ACE), but Down-Regulates ACE2 via the AT1-ERK/p38 MAP Kinase Pathway.
Am J Pathol 2008; 172: 1174–83.

58

Wysocki J, Ye M, Rodriguez E, et al. Targeting the degradation of angiotensin II with recombinant
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2: Prevention of angiotensin II-dependent hypertension.
Hypertension 2010; 55: 90–8.

59

Sims AC, Baric RS, Yount B, Burkett SE, Collins PL, Pickles RJ. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus Infection of Human Ciliated Airway Epithelia: Role of Ciliated Cells in Viral Spread in the
Conducting Airways of the Lungs. J Virol 2005; 79: 15511–24.

60

Menachery VD, Schäfer A, Burnum-Johnson KE, et al. MERS-CoV and H5N1 influenza virus
antagonize antigen presentation by altering the epigenetic landscape. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;
115: E1012–21.

61

Komukai K, Mochizuki S, Yoshimura M. Gender and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2010; 24: 687–98.

62

Osterholm MT. Preparing for the Next Pandemic. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1839–42.

Table 2. Summary of the main evidence derived from the work.
-The presence of ACE2 and associated proteins favouring the viral entry in oral tissues suggests that
the initial infection could arise preferentially in the mouth and, if favoured by clinical conditions and
not arrested by an efficient immune response, would spread to the lung through the vascular system,
provoking a cytokine storm that can be fatal.
-An over infection in lung tissues, mediated by previous or concurrent medical treatments or
predisposition might enhance fast engulfment of the alveoli due to an over response of the innate
immune system. This is accompanied by the cooperative effect of the misfunctioning of the ACE2ANG(1-7) axis of the RAS signalling system, that further contributes to the inflammatory response,
while not anymore protecting lungs from injuries.
-Increase of ACE2 content could favour viral invasion (evidence of ACE2 increase are found in
scientific literature for mineralocorticoid receptor blockers (MRB), ibuprofen, ARBs-Sartans).
-Substances could sequester or inactivate molecules that reduce ACE2 content; as an example, AT1r
sequestering by ARBs (Sartans) increases ACE2 content on cell membranes.
-Substances could favour shedding or internalization of ACE2m could decrease the viral infection rate,
although side effects due to the decreased functioning of the ACE2-ANG(1-7) RAS signalling axis.
-Exclusive treatments by ACE-inhibitors (not accompanied by ARBs (Sartan) treatments) could exert
a protective effect.
-Targeted actions based on deep diagnostics to reduce cytokine overload (not using general antiinflammatory treatments) should be provided since some cytokines appears to favour while others
inhibit the viral infection (examples are reported in model here provided (Figure 1)).
-Information on cytokines average content from COVID-19 patients (critical or dead) are available
from Wuhan patients and from SARS-CoV previous pandemic. This diagnostic parameters could be
useful to be traced per patient, and could provide relevant information for treatments and for further
investigations on the disease progression.
-Inappropriate treatments could favour attacks from secondary pathogens (eg. decreasing cytokins)
-Inappropriate treatments could favour the viral invasion (eg. increasing ACE2 content)
- ACE2 levels increase in a number of pathologies, as here reviewed, and that predispose to the
infection.

Figure 2. Main components of RAS and of known pathways from viral (CoV19) infection.
Solid lines represent known connections. Dashed lines represent inferred connections based on
scientific evidence. In green parameters that would need monitoring in COVID19 infected patients
for risk assessment.

Figure 2. Possible routes for viral infection according to medical treatments affecting the RAS
signalling (panels b, c, d). Panel a indicates high ANG-II content conditions (eg. in hypertension).
High risk and low risk treatments to viral infection are shown.
a.Results from in vitro experiments on human tubular cell lines (HK-2) which were performed to
analyse the response to increasing dosages of Ang II57 show up-regulation of ACE mRNA (ace) as
well as of the encoded protein (ACE), while reducing ace2 and ACE2m content, respectively.
b.Exposure to losartan, an AT1r blocker (ARB), resulted in decreased ACE levels for both mRNAs
and proteins and in the increase of ACE2 (mRNA and protein).
Results from treatments with sartans on rats54 revealed increased ACE2 and ace2, indicating high
ACE2 activity and high mRNA levels, in agreement with what reported for human cell lines57 for
similar treatments (b).
c. Increased mRNA levels and control-like ACE2 activity were revealed under exposure to
lisinopril (an ACE inhibitor).
d. Control like ace2 mRNA expression and an increased ACE2 activity resulted in the combination
of the two treatments. Noticeable, in rats medicated with lisinopril, increased cardiac ace2 gene
transcription did not elicit a comparable increase in ACE2 activity.
In green boxes, some of the parameters that would need monitoring for appropriate health and risk
assessments in individuals.

