From plague to coronavirus:
On the value of ship traffic data for epidemic modeling
Katherine Hoffmann Pham1,2 and Miguel Luengo-Oroz1

arXiv:2003.02253v1 [cs.CY] 4 Mar 2020

1

United Nations Global Pulse, 2 NYU Stern School of Business
katherine@unglobalpulse.org, miguel@unglobalpulse.org

Abstract

has been used in a diverse range of applications, including monitoring for port security, detecting fishing behavior, and studying search and rescue operations involving
migrant and refugee boats [4, 5, 6].
Currently, a standard approach to calculating disease
import risk at the international level is epidemic modeling using flight network data. However, vessels can
also be global carriers for infected individuals and disease vectors. For example, the “Black Death” plague
outbreak in 1347, which killed an estimated 25 million
Europeans, is believed to have been spread throughout
Europe by merchant ships, possibly by rats on board and
their parasites [7]. Similarly, the travel of infected civilians and soldiers along shipping routes is credited with
helping to spread the catastrophic 1918 Spanish flu epidemic, which killed an estimated 20 - 40 million people
worldwide [8].
Although passenger ships have largely been replaced
by airlines in the modern day, ships still represent a large
amount of traffic in island nations, and continue to play
an important role in international trade. Although ship
traffic patterns have transmission potentials that are distinct from airline traffic, they are not typically taken into
account in current epidemic models. Below, we discuss
two case studies in which shipping traffic is relevant to
the study of disease transmission.

In addition to moving people and goods, ships can spread
disease. Ship traffic may complement air traffic as a
source of import risk, and cruise ships – with large
passenger volumes and multiple stops – are potential
hotspots, in particular for diseases with long incubation
periods. Vessel trajectory data from ship Automatic
Identification Systems (AIS) is available online and it
is possible to extract and analyze this data. We illustrate this in the case of the current coronavirus epidemic,
in which hundreds of infected individuals have traveled
in ships captured in the AIS dataset. This real time
and historical data should be included in epidemiological models of disease to inform the corresponding operational response.

1

Introduction

Faced with a global epidemic, there is a need to quickly
estimate potential routes for disease transmission in order to prepare a public health response. In recent years,
the growing availability of big data sources has facilitated
the modeling of these potential routes. For example, previous studies have used mobile phone records, commuting flow data, and airline flight matrices to identify possible disease hotspots, predict contagion patterns, and/or
estimate import risk [1, 2]. In this research, we highlight another dataset – Automatic Identification System
(AIS) data containing historical and real-time ship trajectories – as a complementary source of information on
possible transmission routes.
AIS data forms a global database of maritime traffic.
All passenger ships, international ships over 300 tons,
and cargo ships over 500 tons must be equipped with
an AIS transceiver, which reports dynamic information
about the ship’s position – such as its location, speed,
and course over ground – as well as static information
such as the ship’s identifiers, vessel type, and flag [3].
This data is collected by a network of land- and satellitebased receivers and subsequently aggregated by thirdparty providers, which redistribute the data and/or render it for viewing in a graphical user interface. AIS data

2
2.1

Analysis
The 2017 Madagascar plague outbreak

In Fall 2017 Madagascar was struck by a plague epidemic, affecting an estimated 2,348 individuals and resulting in 202 deaths [9]. Since Madagascar is an island
nation, we examined travel patterns in the AIS data
to estimate possible transmission routes through commercial and cruise ships. Our methodology consisted of
gathering information from ports and cruise ships and
constructing an origin-destination matrix that captured
all trips between ports inside Madagascar (∼ 40% of observed trips) and outside Madagascar (∼ 60%).
From 26 September to 26 October 2017 we identified
1

(a) Origin-destination matrix for ships visiting Wuhan from
the 8th to 21st January 2020. Data source: UN Global
Platform AIS Database.

(b) The tracks of the cruise ship MS Westerdam from 1st
January to 19th February 2020. Data source: UN Global
Platform AIS Database. Basemap source: Stamen Design
and OpenStreetMap contributors.

Figure 1: Sample applications of AIS data
uary 2020. All told, we identified 1,107 ships connecting 34 different ports across China and Japan
(see Figure 1a).

126 vessel departures from the main ports in Madagascar, including cargo vessels, tankers, tugs, and fishing
vessels. Interestingly from an epidemic risk perspective, long-range trips included destinations as diverse as
Mayotte, Mauritius, Reunion, Mozambique, France, and
China. A further analysis of cruise traffic specifically
found 6 cruises that were scheduled to arrive in Madagascar over the course of November 2017. Generally, these
cruises were scheduled to stop in more than one port, and
the number of passengers and crew members on board
was over 1,200 on average. These cruises therefore represent high-volume points of human contact which in
this case would have subsequently visited South Africa,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Reunion, Seychelles, and Italy.

2.2

• Spain’s first case of the coronavirus was identified
in the Canary Islands, in a traveler who arrived
in La Gomera by ferry from Tenerife [10, 11]. In
addition to the islands’ air traffic connections, AIS
data analysis for 8 - 21 January 2020 showed that
ships passing by the Canary Islands were associated
with ports in 56 different countries, including frequent travel to peninsular Spain, Morocco, Senegal,
Gibraltar, the UK, the Netherlands, and Portugal.

The 2020 coronavirus epidemic

• The Diamond Princess cruise ship was quarantined
off the coast of Japan with approximately 3,700 individuals on board, and 621 people on the ship were
ultimately infected [12]. A second cruise ship, the
MS Westerdam, was repeatedly denied entry at port
for fear that there were infected individuals among
the 2,257 people onboard, and a passenger tested
positive for coronavirus only after the ship docked in
Cambodia, leading to fears that other infected but
asymptomatic individuals could spread new cases
(although the passenger has since tested negative)
[13, 14]. The locations of both ships are available in
real time and their travel paths can be reconstructed
using historical AIS traces (see Figure 1b). Similar
data on positions, historical travel paths, maximum
capacity, and expected ports of arrival could also be
extracted for other cruise ships in the region.

Given the long incubation period of the disease and the
possibility of mild, asymptomatic cases, maritime traffic has played a significant role in the current spread
of the coronavirus epidemic. In particular, experience
has shown that large cruise ships can become important
hotspots. Below are three scenarios in which AIS information could be used to support further investigations
and risk modeling.
• Wuhan, the city at the center of the outbreak, is located at the junction of the Yangtze and Han rivers.
Therefore, shipping traffic is one pathway by which
disease might spread out of the city. Using AIS data
from Exact Earth, we obtained all traffic from ships
that passed within 50km of Wuhan with a speed of
less than 2 knots for the period between 8 - 21 Jan2

3

Discussion

tifying the Impact of Human Mobility on Malaria,”
Science, vol. 338, pp. 267–270, Oct. 2012.

Ships represent a source of epidemic risk which might be
particularly relevant in port cities and island nations or
for diseases with long incubation periods. Our analysis of
data from Madagascar and the Canary Islands illustrates
that island shipping traffic has a broad reach (in these
cases, reaching three or more continents within a month)
and may potentially carry high volumes of passengers.
Even a landlocked city such as Wuhan saw a considerable
volume of river traffic in the two-week period prior to
quarantine.
AIS data makes it possible to visualize individual ship
trajectories, along with additional ship information such
as vessel type and size. It is simple to filter out, for instance, passenger ships that might have stopped in cities
with high risk, as well as to account for their expected
arrival times in future ports. The ability to acquire such
information in real time might be of critical relevance for
operational responses to disease outbreaks.
The approach described in this communication represents a first step towards estimating the potential role
of vessel traffic in global disease spread. We assert that
ship origin-destination matrices can offer insights into
travel routes which may be overlooked when focusing on
flight path data alone, and should be considered when
modeling the spread of disease in port cities and island
nations. The availability of real-time and historical data
from commercial providers makes analysis of AIS data
feasible. Vessel trajectory data can be enhanced with
other sources of data on the number of passengers and
crew aboard tourist or commercial ships. Future work
should explore how adding shipping traffic to existing
flight network data changes the outcome of disease simulations and risk estimates.

[3] Raymarine,
“AIS - The Ultimate Guide
to
Automatic
Identification
Systems.”
http://www.raymarine.com/view/blog/
news/details/?ID=15032385552, Sept. 2016.
[4] B. J. Rhodes, N. A. Bomberger, M. Seibert, and
A. M. Waxman, “Maritime situation monitoring
and awareness using learning mechanisms,” in MILCOM 2005 - 2005 IEEE Military Communications
Conference, pp. 646–652 Vol. 1, Oct. 2005.
[5] F. Natale, M. Gibin, A. Alessandrini, M. Vespe, and
A. Paulrud, “Mapping Fishing Effort through AIS
Data,” PLOS ONE, vol. 10, June 2015.
[6] K. Hoffmann Pham, J. Boy, and M. Luengo-Oroz,
“Data Fusion to Describe and Quantify Search and
Rescue Operations in the Mediterranean Sea,” in
IEEE 5th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 514–523,
2018.
[7] Encyclopaedia
Britannica,
“Black
Death.”
https://www.britannica.com/event/Black-Death,
Oct. 2019.
[8] M. Billings and R. Siegel, “The 1918 Influenza
Pandemic.” https://virus.stanford.edu/uda/, Feb.
2005.
[9] World Health Organization, “Plague - Madagascar.” http://www.who.int/csr/don/27-november2017-plague-madagascar/en/, Nov. 2017.
[10] R. Paniagua, “En unas dos semanas el coronavirus
se trasladó desde Wuhan hasta La Gomera,” El
Mundo, Feb. 2020.

Acknowledgements

[11] Reuters, “UPDATE 1-Spain confirms first case of
coronavirus - Health Ministry,” Reuters, Jan. 2020.

We thank Daniela Perrotta for her contributions to the
analysis of the Madagascar data. We thank the UN
Global Platform for access to its AIS database [15].
United Nations Global Pulse is supported by the Governments of the Netherlands, Sweden, and Germany and
by the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.

[12] BBC News, “Growing criticism over Japan cruise
quarantine,” BBC News, Feb. 2020.
[13] BBC News, “How did Cambodia’s cruise ship welcome go wrong?,” BBC News, Feb. 2020.
[14] J. Ducharme, “An American Westerdam Cruise
Ship Passenger Does Not Have COVID-19,” Time,
Feb. 2020.

References
[1] W. V. den Broeck, C. Gioannini, B. Gonçalves,
M. Quaggiotto, V. Colizza, and A. Vespignani, “The
GLEaMviz computational tool, a publicly available
software to explore realistic epidemic spreading scenarios at the global scale,” BMC Infectious Diseases, vol. 11, Feb. 2011.

[15] UN Statistics Division, “Global AIS Data Feed.”
https://marketplace.officialstatistics.org/datasets/aisdata, 2020.
[16] exactEarth, “AIS vessel tracking — maritime ship
monitoring.” http://www.exactearth.com/, 2020.

[2] A. Wesolowski, N. Eagle, A. J. Tatem, D. L. Smith,
A. M. Noor, R. W. Snow, and C. O. Buckee, “Quan-

[17] FleetMon, “Live AIS Vessel Tracker with Ship and
Port Database.” https://www.fleetmon.com/, 2020.
3

[18] MarineTraffic, “Global Ship Tracking Intelligence.”
https://www.marinetraffic.com/, 2020.
[19] ORBCOMM, “IoT and M2M Tracking, Monitoring and Control Solutions - Satellite,
Cellular and Dual-Mode Communications.”
https://www.orbcomm.com/, 2020.
[20] VesselFinder, “Free AIS Ship Tracking of Marine
Traffic.” https://www.vesselfinder.com, 2020.
[21] VesselTracker,
“Terrestrial
&
Satellite AIS Tracking Service in Realtime.”
https://www.vesseltracker.com/, 2020.
[22] All
About
AIS,
“FAQs.”
http://www.allaboutais.com/index.php/en/faqs,
2020.
[23] National
Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency,
“Nautical Publications - World Port Index.”
https://msi.nga.mil/Publications/WPI, 2019.

4

Appendix: Data and Methods
AIS data
Popular AIS data providers include ExactEarth, FleetMon, MarineTraffic, OrbComm, VesselFinder, and VesselTracker [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. The frequency of
AIS readings varies, with some providers offering better resolution than others; in our experience, we have
found that this resolution can range from approximately
one reading every two minutes to one reading per hour.
Furthermore, providers differ in their access to land- or
satellite-based receivers; typically, land-based receivers
detect ships within 15 - 20 (and up to 60) nautical miles
away [22], whereas satellite-based receivers are used to
monitor ships further out to sea.

Selecting AIS data for OD matrices
We first queried the AIS database to find the Maritime
Mobile Service Identities (MMSI) of all ships which had
passed within 50km of Wuhan, or 300km of the Canary
Islands, at a speed of less than 2 knots during our period
of interest (8 - 21 January 2020). Examples of observed
traffic in the areas of interest are shown in Figure 2, while
the regions used for the query are shown in Figure 3.
Given the resulting list of ship MMSIs, we then extracted
all trajectory points for these ships during the period
from 8 - 21 January, again retaining only points for which
the ships recorded a speed of less than 2 knots.

Figure 2: Snapshots of real-time plane and flight traffic
from Wuhan (above) and the Canary islands (below) in
February 2020. Source: UN Global Platform.

Filtering AIS data for OD matrices
We reduced the size of the AIS dataset using several criteria. First, we removed ships with invalid MMSI, dropping MMSI which were less than 9 digits in length and
MMSI which were associated with multiple different vessel types (a sign that more than one ship might be using
the same MMSI). Next, we removed duplicate readings;
readings after which ships had moved less than 0.001 degrees in the vertical and horizontal directions from the
previous reading; and ships whose position jumped at a
rate of more than 1.7 degrees per hour (approximately
100 knots) in latitude or longitude between subsequent
position reports (another sign that more than one ship
might be using the same MMSI).

Building OD matrices from AIS data
Using the list of ports supplied by the World Port Index
[23], we next restricted our dataset to position readings
which fell within approximately 50km of a port, and associated each of the remaining points with its nearest
port. We then retrieved the port associated with the
ship’s previous location reading, dropping any connections between a port and itself. Finally, we aggregated
the port-to-port connections of individual ships to yield
an origin-destination (OD) matrix.

Figure 3: The radii used to select ships visiting Wuhan
(above) and the Canary Islands (below). Basemap
source: Google Maps.

5

