A phenomenological approach to COVID-19 spread in a population
A Thyagaraja
Visiting Research Fellow, Astrophysics Group, Bristol University, Bristol, UK
March 31, 2020

arXiv:2003.12781v1 [q-bio.PE] 28 Mar 2020

Summary
A phenomenological model to describe the Corona Virus Pandemic spread in a
given population is developed. It enables the identification of the key quantities
required to form adequate policies for control and mitigation in terms of observable
parameters using the Landau-Stuart equation. It is intended to be complementary
to detailed simulations and methods published recently by Ferguson et al, March
16, (2020). The results suggest that the initial growth/spreading rate γc of the
disease, and the fraction of infected persons in the population pi (0) can be used
to define a “retardation/inhibition co-efficient” k∗ , which is a measure of the effectiveness of the control policies adopted. The results are obtained analytically
and numerically using a simple Python code. The solutions provide both qualitative and quantitative information. They substantiate and justify two basic control
policies enunciated by WHO and adopted in many countries: a) Systematic and
early intensive testing individuals for covid-19 and b) Sequestration policies such as
“social distancing” and “population density reduction” by strict quarantining are
essential for making k∗ > 1, necessary for suppressing the pandemic. The model
indicates that relaxing such measures when the infection rate starts to decrease as
a result of earlier policies could simply restart the infection rate in the non-infected
population. Presently available available statistical data in WHO and other reports
can be readily used to determine the the key parameters of the model. Possible
extensions to the basic model to make it more realistic are indicated.
1. Introduction:
The Corona Virus [Covid-19] Pandemic is causing devastating health-related and
associated economic devastation throughout the World. I was motivated to think
about this after reading the data presented by reputable sources [1] and the nowjustly famous paper by Ferguson et al, (2019)[2]. The results obtained by expert epidemiologists depend upon detailed statistical/stochastic modelling based
on available data from various countries hardest hit by the Covid-19 Pandemic and
on plausible hypotheses. One might term these models as “microscopic” in the
sense that they take into account of individual interactions and the transmission
characteristics of this new disease which appears to have arisen first in China. Al1

though extremely important for national policy-making involving a multitude of
factors, it should be possible to understand the principal qualitative properties of
the effects of this pandemic. It is therefore important to have some model which is
complementary to the detailed dynamics of the disease epidemiology which helps
in accurately parametrising the overall statistical numbers available.
Motivated by the considerations stated in brief above and to aid understanding many confusing and often contradictory statements made by authorities to the
public, I have formulated in this Note, a simple, phenomenological mathematical
model based on the well-known Landau-Stuart equation[3, 4]. This equation has
been used in many fields, in “predator/prey” models of Lotka-Volterra and notably,
in fluid/plasma turbulence. The purpose of this Note is to demonstrate its usefulness in connection with the spread of Covid-19 in any sufficiently large population
of uninfected persons.
2. Model assumptions and formulation:
A population of N0 individuals is assumed; t denotes the time. As a typical example, consider a region (for example, an isolated island, country or continent) in
the World with a population of 1 million persons (N0 = 106 ).
Let ni (t) refer to the number of infected individuals in the population. The
number of non-infected individuals is denoted by nw (t). For the present, we shall
take N0 = ni (t) + nw (t), and assume no births, deaths or in/out fluxes of people
to the population. These additional, more realistic features can also be taken into
account within the spirit of the model.
Consider the spread of an epidemic which does not kill the infected persons, and
which does not re-infect a person already infected who recovers from the illness.
We also assume that initially, there is a “seed population” of infected individuals:ni (0)  N0 ; in our example, we could take ni (0) = 10. It is assumed that the
infection spreads through the population with a constant growth rate, γc , if no
action whatever is taken on the system to constrain the spread of infection. It is
then obvious that,
dni
= γc ni
(1)
dt
with the solution, ni (t) = ni (0)eγc t and nw (t) = N0 −ni (t) It follows that the entire
population will be infected in the time:
1
N0
Ttot = ( ) ln(
)
(2)
γc
ni (0)
Clearly, at this time we will see that ni (Ttot ) = N0 and nw = 0. It is important
2

to note that the total infection time defined by Ttot depends both on the timescale defined by ( γ1c ) and on the initial infection ratio, nNi (0)
. The first factor is
0
determined both by the infectivity of the virus and the properties of the population
considered: for example how dense it is and how it is distributed in space, which is
assumed to be “connected” in the usual topological sense. In the example, it would
be “simply connected”. The second factor depends upon the relative number of
infected persons who were present in the population at the start.
How may one “mitigate/control” this naturally exponential (sometimes called
“explosive”) spread of infection? We might attempt to control this rate by testing
to statistically estimate the value of ni (t) once the infection starts and attempt to
suppress it by various means, such as “social distancing” or “strictly quarantining”meaning that we subdivide the population into “disconnected groups” which are
closed off to all movements of people across their boundaries, so that the spread is
limited to disconnected subsets of the whole area. This can be simply represented
in the present phenomenological model. We might, for example, add a new term
in the basic Eq.(1) and consider,
dni
= γc [1 − kni ]ni
dt

(3)

where k is a constant (in this simplest model) which represents the efficacy with
which we estimate the size of ni (0)/N0 and put in measures to reduce the speed
of the spreading represented by the spreading rate constant γc . Thus, we are attempting to retard/suppress the spreading by reducing(hopefully eliminating)
contacts between the infected and the uninfected, by various methods like “physical/social distancing” or “stay-in-place” policies. This will obviously depend upon
ni /N0 , since it is this fraction that we normally use to increase the “retardation”
of the unstable growth of the infection. In the present model, we assume that k
is a constant. More generally, it could in principle also be a function of ni (t)/N0
and possibly of time. Note that when ni is very small (this means, in practice,
ni  N0 ), the disease will initially grow exponentially with time.
Eq.(3) is solved exactly[see Appendix for detailed mathematical analysis] for arbitrarily specified values of γc , k, N0, ni (0) to get ni (t)/N0 of all values of t. Numerical solutions for a typical example which promotes a more detailed, quantitative
understanding are also presented and discussed.
Before examining the quantitative implications of the model, it is instructive to
consider some of its qualitative properties.

3

3. Qualitative considerations:
The Landau-Stuart Eq.(3) has some interesting properties which can be inferred
from its mathematical form. Some of these also reveal the idealisations in the basic
assumptions which lead to it.
1. Evidently, if ni (0) = 0, we see that it will remain zero for all t. This property is “trivial” in the sense, the model does not describe the “spontaneous”
appearance of the pandemic. This property is also shared by its much simpler
linear “progenitor”, Eq.(1).
2. If we take no action, obviously k = 0 and we have “explosive/exponential
spread”, since then Eq.(3) reduces to Eq.(1).
3. If k > 0, and ni (t) < 1/k , the equation says that ni (t) will continue to grow
in time, although not at the rate, γc of “uncontrolled spreading”. It is readily
seen [from Eq.(3)] that, as kni (t) grows from some initially small kni (0), the
“effective growth rate” [ie,γc (1 − kni )] keeps reducing and would become zero
at a time Tmax when kni (Tmax ) = 1. After this, ni (t) is at its maximum value,
nmax . We shall show in the Appendix that Tmax is actually infinity! What this
means is that as t increases, ni (t) always remains smaller than nmax = 1/k ,
but approaches it arbitrarily closely from below.
4. The observations above imply that we should make the constant (in this simple
model) k as large as we can by implementing adequate “infection-retardation”
control measures. Evidently, what matters here is the fact that accuracy of
testing is likely to be decided by the probable number of people who developed the illness at t. This is represented in the model by the ratio, ni /N0 .
Thus, we set, k = k∗ /N0 , where k∗ is a pure number [it seems reasonable to call
this the infection retardation coefficient]. Then, kni = k∗ ( Nni0 ), k∗ = kN0 .
We may then write the effective growth/spreading rate=Γeff (t) in the
form:
ni
Γeff (t) = γc [1 − k∗ ( )]
(4)
N0
Note that unlike γc , the effective growth rate depends upon the relative size of
the infected cohort with reference to the initial total population, and is clearly
a function of time. Since, we are usually interested in mitigating (rather than
aggravating!) the growth rate, our efforts must try to make k∗ > 0.
If k∗ < 1, it is easy to see that although the growth will slow as time goes on,
Γeff (t) > (1 − k∗ ) > 0 even when ni (t) = N0 , and everyone in the population
will have been infected. Hence, we require, for significant retardation, k∗ > 1.
4

Provided we can formulate controls to ensure k∗ > 1, we can derive an interesting consequence: for very long times, the total number infected is predicted
by Eq.(4) to be, slightly less than, nmax
= Nk∗0 < N0 . Thus, this model predicts
i
that,
N0
nmax
=
i
k∗
is an upper limit (as t → ∞) to the number of persons who can get the
infection provided k∗ is kept constant in time.
It is easy to see that if at any time after the start of applying k∗ we “relax” our
controls and allow it to decrease below unity, the disease will start to spread
again into the remaining non-infected population. This raises important questions for policy makers. The model does not take account of asymptomatic
infectors. It is at present not clear from the available data to know if people cured of the illness can infect the non-infected and whether asymptomatic
disease transmission really exists.
5. The “spreading equation” Eq.(3) can be written in a more understandable
form. It is convenient to introduce pi (t) = Nni0 and divide the equation through
by N0 , to obtain,
dpi
= γc [1 − k∗ pi ]pi
(5)
dt
,
This form immediately leads to [provided k∗ pi (0) < 1]: pi (t) < k1∗ , k1∗ = pmax
i
max
depends only upon our “retardation constant”,
for all t ≥ 0. Note that pi
k∗ . In particular, it does not depend upon the growth rate constant, γc , nor,
remarkably on N0 or pi (0)!
6. In the Appendix we show using Eq.(5) that the maximum value of the instani
taneous rate of growth [defined by, dp
dt ] occurs when k∗ pi = 1/2, namely,
when pi (t) = 2k1∗ . The exact solution of the equation gives the time when this
happens.
4. Discussion of exact and numerical solutions:
The exact solution for pi (t) [equivalent to ni (t) in this model] shows that the
instantaneous infection spread rate, is an interesting function:
pmax
c0 γc exp γc t
ṗi = i
(1 + c0 exp γc t)2
This can be written is a more illuminating form:


1
max 1
2
ṗi (t) = (γc pi )
1−
]
(6)
c0
(1 + c0 eγc t )
5

The first factor on the right is constant in time, governed only by γc /k∗ . The
second and third terms depend upon, k∗ , c0 , γc t as well (since, to a good approximation, c0 ≈ x0 = x(0) = k∗ pi (0); this follows from, pi (0)  1). Notably, it does
not depend upon N0 . The time-dependence is only through the product, γc t.
We can discuss qualitatively the course of this key function in time: At t = 0,
it is easily shown that the time-dependent term within parenthesis equals c20 to an
excellent approximation. Then, we see that ṗi (0) = (γc pmax
)c0 = γc pi (0), consistent
i
with Eq.(5) when k∗ pi (0) is very small compared to unity. As t increases, this
increases and reaches a maximum when pi = pmax
/2. We can verify that at this
i
pmax
time [tpeak = ln( pii(0) )], Eq.(5) implies: ṗmax
= γc /4.
i
While the exact solution is useful for demonstrating theoretical features of the
model [such as relating the basic parameters to epidemiologically important objects
and the fact that the “invariant” profile of the rate of increase], it is useful
like pmax
i
to solve Eq.(5) numerically for a typical case.
In the following, the Example introduced earlier will be elaborated: thus, it has
already been stated that ni (0)/N0 = pi (0) = 1.0−5 (ie, 10 infected individuals in a
million). If we take the unit of time as a day, anecdotal evidence suggests that in
two days, the disease will spread to 2 or 3 individuals. For this reason, γc = 0.5
is assumed. The calculation is carried out for a period of 50 days. Keeping these
parameters fixed the following values of k∗ = 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 5.0 are considered and
i
two interesting quantities, pi and dp
dt as functions of t are plotted in Figs. 1-5.

(a) pi vs. t

Figure 1:

(b)

dpi
dt

vs. t

Infection Probability and Infection Rate as functions of time(in days): k∗ =

0
Figure 1 shows what happens when k∗ = 0.0. Fig. 1A shows the rapid rise of
pi (t). It is evident that for the parameters assumed in the calculation, in about
23 days, ni (t) = N0 . This is Ttot . After this, “infection probability” does not
6

make sense and the calculation is stopped. Fig. 1B shows a similar behaviour of
the infection growth rate. In this case, the two rates are simply proportional to
each other as shown by Eq.(5). The proportionality is simply γc = 1/2. This is a
reference calculation which shows the effect of simply ignoring the disease.

(a) pi vs. t

Figure 2:

(b)

dpi
dt

vs. t

Infection Probability and Infection Rate as functions of time(in days): k∗ =

0.5
Figure 2 demonstrates the effect of choosing k∗ = 1/2. As discussed earlier, this
is less than the ‘critical value’ k∗ = 1. It is seen that pi = 1 around 24 days.
Remarkably, this sub-critical value of the co-efficient only lengthens the time-scale
of the total infection of the population of 1 million individuals (starting with 10 at
the start) slightly. However, the infection rate is lower by 50%, relative to the “do
nothing” scenario. This illustrates that half-measures will not be effective in really
controlling the disease and protecting a significant fraction of the population. As
before, the calculation stops at the time not substantially different from Ttot .
Figure 3 shows that when k∗ = 1, pi keeps rising monotonically and ni (t)
always remains less than N0 . By about 40 days the population does get fully
infected. In actual fact, pi (t) < 1, and approaches this value as a limit. This is
i
demonstrable from Eq.(5). In this case, we see that dp
dt has a “bell-like” shape with
a maximum at 1/8. Contrary to popular belief, the curve is not a Gaussian, nor is
it really symmetrical about the maximum. It is, in fact, correctly represented by
the formula, Eq.(6). The maximum rate of infection occurs around 24 days.
Figure 4 shows the the effect of choosing k∗ = 3/2, a “super-critical” value.
This time, pi adopts the classic S [called a “saturation curve”] shape as in the
critical case. However, pmax
= 1/k∗ , as predicted theoretically from exact solution
i
of Eq.(6). Thus this policy certainly shields 33% of the initial population from the
illness. Furthermore, the infection rate curve in Fig. 4B, is certainly “flattened” as
compared with Fig. 3B. However, the area under it is not equal to the curve in
7

Fig. 2B. In actual fact, it must be 33% smaller as also predicted by the analysis.

(a) pi vs. t

Figure 3:

(b)

dpi
dt

vs. t

Infection Probability and Infection Rate as functions of time(in days): k∗ =

1.0

(a) pi vs. t

Figure 4:

(b)

dpi
dt

vs. t

Infection Probability and Infection Rate as functions of time(in days): k∗ =

1.5
Figure 5 shows that by having a relatively large k∗ = 5.0, one can shield nearly
80% of population and really flatten the infection rate curve. This should not cause
any surprise since k∗ pi reaches unity by about 25 days. After that, the effective
growth rate, Γeff < 0.
This concludes the discussion of the analytical and numerical results of the model
presented. In the next Section some possible extensions and applications of similar,
but more realistic models in understanding the variety of data from around the
world and producing a coherent explanation of the significant variations among
different countries are suggested.
8

(a) pi vs. t

(b)

dpi
dt

vs. t

Infection Probability and Infection Rate Infection Rate as functions of
time(in days): k∗ = 5.0
Figure 5:

5. Conclusions:
The model presented can be extended and generalised in several ways to take better
account of the observations of Covid-19. Some of these will now be briefly discussed.
The model, as stated, does not account for mortality as a result of infection. To
represent this, one needs to introduce, the probability that an individual would die
after infection. If we set nd (t) for number of deaths due to the infection, and
assume a mean probability of deaths equal to nd /ni (t) = rd ≤ 1, we can calculate
nd after obtaining ni as described earlier. It is known that this probability varies
with many factors and is certainly not the same for all age groups[1]. We can
follow the distribution of (pi (t)) among different age groups by introducing the
distribution function, fi (y, t) where, y is the age of the person. It is clear that ,
Z Y
ni (t) =
fi (y, t)dy
0

where Y is the largest age of a person in the population. We must develop
equations for fi (y, t) similar in form to Eq.(3). If all other deaths, births etc are
ignored and we consider times shorter than a year, the total population N0 , will no
longer be constant in time, but decrease. If the mortality rd of a person depends
upon age but not on the time, we estimate the number of deaths in time t by,
Z Y
nd (t) =
rd (y)fi (y, dt)
0

In principle, it is not difficult to set up equations corresponding to Eq.(3) already
data exists relating to r(d), and is bound to be improved as experts in the field
have longer to validate statistical results
9

It is also relatively straight forward to account for possible “seasonal” variations
of γc , in the case of the simple model described by Eq.(3). Thus, when γc (t) is
taken to be of the form,
γc (t) = γc0 (1 + g1 sin ωt + ..)
which is a typical periodic function (which equals γc0 of time with period 2π/ω ,
Eq.(3) takes the form,
dni
= γc (t)[1 − kni ]ni
dt
Rt
To solve this, one introduces a new ‘time-like’ variable, τ = 0 γc (u)du. In terms of
this new independent variable, the modified “spreading equation” takes the form:
dni
= γc (τ )[1 − kni ]ni
dτ
This standard change of variable can be actually implemented in principle (numerically, if necessary) once the seasonal variation coefficients, γc0 , g1 , .. are known.
What of cases where the ‘retardation coefficient’, k∗ itself varies with time? This
could occur during the pandemic as policy changes are implemented over time. It
is easy to see that if k∗ (t) is known, we can simply define k∗ (t)pi = p∗ (t) and
transform Eq.(9) to the form,
dp∗
p∗ dk∗
−( )
= γ∗ k∗ [1 − p∗ ]
dt
k∗ dt
It is interesting to note that if the control measures are programmed to increase,
as the infection starts to spread (making k∗ (t) an increasing function of t), the rate
of increase can be ‘flattened’ even faster. Conversely, if k∗ decreases as a function
of time, the rate of spreading will necessarily increase. If the variation with time is
complicated (such as a ‘step function’), the equation can still be solved over every
’interval of constancy’ and the overall solution obtained numerically by continuing
the solutions across the boundary points of each interval.
As is characteristic of any phenomenological model, the parameters such as
γc , k∗ , pi (0) have to be empirically obtained. Thus available data can be used
to estimate such model parameters. More detailed epidemiological statistical models will certainly be needed to obtain such parameters from ‘first principles’. An
analogy from Physics may be relevant here: just as Thermodynamics describes
matter in a gross, phenomenological manner and has to be supplemented by detailed molecular models to relate its results to fundamental physical principles (eg.
Classical or Quantum Statistical Mechanics/Kinetics). The model described in this
Note is best at giving a relatively simple “macro-level” description of a very complex epidemiological dynamical system represented by the Covid-19 pandemic.
10

Appendix:
The analysis of Eq.(5) is presented here.
pi(t)
, and a new
It is convenient to introduce the new variable, x(t) = k∗ pi (t) = pmax
i
“relative time”, τ (t) = γc t. Thus τ is the measure of time in terms of the “growth
time” 1/γc , characteristic of the disease. It is easily related to the observed rates
of the disease (with some errors due to inadequate testing etc). We find then that
Eq.(5) becomes, when written in the new variables,
dx
= (1 − x)x
dτ
Z
dx
τ +C =
x(1 − x)

(7)

leading to,
x
= c0 exp τ
1−x
The initial condition, x0 = x(0) gives c0 =
x(τ ) = 1 −

x0
1−x0 .

We obtain from this,

1
1 + c0 exp τ

(8)

We can express this in terms of the original variables to get a feel for the character
of the solution and some of its key properties.


1
pi (t) = pmax
(9)
1−
i
1 + c0 exp γc t
= k1∗ .
Thus, it is clear that at t = 0, pi (0) = pmax
x0 and as t → ∞, pi (t) → pmax
i
i
< 1.
Since pi (t) is manifestly increasing function of t, we see that k1∗ pi (t) < pmax
i
We next examine when the rate of new infections defined as
Evidently, this will occur at a time τpeak , when

dpi
dt

is a maximum.

d2 pi
=0
dt2
From Eq.(9) this happens when t satisfies,
d
c0 γc exp γc t
[
] = 0
dt (1 + c0 exp γc t)2
c0 exp γc t
which implies the relation, 1 − 2 1+c
= 0, precisely the condition
0 exp γc t

pi (t) = pmax
/2
i
11

(10)

predicted from Eq.(3).
Eq.(9) then leads to:
τpeak =

1
1
ln( )
γc
c0

(11)

Since c0 x0 when x0  1,
τpeak =

ln(1/x0 )
γc

to an excellent approximation.
References
[1] https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus2019/situation-reports/
[2] Neil M Ferguson, et al Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team Report,
16/03/2020.
[3] P. G. Drazin and W. H. Reid, Hydrodynamic Stability, Ch. 7, Camb. Univ.
Press, (1981).
[4] J. T. Stuart, J. Fluid Mech., 9, 353-370, (1960).

12

