Rational evaluation of various epidemic models based on the COVID-19 data of
China
Wuyue Yang1a) , Dongyan Zhang2a) , Liangrong Peng3 , Changjing Zhuge2b) , Liu Hong1b)
1

Zhou Pei-Yuan Center for Applied Mathematics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084,

P.R.C.

arXiv:2003.05666v1 [q-bio.PE] 12 Mar 2020

2

Beijing Institute for Scientific and Engineering Computing, College of Applied Sciences,

Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, 100124, P.R.C.
3

College of Mathematics and Data Science, Minjiang University, Fuzhou, 350108, P.R.C.

a)

Those authors contribute equally to this work.

b)

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: zcamhl@tsinghua.edu.cn(L.Hong),
zhuge@bjut.edu.cn(C.Zhuge)

1

During the study of epidemics, one of the most significant and also challenging problems is to forecast the future trends, on which all follow-up actions of individuals and
governments heavily rely. However, to pick out a reliable predictable model/method
is far from simple, a rational evaluation of various possible choices is eagerly needed,
especially under the severe threat of COVID-19 pandemics now.
In this paper, based on the public COVID-19 data of seven provinces/cities in
China reported during the spring of 2020, we make a systematical investigation on
the forecast ability of eight widely used empirical functions, four statistical inference
methods and five dynamical models widely used in the literature. We highlight the
significance of a well balance between model complexity and accuracy, over-fitting
and under-fitting, as well as model robustness and sensitivity. We further introduce
the Akaike information criterion, root mean square errors and robustness index to
quantify these three golden means and to evaluate various epidemic models/methods.
Through extensive simulations, we find that the inflection point plays a crucial role
in forecasting. Before the inflection point, no model considered here could make a
reliable prediction. We further notice the Logistic function steadily underestimate
the final epidemic size, while the Gomertz’s function makes an overestimation in all
cases. Since the methods of sequential Bayesian and time-dependent reproduction
number take the non-constant nature of the effective reproduction number with the
progression of epidemics into consideration, we suggest to employ them especially
in the late stage of an epidemic. The transition-like behavior of exponential growth
method from underestimation to overestimation with respect to the inflection point
might be useful for constructing a more reliable forecast. Towards the dynamical
models based on ODEs, it is observed that the SEIR-QD and SEIR-PO models
generally show a better performance than SIR, SEIR and SEIR-AHQ models on
the COVID-19 epidemics, whose success could be attributed to the inclusion of selfprotection and quarantine, and a proper trade-off between model complexity and
fitting accuracy.
Keywords: COVID-19, Model evaluation, Epidemic size, Forecast, Akaike information criterion

2

I.

INTRODUCTION
During the study of epidemics, one of the most significant and challenging problem is

to forecast the future trends, like how many individuals might be infected each day, when
the epidemics stop spreading, what kinds of policies and actions have to taken and how
they influence the epidemics, and so forth1–4 . The importance of epidemic forecast cannot
be emphasized too much. After the outbreak of an epidemic, all actions of individuals and
government heavily depend on our understandings on its future trend. The SARS in 20035 ,
H1N1 flu in 20096,7 and recent COVID-19 are several well-known examples.
Since the accurate epidemic forecast is so critical, there are diverse methods reported
in the literature to try to achieve this goal8–12 . Among them, empirical functions, methods
based on statistical inference and dynamical models (difference equations, ODEs and PDEs)
are three major routines (see Fig. 1). Empirical functions, especially those with explicit
forms, are most popular ones. They are simple, easily understandable, fast implemented
and analyzable. So many merits lay down the unreplaceable role of empirical functions
in this field. The statistical inference methods are also highly welcomed, especially in the
presence of a large amount of first-hand data. The basic goal of most statistical methods
in epidemics is to estimate the basic/effective reproduction number, which serves as a key
quantity to evaluate the future trends of an infectious disease. In dynamical models, the
basic/effective reproduction number is transformed into reaction coefficients. Based on compartment assumptions on populations involved in epidemics, such as susceptible, exposed,
infected, quarantined, hospitalized, recovered and death, classical SI, SIR, SEIR and other
generalized models show a great ability to correctly reproduce the basic features of the
spreading process of an infectious disease, to reveal the hidden dynamics, like the numbers
of exposed cases and asymptomatic carriers which are hard to be learnt from usual epidemiology investigation, to forecast the future trends of epidemics, as well to evaluate the
influence of diverse control policies and actions against the spreading of infectious diseases
in quantity.
However, in the face of so many possible choices, which one would be our best choice,
especially for the purpose of a reliable estimation on the future epidemic trend? In this
paper, based on the COVID-19 data of Shanghai and other six provinces/cities in China in
the spring of 2020, we explore this critical issue systematically by comparing the performance
3

of eight widely used empirical functions, four statistical inference methods and five dynamical
models reported in the literature. The basic guiding principles and evaluation criteria are
summarized in Section II. Detailed analyses, comparisons and evaluations among various
epidemic models are carried out in Section III. In Section IV, we forecast the epidemic trends
in South Korea, Italy and Iran in the near future. The last section contains a conclusion
and some brief discussions.

II.

THREE GOLDEN MEANS FOR MODEL EVALUATION
It is far from a trivial problem to evaluate the forecast ability of various functions/models/method

in a rational way10,12,13 . Many aspects should be considered at the same time. Here, as
a very general guiding principle, we propose three golden means which can be measured
through explicitly calculable quantities, i.e.
• Complexity v.s. Accuracy. We seek for a well-balance between the model complexity and fitting accuracy. Neither too complicated models with too many free
parameters and unverified mechanisms nor over simplified models without sufficient
capability to mimic the real complicated situations and all available data is welcomed.
This issue is also closely related to the over-fitting and under-fitting problem met in
numerics.

• Fitting v.s. Prediction. It is a very one-sided pursuit of the lowest fitting errors (measured by MSE, RMSE, correlation coefficients, etc.) for a predictive model,
though it is always the case in most published works! In fact, there are tremendous
evidences to show that the best fitting does not always lead to the best forecast (see
Fig. S3 in SI for example). Just as an old Chinese proverb says, going too far is
as bad as falling short. So we need to make a trade-off between the short-term best
fittings and long-term promising predictions. A more reasonable choice in practice
would be the statistical average of all possible results according to their weights (e.g.
the Boltzmann factor).
• Robustness v.s. Sensitivity. On one hand, we hope our model be sensitive to
parameter changes in order to model the influence of different situations and strategies,
4

to pick out the best fitting parameters, etc. On the other hand, the model is expected
to be robust (insensitive in other words) to against perturbations coming from various
sources, such as numerical errors, data noise, incomplete knowledge about epidemic
mechanisms, etc. Obviously, these are two opposite pursuits just like two sides of
the same coin and can not be optimized simultaneously. So that we need to relax
our requirement on model robustness and sensitivity, and focus on the reproducibility
of key dynamical features (like the inflection point, half time, etc.), the asymptotic
stability (basic/effective reproduction number R0 ), the bifurcation point, etc.

Above three golden means reflect the struggle and compromise between complexity and
simplicity, over-fitting and under-fitting, short-term and long-term goals, robustness and sensitivity, as well as energetic and entropic, deterministic and statistical, local and global views.
These issues are met here and there, now and then. The overemphasis of one aspect by omitting the other either deliberately or unintentionally would lead to unsatisfactory predictions.
As a perfect reflection of the central spirit of Confucianism – Zhongyong, our three golden
means provide a practical solution to above difficulties both qualitatively and quantitatively,
and can be used for making a rational evaluation of different fucntions/methods/models for
epidemic forecast and other related scientific problems.
To quantify these three golden means, here we propose three easily calculable factors for
model evaluation.
(1) The Akaike information criterion (AIC) and its various modified versions, like
AICc, AICu, QAIC, BIC, etc. AIC was introduced by Japanese statistician Akaike in the
early 1970s14 . It is based on the concept of entropy, and incorporate the model complexity
and its goodness of fit together in accordance with our first golden mean.
AIC = 2k − 2 ln(L),

(1)

in which k is the total number of free parameters in a model, while L is the likelihood
function. Models with less free parameters and high fitting accuracy will have lower AIC
values. In this work, we use AICc = −2 ln(L)/N + (N + k)/(N − k − 2) proposed by
McQuarrie and Tsai15 to remove the size dependence on data set N .
(2) The robustness index (RB). There are plenty of ways to quantity model robust5

ness. A common formula is
model robustness =

variation of prediction
.
strength of perturbation

(2)

By either introducing noises to training data or make perturbations on model parameters
and initial values, the variations of model predictions on the basic/effective reproduction,
inflection point, half time, the bifurcation point, etc. could be measured in quantity. For
models involving multiple free parameters, a more practical way to quantify its robustness is
to perform Monte Carlo simulations and look at the variance of predictions. Here we simply
define RB as the ratio between the 5% quantile and 95% quantile of all simulations.
(3) The root mean square error (RMSE). It is defined as
v
u
N
u1 X
(xi − yi )2 ,
RM SE = t
N i=1

(3)

in which N denotes the data size, xi and yi are the true values and predicted ones separately.
The RMSE is widely used to quantify the accuracy of regression models and needs no more
explanation.

III.

MODEL EVALUATION BASED ON DATA FOR COVID-19

EPIDEMICS IN CHINA
In this part, we apply our three golden means to evaluate most widely used models/methods in the field of epidemics. Far from complete, we collect eight empirical function
with explicit formulas – linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential, Hill’s, Logistic, Gompertz’s
and Richards’ functions16 , four statistical inference methods – exponential growth, maximum likelihood, sequential Bayesian and time-dependent reproduction number17,18 , as well
as five ODE models – SIR, SEIR, SEIR-QD19 , SEIR-AHQ20 and SEIR-PO (see Fig. 1). The
unknown parameters involved in different models are estimated respectively by fitting the
models to the epidemic data through the standard non-linear least squares approach.
To make a quantitative comparison, here we focus on the outbreaks of COVID-19 caused
by the novel coronavirus – SARS-CoV-2, which currently spreads severely worldwide. We
collect the data of daily reported confirmed infected cases C(t) from the China CDC
(http://www.chinacdc.cn/). The forty-day data from Jan. 20th, 2020 to Feb. 28th, 2020 of
Shanghai, which is located in eastern China and is considered as one of the most successful
6

FIG. 1. A summary on the empirical functions, statistical inference methods and dynamical models
for epidemics evaluated in the current study. See SI for details.

controlled big cities in China during the battle against COVID-19, are equally divided into
four sequential series every ten days. By separately fitting various models to different training data set, their forecasting abilities are compared in quantity through RMSE, AICc and
RB values based on the test data set.
Then similar approaches are carried out for the COVID-19 epidemics during almost the
same time period in other six different regions in China selected mainly according to their
geographic location (see Fig. 2), including Heilongjiang province (northeast China), Tianjin
(northern), Guangdong province (southern), Chongqing (southwest), Hunan province (central) and Xiaogan city in Hubei province (central, the city with the second largest reported
infected populations). However, their data set are divided into two instead of four and only
one comparison is made for each case for simplicity.
Our main findings are summarized as follows:
(1) The best model for epidemic forecast can be picked out based on AIC
and RB. The best model (judged by RMSE of test data) can be easily picked out from
each group based on the values of AICc and RB (depending only on the model and training
data!). The lower the AICc value is, the better trade-off between model complexity and
7

FIG. 2. The COVID-19 epidemics in seven provinces/cities considered in the current study (colored
in red) and their geographic locations in China.

fitting accuracy is achieved. Meanwhile, a medium RB value (0.5 − 0.9 in general) could
take the requirements on model robustness and sensitivity into consideration at the same
time. Among 27 groups (9 cases times 3 groups of models) under comparison, the AICc
value helps to find out 18 best models (by RMSE), and the rest 9 best models all have the
second lowest AICc values (see Table. I and Table. II for details).
(2) Sigmoid functions are more suitable for epidemic forecast.

Linear,

quadratic, cubic and exponential functions are not suitable for describing epidemic data
in general (see SI), while Hill’s, Logistic, Gompertz’s and Richards’ functions can well
capture the typical S-shaped curve for the cumulative infected cases.
(3) At the early stage of an epidemic, no model is reliable. In the case of very
limited data during the early stage of an epidemic, there is no way to tell which model is
superior than the other. They may either overestimate or underestimate the real situation
of a epidemic in an unpredictable way. Since the model with fewer parameters are more
robust, we suggest to adopt either exponential function or even linear function, though
their valid region is quite narrow. A more delicate way is to combine the knowledge of
the reproduction number by statistics methods and the forecast ability of exponential or
logistic functions. However, it should be noted that during the early stage the variance of
8

the derived basic/effective reproduction number is generally very large (see SI), making a
long-term reliable forecast almost impossible.
(4)The inflection is crucial for forecast. The inflection point plays in role in
forecast. It was suggested by Zhao et al.16 in Zika research that in the period when enough
data are collected, typically when the epidemic passes the inflection point, predictions on
the final epidemic size by the sigmoid empirical functions, such as Logistic, Gompertz’s
and Richards’ functions, will converge to the true values. Here we basically reproduce their
results. As shown in the last row of Fig. 3, the RMSE of predictions on the COVID-19
epidemic data of Shanghai grows in an exponential way with respect to the size of training
data, meanwhile the RMSE of fitting keeps nearly unchanged. Interestingly, before Jan.
31st which is also the inflection point of Shanghai, all functions fail to make a reliable fitting
(though some functions fail even earlier) and their RB values rapidly drop to zero.

TABLE I. Summary of AICc, RB and RMSE values for three stages in Shanghai based on different
models. Note the negative AICc values are caused by fewer data points than free model parameters.

(5) The observation that Logistic function underestimates the epidemic size
9

FIG. 3. Forecast of the COVID-19 epidemic in Shanghai from 01/20/2020 to 02/28/2020 based
on data of first 10 (early), 20 (middle) and 30 (late) days respectively. The first three panels give
the results of (upper) four explicit functions, (middle) four different statistical inference methods
combined with the Logistic function (the exponent γ derived from R0 ), (lower) and five ODE
dynamical models. The last row shows the variations of AICc, RMSE and RB in forecast of four
explicit functions with respect to different sizes of training data set (from Jan. 20th to the date as
marked).

while Gompertz’s function overestimates it requires further validation. In all
nine cases (including three cases for Shanghai), we notice the Logistic functions always
underestimate the total number of infected cases, while the Gomertz’s function makes an
overestimate (see Fig. 4). If this is not a coincidence, it would be extremely useful for
estimating the lower and upper bounds for the real total infected populations, though it still
10

requires further more evidences. The predictions of the other two functions are not so stable
and their goodness-of-fit varies from case to case, which reflects the lacking of theoretical
support of empirical functions during application.
(6) Methods fo sequential Bayesian and time-dependent reproduction number are more accurate at the late stage of an epidemic. For statistical methods,
since sequential Bayesian and time-dependent reproduction number methods take the nonconstant nature of the effective reproduction number with the progression of epidemics into
consideration, they appear to be more accurate than the exponential growth and maximum
likelihood methods in the late stage. In addition, the sequential Bayesian method seems to
be less robust than the time-dependent reproduction number method. The latter inherits the
merit of Logistic function by slightly underestimate the true epidemic size. It is further observed that the estimated basic reproduction number R0 by the exponential growth method
exhibits a transition from overestimation to underestimation with respect to the inflection
point, which is in accordance with the S-shaped curve for the total infected populations. As
a consequence, in the early stage of Shanghai COVID-19 epidemic, the exponential growth
method after combining with the Logistic function makes an underestimation on the final
epidemic size, and a contrary overestimation based on accumulated data in the late stage.
Finally, we find the maximum likelihood method overestimates the epidemic size to a large
extent in all seven cases, indicating this method may not be suitable for studying COVID-19
epidemics.
(7) The SEIR-QD and SEIR-PO models are suitable for modeling COVID10 epidemics. The dynamical models generally requires more reliable data to achieve
a reliable forecast than empirical functions, since the former usually involves more free
parameters and more complicated mathematical structure than the latter. Based on their
performance, the dynamical models can be classified into three groups. The classical SIR
model and SEIR model seem to be inadequate to describe the outbreak of COVID-19,
especially the final equilibration phase. Contrarily, the SEIR-AHQ model involves too many
free parameters as reflected through the large AICc value. As a consequence, its robustness is
also the poorest among all five models. The SEIR-QD and SEIR-PO models are two suitable
ones for modeling COVID-19 by appropriately incorporating the effects of quarantine and
self-protection.
11

FIG. 4. Forecast of COVID-19 epidemics in Heilongjiang province (data for first 18 days of 38
in total are used for modeling fitting (training set), while the rest 20 data points are used for
validation (test set)), Tianjin (17/39), Hunan province (15/39), Guangdong province (15/40),
Chongqing (15/39) and Xiaogan city (18/37) in Hubei province (central, city with the second
largest reported infected populations). The upper panel (A) shows the results of (upper) four
explicit functions, the middle one (B) for four different statistical inference methods combined
with the Logistic function (the exponent γ derived from R0 ), while the lower panel (C) gives the
results of five ODE dynamical models.

12

IV.

EPIDEMIC TRENDS IN SEVERAL HOT COUNTRIES

Based on our previous evaluations on different epidemic models and methods, we try to
forecast the epidemic trends in several hot countries, which is currently facing severe threat
of the outbreak of COVID-19 epidemics. However, after a very careful examination, we find
that except China most countries with more than 100 confirmed COVID-19 cases are still
within the early stage of epidemics (the inflection point has not be reached yet). It is really
terrible! As a consequence, we refer to the statistical inference method, the time-dependent
reproduction number to be exact, to try to derive the basic/effective reproduction number.
Then we adopt the Gompertz’s function (usually overestimate the final epidemic size as we
claimed above), Logistic function, as well as Logistic function combined with R0 derived
from the exponential growth model (usually underestimate the final epidemic size before the
inflection point and make an overestimation after that) to try to provide more reasonable
upper and lower bounds for the total confirmed infected case at least in the near future.
Here we look into three examples – South Korea, Italy and Iran, which have the second
to fourth largest confirmed infected populations by COVID-19 till Mar. 10th, 2020. Based
on the effective reproduction number Rt derived from the method of time-dependent reproduction number, it is observed that Rt for South Korea becomes lower than 1, meaning the
COVID-19 epidemic is under control. The number of total confirmed cases is estimated to
be 8, 000 − 10, 800. In contrast, Rt for Italy and Iran are both larger than 1, suggesting a
rapid spreading of COVID-19 in these countries. A conservative estimate of final confirmed
cases is around 18, 000 − 23, 000 for Italy and 9, 500 − 13, 500 for Iran. Similar severe epidemic situations are observed in Germany, France and Spain (data not shown), meaning
these European countries (and also some others) are in great danger too.

V.

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, based on the COVID-19 data of seven provinces/cities in China during

the spring of 2020, we make a systematical investigation on the forecast ability of eight
widely used empirical functions, four statistical inference methods and five dynamical models
reported in the literature. We highlight the significance of a well balance between model
complexity and accuracy, over-fitting and under-fitting, as well as model robustness and
13

FIG. 5. Forecast of the COVID-19 epidemics in South Korea, Italy and Iran. Left column shows the
effective reproduction number derived from the method of time-dependent reproduction number,
while the right column gives the reported confirmed cases and predicted ones by using Gompertz’s
function, Logistic function, and Logistic function combined with the exponential growth model.

sensitivity. We further introduce the Akaike information criterion, root mean square errors
and robustness index to quantify these three golden means and to evaluate various epidemic
models/methods.
Through extensive simulations and detailed comparisons, we find that the inflection point
plays a crucial role for making reliable forecasts, in agreement with previous reports16 . The
RMSE of model prediction decays exponentially with respect to the size of training data set,
while the model robustness characterized through the variance of final epidemic size also
approaches to unity rapidly after the inflection point. Furthermore, the forecast abilities
of several epidemic models are also closely related to the inflection point. For example,
the estimated basic reproduction number R0 by the exponential growth method exhibits a
transition from overestimation to underestimation with the increasing in the size of training
data set, and the inflection point acts as the demarcation.
We notice the Logistic functions always underestimate the total number of infected cases,
14

while the Gomertz’s function makes an overestimate in all cases we studies. Hill’s and
Richards’ functions do not have such a consistency. Since the sequential Bayesian and
time-dependent reproduction number methods take the non-constant nature of the effective
reproduction number with the progression of epidemics into consideration, we think they
are more accurate than the exponential growth and maximum likelihood methods especially
in the late stage of an epidemic. The transition of exponential growth method from underestimation to overestimation with respect to the inflection point could be quite useful
for constructing a more reliable forecast. Towards the dynamic models based on ODEs, it
is observed that the SEIR-QD and SEIR-PO models generally show a better performance
than the other three, highlighting the essential of a trade-off between model complexity
and fitting accuracy. The success of the former two models could also be attributed to the
inclusion of self-protection and quarantine during the progression of COVID-19 epidemics.
This work has some limitations. The analyses are highly relied on the quality of the
epidemic data. The initial conditions and parameter regions may also affect the results
significantly, though our qualitative conclusions will not be changed. Besides five simple
ODE models, many other epidemic models inclduing PDEs, stochastic equations and timedelayed equations are not considered. In addition, further validations than seven cases are
needed to explore the applicable regions of all the methods/models.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledged the financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 21877070, 11801020), Startup Research Funding of Minjiang
University (mjy19033) and Special Pre-research Project of Beijing University of Technology
for Fighting the Outbreak of Epidemics. Zhuge would like to thank Dr. Yi Wei for his
support on data collection.

REFERENCES
1

Michael Y. Li. Important Concepts in Mathematical Modeling of Infectious Diseases, pages
1–33. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018.
15

2

Chelsea S. Lutz, Mimi P. Huynh, Monica Schroeder, Sophia Anyatonwu, F. Scott Dahlgren,
Gregory Danyluk, Danielle Fernandez, Sharon K. Greene, Nodar Kipshidze, Leann Liu,
Osaro Mgbere, Lisa A. McHugh, Jennifer F. Myers, Alan Siniscalchi, Amy D. Sullivan,
Nicole West, Michael A. Johansson, and Matthew Biggerstaff. Applying infectious disease
forecasting to public health: a path forward using influenza forecasting examples. BMC
Public Health, 19(1):1659, December 2019.

3

Sanjay Basu and Jason Andrews. Complexity in mathematical models of public health
policies: A guide for consumers of models. PLOS Medicine, 10(10):1–6, 10 2013.

4

Guillaume Gingras, Marie-Hélène Guertin, Jean-François Laprise, Mélanie Drolet, and
Marc Brisson. Mathematical modeling of the transmission dynamics of clostridium difficile infection and colonization in healthcare settings: A systematic review. PLOS ONE,
11(9):1–19, 09 2016.

5

Xiao-Na Han, Sake J. De Vlas, Li-Qun Fang, Dan Feng, Wu-Chun Cao, and J. Dik F.
Habbema. Mathematical modelling of sars and other infectious diseases in china: a review.
Tropical Medicine & International Health, 14(s1):92–100, 2009.

6

Catherine A. A. Beauchemin and Andreas Handel. A review of mathematical models of
influenza a infections within a host or cell culture: lessons learned and challenges ahead.
BMC Public Health, 11(1):S7, February 2011.

7

Anirudh Mutalik. Models to predict h1n1 outbreaks: a literature review. International
Journal Of Community Medicine And Public Health, 4(9):3068–3075, 2017.

8

Gerardo Chowell, Lisa Sattenspiel, Shweta Bansal, and Cécile Viboud. Mathematical
models to characterize early epidemic growth: A review. Physics of Life Reviews, 18:66 –
97, 2016.

9

Caroline E. Walters, Margaux M.I. Meslé, and Ian M. Hall. Modelling the global spread
of diseases: A review of current practice and capability. Epidemics, 25:1 – 8, 2018.

10

Sebastian Funk, Anton Camacho, Adam J. Kucharski, Rachel Lowe, Rosalind M. Eggo,
and W. John Edmunds. Assessing the performance of real-time epidemic forecasts: A case
study of ebola in the western area region of sierra leone, 2014-15. PLOS Computational
Biology, 15(2):1–17, 02 2019.

11

Theresa Stocks, Tom Britton, and Michael Höhle. Model selection and parameter estimation for dynamic epidemic models via iterated filtering: application to rotavirus in
Germany. Biostatistics, 09 2018. kxy057.
16

12

Kimberlyn Roosa and Gerardo Chowell. Assessing parameter identifiability in compartmental dynamic models using a computational approach: application to infectious disease
transmission models. Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling, 16(1):1, January 2019.

13

Farzaneh Sadat Tabataba, Prithwish Chakraborty, Naren Ramakrishnan, Srinivasan
Venkatramanan, Jiangzhuo Chen, Bryan Lewis, and Madhav Marathe. A framework for
evaluating epidemic forecasts. BMC Infectious Diseases, 17(1):345, May 2017.

14

Hirotugu Akaike. A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE transactions on
automatic control, 19(6):716–723, 1974.

15

Allan D. R. McQuarrie and Chih-Ling Tsai. Regression and Time Series Model Selection.
World Scientific, 1998.

16

Shi Zhao, Salihu S Musa, Hao Fu, Daihai He, and Jing Qin. Simple framework for real-time
forecast in a data-limited situation: the zika virus (zikv) outbreaks in brazil from 2015 to
2016 as an example. Parasites & vectors, 12(1):344, 2019.

17

Thomas Obadia, Romana Haneef, and Pierre-Yves Boëlle. The r0 package: a toolbox
to estimate reproduction numbers for epidemic outbreaks. BMC medical informatics and
decision making, 12(1):147, 2012.

18

Jinghua Li, Yijing Wang, Stuart Gilmour, Mengying Wang, Daisuke Yoneoka, Ying Wang,
Xinyi You, Jing Gu, Chun Hao, Liping Peng, Zhicheng Du, Dong Roman Xu, and Yuantao
Hao. Estimation of the epidemic properties of the 2019 novel coronavirus: A mathematical
modeling study. medRxiv, 2020.

19

Liangrong Peng, Wuyue Yang, Dongyan Zhang, Changjing Zhuge, and Liu Hong. Epidemic
analysis of covid-19 in china by dynamical modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06563,
2020.

20

Biao Tang, Xia Wang, Qian Li, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Sanyi Tang, Yanni Xiao, and
Jianhong Wu. Estimation of the transmission risk of the 2019-ncov and its implication for
public health interventions. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(2), 2020.

17

TABLE II. Summary of AICc, RB and RMSE values for six provinces/cities in China based on
different models.

18

