Can the COVID-19 epidemic be controlled
on the basis of daily test reports?

arXiv:2003.06967v5 [physics.soc-ph] 20 Jul 2020

Francesco Casella1

Abstract—This paper studies if and to which extent COVID19 epidemics can be controlled by authorities taking decisions
on public health measures on the basis of daily reports of swab
test results, active cases and total cases. A suitably simplified
process model is derived to support the controllability analysis,
highlighting the presence of very significant time delay; the model
is validated with data from several outbreaks. The analysis shows
that suppression strategies can be effective if strong enough and
enacted early on. It also shows how mitigation strategies can
fail because of the combination of delay, unstable dynamics, and
uncertainty in the feedback loop; approximate conditions based
on the theory of limitation of linear control are given for feedback
control to be feasible.
Index Terms—List of keywords (Control applications, Delay
systems, Emerging control applications, Healthcare and medical
systems, Modeling)

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE first outbreak of the COVID-19 [1] virus epidemic
took place in China, starting at the end of 2019, and has
since then caused a global pandemic with disruptive effects
on public health, social life, and the economy. The pandemic
will likely spark a large number of studies to understand its
behaviour and to determine effective control strategies.
A wide range of mathematical models have been proposed
to describe the dynamic evolution of epidemics, starting from
the seminal paper [2], and including a wide range of possibly
quite sophisticated models, see e.g. [3] for a comprehensive
review. The analysis of these models allows to predict the
evolution of the disease over time, its asymptotic behaviour
(e.g. endemic disease equilibria vs. eradication), and most
importantly how it depends on the model parameters.
Epidemiological models are widely used to design vaccination and treatment strategies based on optimal control, see, e.g.
[4] and references therein. They can also be used to design
feedback vaccination strategies [5], or even feedback strategies
combining different actions such as vaccination, treatment, and
culling [6]. Some studies take into the account the feedback
effects of behavioural changes in the evolution of an epidemic,
see [7] and reference therein.
Most models employed to study control strategies are formulated in terms of ordinary differential equations, e.g. the
classical SIR and SEIR models and their variants. In some
cases, time delays are also included in the model, to account
for the incubation time, see, e.g., [8], [9].
1 Francesco
Casella
is
with
Dipartimento
di
Elettronica,
Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza
Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy; tel. +39 02 2399 3465

francesco.casella@polimi.it

Detailed models of the COVID-19 outbreak have started
to appear in the literature. With reference to the outbreak in
Italy, [10] proposes an extension of the classic SIR model with
eight state variables, while [11] presents a spatially resolved
model with nine state variables for each of the 107 provinces
of the country. Both models confirmed the appropriateness of
the public measures taken by the Italian authorities to contain
the virus outbreak. A highly detailed epidemiological model
of the UK was used in [12] to predict possible outcomes of the
virus outbreak and to suggest the adoption of a suppression
policy.
The report [13] attempts to estimate the effects of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs, i.e., public health measures) onto the relative reduction of the reproduction number
Rt of COVID-19, by applying Bayesian methods to data from
11 European countries. Given the estimates of the initial reproduction number R0 , a reduction by at least 60-70% or more
is necessary to suppress exponential growth. The main result
of [13] is that lockdown leads to an average reduction of Rt
by 50%, school closure by 20%, other measures around 10%.
However, 95% confidence intervals on the reduction factors
are huge, e.g. 10% to 80% reduction for lockdown, 0% to
45% reduction for school closure, severely undermining their
predictive power. This problem is inherent to the requirement
of a large enough data set to be statistically significant, which
requires to put countries with very different social habits
and very different interpretations of the same measure (e.g.
lockdown) in the same data set.
The use of feedback control theory has been advocated
early on as a powerful tool to support the management of the
COVID-19 outbreak [14]. Unfortunately, most of the existing
literature on the control of epidemics involves vaccines or
treatments, which are currently not available for COVID19. Some innovative feedback control strategies have been
proposed in preprints at the time of this writing, e.g. [15],
which proposes a feedback mitigation strategy based on fast
lockdown cycles controlled by a supervisory loop, or [16],
advocating a strategy based on massive random testing.
The aim of this paper is to assess the controllability of
the COVID-19 outbreak, assuming that the population is
sufficiently well mixed and that the decisions of public health
measures by the authorities are based on daily reports of
positive swab tests, active cases, and total cases. To this aim,
a suitably simplified model is presented, which is specifically
aimed at capturing the fundamental dynamics of the process
which is relevant for feedback control, which turns out to be
heavily affected by time delay.
The main result of the analysis is twofold. On one hand,

suppression strategies can be effective if enacted early on and
with strong enough measures. On the other hand, mitigation
strategies turn out to be infeasible if the reproduction number
is significantly higher than one, and are in any case limited
by the time delays in the feedback loop.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, a controloriented model of the epidemic is introduced and validated
against data from the outbreaks in different countries. In
Section III, the two above-mentioned strategies are analysed in
terms of feedback control. Section IV draws conclusions from
the control-theoretical analysis with some recommendations
for decision makers and future research.
II. M ODELLING
A. Derivation of the model
Models of the COVID-19 epidemic such as those mentioned
in Sect. I are based on first principles, in the sense that their
equations describe the time evolution of different categories
of subjects, based on the known mechanisms of infection,
recovery, and care of patients. However, their behaviour is
ultimately decided by the values of coefficients that must
be identified from experimental data, which is preciously
scarce in the case of a new disease such as COVID-19.
The quality and homogeneity of data used to tune those
models are also often questionable: different countries adopt
different standards for swab testing, possibly changing them
over time; some data get lost because of clerical errors; some
countries or regions may report lower numbers than real
because of political pressures. Even bona-fide reports may fail
to provide reliable data, as revealed by the mismatch between
official COVID-19 deaths and additional numbers of deaths
on municipal records in previous years. The actual effects of
NPIs are still quite uncertain, see [13].
Public policies based on such models cannot thus be applied
blindly, but must be adapted and corrected based on the
observed outcome. Indicators used by public decision makers
include daily reports of a) new positive swab tests, b) current
number of infected subjects, and c) total number of reported
cases. The crucial question is then: is feedback control feasible
at all in such a system?
In order to answer this question, a suitably simplified model
of the epidemic is derived here to capture the fundamental
dynamics that is relevant for the design of the feedback policy,
in particular the dynamic relationship between NPIs and the
response of the three above-mentioned indicators. The starting
point is the basic SEIR model [3] with the addition of a further
compartment L:
βIS
dS
=−
dt
N
dE
βIS
=
− E
dt
N
dI
= E − γI
dt
dL
= γI − δL
dt
dR
= δL
dt

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

were N is the total population, S is the number of Susceptible
individuals, E is the number of Exposed individuals, that
have caught the infection but are not yet infectious, I is
the number of Infectious individuals, L is the number of
subjects which are still iLl, but are no longer infectious due
to hospitalization, quarantine, or just because infected subjects
are mostly infectious during the first few days after the end
of the latency period [17], and R the number of recovered
resistant subjects.
The parameter β accounts for the likelihood of infection per
unit time;  is the inverse of the average latency time before
one becomes infectious, γ is the inverse of the average time
infectious subjects spend by actually infecting other people,
and δ is the inverse of the average time subjects remain ill but
without infecting others. Given the short time spans involved
and the relatively low mortality rate, deaths and births can
be neglected, as well as immigration and emigration, that are
restricted during the outbreak.
The features of the COVID-19 virus, coupled with the
unavailability of effective treatments at the time of this writing,
are such that allowing more than a few percent of the population to be infected at any point in time is unacceptable,
as doing so would lead to a collapse of the public health
system, particularly with reference to the significant fraction
of infected subjects needing intensive care to survive the
acute respiratory syndrome that the virus can cause. This fact,
coupled with the fairly long recovery time (about one month),
means that even the worst outbreaks in Western Europe are
currently estimated to have infected less than 10% of the
population after a few months in the course of the epidemic.
This allows to consider S(t)/N ≈ 1 and get rid of Eq. (1).
In fact, a significant portion of the population may be not
susceptible a priori, e.g. due to genetic reasons. However,
absent any concrete evidence of this fact, the precautionary
principle suggest to consider the worst case S(t)/N = 1.
Assuming then a constant value of β, the three eigenvalues
of system (2)-(4) are −δ and the two roots p and r of
s2 + ( + γ)s − (β − γ) = (s − p)(s − r).

(6)

If β > γ, there is one negative eigenvalue p and one positive
eigenvalue r. Assuming that the negative exponential mode
has already died out, the solution of (2)-(3) is then:
I(t) ≈ I(0)ert ,
(7)
βI(0) rt
e
(8)
E(t) ≈
r+
The doubling time of I(t) is Td = log(2)/r. Under the
assumption that S ≈ N , we can approximate the current
reproduction number Rt = β/γ. This formula is not exact
during transients, when the number of infectious subjects
changes over time, but allows to later obtain some interesting
synthetic results, though with some approximation.
In contexts where massive testing was carried out, it was
found that about 40% of positive tested subjects are entirely asymptomatic, despite being infectious [18], [19], which
makes COVID-19 particularly insidious. This suggests that
a similar fraction of the infectious subjects goes unnoticed
and escapes the testing process in the general population.

Furthermore, swab tests are affected by more than 20% false
negatives [20], and some mildly symptomatic subjects may
also end up not being tested. The ratio α between the number
the infectious subjects I(t) at a certain time t and the number
of infectious subjects It (t) at the same time t that will
eventually get tested positive is then likely between two and
three. On the other hand, α is only relevant to determine when
the ratio S(t)/N starts decreasing significantly below one,
providing some degree of herd immunity, as all other important
indicators, namely the mortality ratio, the ratio of hospitalized
subjects and the ratio of subjects requiring intensive care, are
all referred to It (t).
Assuming that α is constant, one can use Eqs. (2)-(5) to
also describe the dynamics of the fraction of subjects that are
eventually tested positive through the various stages of the
disease, Et (t), It (t), and Lt (t).
In most cases, subjects are only tested after they show serious symptoms, which happens on average τt days after they
have become infectious. The lab processing also introduces a
delay τr before reports are available. Although in principle it
is possible to provide the results of the test in a few hours,
the average reporting time is usually much longer because of
limited equipment availability, up to one week or more.
The NPIs mentioned earlier (lockdown, school closures,
etc.) reduce the rate of infection β, hence the current reproduction number Rt ≈ β/γ. These measures are varied
and can be applied progressively. We can then assume that
the time-varying parameter β is in fact a function of a
representative manipulated variable u(t), with u indicating
the intensity of adopted public health measures on a scale
from 0 (no intervention) to 1 (full lockdown and isolation
of all individuals). The β(·) function is thus monotonously
decreasing from the value β0 , when no social restrictions
are enforced, to zero, corresponding to the total isolation of
each person in the contry. Of course β is also a function
of other unknown factors d(t) that act as disturbances on
the system, e.g. mutations of the virus or changes in social
behaviour which are not directly mandated by the authorities.
Considerable uncertainty is involved in the estimation of the
effects of different interventions in terms of reduction of β or,
equivalently, of Rt , see [13], hence β(·) is also uncertain.
The control-oriented model can thus be formulated as a
state-space system with output delays:
dEt (t)
= β(u(t), d(t))It (t) − Et (t)
dt
dIt (t)
= Et (t) − γIt (t)
dt
dLt (t)
= γIt (t) − δLt (t)
dt
dTt (t)
= Et (t)
dt
Nr (t) = Et (t − τm )

(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

Ar (t) = It (t − τm ) + Lt (t − τm )

(14)

Tr (t) = Tt (t − τm ),

(15)

where β(u, d) is an uncertain function, , γ, δ are uncertain
constant parameters, τt , τr are uncertain parameters, τm =

τt + τr is the overall measurement delay, and Tt (t) computes
the cumulative number of positive tested subjects.
The first measured variable of the process is the number
of new daily reported cases Nr (t), which is affected by the
overall delay τm . The second measured variable is the number
of reported active cases Ar (t), i.e. the number of subjects for
which a positive test report has been received and a double
negative test has not yet been issued to certify their recovery.
As τt and τr are similar (several days), 2τr ≈ τt + τr = τm ,
leading to Ar (t) = It (t−τm )+Lt (t−τm ). The third measured
variable is the total cumulated number of reported positive
swab test reports Tr (t) = Tt (t − τm ).
Note that the model (10)-(15) has a time delay on the
output equations. Since input/output dynamics only will be
considered in the next Section, an equivalent representation
could be used where the delay is applied to the input instead.
B. Validation and Tuning
The goal of the model is to describe the dynamic response
of the Nr (t), Ar (t), and Tr (t) indicators to the application
of NPIs by central authorities, described by changes in u(t).
Four outbreaks cases were selected, all characterized by step
changes of u(t) at the central government level, in order to
make the validation easier: China, with data taken from [1],
Italy, France, and the UK, with data taken from [21], which
reports data from national authorities.
In the case of Italy and UK, some partial restrictions were
introduced first, causing a noticeable delayed reduction of the
exponential increase rate of new cases, then a full lockdown
was prescribed, whose effect was to change the positive
exponential growth of new cases into a negative exponential
decay after some delay. We then assume that β = β0 at t = 0,
then β undergoes a step reduction to β = ρ1 β0 at t = t1 and
a further step reduction to β = ρ2 β0 at time t = t2 . In the
case of China and France no NPIs were enforced before full
lockdown, yet a reduction of the exponential growth rate well
ahead of the effects of lockdown is clearly visible, possibly
due to social feedback effects or other disturbances. Two step
reduction were thus applied also in those cases.
The parameters of the model were tuned manually to obtain
a good fit with the available data. In particular, τm is easily
tuned to match the delay between the lockdown and the peak
of Nr (t), Rt = β/γ and ρ1 determine the growth rates in
the pre-lockdown behaviour of Nr (t), ρ2 , γ and  determine
the shape and decay rate of the post-lockdown behaviour of
Nr (t). Tr (t) is the integral of Nr (t), so fitting it helps refining
the parameter tuning considering the noisy nature of Nr (t),
which is also affected by a weekly oscillation due to repeating
lab schedules. Finally, δ is tuned to match the peak of active
cases Ar (t), which is much wider and delayed than the peak of
Ir (t). A detailed error analysis was not performed and could
be the subject of future work considering a more extensive
data set; in any case, high parameter accuracy is not required
to support the forthcoming analysis.
The values obtained for the four outbreaks are reported in
Table I. They are fairly consistent with each other and are
compatible with the ones reported in [11] and [21]. The initial

8000

to disrupt the social and economic life of their country, drastic
containment measures are taken:

0, Ar (t) < As
u(t) =
.
(16)
ū, Ar (t) ≥ As

Model
Data

7000

Nr/ days-1

6000
5000

Lockdown

4000
3000
Restrictions
2000
1000
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time / days

Fig. 1. Italian outbreak validation: new daily reported cases
105
A r: Model

2

A r: Data
Tr: Model

Ar, Tr

1.5

Tr: Data

1
Restrictions

Lockdown

0.5
Peak
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time / days

Fig. 2. Italian outbreak validation: active and total reported cases

reproduction number R0 and the current reproduction numbers
R1 and R2 computed after each change of β are reported,
as well as the doubling times Td0 and Td1 of the unstable
mode before and after the first change of β, and the maximum
reproduction number Rl corresponding to the controllability
limit derived in Section III-B4.
The detailed results for the case of Italy, computed with
the code available online in [22], are reported in Figs. 1-2.
The interplay between Et and Rt accounts for the growth
or decay of cases, depending on Rt . The E compartment is
essential to explain why Nr (t) does not drop sharply, when β
is sharply reduced, once the τm delay has elapsed, while the L
compartment is necessary to explain the much slower dynamic
response of active reported cases Ar (t). The validation results
of the other cases are reported in [23].
III. C ONTROL
The effects of the application of the two control policies
outlined in the Introduction will now be analysed. The title of
this section may well be ”Respect the Unstable” [24]: feedback
control strategies should not be applied light-heartedly to
safety-critical unstable systems.
A. Suppression
The suppression strategy can be brutally summarized in the
following terms: as soon as Ar (t) reaches a value As which is
scary enough to decision makers to overcome their reluctance

If the threshold As is crossed at time ts and ū is large
enough, then β(ū)/γ < 1 and thus r < 0. Assuming also d(t)
remains constant for t ≥ ts , Eqs. (9)–(11) form a homogeneous LTI system with three negative eigenvalues r, p, and
−δ. The actual number of eventually tested positive exposed
subject Et (t) will start decaying immediately; however, the
number of new daily reported infectious cases Nr (t) will
continue its exponential growth for τm days, before starting
to decay as well. The number of reported active cases Ar (t),
hence the required number of beds in hospitals and intensive
care units, will also stop increasing exponentially after τm
days, but will continue growing and peak much later, due to
the much slower time constant 1/δ, see, e.g., Fig. 2. Then,
states and outputs asymptotically approach the equilibrium in
the origin, that corresponds to the eradication of the virus.
The peak value of active cases Ap = max Ar (t) can be
computed by numerical integration of Eqs. (9)–(11) and (14).
The ratio M = Ap /Ar (ts ) can be quite large, e.g. M = 8 for
the Italian outbreak and M = 10 for the French outbreak.
Assuming that a fraction σ (about 4% in Italy) of active
cases requires intensive care, and that Nic intensive care beds
are available, a wise choice of As requires σAr (t) < Nic ∀t;
hence, As < Nic /σM . Political decision-makers without a
training in mathematical modelling may have difficulties in
understanding the role and magnitude of factor M and may
be caught by surprise once it is too late to act.
B. Mitigation
1) Policy statement: The basic idea of mitigation policies
is to manage the outbreak, in particular the trajectory of Ar (t),
in order to avoid overloading the public health system, without
trying to suppress it. This strategy was followed until 16 March
2020 by the UK government, which aimed at achieving herd
immunity [25], and until at least 10 June 2020 by the Swedish
government [26].
2) Mathematical formalization: The first step to enact
this strategy is to compute a reference control policy u0 (t),
obtained by the application of suitable NPIs over time, whose
effects on β is accurately calibrated, leading to reference
trajectories Nr0 (t), A0r (t) and Tr0 (t) for the corresponding
indicators, respecting the constraint σA0r (t) < Nic . These
trajectories can be obtained by means of constrained optimal
control, using sophisticated models of the epidemic as, e.g.,
the ones reported in [12], [11], and [10].
The unstable nature of the state trajectories while r > 0
makes an open-loop implementation of this policy infeasible,
unless one wants to risk runaways that can cause the collapse
of the public health system. The reference trajectory should
rather be followed by adapting the public policy measures
u(t) in real time, based on the values of N r (t), Ar (t), and
T r (t), which are constantly monitored by the authorities. This
corresponds in principle to closing a feedback loop to stabilize
the unstable reference trajectory, see Fig. 3.

TABLE I
M ODEL PARAMETERS ( TIME CONSTANTS IN DAYS )

China
Italy
France
UK

CFF

Period
18/01/2020 – 11/02/2020
22/02/2020 – 01/05/2020
28/02/2020 – 03/05/2020
01/03/2020 – 10/05/2020

Nr°/Ar°/Tr°
-

CFB

β0
1.6
1.3
1.3
1.28

u°
u

1/γ
2.5
3.1
2.9
2.8

1/
5.0
4.3
5.0
6.2

1/δ
N/A
33
29
N/A

t2 , ρ2
5, 0.160
19, 0.205
17, 0.195
25, 0.270

R0
4.0
4.0
3.8
3.6

R1
2.5
2.5
2.28
2.34

R2
0.64
0.82
0.74
0.97

Td0
2.5
2.6
2.8
3.4

Td1
4.3
5.2
5.3
5.8

τm
12
9
12
10

and the loop transfer function of the controlled system is

d

P

Nr/Ar/Tr

Fig. 3. Mitigation control architecture

3) Ideal Feedback controller design: The process model
(9)-(14) can be linearized around the reference trajectory at
time ta , obtaining a linear model with constant coefficients
0
a ),d(ta ))
except for the terms β(u0 (ta ), d(ta )) and ∂β(u (t∂u
,
which depend on ta for non-trivial reference control trajectories u0 (t). For the sake of the subsequent analysis, we
assume that these parameters change over a time scale which
is much longer than the time scale of the closed-loop system
feedback response, a common assumption when dealing with
gain-scheduling control, and thus consider them as constants,
with the value they have at time ta around which the feedback
stability analysis is performed. The transfer functions of the
linearized process then reads:
∆Nr (s)
µ(ta )(s + γ)
=
e−τm s
∆u(t)
(s − p(ta ))(s − r(ta ))
∆Ar (s)
µ(ta )(s + (γ + δ))
=
e−τm s
∆u(t)
(s − p(ta ))(s − r(ta ))(s + δ)
∆Tr (s)
µ(ta )(s + γ)
=
e−τm s
∆u(t)
(s − p(ta ))(s − r(ta ))s
0

t1 , ρ1
0, 0.63
2, 0.56
2, 0.60
15, 0.65

(17)
(18)
(19)

a ),d(ta )) 0
where µ(ta ) =  ∂β(u (t∂u
I (ta ), and p(ta ) and r(ta ) are
the eigenvalues of system (9)-(10) linearized at t = ta around
the reference trajectory.
By making the very optimistic assumptions that the parameters , γ, δ, and τm are constant and perfectly known,
that the function β(u, d) that expresses the effects of public
policy decisions is perfectly known, monotonously decreasing
and smooth with respect to u, and that d(t) ≡ 0, one can
design the feedback controller CFB as a linear controller C(s)
with gain scheduling, that compensates for the nonlinearity
of the process gain, resulting in a linear and (approximately)
time-invariant loop dynamics. While doing so, one should
also account for an additional delay τc of 2 ÷ 4 days within
the controller, corresponding to the decision making and
implementation delay. Assuming one wants to use Nr (t) for
feedback control, the overall control law is thus:
1
uf (t − τc )
(20)
u(t) = u0 (t) +
µ(t − τc )
h
i
uf (s) = C(s) Nr0 (s) − Nr (s)
(21)

µr (s + γ)
e−s(τm +τc ) ,
(s − p(t − τc ))(s − r(t − τc ))
(22)
where µr is the ratio between the actual value of the gain µ
of transfer function (17) and its reference value used for gain
scheduling. In ideal conditions, µr = 1, though results from
[13] imply this gain is subject to significant uncertainty. In
case one wants to control Ar (t) or Tr (t), similar consideration
apply, using (18) or (19) instead of (17).
In all the three cases, the loop transfer function reveals the
very dangerous nature of this process, which features a time
delay τ , an uncertain gain µr , and an unstable pole with time
constant T if β(ta )/γ > 1, where
L(s) = C(s)

Td
1
=
r
log(2)
τ = τt + τr + τc .
T =

(23)
(24)

Considering the values reported in Table I, Td = 4.3 ÷ 5.8
before lockdown, while τ = 9 ÷ 12 days.
4) Control feasibility: In order to guarantee some robustness of the system performance against the large gain uncertainty of the process, the Bode plot of L(jω) should maintain
a roughly constant slope over a sufficiently wide interval
around the crossover frequency ωc , thus approximating Bode’s
ideal loop transfer function.
When Rt (t) > 1, hence r(t) > 0, the analysis reported in
[27], Sect. 4.6, leads to conclude that if one wants to limit the
maximum norm of the sensitivity function Ms < 2 to achieve
some robustness, the product of the unstable pole r and of the
time delay τ should be rτ < 0.156. Introducing the doubling
time Td , this condition becomes:
τ
< 0.225,
(25)
Td
i.e., under very optimistic assumptions on the knowledge of
the process parameters, feedback control is feasible only if the
overall loop delay is less than a quarter of the doubling time
of the outbreak. Considering the values reported in Table I,
this limitation translates into Rt (t) < 1.1.
When Rt (t) < 1, hence r(t) < 0, [27] concludes that the
maximum crossover frequency is 1.57/τ ; hence, the time constant of the response of the feedback controller to unexpected
disturbances cannot be less than T = τ /1.57.
Unfortunately there is no theorem that can be directly
invoked to prove that any feedback control policy would not
suffer from the same limitations of a carefully scheduled
linear controller. However, the results of this analysis provides
an insightful benchmark, pointing out the crucial role of

measurement and decision delays, which should explicitly be
taken into account for feedback control design, and minimized
as much as possible. It also suggest that robust feedback
control may not be feasible around trajectories where Rt is
significantly above one. For example, this may explain the
runaway scenarios happening with non-negligible likelihood
in [15], when taking into account the statistical distribution of
the uncertain process parameters.
IV. C ONCLUSIONS
Governments all the world over are faced with very challenging life-or-death decisions regarding the management of
the COVID-19 epidemic, involving the balance between public
health and economic issues. In order to take such decisions,
they rely on expert advice based on the results of epidemiological mathematical models and on daily case reports, based
on swab test results.
This paper puts the problem in a control systems perspective
as a feedback control problem, using a simple model to capture
the control-relevant dynamic response of those reports to the
application of NPIs. The model was tuned and validated with
data from four different outbreaks.
These are the main results of the analysis:
• The suppression strategy is effective if NPIs are strong
enough to obtain Rt < 1, but it requires to understand
the role of the multiplicative factor M to correctly decide
when it is the right time to enforce them.
• Mitigation strategies are limited by the combination of
delay, uncertainty, and unstable dynamics. Designing
robust stabilizing controllers around trajectories with
Rt > 1.1 is likely to be difficult or impossible. Reducing
the overall delay by 50% would bring the limit to
Rt > 1.2. This information is particularly relevant for
the management of the reopening phase after lockdown.
• Measurement and decision delays play a crucial role
in determining the feedback control performance and
stability; hence, they should be explicitly taken into
account in the design of any feedback controller, and
minimized as much as possible, e.g., by promoting fast
testing policies and technologies.
• The analysis and design of NPIs can benefit from control theory tools, possibly suggesting viable solutions or
pointing out shortcomings of proposed strategies, that are
not obvious to epidemiologists and physicians.
At the time of this writing, the emerging consensus seems
to be that the safest policy to address exponentially growing
COVID-19 outbreaks is to apply aggressive enough suppression policies; the results reported in this paper can further
motivate why this is actually the case.
These results could also be useful to devise effective and
safe strategies to cope with the reopening phase that countries
face after successfully suppressing the first outbreak, in particular if the number of new daily cases becomes too large to
allow for testing, tracing and tracking of individual cases.

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Wu and J. M. McGoogan, “Characteristics of and Important Lessons
From the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China:

[27]

Summary of a Report of 72 314 Cases From the Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention,” JAMA, 02 2020.
W. Kermack and A. McKendrick, “A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
A, vol. 115, pp. 700–721, 1927.
H. W. Hethcote, “The mathematics of infectious diseases,” SIAM Review,
vol. 42, pp. 599–653, 2000.
O. Sharomi and T. Malik, “Optimal control in epidemiology,” Annals
of Operations Research, vol. 251, pp. 55–71, 2017.
M. D. la Sen and S. Alonso-Quesada, “Vaccination strategies based on
feedback control techniques for a general seir-epidemic model,” Applied
Mathematics and Computation, vol. 218, no. 7, pp. 3888–3904, 2011.
M. D. la Sen, A. Ibeas, S. Alonso-Quesada, and R. Nistal, “On a new
epidemic model with asymptomatic and dead-infective subpopulations
with feedback controls useful for Ebola disease,” Discrete Dynamics in
Nature and Society, vol. 2017, pp. 1–22, 2017.
S. M. P. Poletti, M. Ajelli, “Risk perception and effectiveness of uncoordinated behavioral responses in an emerging epidemic,” Mathematical
Biosciences, vol. 238, pp. 80–89, 2012.
N. Yoshida and T. Hara, “Global stability of a delayed SIR epidemic
model with density dependent birth and death rates,” J. of Computational
and Applied Mathematics, vol. 201, pp. 339–347, 2007.
G. Zaman, Y. Kang, and I. Jung, “Optimal treatment of an SIR epidemic
model with time delay,” BioSystems, vol. 98, pp. 43–50, 2009.
G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo,
A. Di Matteo, and M. Colaneri, “Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic
and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy,” Nature
Medicine, 2020.
M. Gatto et al., “Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in
Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, vol. 117, no. 19, pp. 10 484–
10 491, 2020.
N. Ferguson et al., “Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs)
to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” Imperial College
London, Tech. Rep., 2020.
S. Flaxman et al., “Estimating the number of infections and the impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European
countries,” Imperial College London, Tech. Rep., 2020.
G. Stewart, K. van Heusden, and G. Dumont, “How control
theory can help us control COVID-19,” IEEE Spectrum, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/diagnostics/
how-control-theory-can-help-control-covid19
M. Bin, P. Cheung, E. Crisostomi, P. Ferraro, H. Lhachemi, R. MurraySmith, C. Myant, T. Parisini, R. Shorten, S. Stein, and L. Stone, “On
fast multi-shot COVID-19 interventions for post lock-down mitigation,”
arXiv, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09930
M. Mueller, P. Derlet, C. Mudry, and G. Aeppli, “Using random
testing in a feedback-control loop to manage a safe exit from the
COVID-19 lockdown,” medRxiv, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/04/20/2020.04.09.20059360
X. He et al., “Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility
of covid-19,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, pp. 672–675, 2020.
D. Oran and E. Topol, “Prevalence of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
infection,” Annals of Internal Medicine, June 2020.
E. Lavezzo et al., “Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in the italian
municipality of vo,” Nature, 2020.
L. Kucirka et al., “Variation in false-negative rate of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reactionbased SARS-CoV-2 tests by time since
exposure,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2020.
“Worldometer coronavirus website,” https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/, accessed: 2020-06-09.
“COVID 19 Model Validation.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
casella/COVID19Control
F. Casella, “Can the COVID-19 epidemic be controlled on the
basis of daily test reports?” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2003.06967
G. Stein, “Respect the unstable,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 12–25, 2003.
D. J. Hunter, “Covid-19 and the stiff upper lip – The pandemic response
in the United Kingdom,” The New England J. of Medicine, March 2020.
M. Paterlini, “Closing borders is ridiculous: the epidemiologist behind
Swedens controversial coronavirus strategy,” Nature, vol. 580, no. 574,
2020.
K. J. Åström, “Limitations on control system performance,” European
Journal of Control, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 2–20, 2000.

8000

S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Model
Data

Detailed results of the model validation in the cases of
China, France, and UK are discussed in this appendix, which
does not fit the strict 6-page limit of IEEE Control Systems
Letters publications, and therefore is only made available in
the arXiv version of the paper.

Fig. 4 reports the validation of the Nr (t) trajectory for the
Chinese outbreak, based on data from [1].
The lockdown became effective on day 5 for the city of
Wuhan, which had the majority of cases at the time, and
on day 6 for all the Hubei region. Since it is not possible
from available data to figure out what are the separate effects
of two such very close events, the second one was lumped
together with the first one, which produced the largest number
of reported cases.
The data at the beginning of the time series until day 5
doesn’t really fit well an exponential curve, but that is probably
due to issues with the collection of swab test results. However,
the effect of the time delay τm is very clearly visible, as the
number of new reported daily cases only stopped growing
exponentially after 12 days. The behaviour of Nr (t) after the
peak allowed to tune the γ and  parameters, and to estimate
a reproduction number Rt = 0.64 immediately after the effect
of lockdown was felt.

6000
5000

Nr/ days-1

A. China

7000

Lockdown

3000
2000
1000
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time / days

Fig. 5. French outbreak validation: new daily reported cases

14

104
A r: Model
A r: Data

12

Tr: Model
Tr: Data

Peak
10

Ar, Tr

B. France
Fig. 5 reports the validation of the Nr (t) trajectory for the
French outbreak, based on data from [21].
As already mentioned in Sect. II-B, the doubling time
increased significantly after day 14, corresponding to a change
of β happened around day 2, given the delay τ = 12. The
cause of this change is unknown, it may actually have been
caused by some feedback effects on social behaviour caused
by the growing fear of contagion sparked by the nearby

4000

8

6

Lockdown

4

2

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time / days
4000

Model
Data

Fig. 6. French outbreak validation: active and total reported cases

3500

Nr/ days-1

3000

Italian case. The trend of Nr (t) after the delayed effect of
the lockdown on day 17 is very noisy but clearly decreasing
on average. This is confermed by looking at the very good
match in the validation of the Tr (t) trajectory reported in Fig.
6: as Tr (t) is the integral of Nr (t) (see (15)), high-frequency
noise is filtered out.

2500
2000

Lockdown

1500
1000
500
0

0

5

10

15

Time / days

Fig. 4. Chinese outbreak validation: new daily reported cases

20

As to the trajectory of active cases Ar (t) shown in Fig.
6, the matching of the simulation results with the data is
very good for the first 25 days, then some mechanism seems
to have somewhat dampened the experimental curve more
efficiently than the model in this paper. In any case, the model
overestimates the peak value by around 15%, which is not that
bad, considering how simple the model is.

9000

2.2

Model
Data

105
Tr: Model

8000

2

7000

1.8

Tr: Data

1.6

6000

1.2

Tr

Nr/ days-1

1.4

5000
Lockdown
4000
3000

1
Lockdown

0.8

Restrictions

Restrictions
0.6

2000
0.4

1000
0

0.2
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Time / days

Fig. 7. UK outbreak validation: new daily reported cases

C. UK
Finally, we take into consideration the case of UK, again
using data taken from [21]. The virus was basically allowed
to run unchecked until March 16, 2020 (day 15), when the
government issued some recommendations to avoid going to
pubs or theaters, without however closing them or issuing any
legally binding rules or restriction. This seems to have slowed
down the exponential growth after a 10-day delay, increasing
the doubling time from 3.4 to 5.8 days.
Full lockdown was announced on Mar 23 and went into
effect on Mar 26 (day 25). Also in this case, the effect on
Nr (t) was felt after a significant delay, in this case of about
10 days, see Fig. 7. Once that time interval was elapsed, the
number of new daily positive swab tests plateaued, instead of
starting to decay, settling down on a trajectory with estimated
Rt = 0.97, very close to the stability limit.
Also in this case, the experimental data about Nr (t) are
very noisy; however, an excellent match with data is obtained
with the cumulated Tr (t) trajectory, which is less sensitve
to nois because of the additional integral effect, see Fig. 8.
Unfortunately, data for Ar (t) were not available from [21], so
it was not possible to validate the active cases output in this
case.

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time / days

Fig. 8. UK outbreak validation: active and total reported cases

70

