SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) by the numbers
Yinon M. Bar-On​1​, Avi Flamholz​2​, Rob Phillips​3,4​, and Ron Milo​1
1​

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4​
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, 499 Illinois Street, SF CA 94158, USA
2​
3​

Abstract
The current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic is a harsh reminder of the fact that, whether in a single human host or a wave of infection across continents, viral dynamics is often a story about
the numbers. In this snapshot, our aim is to provide a one-stop, curated graphical source for the key numbers that help us understand the virus driving our current global crisis. The
discussion is framed around two broad themes: 1) the biology of the virus itself and 2) the characteristics of the infection of a single human host. Our one-page summary provides
the key numbers pertaining to SARS-CoV-2, based mostly on peer-reviewed literature. The numbers reported in summary format are substantiated by the annotated references
below. Readers are urged to remember that much uncertainty remains and knowledge of this pandemic and the virus driving it is rapidly evolving. In the paragraphs below we
provide “back of the envelope” calculations that exemplify the insights that can be gained from knowing some key numbers and using quantitative logic. These calculations serve to
improve our intuition through sanity checks, but do not replace detailed epidemiological analysis.

1. How long does it take a single infected person to yield one million
infected people?
If everybody continued to behave as usual, how long would it take the pandemic to
spread from one person to a million infected victims? The basic reproduction
number, R​0​, suggests each infection directly generates 2-4 more infections in the
absence of countermeasures like social distancing. Once a person is infected, it
takes a period of time known as the latent period before they are able to transmit the
virus. The current best-estimate of the median latent time is ≈3 days followed by a
≈4 day infectious period ​(Li et al. 2020​, ​He et al. 2020)​. The exact durations vary
among people, and some are infectious for much longer. Using R​0​≈4, the number of
cases will quadruple every ≈7 days or double every ≈3 days. 1000-fold growth
(going from one case to 10​3​) requires 10 doublings since 2​10​ ≈ 10​3​; 3 days ​× ​10
doublings = 30 days, or about one month. So we expect ≈1000x growth in one
month, million-fold (10​6​) in two months, and a billion fold (10​9​) in three months. Even
though this calculation is highly simplified, ignoring the effects of “super-spreaders”
and incomplete testing, it emphasizes the fact that viruses can spread at a
bewildering pace when no countermeasures are taken. This illustrates why it is
crucial to limit the spread of the virus by social distancing measures. For fuller
discussion of the meaning of R​0​, the latent and infectious periods, as well as various
caveats, see the “Definitions” section.

droplet nuclei produced by coughing is on the order of ~1 μm (​Yang et al 2007​).
Therefore, N95 masks likely protect against several modes of viral transmission.

5. How similar is SARS-CoV-2 to the common cold and flu viruses?
SARS-CoV-2 is a beta-coronavirus whose genome is a single ​≈​30 kb strand of RNA.
The flu is caused by an entirely different family of RNA viruses called influenza
viruses. Flu viruses have smaller genomes (​≈​14 kb) encoded in 8 distinct strands of
RNA, and they infect human cells in a different manner than coronaviruses. The
“common cold” is caused by a variety of viruses, including some coronaviruses and
rhinoviruses. Cold-causing coronaviruses (e.g. OC43 and 229E strains) are quite
similar to SARS-CoV-2 in genome length (within 10%) and gene content, but
different from SARS-CoV-2 in sequence (​≈​50% nucleotide identity) and infection
severity. One interesting facet of coronaviruses is that they have the largest
genomes of any known RNA viruses (​≈3
​ 0 kb). These large genomes led
researchers to suspect the presence of a “proofreading mechanism” to reduce the
mutation rate and stabilize the genome. Indeed, coronaviruses have a proofreading
exonuclease called ExoN, which explains their very low mutation rates (~10​-6​ per
site per cycle) in comparison to influenza (≈3×10​-5​ per site per cycle ​(Sanjuan et al.
2010)​). This relatively low mutation rate will be of interest for future studies
predicting the speed with which coronaviruses can evade our immunization efforts.

2. What is the effect of social distancing?

6. How much is known about the SARS-CoV-2 genome and proteome?

A highly simplified quantitative example helps clarify the need for social distancing.
Suppose that you are infected and you encounter 50 people over the course of a
day of working, commuting, socializing and running errands. To make the numbers
round, let’s further suppose that you have a 2% chance of transmitting the virus in
each of these encounters, so that you are likely to infect 1 new person each day. If
you are infectious for 4 days, then you will infect 4 others on average, which is on
the high end of the R​0​ values for SARS-CoV-2 in the absence of social distancing. If
you instead see 5 people each day (preferably fewer) because of social distancing,
then you will infect 0.1 people per day, or 0.4 people before you become less
infectious. The desired effect of social distancing is to make each current infection
produce < 1 new infections. An effective reproduction number (R​e​) smaller than 1
will ensure the number of infections eventually dwindles. It is critically important to
quickly achieve R​e​ < 1, which is substantially more achievable than pushing R​e​ to
near ​zero through public health measures.

SARS-CoV-2 has a single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome that codes for 10
genes ultimately producing 26 proteins according to an NCBI annotation
(​NC_045512​). How is it that 10 genes code for >20 proteins? One long gene,
orf1ab, encodes a polyprotein that is cleaved into 16 proteins by proteases that are
themselves part of the polyprotein. In addition to proteases, the polyprotein encodes
an RNA polymerase and associated factors to copy the genome, a proofreading
exonuclease, and several other non-structural proteins. The remaining genes
predominantly code for structural components of the virus: (i) the spike protein which
binds the cognate receptor on a human or animal cell; (ii) a nucleoprotein that
packages the genome; and (iii) two membrane-bound proteins. Though much
current work is centered on understanding the role of “accessory” proteins in the
viral life cycle, we estimate that it is currently possible to ascribe clear biochemical or
structural functions to only about half of SARS-CoV-2 gene products.

3. Why is the quarantine period two weeks?

Studying viral evolution, researchers commonly use two measures describing the
rate of genomic change. The first is the evolutionary rate, which is defined as the
average ​number of substitutions that become fixed per year in strains of the virus,
given in units of mutations per site per year. The second is the mutation rate, which
is the number of substitutions per site per replication cycle. How can we relate these
two values? Consider a single site at the end of a year. The only measurement of a
mutation rate in a β-coronavirus suggests that this site will accumulate ~10​-6
mutations in each round of replication. Each round of replication cycle takes ~10
hours, and so there are 10​3​ cycles/year. Multiplying the mutation rate by the number
of replications, and neglecting the potential effects of evolutionary selection and drift,
we arrive at 10​-3​ mutations per site per year, consistent with the evolutionary rate
inferred from sequenced coronavirus genomes. As our estimate is consistent with
the measured rate, we infer that the virus undergoes near-continuous replication in
the wild, constantly generating new mutations that accumulate over the course of
the year. ​Using our knowledge of the mutation rate, we can also draw inferences
about single infections. For example, since the mutation rate is ~10​-6
mutations/site/cycle and an mL of sputum might contain upwards of 10​7​ viral RNAs,
we infer that every site is mutated more than once in such samples.

The period of time from infection to symptoms is termed the incubation period. The
median SARS-CoV-2 incubation period is estimated to be roughly 5 days ​(Lauer et
al. 2020)​. Yet there is much person-to-person variation. Approximately 99% of those
showing symptoms will show them before day 14, which explains the two week
confinement period. Importantly, this analysis neglects infected people who never
show symptoms. Since asymptomatic people are not usually tested, it is still not
clear how many such cases there are or how long asymptomatic people remain
infectious for.

4. How do N95 masks block SARS-CoV-2?
N95 masks are designed to remove more than 95% of all particles that are at least
0.3 microns (µm) in diameter ​(NIOSH 42 CFR Part 84)​. In fact, measurements of the
particle filtration efficiency of N95 masks show that they are capable of filtering
≈99.8% of particles with a diameter of ~0.1 μm ​(Regnasamy et al. 2017)​.
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped virus ~0.1 μm in diameter, so N95 masks are capable
of filtering most free virions, but they do more than that. How so? Viruses are often
transmitted through respiratory droplets produced by coughing and sneezing.
Respiratory droplets are usually divided into two size bins, large droplets (> 5 μm in
diameter) that fall rapidly to the ground and are thus transmitted only over short
distances, and small droplets (≤ 5 μm in diameter). Small droplets can evaporate
into “droplet nuclei,” remain suspended in air for significant periods of time and could
be inhaled. Some viruses, such as measles, can be transmitted by droplet nuclei
(Tellier et al. 2019)​. At present there is no direct evidence showing SARS-CoV-2
transmission by droplet nuclei. Rather, larger droplets are believed to be the main
vector of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, usually by settling onto surfaces that are
touched and transported by hands onto mucosal membranes such as the eyes,
nose and mouth ​(CDC 2020)​. The characteristic diameter of large droplets produced
by sneezing is ~100 μm (​Han J. R. Soc. Interface 2013​), while the diameter of

7. What can we learn from the mutation rate of the virus?

8. How stable and infectious is the virion on surfaces?
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected on various surfaces several weeks after they
were last touched​ ​(Moriarty et al. 2020)​. In the definitions we clarify the difference
between detecting viral RNA and active virus. The probability of human infection
from such exposure is not yet characterized as experiments to make this
determination are very challenging. Nevertheless, caution and protective measures
must be taken. We estimate that during the infectious period an undiagnosed
infectious person touches surfaces tens of times. These surfaces will subsequently
be touched by hundreds of other people. From the basic reproduction number R​0
≈2-4 we can infer that not everyone touching those surfaces will be infected. More
detailed bounds on the risk of infection from touching surfaces urgently awaits
study.

Glossary
Clinical Measures
Incubation period​: time between exposure and symptoms.
Seroconversion​: time between exposure to virus and detectable antibody
response.

Epidemiological Inferences
R​0​: the average number of cases directly generated by an individual infection.
Latent period: ​time between exposure and becoming infective.
Infectious period: t​ ime for which an individual is infective.
Interval of half-maximum infectiousness:​ the time interval during which the
probability of viral transmission is higher than half of the peak infectiousness. This
interval is similar to the infectious period, but applies also in cases where the
probability of infection is not uniform in time.

Viral Species
SARS-CoV-2​: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. A β-coronavirus
causing the present COVID-19 outbreak.
SARS-CoV-1​: β-coronavirus that caused the 2002 SARS outbreak in China.
MERS​: a β-coronavirus that caused the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome outbreak
beginning in Jordan in 2012.
MHV​: Murine herpes virus, a model β-coronavirus on which much laboratory
research has been conducted.
TGEV​:​ ​Transmissible gastroenteritis virus, a model ⍺-coronavirus which infects pigs.
229E and OC43: t​ wo strains of coronavirus (⍺- and β- respectively) that are cause a
fraction of common colds.

Viral Life-Cycle
Eclipse period: t​ ime between viral entry and appearance of intracellular virions.
Latent period (cellular level): t​ ime between viral entry and appearance of
extracellular virions. Not to be confused with the epidemiological latent period
described below.
Burst size​: the number of virions produced from infection of a single cell. More
appropriately called “per-cell viral yield” for non-lytic viruses like SARS-CoV-2.
Virion​: a viral particle.
Polyprotein​: a long protein that is proteolytically cleaved into a number of distinct
proteins. Distinct from a polypeptide, which is a linear chain of amino acids making
up a protein.

Human Biology
Alveolar Macrophage: i​ mmune cells found in the lung that engulf foreign material
like dust and microbes (“professional phagocytes”)
Pneumocytes: ​the non-immune cells in the lung.
ACE2: A
​ ngiotensin-converting enzyme 2, the mammalian cell surface receptor that
SARS-CoV-2 binds.
TMPRSS2: ​Transmembrane protease, serine 2, a mammalian membrane-bound
serine protease that cleaves the viral spike trimer after it binds ACE2, revealing a
fusion peptide that participates in membrane fusion which enables subsequent
injection of viral DNA into the host cytoplasm.
Nasopharynx:​ ​the space above the soft palate at the back of the nose which
connects the nose to the mouth.

Notation
Note the difference in notation between the symbol ≈, which indicates
“approximately” and connotes accuracy to within a factor 2, and the symbol ~, which
indicates “order of magnitude” or accuracy to within a factor of 10.

More on definitions and measurement methods
What are the meanings of R​0​, “latent period” and “infectious period”?
The basic reproduction number, R​0​, estimates the average number of new infections
directly generated by a single infectious person. The 0 subscript connotes that this
refers to early stages of an epidemic, when everyone in the region is susceptible (i.e.
there is no immunity) and no counter-measures have been taken. As geography and
culture affect how many people we encounter daily, how much we touch them and
share food with them, estimates of R​0​ can vary between locales. Moreover, because
R​0​ is defined in the absence of countermeasures and immunity, we are usually only
able to assess the effective R (R​e​). At the beginning of an epidemic, before any
countermeasures, R​e​ ≈ R​0​. Several days pass before a newly-infected person
becomes infectious themselves. This “latent period” is typically followed by several
days of infectivity called the “infectious period.” It is important to understand that
reported values for all these parameters are population averages inferred from
epidemiological models fit to counts of infected, symptomatic, and dying patients.
Because testing is always incomplete and model fitting is imperfect, and data will
vary between different locations, there is substantial uncertainty associated with
reported values. Moreover, these median or average best-fit values do not describe
person-to-person variation. For example, viral RNA was detectable in patients with
moderate symptoms for > 1 week after the onset of symptoms, and more than 2
weeks in patients with severe symptoms (​ ​ECDC 2020​).​ Though detectable RNA is
not the same as active virus, this evidence calls for caution in using uncertain,
average parameters to describe a pandemic. Why aren’t detailed distributions of
these parameters across people published? Direct measurement of latent and
infectious periods at the individual level is extremely challenging, as accurately
identifying the precise time of infection is usually very difficult.

What is the difference between measurements of viral RNA and
infectious viruses?
Diagnosis and quantification of viruses utilizes several different methodologies. One
common approach is to quantify the amount of viral RNA in an environmental (e.g.
surface) or clinical (e.g. sputum) sample via quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). This method measures the number of copies
of viral RNA in a sample. The presence of viral RNA does not necessarily imply the
presence of infectious virions. Virions could be defective (e.g. by mutation) or might
have been deactivated by environmental conditions. To assess the concentration of
infectious viruses, researchers typically measure the “50% tissue-culture infectious
dose” (TCID​50​). Measuring TCID​50​ involves infecting replicate cultures of susceptible
cells with dilutions of the virus and noting the dilution at which half the replicate
dishes become infected. Viral counts reported by TCID​50​ tend to be much lower than
RT-qPCR measurements, which could be one reason why studies relying on RNA
measurements (​ Moriarty et al. 2020)​ report the persistence of viral RNA on surfaces
for much longer times than studies relying on TCID​50​ ​(van Doremalen et al. 2020)​. It
is important to keep this caveat in mind when interpreting data about viral loads, for
example a report measuring viral RNA in patient stool samples for several days after
recovery (​ We et al. 2020)​. Nevertheless, for many viruses even a small dose of
virions can lead to infection. For the common cold, for example, ~0.1 TCID​50​ are
sufficient to infect half of the people exposed ​(Couch et al. 1966)​.

What is the difference between the case fatality rate and the infection
fatality rate?
Global statistics on new infections and fatalities are pouring in from many countries,
providing somewhat different views on the severity and progression of the
pandemic. Assessing the severity of the pandemic is critical for policy making and
thus much effort has been put into quantification. The most common measure for
the severity of a disease is the fatality rate. One commonly reported measure is the
case fatality rate (CFR), which is the proportion of fatalities out of total diagnosed
cases. The CFR reported in different countries varies significantly, from 0.3% to
about 10%. Several key factors affect the CFR. First, demographic parameters and
practices associated with increased or decreased risk differ greatly across
societies. For example, the prevalence of smoking, the average age of the
population, and the capacity of the healthcare system. Indeed, the majority of people
dying from SARS-CoV-2 have a preexisting condition such as cardiovascular disease
or smoking ​(China CDC 2020)​. There is also potential for bias in estimating the CFR.
For example, a tendency to identify more severe cases (selection bias) will tend to
overestimate the CFR. On the other hand, there is usually a delay between the onset
of symptoms and death, which can lead to an underestimate of the CFR early in the
progression of an epidemic. Even when correcting for these factors, the CFR does
not give a complete picture as many cases with mild or no symptoms are not tested.
Thus, the CFR will tend to overestimate the rate of fatalities per infected person,
termed the infection fatality rate (IFR). Estimating the total number of infected
people is usually accomplished by testing a random sample for anti-viral antibodies,
whose presence indicates that the patient was previously infected. As of writing,
such assays are not widely available, and so researchers resort to surrogate
datasets generated bytesting of foreign citizens returning home from infected
countries (​ Verity et al. 2020)​, or epidemiological models estimating the number of
undocumented cases ​(Li et al. 2020)​. These methods provide a first glimpse of the
true severity of the disease.

What is the burst size and the replication time of the virus?
Two important characteristics of the viral life cycle are the time it takes them to
produce new infectious progeny, and the number of progeny each infected cell
produces. The yield of new virions per infected cell is more clearly defined in lytic
viruses, such as those infecting bacteria (bacteriophages), as viruses replicate
within the cell and subsequently lyse the cell to release a “burst” of progeny. This
measure is usually termed “burst size.” SARS-CoV-2 does not release its progeny by
lysing the cell, but rather by continuous budding (​ Park et al. 2020)​. Even though
there is no “burst”, we can still estimate the average number of virions produced by
a single infected cell. Measuring the time to complete a replication cycle or the burst
size i​ n vivo​ is very challenging, and thus researchers usually resort to measuring
these values in tissue-culture. There are various ways to estimate these quantities,
but a common and simple one is using “one-step” growth dynamics. The key
principle of this method is to ensure that only a single replication cycle occurs. This
is typically achieved by infecting the cells with a large number of virions, such that
every cell gets infected, thus leaving no opportunity for secondary infections.
Assuming entry of the virus to the cells is rapid (we estimate 10 minutes for
SARS-CoV-2), the time it takes to produce progeny can be estimated by quantifying
the lag between inoculation and the appearance of new intracellular virions, also
known as the “eclipse period”. This eclipse period does not account for the time it
takes to release new virions from the cell. The time from cell entry until the
appearance of the first extracellular viruses, known as the “latent period” (not to be
confused with the epidemiological latent period, see Glossary), estimates the
duration of the full replication cycle. The burst size can be estimated by waiting until
virion production saturates, and then dividing the total virion yield by the number of
cells infected. While both the time to complete a replication cycle and the burst size
may vary significantly in an animal host due to factors including the type of cell
infected or the action of the immune system, these numbers provide us with an
approximate quantitative view of the viral life-cycle at the cellular level.

References and excerpts

Concentration

Note that for about 10 out of 45 parameters, the literature values are from other
coronaviruses. We await corresponding measurements for SARS-CoV-2.

Nasopharynx, Throat, Stool, and Sputum​: ​(Woelfel et al. 2020)​ - Figure 2.​ ​and (​ Kim et al. 2020)​ Figure 1​ ​and (​ Pan et al. 2020)​ - F
​ igure. We took the maximal viral load for each patient in
nasopharyngeal swabs, throat swabs, stool or in sputum.

Size & Content

Antibody Response - Seroconversion

Diameter​: ​(Zhu et al. 2020)​ - ​“E
​ lectron micrographs of negative-stained 2019-nCoV particles were
generally spherical with some pleomorphism (​Figure 3​). Diameter varied from about 60 to 140 nm.​“
Volume- Using diameter and assuming the virus is a sphere
Mass​: Using the volume and a density of ~ 1 g per mL
Number of surface spikes trimers​: ​(Neuman et al. 2011)​ - “​ Our model predicts ∼90 spikes per
particle.”
Length of surface spikes trimers​: ​(Zhu et al. 2020)​ - ​“​ Virus particles had quite distinctive spikes,
about 9 to 12 nm, and gave virions the appearance of a solar corona.​“
Receptor binding affinity (K​d​)​: ​(Walls et al. 2020)​ - Walls et al. reports K​d​ of ≈
​ 1
​ nM for the binding
domain in Table 1 using B
​ iolayer interferometry with k​on​ of ≈1.5​×​10​5​ M​-1​ s​-1​ and k​off​ of ≈1.6​×1
​ 0​-4​ s​-1​.
(Wrapp et al. 2020)​ - ​Wrapp et al. reports K
​ ​d​ of ≈
​ ​15 nM for the spike (Fig.3) and ≈
​ ​35 nM for the
binding domain (Fig.4) using s
​ urface plasmon resonance with k​on​ of ≈1.9​×​10​5​ M​-1​ s​-1​ and k​off​ of
≈2.8​×​10​-3​ s​-1​ for the spike and k​on​ of ≈1.4​×​10​5​ M​-1​ s​-1​ and k​off​ of ≈4.7​×​10​-3​ s​-1​ for the binding domain.
The main disagreement between the studies seems to be on the k​off​.
Membrane (M; 222 aa)​: ​(Neuman et al. 2011)​ - “​ Using the M spacing data for each virus (​Fig.6​C),
this would give ∼1100 M2 molecules per average SARS-CoV, MHV and FCoV particle”
Envelope (E; 75 aa)​: ​(Godet et al. 1992)​ - “​Based on the estimated molar ratio and assuming that
coronavirions bear 100 (Roseto et al., 1982) to 200 spikes, each composed of 3 S molecules
(Delmas and Laude, 1990) it can be inferred that approximately 15- 30 copies of ORF4 protein are
incorporated into TGEV virions (Purdue strain).​”
Nucleoprotein (364 aa)​: (​ Neuman et al. 2011)​ - “​ Estimated ratios of M to N protein in purified
coronaviruses range from about 3M:1N (​Cavanagh, 1983​, ​Escors et al., 2001b​) to 1M:1N (​Hogue and
Brian, 1986​, ​Liu and Inglis, 1991​), giving 730–2200 N molecules per virion.”

Seroconversion time (​time period until a specific antibody becomes detectable in the blood)​:
(​Zhao et al. 2020​) - “​The seroconversion sequentially appeared for Ab, IgM and then IgG, with a
median time of 11, 12 and 14 days, respectively​” and (​ To et al. 2020)​ - “​For 16 patients with serum
samples available 14 days or longer after symptom onset, rates of seropositivity were 94% for
anti-NP IgG (n=15), 88% for anti-NP IgM (n=14), 100% for anti-RBD IgG (n=16), and 94% for anti-RBD
IgM (n=15)​”
Maintenance of antibody response to virus​: ​(Wu et al. 2007)​ - “​Among 176 patients who had had
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), SARS-specific antibodies were maintained for an
average of 2 years, and significant reduction of immunoglobulin G–positive percentage and titers
occurred in the third year.​”

Genome
Type​: (​ViralZone​) +ssRNA “​Monopartite, linear ​ssRNA(+) genome​”
Genome length​: ​(Wu et al. 2020)​ - F
​ igure 2
Number of genes​: ​(Wu et al. 2020)​ - “​SARS-CoV-2 genome has 10 open reading frames (​Fig. 2​A).​“ or
(Wu et al. 2020)​ - "​The 2019-nCoV genome was annotated to possess 14 ORFs encoding 27
proteins​"​.
Number of proteins​: ​(Wu et al. 2020)​ -”​By aligning with the amino acid sequence of SARS PP1ab
and analyzing the characteristics of restriction cleavage sites recognized by 3CLpro and PLpro, we
speculated 14 specific proteolytic sites of 3CLpro and PLpro in SARS-CoV-2 PP1ab (​Fig. 2​B). PLpro
cleaves three sites at 181–182, 818–819, and 2763–2764 at the N-terminus and 3CLpro cuts at the
other 11 sites at the C-terminus, and forming 15 non-structural proteins.​”
Evolution rate​: (​ K
​ oyama et al. 2020)​ - “Mutation rates estimated for SARS, MERS, and OC43 show a
large range, covering a span of 0.27 to 2.38 substitutions ×10-3 / site / year (10-16).”​ Recent
unpublished e
​ vidence​ also suggest this rate is of the same order of magnitude in SARS-CoV-2.
Mutation rate​: ​(Sanjuan et al. 2010)​ - “​Murine hepatitis virus … Therefore, the corrected estimate of
the mutation rate is μ​s/n/c​ = 1.9x10​-6​ / 0.55 = 3.5 x 10​-6​.​”
Genome similarity​: ​For all species except pangolin: ​(Wu et al. 2020)​ - “​After phylogenetic analysis
and sequence alignment of 23 coronaviruses from various species. We found three coronaviruses
from bat (96%, 88% and 88% for Bat-Cov RaTG13, bat-SL-CoVZXC12 and bat-SL-CoVZC45,
respectively) have the highest genome sequence identity to SARS-CoV-2 (​Fig. 1​A). Moreover, as
shown in ​Fig. 1​B, Bat-Cov RaTG13 exhibited the closest linkage with SARS-CoV-2. These
phylogenetic evidences suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may be evolved from bat CoVs, especially
RaTG13. Among all coronaviruses from human, SARS-CoV (80%) exhibited the highest genome
sequence identity to SARS-CoV-2. And MERS/isolate NL13845 also has 50% identity with
SARS-CoV-2.​” For pangolin: ​(Zhang et al. 2020)​ - Figure 3

Replication Timescales
Virion entry into cell​: ​(Schneider et al. 2012)​ - “​Previous experiments had revealed that virus is
internalized within 15 min” ​and (​ N
​ g et al. 2003​)​ - “​Within the first 10 min, some virus particles were
internalised into vacuoles (arrow) that were just below the plasma membrane surface (Fig. 2,
arrows). … The observation at 15 min postinfection (p.i.), did not differ much from 10 min p.i. (Fig.
4a)​”
Eclipse period​: ​(Schneider et al. 2012)​ - “​ SARS-CoV replication cycle from adsorption to release of
infectious progeny takes about 7 to 8 h (data not shown).​” and (​ Harcourt et al. 2020)​ - Figure 4
shows virions are released after 12-36 hrs but because this is multi-step growth this represents an
upper bound for the replication cycle.
Burst size​: ​(Hirano et al. 1976)​ - “​The average per‐cell yield of active virus was estimated to be
about 6–7× 10​2​ plaque‐forming units.​” This data is for MHV, more research is needed to verify
these values for SARS-CoV-2.

Host Cells
Type​: ​(Shieh et al. 2005)​ - “​ I​ mmunohistochemical and ​in situ hybridization​ assays demonstrated
evidence of ​SARS-associated coronavirus​ (SARS-CoV) infection in various respiratory epithelial cells,
predominantly type II pneumocytes, and in ​alveolar macrophages​ in the lung.​“ and (​ Walls et al.
2020)​ -​ “​SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 to enter target cells​” and (​ Rockx et al. 2020)​ ​ - “​In
SARS-CoV-2-infected macaques, virus was excreted from nose and throat in absence of clinical
signs, and detected in type I and II pneumocytes in foci of diffuse alveolar damage and mucous
glands of the nasal cavity​….​In the upper respiratory tract, there was focal 5 or locally extensive
SARS-CoV-2 antigen expression in epithelial cells of mucous glands in the nasal cavity (septum or
concha) of all four macaques, without any associated histological lesions (fig. 2I)​.”​
Type I and Type II pneumocyte and alveolar macrophage cell number​: ​(Crapo et al. 1982)​ - Table 4
and (​ Stone et al. 1992)​ - Table 5
Epithelial cells in mucous gland cell number and volume​: ​(ICRP 1975)​ - ​surface area of nasal
cavity​, ​(Tos & Mogensen, 1976)​ and (​ Tos & Mogensen, 1977)​ - mucous gland density,
(Widdicombe 2019)​ - mucous gland volume, (​ ​Ordoñez et al. 2001​)​ and (​ Mercer et al. 1994)​ mucous cell volume. We divide the mucous gland volume by the mucous cell volume to arrive at
the total number of mucous cells in a mucous gland. We multiply the surface density of mucous
glands by the surface area of the nasal cavity to arrive at the total number of mucous glands, and
then multiply the total number of mucous glands by the number of mucous cells per mucous
gland.
Type II pneumocyte volume​: ​(Fehrenbach et al. 1995)​ - “​ ​Morphometry revealed that although
inter‐individual variation due to some oedematous swelling was present, the cells were in a normal
size range as indicated by an estimated mean volume of 763 ± 64 μm​3​“
Alveolar macrophage volume​: ​(Crapo et al. 1982)​ - “​Alveolar macrophages were found to be the
largest cell in the populations studied, having a mean volume of 2,491 μm​3​”

Virus Environmental Stability
Half life on surfaces​: ​(van Doremalen et al. 2020)​ - For half-lives we use Supplementary Table 1.
For time to decay from ~10​4​ to ~10 TCID​50​/L​-1​ air or mL​-1​ medium, we use the first time titer
reached detection limit in Figure 1A for surfaces. For aerosols, we use ten half-life values
(1000-fold decrease from 10​4​ to 10, meaning 10 halvings of concentration) from Supplementary
Table 1. More studies are urgently needed to clarify the implications of virion stability on the
probability of infection from aerosols or surfaces.
RNA stability on surfaces​: ​(Moriarty et al. 2020)​ - “​ ​SARS-CoV-2 RNA was identified on a variety of
surfaces in cabins of both symptomatic and asymptomatic infected passengers up to 17 days after
cabins were vacated on the Diamond Princess but before disinfection procedures had been
conducted (Takuya Yamagishi, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, personal communication,
2020).​”

“Characteristic” Infection Progression in a Single Patient
Basic reproductive number, R​0​: ​(Li et al. 2020)​ - “​ ​Our median estimate of the effective reproductive
number, Re—equivalent to the basic reproductive number (R0) at the beginning of the epidemic—is
2.38 (95% CI: 2.04−2.77)​” and (​ Park et al. 2020)​ - “​Our estimated R0 from the pooled distribution
has a median of 2.9 (95% CI: 2.1–4.5).​”
Latent period (from infection to being able to transmit)​: ​(Li et al. 2020)​ - ”​In addition, the median
estimates for the latent and infectious periods are approximately 3.69 and 3.48 days,
respectively.​” and T
​ able 1 and (​ He et al. 2020)​ - We use the time it takes the infectiousness to
reach half its peak, which happens two days before symptom onset based on Figure 1b. As
symptoms arise after 5 days (see incubation period), this means the latent period is about 3 days.
Incubation period (from infection to symptoms)​: ​(Lauer et al. 2020)​ - “​The median incubation
period was estimated to be 5.1 days (95% CI, 4.5 to 5.8 days), and 97.5% of those who develop
symptoms will do so within 11.5 days (CI, 8.2 to 15.6 days) of infection. These estimates imply that,
under conservative assumptions, 101 out of every 10 000 cases (99th percentile, 482) will develop
symptoms after 14 days of active monitoring or quarantine.​” and (​ Li et al. 2020)​ - “​The mean
incubation period was 5.2 days (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.1 to 7.0), with the 95th percentile of
the distribution at 12.5 days.​”
Infectious period (partially overlaps latent period)​: ​(Li et al. 2020)​ - ”​In addition, the median
estimates for the latent and infectious periods are approximately 3.69 and 3.48 days, respectively​.”​
and T
​ able 1 and (​ He et al. 2020)​ - We quantify the interval between half the maximal
infectiousness from the infectiousness profile in Figure 1b.
Disease duration​: ​(WHO 2020)​ - “​Using available preliminary data, the median time from onset to
clinical recovery for mild cases is approximately 2 weeks and is 3-6 weeks for patients with severe
or critical disease​”
Time until diagnosis​: ​(Xu et al. 2020)​ - We used data on cases with known symptom onset and
case confirmation dates and calculated the median time delay between these two dates.
Case Fatality Rate​: ​(ECDC geographic distribution of cases from 29/03/2020)​ - We use data from
all countries with more than 50 death cases and calculate the uncorrected raw Case Fatality Rate
for each country. The range represents the lowest and highest rates observed.
Infected Fatality Rate​: (​ Verity et al. 2020)​ - “​ ​We obtain an overall IFR estimate for China of 0.66%
(0.39%,1.33%)​” ​and (​ Ferguson et al. 2020)​ - “​The IFR estimates from Verity et al.12 have been
adjusted to account for a non-uniform attack rate giving an overall IFR of 0.9% (95% credible interval
0.4%-1.4%).​”

Acknowledgements
We thank Uri Alon, Niv Antonovsky, David Baltimore, ​Rachel Banks, ​Arren Bar Even,
Naama Barkai, M
​ olly Bassette, ​Menalu Berihoon, Biana Bernshtein, P
​ amela
Bjorkman, ​Cecilia Blikstad, Julia Borden, B
​ ill Burkholder, ​Griffin Chure, Lillian Cohn,
Bernadeta Dadonaite, Emmie De wit, ​Ron Diskin, A
​ na Duarte, Tal Einav, A
​ vigdor
Eldar, ​Elizabeth Fischer, William Gelbart, A
​ lon Gildoni, Britt Glausinger, Shmuel
Gleizer, Dani Gluck, ​Soichi Hirokawa, Greg Huber, Christina Hueschen,​ ​Amit Huppert,
Shalev Itzkovitz, Martin Jonikas, Leeat Keren, Gilmor Keshet, Marc Kirschner, Roy
Kishony, Amy Kistler, Liad Levi, ​Sergei Maslov,​ Adi Millman, Amir Milo, Elad Noor, Gal
Ofir, ​Alan Perelson, Steve Quake, I​ tai Raveh, Andrew Rennekamp, T
​ om Roeschinger,
Daniel Rokhsar, A
​ lex Rubinsteyn, ​Gabriel Salmon, M
​ aya Schuldiner, Eran Segal, Ron
Sender, Alex Sigal, Maya Shamir, Arik Shams, Mike Springer, Adi Stern, Noam
Stern-Ginossar, ​Lubert Stryer,​ Dan Tawfik, ​Boris Veytsman, A
​ ryeh Wides, Tali Wiesel,
Anat Yarden, Yossi Yovel, Dudi Zeevi, Mushon Zer Aviv, and ​Alexander ​Zlokapa​ for
productive feedback on this manuscript. Figure created using Biorender.

