Coronavirus Geographic Dissemination at Chicago and its Potential
Proximity to Public Commuter Rail
Peter Fang
Perceptiongraph LLC, Glenview, IL
Abstract: The community spread of coronavirus at great Chicago area has severely threatened the
residents’ health, family and normal activities. CDC daily updates on infected cases on County level are
not satisfying to address public’s concern on virus spread. On March20th, NBC5 published case
information of 435 coronavirus infections. The data is relative comprehensive and of high value for
understanding on the virus spread patterns at Chicago. Data engineering, natural language processing and
Google map technology are applied to organize the data and retrieve geographic information of the virus.
The analysis shows community spread in Chicago areas has a potential proximity relation with public
commuter rail. Residents nearby major public commuter rails need limit outdoor activities during the
outbreak and even the post-peak time.

Introduction: The panic among Chicago residents have escalated rapidly as lacking basic knowledge of
virus community spread regarding key questions on the geographic distribution, pollution concentration,
self-protection, and forecast on contingency. Solutions should be able be found as substantial reliable data
are available. CDC so far didn’t disclose sufficient information to the public may have some concerns,
especially data collection, analysis and modeling takes time. The pain point is that public needs to know
more accurate information about the virus at Chicago so to manage the crisis and reduce the risk of
personal health and the prohibition of their economic activities.
The needs on crisis manage lead to a comprehensive report of 435 virus report from the NBC 5 Chicago
up to March 20th. The dataset doesn’t contain patient personal information but provide important county,
city, and travel history data. The data are of extremely high value as it provides sufficient information for
scientists to model the virus dissemination patterns in Chicago areas because of the travel history can
differentiate the patient whether being affected from travel with community infection. Secondly, the city
data significantly narrow down the geographic positions, contrasting to current status that only county
data are provided, for example a data has city information in the Cook County is more accurate than the
County in terms of the spatial resolution.
Methods and hypothesis: To extract the virus dissemination patterns from the NBC 5 reports are
challenging. First, 200 city data are missing and the City of Chicago is too big to decide a relatively
accurate position of the virus. Statistics and natural language processing are used in this work to solve the
problem. Statistics can determine the most likely city in a County where the virus is reported. If the city
data for a given case is missing, we can impute the missing one with the most likely city name. Cases in
the City of Chicago are hard to determine the locations. Fortunately, the travel history data from the NBC
5 have patients’ working address or relevant addresses such as condominium or gym. It is safe to
hypothesize a 60-70% probability that the patients are infected in areas close to their working addresses if

not travel related or directly contact other known cases. Therefore, the addresses information in the
history data are extracted and used in this work.
In addition to the missing city data, accurate differentiation between travel related and community
infection is also hard to solve because that the history data is a log file recorded by different agents using
non-uniform formats, documentation methods, and writing. The problem is solved using regex
programming and a data ETL (Extract-transform-load) pipeline.
The most challenge is how to deliver a reasonable understanding on the virus dissemination pattern
without misinformation and misleading conclusions.
Tools and Technology: Python programming, including pandas and regex, are used to clean the
unstructured data. Natural language processing package Spacy is used to extract address or position
information from the travel history data. Python package Gmaps is used to display data. Google map API
and its function of transit route view are used to for data visualization.
Discussion:
The travel related or communities infected are separated by data engineering pipeline. Below I show
samples of travel related cases and communities infected cases in different tables.

Table I: Samples of travel related cases. The ‘History’ column shows the original data describing patients
travel history. ‘History_result’ is a classification on the contents of the ‘History’ column whether the
cases are travel related.

Table II: Samples of communities infected cases. ‘History’ column is the original data describing patients
travel history. ‘History_result’ column briefs the ‘History’ column as commute spread. If not explicitly
noting a travel related, cases are considered as community spread. It is pointing out here that cases in the
original data such as “no details reported by public health officials or in news stories” are not useful in
our analysis and were dropped out. Around 160 data are used in the current analysis. 160 data is a smaller
sample set but of high quality that sufficiently provides valuable information on certain extent.

After separating travel-related cases with community infected cases, the two groups of data are visualized
on maps using Google map API. Only Chicago areas are focused as most cases are concentrated in
Chicago and its suburbs. The solid green circle in Graph I represents travel related cases or patients who
have close contacts with travel cases, including people from China, Italy, Cruise, California or other states
in US. The red solid circles are the community infected cases. Because of the size of each red circle,
many cases overlap on each other if their locations are close, for example, Willowbrook nursing center
has 46 cases up to March 20th. From the visualization, many cases happened in Downtown Chicago,
which is not very surprising as flux of people in and out downtown daily. An interesting feature in Graph
I is that community spread cases (red points) seems loosely connect with the green circles where most of
them are at the north-west side Chicago such as Arlington Height. The loose connection between two
group data doesn’t support community dissemination comes from north-west side Chicago. One striking
feature of the graph is that the red points stretch from downtown to northbound Chicago within a confined
stripe-like pattern, indicating virus spread taking advantage of a special media. A most straightforward
bet is the public transit. To valid the hypothesis, four public transit lines are visualized on the same graph.
MD-N line and UP-N line almost superimpose on the confined stripe-like pattern of the virus
dissemination. The coincidence suggests a potential proximity relation between virus spread in Chicago
with the public commuter rails. If the proximity true, it can explain the outbreak of the Willowbrook

nursing center where is close to BNSF line. Some stuffs, visitors or residents may commute to downtown
Chicago via the line recently.

Graph I. Communities spread of coronavirus in Chicago may have a proximity effect with the public
commuter rails. Solid red points are reported cases due to community spread. The green points represent
cases introduced from abroad or other states in US. The blue lines are public commuter rails of Chicago.

Conclusion:
The analysis shows community spread of coronavirus in Chicago areas has a potential proximity relation
with public commuter rails. Residents nearby major public commuter rail need limit outdoor activities
during the outbreak and even the post-peak time.
The proximity concept introduced in this paper cannot be generalized to other major metro areas where
virus spread patterns could be significantly different. The concept may not valid anymore if more
migrated cases hit Chicago in a short time.

References:
1,100 as of Sunday Evening: What We Know So Far About Every One of the Chicago Area’s
Coronavirus Cases https://www.nbcchicago.com/news/local/what-we-know-so-far-about-every-one-of-the-chicago-areas435-coronavirus-cases/2240689/

