The effect of interurban movements on the spatial distribution of population in China
Jiachen Ye,1,2 Qitong Hu,1,2 Peng Ji,1,2∗ and Marc Barthelemy3,4†

arXiv:2003.07276v1 [physics.soc-ph] 16 Mar 2020

1

Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Research Institute of Intelligent and Complex Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Institut de Physique Théorique, Université Paris Saclay,
CEA, CNRS, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France and
4
Centre d’Analyse et de Mathématique Sociales, (CNRS/EHESS) 54, Boulevard Raspail, 75006 Paris, France
(Dated:)
Understanding how interurban movements can modify the spatial distribution of the population
is important for transport planning but is also a fundamental ingredient for epidemic modeling. We
focus here on vacation trips (for all transportation modes) during the Chinese Lunar New Year and
compare the results for 2019 with the ones for 2020 where travel bans were applied for mitigating
the spread of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19). We first show that these travel flows are broadly
distributed and display both large temporal and spatial fluctuations, making their modeling very
difficult. When flows are larger, they appear to be more dispersed over a larger number of origins and
destinations, creating de facto hubs that can spread an epidemic at a large scale. These movements
quickly induce (in about a week) a very strong population concentration in a small set of cities.
We characterize quantitatively the return to the initial distribution by defining a pendular ratio
which allows us to show that this dynamics is very slow and even stopped for the 2020 Lunar New
Year due to travel restrictions. Travel restrictions obviously limit the spread of the diseases between
different cities, but have thus the counter-effect of keeping high concentration in a small set of cities,
a priori favoring intra-city spread, unless individual contacts are strongly limited. These results
shed some light on how interurban movements modify the national distribution of populations, a
crucial ingredient for devising effective control strategies at a national level.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In early January 2020, we observed the outbreak of a
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) in Wuhan, China, which
has been quickly spreading out to the whole country, and
more recently to other countries in the world [1]. Infectious diseases spread among humans because of their
interactions and movements, and the proximity of this
outbreak with the Spring Festival, a period of travel
with high traffic loads, provided terrible conditions for
the spread of this disease. With an increasing amount
of confirmed cases, more attention has been devoted to
modeling the spread of COVID-19 from various aspects
such as determining the value of the reproductive number
[2–7], of the incubation period [8–10]. In general, analytical modeling plays of course an important role in the
prediction of the spread and allows in particular to test
control strategies [11], which was verified in this case too
[12–20, 20, 21, 21, 22]. Particularly important were estimate of probability to export the disease in other countries [19, 23, 24], and how effective were travel restrictions
inside China [19].
Demographic information and mobility, either under
the form of data or given by transportation models (see
for example the review [25]), are crucial for these transmission models. Mobility can concern either the global
scale with movements between countries [18–21], or the
national scale between cities, or even inside cities [20–22].

∗ Electronic
† Electronic

address: pengji@fudan.edu.cn
address: marc.barthelemy@ipht.fr

In this study we are focusing on the national level and
we won’t try to model the spread of the disease. Instead
we will focus on the statistical properties of the interurban mobility, and how it affects the spatial distribution
of populations. More precisely, we will investigate the
statistical properties, of traffic flows between cities during the Chinese Spring Festival in 2020 and by comparing
with data for 2019, which are the most salient differences
induced by travel restrictions. This knowledge will help
us to understand the effect of travel restrictions and their
impact on epidemic spread, and more generally to guide
us for modeling mobility at this scale, a crucial ingredient
in epidemiological studies, but also for other fields such
as transportation planning.

II.

STATISTICS OF INTERURBAN FLOWS

We will first study standard statistical properties of interurban flows obtained from migration data collected by
Baidu Qianxi (see Material and Methods). This dataset
enables us to monitor the traffic flows between cities. For
each day d (d = 1, 2, . . . , T ), we can extract the number
of individuals N (i, j, d) going from city i to city j with
any travel mode. The migration data can thus be seen as
a directed, weighted network of flows between the set of
n = 296 cities of China whose populations are also known
(see Material and Methods). We collected the data for
the Spring Festival of 2020 (from Jan. 1st to Feb. 12th,
2020) and for assessing the impact of travel bans, we also
collected the data for the Spring Festival of 2019 (which
according to the Chinese lunar calendar takes place from
Jan. 12th to Feb. 23rd, 2019).

2

Figure 2: (a) Relative standard deviation of the flows N averaged over traffic flows and represented here versus time. (b)
Distribution of the relative standard deviation of N averaged
over time. (c) Relative standard deviation of Nin (i, d) and
Nout (i, d) averaged over cities and shown here versus time.
(d) Distribution of the relative standard deviation of Nin and
Nout averaged over time
Figure 1: (a) Distribution of all traffic flows N (i, j, d) in
loglog. The line is a power law fit of the form N −α with
exponent α = 2.27 with fitting method described in [26]. (b)
Average and standard deviation of the flows N (i, j, d) averaged over traffic flows versus the date d (from 1st January to
12th February).

Large heterogeneity of flows

We first consider the distribution of all flows of individuals N (i, j, d) for all cities i and j and all days d
and which is shown in Fig. 1 (a). The maximum flow
is of order 105 and the average of order 103 indicating
a broad distribution. A power law fit is consistent with
this picture with an exponent α ≈ 2.3 (Fig. 1 (a)). This
heterogeneity is confirmed in Fig. 1 (b) which shows both
the average value µd and the standard deviation σd computed over all inter-city flows (for each day d). We see
that for most days the relative dispersion σd /µd is of order 5 − 10. This heterogeneity is probably due to the
large diversity of cities that can serve as origins or destinations of flows (see below for further analysis). An
important feature that we can observe on Fig. 1 (b) is
the sharp drop of the standard deviation after Jan. 25th,
the Lunar New Year (LNY), which we will see below is
mainly due to the travel ban (see also Fig. S1, S3 in SI
for a detailed discussion).

Temporal versus spatial fluctuations

In order to understand the nature of the different fluctuations affecting the flows N (i, j, d), we compute the
σ
relative standard deviation ∆ij = µij
, where µij and σij
ij
are the average and standard deviation computed over

time, and the relative standard deviation ∆d = µσdd , average over all flows, for a given day d. We show on Fig. 2
(a) the spatial dispersion ∆d versus time and in Fig. 2
(b) the distribution of ∆ij . We observe that the spatial
dispersion is of order 8.3, while the temporal dispersion is
less (mainly concentrated around 1). The main reason for
heterogeneity thus lies in the flow fluctuations between
different origins and destinations, while temporal fluctuations are smaller but not negligible. These two sources
of heterogeneity clearly represent a challenge for modeling these flows, especially with very simplified models.
Our results indicate that the first modeling step would
be to describe the spatial heterogeneity of flows and then
consider temporal variations.
The next natural quantities that can be computed over
this network are the incoming and outgoing flows defined
by
(
Pn
Nin (i, d) = j=1 N (j, i, d)
Pn
(1)
Nout (i, d) = j=1 N (i, j, d)
respectively. We measure in the same way as above various measures of fluctuations, either averaged over cities
in (out)
in (out)
or over time, leading to the quantities ∆d
, ∆i
.
As these quantities are sums of random variables, we expect smaller relative dispersions than for N (i, j, d) which
is indeed what we observe (see Fig. 2 (c) and (d), with
typical values of relative dispersion of order 1 (see Figs.
S4,S5 for additional details). In order to get first insights
about the influence of travel bans, we compare the incoming flows and outgoing flows versus city population
before
after
in 2019 and 2020 with days Nin,
out before and Nout,in
after LNY. We first observe that (see Fig. S2 in Supplementary Information (SI)) basically the number of outgoing individuals before LNY corresponds approximately

3
to the number of incoming individuals after LNY with
before
after
Nin
(out) ≈ Nout (in) (and vice-versa). These relations
thus correspond roughly to the conservation of the number of individuals traveling during the Chinese Spring
Festival.
Structure of incoming and outgoing flows

The value of incoming or outgoing flows gives information about the volume of migrations, but not about
the number of important origins or destinations. In order to characterize the dispersion over different cities, we
denote by O(i, d) and D(i, d), the sets of origin of flows
incoming in city i and destinations of flows from city i
(for the day d), respectively. We then use Gini indices
[27] that capture the dispersion of incoming and outgoing
flows and are given by
X
1
Gin (i, d) =
|N (p, i, d) − N (q, i, d)|
2
2O N in (i, d) p,q∈O(i,d)
(2)

Figure 3: (a) Gin versus Nin for all cities and days. (b) Gout
versus Nout for all cities and days (shown in loglog). The
thick line indicates the average of Gin ( Gout ) versus of Nin
(Nout ) and the shaded area represents the standard deviation
of the average. Top 5 critical cities for (c) incoming flows and
(d) outgoing flows.

1
|N (i, p, d) − N (i, q, d)|
2D2 N out (i, d) p,q∈D(i,d)
will receive a large number of individuals while for others
we expect a decrease of their population. Migration thus
(3)
affects the statistical structure of the national population
where O and D represent the number of elements of the
and in this section we will characterize this effect.
in (i,d)
sets O(i, d) and D(i, d). The quantity N in (i, d) = N
|O(i,d)|
Gout (i, d) =

X

out (i,d)
is the average incoming flows and N out (i, d) = N|D(i,d)|
the average outgoing flows. Intuitively, if all traffic flows
to city i are from one single origin city on day d, the Gini
index Gin (i, d) will be 1, while if traffic flows to city i are
all equal, the Gini index Gin (i, d) will be 0 (and similarly
for Gout (i, d)).
We plot these Gini indices computed for each city versus the traffic flows to or from this city. These figures
3 (a,b) show that on average the larger the traffic flows
are, the more dispersed they are over a larger number of
origins or destinations. In terms of epidemic control, it
is clear that cities with a large flow Nin and a small Gini
index Gin are the most critical, in the sense that many
people from many different cities are converging to the
same place. Equally, cities with a large Nout and a small
Gout should be particularly monitored, since they can act
as hubs in spreading the disease over the inter-city network. As shown in Fig. 3 (c,d), we show the top 5 critical cities, including Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing and
Guangzhou for both the incoming and outgoing flows,
Shenzhen for the incoming flows, and Dongguan for the
outgoing flows.

III.

STATISTICAL STRUCTURE OF THE
NATIONAL POPULATION

An important effect of incoming and outgoing flows is
that they change the population structure. Some cities

Temporal evolution of population structure

In order to characterize the disparity of the population
distribution and how it varies during seasonal migrations,
we consider the population of city i at time d given by
X
X
P (i, d) = P0 (i) +
Nin (i, d0 ) −
Nout (i, d0 ), (4)
d0 6d

d0 6d

where P0 (i) represents the population of city i without
incoming and outgoing flows. The Gini index for the city
population of the whole country at day d is then given
by
G(d) =

n
X
1
|P (i, d) − P (j, d)|,
2n2 P (d) i,j=1

(5)

Pn
where P (d) = n1 i=1 P (i, d) is the average population
of all cities at day d. Intuitively, if all people gather in
one city, G will be 1, while if people spread evenly across
all cities, G will be 0. For comparison, we also define the
Gini index at rest as
Grest =

n
X
1
|P0 (i) − P0 (j)|.
2n2 P 0 i,j=1

(6)

This quantity captures the degree of population concentration without any traffic flows, where P 0 =

4

Figure 4: Temporal variations around the Spring Festival holidays of the population Gini index for 2019 and 2020. The
horizontal dotted line represents the value ‘at rest’. The vertical line indicates the day of the LNY.

1
n

Pn

i=1 P0 (i) is the average population of all cities without any traffic flows. We show in Fig. 4 the variation
of the Gini coefficient when we take into account migration flows. We plot both the results for 2019 and
2020. In both cases we see an important increase of the
Gini coefficient in a short time (about a week): when
the LNY is approaching, people go back from workplaces
to hometowns for reunion with families. A smaller set of
cities concentrates these meetings with the number of important cities reaching its minimum and the Gini index
reaching its peak on the LNY. Based on the Gini index,
we can estimate the number of ‘important’ cities where
the concentration takes place through [n(1 − G)], where
[·] denotes the integer part (see SI for details where we
show in Fig. S6 this number versus time and we indeed
observe an important drop when approaching the LNY).
After the LNY (Jan. 25th), individuals are going back
home and the Gini coefficient relaxes back to its original value, but much slower. We observe that in 2020,
the increase of the Gini index is larger and, due to travel
bans, the decrease even slower than normal. The reason may be that after the outbreak of COVID-19, almost
all regions have deferred the time of resuming works and
classes after the Spring Festival holiday. For example,
Shanghai proposed that companies not crucial to the nation should not resume works before Feb. 10th and that
schools should provide online classes. At this point, the
population structure at the national level is far from being back to normal. These different results show that
these seasonal movements induce a strong concentration
of individuals in a relative small set of cities, and that
travel bans tend to keep this situation of high concentration.

Return to ‘equilibrium’: pendular ratio

We observe in Fig. 4 that after the LNY there is a
decrease of the Gini index indicating a return to normal

Figure 5: (a) Emitter, receiver and transit cities according to
the value of R(i, 1) for 2019 with the number of three categories of cites at lower left corner. (b) Emitter, receiver and
transit cities according to the value of R(i, 1) for 2020 with
the number of three categories of cites at lower left corner.

state characterized by a lower concentration of individuals. In order to characterize quantitatively this return to
the original state (before holidays), we measure the gap
between individuals going out from a city before the LNY
and coming back after it. This gap defines a ‘pendular
ratio’ given by
P
ˆ
ˆ f Nin (i, d)
d<d6
d+d
R(i, df ) = P
,
(7)
ˆ f 6d<dˆ Nout (i, d)
d−d
ˆ If this
where df is a range of days around the LNY d.
ratio is much larger than 1, it means that for this city
there is a large incoming flow while for the opposite situation R(i, df )  1, a large number of individuals are
going out (compared to the incoming flows). At large
times df , we expect that R ' 1 since most of the in-

5
groups adding credit to their definition. In addition, compared to 2019, the values of R(i, 1) corresponding to 2020
are much smaller. We observe that in 2019, the pendular
ratio of all the three types of cities returns to 1, meaning that the majority of individuals who went away for
the holidays came back. The situation for 2020 is very
different with a pendular ratio for all types of cities that
converges to a value less than 1 (even less than 0.5), indicating that the majority of people who went away for the
holidays did not come back yet. This result remains consistent with the conclusion of Gini index (Fig. 3) about
a larger concentration in cities and the effect of travel
bans.

Figure 6: Comparison of pendular ratio between 2019 and
2020. (a) Pendular ratio for all cities versus days df from
LNY in 2019. We highlight five important cities. (b) Pendular ratio for all cities versus days df from LNY in 2020 with
highlight of 5 cities. (c) Average values of the pendular ratio
over cities according to the classification (receiver, emitter or
transit cities) versus days from LNY in 2019. The colored areas correspond to one standard deviation. (d) Mean value of
the pendular ratio over cities according to the classification
versus days from LNY in 2020 with the shaded area representing the corresponding standard deviation.

dividuals have come back. We divide cities into three
categories according to the value of R(i, 1): If the value
is larger than 1.5, we classify city i as a ‘receiver’ city. If
the value is less than 0.5, we classify city i as an ‘emitter’ city. Finally, if the value is between 0.5 and 1.5,
we classify city i as a ‘transit’ city. We represent on
Fig. 5 the cities of different types on the map of China.
We observe that both receiver and transit cities are homogeneously distributed in China. In constrat emitters
cities are in general located in developed regions, e.g.,
Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and so on, as shown in
figures 5 (a) and (b). It is interesting to note that cities
of the Hubei province (within the dashed circle in the figure) are emitters cities in 2020, essentially due to travel
restrictions that prevented individuals to come back to
Wuhan. This is an important difference compared to the
year of 2019 that appears here in the spatial structure of
emitters and receivers.
We show in Fig. 6 (a,b) the pendular ratio for 2019 and
2020 for all cities and we highlight 5 cities: Wuhan, Beijing, Tianjin, Chongqing and Shanghai, corresponding to
the origin place of COVID-19 and four province-level municipalities. We note here that the curve corresponding
to Wuhan is at the bottom of all cities in Fig. 6 (b), reflecting the success of sealing off Wuhan from all outside
contact to stop the spread of the disease since Jan. 23rd.
In Fig. 6 (c,d) we show this pendular ratio for 2019
and 2020 for the different types of cities (we average over
cities in a given category, emitter, receiver or transit). We
observe that the standard deviation is small for the three

Finally, we note here that we additionally implemented
our whole analysis at the province level (see SI) and the
results obtained are similar are those obtained at the city
level.

IV.

CONCLUSION

Our findings thus concern four different aspects. First,
the traffic flows between cities are very heterogeneous not
only spatially but also from a temporal perspective. Such
a large heterogeneity could be induced by both the Spring
Festival and the travel ban. Similar results apply also to
an aggregated level, i.e. the incoming and outgoing flows
for cities also display important heterogeneities. This aspect is crucial for understanding and modeling epidemic
spreading for which we know the importance of heterogeneity for epidemic spreading on networks [28, 29] and
more generally for most processes [30]. We also quantify the dispersion of origins/destinations of the incoming/outgoing flows showing that for larger flows we have
a larger variety of origins and destinations. We also show
that during these seasonal migrations of the Spring Festival, the national structure of population changes quickly
with a larger concentration in a small set of cities. This
concentration decays normally in time after the festivities but travel bans slow down this return to the initial
state. It is natural to try to stop the geographical spread
of the disease by stopping interurban movements, but on
the other hand, large concentration in cities can favor
the spread at the city level and increase the number of
infected cases. This concentration can be compensated
by a more important control at the individual contact
level which is what was done in cities such as Wuhan.
These results are in line with epidemic modeling results
[19], where it was shown that travel quarantine is effective only when combined with a large reduction of intracommunity transmission. Our results thus highlight the
importance of mobility studies for modeling a variety of
processes and in particular for understanding and modeling the spread of epidemics. Effective mitigating strategies need to take into account the change of population
structure that we exhibited here.

6

Data

comparison, the migration index during the same period
of 2019 (re-scaled according to Chinese lunar calendar,
from Jan. 12th to Feb. 23rd, 2019) is also used.

We obtained the migration data from Baidu Qianxi
(http://qianxi.baidu.com), based on Baidu Location
Based Services and Baidu Tianyan, for all transportation
modes. It provides the following two datasets: migration
index reflecting the size of the population moving into or
out from a city/province, and migration ratio capturing
the proportion of each origins and destination. We collected the data during Chinese Spring Festival period of
2020 (from Jan. 1st to Feb. 12th, 2020). For parallel

In addition to the migration data, we collected
the demographic from China Statistical Yearbook
(http://www.statsdatabank.com), an annual statistical
publication, which reflects comprehensively economic
and social development of China. It covers key statistical data in recent years at both the city level and the
province level. We collected the data of population of
31 province-level regions and 296 city-level regions from
China Statistical Yearbook 2019, the latest edition provided.

[1] Hernández JC Wee S, McNeil Jr DG. W.h.o. declares
global emergency as wuhan coronavirus spreads. The
New York Times, 2020.
[2] Zhidong Cao, Qingpeng Zhang, Xin Lu, Dirk Pfeiffer, Zhongwei Jia, Hongbing Song, and Daniel Dajun
Zeng. Estimating the effective reproduction number of
the 2019-ncov in china. medRxiv, 2020.
[3] Biao Tang, Xia Wang, Qian Li, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi,
Sanyi Tang, Yanni Xiao, and Jianhong Wu. Estimation
of the transmission risk of the 2019-ncov and its implication for public health interventions. Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 9(2):462, 2020.
[4] Julien Riou and Christian L Althaus. Pattern of early
human-to-human transmission of wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), december 2019 to january 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(4), 2020.
[5] Shi Zhao, Qianyin Lin, Jinjun Ran, Salihu S Musa,
Guangpu Yang, Weiming Wang, Yijun Lou, Daozhou
Gao, Lin Yang, Daihai He, et al. Preliminary estimation
of the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus
(2019-ncov) in china, from 2019 to 2020: A data-driven
analysis in the early phase of the outbreak. International
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[6] Sang Woo Park, David Champredon, David JD Earn,
Michael Li, Joshua S Weitz, Bryan T Grenfell, and
Jonathan Dushoff. Reconciling early-outbreak preliminary estimates of the basic reproductive number and its
uncertainty: a new framework and applications to the
novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak. medRxiv, 2020.
[7] Juanjuan Zhang, Maria Litvinova, Wei Wang, Yan Wang,
Xiaowei Deng, Xinghui Chen, Mei Li, Wen Zheng, Lan
Yi, Xinhua Chen, et al. Evolving epidemiology of novel
coronavirus diseases 2019 and possible interruption of local transmission outside hubei province in china: a descriptive and modeling study. medRxiv, 2020.
[8] Jantien A Backer, Don Klinkenberg, and Jacco Wallinga.
Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov)
infections among travellers from wuhan, china, 20–28 january 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(5):2000062, 2020.
[9] Jonathan M Read, Jessica RE Bridgen, Derek AT Cummings, Antonia Ho, and Chris P Jewell. Novel coronavirus 2019-ncov: early estimation of epidemiological parameters and epidemic predictions. medRxiv, 2020.
[10] Tao Liu, Jianxiong Hu, Min Kang, Lifeng Lin, Haojie
Zhong, Jianpeng Xiao, Guanhao He, Tie Song, Qiong

Huang, Zuhua Rong, et al. Transmission dynamics of
2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). 2020.
H. Heesterbeek, R. M. Anderson, V. Andreasen,
S. Bansal, D. De Angelis, C. Dye, K. T. D. Eames, W. J.
Edmunds, S. D. W. Frost, and S. Funk. Modeling infectious disease dynamics in the complex landscape of global
health. Science, 347(6227):aaa4339–aaa4339, 2015.
Ye Liang, Dan Xu, Shang Fu, Kewa Gao, Jingjing Huan,
Linyong Xu, and Jia-da Li. A simple prediction model for
the development trend of 2019-ncov epidemics based on
medical observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00426,
2020.
Yu Chen, Jin Cheng, Yu Jiang, and Keji Liu. A
time delay dynamical model for outbreak of 2019ncov and the parameter identification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.00418, 2020.
Wai-kit Ming, Jian Huang, and Casper JP Zhang. Breaking down of healthcare system: Mathematical modelling
for controlling the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak in wuhan, china. bioRxiv, 2020.
Maimuna Majumder and Kenneth D Mandl. Early transmissibility assessment of a novel coronavirus in wuhan,
china. China (January 23, 2020), 2020.
Zeliang Chen, Wenjun Zhang, Yi Lu, Cheng Guo, Zhongmin Guo, Conghui Liao, Xi Zhang, Yi Zhang, Xiaohu
Han, Qianlin Li, et al. From sars-cov to wuhan 2019-ncov
outbreak: Similarity of early epidemic and prediction
of future trends. CELL-HOST-MICROBE-D-20-00063,
2020.
Jun Li. A robust stochastic method of estimating the
transmission potential of 2019-ncov. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.03828, 2020.
Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, and Gabriel M Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in
wuhan, china: a modelling study. The Lancet, 2020.
Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Corrado Gioannini,
Maria Litvinova, A Pastore y Piontti, Luca Rossi, Xinyue
Xiong, M Elizabeth Halloran, IM Longini, and Alessandro Vespignani. Preliminary assessment of the international spreading risk associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak in wuhan city. Center for
Inference and Dynamics of Infectious Diseases, USA. Retrieved, 8, 2020.
Shengjie Lai, Isaac I Bogoch, Alexander Watts, Kam-

V.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

7

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

ran Khan, Zhongjie Li, and Andrew Tatem. Preliminary
risk analysis of 2019 novel coronavirus spread within and
beyond china, 2020.
Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado
Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore
y Piontti, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, et al.
The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019
novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak. medRxiv, 2020.
Xinwu Qian, Lijun Sun, and Satish V Ukkusuri. Scaling of contact networks for epidemic spreading in urban
transit systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03564, 2020.
Giulia Pullano, Francesco Pinotti, Eugenio Valdano,
Pierre-Yves Boëlle, Chiara Poletto, and Vittoria Colizza.
Novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) early-stage importation
risk to europe, january 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(4),
2020.
Marius Gilbert, Giulia Pullano, Francesco Pinotti, Eugenio Valdano, Chiara Poletto, Pierre-Yves Boëlle, Eric
D’Ortenzio, Yazdan Yazdanpanah, Serge Paul Eholie,
Mathias Altmann, et al. Preparedness and vulnerability of african countries against importations of covid-19:
a modelling study. The Lancet, 2020.

[25] Hugo Barbosa, Marc Barthelemy, Gourab Ghoshal,
Charlotte R James, Maxime Lenormand, Thomas Louail,
Ronaldo Menezes, José J Ramasco, Filippo Simini, and
Marcello Tomasini. Human mobility: Models and applications. Physics Reports, 734:1–74, 2018.
[26] Jeff Alstott, Ed Bullmore, and Dietmar Plenz. powerlaw:
A python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distributions. Plos One, 9, 2014.
[27] Philip M Dixon, Jacob Weiner, Thomas Mitchell-Olds,
and Robert Woodley. Bootstrapping the gini coefficient
of inequality. Ecology, 68(5):1548–1551, 1987.
[28] Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani.
Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Physical review letters, 86(14):3200, 2001.
[29] Marc Barthélemy, Alain Barrat, Romualdo PastorSatorras, and Alessandro Vespignani. Velocity and hierarchical spread of epidemic outbreaks in scale-free networks. Physical review letters, 92(17):178701, 2004.
[30] Alain Barrat, Marc Barthelemy, and Alessandro Vespignani. Dynamical processes on complex networks. Cambridge university press, 2008.

Appendix A: Supplementary Materials
Data for 2019

In order to evaluate the heterogeneity of flows of 2019 with comparison to that of 2020, we use the migration
index during the same period of 2019 (re-scaled according to Chinese lunar calendar, from Jan. 12th to Feb. 23rd,
2019), and we would compute the distribution of all flows N (i, j, d), for all cities i and j and all days d, though
N (i, j, d) = Nout (i, d) × p(i, j, d). The Chinese Lunar New Year of 2019 is Feb. 5th. Here, Nout (i, d) is migration index
reflecting the size of the population moving into or out from a city/province, and p(i, j, d) is migration ratio capturing
the proportion of each origins and destination. However, the migration ratio is unavailable for 2019. We apply the
data of p(i, j, d) for 2020 to the computation of N (i, j, d) for 2019, with results shown in Fig. S1. This result exhibits
large heterogeneity of flows and displays a localized drop around LNY.

Statistics of Nin and Nout
Versus population

We observe a power law relationship between the incoming/outgoing flows and city population in Fig. S2 which
indicates that the larger a city and the more flows it carries. Compared to 2019, the differences between the scatter
points for incoming flows corresponding to days before and after LNY are much larger in 2020. This result emphasizes
again that travel ban causes indeed the sharp drop of standard deviation in Fig. 1 (b) of the main text rather than
the low travel intention during the Spring Festival.
The power law fits that we obtain imply that Nin ∼ P0γin where γin ≈ 0.93 before LNY and γin ≈ 0.88 after LNY.
Similarly for outgoing flows we obtain γout ≈ 0.85 before and γout ≈ 0.93 after LNY. We can interpret these results
as a consequence of the conservation of the number of individuals traveling before and after LNY.

Distribution of Nin,out for 2020

We show the distribution, average and standard deviation of incoming/outgoing flows in Fig. S3. We observe that
these distributions are relatively broad, in particular outgoing flows (Fig. S3 (a) and (b)). We show the standard
deviation of incoming flows and outgoing flows over cities for each day, and the corresponding average (the same for
the incoming and outgoing flows) in Fig. S3 (c). Note that the standard deviation of Nin is smaller than that of Nout
before Jan. 25th, the 2020 LNY, while the situation reverses after Jan. 25th. A reasonable explanation for this is

8
that people go to a relative large number of hometowns from a relative small number of workplaces before the Spring
Festival; Due to the travel ban, people do not come back after the Spring Festival.

Distribution of Nin,out for 2019

We show the same quantities as above but for the year 2019. Here also, we observe broad distributions both for all
incoming flows and all outgoing flows are shown in Fig. S4.
Fluctuations are larger around LNY where the total flow of individuals is larger, allowing for more heterogeneity.
Before LNY individuals move from a large variety of cities to a relatively small number of hometowns explaining the
large fluctuations of Nout . After LNY, individuals are returning from a small number of hometowns to a large variety
in
of cities, inducing large fluctuations of Nin . The corresponding dispersion and relative dispersions ∆out
d ) and ∆d ) are
shown in figures S4 (c) and (d). This also results in the heterogeneous distribution for the relative standard deviation
of Nin and Nout averaged over cities for 2019 in Fig. S4 (e).

Gini indices for Nin,out

We compute Gini indices for cities. Instead of showing results for all cities, we plot Gini indices versus the traffic
Nout (i,d)
in (i,d)
flows to or from cities in set {i ∈ V| min{max{ NNout
(i,d) }, max{ Nin (i,d) }} > 4.5} and Wuhan in Fig. S5. In this
d

d

d

case from these cities, many people go out to or come in from many different cities. These cities are critical and
include Shanghai, Beijing, and so on. Due to travel bans, Wuhan exhibits specific features of scatter points with clear
separation before and after LNY (see the scatter points in blue at the upper left corner corresponding to Wuhan in
Fig. S5).
We also observe here in both cases a decreasing behavior on average. This is more salient for Nout where the trend
is clearly visible. This indicates that for larger outgoing flows, the Gini is smaller with no clearly dominant flow.

Statistical structure of the national population

We first show the population distribution in Fig. S6 (a). We observe a broad distribution and a power law fit gives
the exponent α ≈ 5. We also show the number of important cities quantified by the integer part of n[1 − G(d)], in
Fig. S6 (b).

Pendular ratio

In order to test the dependence of the pendular ratios on the criteria for defining classes, we change the criteria as
follows: here if the value of R(i, 1) is larger than 1.2, we classify city i as a ‘receiver’ city. If the value is less than 0.8,
we classify city i as an ‘emitter’ city. Finally, if the value is between 0.8 and 1.2, we classify city i as a ‘transit’ city.
We show the location of three categories of cites on the map of China for 2019 and 2020 in Fig. S7.
Compared to the criteria in the main text, the number of transit cities decreases, while the number of emitter
and receiver cities increases. However, as shown in Fig. S8, the patterns of the average value of pendular ratio
corresponding to three categories of cites remain unchanged.

Statistics at the inter-province level
Statistics of flows

In what follows, we show some corresponding results based on province-level data instead of city-level data. The
distribution of traffic flows between provinces exhibits large heterogeneity with the exponent of power law fit α around
2.24, as shown in Fig. S9 (a). A sharp drop of the standard deviation after Jan. 25th is observed in Fig. S9 (b).
We show the relative standard deviation of N over flows versus time with an order around 2.96 in Fig. S10 (a) and
the distribution of the relative standard deviation of N over time concentrating around 0.64 in Fig. S10 (b). Large
heterogeneity of traffic flows between provinces confirms the difficulty of modeling these flows. The relative standard

9
deviations corresponding to incoming and outgoing flows with smaller relative dispersions are shown in figures S10
(c) and (d).
We compare the incoming flows and outgoing flows versus city population in 2019 and 2020 at province-level with
days before and after LNY highlighted by different colors in Fig. S11. Compared to 2019 (figures S11 (a) and (b)),
the differences between days before and after LNY are much larger in 2020 (figures S11 (c) and (d)).

Statistical structure of the national population

The trends of the population Gini index for 2019 and 2020 are shown in Fig. S12. The Gini index reaches its
maximum around LNY and returns to normal state gradually. Compared to 2019, the Gini index corresponding to
2020 has a higher peak and decreases with a slower speed.
We apply the criteria of three categories of provinces similar to that for city: If the value of R(i, 1) is larger than
1.2, we classify province i as a ‘receiver’ province. If the value is less than 0.8, we classify province i as an ‘emitter’
province. Finally, if the value is between 0.8 and 1.2, we classify province i as a ‘transit’ province. We show the
location of three categories of cites on map of China for 2019 and 2020 in Fig. S13 and observe that receiver provinces
are the majority in 2019 while emitter provinces are the majority in 2020. This results seem to make sense since most
people defer the return time due to the travel ban, so that most provinces are ‘emitters’ in 2020.
We show in figures S14 (a) and (b) the pendular ratio for 2019 and 2020 for all provinces and highlight 5 provinces:
Hubei, Beijing, Tianjin, Chongqing and Shanghai, corresponding to the origin province of COVID-19 and four
province-level municipalities. We note that the curve corresponding to Hubei is in the bottom from all provinces
in Fig. S14 (b), indicating that except Wuhan, the origin city of COVID-19, people also avoid going to cities of Hubei.
We observe that, in 2019, the pendular ratios of all the three types of cities return to 1, meaning that the majority
of individuals who went away for the holidays came back, as shown in Fig. S14 (c). The situation for 2020 is very
different with a pendular ratio for all types of cities that converges to a value less than 1, indicating that the majority
of people who went away for the holidays did not back yet, as shown in Fig. S14 (d).
To sum up, we show that the traffic flows between provinces are very heterogeneous, and display both large temporal
and spatial fluctuations, and so on. These results for province-level are in good agreement with for city-level, indicating
that our methods are applicable to both scales. Despite the detailed characters of traffic flows revealed by results
for city-level and province-level, a global view of a higher level is also necessary. The statistical properties of the
interurban mobility help us to understand the effect of travel restrictions, their impact on and the control of epidemic
spread.

Figure S1: Average and standard deviation of N over traffic flows versus time for 2019 with the corresponding migration ratio
for 2020.

10

Figure S2: Incoming flows (a) and outgoing flows (b) for all cities and days versus city population before and after the 2019
LNY in loglog. Incoming flows (c) and outgoing flows (d) for all cities and days versus city population before and after the
2020 LNY in loglog.

Figure S3: Observation of incoming and outgoing flows for 2020. (a) Distribution of all incoming flows in loglog with parameters
of power law fitting on the top middle. (b) Distribution of all outgoing flows in loglog with parameters of power law fitting on
the top middle. (c) Average and standard deviation of Nin and Nout over cities versus time.

11

Figure S4: Observation of incoming and outgoing flows for 2019. (a) Distribution of all incoming flows in loglog with parameters
of power law fitting on the top middle. (b) Distribution of all outgoing flows in loglog with parameters of power law fitting on
the top middle. (c) Average and standard deviation of Nin and Nout over cities versus time. (d) Relative standard deviation of
Nin and Nout over cities versus time. (e) Distribution of the relative standard deviation of Nin and Nout over time.

Figure S5: (a) Gin versus Nin for some cities and all days. (b) Gout versus Nout for some cities and all days.

12

Figure S6: (a) Distribution of populations of all cities in loglog. (b) The number of important cities versus time corresponding
to 2019 and 2020. We match the time scale for 2019 and 2020 according to LNY (for the sake of clarity, we show on the x-axis
the dates for 2020 only). The vertical line highlights the LNY.

Figure S7: (a) Emitter, receiver and transit cities according to the value of R(i, 1) for 2019 with the number of three categories
of provinces at the lower left corner. (b) Emitter, receiver and transit cities according to the value of R(i, 1) for 2020 with the
number of three categories of provinces at the lower left corner.

Figure S8: (a) Mean value of the pendular ratios over cities according to the classification (receiver, emitter or transit cities)
with different criteria versus days from LNY in 2019. The colored areas correspond to one standard deviation. (b) Mean value
of the pendular ratios over cities according to the classification with different criteria versus days from LNY in 2020 with shaded
areas representing standard deviation.

13

Figure S9: (a) Distribution of all traffic flows N (i, j, d) in loglog. The line is a power law fit of the form N −α with exponent
α = 2.27. (b) Average and standard deviation of N over traffic flows versus time.

Figure S10: (a) Relative standard deviation of N over traffic flows versus time. (b) Distribution of the relative standard
deviation of N over time. (c) Relative standard deviation of Nin and Nout over provinces versus time. (d) Distribution of the
relative standard deviation of Nin and Nout over time.

14

Figure S11: Incoming flows (a) and outgoing flows (b) for all provinces and days versus province population before and after
the 2019 LNY in loglog. Incoming flows (c) and outgoing flows (d) for all provinces and days versus province population before
and after the 2020 LNY in loglog.

Figure S12: Temporal variations during the Spring Festical of the population Gini index for 2019 and 2020. The dotted line
represents the value ‘at rest’.

15

Figure S13: (a) Emitter, receiver and transit provinces according to the value of R(i, 1) for 2019 with the number of three
categories of provinces at lower left corner. (b) Emitter, receiver and transit provinces according to the value of R(i, 1) for 2020
with the number of three categories of provinces at lower left corner.

Figure S14: Comparison of pendular ratio between 2019 and 2020. (a) Pendular ratio for all provinces versus days df from LNY
in 2019. We highlighted five important provinces. (b) Pendular ratio for all provinces versus days df from LNY in 2020 with
highlight of 5 provinces. (c) Mean values of the pendular ratio over provinces according to the classification (receiver, emitter
or transit provinces) versus days from LNY in 2019. The colored areas correspond to one standard deviation. (d) Mean value
of the pendular ratio over provinces according to the classification versus days from LNY in 2020 with colorbar representing
standard deviation.

