Reconfiguring health services to reduce the workload of caregivers during
the COVID-19 outbreak using an open-source scalable platform for remote
digital monitoring and coordination of care in hospital Command Centres
Philippe Ravaud1,2, Franck le Ouay3*, Etienne Depaulis3, Alexandre Huckert3, Bruno
Vegreville4, Viet-Thi Tran1,2
1

University of Paris, CRESS, INSERM, INRA, F-75004 Paris, France

2

Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, F-75004 Paris France

3 Lifen,
4

Paris France

Inato, Paris, France

Words: 1167
Corresponding author:
Frank le Ouay
Lifen
franck@lifen.fr

Exclusive licence
The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does grant on
behalf of all authors, a worldwide licence to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity, in
all forms, formats and media (whether known now or created in the future), to i) publish,
reproduce, distribute, display and store the Contribution, ii) translate the Contribution into
other languages, create adaptations, reprints, include within collections and create summaries,
extracts and/or, abstracts of the Contribution and convert or allow conversion into any format
including without limitation audio, iii) create any other derivative work(s) based in whole or
part on the on the Contribution, iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights to exploit all subsidiary
rights that currently exist or as may exist in the future in the Contribution, v) the inclusion of
electronic links from the Contribution to third party material where-ever it may be located;
and, vi) licence any third party to do any or all of the above.
All research articles will be made available on an open access basis (with authors being asked
to pay an open access fee—see http://www.bmj.com/about-bmj/resources-authors/forms-

policies-and-checklists/copyright-open-access-and-permission-reuse). The terms of such open
access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence—details as to which Creative
Commons licence will apply to the research article are set out in our worldwide licence
referred to above.
Contributorship statement:
PR, FLO, ED, AH, BV and V-TT designed the remote monitoring platform and the Command
Centres. PR and V-TT drafted the online questionnaires and the decision rules, with the help of
clinicians. FLO, ED, AH and BV developed the software. V-TT drafted the manuscript. All
authors provided critics and revised on the manuscript. All authors approved the manuscript.
Dissemination to patients’ organizations is not applicable.
There was no public and patient involvement in the conception of this manuscript

Abstract (82 words)
The Covid-19 outbreak threatens to saturate healthcare systems in most Western countries. We
describe how digital technologies may be used to automatically and remotely monitor patients
at home. Patients answer simple self-reported questionnaires and their data is transmitted, in
real time, to a Command Centre in the nearest reference hospital. Patient reported data are
automatically filtered by algorithms to identify those with early warning signs. Open-source
code of all software components required to deploy the remote digital monitoring platform and
Command Centres is available.

Context
The coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) has been declared a public health emergency of
international concern1. On the 11th of March 2020, 118 162 cases were confirmed in 113
countries, with 4 290 deaths 2. The Covid-19 outbreak threatens to saturate healthcare systems
in Western countries which are already at breaking point dealing with routine demands3. Indeed,
the virus transmits easily (R0 between 1.4 and 3.28) and its current management involves
mainly hospital care, despite the fact that most patients who will contract the virus will have
few symptoms and long term effects 3-5. Naïve calculations show that this strategy will not be
sustainable as the epidemic progresses 6. To anticipate for the escalation of the epidemic, since
the 7th of March 2020, patients with confirmed Covid-19 without signs of severity in France
can be managed at home by their general practitioner 7. Similarly, in the United Kingdom, a 24
hour, seven day a week, service has been set-up to manage patients who “do not require
immediate admission” to the hospital”, at home 5. Yet, these solutions rely heavily on in-person
management of patients and will still place an important workload on general practitioners and
other care professionals involved.
Our proposal is to exploit digital technologies to remotely monitor patients at home. Data from
remote monitoring of patients are transmitted to a Command Centre, in the nearest reference
hospital, and automated algorithms triage patients with early warning signs. This will spare
human time and let physicians focus on patients who may need specific care actions (Figure,
Supplementary Material 1). In addition to reducing contacts with care professionals and risks
of contamination, remote monitoring of patients and automated decisions may alleviate the
workload of caregivers and delay the expected disorganization of care structures.
In a few days, public health researchers and clinicians from the Assistance Publique Hôpitaux
de Paris and University of Paris, software architects and developers co-constructed a prototype
for the remote monitoring platform (Supplementary Material 2). Open-source code of all

software components required to deploy the remote monitoring platform and Command Centres
was developed by Lifen and is available at: https://github.com/lifen-labs/covid.

Remote monitoring for patients in quarantine
Patients with confirmed Covid-19 are assessed by clinicians (in hospital or in community) for:
1) absence of initial signs of severity (based on their age, comorbidities, initial presentation of
the disease); 2) their ability to be quarantined at home (e.g., absence of a psychiatric disorder
or of a loss of autonomy); and 3) their ability to perform the remote monitoring at home (e.g.,
basic computer literacy, smartphone availability). If all criteria are fulfilled and if the patient
consents for remote digital monitoring, he is sent home with instructions for quarantine 8.
Information is automatically sent to the patient’s general practitioner, informing them that one
of their patients has been confirmed with Covid-19 and is now being monitored at home.
Remote follow-up of patients at home was designed to be minimally disruptive. It consists of a
self-reported questionnaire, once or twice a day. Patients receive a text-message with a direct
secure link to an online questionnaire. No login is required. Questionnaires involve <10 items
and collect self-reported symptoms with validated tools (e.g., temperature, dyspnoea, pain) and
quarantine information (e.g., psychological state regarding the quarantine and the disease,
change of the people who are at home with them). In case of emergency, patients can contact
the Command Centre or the National emergency number.

Command Centres
Command Centres are located in hospitals and involve human personnel, including physicians
and nurses who will analyse the constant influx of information from the remote monitoring.
These people are equipped with real-time and decision-support tools, and assess whether patient
care needs to be modified. They take necessary actions (e.g., intensifying monitoring, sending

medical assistance, calling the patient for reassurance etc.) or provide feedback to patients and
General Practitioners.
Each time a patient sends new information by completing a self-reported questionnaire, their
data are updated in real time. Automatic algorithms flag patients, using pre-defined decision
rules, in four categories:
-

“Green” patients are asymptomatic and have no problems with the quarantine. No action
from clinicians is required for these patients. Automatic messages are sent to reassure
patients and to remind them to continue completing the regular questionnaires.

-

“Yellow” patients are stable with no signs of severity. No action from clinicians is
required for these patients. Automatic messages are sent to reassure patients and to
remind them to continue completing the regular questionnaires.

-

“Orange” patients are those with a recent change of symptoms and who may require
closer monitoring. When a patient is flagged “Orange”, the frequency of questionnaires
is increased. In addition, an action is required from clinicians.

-

“Red” patients are those with rapid evolution of symptoms, signs of severity and/or
those who have problems with the quarantine. Rapid action is required from clinicians.

-

“Patients who did not complete the questionnaire after 8h”. Patients are highlighted and
are called by the Command Centre.

Whenever new data is received at the Command Centre, a summary of the patient status and of
decisions taken is sent to their GP.
To manage patients, the human personnel in Command Centres have access to dashboards
where they can 1) visualize all patients enrolled in the remote monitoring, their main symptoms,
and their flags; 2) examine a given patient’s data and take actions; or 3) zoom out to examine
the state of the Command Centre regarding specific subgroups of patients (e.g., those requiring

actions, severe patients, etc.). A video demonstration of the Platform is available
(Supplementary Material 3).

Scalability and Future evolutions
The platform was designed to be compatible with nationwide deployment, in various size
hospitals.
The remote digital monitoring platform was also envisioned to evolve according to the
evolution of the epidemic. First, the platform could be modified for other purposes, such as
estimating the number of patients developing the disease by using simple self-reported
questionnaires to identify the moment when asymptomatic contact subjects develop the disease.
Secondly, the platform was thought to be compatible with the potential enrichment of patientreported information with data from biometric monitoring devices, such as pulse oximeters
(these could be either provided to patients or via patients’ own smartphones as in a Bring Your
Own Device approach9). This could help further pinpoint patients requiring hospital care and
spare precious hospital beds. Thirdly, our platform could be integrated in a larger ecosystem of
Covid-19 management integrating the remote follow-up of patients using different
communication channels (e.g., telephone, smartphone application, etc.) according to the age,
ability of the patient to use a smartphone, or severity of the disease etc. Finally, the remote
digital monitoring of patients will provide continuous streams of data which will automatically
update interactive dashboards about the local or regional state of the epidemic and about the
capacity of the different Command Centres. In addition, data from all command centres can be
pooled to provide real-time data visualizations on the state of the epidemic at national level or
to constitute a research database.

Acknowledgements

We thank greatly Prof Xavier Lescure (Infectious Diseases), Prof Enrique Casalino (Emergency
Medicine) and Dr François Grolleau (Intensive Care Medicine) who helped us build the clinical
questionnaires and decision rules. We also thank Dr Youri Yordanov (Emergency Medicine)
for useful discussions about this paper. We thank Elise Diard for her help in drafting figures.

Conflicts of Interest
Franck le Ouay, Etienne Depaulis and Alexandre Huckert are co-founders of Lifen. Bruno
Vegreville is employed by Inato. Philippe Ravaud holds shares in Inato.

References
1. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. The
New England journal of medicine 2020 doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 [published Online
First: 2020/02/29]
2. World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (COVID-19) Situation 2020 [cited 2020 11/03].
Available from:
https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/685d0ace521648f8a5beeeee1b9125cd accessed
11/03 2020.
3. Watkins J. Preventing a covid-19 pandemic. BMJ (Clinical research ed) 2020;368:m810. doi:
10.1136/bmj.m810 [published Online First: 2020/03/01]
4. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel CoronavirusInfected Pneumonia. The New England journal of medicine 2020 doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa2001316 [published Online First: 2020/01/30]
5. Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, et al. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher
compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of travel medicine 2020 doi: 10.1093/jtm/taaa021
[published Online First: 2020/02/14]
6. Lalibre.be. Coronavirus en Belgique, le scénario du pire : "jusqu'à 850 000 personnes infectées et 50
000 morts", vraiment ? : Lalibre.be; 2020 [Available from:
https://www.lalibre.be/debats/opinions/coronavirus-sans-mesures-de-precaution-drastiqueson-risque-d-avoir-850-000-personnes-infectees-et-50-000-morts-en-belgique5e5cf60f9978e23106a0bfd9?fbclid=IwAR3YHFU64eNN0S32OoQWohxsqYF8xdkmnTEk_dCNwRnL4xG70Dj1b4PPOA accessed 06/03 2020.
7. Ministère des solidarités et de la Santé. Lignes directrices pour la prise en charge en ambulatoire des
patients Covid-19 sans critère de gravité Paris: Ministère des solidarités et de la Santé,; 2020
[Available from: https://solidaritessante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/fiche_filiere_ambulatoire_cas_confirmes.pdf.
8. Santé Publique France. Conduite à tenir France: Santé Publique France, ; 2020 [accessed 06/03
2020.
9. Tayfur I, Afacan MA. Reliability of smartphone measurements of vital parameters: A prospective
study using a reference method. The American journal of emergency medicine
2019;37(8):1527-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2019.03.021 [published Online First: 2019/03/25]

Figures
Figure. Key elements of the remote digital monitoring platform and Command Centres

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material 1. Architecture diagram of the remote digital monitoring platform and
Command Centres
Supplementary Material 2. Development steps of the remote digital monitoring platform and
Command Centres
Supplementary Material 3. Video demonstration of the remote digital monitoring platform and
Command Centres

Patients with
confirmed Covid-19,
in quarantine

Hospital
Remote monitoring
of patients at home

Hospital Command Center

Self reported data

Medical and paramedical coordination 24/7

Obtained daily through a
smartphone-app
OR by phone (for people
unable to fill questionnaires
on a smartphone)
Transmission of clinical
parameters
(dyspnea, temperature...)

Biometric
monitoring devices
Pulse oximeter
(either by using specific
sensor supplied or using
a smartphone application)

Dashboard
generation

All patients

One given patient

- automatic triage based on patients severity
- feedback to patients
- decisions to intensify surveillance (increasing the frequency of
self-reported questionnaires or adding biometric monitoring devices)
- phone contact with the patient, if necessary
- decision to hospitalize of patients in wards or in intensive care units

SAMU
- Triage and response to
patients' complaints
- Dispatching an ambulance
or response vehicle

Emergency department
Management of hospital beds and ressources

Intensive care units
Other departments

Outpatient care

General practitioner

Data for surveillance of Covid-19 at local, regional or national level and research

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Material 1. Architecture diagram of the remote digital monitoring platform and Command Center

Supplementary Material 2. Development steps of the remote digital monitoring platform and Command Center

Supplementary Material 3. Video demonstration of the remote digital monitoring platform and Command Center

https://youtu.be/wwDJNR6SKmI

