Self-isolation or borders closing: what prevents epidemic spreading better?
O. Valba1,2 , V. Avetisov2 , A. Gorsky3,4 , and S. Nechaev5,6

arXiv:2003.12290v2 [physics.soc-ph] 7 Apr 2020

1

Department of Applied Mathematics, National Research University Higher School of Economics, 101000, Moscow, Russia
2
Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics RAS, 119991, Moscow, Russia
3
Institute of Information Transmission Problems RAS, 127051 Moscow, Russia
4
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny 141700, Russia
5
Interdisciplinary Scientific Center Poncelet, CNRS UMI 2615, 119002 Moscow, Russia
6
P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute RAS, 119991 Moscow, Russia
Pandemic distribution of COVID-19 in the world has motivated us to discuss combined effects
of network clustering and adaptivity on epidemic spreading. We address the question concerning
the choice of optimal mechanism for most effective prohibiting disease propagation in a connected
network: adaptive clustering, which mimics self-isolation (SI) in local communities, or sharp instant
clustering, which looks like frontiers closing (FC) between cities and countries. SI-networks are
”adaptively grown” under condition of maximization of small cliques in the entire network, while
FC-networks are ”instantly created”. Running the standard SIR model on clustered SI- and FCnetworks, we demonstrate that the adaptive network clustering prohibits the epidemic spreading
better than the instant clustering in the network with similar parameters. We found that SI model
has scale-free property for degree distribution P (k) ∼ kη with small critical exponent −2 < η < −1
and argue that scale-free behavior emerges due to the randomness in the initial degree distributions
and is absent for random regular graphs.

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is known [1] that any epidemic spreading is sensitive
to two generic features: clustering and adaptivity. Both
of them have a strong impact on epidemic threshold [2–
5], peak value and typical distribution time. Here we are
focused on a specific mechanism of adaptive clustering,
which has strong impact on the disease propagation. Our
work, inspired by the pandemic distribution of COVID19 in the world, motivated us to discuss combined effects
of network clustering and adaptivity on epidemic spreading.
We are encouraged by an observation made in [6] concerning localization of one-body excitations on network
clusters obtained in a specific evolutionary way. More
recently, similar results have been derived for networks
with different patterns of dynamically induced clustering [7–9]. In the current Letter we analyze and compare
numerically the epidemic spreading on adaptively and
instantly clustered connected networks.
In [6] we have considered spectral properties of two
types constrained random Erdős-Rényi networks in the
clustered phase: (i) ”e-networks” obtained by the evolutionary Metropolis maximization of small cliques, and (ii)
”i-networks”, instantly prepared clustered graphs having the same geometrical properties as ”e-networks”, but
which are created without any evolutionary selection. In
e-networks, which are non-ergodic, excitations are mostly
localized on clusters and weakly spread through the entire network, since the network is connected and there is
a small, though finite density of inter-cluster links. Ergodic i-networks, which serve as a particular example of
a ”stochastic block model” [10, 11], being geometrically
very similar to e-networks, are less effective in blocking
the excitation spreading. As we show below, the dis-

tinction between e- and i-networks deals with different
statistics of inter-cluster links in these networks. In our
work we report results of simulations of the standard SIR
model on clustered e- and i-networks. The SIR model
(described in Section IV) is the simplest and widely used
model of disease transmission from human to human.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II we formulate the model of adaptive clustering. In Section III we
argue that our model has a scale-free degree distribution
providing explanation of a very specific triangular shape
of the spectral density of clustered e-networks observed
in [15]. In Section IV we describe results of simulations
of SIR model on Erdős-Rényi (ER), e- and i-networks. In
Discussion we speculate about possible interpretation of
self-isolation (SI) in communities as formation of adaptively clustered e-networks, frontiers closing (FC) – as
formation of i-networks, and demonstrate that SI prohibits the epidemic spread more efficient than FC.

II.

DEFINITIONS AND NETWORKS
GENERATION

The main object of our consideration is the dynamically evolving constrained Erdős-Rényi network. The
N -vertex Erdős-Rényi network is a topological graph of
N vertices constructed by random linking with probability p any pair of points from a set of N arbitrary points.
The probability, P (k), to find a vertex in ER network,
linked with other k vertices, is Poissonian with the mean
value hki = N p. Another well-studied class of random
networks are the so-called scale-free networks, for which
the vertex degree distribution, P (k) ∼ k η , has a powerlaw tail with a critical exponent η < 0 (typically η < −2).
The overwhelming majority of natural networks is scale-

2
free, and the network of distribution of COVID-19 is not
an exception [12].
Natural networks, being complex self-organized objects, evolve in time trying to adapt themselves to imposed external conditions. We distinguish two classes of
dynamic Erdős-Rényi networks: ”unconstrained” (without the vertex degree conservation during the network
evolution) and ”constrained” (with preservation of vertex
degrees in all nodes under network rewiring). In unconstrained ER networks one can remove any link from one
place of the network and insert it into any other place. To
the contrary, in constrained ER networks the realization
of a rewiring is more complex and involves simultaneous
replacement at least two bonds.
Speaking less abstract, consider a network of human
social relations, where each graph vertex represents a
particular individual. It seems reasonable to assume that
for each individual, the number of social connections (the
particular vertex degree in a social network) is conserved.
The number of connections may vary from one individual to another, however for each human it is supposed to
be fixed and unchanged during the social network evolution. Such a supposition seems rather natural since the
number of relations per one individual rapidly increases,
saturates and then remains approximately conserved in
time. Specifically, we proceed with the following rewiring
setup which conserves vertex degrees. We take a random
Erdős-Rényi N -vertex graph without double connections
as an initial state of a network. Then, we randomly select a pair of arbitrary links, say, (ij) (between vertices i
and j) and (k, l) (between k and l), and reconnect them,
getting new links (i, k) and (j, l). Such reconnections
conserve the vertex degree [13], however allow for bonds
redistribution and do not prohibit topological changes in
the entire network. In the context of phase transitions in
social networks such dynamic model has been discussed
in [14].
The following question has been addressed in [15]. Suppose that we rewire links in the constrained Erdős-Rényi
network under the condition that at each step of rewiring
we try to maximize the number of small cliques (small
complete subgraphs of few links). Which is the equilibrium structure of the entire network? In mathematical
terms this question reads as follows. We assign the energy µ to each simplest clique (closed triad of bonds) and
denote by n4 the number of such triads in the network.
The partition function of the network can be written as
X0
Z(µ) =
e−µn4
(1)
{states}

where prime in (1) means that the summation runs over
all possible configurations of links (”states”), under the
condition of fixed degrees {v1 , ..., vN } in all network vertices.
To simulate the rewiring process, one applies the standard Metropolis algorithm with the following rules: i)

if under the reconnection the number of closed triads
is increasing, a move (rewiring) is accepted, ii) if the
number of closed triads is decreasing by ∆ n4 , or remains unchanged, a move is accepted with the probability e−µ∆ n4 . The Metropolis algorithm runs repeatedly
for large set of randomly chosen pairs of links, until it
converges. In [16] it was proven that such Metropolis
algorithm converges to the Gibbs measure eµN4 in the
equilibrium ensemble of random undirected Erdős-Renyi
networks with fixed vertex degree.
In [15] it has been shown that given the bond formation
probability, p, in the initial graph, the evolving network
splits into the maximally possible number of clusters, Ncl :

 

N
1
Ncl =
≈
,
(2)
N p + 1 N 1
p
where [x] means the integer part of x and the denominator (N p + 1) defines the minimal size of formed cliques.
The asymptotic limit ∼ [p−1 ] at N → ∞ in (2) is independent on the particular set of corresponding vertex
degrees, {v1 , ..., vN }.
According to the work [15], clustering of evolving constrained Erdős-Renyi network occurs under condition
of triads maximization, as a first order phase transition where µ is a control value. To have some insight
about topological network structure in course of its evolution under maximization of triadic motifs, we reproduce
in Fig.1 typical adjacency matrices at three sequential
stages of a particular network rearrangement – see [15]
for details.

Figure 1: Few typical samples of intermediate stages of a
network evolution at fixed vertex degree under condition of
triads maximization.

To visualize the evolution, we enumerate vertices at
the preparation condition in arbitrary order and run the
Metropolis stochastic dynamics. When the system is
equilibrated and clusters are formed, we re-enumerate
vertices sequentially according to their belongings to clusters. Then we restore corresponding dynamic pathways
back to the initial configuration.
The evolutionary grown clustered ”e-network”, obtained by the maximization of triangles (triadic motifs)
we compare with another mechanism of clustered ”inetwork” formation. The ”i-network” is instantly formed
being a particular example of a stochastic block random
graph [10, 11]. The i-network is constructed by the following procedure. Firstly, we detect clusters {J} in the

3
e-network, define the link probability, pJin , inside each
cluster J, and between clusters, pout . Secondly, we split
the set of N points in groups as in the e-network, and
generate new random clusters by connecting vertices in
these groups with the probability pJin . In such a way
we ”mimic” clusters of e-networks. Finally, we randomly
connect nodes belonging to different clusters with the
probability pout borrowed from the average connection
probability between clusters in e-network. Such an ”instantly created” i-network mimics the e-network, since
i-network has the same linking probability and community structure as the evolutionary grown e-network – see
Fig.2. However the i-network has no any pre-history, it
knows nothing about the evolution, it has no dependence
on µ, and has no vertex degree conservation. Visual inspection of Fig.2 does not allow us to distinguish adjacency matrices e- and i-networks. Besides, propagation of
excitation on e- and i-networks behaves very differently.

Figure 2: Examples of typical adjacency matrices for random,
e- and i-networks, which have N = 750 vertices and are created with the link probability p = 0.08. By visual inspection
it is almost impossible to distinguish the adjacency matrices
of e- and i-networks.

To summarize, we have in hands ensembles of two
kinds of networks: (i) evolutionary grown (e-networks)
which have memory about the history of its creation,
and (ii) instantly ad hoc formed (i-networks). Comparing mechanisms of construction of e- and i-networks, it
seems plausible:

III. ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING AND
SCALE-FREE DISTRIBUTION IN E-NETWORKS

In [15] we have pointed out some puzzling property
of the spectral density (eigenvalue distribution) of adaptively clustered networks. The spectrum above clustering transition has two-band structure in which the first
(main) band was naturally attributed with perturbative excitations inside clusters, while the second ”nonperturbative” band emerged from eigenvalues tunneled
from the first zone aside. It was found numerically that
the spectral density in the perturbative band has triangular shape typical for scale-free networks [20, 21]. Such
result looked surprising since the clustered network is
originated from a standard Erdős-Rényi graph with a binomial degree distribution and since the vertex degree
is conserved in the network evolution. Naively thinking
there is no place for a network to be scale-free.
The resolution of that puzzle turns out to be as follows:
we have to study separately distributions of internal (inside cluster) and external (between clusters) vertex degrees. Consider a vertex i, which belongs to the cluster J
of clustered e-network, and define the ”outer degree” for
a vertex i as the number of links, connecting i to vertices
of clusters different from J. In Fig.3 we have plotted the
”outer vertex degree distribution”, ρ(k), of cluster nodes
for three types of networks: e-networks (black squares),
i-networks (red circles) and RRG e-networks (blue triangles). Simulations show for e-networks the power-law
scaling
ρ(k) ∼ k η

(3)

with surprisingly small value of η. The line of the best fit
in Fig.3 for ”outer vertex degree” of e-networks has the
slope η = −1.12. The ”inner vertex degree distribution”
demonstrates at the same time the binomial distribution
modified by the long tail at small degrees. Instantly created i-networks (red circles) do not possess such scale-free
behavior for vertex degrees between clusters.

- To identify instantly created i-networks with splitting of entire human network into collection of
weakly connected clusters obtained by frontiers
(borders) closing (FC).

It is eligible to ask a question which property of enetwork is responsible for the scale-free distribution. To
this aim we consider the e-networks constructed on the
basis of random regular graphs (RRG), possessing the
similar cluster structure. The outer vertex degree distribution of RRG e-networks is shown by blue triangles in
Fig.3 and demonstrates the absence of scale-free behavior, however the distribution itself seems to be closer to
the one of e-networks, rather than of i-networks. Thus,
we have solid arguments to suggest that the scale-free
behavior of e-networks is induced by the disorder in the
vertex degree distribution of the ”parent” constrained ER
network.

For comparison we also consider random Erdős-Renyi
networks of the same vertex degree distribution, which
are initial states of our evolutionary algorithm.

The dependence (3) is fully consistent with our investigations [6, 15] of spectral statistics of evolutionary grown
clustered networks. It was shown in [15] that the enveloping shape of the main band in spectral density of the adjacency matrix is changing with increasing of µ from the

- To identify clustered e-networks, obtained by adaptive preferential arrangement of network vertices in
small cliques with self-isolation (SI) of humans in
small communities,

4
the pathogen, (b) infectious (I) for contagious individuals
have contacted the pathogen and can infect others, (c)
recovered (R) for recovered (or immune) individuals. The
distribution of disease on some target space is considered
in the frameworks of transformation between susceptible,
infectious and recovered agents and is known as the SIR
model [19]. The standard dynamics of SIR model reads:
β

S+I −
→I +I
γ

(4)

I−
→R

Figure 3: (a) The outer cluster degree distribution ρ(k) in
log-log scale. Results are obtained for 100 realizations of enetworks with N = 750 nodes and the linking probability
p = 0.08; (b) The distributions for the constrained ER and
random regular graphs (RRG).

semicircle (in the initial ER network and below µcr ) to
the triangle (above µcr , in the clustered network), where
µc is first order transition point. According to our observation, the triangular shape of the spectral density in the
main band should be attributed mainly to the scale-free
property of inter-cluster excitations of e-networks.
The critical exponent η is small (−2 < η < −1), which
means that the average vertex degree distribution diverges. The general conditions to have η > −2 in scalefree networks with fixed number of nodes is discussed in
[17, 18]. Rather nontrivial rewiring procedure for generating networks with η > −2 has been proposed in [17].
Despite the algorithm of [17] looks rather sophisticated,
the ideas behind its construction are in good agreement
with our simple generation procedure of the scale-free
network with −2 < η < −1. Namely, to get η > −2
one should accurately tune the combination of local and
global constraints. One more rewiring procedure was
suggested in [18] for getting η = −1. Fortunately, our
simple algorithm dealing with maximization of triads in
constrained Erdős-Rényi network brings the system automatically in the regime where generation of a scale-free
subnetwork with −2 < η < −1 occurs. To summarize,
the main result of this section consists in providing a new
simple rewiring mechanism for the fabrication of scalefree distribution in constrained Erdős-Rényi networks.

IV.

NUMERICAL SIMULATION OF SIR
MODEL

Epidemic models classify individual agents (humans)
based on the stage of disease affecting them. The simplest classification scheme assumes that an individual can
be in one of three states (compartments): (a) susceptible (S) for healthy individuals having not yet contacted

The model has two adjustable parameters (β, γ). These
parameters set transition rates, β, for susceptible nodes
to become infected from infected neighbors, and γ, for
infected nodes to recover.
We have run the SIR model on three archetypes of
graphs: random Erdős-Renyi (ER) network, e-network
and i-network, the respective adjacency matrices are
shown in Fig.2. The results of our simulations are depicted in Fig.4, where we have plotted the density of
infected agents, fi , versus time, t. To be able to compare distributions, we developed networks from different
classes with the identical set of parameters, namely with
the number of nodes N = 750 and the link probability p = 0.08. Solid curves in Fig.4 (black for random
Erdős-Renyi (ER) network, red for e-network and blue for
i-network) represent mean distributions, averaged over
n = 1000 simulations on each networks, while shadowed
regions designate standard deviations. The parameters
β and γ are set to β = 0.05, γ = 0.03. The numerical
results are reproduced for different network realizations.

Figure 4: The fraction of infected nodes in time for random, iand e-networks. Results were obtained for the SIR dynamics
with transmission rates β = 0.05 and recovery rate γ = 0.03
and with n = 1000 simulations on each networks. Shadowed
regions designate the confidence range of respective network
archetype.

Analyzing distributions in Fig.4, let us point out two
important features of the epidemic spreading described

5
by SIR model on different network archetypes. Apart
from the maximal distribution on non-clustered ER network (black curve) which is our reference state, the interesting features demonstrate e-networks and i-networks.
It turns out that clustering actually weakens the epidemic spread, but details are very sensitive to the way
how the clustered network is constructed. The evolutionary grown e-networks demonstrate better suppression of
epidemic spreading than instantly created i-networks for
the same set of parameters. Meanwhile, the peak of the
distribution of infected agents on e-networks is shifted to
later times compared to both random and i-networks.

V.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Here we briefly speculate about a rather provocative
title of our work in the context of selection between two
different protocols of suppressing virus distribution. Currently two main mechanisms of a human population clustering are exploited by different countries in order to
prevent the uncontrolled spreading of COVID-19. Tentatively these mechanisms could be named a ”self-isolation”
(SI) and a ”frontiers closing” (FC). In both cases the
aim of clustering is to localize the illness in closed community and prevent it from the propagation through the
entire human network. Specifically, we are interested in
the question which mechanism blocks better an epidemic
spreading: self-quarantine in local communities induced
by adaptive clustering, or sharp clustering via closing of
borders between cities and countries? In an ideal situation, when all self-isolated communities are absolutely
disconnected from each other, and when the border crossings between cities and countries is totally prohibited,
both protocols are equally efficient and definitely inhibit
disease expansion. However, in reality, it is impossible
to isolate communities completely and some fraction of
cross-community connections always is present. Readers
are invited to make their own judgement whether such a
speculation seems plausible and to which extent.

[1] Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P. and
Vespignani, A. Epidemic processes in complex networks.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 925979 (2015)
[2] Serrano, M. . and Boguná, M. Percolation and epidemic
thresholds in clustered networks. Physical Review Letters
97, 088701 (2006)
[3] Keeling, M. J. (1999), Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 266, 859.
[4] Moore, C., and M. E. J. Newman (2000), Phys. Rev. E
61, 5678.
[5] Gross, T., C. DLima, and B. Blasius (2006), Physical
Review Letters 96 (20), 208701
[6] Avetisov, V., Gorsky, A., Nechaev, S., and Valba,
O. Localization and non-ergodicity in clustered random networks, Journal of Complex Networks, (2019)

We have demonstrated that the network which is evolutionary grown from a randomly generated Erdős-Rényi
graph with fixed vertex degree under condition of maximization of small cliques (triadic motifs) gets clustered
into communities-clusters and the number of such communities depends on the linking probability p in the initial graph (see (2)). We have also verified that similar
adaptive clustering occurs when triadic motifs are replaced by complete 4-cliques. Running SIR model on
e-networks, and in parallel, on i-networks (which mimic
clustered structure of e-networks, however are memoryless), we see from Fig.4 that e-networks prevent better
epidemic spreading than i-networks (the maximum of infected agents is lower for e-networks), while the maximum of infected agents is shifted to later times compared
to i-networks.
Importantly, we have found that the clustered enetwork are scale-free. That explains some previous numerical observation concerning spectral density of such
adaptively grown networks. We have also proposed new
mechanism of derivation of scale-free behavior via peculiar rewiring process. Epidemic spreading on scale-free
network has some specific peculiarities [22]. In particular, the epidemic threshold almost vanishes which means
that scale-free network is bad for epidemic suppression at
the beginning of its distribution. However once started,
it can be operated on scale-free network more effectively
than on other types of networks. The new rewiring mechanism for getting scale-free behavior can be useful for
these purposes.
We are grateful to O. Yartseva for pushing us to think
about the impact of the underlying network structure on
epidemic spread and to M. Tamm for valuable discussions. The work of OV is supported within the framework of the Basic Research Program at the NRU Higher
School of Economics in 2020. SN and AG acknowledge
the supports of foundations BASIS (17-11-122-1 for AG
and 19-1-1-48-1 for SN), and RFBR (18-29-13013). The
work of VA is supported within frameworks of the state
task for the FRC CP RAS # FFZE-2019-0016.

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

CNZ026, https://doi.org/10.1093/comnet/cnz026, ePrint: arXiv:1611.08531
P. Sala, T. Rakovszky, R. Verresen, M. Knap, and F.
Pollmann, arXiv:1904.04266 (2019)
V. Khemani and R. Nandkishore, arXiv:1904.04815
(2019)
F. Pietracaprina and N. Laflorencie, arXiv:1906.05709
(2019)
Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Physics
Reports 486.3-5, 75-174 (2010)
Decelle, A., et al. Asymptotic analysis of the stochastic
block model for modular networks and its algorithmic
applications. Physical Review E 84.6, 066106 (2011)
Gábor Vattay, Predicting the ultimate outcome of the

6
COVID-19 outbreak in Italy, arXiv:2003.07912
[13] S. Maslov and K. Sneppen, Specificity and Stability in
Topology of Protein Networks, Science, 296, 910 (2002)
[14] V. Avetisov, A. Gorsky, S. Maslov, S. Nechaev, and O.
Valba, Social behavior beyond the Schelling model, Phys.
Rev. E 002300 (2018)
[15] Avetisov, V., Hovhannisyan, M., Gorsky, A., Nechaev,
S., Tamm, M., and Valba, O. Eigenvalue tunneling and
decay of quenched random network. Phys. Rev. E 94,
062313 (2016)
[16] F. Viger and M. Latapy, Efficient and simple generation
of random simple connected graphs with prescribed degree sequence, Computing and Combinatorics, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 3595, 440 (2005)
[17] Hamed Seyed-allaei, Ginestra Bianconi, Matteo Marsili,
Scale-free networks with an exponent less than two, Phys.

Rev. E 73, 046113 (2006)
[18] Gbor Timr, Sergey N. Dorogovtsev, Jos Fernando F.
Mendes, Scale-free networks with exponent one, Phys.
Rev. E 94, 022302 (2016)
[19] Hethcote H. The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases.
SIAM Review. 42 (4): 599653 (2000)
[20] Illes J. Farkas, Imre Derenyi, Albert-Laszlo Barabasi,
Tamas Vicsek, Spectra of ”Real-World” Graphs: Beyond
the Semi-Circle Law, Phys. Rev. E 64, 026704:1-12 (2001)
[21] K.-I. Goh, B. Kahng, D. Kim, Spectra and eigenvectors
of scale-free networks, Phys. Rev. E 64, 051903 (2001)
[22] Pastor-Satorras, R. and Vespignani, A. Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3200
(2001).

