Spatio-temporal propagation of COVID-19 pandemics
Bnaya Gross,1, ∗ Zhiguo Zheng,2 Shiyan Liu,2 Xiaoqi Chen,2
Alon Sela,3, 1 Jianxin Li,4, 5 Daqing Li,6, 2 and Shlomo Havlin1
1
Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
School of Reliability and Systems Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Department of Industrial Engineering, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100083, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100083, China
6
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
(Dated: July 13, 2020)

arXiv:2003.08382v3 [physics.soc-ph] 9 Jul 2020

2

The new coronavirus known as COVID-19 is spread world-wide since December 2019. Without any
vaccination or medicine, the means of controlling it are limited to quarantine and social distancing.
Here we study the spatio-temporal propagation of the first wave of the COVID-19 virus in China and
compare it to other global locations. We provide a comprehensive picture of the spatial propagation
from Hubei to other provinces in China in terms of distance, population size, and human mobility
and their scaling relations. Since strict quarantine has been usually applied between cities, more
insight about the temporal evolution of the disease can be obtained by analyzing the epidemic
within cities, especially the time evolution of the infection, death, and recovery rates which affected
by policies. We study and compare the infection rate in different cities in China and provinces in
Italy and find that the disease spread is characterized by a two-stages process. At early times, at
order of few days, the infection rate is close to a constant probably due to the lack of means to
detect infected individuals before infection symptoms are observed. Then at later times it decays
approximately exponentially due to quarantines. The time evolution of the death and recovery rates
also distinguish between these two stages and reflect the health system situation which could be
overloaded.
Keywords: COVID-19,Quarantine efficiency,Spatio-temporal analysis

I.

INTRODUCTION

Since December 2019 the world is fiercely struggling
against an epidemics of a novel Coronavirus named
COVID-19 identified in Wuhan, a city of 11 million people in Hubei Provence, China. A medical cure from the
disease is yet unavailable and the number of infected
cases is increasing. As for April 1 2020, the virus has
already spread to more than 100 countries around the
world with more than 1 million confirmed cases.
In the absence of both medicine and vaccination,
strategies of effective distributing of them are not considered yet and the options to stop the propagation of
the disease are currently to quarantines the infected individuals [1] and social distancing [2] in order to cut the
infection channels. Statistical estimations of the incubating (latency) period of the virus which includes no
illness symptoms vary between different populations and
found to be of about 4-6 days [3] while a long incubation period of 19 days has also been observed [4]. The
14 days quarantine period, which has been adopted by
many countries, is a result of the high limit of the 95%
confidence levels [5] of this incubating period. Under this
quarantine strategy, the virus spreading could be alleviated.
The first wave of COVID-19 in China was controlled

∗ Electronic

address: bnaya.gross@gmail.com

much faster compared to other locations in the world. Although China was the country with most infection cases
up to the middle of March 2020 (Fig. 1a), it was able
to stop the spreading while in other countries the disease kept propagating close to exponentially as can be
seen in Fig. 1b. In fact, in most cities in China the
spreading stopped approximately after 20 days as shown
in Fig. 1c. In contrast, in other locations it got controlled very slowly as shown, e.g., for Italy in Fig. 1d.
This suggests that one can learn from the disease decay in China and apply appropriate measures in other
locations in the world. While a general estimation of
the disease evolution has been recently conducted [6, 7],
a comprehensive analysis of its spatio-temporal propagation which is important for epidemic forecast and
modelling [8–10], is still missing. In this manuscript,
we study some aspects of the spatio-temporal propagation of the first wave of the COVID-19 virus and discuss the differences between China and other countries.
The data source is available at https://github.com/
canghailan/Wuhan-2019-nCoV.
We study the spatial dynamics of the COVID-19 originated from Hubei and find scaling (power) laws for the
number of infected individuals in different provinces as a
function of the province population, the distance from
Hubei and their relation to the population migration
from Hubei. The human mobility [11–13] which has been
suggested to follow a Lévy-flight pattern [14–16] is significantly important for modelling the spatial propagation
of the disease. A reasonable explanation for the corre-

2

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 1: General view of the COVID-19 propagation as
for April 1, 2020. (a) The number of confirmed infected
cases I(t) in mainland China and other locations around the
globe on a semi-log scale. Less than two months since COVID19 inception, the number of infected individuals in China almost reaches saturation while the number in other locations
have been rapidly increasing. (b) The slope (derivative) of
log(I(t)). The COVID-19 propagation decays rapidly in most
cities in China and the disease is almost stabilized with the
derivative approaches zero. In contrast, cities in other locations around the globe have been still in their early stage and
the disease was still spreading as can be seen by the almost
constant or even increase of the derivative. (c) The number of confirmed infected cases I(t) in different locations in
China and Italy since the first infection. While in most cities
in China the disease stabilized after a short time of approximately 20 days on average, the disease in Italy has been still
spreading and approached stability much later, see (d). The
slope (derivative) of log(I(t)) in different locations in China
and Italy since the first infection.

undetectable due to the incubating period while spreading within the city. Another possibility is that it takes a
few days for the city to become prepared for the disease.
At later times, the infected individuals have been quarantined and the disease started to decay approximately
exponentially in many cities. The quarantines have been
effective to extinct the disease inside a city and reach a
stable state with infection rates close to zero. Since quarantines were applied almost at the same time in most
cities in China, we find that the decay stage of the disease starts almost at the same time for most of the cities
no matter if they are large central cities, small cities or
even Hubei province cities. For this reason most of the
cities experience a similar 10-30 days characteristic time
of the disease drastic reduction. In addition, most cities
in China show similar exponential growth of the recovery
rate which can reflect the similarity of health system efficiency. This in marked contrast to Italy which did not
show an exponential growth probably due to overloaded
health system by the many unexpected patients or because of a less obedient population to the health systems
regulations.

II.

SPATIAL SCALING

One of the most important properties of epidemics
spreading is its spatial propagation, a characteristic
which mainly depends on the epidemic mechanism, human mobility and control strategy. While the relation of
human mobility to the epidemic spread has been shown
[21, 22], a comprehensive picture of the epidemic spread
in terms of distance, population size and human mobility and their scaling relations is still missing. We assume that the number of infected individuals in different
provinces in China can be generally described as
I = f (r, m)

lation between the population migration and the disease
spread can be the strict quarantines applied in most cities
in China after the shutdown of Wuhan traffic [17–19].
These quarantines were effective and probably prevented
infected individuals to further spread the disease to other
cities. Hence, the number of infected individuals is highly
correlated to the population migration from Hubei before
the shutdown, Fig. 2.
As a result of the heterogeneous structure of cities in a
country [20], quarantine has been usually applied strictly
between cities and the mobility within cities was less restricted. Thus, more insight can be obtained in analyzing the epidemic within cities while studying the disease
decay on a country scale might lead to uncertain conclusion regarding the disease situation since the disease may
propagate in one city and decay in another. Our results
suggest that the temporal propagation of the disease in
most cities in China is similar. In fact, many cities in
China experienced a two-stages process of the disease.
At early times (of order of few days), the disease was

(1)

where r is the distance of the province from Wuhan and
m is the population of the province. Since r and m are
independent of each others, one can assume and study
the scaling relation of each of them independently,
I ∼ rα

(2)

I ∼ mβ .

(3)

and

Since r and m are independent, Eq. 1 can assume the
scaling form (in analogous with population mobility [23]),
I ∼ rν /mµ

(4)

from which the relation ν/α−µ/β = 1 should be satisfied.
Using weighted least squares regression for the scaling we
find in Fig. 2a that α ' −1.87±0.23 in agreement with a
recent study [24] and β ' 1.18±0.20 as shown in Fig. 2b.

3

α =−1.87 ± 0.23

(a)

(d)

ϕ =0.96 ± 0.25

γ =−0.84 ± 0.09

β=1.18 ± 0.20

(b)

~
α =−1.37 ± 0.11

(c)

~
β =1.11 ± 0.09

(e)

(f)

~
γ =−0.74 ± 0.13

(g)

FIG. 2: Spatial propagation analysis of the COVID-19 in China. (a) The number of infected individuals I (as of March
1, 2020) as a function of the distance from Hubei. The scaling follows Eq. (2) with α = −1.87 ± 0.23. (b) The number of
infected individuals I as a function of the city population, m. The scaling follows Eq. (3) with β = 1.18 ± 0.20. (c) The scaling
of I with the distance-population ratio r/m follows Eq. (5) with γ = −0.84 ± 0.09. The exponents within the errorbars follow
Eq. (6). (d) The scaling of infected individuals with the population migration from Hubei. Almost linear scaling is observed
with φ = 0.96 ± 0.25 strongly relating the disease propagation to human mobility. The scaling of population migration with
the (e) distance, (f ) population and (g) distance-population ratio follow Eq. (8) with α̃ = −1.37 ± 0.11, β̃ = 1.11 ± 0.09 and
γ̃ = −0.74 ± 0.13 respectively. The large value of α compared to α̃ possibly indicate the quarantines efficiency.

The minimization of the error of the exponents relation
yields that ν = µ ' −0.84 ± 0.09. Thus, Eq. 4 takes the
form
I ∼ (r/m)γ

(5)

with γ = ν = µ ' −0.84±0.09 as shown in Fig. 2c. Thus,
r/m can be regarded as a suitable distance-population
parameter. The relation between these 3 exponents thus,
1/α − 1/β = 1/γ.

(6)

In order to better understand the basic mechanism of
the disease propagation, we examine the relation of the
number of infected individuals in different provinces in
China with the population migration, Pm , from Hubei.
Our results shown in Fig. 2d suggest an almost linear
scaling relation
φ
I ∼ Pm

the relation between the disease propagation and human
mobility and indicates that earlier quarantine of Hubei
could attenuate the world-wide spreading.

(7)

with φ = 0.96 ± 0.25. This relation can be understood
since strict quarantines were applied in most cities in
China after the shutdown of Wuhan traffic. The quarantines were efficient to prevent infected individuals to
spread the disease to other cities leading to a close to linear relation between the number of infected individuals
and the population migration from Hubei. This supports

To further study the relation between population migration and the disease propagation we measured the
population migration number, Pm , as a function of the
distance, population and the distance-population parameter. We assume the following scaling relations [23],
Pm ∼ rα̃
Pm ∼ mβ̃
Pm ∼ (r/m)γ̃

(8)

with α̃ = −1.37 ± 0.11, β̃ = 1.11 ± 0.09 and γ̃ =
−0.74 ± 0.13 as shown in Figs. 2e,f,g respectively. These
exponents for the population migration represent the
analogy of the exponents α, β and γ of the number of
infected individuals and follow a similar relation as Eq. 6
within the errorbars. Interestingly, α̃ is lower than α and
it can possibly be understood by quarantines efficiency
which reduces the spatial spread of infected individuals
compared to the population migration. A summary of
the exponents of 2-8 can be found in Table I.

4

(a)

(b)
(c)

FIG. 3: Two-stages infection rate. The infection rate Pinf ection (t) for different types of cities: (a) cities in Hubei province,
(b) small cities in China and (c) large central cities in China and provinces in Italy. At early times an approximate constant
infection rate, P0 ∼ 0.74 ± 0.55 is usually observed (below the black horizontal dashed line). After a few days, an exponential
decay is observed in China representing the efficiency of the quarantines. The colored dashed lines are the best fit for the
exponential decay, Eq. 10. The characteristic decay time τ in Eq. 10 represents the time it takes to control the disease in a
city. Interestingly, while the infection rate in cities (provinces) in both China and Italy is decaying, the characteristic decay
parameter τ in Italy is several times longer than China due to different quarantine efficiency.

α
α̃
β
β̃
γ
γ̃
φ
P0
τ
k

Spatial
-1.87 ± 0.23
-1.37 ± 0.11
1.18 ± 0.20
1.11 ± 0.09
-0.84 ± 0.09
-0.74 ± 0.13
0.96 ± 0.25
Temporal
0.74 ± 0.55
19.4 ± 8.3
0.027 ± 0.006

TABLE I: Spatio-temporal scaling exponents. Spatial
- α is the exponent of the spatial distribution of infected individuals, Eq. 2. β is the scaling exponent of the population, m,
Eq. 3, and γ is the scaling exponent for the scaling function
of the distance-population ratio r/m, Eq. 5. The exponent
φ relates the number of infected individuals to the measured
number of population migration with almost linear scaling,
Eq. 7. α̃, β̃ and γ̃ are the exponents characterizing the scaling
of the population migration with r, m and r/m respectively,
Eq. 8. Temporal - P0 is the approximately constant infection rate at early times while the disease is spreading. τ is
the characteristic time of the disease decay at later times, assuming exponential decay, Eq. 10. k is the growth parameter
of the recovery rate, Eq. 13.

III.

TEMPORAL BEHAVIOUR

The absence of vaccination makes the control of the
disease very difficult and the main action possible is to
quarantine infected individuals and those that were in
contact with them in order to prevent further spreading.
This approach is effective but limited since an infected

individual can spread the disease before showing illness
symptoms. Nonetheless, an efficient quarantine strategy
can succeed in controlling the disease and a method to
quantify its efficiency is needed. In addition, while a recent study showed that quarantine was efficient resulting
in a subexponential growth of the confirmed cases in different cities in China [6], it did not show how it affects
the infection rate which is important for modeling. Moreover, a temporal analysis of the death and recovery rates
is required as they may be affected by the health system
efficiency which might be overloaded. Here we will analyze the temporal evolution of the infection, death, and
recovery rates under the quarantine restrictions in different cities in China and compare it to different provinces
in Italy.
Since quarantines have been usually applied within and
between cities, studying the disease decay on a country
scale might lead to uncertain conclusion regarding the
disease situation since the disease may propagate in one
city and decay in another. Thus, to further study the
effect of quarantines, we measured the infection rate in
different cities in China and different provinces in Italy.
The infection rate, Pinf ection (t), is measured for each city
(province) using the total number of infected individuals
in the city in a given day, I(t), from the first day that
infected individuals have been detected in the city. The
infection rate at a given day is defined as the fraction of
newly infected individuals emerging from the total number of infected individuals a day earlier
Pinf ection (t) =

I(t) − I(t − 1)
.
I(t − 1)

(9)

We examined three different types of cities in China. a)
cities in Hubei province, b) small cities and c) large central cities as shown in Fig. 3a,b,c respectively. In all

5
three cases, an approximately constant infection rate is
observed in early times. However, after a few days, a decay in the infection rate is observed. Determining if the
decay is exponential or power-law can not be certain due
to the few data points in the samples. Assuming exponential decay [25] gives a plausible consistent picture. In
this case, Eq. 9 takes the form
(
P0
t0 < t < t x
Pinf ection (t) =
(10)
−(t−tx )/τ
P0 e
tx < t,
where P0 is the constant infection rate without constrains, t0 represents the time that the first infected individual was detected in the city, tx is the time when the
quarantine starts and τ is the characteristic time for the
disease drastic reduction. The approximately constant
infection rate in early times represents the real infection
rate of the disease before quarantines were applied to
control the disease while the exponential decay in later
times represents the efficiency of quarantines in reducing
the infected rate. Small value of the parameter τ indicate more efficient restrictions. The constant value tx is
very similar in different cities in China due to the similar emergency response of other provinces with respect
to the epidemic outbreak. The exponential decay with
low values of τ indicates that quarantines are efficient
to tame the disease in most cities in China and indeed,
in the last days of February, the infection rate has been
almost zero with rarely new cases as seen in Fig. 3. In
marked contrast, the decay in Italy has been slower with
much larger values of τ indicating less efficient quarantine strategy as seen in Fig. 3c. While the infection rate
might be biased by different number of tests and reporting policies [26], an efficient quarantine should still result
with a decay of the infection rate.
While the infection rate characterize the quarantine
efficiency, the death and recovery rates can characterize
the health system efficiency which may be overloaded by
the unexpected amount of patients. The death and recovery rates are defined as the fraction of the newly dead
and recovered individuals at each day and the number of
infected individual a days earlier
Pdeath (t) =

D(t) − D(t − 1)
I(t − 1)

R(t) − R(t − 1)
I(t − 1)

(b)

FIG. 4: Death and recovery rates. (a) The death rate
in Wuhan shows an approximate exponential decay similar to
the infection rate (other cities show poor statistics). The characteristic decay time τ is about twice time longer for the death
rate than the infection rate. Provinces in Italy with most cases
show much slower decay suggesting an overloaded health system. (b) The recovery rate in China shows an approximate
exponential growth as the disease is getting controlled, Eq.
13. The growth parameter k characterizes the health system
efficiency. Provinces in Italy with most recovery cases do not
show growth and remain approximately constant suggesting
an overloaded health system as suggested by the death rate.

(11)
The recovery rate in China increases exponentially as
the disease gets controlled with less new cases and can
be well approximated as

and
Precovery (t) =

(a)

(12)

where D(t) is the number of dead people at time t and
R(t) is the number of recovered at time t. The death
rate in Wuhan shows an approximate exponential decay
similar to the infection rate with characteristic time close
to twice longer. In marked contrast, the provinces with
most cases in Italy show much slower decay, as seen in
Fig. 4a, which indicates an overloaded health system.

Precovery (t) ∼ ekt ,

(13)

where k is the growth parameter which might indicate
the health system efficiency. In Italy the recovery rate
is approximately constant, as shown in Fig. 4b, which
suggests, similarly to the death rate, an overloaded health
system as shown in Fig. 4a.
The temporal parameters characterizing the infection,
death and recovery rates are found to be similar for most

6
cities in China with P0 in the range 0.5-2 with an average of 0.74 and a standard deviation of 0.55 as shown in
Fig. 5a. The value of τ for most of the cities is 10-30 days
while for a few cities the characteristic time can be longer
as seen in Fig. 5b. The value of τ may characterizes the
efficiency of quarantines. The average value of τ is 19.4
with standard deviation 8.3. The values of k are in range
0.015 - 0.045 and may characterize the health system efficiency. The average value of k is 0.027 with standard
deviation 0.006. Summary of the temporal parameters
can be found in Table I. The similar values of the temporal parameters in most cities in China is consistent with
the strict quarantine applied in them simultaneously.

IV.

(a)

(b)

DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY

While many countries have been struggling to overcome the first wave of the COVID-19, China controlled
it relatively fast. Controlling the disease is not easy, the
spread of the disease is highly related to population migration which assumed to follows a Lévy flight behavior, a characteristic of human mobility with long jumps
which spread the disease rapidly. The incubating period
together with the Lévy flight long jumps makes the disease very hard to control since by the time that infected
individual is being detectable, it can already perform a
long-distance trip and further spread the disease. This
spatial dynamics is very important and should be taken
into account in epidemic modeling. Despite these difficulties, an efficient quarantine strategy could control the
disease leading to an exponential decay of the infection
rate. This decay is characterized by the characteristic
decay time τ and allows a quantitative comparison between quarantine strategies performed in different places.
In fact, the lifetime of the disease in a city is characterized by two stages, uncontrolled infection in early times
(for few days) and decaying stage at later times once
quarantines start to effect. These two stages can explain
the temporal dynamics of the disease situation in China
in the first wave and explain the situation in other locations in the world where similar strategies have been
only partly adopted. Moreover, this two-stage process is
very important for modeling since one should take into
account how the infection rate changes in time due to
quarantine strategies.
In addition, while the temporal dynamics of the infection rate is related to the quarantine efficiency, the
temporal dynamics of the death and recovery rates is
more related to the health system efficiency which may
be overloaded or inefficient. Even though different countries are characterized by different age population distribution which suffers from different mortality rates [27], a
sharp rise of the death rate (or very slow decay) may indicate an overloaded health system. The same conclusion
applies for the case of a decay of the recovery rate.
Our work highlights the importance of efficient quarantine strategies and the strong relation between popu-

(c)

FIG. 5: Statistical properties of the temporal behaviour of cities in China (a) The constant infection rate,
P0 is mostly in the range 0-2 while in a few cities it is much
larger. The average value is 0.74 with standard deviation
0.55. (b) The distribution of the exponent τ characterizing
the extinction of the disease which found to be in the range
10-50 days. The average value is 19.4 with standard deviation
8.3. (c) The distribution of k characterizing the recovery rate
and reflects the health system efficiency is found to be in the
range between 0.015-0.045. The average value is 0.027 with
standard deviation 0.006. The parameters are very similar
in most cities in China consistent with the strict quarantine
applied in them simultaneously.

lation migration and the disease spreading. Moreover,
our results suggest that early action may attenuate the
disease propagation and prevent overload of the health
system which have not been ready for the large amount
of unexpected new patients.

7
Acknowledgments

We thank Ivan Bonamassa for very useful discussions
related to this project. We thank the Israel Science Foundation (Grant no. 189/19) and the joint China-Israel

[1] Qun Li, Xuhua Guan, Peng Wu, Xiaoye Wang, Lei Zhou,
Yeqing Tong, Ruiqi Ren, Kathy SM Leung, Eric HY Lau,
Jessica Y Wong, et al. Early transmission dynamics in
wuhan, china, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia.
New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[2] Chenlin GU, Wei Jiang, Tianyuan Zhao, and Ban Zheng.
Mathematical recommendations to fight against covid19. Available at SSRN 3551006, 2020.
[3] Char Leung. Estimating the distribution of the incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) infection between travelers to hubei, china and non-travelers.
medRxiv, 2020.
[4] Yan Bai, Lingsheng Yao, Tao Wei, Fei Tian, Dong-Yan
Jin, Lijuan Chen, and Meiyun Wang. Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19. Jama, 2020.
[5] Natalie M Linton, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov, Sung-mok
Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura.
Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with right truncation: A statistical analysis of publicly available case
data. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(2):538, 2020.
[6] Benjamin F Maier and Dirk Brockmann. Effective containment explains subexponential growth in recent confirmed covid-19 cases in china. Science, 368(6492):742–
746, 2020.
[7] Yi Li, Xianhong Yin, Meng Liang, Xiaoyu Liu, Meng
Hao, and Yi Wang. A note on ncp diagnosis number
prediction model. medRxiv, 2020.
[8] Fotios Petropoulos and Spyros Makridakis. Forecasting
the novel coronavirus covid-19. PloS one, 15(3):e0231236,
2020.
[9] Alessandro Vespignani, Huaiyu Tian, Christopher Dye,
James O Lloyd-Smith, Rosalind M Eggo, Munik
Shrestha, Samuel V Scarpino, Bernardo Gutierrez,
Moritz UG Kraemer, Joseph Wu, et al. Modelling covid19. Nature Reviews Physics, pages 1–3, 2020.
[10] Cleo Anastassopoulou, Lucia Russo, Athanasios Tsakris,
and Constantinos Siettos. Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of the covid-19 outbreak. PloS one,
15(3):e0230405, 2020.
[11] Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo
Barabasi. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. nature, 453(7196):779–782, 2008.
[12] Chaoming Song, Tal Koren, Pu Wang, and Albert-László
Barabási. Modelling the scaling properties of human mobility. Nature Physics, 6(10):818–823, 2010.
[13] Marino Gatto, Enrico Bertuzzo, Lorenzo Mari, Stefano
Miccoli, Luca Carraro, Renato Casagrandi, and Andrea
Rinaldo. Spread and dynamics of the covid-19 epidemic in italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
117(19):10484–10491, 2020.
[14] Dirk Brockmann, Lars Hufnagel, and Theo Geisel. The

Science Foundation (Grant no. 3132/19), ONR, the BIU
Center for Research in Applied Cryptography and Cyber
Security, and DTRA Grant no. HDTRA-1-19-1-0016 for
financial support.

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

scaling laws of human travel. Nature, 439(7075):462–465,
2006.
Andrea Baronchelli and Filippo Radicchi. Lévy flights
in human behavior and cognition. Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, 56:101–105, 2013.
V Zaburdaev, S Denisov, and J Klafter. Lévy walks.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 87(2):483, 2015.
Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado
Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore
y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, et al.
The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019
novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science, 2020.
Simiao Chen, Juntao Yang, Weizhong Yang, Chen Wang,
and Till Bärnighausen. Covid-19 control in china during
mass population movements at new year. The Lancet,
2020.
Shengjie Lai, Nick W Ruktanonchai, Liangcai Zhou,
Olivia Prosper, Wei Luo, Jessica R Floyd, Amy
Wesolowski, Mauricio Santillana, Chi Zhang, Xiangjun
Du, et al. Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions to
contain covid-19 in china. 2020.
Bnaya Gross, Dana Vaknin, Sergey Buldyrev, and
Shlomo Havlin. Two transitions in spatial modular networks. New Journal of Physics, 2020.
Moritz UG Kraemer, Chia-Hung Yang, Bernardo Gutierrez, Chieh-Hsi Wu, Brennan Klein, David M Pigott,
Louis Du Plessis, Nuno R Faria, Ruoran Li, William P
Hanage, et al. The effect of human mobility and control
measures on the covid-19 epidemic in china. Science,
368(6490):493–497, 2020.
Huaiyu Tian, Yonghong Liu, Yidan Li, Chieh-Hsi Wu,
Bin Chen, Moritz UG Kraemer, Bingying Li, Jun Cai,
Bo Xu, Qiqi Yang, et al. An investigation of transmission
control measures during the first 50 days of the covid-19
epidemic in china. Science, 368(6491):638–642, 2020.
Filippo Simini, Marta C González, Amos Maritan, and
Albert-László Barabási. A universal model for mobility
and migration patterns. Nature, 484(7392):96–100, 2012.
Kathakali Biswas and Parongama Sen. Space-time dependence of corona virus (covid-19) outbreak. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.03149, 2020.
Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani.
Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Physical Review Letters, 86(14):3200, 2001.
Facundo Piguillem and Liyan Shi. Optimal covid-19
quarantine and testing policies. 2020.
Jennifer Beam Dowd, Liliana Andriano, David M Brazel,
Valentina Rotondi, Per Block, Xuejie Ding, Yan Liu,
and Melinda C Mills. Demographic science aids in
understanding the spread and fatality rates of covid19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
117(18):9696–9698, 2020.

