Laser Spectroscopic Technique for Direct Identification of a Single Virus I:
FASTER CARS
V. Deckert1,2,3, *, T. Deckert-Gaudig1, D. Cialla2,3, J. Popp2,3, R. Zell4, A. V. Sokolov1, Z. Yi1
and M. O. Scully1,5,6, *
1

Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering (IQSE), Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, USA
2

Institute of Photonic Technology (IPHT) Albert-Einstein-Str. 9, 07745 Jena, Germany

3

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Institute of Physical Chemistry and Abbe Center of
Photonics, Helmholtzweg 4, 07743 Jena, Germany
4

University Hospital Jena, Department of Virology and Antiviral Therapy, Hans-Knöll-Str.
2, 07745 Jena, Germany
5

Baylor University, Waco, TX 76706, USA

6

Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

*Corresponding authors: Volker.deckert@uni-jena.de (V. D.), scully@tamu.edu (M.O.S.)
Abstract: From the famous 1918 H1N1 influenza to the present COVID-19 pandemic, the
need for improved virial detection techniques is all too apparent. The aim of the present
paper is to show that identification of individual virus particles in clinical sample materials
quickly and reliably is near at hand. First of all, our team has developed techniques for
identification of virions based on a modular atomic force microscopy (AFM). Furthermore,
Femtosecond Adaptive Spectroscopic Techniques with Enhanced Resolution via Coherent
Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (FASTER CARS) [1] using tip-enhanced techniques markedly
improves the sensitivity.

1

I. Introduction

Scanning probe microscopy, especially in combination with plasmon-enhanced near-field
spectroscopy, is used to specifically analyze and study objects below Abbe’s diffraction limit. The
scientific goal is, in addition to virus diagnostics, to identify structural changes of the virus surface
at an early stage, using so-called tip enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) together with coherent
anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS), see Fig. 1. This combined technique will improve the
sensitivity and consequently speed up acquisition times considerably. In contrast to known
methods, this is unique. Due to its surface specificity our technique allows early detection of
change that alter the antigenic properties of viruses and thus the effectiveness of vaccines, with
the smallest sample quantities. Furthermore, identification without specific antibodies is possible.
This goes far beyond the current state of the art.

In the following section II, we demonstrate how the Tip-Enhanced Raman technique can be used
to characterize and differentiate between influenza and picornavirus. In section III we explain the
instrumentation and show how it provides exciting new tools for viral research and detection
systems, e.g. FASTER CARS: Femtosecond Adaptive Spectroscopic Techniques with Enhanced
Resolution via Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering. Section IV presents a conclusion and
outlook.

2

Figure 1: a) Schematics of the transmission TERS setup used in the experiments with the virus
mixture spread on a slide and the laser illuminating the sample from below. b) Model of H1N1
virus with protein spikes (blue) protruding from the lipid bilayer (green). c) Model of a CVB3 virus
with the protein lattice (blue) on the surface and RNA strands (red) inside the virus. d) Selected
TERS spectra recorded on H1N1 virus. e) Selected TERS spectra recorded on CVB2 virus. In d) and

3

e), protein marker bands (blue) and RNA marker bands (red) are highlighted. See the text in
section II for further explanation.

II. Nano-spectroscopic system for differentiating between influenza and picornavirus

A virus is an infectious agent that is spread by nano-sized particles, or virions. As the infection
propagates, the virus attacks a cell of a living organism by injecting it with genetic material and
inducing the cell to make multiple replicas of the virion. The building blocks of a virion (also called
a virus, or a virus particle) are either DNA or RNA molecules surrounded by a protective coat of
proteins, the so called (nucleo-)capsid. Moreover, there can be a lipid bilayer serving as envelope.
Some viruses are pathogenic and can cause severe diseases, which makes accurate diagnostics
essential. The goal is to characterize the specific virus based on single virial particles. One
common technique is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which has simplified and accelerated
the detection of pathogens over culturing techniques [2-4]. In PCR, the nucleic acid—either DNA
or RNA—has to be extracted from the specimen first. Next, characteristic viral sequences are
amplified employing varying primer sets followed by further molecular analysis [2,3]. In general,
multiple DNA target molecules are necessary for sufficient amplification. The examination of a
single virus particle is still challenging. Although PCR technologies are quite powerful, several
drawbacks limit the application in microbiological diagnostics. On the one hand, high sensitivity
of DNA/RNA amplification makes this process susceptible to contamination that might yield falsepositive results. On the other hand, false-negative results, e.g. due to failed amplification, have to
be considered, too [4]. The nature of the PCR process is prone to several disturbing factors that
4

may hamper exponential DNA amplification. The implementation of the quantitative Real-Time
PCR (qRT-PCR) in recent years, where fluorescent molecules are added, enables exact
quantitation of template DNA [3,5,6].

Another approach to identifying viruses is the immunoassay-based detection of viral proteins,
which is in some cases less sensitive. Thus, the existing molecular analysis tools do not permit a
combination of multiplexing and quantitation and in every case the viral components have to be
extracted. Working on a single viral particle via the PCR technique is not possible.

Ideally, a new technique would combine the ability of qualitative and quantitative analysis at the
single virus particle level, rendering the need for separation of the different components
unnecessary. A promising technique for that endeavor is tip-enhanced Raman and potentially
other nonlinear optical spectroscopies like FASTER CARS. TERS has been demonstrated to operate
in a very specific and sensitive mode down to the single molecule level, with nanometer resolution
and below [7-10]. In TERS, scanning probe techniques (atomic force microscopy / AFM or
scanning tunneling microscopy / STM) are paired with Raman spectroscopy. The former
component enables morphological imaging with sub-nanometer lateral resolution, the latter
provides detailed spectral information on every specifically selected position on the sample
surface.

The heart piece in TERS is the probe, which generally is a commercial AFM tip (for AFM-based
setups) that is commonly evaporated with silver and exactly positioned in the laser focus. Upon

5

laser irradiation of the metallized tip a so-called evanescent field is generated. Molecules located
in some nanometer proximity to the tip experience a Raman signal enhancement (up to 107) of
their vibrational modes according to the surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy theory (see for
instance refs. [11-15]).

Once the tip is positioned in the laser spot, the sample is moved under the tip and the region of
interest is selected. After setting a grid of profile lines on the sample, the AFM is coupled to the
Raman spectrometer and enhanced Raman spectra are recorded. Such a setup does not need
special sample pretreatments or tagging and allows a direct chemical characterization. The same
setup also provides topographic imaging of the sample surface in a single experiment. The spatial
resolution in TERS is limited by the diameter of the silver particle at the tip, and lately has been
pushed down to around 0.5 – 1 nm for bio-samples [9, 16, 17]. A not-to-scale setup is sketched in
Fig. 1a). For specific instrumental details the reader is referred to ref. [18]. Depending on the
number of acquired data, subsequent multivariate data analysis might be useful for data
assessment. In the context of a general tip-enhanced approach of a virus identification, it is
important to point out that not only all major components to be expected in viruses (namely DNA
/ RNA [19-21], proteins, lipids and even sugars) have been already detected by TERS. Also,
different studies on viruses [22-24] already proved the feasibility of the concept. In contrast to
PCR-related techniques, in TERS a separation of the different components or labeling is not
required, and ultimately only a single virion is sufficient for an identification.

6

So far, reported TERS experiments on single virus particles were performed on more or less
randomly chosen points, which is apparently not sufficient for a thorough characterization [2224]. It was shown that grid-based TERS mapping of Varicella-zoster and Porcine teschovirus
allowed a linear discriminant supported distinction of the two viruses. Clearly, the identification
and discrimination of different virus strains demand a comprehensive characterization in terms
of spectral surface imaging which is in line with the above mentioned extreme lateral resolution.

For the present experiments an enveloped influenza A virus H1N1 and a non-enveloped coxsackie
virus B3 (CVB3) were chosen. The swine H1N1 influenza virus particle is composed of a 2-6 nm
lipid bilayer decorated with viral proteins and eight ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. The RNPs
consist of RNA strands, which interact with numerous nucleoprotein molecules and some viral
polymerase complexes. The consistency of the lipid envelope depends on the type of cell
membrane of host cell the virus originates. The inner surface is covered completely with viral
matrix protein. From the lipid layer flexible protein spikes with a protrusion height of 10-14 nm
stick out [25]. In Fig. 1b) the structure of an influenza virus is sketched. From AFM measurements
it is known that H1N1 shows pleomorphism that means size (150 – 400 nm) and shape (spherical
or rod-like) vary [25, 26]. The dimension of the CVB3 virus (Fig. 1c)) is ten times smaller (20-30
nm), with an icosahedral structure (determined by crystallography), where the RNA is packed in
a protein coat (capsid) [27]. Clearly, the different surface components of the viruses yield TERS
spectra with information on proteins and lipids for H1N1 (Fig. 1d)) and protein and RNA for CVB3
(Fig. 1e)). Again, it is obvious that spectral variability on the virus surface occurs and a larger virus
7

surface area must be considered. Nevertheless, a discrimination of both viruses solely based on
the TERS spectra is quite straightforward. The experiment with the full statistical evaluation
(multiple maps, different particles, different tips) will be published elsewhere. Here we want to
emphasize that the method is potentially able to identify any single virus based on the surface
composition. The main challenge is the time required for an assessment, particularly the spectral
acquisition time. Interestingly, the necessary AFM topography which is always detected to locate
a sample can also provide substantial information for a virus pre-screening, thus considerably
limiting the potential candidates for TERS investigations. Another possibility to increase the
sensitivity will be introduced in the following section where we combined tip/surface enhanced
Raman techniques with FAST CARS.

III. Instrumentation and new techniques

To our best knowledge, tip-enhanced CARS has been demonstrated in early 2000s [28]. Following
our success in detecting anthrax using FAST CARS [29], we have developed new vibrational
spectroscopic techniques for nanoscale real-time molecular sensing having large signal
enhancement, small background, short detection time and high spectral resolution [30]. On other
hand, other groups have pushed the surface-enhanced CARS to single molecule sensitivity [31,
32]. Our time-resolved Tip Enhanced Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy (TECARS) is an
exciting new tool for virus research. Our early “proof of principle” research was used to detect
hydrogen-bonded molecular complexes of pyridine with water in the near field of gold

8

nanoparticles with large signal enhancement. This yields an improved FAST CARS [1] approach
which is aptly called FASTER CARS.

Combining this technique with modern quantum molecular calculation is natural for studying
complex biological systems. Fig. 2 shows a simplified experimental arrangement used in ref. [30].
Fig. 3 shows typical data.

Figure 2: Simplified experimental setup of time-resolved surface-enhanced CARS spectroscopy.
Three laser beams collinearly excite nanomolar amounts of pyridine in the near-field of gold
nanoparticles. The pump (green) and Stokes (orange) broadband femtosecond laser pulses excite
a molecular vibrational coherence which is probed by a time-delayed shaped narrowband
picosecond probe pulse (red). The probe pulse is Sinc-shaped by a pulse shaper slit. The CARS
signal is generated in the forward direction (blue) and collected by a spectrometer with a 0.1 s
integration time.

9

Figure 3: Normalized spectra for 1 ps delay and temporal traces of pyridine with (red) and without
(blue, green) gold nanoparticles (NPs). Signals with NPs were obtained from 12 µm thick layers of
pyridine on the surface of NPs. Bulk signals without NPs showed no detectable spectral features
for 12 µm thick samples (green, (a)). Therefore, bulk signals without NPs were obtained under
similar excitation conditions from 2 mm thick layers (blue). The ring breathing mode of the
pyridine-water complex is not resolved in the spectra (a), but can be extracted from the temporal
trace (c) where the vibrational dephasing is deconvoluted from the probe pulse shape. No
detectable signals were observed without NPs under identical conditions (green) and, therefore,
the amount of bulk pyridine was increased (blue). Additional details can be found in ref. [30].

The review article of Lis and Ceccht characterizes this technique nicely; they say [33]:

“Investigations demonstrated that the electronic background that derives from
the water and the metal could also be reduced on such kind of solid substrates.

10

Voronine et al. used time-resolved surface-enhanced CARS, which combines
delayed laser pulses of different widths, to obtain a high spectral resolution with
the suppression of the non-resonant back ground.”

They go on to say that this technique yields “astonishing sensitivity”. Indeed, this improvement
over our earlier FAST CARS anthrax detection scheme holds real promise for detection and
identification of single virus particles such as SARS-COV-2 virus which causes COVID-19.

IV Conclusion and outlook

We have shown that on one hand, the Tip-Enhanced Raman technique can be used to characterize
and differentiate between influenza and picornavirus. On the other hand, surface enhanced CARS
result in “astonishing” enhancement in the sensitivity [33]. The new FASTER CARS system, which
combines nanometer spatial resolution and enhanced sensitivity, forged by both the tip and
coherent Raman enhancement, provides exciting new tools for viral research and detection, e.g.,
the SARS-COV-2 virus.

Acknowledgements:

We would like to express our deep appreciation to TAMUS chancellor John Sharp without whom
this project would not have happened. We thank the: Office of Naval Research (Award No.
N00014-16-1-3054), Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Award No. FA9550-18-1-0141),
National Science Foundation (Awards No. 1828416, 1609608), Chancellor’s Research
Initiative/Governor’s University Research Initiative (CRI/GURI), the Robert A. Welch Foundation
11

(Grant No. A-1261), King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation, Grant No. DFG-CRC1375NOA) for
support of the work. We also like to thank Drs. G. Agarwal, B. Brick, K. Chamakura, J. Mogford, J.
Sharp, R. Young, and A. Zheltikov for stimulating and helpful discussions.

References:
[1] The present paper builds on and extends our earlier femtosecond Raman work in which the
focus was on detection of anthrax. See M. O. Scully, A. Sokolov, M. Zubairy, et al., "FAST
CARS: Engineering a laser spectroscopic technique for rapid identification of bacterial
spores," PNAS 99 (17), 10994-11001 (2002).
[2] Y.-W. Tang, G. W. Procop, and D. H. Persing, "Molecular diagnostics of infectious diseases,"
Clinical Chemistry 43, 2021-2038 (1997).
[3] J. S. Ellis and M. C. Zambon, "Molecular diagnosis of influenza," Rev. Med. Virol. 12, 375-389
(2002).
[4] M. Vaneechoutte and J. Van Eldere, "The possibilities and limitations of nucleic acid
amplification technology in diagnostic microbiology," J. Med. Microbiol. 46, 188-194 (1997).
[5] M. A. A. Valones, R. L. Guimaraes, L. A. C. Brandao, P. R. E. de Souza, A. A. T. Carvalho, and S.
Crovela, "Principles and applications of polymerase chain reaction in medical diagnostic
fields: a review," Braz. J. Microbiol. 40, 1-11 (2009).
[6] I. M. Mackay, K. E. Arden, and A. Nitsche, "Reat-Time PCR in virology," Nucl. Acid. Research
30, 1292-1305 (2002).
12

[7] R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. C. Dong, S. Jiang, C. Zhang, L. G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liao, J. Aizpurua, Y.
Luo, J. L. Yang, and J. G. Hou, "Chemical mapping of a single molecule by plasmon-enhanced
Raman scattering," Nature 498 (7452), 82-86 (2013).
[8] Tanja Deckert-Gaudig, Evelyn Kämmer, and Volker Deckert, "Tracking of nanoscale
structural variations on a single amyloid fibril with tip-enhanced Raman scattering.," Journal
of Biophotonics 5 (3), 215-219 (2012).
[9] Tanja Deckert-Gaudig, Dmitry Kurouski, Martin A. B. Hedegaard, Pushkar Singh, Igor K.
Lednev, and Volker Deckert, "Spatially resolved spectroscopic differentiation of hydrophilic
and hydrophobic domains on individual insulin amyloid fibrils," Scientific Reports 6, 33575
(2016).
[10]Joonhee Lee, Kevin T. Crampton, Nicholas Tallarida, and V. Ara Apkarian, "Visualizing
vibrational normal modes of a single molecule with atomically confined light," Nature 568
(7750), 78-82 (2019).
[11] Tanja Deckert-Gaudig, Atsushi Taguchi, Satoshi Kawata, and Volker Deckert, "Tip-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy - from early developments to recent advances.," Chemical Society
Reviews 46 (13), 4077-4110 (2017).
[12] Satoshi Kawata, Taro Ichimura, Atsushi Taguchi, and Yasuaki Kumamoto, "Nano-Raman
Scattering Microscopy: Resolution and Enhancement.," Chemical Reviews 117 (7), 49835001 (2017).

13

[13] Marie Richard-Lacroix, Yao Zhang, Zhenchao Dong, and Volker Deckert, "Mastering high
resolution tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy: towards a shift of perception," Chemical
Society Reviews 46 (13), 3922-3944 (2017).
[14] Prabhat Verma, "Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Technique and Recent Advances.,"
Chemical Reviews 117 (9), 6447-6466 (2017).
[15] Judith Langer et al., "Present and Future of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering," Acs Nano
14 (1), 28-117 (2020).
[16] Zhe He, Zehua Han, Megan Kizer, Robert J. Linhardt, Xing Wang, Alexander M. Sinyukov,
Jizhou Wang, Volker Deckert, Alexei V. Sokolov, Jonathan Hu, and Marlan O. Scully, "TipEnhanced Raman Imaging of Single-Stranded DNA with Single Base Resolution," Journal of
the American Chemical Society 141 (2), 753-757 (2019).
[17] Xiu-Mei Lin, Tanja Deckert-Gaudig, Prabha Singh, Michael Siegmann, Stephan Kupfer,
Zhenglong Zhang, Stefanie Gräfe, and Volker Deckert, "Direct Base-to-Base Transitions in
ssDNA Revealed by Tip-Enhanced Raman Scattering," (2016).
[18] Lucas Langelüddecke, Prabha Singh, and Volker Deckert, "Exploring the Nanoscale: Fifteen
Years of Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.," Applied Spectroscopy 69 (12), 1357-1371
(2015).
[19] K. Domke, D. Zhang, and B. Pettinger, "Tip-enhanced Raman spectra of picomole quantities
of DNA nuclerobases at Au(111)," J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 6708-6709 (2007).

14

[20]L. E. Hennemann, A. J. Meixner, and D. Zhang, "Surface- and tip-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy of DNA," Spectroscopy 24, 119-124 (2010).
[21] E. Bailo and V. Deckert, "Tip-enhanced Raman scattering," Chem. Soc. Rev 37, 921-930
(2008).
[22] P. Hermann, A. Hermelink, V. Lausch, G. Holland, L. Möller, N. Bannert, and D. Naumann,
"Evaluation of tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for characterizing different virus strains,"
Analyst 136, 1148-1152 (2011).
[23] P. Hermann, H. Fabian, D. Naumann, and A. Hermelink, "Comparative study of far-field and
near-field Raman spectra from silicon-based samples and biological nanostructures," J. Phys.
Chem. C 115, 24512-24520 (2011).
[24] D. Cialla, T. Deckert-Gaudig, C. Budich, M. Laue, R. Möller, D. Naumann, V. Deckert, and J.
Popp, "Raman to the limit: tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopic investigations of single
tobacco mosaic virus," J. Raman Spectrosc. 40, 240-243 (2009).
[25] M.-C. Giocondi, F. Ronzon, M. C. Nicolai, P. Dosset, P.-E. Milhiet, and M. Chevalie,
"Organization of influenza A virus envelope at neutral and low ph," J. Gen. Virol. 91, 329-338
(2010).
[26] Y. Liu, K. Hu, Y. Hong, Y. Yang, H. Suo, and J. Wang, Chin. J. Virol. 24, 106-110 (2008).
[27] J. K. Muckelbauer, M. Kremer, I. Minor, G. Diana, F. J. Dutko, J. Groarke, D. C. Pevear, and
M. G. Rossmann, "The structure of coxsackie B3 at 3.5Â resolution," Structure 3, 653-667
(1995).

15

[28] Taro Ichimura, Norihiko Hayazawa, Mamoru Hashimoto, Yasushi Inouye, and Satoshi
Kawata, "Application of tip-enhanced microscopy for nonlinear Raman spectroscopy,"
Applied Physics Letters 84 (10), 1768-1770 (2004).
[29] Dmitry Pestov, Robert K. Murawski, Gombojav O. Ariunbold, Xi Wang, Miaochan Zhi, Alexei
V. Sokolov, Vladimir A. Sautenkov, Yuri V. Rostovtsev, Arthur Dogariu, Yu Huang, and Marlan
O. Scully, "Optimizing the Laser-Pulse Configuration for Coherent Raman Spectroscopy,"
Science 316 (5822), 265-268 (2007).
[30] Dmitri V. Voronine, Alexander M. Sinyukov, Xia Hua, Kai Wang, Pankaj K. Jha, Elango
Munusamy, Steven E. Wheeler, George Welch, Alexei V. Sokolov, and Marlan O. Scully,
"Time-Resolved Surface-Enhanced Coherent Sensing of Nanoscale Molecular Complexes,"
Scientific Reports 2, 891 (2012).
[31] Yu Zhang, Yu-Rong Zhen, Oara Neumann, Jared K. Day, Peter Nordlander, and Naomi J.
Halas, "Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering with single-molecule sensitivity using a
plasmonic Fano resonance," Nature Communications 5, 4424 (2014).
[32] Steven Yampolsky, Dmitry A. Fishman, Shirshendu Dey, Eero Hulkko, Mayukh Banik, Eric O.
Potma, and Vartkess A. Apkarian, "Seeing a single molecule vibrate through time-resolved
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering," Nature Photonics 8, 650 (2014).
[33] Dan Lis and Francesca Cecchet, "Localized surface plasmon resonances in nanostructures to
enhance nonlinear vibrational spectroscopies: towards an astonishing molecular sensitivity,"
Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 5, 2275-2292 (2014).

16

