A Machine Learning Application for Raising WASH Awareness in
the Times of COVID-19 Pandemic.
Original Paper
Rohan Pandey​1 #​; Vaibhav Gautam​1$​; Ridam Pal​2$​; Harsh Bandhey​2$​; Lovedeep Singh
Dhingra​2,3$​; Himanshu Sharma​4&​; Chirag Jain​2&​; Kanav Bhagat​2&​; Arushi​3&​; Lajjaben
Patel​3&​; Mudit Agarwal​3&​; Samprati Agrawal​3&​;Rishabh Jalan​2&​; Akshat Wadhwa​2&​;
Ayush Garg​2&​; Vihaan Misra​5&​; Yashwin Agrawal​2&​; Bhavika Rana​2​;Ponnurangam
Kumaraguru​2​; Tavpritesh Sethi​2
1​
Shiv Nadar University, Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
2​
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, India
3​
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, India
4​
GL Bajaj Institute Of Tech and Management, Uttar Pradesh, Greater Noida, India
5​
Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Dwarka, New Delhi, India
#​

contributed equally, $​ ​contributed equally, &​ ​contributed equally

Corresponding Author:
Tavpritesh Sethi
Department of Computational Biology
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi
Okhla Industrial Estate, Phase III, New Delhi - 110020
Delhi
India
Email: tavpritesthsethi@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
Background: ​The COVID-19 pandemic has uncovered the potential of digital
misinformation in shaping the health of nations. The deluge of unverified
information that spreads faster than the epidemic itself is an unprecedented
phenomenon that has put millions of lives in danger. Mitigating this ‘Infodemic’
requires strong health messaging systems that are engaging, vernacular, scalable,
effective and continuously learn the new patterns of misinformation.
Objective: ​We created WashKaro, a multi-pronged intervention for mitigating
misinformation through conversational AI, machine translation and natural
language processing. WashKaro provides the right information matched against
WHO guidelines through AI, and delivers it in the right format in local languages.
Methods: ​We theorize (i) an NLP based AI engine that could continuously
incorporate user feedback to improve relevance of information, (ii) bite sized audio
in the local language to improve penetrance in a country with skewed gender

literacy ratios, and (iii) conversational but interactive AI engagement with users
towards an increased health awareness in the community.
Results: ​ A total of 5026 people who downloaded the app during the study window,
among those 1545 were active users. Our study shows that 3.4 times more females
engaged with the App in Hindi as compared to males, the relevance of AI-filtered
news content doubled within 45 days of continuous machine learning, and the
prudence of integrated AI chatbot “Satya” increased thus proving the usefulness of
an mHealth platform to mitigate health misinformation.
Conclusion: ​We conclude that a multi-pronged machine learning application
delivering vernacular bite-sized audios and conversational AI is an effective
approach to mitigate health misinformation.
Trial Registration:​ Not Applicable
Keywords: ​COVID-19, mHealth, Machine Learning

Introduction
Healthcare misinformation is a growing menace in digital societies. This is clearly
highlighted by the COVID-19 pandemic that has affected over 3.8 million people
worldwide causing a widespread loss in all aspects of daily life [1]. Digital
consumption has increased manifolds, creating both an opportunity and a danger in
terms of information dissemination. Infodemic has been defined as an
overabundance of information, some accurate and some not, that makes it hard for
people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they need it [2]. The
spread of COVID-19 infodemic was much faster than the pandemic itself and still
continues to pose a threat to public health [3]. Further, mitigation of misinformation
is also important for raising correct awareness for primary prevention of most
communicable and non-communicable diseases. However, the role of machine
learning, artificial intelligence and digital technologies in mitigating health
misinformation has been under-explored. Mobile health (mHealth), coupled with
verified health information, can serve as an information dispensing tool to tackle the
spread of misinformation. Clear and effective communication of preventive
measures and updated information is essential. To achieve this goal, designing a
trustworthy app that helps navigate the information deluge is
important. Therefore, recognizing the potential of mHealth platforms, we developed
WashKaro, a multi-pronged AI approach for Infodemic Management. WashKaro was
driven by the imminent need to raise Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)
awareness and combines English (WASH) with vernacular (Karo, meaning "Do" in
Hindi) for mitigating the spread of COVID-19. WashKaro combines Natural
Language Processing (NLP) to match information with WHO guidelines(OnAIr), and
conversational AI (Satya, meaning "Truth" in Hindi) to reach out to the community
as audio-visual content in local languages. In order to keep the information relevant,
WashKaro provides daily news matched with WHO guidelines, WHO directive-based
Symptom Self-Assessment tool, and human-vetted information delivering these in
Hindi, the most widely understood local language across India. Since India is one of
the largest and fastest-growing markets for digital consumers, with 560 million

Internet subscribers in 2018 [4], and about 60% using mHealth technologies [5],
this offered a unique opportunity to test WashKaro.

Figure 1: Our proposed workflow. The methodology used for this study is centered
around the WHO EPI-WIN strategy which covers four strategic areas of work to
respond to the infodemic. The first area of coverage is focused on identifying the
the problem at hand given the current evidence and information in order to
strategically promote and form public policies. We have identified the
context-specific community problems and the potential of mHealth, AI, and NLP in
order to acknowledge possible solutions. This is followed by the simplification of the
enormous amount of information currently available across multiple sources in
order to disseminate accurate information in a simplified manner. In order to
achieve this objective, multilingual support is provided in the form of audio
visual-based content. The spread of misinformation is tackled by providing
information such as Mythbusters and government updates along with
meta-information in the form of geographic coordinates of essential facilities. We

also provide periodic hand washing reminders. In case of such an unforeseen event,
it is important to amplify the intervention by means of establishing two-way
communication with the intended audience to tailor the advice and messages. This
has been catered to by engaging users in active feedback based involvement,
participating in enhancing the AI proposed model along with any generic feedback
in an audio format. A public health survey and symptom self-assessment are crucial
components in amplifying our study. In order to devise constantly evolving
strategies it is essential to validate the methodology and quantify the infodemic.
WashKaro application statistics, demographic analysis of public health surveys,
health analysis of at-risk population using symptom self-assessment, and user
agreement on AI-based intervention is critical to quantify and evaluate.

Methods
WashKaro was developed as a holistic mHealth solution that could serve as a
one-stop AI-powered infodemic management suite during the current COVID 19
pandemic. The underlying strategy utilized was Identify-Simplify-Amplify-Quantify,
as deployed by the Information Network for Epidemics (EPI-WIN) established by
the WHO [2]. Gathering raw data from credible sources such as the WHO, and
consumer centric daily news articles, we used NLP approaches along with machine
learning to identify authentic and pertinent information. The information thus
extracted was simplified and presented as audio-visual content in Hindi (the most
widely understood local language across India), English, and various other
vernaculars. By garnering feedback on the relevance of the WHO information
provided along with the news pieces, the advice to the individual was tailored
according to their personal needs, thus amplifying the reach of appropriate
messages. We also offered a WHO directive-based Symptom Self-Assessment tool, as
well as numerous categories of human-vetted information in the form of
Infographics, MythBusters, geographic information, etc. Forming real-time,
on-the-ground, multidisciplinary research partnerships is essential to mitigate the
infodemic. Our entire methodology and infodemic suite is, therefore, open-source
and available for the entire scientific community to build upon it.
NLP in healthcare
In the current situation, timely delivery of tenable content to the masses is
exceptionally crucial to counter the spread of misinformation. WashKaro targeted
this requirement using Natural Language Processing techniques to dispense
information sourced through highly trusted outlets of WHO such as EPI-WIN, which
perhaps may not reach the appropriate audience, or be too complicated for them
[6].
The NLP pipeline involved two datasets, namely the WHO guidelines and the news
articles. After preliminary preprocessing of both the datasets, extractive ML
summarization techniques were used to abbreviate the text. Embeddings were

generated for the summarized guidelines and news articles and matched against
each other. Subsequently, the users were provided with the pair of WHO guidelines
and its matching news article with the highest similarity score. This pipeline served
to complement the user's daily news consumption that suits their palette with an
appropriate WHO guideline related to COVID-19 and WASH (Water Sanitation and
Hygiene), thus augmenting healthcare awareness. In order to enhance engagement
and provide increasingly relevant content, user feedback was sought at the end of
each matching- the users marked each pair of WHO guideline and news article
provided to them as either relevant or irrelevant. This active user feedback aided
the machine learning backend in improving with each review by determining the
type of news articles the user found relevant to a particular guideline. Further, any
new article provided to the user took into account the previous learning, which
enabled deliverance of more relevant information with each feedback cycle.

Figure 2: NLP Pipeline. The pipeline takes in news articles and WHO reports, and
constructs two-level sentence similarity between titles and the full-text to construct
a similarity score. Finally, the relevant texts are subject to translation and text to
speech conversion for consumption in the local language (Hindi).
Simplification
We made a deliberate attempt to convey context-specific and consumable
information in a medium of the user's choice. Infographics based on WHO
recommendations were used for effective presentation of preventive measures. Byte
sized information packets were delivered in multiple local languages to ensure
accessibility to various marginalized groups. Text-to-speech engines helped convert
the information to an audio-visual format, thus reaching out to the less educated
population. Mythbusters and government advisories, critical in countering
misinformation and uncertainties surrounding the official guidelines, were credibly
sourced and regularly updated. Information on containment zones, hospitals, and
hunger relief centers was provided in a geographical context, with directions
imparted through Google Maps, a popular user-friendly interface. Regular

notifications, worded positively to encourage participation, reminding the user to
wash their hands and use masks in public places, were displayed.
Symptom Self Assessment
Low accessibility of the healthcare system, given the lockdown and social distancing
measures in place, and a skewed ratio between the population who wishes to get
tested and medical professionals who can verify this need, call for an effective
alternative to screen patients [7]. Thus, we devised a self-assessment tool for the
symptoms of COVID-19, thereby enabling quicker identification of suspect cases
who can then be guided to the Government helpline numbers and informed about
proper self-quarantine protocols, nearby hospitals admitting COVID suspects, and
testing centers. We defined the Suspect Case using the WHO Interim Guidance on
Global surveillance for COVID-19 caused by human infection with the COVID-19
virus, and classified them further as Suspect case (A), (B) or (C) [8]. The 7-point
questionnaire was designed using the case definitions from the WHO Interim
Guidance verbatim. Based on the application of the WHO criteria on the answers to
the 7 questions, the user was notified about whether or not they were suspected of
having COVID-19 (Fig. 3).

Figure 3. Self Assessment Tool Flowchart. Based on the WHO Interim Guidance, a
questionnaire and flowchart were developed to classify the responders as `Suspects'
or `Non-suspects'.
Chatbot
Correct and officially verified information regarding the disease should be there for

everyone’s disposal. To serve this purpose, we have made a chatbot, which has
verified information from WHO, CDC, and additional government-approved
sources. Existing Solution consists of an option Driven System[9] where a user
needs to select through various lists of options to find answers to the Query. Thus,
we devised a chatbot system designed to answer user queries using natural
language. The current system consists of an Lstm model fine-tuned on a MedSquad
dataset[10]. The Dataset was encoded using swivel embeddings generated on the
Covid-19 open research dataset[11]. All the data including the training set is
incubated from Credible and Government controlled sources. The user Query is also
passed through spelling correction using symmetric delete spelling correction
algorithm along with artificial increasing frequency of words related to the disease,
symptoms, etc.[12] so as to increase the accuracy and effectiveness of the system.

Figure 4. Request-Response cycle in the chatbot. This is a schematic diagram
depicting how the answer is displayed whenever a query is asked to the chatbot by a
user.
Active User Feedback
Anonymized data was collected through self-assessment usage analytics, Play Store
managed user statistics, and easy to comprehend survey forms. Our suite deployed
an anonymized public health survey that asked basic healthcare-related questions in
order to understand the demographics and to monitor the situation on a periodic
basis. To ensure user convenience, establish a two-way dialogue and prevent
specific suggestions from being marginalized, audio-based feedback was taken from
the user. Illustrations were used whenever possible to make the user aware of the
data being collected, hence protecting their right to information and privacy.

Results
Information Enrichment Over Time: The Number of `Relevant' Votes Increases

Figure 5. Analysis of NLP pipeline. Change in the number of relevant and irrelevant
votes over time, with increasing feedback the relevance of the content increases.
With time and increased user feedback, the relevance of the matching of news
articles with WHO reports increases as seen by the increase in the number of
relevant votes, owing to the constantly evolving machine learning model. The
number of irrelevant votes also decreases, validating our proposed methodology
and providing increasingly relevant content from trusted sources to the user over
time in the language of their preferred choice. At the beginning of the AI-based
learning system on 15 March 2020, the number of `relevant' votes and `irrelevant'
votes were both 18. On 25 March 2020, with an increase in user interaction and AI
learning, the number of relevant votes was 173 and irrelevant votes were 69. The
ratio of relevant votes to irrelevant votes increased from 1.0 to 2.5 over a period of
one month.
Demographics- Females engaged more in Hindi

Figure 6. Analysis of Public Health Survey. Distribution graphs showing the
distribution of gender among Hindi and English Users. It clearly shows skewness in
gender for English users whereas in the case of Hindi users it shows an approximate
normalization among the genders.
A total of 436 people took part in the English language based survey, and 126 took
part in the Hindi language based survey. This plot was created based on the survey
conducted on the WashKaro app. The analysis of this plot suggests that the number
of English users are more than the number of Hindi users. It also depicts that the
overall number of male users is more than female users. A key insight observed
from the data depicted that Hindi speaking female users (33% of total Hindi
speaking users) were more than English speaking female users (11% of total
English speaking users). The census of India 2011, highlighted the disparity of
literacy rates across genders with 82.14% literacy rates amongst Indian males and
65.46% literacy rates in Indian females [13]. This underscores the fact that using
local languages empowers the sections of the population that might not have
otherwise access to the information. Also, as highlighted by previous work, teaching
interventions to women is an effective method of mitigating diseases, given their
greatest willingness to devote time towards health and survival [14].
Target population: Users who reported higher than expected incidence

Figure 7. Analysis of Self Assessment. A simple user-level self-assessment has been
deployed in order to enable the general population to perform self-assessment and
to identify the population at risk which can be used as an effective screening. This
vividly states that the person tested for self-analysis was higher than expected
numbers.
Based on the data collected from the symptom self-assessment we can distil the
general population so that we can trace the potential number of positive patients
who are at risk of COVID-19 and can also help in identifying patients who are
already suffering from this disease. The question has been framed in such a way that
potential threats are identified at the early stage so that we can mitigate the chances
of community transmission. Out of 3567 respondents, 276 (7% of respondents)
were found to be suspect cases according to their responses, while 3291 were
non-suspect. 467 (13.09 %) of the respondents reported a travel history to locations
reporting community transmission of COVID-19, 326 (9.13%) reported close
contact with COVID-19 positive patient, 323 (9.05% of respondents) reported fever,
556(15.58%) reported cough, 367(10.28%) reported shortness of breath (SOB),
277 (7.77%) reported that they required Hospitalization and 395 (11.07%)
respondents reported there was an alternate diagnosis for their condition.

Discussion
Over the years mHealth and machine learning have made significant contributions
in the medical domain. In the case of COVID-19, where reliable therapeutic
strategies are still under experimentation, the role of such mHealth and machine
learning interventions is critical. Timely dissemination of trusted byte-sized

information is extremely instrumental in mitigating the infodemic. With the
majority of the world population staying at home, the increased amount of digital
consumption opens up the scope to deploy these techniques as an effective social
intervention to mitigate the infodemic by delivering the right information to the
right people at the right time. When organizations across the globe are proactively
testing various strategies to address the issue at hand, open-source software will
play a vital role in such scenarios at a global stage to mitigate pandemics and
infodemics at the root level. We provide an open-source template featured with
functions like Symptom Self-Assessment, Notification amplifier which notifies the
user for washing hands, which are required for fighting against epidemics and
pandemics. This also helps in the propagation of the right information hence proper
management of infodemic can be done without misleading the masses in crucial
scenarios. The enhancement of a few features within the WashKaro application can
help in serving as an effective intervention for the government and policymakers.
Detailed questions can be formulated targeting the at-risk users identified using
symptom self- assessment, which can be incorporated into the existing framework
followed by the higher authorities and medical workers for predicting the suspects
of COVID-19 at an early stage. After identification and testing of the at-risk
population, our analysis can be extended to predict patients who have chances of
being at risk in the near future from the definitive set of questions, based on the
priority of each question. We can present this data to the suitable administration
and decision-makers for taking effective measures against such individuals at an
early stage. For the Suspect Cases, we can administer a second questionnaire to
further stratify the risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and septic
shock by assessing the severity of symptoms and looking for identified risk factors
like age and pre-existing comorbidities that are not included in the WHO Interim
Guidance. This can aid in making decisions regarding home quarantine against
hospital admission. The app can also be used to identify other suspect cases in the
same household. Further, to assist the government authorities to identify those
requiring testing for COVID-19, we can ask for contact details of the Suspect Cases
with informed consent and relay them to the appropriate government authorities to
enable targeted testing. A follow up of the suspect cases through push notifications,
advising testing and recording test results, can help ensure that complacence does
not set in.
Finally, there are some limitations to the study that have been conducted prior to
the revamp of the application. All applications with COVID-19 information were
removed in association with the guidelines regarding COVID-19 related applications
on the Google Play store. The time frame of the case study for COVID-19 was
shortened due to this reason. Now, WashKaro is a generic public health intervention
suite that is currently structured to address Tuberculosis(TB) as it is the leading
cause from a single infectious agent [15]. The Application currently features
multilingual success-stories, FAQs, Mythbusters, a TB based chatbot, a TB awareness
quiz, a Twitter Analysis screen for TB related tweets, and insights from tweets
related to Tuberculosis. Secondly, due to data privacy policies, we could not obtain
granular information on individuals' locations, such granularity of data could have

helped articulate user studies in a more diverse way. The development of innovative
approaches while protecting individual data yet gathering useful inference is an
active area of research, and our further work will address this limitation in various
public health scenarios. Therefore, we conclude that the role of digital health
interventions in the form of systems articulating vetted messages needs to be
explored effectively dealing with public health challenges, both during health
emergencies and normal times addressing the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) put forward by WHO.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the Wellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance
Fellowship IA/CPHE/14/1/501504 awarded to Tavpritesh Sethi. Tavpritesh Sethi
also acknowledges support from the Center for Artificial Intelligence at IIIT-Delhi.
We acknowledge Bhavika Rana for her inputs on App design and Prof. Rakesh
Lodha, AIIMS New Delhi, for his clinical inputs.
Conflicts of Interest
No conflicts of interest declared.
Abbreviations
WHO: World Health Organization
WASH: Water Sanitation Hygiene
EPI-WIN: WHO’s Information Network for Epidemics
AI: Artificial Intelligence
NLP: Natural Language Processing

References
1. World Health Organization, et al.. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19):
situation report, 110; 2020.
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200509covid-19-sitrep-110.pdf?sfvrsn=3b92992c_6
2. World Health Organization, et al.. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19):
situation report, 91; 2020.
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200420-sitrep-91-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=fcf0670b_4
3. Kouzy R, Abi Jaoude J, Kraitem A, El Alam MB, Karam B, Adib E, et al.
Coronavirus goes viral: Quantifying the covid-19 misinformation epidemic on
twitter. Cureus. 2020;12(3). (doi:10.7759/cureus.7255)
4. Kaka N, Madgavkar A, Kshirsagar A, Gupta R, Manyika J, Bahl K, et al. Digital
India: Technology to transform a connected nation. McKinsey Global
Institute, March. 2019;.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/mc
kinsey%20digital/our%20insights/digital%20india%20technology%20to%

20transform%20a%20connected%20nation/digital-india-technology-to-tra
nsform-a-connected-nation-full-report.pdf
5. Levy D, Wasden C, DiFilippo D, Sur P. Emerging mHealth: paths for growth.
PwC M-Health. 2012; p. 1-44.
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/healthcare/mhealth/assets/pwc-emerging-m
health-full.pdf
6. Zarocostas J. How to fight an infodemic. The Lancet. 2020;395(10225):676.
(doi: DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30461-X)
7. Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R, Thome B, Parker M, Glickman A, et al.. Fair
allocation of scarce medical resources in the time of Covid-19; 2020. (doi:
10.1056/NEJMsb2005114)
8. World Health Organization, et al. Global surveillance for COVID-19 caused by
human infection with COVID-19 virus: interim guidance, 20 March 2020.
World Health Organization; 2020.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331506
Webcite:
9. WHO Health Alert. 20 March 2020. World Health Organization; 2020.
URL:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/who-health-al
ert-brings-covid-19-facts-to-billions-via-whatsapp
Webcite:
10. Abacha AB, Demner-Fushman D. A Question-Entailment Approach to
Question Answering. ArXiv; 2019. doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-3119-4
11. Wang, Lucy Lu et al. “CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset.” ArXiv;
2020 (doi: arXiv:2004.10706)
12. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak Glossary. Kaiser Family Foundation; 2020.
URL: https://www.kff.org/glossary/covid-19-outbreak-glossary/
Webcite:
13. Chandramouli C, General R. Census of India 2011. Provisional Population
Totals New Delhi: Government of India. 2011; p. 409-413.
14. Caldwell JC, Caldwell P. Roles of women, families and communities in
preventing illness and providing health services in developing countries. The
epidemiologic transition: policy and planning implications for developing
countries Washington DC: National Academy Press p. 1993; p. 252-271.
15. Harding E. WHO global progress report on tuberculosis elimination. The
Lancet Respiratory Medicine. 2020;8(1):19.

