This work has been submitted to Radiology: Artificial Intelligence for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible.

Originally Submitted: March 10, 2020
Revised: March12, 2020

Title:
Rapid AI Development Cycle for the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic:
Initial Results for Automated Detection & Patient Monitoring
using Deep Learning CT Image Analysis
Article Type:
Original Research

Authors:
Ophir Gozes (1)(+), Ma’ayan Frid-Adar (1)(+), Hayit Greenspan, PhD (*)(1)(2), Patrick D.
Browning, MD (1), Huangqi Zhang, MD (3), Wenbin Ji, MD (3), Adam Bernheim, MD (4), and
Eliot Siegel, MD (5)
(1) RADLogics
(2) Tel-Aviv University
(3) Affiliated Taizhou Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 150 Ximen Street, Linhai,
317000, Zhejiang Province, China
(4) Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY
(5) University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
(+) Equal Contributers
(*) Corresponding Author

Summary Statement:
Rapidly developed AI-based automated CT image analysis tools can achieve high accuracy in
detection of Coronavirus positive patients as well as quantification of disease burden.

Key Results:
•

Utilizing the deep-learning image analysis system developed, we achieved classification
results for Coronavirus vs Non-coronavirus cases per thoracic CT studies of 0.996 AUC
(95%CI: 0.989-1.00) on Chinese control and infected patients. Possible working point: 98.2%
sensitivity, 92.2% specificity.

•

For Coronavirus patients the system outputs quantitative opacity measurements and a
visualization of the larger opacities in a slice-based “heat map” or a 3D volume display. A
suggested “Corona score” measures the progression of patients over time.

List of abbreviations:
o
o
o
o

AI—Artificial Intelligence
DL—Deep Learning
CT—Computer Tomography
COVID-19—Corona Virus 2019

Abstract
• Background:
The coronavirus infection surprised the world with its rapid spread and has had a major impact on
the lives of billions of people. Non-contrast thoracic CT has been shown to be an effective tool in
detection, quantification and follow-up of disease. Deep learning algorithms can be developed to
assist in analyzing potentially large numbers of thoracic CT exams.
• Purpose:
To develop AI-based automated CT image analysis tools for detection, quantification, and tracking
of Coronavirus and demonstrate that they can differentiate coronavirus patients from those who
do not have the disease.
• Materials and Methods:
Multiple international datasets, including from Chinese disease-infected areas were included. We
present a system that utilizes robust 2D and 3D deep learning models, modifying and adapting
existing AI models and combining them with clinical understanding.
We conducted multiple retrospective experiments to analyze the performance of the system in the
detection of suspected COVID-19 thoracic CT features and to evaluate evolution of the disease in
each patient over time using a 3D volume review, generating a “Corona score”. The study includes
a testing set of 157 international patients (China and U.S).
• Results:
Classification results for Coronavirus vs Non-coronavirus cases per thoracic CT studies were 0.996
AUC (95%CI: 0.989-1.00) ; on datasets of Chinese control and infected patients. Possible working
point: 98.2% sensitivity, 92.2% specificity.
For time analysis of Coronavirus patients, the system output enables quantitative measurements
for smaller opacities (volume, diameter) and visualization of the larger opacities in a slice-based
“heat map” or a 3D volume display. Our suggested “Corona score” measures the progression of
disease over time.
• Conclusion:
This initial study, which is currently being expanded to a larger population, demonstrated that
rapidly developed AI-based image analysis can achieve high accuracy in detection of Coronavirus
as well as quantification and tracking of disease burden.

I. Introduction

The coronavirus infection, COVID-19 has surprised the world with its rapid spread, potential virulence,
with potential profound overall impact on the lives of billions of people from both a safety and an economic
perspective. As of this writing, there are approximately 93,158 confirmed cases of which 80,270 are in
“Mainland China” with 3,198 deaths, a mortality rate of 3.4% [1].
The sensitivity of the current diagnostic gold standard at the initial presentation of the disease has been
called into question. Fang et al [2] compared the sensitivity of non-contrast chest CT with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) which detects viral nucleic acid and is the current
reference standard in the detection of COVID-19. Their study looked at 51 patients who had a history of
travel or residence in endemic areas and fever or acute respiratory symptoms of unknown cause. The
patients underwent initial and repeat RT-PCR testing. Their gold standard was an eventual confirmed
diagnosis of COVID-19 infection by serial RT-PCR testing. The authors suggested a sensitivity of noncontrast chest CT for detection of COVID-19 infection of 98% compared to initial RT-PCR sensitivity
(results of the first RT_RPR test) of 71%. Cases highlighted in their paper demonstrated either diffuse or
focal ground-glass opacities. This lack of sensitivity on initial RT-PCR testing was also described in
another study by Xie et al [3] who reported that 3% of 167 patients had negative RT-PCR for the virus
despite chest CT findings typical of viral pneumonia suggesting the use of chest CT to decrease false
negative lab studies. Bernheim et al [4] examined 121 chest CT studies from four centers in China that
were obtained in the early, intermediate and late stages of infection. They also described ground glass
opacities as characteristic of the disease, particularly bilateral and peripheral ground-class and consolidative
pulmonary opacities. They noted greater severity of disease with increasing time from onset of symptoms
and they described later signs of disease to include “greater lung involvement, linear opacities, “crazypaving” pattern and the “reverse halo” sign. There was bilateral lung involvement in 28% of early patients,
76% of intermediate patients and 88% of patients in late stages (6-12 days) of disease.

Once a decision has been made to use thoracic CT as these recent studies suggest for patient diagnosis or
screening, a need immediately rises to rapidly evaluate potentially very large numbers of imaging studies.
AI technology, in particular deep learning image analysis tools, can potentially be developed to support
radiologists in the triage, quantification, trend analysis of the data. AI solutions have the potential to analyze
multiple cases in parallel to detect whether chest CT reveals any abnormalities in the lung. If the software
suggests a significantly increased likelihood of disease, the case can be flagged for further review by a
radiologist or clinician for possible treatment/quarantine. Such systems, or variations thereof, once verified
and tested – can become key contributors in the detection and control of patients with the virus.
In a manner analogous to the way in which COVID-19 represents a new strain of coronavirus not previously
found in humans and presumably representing a mutation of other coronaviruses, an AI algorithm can be
rapidly created from one or more algorithms that perform a similar task. This is in contrast to the standard
way of developing a DL algorithm, entailing several phases: I. Data-collection phase in which a large
amount of data samples need to be collected from predefined categories; expert annotations are needed for
ground-truthing the data; II. Training phase in which the collected data is used to train network models.
Each category needs to be represented well enough so that the training can generalize to new cases that will
be seen by the network in the testing phase. In this learning phase, the large number of network parameters
(typically on the order of millions) are automatically generated; III. Testing phase in which an additional
set of cases not used in training is presented to the network and the output of the network is tested
statistically to determine its success of categorization.
In the case of a new disease, such as the coronavirus, datasets are just now being identified and annotated.
There are very limited data sources as well as limited expertise in labeling the data specific to this new
strain of the virus in humans. Accordingly, it is not clear that there are enough examples to achieve clinically
meaningful learning at this early stage of data collection despite the increasingly critical importance of this
software, especially given fears of a pandemic. It is our hypothesis that AI-based tools can be rapidly
developed leveraging the ability to modify and adapt existing AI models and combine them with initial

clinical understanding to address the new challenges and new category of COVID-19. Our goal is to
develop deep-learning based automated CT image analysis tools and demonstrate that they can enable
differentiation of coronavirus patients from those who do not have the disease to provide support in the
detection, measurements, and tracking of disease progression.

II. Methods
The system we propose receives thoracic CT images and flags cases suspected with COVID-19 features.
In addition, for cases classified as positive, the system outputs a lung abnormality localization map and
measurements. Figure 1 shows a block diagram of the developed system. The system is comprised of
several components and analyzes the CT case at two distinct levels: Subsystem A: 3D analysis of the case
volume for nodules and focal opacities using existing, previously developed algorithms and Subsystem B:
newly developed 2D analysis of each slice of the case to detect and localize larger-sized diffuse opacities
including ground glass infiltrates which have been clinically described as representative of the coronavirus.
For Subsystem A we use commercial off-the-shelf software that detects nodules and small opacities within
a 3D lung volume (RADLogics Inc., Boston [5]). This software was developed as a solution for lung
pathology detection and provides quantitative measurements (including volumetric measurements, axial
measurements (RECIST), HU values, calcification detection and texture characterization for solid vs subsolid vs GG). Because ground-glass opacities (GGO) have emerged in recent studies as one of the key
features for COVID-19, we hypothesized that the existing software can detect smaller-sized focal GG
opacities within a case. An example of this can be seen in Figure 2(A): two Coronavirus cases are shown
in which the opacities are relatively subtle. In addition to the detection of abnormalities, measurements and
localization are provided. In each case, the software detected a single focal opacity (outlined by a red
bounding-box). An image of the detected opacity is shown, along with its segmentation. Finally, a list of
lesion features is automatically generated and provided.

Since current lung pathology detection solutions were built with a specific focus on the nodule detection
task, they cannot be relied upon for detecting more diffuse global GG opacities. To address the additional
disease-driven opacities, we proposed a data-driven solution on a per-slice basis, as shown in Figure 1,
Subsystem B. Working in the 2D (slice) space has several advantages for Deep-Learning based algorithms,
in limited data scenarios. These include an increase in training samples (with many slices per single case),
using pre-trained networks that are common in the 2D space, and easier annotation for segmentation
purposes.
In our solution (B), the first step is the Lung Crop stage: we extract the lung region of interest (ROI) using
a lung segmentation module. The U-net architecture for image segmentation [6,7] was trained using 6,150
CT slices of cases with lung abnormalities and their corresponding lung masks which were taken from a
U.S based hospital (Table I: Dataset-6). The segmentation step enables the removal of image portions that
are not relevant for the detection of within-lung disease making the learning process of the next step easier.
In the following step, we focus on Detecting Coronavirus related abnormalities: We use a Resnet-50 - 2D
deep convolutional neural network architecture [8]; The network is 50 layers deep and can classify images
into 1000 categories. The network was pre-trained on more than a million images from the ImageNet
database [9]. As commonly done in the medical imaging field, we further train the network parameters
(fine-tune) to solve the problem at hand: suspected COVID-19 cases from several Chinese hospitals are
used (Table I: Dataset-1). The cases were annotated per slice as normal (n=1036) vs abnormal (n=829). To
overcome the limited amount of cases, we employ data augmentation techniques (image rotations,
horizontal flips and cropping). In a follow-up abnormality localization step, given a new slice classified as
positive, we extract “network-activation maps” which correspond to the areas most contributing to the
network’s decision. This is performed using the Grad-cam technique for producing visual explanations for
network decisions [10].
Example results of four COVID-19 slices that we classified as abnormal by the network can be seen in
Figure 2(B). On top, the CT image is shown. In the bottom row, corresponding colored maps are provided.

In red we see the strongest network output while blue is the weakest. We note the maps align well with the
diffused opacities, providing a strong indication that the network managed to learn important characteristics
associated with COVID-19 manifestations.
To mark a case as COVID-19 positive, we calculate the ratio of positive detected slices out of the total
slices of the lung (positive ratio). A positive case-decision is made if the positive ratio exceeds a pre-defined
threshold.
To provide a complete review of the case, we combine the output of Subsystem A - 3D analysis and
Subsystem B - 2D slice-level. In Figure 3 we see a case of Coronavirus and the combined output findings
map from the proposed system. We can see the nodular and focal diffuse opacity detections in green and
the larger opacity detection in red. The two subsystems complement and, in some locations reinforce each
other.
In addition to the visualization, the system automatically extracts several outputs of interest, including per
slice localization of opacities (2D), and a 3D volumetric presentation of the opacities throughout the lungs.
We also propose a Corona score which is a volumetric measurement of the opacities burden. The corona
score is computed by a volumetric summation of the network-activation maps. The score is robust to slice
thickness and pixel spacing as it includes pixel volume. For patient-specific monitoring of disease
progression, we suggest the Relative Corona score in which we normalize the corona score by the score
computed at the first time point.

III. Results
A set of experiments is conducted next to demonstrate the performance of the automated analysis.
I. Classification:
We start with an evaluation of the ability to detect slice-level Coronavirus. The performance of this step is
crucial for obtaining overall case wise detection. For the validation step, we used 10% of the slices from

the development dataset comprised of cases from the Chinese population (Table I: Dataset-1). The split was
patient wise and there is no overlap with the slices used for training. A total of 270 slices were analyzed:
150 normal slices and 120 COVID-19 suspected slices. Area Under Curve (AUC) was 0.994 with 94%
sensitivity and 98% specificity (at threshold 0.5).
We proceed with an evaluation of the ability to detect at the case-level for Coronavirus vs non-Corona virus
patients. First, we evaluate the classification solely on the Chinese population. For Coronavirus patients,
we use a collection of 56 patients with confirmed COVID-19 diagnosis (Table I: Dataset-2) and for nonCoronavirus patients, we use a dataset of 51 Chinese patients from multiple institutions in China (Table I:
Dataset-3). Using the positive ratio as a decision feature, we were able to achieve an AUC of 0.996 (95%CI:
0.989-1.00). The power of using AI for screening comes from the ability to tune the operating point to
support various clinical scenarios. Basing the case level decision on the positive ratio: A threshold of 1.1%
(percent of positive detected slice to lung slices) yields a case level sensitivity of 98.2% with 92.2%
specificity. A threshold of 1.9% yields a sensitivity of 96.4% and specificity of 98%.
To explore the relevance of the solution to a non-Chinese population, we perform a second analysis with
the same 56 Chinese patients as COVID-19 positive group, using a U.S source for 49 non-Coronavirus
patients (Table I: Dataset-4,5). For this population, we achieve AUC of 0.996 (95%CI: 0.989-1.00),
sensitivity of 98.2% and specificity of 91.8% at a positive ratio of 1% and sensitivity of 94.6% and
specificity of 98% at a threshold of 4.3%.
Both ROC curves are displayed in Figure 4A. In the ROC calculation, for Coronavirus patients that include
multiple time points, the analysis was performed using the first time point in the series.
II. Evaluation over time:
In our final experiment, we evaluate patients that were imaged in time points for whom the first CT scan
was obtained 1-4 days following the first signs of the virus (fever, cough). In the first example patient, we
review a case with a single focal opacity and present volumetric measurements over time. The second case

involves patient with multiple opacities and shows an overview of the patient recovery process with its
corresponding Corona score over time.
Figure 5 shows tracking over time of a specific opacity in a Coronavirus patient (red box). The four CT
scans shown across different time points show a reduction in the lesion size. For each time point, the volume
measurement and average axial diameter measurement are displayed at the bottom. The first scan (Jan 26)
was taken 1-4 days following symptoms of COVID-19, with a measured volume of 9.9 cm3. The second
scan (Jan 30) was taken 5-8 days after the first symptoms and shows a higher volume measurement of 19.9
cm3. The third and fourth scans (Feb 4 and Feb 11) taken 10-13 days and 17-20 days, after first symptoms,
respectively, show a decrease in the lesion volume suggesting resolution of disease.
Figure 6 presents an entire case review of a second Coronavirus patient who underwent three CT scans
throughout the disease. The 3D lung volume is displayed in blue with the proposed system opacity detection
and localization output displayed in red and green. In addition to the representation of the case, the Corona
score is calculated for each time point to give a quantitative representation of the disease: The patient’s
first thoracic CT was obtained Jan 27 (1-4 days after symptoms of COVID-19 were present). Opacities,
when present in this patient, appear to more frequently in the mid- and upper-lungs, and less frequently in
the lower lobes. The Corona score at this time point is 191.5 cm3. The second CT scan was taken 4 days
later, on Jan 31. We can visually detect a reduction in the opacities within the lung volume with Corona
score of 97.1 cm3. In comparison to the first scan, we can see and quantitate a reduction of 49% in overall
opacity-burden. The final CT scan was taken 15 days after the second scan; here no opacities are present
(with Corona score: 0); indicating full thoracic CT finding based resolution of disease.
Figure 4.B displays quantitative assessment scores for 18 COVID-19 patients that were monitored for 30
Days. On the left, we see a plot of the corona score. In this plot, we can assess the relative severity of
coronavirus among the patients. A plot of the Relative Corona Score is shown on the right. Here, different
courses of the disease can be identified.

IV. Discussion
In this initial exploratory work, we show the capabilities of AI to assist in the efforts to accurately detect
and track the progression or resolution of the Coronavirus. This is the first report to our knowledge in the
literature of software specifically developed to detect, characterize and track the progression of COVID19.
Rapidly developed AI-based automated CT image analysis tools can achieve high accuracy in the detection
of Coronavirus positive patients as well as quantification of disease burden. Utilizing the deep-learning
image analysis system developed, we achieved classification results for Coronavirus vs Non-coronavirus
cases per thoracic CT studies of 0.996 AUC (95%CI: 0.989-1.00) on datasets of Chinese control and
infected patients. Two possible working points are: 98.2% sensitivity, 92.2% specificity (high sensitivity
point); 96.4% sensitivity, 98% specificity (high specificity point). For Coronavirus patients the system
outputs quantitative opacity measurements and a visualization of the larger opacities in a slice-based “heat
map” or a 3D volume display. A suggested “Corona score” measures the progression of patients over time.

A consistent and reproducible method for rapid evaluation of high volumes of screening or diagnostic
thoracic CT studies using AI can assist in this crisis in several ways: Highly accurate systems can reliably
exclude CTs which are negative for findings associated with the corona virus. This decreases the volume
of cases passing through to the radiologist without overlooking positive cases. Progression and regression
of findings could be monitored more quantitatively and consistently. This would allow a greater volume of
patients being screened for Coronavirus, with earlier and more rapid detection of positive cases, which
could lead to more effective identification and containment of early cases.
As illustrated above, using standard machine learning techniques and innovative AI applications, in
combination with an established pulmonary CT detection platform, an effective tool can be utilized for the
screening and early detection of patients who may have contracted the COVID-19 pathogen. In individual
patients who have contracted the virus and have the pulmonary abnormalities associated with it, the same

methodologies can be used to accurately and more rapidly assess disease progression and guide therapy and
patient management.

REFERENCES
1. The Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID). Coronavirus COVID-19 Global
Cases by Johns Hopkins CSSE. https://www.gisaid.org/epiflu-applications/global-casescovid-19/.
2. Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, Lin M, Ying L, Pang P, Ji W. Sensitivity of Chest CT for COVID19: Comparison to RT-PCR. Radiology 2020 Feb. 19:200432. [Epub ahead of print], doi:
https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/full/10.1148/radiol.2020200432.
3.

Xie X, Zhong Z, Zhao W, Zheng C, Wang F, Liu, J. Chest CT for typical 2019-nCoV
pneumonia: relationship to negative RT-PCR testing. Radiology 2020 Feb. 7 (Epub ahead of
print), doi: https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/10.1148/radiol.2020200343.

4.

Bernheim A, Mei X, Huang M et al. Chest CT Findings in Coronavirus Disease-19 (COVID19): Relationship to Duration of Infection. Radiology 2020 February 20. doi:
https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/10.1148/radiol.2020200463.

5. RADLogics Inc. (www.radlogics.com/)
6.

Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. and Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). [online] Switzerland: Springer, Cham,
pp.159-168. Available at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28
[Accessed 18 Nov. 2015].

7.

Frid-Adar, M., Ben-Cohen, A., Amer, R. and Greenspan, H. (2018). Improving the
segmentation of anatomical structures in chest radiographs using u-net with an imagenet pretrained encoder. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and ComputerAssisted Intervention (MICCAI). [online] Switzerland: Springer, Cham, pp.159-168.
Available at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-00946-5_17 [Accessed 12
Sep. 2018].

8. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition.
In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [online] Piscataway, New Jersey, USA:
IEEE, pp.770-778. Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7780459 [Accessed 12
Dec. 2016].
9. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K. and Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [online]
Piscataway,
New
Jersey,
USA:
IEEE,
pp.248-255.
Available
at:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5206848 [Accessed 18 Aug. 2009]

10. Selvaraju, R. R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D. and Batra, D. Grad-cam:
Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In: International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). [online] Piscataway, New Jersey, USA: IEEE, pp.
618-626. Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8237336 [Accessed 25 Dec. 2017]
11. ChainZ (www.ChainZ.cn)
12. Armato III SG, McLennan G, Bidaut L, McNitt‐Gray MF, Meyer CR, Reeves AP, Zhao B,
Aberle DR, Henschke CI, Hoffman EA, Kazerooni EA. The lung image database consortium
(LIDC) and image database resource initiative (IDRI): a completed reference database of lung
nodules
on
CT
scans.
Medical
physics
2011
Feb;38(2):915-31.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1118/1.3528204

Figure Legends

Figure 1: System Block Diagram
Figure 2A: Subsystem A: Focal opacities detection and measurements.
Figure 2B: Subsystem B: Slices classified as positive for Coronavirus abnormalities and their
corresponding “heatmap”.
Figure 3: Patient case visualization. Left: Coronal view; Right: Automatically generated 3D
volume map of focal opacities (green) and larger diffuse opacities (red).
Figure 4A: ROC curves for the task of COVID-19 detection using positive ratio feature.
Left:
Chinese
Right: Coronavirus patients from China; Non-Coronavirus patients from US

Population

Figure 4B: Tracking of patient’s disease progression over time using Corona Score (Left) and
Relative Corona Score (Right). Day 0 corresponds to 1-4 days following first signs of the virus.
Figure 5: Multi time point tracking of patient disease progression
Figure 6: Corona score for patient disease progression monitoring

TABLE I: Datasets
Dataset 1: Development Dataset
Source: Chainz [11]

Dataset 2: Testing Dataset
Source: Hospital in Wenzhou, China

Dataset 3: Testing Dataset
Source: Chainz [11]
Dataset 4: Testing Dataset
Source: El-Camino Hospital (CA)
Dataset 5: Testing Dataset
Source: LIDC [12]
Dataset 6: Lung segmentation Development
Sources: El-Camino Hospital (CA)

50 abnormal thoracic CT scans (slice
thickness, {5,7,8,9,10}mm) from China of
patients that were diagnosed by a radiologist as
suspicious for COVID-19 (from Jan-Feb
2020). The cases were extracted by querying a
cloud PACS system for cases that were
referred for laboratory testing following the
scan.
Cases were annotated for each slice as normal
(n=1036) vs abnormal (n=829)
56 patients with confirmed diagnosis of
COVID-19 infection by RT-PCR testing. Each
patient had a chest CT scan (slice thickness,
{1,1.5,5}mm) at one or more time points
(between 1 and 5)
51 normal thoracic CT scans (slice thickness,
{1,1.3,4,5,9,10}mm) of different patients
without any abnormal lung findings in the
radiologist’s report
30 normal lung chest CT scans (slice thickness,
{0.8,1,1.5,2.5,3}mm) collected between 20142016
19 normal chest CT scans (slice thickness,
{1.3,2.5}mm) of diagnostic and lung cancer
screening patients
6,150 CT slices of cases with lung
abnormalities and their corresponding lung
masks

Figure 1: System Block Diagram

Figure 2A: Subsystem A: Focal opacities detection and measurements.
Figure 2B: Subsystem B: Slices classified as positive for Coronavirus
abnormalities and their corresponding “heatmap”.

Figure 3: Patient case visualization. Left: Coronal view; Right: Automatically
generated 3D volume map of focal opacities (green) and larger diffuse opacities
(red).

Figure 4A: ROC curves for the task of COVID-19 detection using positive ratio feature.
Left: Chinese Population
Right: Coronavirus patients from China; Non-Coronavirus patients from US
Figure 4B: Tracking of patient’s disease progression over time using Corona Score (Left) and
Relative Corona Score (Right). Day 0 corresponds to 1-4 days following first signs of the
virus.

Figure 5: Multi time point tracking of patient disease progression

Figure 6: Corona score for patient disease progression monitoring

