Is a COVID19 Quarantine Justified in Chile or USA Right Now?
R. I. Gonzalez∗
Centro de Nanotecnologı́a Aplicada, Universidad Mayor, Santiago, Chile†

arXiv:2003.10879v1 [physics.med-ph] 24 Mar 2020

F. Munoz,∗ P. S. Moya, and M. Kiwi∗
Departamento de Fı́sica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(Dated: March 25, 2020)
During the current COVID-19 pandemic it is imperative to give early warnings to reduce mortality.
However, non-specialist such as authorities and the general population face several problems to
understand the real thread of this pandemic, and under/overestimation of its risk are a commonplace
in the press and social media. Here we define an index, which we call the COVID-19 Burden Index,
that relates the capacities of the healthcare system of a given country to treat severe and critical
cases. Its value is 0 if there is no extra strain in the healthcare system, and it reaches 1.0 when
the collapse is imminent. As of 23 March 2020, we show that Chile, the USA, UK, among other
countries, must reduce the rate of infections right now, otherwise, in less than 7 days they could be
in a catastrophic situation such as Italy, Spain and Iran.

Is a nationwide quarantine, or other harder measures
justified in Chile? The answer without deeper analysis
is yes. But, the real tricky ingredient is timing. Scientific evidence has to be a key element in making this
decision, and it has to be based on the available data. A
reckless decision could do enormous harm to the national
economy, which in Chile is already crippled by the social
outburst of October 2019. However, acting too late is
likely to imply a large number of causalities, or producing an even harder sociopolitical scenario. The long delay
between the enforcement of measures and their repercussion in the infection rate makes taking the right decision
even more difficult.
Our intention is to show, with just one -easy to graspparameter, how bad the situation facing the national
healthcare system is. And, on that basis, infer if a nationwide quarantine should be enforced as soon as possible.
We avoid making forecasts about the number of infected,
limiting ourselves to the available data. Our assumptions
are minimal and play almost no role in our conclusions.
We suggest a nationwide quarantine considering that our
social life is very similar to that of Italy or Spain, who
are experiencing a giant humanitarian crisis due to the
collapse of their healthcare system. But, beyond this or
another measure, we want to show that the contagion
of the disease must be radically reduced right now, and
this can be achieved by effective social distancing, only
possible by lockdown.

I.

THE COVID-19 BURDEN INDEX

In an epidemic scenario, rather than the contagion percentage of the total population, one of the most critical
elements is the strength of the healthcare system. In the
COVID-19 pandemic, the bottleneck of the healthcare
system is given by the number of beds available for intensive care (ICU). The number of ICU beds in Chile is
not entirely certain, but it could be estimated to 1000
beds1 (or ∼ 5.3 ICU per 100.000 inhabitants). Of those,

we can expect a steady-state occupancy of 75%; this is
the average of the usual hospital beds occupied in the
OECD2 . Due to the exponential growth of the infection, a lower value (i.e., a 50% or a 30% occupancy) does
not make much difference. Therefore, for this study, we
are going to consider the currently available capacity of
the Chilean healthcare system for COVID-19 patients is
∼ 250 ICU beds. As we will show later, a higher number
of ICU beds can be assumed, for example, similar to the
case of Belgium, but the scenario is still quite worrying.
The ratio of COVID-19 infected to those in need of
intensive or critical care is about 15%, and a third of
them require mechanical ventilation3–6 . We will use 15%
for our estimate. To compare the evolution in different
countries we define the COVID-19 burden index as

0.15 × Nconfirmed cases
,
0.25 × Nbeds

where Nconfirmed cases the number of cumulative confirmed cases, and Nbeds the number of ICU beds available in each country prior to 20207 . A zero value means
the basal occupancy of the healthcare system, i.e., the
healthcare system in steady-state before the year 2020.
When this index reaches 1.0 (the Burnout Limit) the
healthcare system is at its local limit. A value larger
than 1.0 reflects, approximately, how many extra ICU
and medical professionals are needed relative to the regular healthcare system situation (75% occupancy). The
important message is to keep the COVID-19 burden index below unity. For values above one doctors will surely
find themselves in the difficult humanitarian dilemma of
who to care for, or even worse, who to save.

10

1

10

Healthcare System
Burnout Limit

0.1

Chile
Germany
Spain
France
Iran
Italy
South Korea
USA
UK
Belgium
Brazil
Iceland

0.01

0.001

0.0001
-21

-14

-7

0

7

14

21

28

Case Fatality Rate (%)

COVID-19 Burden Index

2

4

4.3% World average (03/23/2020)

2

0

7

14

Days (since > 1000 cases)

21

FIG. 2. Fatality rate of COVID-19 by country. Only the data
for countries with more than 1000 infected cases is provided.
The black line is the world average by March 23, 2020. The
small arrow indicates when the Burnout Limit was reached
(COVID-19 Burden Index of 1).

Covid-19 Confirmed Cases

Figure 1 shows the COVID-19 burden index for several countries using the data available8 . The results are
consistent with what is expected; the worst affected countries, i.e., Italy, Iran, and Spain score 4.6, 3.6, and 3.6 in
the last day considered for this report. UK and Germany
are about to reach their limit. Germany has maintained
a controlled COVID-19 Burden index for 16 days; that
is, it has maintained its health system without collapsing. But 16 days below the burnout limit may be insufficient, if they do not manage to reduce the rate, it
spreads urgently. Although the disease is overcome on
average in 2 weeks, critically ill patients take between 3
and 6 weeks9 , so Germany seems still far from overcoming
the emergency. The UK case is very worrying because it
could collapse very quickly if it does not reduce the rate
of infections as soon as 2 or 3 days, or they could face
the worst-case scenario. South Korea is on its limit, its
healthcare system is fully occupied and strained, but it
is copping with the demand. Finally, USA and Chile
are steadily approaching the limits of their healthcare
systems; in about one week, they might not be able to
cope with the demand if they don’t reduce the rate of
contagion right now. An under/over estimate of the parameters used could mean at most one or two days in
reaching the burnout limit. Close to reaching this limit,
the fatality of COVID-19 increases drastically, see Fig. 2.
Looking to the slope of the COVID-19 burden index in
a logarithmic scale from countries such as Iceland, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, and USA, all of them
have similar behavior. At early stages, the contagion depends much on details, such as population, demographics
and/or geography. Then, at intermediate stages -when
around the 500 detected cases is reached- the slope of
the COVID-19 burden index is nearly the same. This
applies to countries so different as Iceland, Chile, USA
and South Korea. It seems that once the exponential
growth of the epidemic is unleashed, specific details for

6

0

Days (since > 500 cases)
FIG. 1.
COVID-19 burden index for several countries as
a function of time, after the first 500 positive cases are confirmed, a reasonable value for Chile. Notice that we present
the index on a logarithmic scale.

8

Germany
Spain
France
Iran
Italy
South Korea
USA
UK
Belgium

45000
40000
35000
30000
25000

Germany
Spain
France
Iran
Italy
South Korea
USA

20000
15000
10000
5000
0
0

7

14

21

Days (since > 500 cases)
FIG. 3. Is it possible to predict the contagion trend with data
of about 500 cases? An exponential trend (dashed lines) was
adjusted for each country real data using values over 50 and
just over 500 cases. As a comparison, the actual data for the
full period is plotted as symbols. Despite the common belief of decision-makers and the general population, it is NOT
possible to give a truthful prediction, for better or for worse
scenarios, during the early stages of COVID-19 spread based
exclusively on the number of confirmed cases.

each country become irrelevant. Also, this slope does not
correlate with the contagion rate found during the early
propagation stages. Afterward, at late stages, the slope
decreases. This is the case of South Korea, Italy and Iran.
This third stage, we infer, is related to contagion control
reducing the contagion rate. But, if this is accomplished
too late as in Iran or Italy, the consequences are disas-

3
trous, as is being experienced. Our recommendation, for
any country that is still in time, is to stay under the
burnout point (1.0) as South Korea achieved. As we will
show below, this can make a difference in reducing the
number of deaths, when compared to the Italian crisis by
about 10 times, using the preliminary data from South
Korea, or even up to about 20 times as preliminary data
from Germany. Finally, the marked difference, between 3
clear stages (or more in the case of South Korea) makes
a prediction of the spread of COVID-19 inaccurate using
standard methods, such as a regression of early contagious data (see Fig. 3).
The most significant danger of this pandemic is not
how contagious it is, or the mortality rate, which are important. The main danger is the collapse of the healthcare system. The case fatality rate (CFR), defined as
the percentage of death from confirmed COVID-19 cases,
changes day to day, and cannot be determined with certainty, and our data are no reference. However, on the
basis of the data available on March 23, it is around
4,3%. This is in sharp contrast with South Korea, with
over 8,000 cases and about 1% CFR. However, Spain
and Italy, with their collapsed healthcare systems, report
around 6 and 9%, respectively. Germany has not overcome the emergency and must take extreme measures.
In any case, having today a similar number of confirmed
infections than those of Spain, and after a similar time
since they both exceeded 500 cases, it has a CFR of less
than 0.5%, which seems encouraging.
Mainly, our intention is to sound an alarm. It is vital
that the authorities of every affected country, on the basis
of ICU available beds and the contagion rate, make their
most to keep the COVID-19 Burden Index below 1, and
take the severe and difficult decisions that this objective
requires. In this analysis, we have tried to avoid any
bias, sticking to the available data8 . We believe that
the COVID-19 burden index is a simple and solid tool
to warn the authorities and decision-makers about the
dangers of COVID-19. If the COVID-19 burden index
reaches values close to 1.0 the collapse of the healthcare
system is imminent, and harsh measures are in need to

∗

†
1

2
3

4

5

Center for the Development of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
m.kiwi.t@gmail.com and rafael.gonzalez@umayor.cl
M. de Salud de Chile, Informe campaña de invierno 2017,
https://www.minsal.cl/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/
Informe-Final-Campa%C3%B1a-de-Invierno-2017.pdf.
OECD, Hospital beds and discharge rates.
M. F. Liew, W. T. Siow, G. MacLaren, and K. C. See,
Preparing for covid-19: early experience from an intensive
care unit in singapore, Critical Care 24, 1 (2020).
Y. M. Arabi, S. Murthy, and S. Webb, Covid-19: a novel
coronavirus and a novel challenge for critical care, Intensive
care medicine , 1 (2020).
J. Xie, Z. Tong, X. Guan, B. Du, H. Qiu, and A. S. Slutsky, Critical care crisis and some recommendations during

avoid a drastic increase in causalities.
Finally, while our main concern is Chile, the US case
is very worrisome. In fact, with more than 100,000 ICU
beds, twice as much as China, they are not shielding the
population from exponential COVID-19 growth. The US
has 17 times more population than Chile, and 100 times
more ICU beds, but there is no guarantee of avoiding
collapse (see Fig. 1). The only way to avoid collapse is
by reducing the contagion rate as early as possible. By
March 23, the slope of the COVID-19 burden index of
USA is similar to South Korea in Day 2 (see Fig. 1).
South Korea shortly afterward decreased the slope of the
curve, avoiding the burnout limit. The same could happen in USA, but it will depend on the measures taken in
the previous weeks.
The authors of this brief communication are used to
analyze data and perform simulations in physics, trying
to describe Nature. Regrettably, in this urgent communication, we rely only on real data and try to find a simple interpretation of a global humanitarian crisis to help
on its solution. The scientific research using computational simulations and experiments are essential to stop
this pandemic. Nevertheless, for this communication, the
computational simulations were not necessary at all; the
evidence from several countries is overwhelming. Unless
the exponential growth is hindered in the following days,
Chile, USA, and other countries in a similar situation
could experience a similar collapse of their healthcare
systems. Sadly, to stop the number of critical cases during the next week, the measures should have been taken
about one week before writing this communication.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are supported by ANID Chile through
Fondecyt grants Nos. 1191351, 1191353, and 11180557,
the Center for the Development of Nanoscience and and
Nanotechnology CEDENNA AFB180001, and Conicyt
PIA/Anillo ACT192023.

6

7

8

9

the covid-19 epidemic in china, Intensive Care Medicine , 1
(2020).
J. Hopman, B. Allegranzi, and S. Mehtar, Managing covid19 in low-and middle-income countries, JAMA.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_
by_hospital_beds.
H. R. Max Roser and E. Ortiz-Ospina, Coronavirus disease (covid-19) statistics and research, Our World in Data
(2020), https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
W. H. Organization, Report of the who-china joint
mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), https:
//www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/
who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.
pdf (2020).

