α-Satellite: An AI-driven System and Benchmark Datasets for
Hierarchical Community-level Risk Assessment to Help Combat COVID-19
Yanfang Ye∗1 , Shifu Hou1 , Yujie Fan1 , Yiyue Qian1
Yiming Zhang1 , Shiyu Sun1 , Qian Peng1 , Kenneth Laparo2

1 Department

arXiv:2003.12232v1 [cs.SI] 27 Mar 2020

2 Department

of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, OH, USA
of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, OH, USA
{yanfang.ye,sxh1055,yxf370,yxq250,xyz2092,sxs2293,qxp36,kal4}@case.edu

ABSTRACT

1

The novel coronavirus and its deadly outbreak have posed grand
challenges to human society: as of March 26, 2020, there have been
85,377 confirmed cases and 1,293 reported deaths in the United
States; and the World Health Organization (WHO) characterized
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) - which has infected more than
531,000 people with more than 24,000 deaths in at least 171 countries - a global pandemic. A growing number of areas reporting local
sub-national community transmission would represent a significant turn for the worse in the battle against the novel coronavirus,
which points to an urgent need for expanded surveillance so we can
better understand the spread of COVID-19 and thus better respond
with actionable strategies for community mitigation. By advancing
capabilities of artificial intelligence (AI) and leveraging the largescale and real-time data generated from heterogeneous sources (e.g.,
disease related data from official public health organizations, demographic data, mobility data, and user geneated data from social
media), in this work, we propose and develop an AI-driven system
(named α-Satellite), as an initial offering, to provide hierarchical
community-level risk assessment to assist with the development
of strategies for combating the fast evolving COVID-19 pandemic.
More specifically, given a specific location (either user input or
automatic positioning), the developed system will automatically
provide risk indexes associated with it in a hierarchical manner (e.g.,
state, county, city, specific location) to enable individuals to select
appropriate actions for protection while minimizing disruptions
to daily life to the extent possible. The developed system and the
generated benchmark datasets have been made publicly accessible
through our website1 . The system description and disclaimer are
also available in our website.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) [34] is an infectious disease caused
by a new virus that had not been previously identified in humans;
this respiratory illness (with symptoms such as a cough, fever and
pneumonia) was first identified during an investigation into an
outbreak in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and is now rapidly
spreading in the U.S. and globally. The novel coronavirus and its
deadly outbreak have posed grand challenges to human society. As
of March 26, 2020, there have been 85,377 confirmed cases and 1,293
reported deaths in the U.S. (Figure 1); and the WHO characterized
COVID-19 - which has infected more than 531,000 people with more
than 24,000 deaths in at least 171 countries - a global pandemic.

KEYWORDS
COVID-19, AI-driven System, Benchemark Datasets, Hierarchical
Community-level Risk Assessment; Community Mitigation.

1 https://COVID-19.yes-lab.org/

Cleveland, OH, 2020
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

INTRODUCTION

Figure 1: COVID-19 in the U.S. (by 2:59pm EDT, 03/26/20).
It is believed that the novel virus which causes COVID-19 emerged
from an animal source, but it is now rapidly spreading from personto-person through various forms of contact. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [4], the coronavirus
seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community - i.e.,
community transmission which means people have been infected
with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how
or where they became infected. An example of community transmission that caused the outbreak of COVID-19 in King County at
Washington State (WA) is shown in Figure 2. The challenge with
community transmission is that carriers are often asymptomatic
and unaware that they are infected and through their movements
within the community they spread the disease. According to the
CDC, before a vaccine or drug becomes widely available (i.e., this is

the case for COVID-19 by far), community mitigation, which is a set
of actions that persons and communities can take to help slow the
spread of respiratory virus infections, is the most readily available
interventions to help slow transmission of the virus in communities [5]. A growing number of areas reporting local sub-national
community transmission would represent a significant turn for the
worse in the battle against the novel coronavirus, which points
to an urgent need for expanded surveillance so we can better
understand the spread of COVID-19 and thus better respond with
actionable strategies for community mitigation.

The framework of our proposed and developed system is shown
in Figure 3. In the system of α-Satellite, (1) we first construct an
attributed heterogeneous information network (AHIN) to model
the collected large-scale and real-time pandemic related data in a
comprehensive way; (2) based on the constructed AHIN, to address
the challenge of limited data that might be available for learning
(e.g., social media data to learn public perceptions towards COVID19 in a given area might not be sufficient), we then exploit the
conditional generative adversarial nets (cGANs) to gain the public
perceptions towards COVID-19 in each given area; and finally (3)
we utilize meta-path based schemes to model both vertical and
horizontal information associated with a given area, and devise
a novel heterogeneous graph auto-encoder (GAE) to aggregate
information from its neighborhood areas to estimate the risk of
the given area in a hierarchical manner. The developed system
α-Satellite and the generated benchmark datasets have been made
publicly accessible through our website.

2

Figure 2: An example of community transmission.
Unlike the 1918 influenza pandemic [2] where the global scope
and devastating impacts were only determined well after the fact,
COVID-19 history is being written daily, if not hourly, and if the
right types of data can be acquired and analyzed there is the potential to improve self awareness of the risk to the population and
develop proactive (rather than reactive) interventions that can halt
the exponential growth in the disease that is currently being observed. Realizing the true potential of real-time surveillance, with
this opportunity comes the challenge: the available data are uncertain and incomplete while we need to provide mitigation strategies
objectively with caution and rigor (i.e., enable people to select appropriate actions to protect themselves at increased risk of COVID-19
while minimize disruptions to daily life to the extent possible).
To address the above challenge, leveraging our long-term and
successful experiences in combating and mitigating widespread malware attacks using AI-driven techniques [7, 8, 10, 11, 15, 16, 20, 37–
45], in this work, we propose to design and develop an AI-driven
system to provide hierarchical community-level risk assessment at the
first attempt to help combat the fast evolving COVID-19 pandemic,
by using the large-scale and real-time data generated from heterogeneous sources. In our developed system (named α-Satellite), we
first develop a set of tools to collect and preprocess the large-scale
and real-time pandemic related data from multiple sources, including disease related data from official public health organizations,
demographic data, mobility data, and user generated data from
social media; and then we devise advanced AI-driven techniques
to provide hierarchical community-level risk assessment to enable
actionable strategies for community mitigation. More specifically,
given a specific location (either user input or automatic positioning), the developed system will automatically provide risk indexes
associated with it in a hierarchical manner (e.g., state, county, city,
specific location) to enable people to select appropriate actions for
protection while minimizing disruptions to daily life.

RELATED WORK

There have been several works on using AI and machine learning techniques to help combat COVID-19: in the biomedical domain, [6, 24, 28, 32, 35] use deep learning methods for COVID-19
pneumonia diagnosis and genome study; while [26, 36] develop
learning-based models to predict severity and survival for patients.
Another research direction is to utilize public accessible data to
help the estimation of infection cases or forecast the COVID-19
outbreak [14, 17, 18, 22, 25, 27, 46]. However, most of these existing
works mainly focus on Wuhan China; the studies of using computational models to combat COVID-19 in the U.S. are scarce and there
has no work on community-level risk assessment to assist with
community mitigation by far. To meet this urgent need and to
bridge the research gap, in this work, by advancing capabilities
of AI and leveraging the large-scale and real-time data generated
from heterogeneous sources, we propose and develop an AI-driven
system, named α-Satellite, to provide hierarchical community-level
risk assessment at the first attempt to help combat the deadly and
fast evolving COVID-19 pandemic.

3

PROPOSED METHOD

In this section, we will introduce our proposed method integrated
in the system of α-Satellite to automatically provide hierarchical
community-level risk assessment related to COVID-19 in detail.

3.1

Data obtained from Heterogeneous Sources

Realizing the true potential of real-time surveillance requires identifying the proper data sources, based on which we can devise models
to extract meaningful and actionable information for community
mitigation. Since relying on a single data source for estimation and
prediction often results in unsatisfactory performance, we develop
a set of crawling tools and preprocessing methods to collect and
parse the large-scale and real-time pandemic related data from
multiple sources, which include the followings.
• Disease related data. We collect the up-to-date county-based coronavirus related data including the numbers of confirmed cases,
new cases, deaths and the fatality rate, from i) official public
health organizations such as WHO, CDC, and county government websites, and ii) digital media with real-time updates of

Figure 3: System architecture of α-Satellite (i.e., an AI-driven system for hierarchical community-level risk assessment). In
α-Satellite, (a) we first construct an AHIN to model the collected large-scale and real-time pandemic related data in a comprehensive way; (b) based on the constructed AHIN, we then exploit the cGANs to gain the public perception towards COVID-19
in an given area; (c) we finally utilize meta-path based schemes to model both vertical and horizontal information associated
with a given area, and devise heterogeneous GAE to aggregate information from its neighborhood areas to estimate the risk
of the given area in a hierarchical manner.
COVID-19 (e.g., 1point3acres2 ). The collected up-to-date countybased COVID-19 related statistical data can be an important
element for risk assessment of an associated area.
• Demographic data. The United States Census Bureau3 provides
the demographic data including basic population, business, and
geography statistics for all states and counties, and for cities and
towns with more than 5,000 people. The demographic information will contribute to the risk assessment of an associated area:
for example, as older adults may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19 [3, 30], the age distribution
of a given area can be considered as an important input. In this
work, given a specific area, we mainly consider the associated
demographic data including the estimated population, population density (e.g., number of people per square mile), age and
gender distributions.
• Mobility data. Given a specific area (either user input or automatic positioning), a mobility measure that estimates how busy
the area is in terms of traffic density will be retained from location service providers (i.e., Google maps).
• User generated data from social media. As users in social media are likely to discuss and share their experiences of COVID19, the data from social media may contribute complementary
knowledge such as public perceptions towards COVID-19 in
the area they associate with. In this work, we initialize our
efforts with the focus on Reddit, as it provides the platform
for scientific discussion of dynamic policies, announcements,
symptoms and events of COVID-19. In particular, we consider
i) three subreddits with general discussion (i.e., r/Coronavirus4 ,
2 https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en

3 https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/PST045219

4 https://www.reddit.com/r/Coronavirus/

r/COVID195 and r/CoronavirusUS6 ); ii) four region-based subreddits, which are r/CoronavirusMidwest, r/CoronavirusSouth,
r/CoronavirusSouthEast and r/CoronavirusWest; and iii) 48 statebased subreddits (i.e., Washington, D.C. and 47 states). To analyze public perceptions towards COVID-19 for a given area (note
that all users are anonymized for analysis using hash values of
usernames), we first exploit Stanford Named Entity Recognizer
[12] to extract the location-based information (e.g., county, city),
and then utilize tools such as NLTK [1] to conduct sentiment
analysis (i.e., positive, neutral or negative). More specifically,
positive denotes well aware of COVID-19, while negative indicates less aware of COVID-19. For example, with the analysis
of the post by a user (with hash value of “CF***6”) in subreddit
of r/CoronaVirusPA on March 14, 2020: “I live in Montgomery
County, PA and everyone here is acting like there’s nothing going
on.”, the location-related information of Montgomery county
and Pennsylvania state (i.e., PA) can be extracted, and a user’s
perception towards COVID-19 in Montgomery county at PA can
be learned (i.e., negative indicating less aware of COVID-19).
Such automatically extracted knowledge will be incorporated
into the risk assessment of the related area; meanwhile, it can
also provide important information to help inform and educate
about the science of coronavirus transmission and prevention.

3.2

AHIN built from Collected Data

To comprehensively describe a given area for its risk assessment
related to COVID-19, based on the data collected from multiple
sources above, we consider and extract higher-level semantics as
well as social and behavioral information within the communities.
5 https://www.reddit.com/r/COVID19/

6 https://www.reddit.com/r/CoronavirusUS/

Attributed Features. Based on the collected data above, we further
extract the corresponding attributed features.
• A1: disease related feature. For a given area, its related COVID19 pandemic data will be extracted including the numbers of
confirmed cases, new cases, deaths and the fatality rate, which
is represented by a numeric feature vector a1 . For example, as of
March 22, 2020, the Cuyahoga County at Ohio State (OH) has
had 125 confirmed cases, 33 new cases, 1 death and 0.8% fatality
rate, which can be represented as a1 =< 125, 33, 1, 0.008 >.
• A2: demographic feature. Given a specific area, we obtain its associated city’s (or town’s) demographic data from the United States
Census Bureau, including the estimated population, population
density (i.e., number of people per square mile), age distribution
(i.e., percentage of people over 65 year-old) and gender distribution (i.e., percentage of females). For example, to assist with the
risk assessment of the area of Euclid Ave in Cleveland at OH, the
obtained demographic data associated with it are: Cleveland with
population of 383793, population density of 5107, 13.5% people
over 65 year-old, and 51.8% females, which will be represented
as a2 =< 383793, 5107, 0.135, 0.518 >.
• A3: mobility feature. Given a specific area, a mobility measure
that estimates how busy the area is in terms of traffic density
will be obtained from Google maps, which will represented by
five degree levels (i.e., [1,5], the larger number the busier).
• A4: representation of public perception. After performing the automatic sentiment analysis based on the collected posts associated
with a given area from Reddit, the public perceptions towards
COVID-19 in this area will be represented by a normalized value
(i.e., [0,1]) indicated the awareness of COVID-19 (i.e., the larger
value the more aware). For the previous example of the Reddit
post of “I live in Montgomery County, PA and everyone here is
acting like there’s nothing going on.”, a related perception towards
COVID-19 in Montgomery County at PA will be formulated as
a numeric vale of 0.220, denoting people in this area were less
aware of COVID-19 on March 14, 2020.
After extracting the above features, we concatenate them as a
normalized attributed feature vector A attached to each given area
for representation, i.e., A = A1 ⊕A2 ⊕A3 ⊕A4 . Note that we zero-pad
the ones in the elements when the data are not available.
Relation-based Features. Besides the above extracted attributed
features, we also consider the rich relations among different areas.
• R1: administrative affiliation. According to the severity of COVID19, available resources and impacts to the residents, different
states may have different policies, actionable strategies and orders with responses to COVID-19. Therefore, given an area, we
accordingly extract its administrative affiliation in a hierarchical
manner. Particularly, we acquire the state-include-county and
county-include-city relations from City-to-County Finder7 .
• R2: geospatial relation. We also consider the geospatial relations
between a given area and its neighborhood areas. More specifically, given an area, we retain its k-nearest neighbors at the same
hierarchical level by calculating the euclidean distances based
on their global positioning system (GPS) coordinates obtained
from Google maps and Wikipedia8 .
7 http://www.stats.indiana.edu/uspr/a/place_frame.html

8 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Michael_J/County_table

AHIN Construction. Given the rich semantics and complex relations extracted above, it is important to model them in a proper
way so that different relations can be better and easier handled. To
solve this problem, we introduce AHIN to model them, which is
able to be composed of different types of entities associated with
attributed features and different types of relations. We first present
the concepts related to AHIN below.
Definition 1. Attributed Heterogeneous Information Network
(AHIN) [21]: Let T = {T1 , ...,Tm } be a set of m entity types, Xi be
the set of entities of type Ti and Ai be the set of attributes defined
for entities of type Ti . An AHIN is defined as a graph G = (V, E, A)
with an entity type mapping ϕ: V → T and a relation type mapping
Ð
ψ : E → R, where V = m
i=1 Xi denotes the entity set and E is the
relation set, T denotes the entity type set and R is the relation type
Ð
set, A = m
i=1 Ai , and |T | + |R| > 2. Network Schema [21]: The
network schema of an AHIN G is a meta-template for G, denoted
as a directed graph TG = (T , R) with nodes as entity types from
T and edges as relation types from R.
In this work, we have four types of entities (i.e., nation, state,
county and city, |T | = 4), two types of relations (i.e., R1 and R2,
|R| = 2), and each entity is attached with an attributed feature
vector as described above. Based on the definitions, the network
schema of AHIN in our case is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Network schema of AHIN.

3.3

AHIN Enrichment by cGAN

Although the constructed AHIN can model the complex and rich
relations among different entities attached with attributed features,
there faces a challenge that there might be missing values of attributed features attached to the entities in the AHIN because of limited
data that might be available for learning. More specifically, given an
area, there may not be sufficient social media data (i.e., Reddit data
in this work) to learn the public perceptions towards COVID-19
in this area. For example, for the state of Montana, as of March 22,
2020, in its corresponding subreddit r/CoronavirusMontana, there
only have been 12 posts by seven users discussing the virus. To
address this issue, we propose to exploit cGANs [23] for synthetic
(virtual) social media user data generation for public perception
learning to enrich the AHIN.
Different from traditional GANs [13], a cGAN is a conditional
model extended from GANs, where both the generator and discriminator are conditioned on some extra information. In our case, we
propose to exploit cGAN to generate the synthetic posts for those
areas where the data are not available. In our designed cGAN, given
an area where Reddit data are not available, the condition composes
of three parts: the disease related feature vector in this area a1 , its
related demographic feature vector a2 and its GPS coordinate denoted as o. As shown in Figure 5, the generator in the devised cGAN
aims to incorporate the prior noise pz (z), with the conditions of a1 ,
a2 and o as the inputs to generate the synthetic posts represented by

latent vectors; while in the discriminator, real post representations
obtained by using doc2vec [19] or generated synthetic post latent
vectors along with a1 , a2 and o are fed to a discriminative function.
Both generator and discriminator could be a non-linear mapping
function, such as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The generator
and discriminator play the adversarial minimax game formulated
as the following minimax problem:
min max V (D, G) = Ep∼pd at a (p) [log D(p|a1 , a2 , o)]
G

D

+ Ez∼pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z|a1 , a2 , o)))].

(1)

The generator and discriminator are trained simultaneously: adjusting parameters for generator to minimize log(1 − D(G(z|a1 , a2 , o)))
while adjusting parameters for discriminator to maximize the probability of assigning the correct labels to both training examples and
generated samples.

Figure 5: cGAN for synthetic post latent vector generation.
After applying cGAN for synthetic post latent vector generation,
we further exploit deep neural network (DNN) to learn the public
perceptions towards COVID-19 in this area. More specifically, we
first use doc2vec to obtain the representations of real posts collected
from Reddit and feed them to train the DNN model; and then given
a generated synthetic post latent vector, we use the trained model
to gain its related perception (i.e., awareness of COVID-19).

3.4

Hierarchical Risk Assessment

Meta-path Expression. To assist with the risk assessment of a
given area related to the fast evolving COVID-19, it might not
be sufficient if only considering its vertical information (e.g., its
related city, county or state’s responses, strategies and policies);
the horizontal information (i.e., information from its neighborhood
areas) will also be important inputs. To comprehensively integrate
both vertical and horizontal information, we propose to exploit
the concept of meta-path [29] to formulate the relatedness among
different areas in the constructed AHIN.
Definition 2. Meta-path. A meta-path P is a path defined on
the network schema TG = (T , R), and is denoted in the form of
R1

R2

RL

T1 −−→ T2 −−→ ... −−→ TL+1 , which defines a composite relation
R = R 1 · R 2 · . . . · R L between types T1 and TL+1 , where · denotes
relation composition operator, and L is the length of P.

Figure 6.(a) shows our designed meta-paths (i.e., P1-P3). For
include

near

example, P1 of county −−−−−−−→ city −−−−→ city denotes that, to
assess the risk of a specific city, we not only consider the city itself,
but also the information from its related county and nearby cities.
Heterogeneous Graph Auto-encoder. Given a node (i.e., area)
in the constructed AHIN, guided by its corresponding meta-path
scheme (i.e., city level guided by P1, county level guided by P2, and
state level guided by P3), to aggregate the information propagated
from its neighborhood nodes, we propose a heterogeneous graph
auto-encoder (GAE) model to achieve this goal. The designed heterogeneous GAE model consists of an encoder and a decoder: the
encoder aims at encoding meta-path based propagation to a latent
representation, and the decoder will reconstruct the topological
information from the representation.
Encoder. We here exploit attentive mechanism [9, 31, 33] to devise
the encoder: it will first search the meta-path based neighbors N (v)
for each node v, and then each node will attentively aggregate
information from its neighbors. To learn the importance of the information from neighborhood nodes, we first present each relation
type r ∈ R in the constructed AHIN by Rr ∈ Rda ×da , where d a
denotes the dimension of the attributed feature vector; and then
the attentive weight β of node u (the neighbor of v) indicate the
relevance of these two nodes measured in terms of the space Rr ,
that is,
βr (v, u) = aTv Rr au ,

(2)

where av and au are the attributed feature vectors attached to node
v and u. We further normalize the weights across all the neighbors
of v by applying softmax function:
exp(βr (v, u))
′ .
u ′ ∈N(v) exp(βr (v, u ))

βer (v, u) = Í

(3)

Then, the neighbors’ representations can be formulated as the linear
combination:
a N(v) = βer (v, u)au ,

(4)

where the weight βer (v, u) indicates the information propagated
from u to v in terms of relation r . Finally, we aggregate v’s representation av and its neighbors’ representations a N(v) by:
av = avд(av + a N(v) ).

(5)

Decoder. The decoder is used to reconstruct the network topological
structure. More specifically, based on the latent representations generated from the encoder, the decoder is trained to predict whether
there is a link between two nodes in the constructed AHIN.
To this end, leveraging latent representations learned from the
heterogeneous GAE, the risk index of a given area is calculated as:
Idx(v) =

da
Õ

γi av (i),

(6)

i=1

Figure 6: Meta-paths and heterogeneous GAE.

where γi is the adjustable parameter that can be specified by human
experts, indicating the importance of i-th element in av (e.g., the
number of confirmed cases, population density, age distribution,
mobility measure, etc.) in the rapidly changing situation.

4

SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT, BENCHMARK
DATASETS AND CASE STUDIES

Because of the critical need to act promptly and deliberately in
this rapidly changing situation, we have deployed our developed
system α-Satellite (i.e., an AI-driven system to automatically provide
hierarchical community-level risk assessment related to COVID19) for public test. Given a specific location (either user input or
automatic positioning), the developed system will automatically
provide risk indexes associated with it in a hierarchical manner
(e.g., state, county, city, specific location) to enable people to select
appropriate actions for protection while minimizing disruptions to
daily life. The link of the system is: https://COVID-19.yes-lab.org,
which also include the brief description and disclaimer of the system
as well as the following benchmark datasets.

4.1

Benchmark Datasets for Public Use

Data Collection and Preprocessing. We have developed a set
of crawling and preprocessing tools to collect and parse the largescale and real-time pandemic related data from multiple sources,
including disease related data from official public health organizations and digital media, demographic data, mobility data, and user
generated data from social media (i.e., Reddit). We have made our
collected and proprocessed data available for public use through
the above link. We describe each publicly accessible benchmark
dataset (i.e., DB1 - DB4 ) in detail below.
DB1 : disease related dataset. According to simplemaps9 , the U.S.
includes 50 states, Washington, D.C. and Puerto Rico as well as 3,203
counties and 28,889 cities. We have collected the up-to-date countybased coronavirus related data including the numbers of confirmed
cases, new cases, deaths and the fatality rate, from official public
health organizations (e.g., WHO, CDC, and county government
websites) and digital media with real-time updates of COVID-19
(e.g., 1point3acres). By the date, we have collected these data from
1,531 counties and 52 states (including Washington, D.C. and Puerto
Rico) on a daily basis from Feb. 28, 2020 to date (i.e., March 25, 2020).
DB2 : demographic and mobility dataset. We parse the demographic data collected from the the United States Census Bureau
(data updated on July 1, 2019) in a hierarchical manner: for each
city, county or state in the U.S., the dataset includes its estimated
population, population density (e.g., number of people per square
mile), age and gender distributions. By the date, we make the demographic and mobility dataset available for public use including the
information of estimated population, population density, and GPS
coordinates for 28,889 cities, 3,203 counties and 52 states (including
Washington, D.C. and Puerto Rico).
DB3 : social media data from Reddit. In this work, we initialize
our efforts on social media data with the focus of public perception
analysis on Reddit, as it provides the platform for scientific discussion of dynamic policies, announcements, symptoms and events of
COVID-19. In particular, we have collected and analyzed 48 statebased subreddits (i.e., Washington, D.C. and 47 states). By the date,
we have crawled and automatically analyze 22,992 posts by 8,948
users on Reddit associated with 182,554 comments by 30,147 users
on the discussion of COVID-19 from February 17, 2020 to date (i.e.,
March 25, 2020). Along with these data, this publicized dataset also
9 https://simplemaps.com/

includes the extracted locations of the posts using Stanford Named
Entity Recognizer.
DB4 : constructed AHIN. Based on our designed AHIN network
schema in this work (shown in Figure 4), the constructed AHIN has
32,145 nodes (i.e., 1 node with type of nation, 52 nodes with type
of state, 3,203 nodes with type of county, 28,889 nodes with type of
city) and 96,459 edges (including 32,144 edges with relation type of
R1 and 64,315 edges with relation type of R2).

4.2

Case Studies

In this section, we evaluate the practical utility of the developed
system α-Satellite for hierarchical community-level risk assessment
related to COVID-19 through a set of case studies.
Case study 1: real-time risk index of a given area. Given a
specific location (either user input or automatic positioning by
Google map), the developed system will automatically provide
its related risk index (i.e., ranging from [0,1], the larger number
indicates higher risk and vice versa) associated with the public
perceptions (i.e., awareness) towards COVID-19 in this area (i.e.,
ranging from [0,1], the larger number denotes more aware and vice
versa), demographic density (i.e., the number of people per square
mile in its related county), and traffic status (i.e., ranging from [1,5],
the larger number means more traffic and vice versa). Figure 7.(a)
shows an example: given the location of Euclid Ave, Cleveland,
OH 44106, the risk index provided by the system was 0.662 (with
public perception of 0.529, demographic density of 1,389, and traffic
status of 3) at 3:58pm EDT on March 24, 2020. At the same time, the
risk indexes and public perceptions of corresponding county (i.e.,
Cuyahoga county with risk index of 0.665 and public perception of
0.585) and state (i.e., OH state with risk index of 0.554 and public
perception of 0.557) will also be shown in a hierarchical manner
to enable people to select appropriate actions for protection while
minimizing disruptions to daily life.
Case study 2: comparisons of risk indexes on different dates.
In this study, given the same area, we examine how the generated
risk indexes change over time. Using the same location above, Figure
7.(b) shows the comparison results on different dates at the time of
3:58pm EDT, from which we have the following observations: 1) in
general, its risk indexes increased over days from March 8, 2020 (i.e.,
0.131) to March 24, 2020 (i.e., 0.662), as the confirmed cases in its
related county (i.e., Cuyahoga county) and its related state (i.e., OH)
continued to grow (i.e., from 0 case in Cuyahoga county on March
8 to 167 cases and 2 deaths on March 24, and from 0 case in OH on
March 8 to 564 cases and 8 deaths on March 24); 2) after the first
three case were confirmed in Cuyahoga county at OH on March 9,
there was a sharp rise of risk index compared with March 8 (from
0.131 to 0.314); 3) the increases of risk indexes relatively slowed
down after the public health and executive orders were issued in
responses to COVID-19. For example, the risk indexes dropped to
0.605, 0.603 and 0.662 on March 15, 16 and 23 respectively, which
might be because the government declared a state of emergency
on March 14, ordered Ohio bars and restaurants to close on March
15 and issued a stay-at-home order on March 2210 .
Case study 3: comparisons of risk indexes at different areas.
In this study, given the same time, we examine how the generated
10 https://coronavirus.ohio.gov/wps/portal/gov/covid-19/home/public-health-

orders/public-health-orders

Figure 7: Risk index of a given area and comparisons of the indexes on different dates.

Figure 8: Comparisons of the indexes at different areas given the same time.
risk indexes change over areas. When a user inputs the areas he/she
are interested in (e.g., grocery stores near me) in the search bar, the
system will display the nearby grocery stores using Google maps
application programming interface (API) and automatically provide
the associated indexes. For example, using the same time in the
first study (i.e., 3:58pm EDT on March 24, 2020), Figure 8 shows
the “grocery stores near me” (i.e., near the location of Euclid Ave,
Cleveland, OH 44106) and their related indexes. From Figure 8, we
can observe that the indexes of nearby areas might vary due to
the factors of different public perceptions towards COVID-19 and
different traffic statuses in specific areas. As shown in the right part
of Figure 8, the system also provides related Reddit posts to users.
Case study 4: comparisons of different counties and states.
In this study, we compare the indexes of different counties and
different states given the same time. Using the time in the first study
(i.e., 3:58pm EDT on March 24, 2020), Figure 9.(a) shows an example
of comparisons. More specifically, at county-level, using OH state as
an example, we choose the counties with top five largest numbers
of confirmed cases on March 24 for comparisons: Cuyahoga (167),
Franklin (75), Hamilton (38), Summit (36) and Lorain (30). Figure.

9.(b) illustrates the risk indexes associated with multiple factors
versus the numbers of confirmed cases in these counties. For the
comparisons of different states, we also choose five states: two
most severe states (New York (NY) with 26,376 confirmed cases
and 271 deaths, California (CA) with 2,628 confirmed cases and 54
deaths), two medium severe states (OH with 564 confirmed cases
and 8 deaths, Virginia (VA) with 304 confirmed cases and 9 deaths)
and one least severe state (West Virginia (WV) with 39 confirmed
cases and 0 deaths). Figure. 9.(c) shows the risk indexes versus the
numbers of confirmed cases in these states, from which we can
see that there is a positive correlation between the numbers of
confirmed cases and the risk indexes.

5

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

To track the emerging dynamics of COVID-19 pandemic in the
U.S., in this work, we propose to collect and model heterogeneous
data from a variety of different sources, devise algorithms to use
these data to train and update the models to estimate the spread of
COVID-19 and predict the risks at community levels, and thus help
provide actionable information to users for community mitigation.

Figure 9: Comparisons of different counties and different states given the same time.
In sum, leveraging the large-scale and real-time data generated from
heterogeneous sources, we have developed the prototype of an AIdriven system (named α-Satellite) to help combat the deadly COVID19 pandemic. The developed system and generated benchmark
datasets have made publicly accessible through our website.
In the future work, we plan to continue our efforts to expand
the data collection and enhance the system to help combat the fast
evolving COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to release our generated data and updates of the system to facilitate researchers and
practitioners on the research to help combat COVID-19 pandemic,
while assisting people to select appropriate actions to protect themselves at increased risk of COVID-19 while minimize disruptions
to daily life to the extent possible.

6

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Y. Ye, S. Hou, Y. Fan, Y. Qian, Y. Zhang, S. Sun and Q. Peng’s work
is partially supported by the NSF under grants IIS-1951504, CNS1940859, CNS-1946327, CNS-1814825 and OAC-1940855, and by
DoJ/NIJ under grant NIJ 2018-75-CX-0032. This work is also partially supported by the Institute for Smart, Secure and Connected
Systems (ISSACS) at Case Western Reserve University.

REFERENCES
[1] Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural language processing
with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media,
Inc".
[2] CDC. 2020. 1918 Pandemic (H1N1 virus). https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemicresources/1918-pandemic-h1n1.html.
[3] CDC. 2020. Are You at Higher Risk for Severe Illness? https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/specific-groups/high-risk-complications.html.
[4] CDC. 2020. How COVID-19 Spreads. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/prepare/transmission.html.
[5] CDC. 2020. Implementation of Mitigation Strategies for Communities with Local COVID-19 Transmission.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
downloads/community-mitigation-strategy.pdf.
[6] Jun Chen, Lianlian Wu, Jun Zhang, Liang Zhang, Dexin Gong, Yilin Zhao, Shan
Hu, Yonggui Wang, Xiao Hu, Biqing Zheng, et al. 2020. Deep learning-based model
for detecting 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia on high-resolution computed
tomography: a prospective study. medRxiv (2020).
[7] Lingwei Chen, Shifu Hou, and Yanfang Ye. 2017. SecureDroid: Enhancing Security
of Machine Learning-based Detection against Adversarial Android Malware
Attacks. In Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC).

[8] Lingwei Chen, Yanfang Ye, and Thirimachos Bourlai. 2017. Adversarial Machine
Learning in Malware Detection: Arms Race between Evasion Attack and Defense.
In European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC).
[9] Shaohua Fan, Junxiong Zhu, Xiaotian Han, Chuan Shi, Linmei Hu, Biyu Ma, and
Yongliang Li. 2019. Metapath-guided Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network for
Intent Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 2478–2486.
[10] Yujie Fan, Shifu Hou, Yiming Zhang, Yanfang Ye, and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2018.
Gotcha - Sly Malware! Scorpion: A Metagraph2vec Based Malware Detection
System. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(ACM SIGKDD).
[11] Yujie Fan, Yanfang Ye, and Lifei Chen. 2016. Malicious Sequential Pattern Mining
for Automatic Malware Detection. Expert Systems with Applications 52 (2016),
16–25.
[12] Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling.
In Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting on association for computational linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 363–370.
[13] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial
nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 2672–2680.
[14] Slav W Hermanowicz. 2020. Forecasting the Wuhan coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
epidemics using a simple (simplistic) model. medRxiv (2020).
[15] Shifu Hou, Yujie Fan, Yiming Zhang, Yanfang Ye, Jingwei Lei, Wenqiang Wan,
Jiabin Wang, Qi Xiong, and Fudong Shao. 2019. alphaCyber: Enhancing Robustness of Android Malware Detection System against Adversarial Attacks on
Heterogeneous Graph based Model. In International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM).
[16] Shifu Hou, Yanfang Ye, Yangqiu Song, and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2017. Hindroid:
An intelligent android malware detection system based on structured heterogeneous information network. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1507–1515.
[17] Zixin Hu, Qiyang Ge, Li Jin, and Momiao Xiong. 2020. Artificial intelligence
forecasting of covid-19 in china. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07112 (2020).
[18] Kia Jahanbin and Vahid Rahmanian. 2020. Using twitter and web news mining
to predict COVID-19 outbreak. Medknow Publications (2020).
[19] Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed representations of sentences and
documents. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 1188–1196.
[20] Deqiang Li, Qianmu Li, Yanfang Ye, and Shouhuai Xu. 2019. Enhancing Robustness of Deep Neural Networks against Adversarial Malware Samples: Principles,
Framework, and Application to AICS’2019 Challenge. In The AAAI-19 Workshop
on Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Security (AICS).
[21] Xiang Li, Yao Wu, Martin Ester, Ben Kao, Xin Wang, and Yudian Zheng. 2017.
Semi-supervised clustering in attributed heterogeneous information networks.
In WWW. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
1621–1629.
[22] Maimuna Majumder and Kenneth D Mandl. 2020. Early transmissibility assessment of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. China (January 23, 2020)
(2020).
[23] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784 (2014).

[24] Gurjit S Randhawa, Maximillian PM Soltysiak, Hadi El Roz, Camila PE de Souza,
Kathleen A Hill, and Lila Kari. 2020. Machine learning using intrinsic genomic
signatures for rapid classification of novel pathogens: COVID-19 case study.
bioRxiv (2020).
[25] Arni SR Srinivasa Rao and Jose A Vazquez. 2020. Identification of COVID-19 Can
be Quicker through Artificial Intelligence framework using a Mobile Phone-Based
Survey in the Populations when Cities/Towns Are Under Quarantine. Infection
Control & Hospital Epidemiology (2020), 1–18.
[26] Weiya Shi, Xueqing Peng, Tiefu Liu, Zenghui Cheng, Hongzhou Lu, Shuyi Yang,
Jiulong Zhang, Feng Li, Mei Wang, Xinlei Zhang, et al. 2020. Deep LearningBased Quantitative Computed Tomography Model in Predicting the Severity of
COVID-19: A Retrospective Study in 196 Patients. (2020).
[27] Peter X Song, Lili Wang, Yiwang Zhou, Jie He, Bin Zhu, Fei Wang, Lu Tang,
and Marisa Eisenberg. 2020. An epidemiological forecast model and software
assessing interventions on COVID-19 epidemic in China. medRxiv (2020).
[28] Ying Song, Shuangjia Zheng, Liang Li, Xiang Zhang, Xiaodong Zhang, Ziwang
Huang, Jianwen Chen, Huiying Zhao, Yusheng Jie, Ruixuan Wang, et al. 2020.
Deep learning Enables Accurate Diagnosis of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
with CT images. medRxiv (2020).
[29] Yizhou Sun, Jiawei Han, Xifeng Yan, Philip S Yu, and Tianyi Wu. 2011. Pathsim:
Meta path-based top-k similarity search in heterogeneous information networks.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 4, 11 (2011), 992–1003.
[30] Vital Surveillances. 2020. the epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of
2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19)-China, 2020. China CDC Weekly 2,
8 (2020), 113–122.
[31] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro
Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10903 (2017).
[32] Shuai Wang, Bo Kang, Jinlu Ma, Xianjun Zeng, Mingming Xiao, Jia Guo, Mengjiao
Cai, Jingyi Yang, Yaodong Li, Xiangfei Meng, et al. 2020. A deep learning algorithm
using CT images to screen for Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19). medRxiv (2020).
[33] Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Yixin Cao, Meng Liu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2019. Kgat:
Knowledge graph attention network for recommendation. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
[34] WHO. 2020. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). https://www.who.int/.
[35] Xiaowei Xu, Xiangao Jiang, Chunlian Ma, Peng Du, Xukun Li, Shuangzhi Lv, Liang
Yu, Yanfei Chen, Junwei Su, Guanjing Lang, et al. 2020. Deep Learning System to
Screen Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09334
(2020).

[36] Li Yan, Hai-Tao Zhang, Yang Xiao, Maolin Wang, Chuan Sun, Jing Liang,
Shusheng Li, Mingyang Zhang, Yuqi Guo, Ying Xiao, et al. 2020. Prediction
of survival for severe Covid-19 patients with three clinical features: development of a machine learning-based prognostic model with clinical data in Wuhan.
medRxiv (2020).
[37] Yanfang Ye, Lingwei Chen, Shifu Hou, William Hardy, and Xin Li. 2017. DeepAM:
A Heterogeneous Deep Learning Framework for Intelligent Malware Detection.
Knowledge and Information Systems (2017), 1–21.
[38] Yanfang Ye, Shifu Hou, Lingwei Chen, Jingwei Lei, Wenqiang Wan, Jiabin Wang,
Qi Xiong, and Fudong Shao. 2019. Out-of-sample Node Representation Learning
for Heterogeneous Graph in Real-time Android Malware Detection. In 28th
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI).
[39] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Donald Adjeroh, and S Sitharama Iyengar. 2017. A Survey on
Malware Detection Using Data Mining Techniques. Comput. Surveys 50, 3 (2017),
41.
[40] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Yong Chen, and Qingshan Jiang. 2010. Automatic Malware
Categorization Using Cluster Ensemble. In Proceedings of ACM International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (ACM SIGKDD). 95–104.
[41] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Qingshan Jiang, Zhixue Han, and Li Wan. 2009. Intelligent
File Scoring System for Malware Detection from the Gray List. In Proceedings of
the 15th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(ACM SIGKDD). 1385–1394.
[42] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Qingshan Jiang, and Youyu Wang. 2010. CIMDS: Adapting
Postprocessing Techniques of Associative Classification for Malware Detection.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics-Part C: Applications and
Reviews 40, 3 (2010), 298–307.
[43] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Shenghuo Zhu, Weiwei Zhuang, Egemen Tas, Umesh Gupta,
and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2011. Combining File Content and File Relations for
Cloud Based Malware Detection. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (ACM SIGKDD). 222–230.
[44] Yanfang Ye, Dingding Wang, Tao Li, and Dongyi Ye. 2007. IMDS: Intelligent Malware Detection System. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (ACM SIGKDD). 1043–1047.
[45] Yanfang Ye, Dingding Wang, Tao Li, Dongyi Ye, and Qingshan Jiang. 2008. An
Intelligent PE-malware Detection System Based on Association Mining. Journal
in Computer Virology 4, 4 (2008), 323–334.
[46] Huaiqiu Zhu, Qian Guo, Mo Li, Chunhui Wang, Zhengcheng Fang, Peihong Wang,
Jie Tan, Shufang Wu, and Yonghong Xiao. 2020. Host and infectivity prediction
of Wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus using deep learning algorithm. bioRxiv (2020).

