COMBINING VISIBLE LIGHT AND INFRARED IMAGING FOR EFFICIENT DETECTION
OF RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS SUCH AS COVID-19 ON PORTABLE DEVICE
Zheng Jiang1 , Menghan Hu2 , Lei Fan1 , Yaling Pan3 , Wei Tang3 , Guangtao Zhai1 , and Yong Lu3

arXiv:2004.06912v1 [cs.CV] 15 Apr 2020

1

Institute of Image Communication and Information Processing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Shanghai Key Labora. of Multidim. Infor. Proce., East China Normal University, China
3
Rui Jin Hospital/Lu Wan Branch, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ABSTRACT

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
has become a serious global epidemic in the past few months
and caused huge loss to human society worldwide. For such
a large-scale epidemic, early detection and isolation of potential virus carriers is essential to curb the spread of the
epidemic. Recent studies have shown that one important feature of COVID-19 is the abnormal respiratory status caused
by viral infections. During the epidemic, many people tend
to wear masks to reduce the risk of getting sick. Therefore,
in this paper, we propose a portable non-contact method to
screen the health condition of people wearing masks through
analysis of the respiratory characteristics. The device mainly
consists of a FLIR one thermal camera and an Android phone.
This may help identify those potential patients of COVID-19
under practical scenarios such as pre-inspection in schools
and hospitals. In this work, we perform the health screening through the combination of the RGB and thermal videos
obtained from the dual-mode camera and deep learning architecture. We first accomplish a respiratory data capture
technique for people wearing masks by using face recognition. Then, a bidirectional GRU neural network with attention mechanism is applied to the respiratory data to obtain
the health screening result. The results of validation experiments show that our model can identify the health status
on respiratory with the accuracy of 83.7% on the real-world
dataset. The abnormal respiratory data and part of normal
respiratory data are collected from Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to The Shanghai Jiao Tong University Medical School.
Other normal respiratory data are obtained from healthy people around our researchers. This work demonstrates that
This work is sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61901172, No. 61831015, No. U1908210), the Shanghai Sailing
Program (No.19YF1414100), the STCSM (No.18DZ2270700), the Science
and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No. 19511120100),
and the foundation of Key Laboratory of Articial Intelligence, Ministry of
Education (No. AI2019002).
Z. Jiang and M. Hu contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: Guangtao Zhai (zhaiguangtao@sjtu.edu.cn),
Yong Lu (18917762053@163.com)

the proposed portable and intelligent health screening device can be used as a pre-scan method for respiratory infections, which may help fight the current COVID-19 epidemic.
The demo videos of the proposed system are available at:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12028032.
Index Terms— COVID-19 epidemic, deep learning,
dual-mode tomography, health screening, recurrent neural
network, respiratory state, SARS-CoV-2, thermal imaging
1. INTRODUCTION
During the outbreak of COVID-19 epidemic, early control is
essential. Among all the control measures, efficient and safe
identification of potential patients is the most important part.
Existing researches show that human physiological state can
be perceived through breathing [1], which means respiratory
signals are vital signs that can reflect human health condition
to a certain extent [2]. Many clinical literature suggests that
abnormal respiratory symptoms may be important factors for
diagnosis of some specific diseases [3]. Recent studies have
found that COVID-19 patients will have obvious respiratory
symptoms such as shortness of breath fever, tiredness, and dry
cough [4, 5]. Among those symptoms, atypical or irregular
breathing is considered as one of the early signs. For many
people, early mild respiratory symptoms are difficult to be
recognized. Therefore, through the measurement of respiration condition, potential COVID-19 patients can be screened
to some extent. This may play an auxiliary diagnostic role,
thus helping to find potential patients as early as possible.
Traditional respiration measurement requires attachments
of sensors to the patient’s body [6]. The monitor of respiration is measured through the movement of the chest or abdomen. Contact measurement equipment is bulky, expensive,
and time-consuming. The most important thing is that the
contact during measurement may increase the risk of spreading infectious diseases such as COVID-19. Therefore, the
non-contact measurement is more suitable for the current situation. In recent years, many non-contact respiration measurement methods have been developed based on imaging sensors, doppler radar [7], depth camera [8] and thermal cam-

era [9]. Considering factors such as safety, stability and price,
the measurement technology of thermal imaging is the most
suitable for extensive promotion. So far, thermal imaging has
been used as a monitoring technology in a wide range of medical fields such as estimations of heart rate [10] and breathing
rate [11–13]. Another important thing is that many existing
respiration measurement devices are large and immovable.
Given the worldwide epdemic, the partable and intelligent
screening equipment is required to meet the needs of largescale screening and other application scenarios in a real-time
manner. For thermal imaging based respiration measurement,
nostril regions and mouth regions are the only focused regions
since only these two parts have periodic heat exchange between the body and the outside environment. However, until
now, researchers seldom considered measuring thermal respiration data for people wearing masks. During the epidemic
of infectious diseases, masks may effectively suppress the
spread of the virus according to recent studies [14,15]. Therefore, developing the respiration measurement method for people wearing masks becomes quite practical. In this study, we
develop a portable and intelligent health screening device that
uses thermal imaging to extract respiration data from masked
people which is then used to do the health screening classification via deep learning architecture.
In classification tasks, deep learning has achieved the
state-of-the-art performance in most research areas. Compared with traditional classifiers, classifiers based on deep
learning can automatically identify the corresponding features and their correlations rather than extracting features
manually. For breathing tasks, algorithms based deep learning can also better extract the corresponding features such
as breathing rate and breath-to-exhale ratio, and make more
accurate predictions [16–19]. Recently, Many researchers
made use of deep learning to analyze the respiratory process.
Cho et al. used a convolutional neural network (CNN) to
analyze human breathing parameters to determine the degree
of nervousness through thermal imaging [20]. Romero et al.
applied a language model to detect acoustic events in sleepdisordered breathing through related sounds [21]. Wang et
al. utilized deep learning and depth camera to classify abnormal respiratory patterns in real time and achieved excellent
results [8]. The disadvantage of this research may be that the
equipment is not portable.
In this paper, we propose a remote, potable and intelligent health screening system based on respiratory data for
pre-screening and auxiliary diagnosis of respiratory diseases
like COVID-19. In order to be more practical in a situation
where people often choose to wear masks, the breathing data
capture method for people wearing masks is introduced. After extracting breathing data from the video obtained from the
thermal camera, a deep learning neural network is performed
to work on the classification between healthy and abnormal
respiration conditions. To verify the robustness of our algorithm and the effectiveness of the proposed equipment, we an-

alyze the influence of mask type, measurement distance and
measurement angle on breathing data.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold. First,
we combine the face recognition technology with dual-mode
imaging to accomplish a respiratory data extraction method
for people wearing masks, which is quite essential for current
situation. Based on our dual-camera algorithm, the respiration data is successfully obtained from masked facial thermal
videos. Subsequently, we propose a classification method to
judge abnormal respiratory state with deep learning framework. Finally, based on the two contributions mentioned
above, we have implemented a non-contact and efficient
health screening system for respiratory infections using the
actual measured data from hospital, which may contribute
to finding the possible cases of COVID-19 and keeping the
control of the secondary spread of SARSCoV-2.
2. METHOD
A brief introduction to the proposed respiration condition
screening method is shown below. We first use the portable
and intelligent screening device to get the thermal and the
corresponding RGB videos. During the data collection, we
also perform a simple real-time screening result. After getting
the thermal videos, the first step is to extract respiration data
from faces in thermal videos. During the extraction process,
we use the face detection method to capture people’s masked
areas. Then a region of interest (ROI) selection algorithm is
proposed to get the region from the mask that stands for the
characteristic of breath most. Finally, we use a bidirectional
GRU neural network with attention mechanism (BiGRUAT) model to work on the classification task with the input
respiration data.
2.1. Overview of Portable and Intelligent Health Screening System for Respiratory Infections
Our data collection is achieved by the system shown in Fig.
1. The whole screening system includes a FLIR one thermal
camera, an Android smartphone and the corresponding application we have written, which is used for data acquisition
and simple instant analysis. Our screening equipment, whose
main advantage is portable, can be easily applied to measure
abnormal breathing in many occasions of instant detection.
As shown in Fig. 1, the FLIR one thermal camera consists of two canmeras, an RGB camera and a thermal camera.
We collect the face videos from both cameras and use face
recogition method to get the nostril area and forehead area.
The temperatures of the two regions are calculated in time series and is shown in the screening result page in Fig. 1(b).
The red line stands for the body temprature and the blue line
stands for breathing data. From the breathing data, we can
predict the respiratory pattern of the testcase. Then, a simple
real-time screening result is given directly in the application

Fig. 1: Overview of portable and intelligent health screening system for respiratory infections: a) device appearance;
b) analysis result of the application. (Notice that the system
can simultaneously collect body temperature signals. In the
current work, this body temperature signal is not considered
in the model and is only used as a reference for the users. )

according to the extracted features shown in Fig. 1. We use
the the raw face videos collected from both RGB camera and
thermal camera as the data for further study to ensure accuracy and higher performance.
2.2. Detection of Masked Region from Dual Mode Image
When continuous breathing activities performs, there is a fact
that periodic temperature fluctuations occur around the nostril due to the inspiration and expiration cycles. Therefore,
respiration data can be obtained by analyzing the temperature data around the nostril based on thermal image sequence.
However, when people wear masks, many facial features are
blocked because of this. Merely recognizing the face through
thermal image will lose a lot of geometric and textural facial
details, resulting in recognition errors of the face and mask
parts. In order to solve this problem, we adopt the method
based on two parallel located RGB and infrared cameras for
face and mask region recognition. The masked region of
face is first captured in the RGB camera, then such region
is mapped to the thermal image with a related mapping function.
The algorithm for masked face detection is based on pyramidbox model created by Tang et al. [22]. The main idea
is to apply tricks like Gaussian pyramidbox in deep learning
to get the context correlations as further characteristics. The
face image is first used to extract features of different scales
using Gaussian pyramid algorithm. For those high-level contextual features, a feature pyramid network is proposed to further excavate high-level contextual features. Then, the output
together with those low-level features are combined in lowlevel feature pyramid layers. Finally, the result is obtained
after another two layers of deep neural network. For faces

that a lot of features are lost due to the cover of mask, such
a context-sensitive structure can obtain more feature correlations and thus improve the accuracy of face detection. In our
experiment, we use the open source model from paddlehub to
detect the face area on RGB videos.
The next step is to extract the masked area and map the
area from RGB video to thermal video. Since the position of
the mask on the human face is fixed, after obtaining the position coordinates of the human face, we obtain the mask area of
the face by scaling down in equal proportions. For a detected
face with width w, and height h, the loaction of left-up corner is defined as (0, 0), the loaction of right-bottom corner is
then (w, h). The corresponding coordinate of the two corners
of mask region is decalred as (w/4, h/2) and (3w/4, 4h/5).
Considering that the background to the boundary of the mask
will produce a large contrast with the movement, which is
easy to cause errors, we choose the center area of the mask
through this division. Then the selected area is mapped from
the RGB image to thermal image to obtain the masked region
in thermal videos.
2.3. Extract Respiration Data from ROI
After getting the masked region in thermal videos, we need
to get the region of interest (ROI) that represents breathing
features. Recent studies often characterize breathing data
through temperature changes around the nostril [10, 23].
However when people wear masks, there exists another problem that the nostrils are also blocked by the masks, and when
people wearing different masks, the ROI may be different.
Therefore, we perform a ROI tracking method based on maximizing the variance of thermal image sequence to extract a
certain area on the masked region of the thermal video which
stands for the breath signals most.
Due to the lack of texture features in masked regions compared to human faces, we judge the ROI by the temperature
change of thermal image sequence. The main idea is to traverse the masked region in the thermal images and find a
small block with the largest temperature change as the selected ROI. The position of a certain block is fixed in the
masked region among all the frames since the nostril area
is fixed on the face region. We do not need to consider the
movement of the block since our face recognition algorithm
can detect the mask position in each frame’s thermal image.
For a certain block with height m, and width n, we define the
average pixel intensity at frame t as:
s̄(t) =

m−1 n−1
1 XX
s(i, j, t)
mn i=0 j=0

(1)

For thermal images, s̄(t) represents the temperature value
at frame t. For every block we obtained, we calculate their
s̄(t) on time line. Then, for each block n, the total variance
of the list of average pixel intensity with T frames σs2 (n) is

Fig. 2: The pipeline of respiration data extraction: a) record the RGB video and thermal video through a FLIR one thermal
camera; b) use face detection method to detect face and mask region in the RGB frames and then map the region to the thermal
frames; c) capture the ROIs in the thermal frames of mask region by tracking method; d) extract the respiration data from the
ROIs.
calculated as shown in Eq. 2, where µ stands for the mean
value of s̄(t).
σs2 (n) =

P
(s̄(t) − µ)2
(0 < t < T )
T

(2)

Since respiration is a periodic data spread out from the
nostril area, we can consider that the block with the largest
variance is the position where the heat changes most in both
frequency and value within the mask, which stands for the
breath data most in the masked region. We adjust the corresponding block size according to the size of the masked region. For a masked region with N blocks, the final ROI is
selected by:
ROI = arg maxσs2 (n)

(3)

1≤n<N

For each thermal video, we traverse all possible blocks in
the mask regions of each frame and find the ROIs for each
frame by the method above. The respiration data is then defined as s̄(t)(0 < t < T ), which is the pixel intensities of
ROIs in all the frames.
2.4. BiGRU-AT Neural Network
We apply a BiGRU-AT neural network to do the classification
task on judging whether the respiration condition is healthy
or not as shown in Fig. 3. The input of the network is the
respiration data obtained by our extraction method. Since the
respiratory data is time series, it can be regarded as a time
series classification problem. Therefore, we choose the Gate
Recurrent Unit (GRU) network with bidirection and attention
layer to work on the sequence prediction task.
Among all the deep learning structures, recurrent neural
network (RNN) is a type of neural network which is specially
used to process time series data samples [24]. For a time step
t, the RNN model can be represented by:



h(t) = φ U x(t) + W h(t−1) + b

(4)

o(t) = V h(t) + c
 
yb(t) = σ o(t)

(5)
(6)

where x(t) , h(t) and o(t) stands for the current input state, hidden state and output at time step t respectively. V, W, U are
parameters obtained by training procedure. b is the bias and
σ and φ are activation functions. The final prediction is yb(t) .
Long-short term memory network is developed on the
basis of RNN [25]. Compared to RNN, which can only
memorize and analyze short-term information, it can process
relatively long-term information, and is suitable for problems with short-term delays or long time intervals. Based
on LSTM, many related structures are proposed in recent
years [26]. GRU is a simplified LSTM which merges three
doors of LSTM (forget, input and output) into two doors
(update and reset) [27]. For tasks with a few data, GRU may
achieve a better result than LSTM since it includes less parameters. In our task, since the input of the neural network is
only the respiration data in time sequence, the GRU network
may perform a better result than LSTM network. The structure of GRU can be expressed by the following equations:
rt = σ (Wr · [ht−1 , xt ] + br )

(7)

zt = σ (Wz · [ht−1 , xt ] + bz )

(8)

h̃t = tanh (Wh̄ · [rt ∗ ht−1 , xt ] + bh )

(9)

ht = (1 − zt ) ∗ ht−1 + zt ∗ h̃t

(10)

where rt is the reset gate that controls the amount of information being passed to the new state from the previous states.
zt stands for the update gate which determines the amount of
information being forgotten and added. Wr , Wz and Wh are
trained parameters that vary in the training procedure. h̃t is

Fig. 3: The structure of the BiGRU-AT network: the network consists of four layers: the input layer, the bidirectional layer,
the attention layer and a final dense layer. The output is a 2 dimension tensor which indicates normal or abnormal respiration
condition.
the candidate hidden layer which can be regarded as a summary of the above information ht−1 and the input information
xt at time step t. ht is the output layer at time step t which
will be sent to the next unit.
The bidirectional RNN has been widely used in natural
language processing [28]. The advantage of such network
structure is that it can strengthen the correlation between context of the sequence. As the respiratory data is a periodic sequence, we use bidirectional GRU to obtain more information
from the periodic sequence. The difference between bidirectional GRU and normal GRU is that backfoward sequence of
data is spliced to the original forward sequence of data. In
this way, the hidden layer of the original h(t) is changed to:
→
− ←
−
ht = [ ht , ht ]

(11)

→
−
←
−
where ht is the original hidden layer and ht is the backfoward
→
−
sequence of ht .
During the analysis of respiratory data, the entire waveform in time sequence should be taken into consideration. For
some specic breathing pattern such as sphyxia, several paticular features such as sudden acceleration may occur only at a
certain point in the entire process. However, if we only use the
BiGRU network, these features may be weakened as the time
sequence data is input step by step which may cause a larger
error in prediction. Therefore, we add an attention layer to
the network, which can ensure that certain key point features
in the breathing process can be maximized.
Attention mechanism is a choice to focus only on those
important points among the total data [29]. It is often combined with neural networks like RNN. Before the RNN model
summarizes the hidden states for the output, an attention layer
can make an estimation of all outputs and find the most important ones. This mechanism has been widely used in many

research areas. The structure of attention layer is:
ut = tanh (Wu ht + bw )

exp u>
t uw

at = P
>
t exp ut uw
X
s=
αt ht

(12)
(13)
(14)

t

where ht represents the BiGRU layer output at time step t,
which is bidirectional. Wu and bw are also parameters that
vary in the training process. at performs a softmax fucntion
on ut to get the weight of each step t. Finally, the output of the
attention layer s is a combination of all the steps from BiGRU
with different weights. By applying another softmax function
to the output s, we get the final prediction of the classification
task. The structure of the whole network is shown in Fig. 3.
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Dataset Explanation and Experimental Settings
Our goal is to distinguish whether there is an epidemic infectious disease such as COVID-19 according to the abnormal
breathing in the respiratory system. Our dataset is not collected from patients with COVID-19. These data were obtained from the inpatients of the respiratory disease department and cardiology department in Ruijin Hospital. Most
of the patients we collected data from only caught with basic or chronic respiratory disease. They did not have fever
which is the typical respiratory symptoms of infectious diseases. Therefore, the body temperature is not taken into consideration in our current screening system.
In Ruijin Hospital wards, we use a FLIR one thermal camera connected to an Android phone to work on the data collection. We collected data from 73 people. For each person, we collect two 20-second infrared and RGB camera data

with a sampling frequency of 10 Hz. Through data cutting
and oversampling, we finally obtained 1,925 healthy breathing data and 2,292 abnormal breathing data, a total of 4,217
data. Each piece of data consists of 100 frames of infrared
and RGB videos in 10 seconds. In the BiGRU-AT network,
the hidden cells in BiGRU layer and attention layers are 32
and 8 respectively. The breathing data is normalized before
input into the neural network and we use cross-entropy as the
loss function. During the training process, we separate the
dataset into two parts. The training set includes 1,427 healthy
breathing data and 1,780 abnormal breathing data. And the
test set contains 498 healthy breathing data and 512 abnormal
breathing data. Once this paper is accepted, we will release
the dataset used in the current work for non-commercial users.

Fig. 4: A Comparison of normal and abnormal respiratory
data: a), b) are abnormal data collected from patients in the
general ward of the respiratory department in Ruijin Hospital;
c), d) are normal data collected from healthy volunteers.
Among the whole dataset, we choose 4 typical respiratory
data examples as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(b)
stand for the abnormal respiratory patterns extracted from patients. Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 4(d) represent the normal respiratory pattern called Eupnea from healthy participants. By
comparison, we can find that the respiratory of normal people
is in strong periodic and evenly distributed while abnormal
respiratory data tend to be more irregular. Generally speaking, most abnormal breathing data from respiratory infections
have faster frequency and irregular amplitude.
3.2. Experimental Result
The experimental results are shown in Table. 1. We consider four evaluation metrics viz. Accuracy, Precision, Recall
and F1. To measure the performance of our model, we compare the result of our model with three other models which
are GRU-AT, BiLSTM-AT and LSTM respectively. The result shows that our method performs better than any other
networks in all evaluation metrics despite the precision value
of GRU-AT. By comparison, the experimental result demonstrates that attention mechanism is well-performed in keeping

important node features in the time series of breathing data
since the networks with attention layer all perform a better result than LSTM. Another point is that GRU based networks
achieve better result than LSTM based networks. This may
beacuse our data set is relatively small which can’t fill the
demand of the LSTM based networks. GRU based networks
require less data than LSTM and perform better result in our
respiration condition classification task.
Table 1: Exprimental results on the test set
Model
BiGRU-AT
GRU-AT
BiLSTM-AT
LSTM

Accuracy
83.69%
79.31%
74.46%
71.98%

Precision
90.23%
90.62%
87.50%
72.07%

Recall
79.65%
74.24%
69.78%
71.98%

F1%
84.61%
81.62%
77.64%
71.97%

To figure out the detailed information about the classification of respiratory state, we plotted the confusion matrixs
of the four models as demonstrated in Fig. 5. As can be seen
from the results, the performance improvement of BiGRU-AT
compared to LSTM is mainly in the accuracy rate of the negative class. This is because many scatter-like abnormalities
in the time series of abnormal breathing are better recognized
by the attention mechanism. Besides, the misclassification
rate of the four networks are relatively high to some extent
which may because many positive samples do not have typical
respiratory infections characteristics since part of the patients
caught other lung-related diseases.

3.3. Analysis
In the analysis section, we give 3 comparasions from different
aspects to prove the robustness of our algorithm and device.

3.3.1. Influence of Mask Types on Respiratory Data
In order to measure the robustness of our breathing data
acquisition algorithm and the effectiveness of the proposed
portable device, we analyze the breathing data of the same
person wearing different masks. We design 3 mask wearing
scenarios that cover most situations: wearing one surgical
mask (blue line); wearing one KN95 (N95) mask (red line)
and wearing two surgical masks (green line). The results are
shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen from the experimental results
that no matter what kind of mask is worn, or even two masks,
the respiratory data can be well recognized. This proves the
stability of our algorithm and device. However, since different masks have different thermal insulation capabilities, the
average breathing temperature may vary as the mask changes.
To minimize this error, respiratory data are normalized before
input into the neural network.

(a) BiGRU-AT

(b) BiLSTM-AT

Fig. 6: The raw respiratory data obtained through the breathing data extraction algorithm with different types of masks.

(c) GRU-AT

(d) LSTM

Fig. 5: Confusion matrices of the four models. Each row is
the number of real labels and each column is the number of
predicted labels. The left one is the result of BiGRU-AT, the
right one is the result of LSTM.

3.3.2. Limitation of Distance to the Camera during Measurement
In order to verify the robustness of our algorithm and device
in different scenarios, we design experiments to collect respiratory data at different distances. Considering the limitations of handheld devices, we test the collection of facial respiration data from a distance of 0 to 2 meters. The result is
demonstrated in Fig. 7. The signal tends to be periodic from
the position of 10 centimeters, and it does not start to lose
regularity until about 1.8 meters. At a distance of about 10
centimeters, the complete face begins to appear in the camera
video. When the distance comes to 1.8 meters, our face detection algorithm begins to fail gradually due to the distance and
pixel limitation. This experiment verifies that our algorithm
and device can guarantee relatively accurate measurement results in the distance range of 0.1 meters to 1.8 meters.

Fig. 7: The raw respiratory data which is obtained under the
distance between camera and device from 0 to 200 cm.

45 degrees to 0 degree. We consider the transformation of
two angles: horizontal and vertical, which respectively represent left and right turning and nodding. The results in the
two cases are quite different as shown in Fig. 8. Our algorithm and device maintain good results in horizontal rotation,
but it is difficult to obtain precise respiratory data in vertical
rotation. This means participants can trun left or turn right
during the measurement but can’t nod or head up since this
may impact the measurement result.

3.3.3. Limitation of Angle to the Camera during Measurement

4. CONCLUSION

Considering that breath detection will be applied in different
scenarios, we design this experiment to show the actual situation under different shooting angles. We define the camera
directly towards the face to be 0 degree, and design an experiment in which the shooting angle gradually changed from

In this paper, we propose a abnormal breathing detection
method based on a portable dual-mode camera which can reocrd both RGB and thermal videos. In our detection method,
we first accomplished an accurate and robust respiratory data
detecion algorithm which can precisely extract breathing data

[4] Zhe Xu, Lei Shi, Yijin Wang, Jiyuan Zhang, Lei Huang, Chao
Zhang, Shuhong Liu, Peng Zhao, Hongxia Liu, Li Zhu, et al.,
“Pathological findings of covid-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome,” The Lancet respiratory medicine,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 420–422, 2020.
[5] Catrin Sohrabi, Zaid Alsafi, Niamh ONeill, Mehdi Khan,
Ahmed Kerwan, Ahmed Al-Jabir, Christos Iosifidis, and Riaz
Agha, “World health organization declares global emergency:
A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19),” International Journal of Surgery, 2020.
[6] Farah Q AL-Khalidi, Reza Saatchi, Derek Burke, H Elphick,
and Stephen Tan, “Respiration rate monitoring methods: A
review,” Pediatric pulmonology, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 523–529,
2011.

Fig. 8: The raw respiratory data obtained while the rotation
from 45 degree of angle to 0 degree of angle. The blue line
stands for the vertical rotation and the red line stands for the
horizontal rotation.
from people wearing masks. Then, a BiGRU-AT network is
applied to work on the screening of respiratory infections.
In validation experiments, the obtained BiGRU-AT network
achieves a realtively good result with the accuracy of 83.7%
on the real-world dataset. It is foreseeable that in patients
with COVID-19 who have more clinical respiratory symptoms, this classification method may yield better results.
During the current outbreak of COVID-19, our research can
work as prescan method for abnomral breathing in many scenarios such as community, campus and hospital which may
contribute to distuigishing the possible cases , and then keep
the control of the virus spread.
In future research, on the basis of ensuring portability, we
plan to use a more stable algorithm to minimize the effect of
different masks on measurement of breathing condition. Besides, temperature may be taken into consideration to achieve
a higher detection accuracy on respiratory infections.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Michelle A Cretikos, Rinaldo Bellomo, Ken Hillman, Jack
Chen, Simon Finfer, and Arthas Flabouris, “Respiratory rate:
the neglected vital sign,” Medical Journal of Australia, vol.
188, no. 11, pp. 657–659, 2008.
[2] Amy D Droitcour, Todd B Seto, Byung-Kwon Park, Shuhei
Yamada, Alex Vergara, Charles El Hourani, Tommy Shing,
Andrea Yuen, Victor M Lubecke, and Olga Boric-Lubecke,
“Non-contact respiratory rate measurement validation for hospitalized patients,” in 2009 Annual International Conference of
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE,
2009, pp. 4812–4815.
[3] Richard Boulding, Rebecca Stacey, Rob Niven, and Stephen J
Fowler, “Dysfunctional breathing: a review of the literature
and proposal for classification,” European Respiratory Review,
vol. 25, no. 141, pp. 287–294, 2016.

[7] Jure Kranjec, Samo Beguš, Janko Drnovšek, and Gregor
Geršak, “Novel methods for noncontact heart rate measurement: A feasibility study,” IEEE transactions on instrumentation and measurement, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 838–847, 2013.
[8] Yunlu Wang, Menghan Hu, Qingli Li, Xiao-Ping Zhang,
Guangtao Zhai, and Nan Yao, “Abnormal respiratory patterns
classifier may contribute to large-scale screening of people infected with covid-19 in an accurate and unobtrusive manner,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05534, 2020.
[9] Meng-Han Hu, Guang-Tao Zhai, Duo Li, Ye-Zhao Fan, XiaoHui Chen, and Xiao-Kang Yang, “Synergetic use of thermal
and visible imaging techniques for contactless and unobtrusive
breathing measurement,” Journal of biomedical optics, vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 036006, 2017.
[10] Menghan Hu, Guangtao Zhai, Duo Li, Yezhao Fan, Huiyu
Duan, Wenhan Zhu, and Xiaokang Yang, “Combination of
near-infrared and thermal imaging techniques for the remote
and simultaneous measurements of breathing and heart rates
under sleep situation,” PloS one, vol. 13, no. 1, 2018.
[11] Carina Barbosa Pereira, Xinchi Yu, Michael Czaplik, Rolf
Rossaint, Vladimir Blazek, and Steffen Leonhardt, “Remote
monitoring of breathing dynamics using infrared thermography,” Biomedical optics express, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 4378–4394,
2015.
[12] Gregory F Lewis, Rodolfo G Gatto, and Stephen W Porges, “A
novel method for extracting respiration rate and relative tidal
volume from infrared thermography,” Psychophysiology, vol.
48, no. 7, pp. 877–887, 2011.
[13] Lushuang Chen, Ning Liu, Menghan Hu, and Guangtao Zhai,
“RGB-thermal imaging system collaborated with marker tracking for remote breathing rate measurement,” in 2019 IEEE
Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP). IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–4.
[14] Shuo Feng, Chen Shen, Nan Xia, Wei Song, Mengzhen Fan,
and Benjamin J Cowling, “Rational use of face masks in the
covid-19 pandemic,” The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 2020.
[15] Chi Chiu Leung, Tai Hing Lam, and Kar Keung Cheng, “Mass
masking in the covid-19 epidemic: people need guidance,”
Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10228, pp. 945, 2020.
[16] Jagmohan Chauhan, Jathushan Rajasegaran, Suranga Seneviratne, Archan Misra, Aruna Seneviratne, and Youngki Lee,

“Performance characterization of deep learning models for
breathing-based authentication on resource-constrained devices,” Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1–24,
2018.
[17] Bang Liu, Xili Dai, Haigang Gong, Zihao Guo, Nianbo Liu,
Xiaomin Wang, and Ming Liu, “Deep learning versus professional healthcare equipment: A fine-grained breathing rate
monitoring model,” Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2018,
2018.
[18] Qiang Zhang, Xianxiang Chen, Qingyuan Zhan, Ting Yang,
and Shanhong Xia, “Respiration-based emotion recognition
with deep learning,” Computers in Industry, vol. 92, pp. 84–
90, 2017.
[19] Usman Mahmood Khan, Zain Kabir, Syed Ali Hassan, and
Syed Hassan Ahmed, “A deep learning framework using passive wifi sensing for respiration monitoring,” in GLOBECOM
2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference. IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[20] Youngjun Cho, Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze, and Simon J Julier,
“Deepbreath: Deep learning of breathing patterns for automatic stress recognition using low-cost thermal imaging in unconstrained settings,” in 2017 Seventh International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 456–463.
[21] H. E. Romero, N. Ma, G. J. Brown, A. V. Beeston, and
M. Hasan, “Deep learning features for robust detection of
acoustic events in sleep-disordered breathing,” in ICASSP 2019
- 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2019, pp. 810–814.
[22] Xu Tang, Daniel K Du, Zeqiang He, and Jingtuo Liu, “Pyramidbox: A context-assisted single shot face detector,” in
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2018, pp. 797–813.
[23] Youngjun Cho, Simon J Julier, Nicolai Marquardt, and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze, “Robust tracking of respiratory rate
in high-dynamic range scenes using mobile thermal imaging,”
Biomedical optics express, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 4480–4503, 2017.
[24] Jeffrey L Elman, “Finding structure in time,” Cognitive science, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 179–211, 1990.
[25] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber, “Long short-term
memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780,
1997.
[26] Klaus Greff, Rupesh K Srivastava, Jan Koutnı́k, Bas R Steunebrink, and Jürgen Schmidhuber, “Lstm: A search space
odyssey,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning
systems, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2222–2232, 2016.
[27] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre,
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and
Yoshua Bengio, “Learning phrase representations using rnn
encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
[28] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio,
“Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.

[29] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.

