arXiv:2004.14940v2 [physics.soc-ph] 21 May 2020

The resumption of sports competitions after COVID-19
lockdown: The case of the Spanish football league.
Javier M. Buldúa,b,c,d , Daniel R. Antequeraa,b,c , Jacobo Aguirreb,e
a

Complex Systems Group, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain
b
Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), Spain
c
Laboratory of Biological Networks, Center for Biomedical Technology, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
d
Institute of Unmanned System and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning
(OPTIMAL), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
e
Centro de Astrobiologı́a (CSIC-INTA), Ctra. de Ajalvir km 4, 28850, Torrejón de
Ardoz, Madrid, Spain.

Abstract
In this work, we present a stochastic discrete-time SEIR SusceptibleExposed-Infectious-Recovered model adapted to describe the propagation of
COVID-19 during a football tournament. Specifically, we are concerned
about the re-start of the Spanish national football league, La Liga, which
is currently –May 2020– stopped with 11 fixtures remaining. Our model
includes two additional states of an individual, confined and quarantined,
which are reached when an individual presents COVID-19 symptoms or has
undergone a virus test with a positive result. The model also accounts for the
interaction dynamics of players, considering three different sources of infection: the player social circle, the contact with his/her team colleagues during
training sessions, and the interaction with rivals during a match. Our results
highlight the influence of the days between matches, the frequency of virus
tests and their sensitivity on the number of players infected at the end of the
season. Following our findings, we finally present a variety of strategies to
minimize the probability that COVID-19 propagates in case the season of La
Liga was re-started after the current lockdown.
Keywords: Epidemics, SEIR, COVID-19, Sports

Preprint submitted to arXiv.org

May 22, 2020

1. Introduction
The propagation of the virus SARS-CoV-2 officially started at the beginning of December 2019 in Wuhan (China), where the first COVID-19 victim
was diagnosed with a new type of coronavirus. The virus first spread over
different states in China before reaching other countries. On March 11th
2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a pandemic, pointing to more than 118000 cases of the coronavirus illness in over
110 countries around the world [1]. The evolution of the pandemic, which is
(in May 2020) still affecting many countries worldwide, has been a matter of
debate, since different strategies can be adopted to mitigate the spreading of
COVID-19, some of them with unclear or unpredictable consequences. Due
to the novelty of this unforeseen pandemic, the use of mathematical models is
being extremely useful to predict the dynamics of the coronavirus spreading
and the effects of different policies on the eventual reduction of the number
of affected individuals.
Despite there are different approaches for modelling the pandemics, both
continuous-time and discrete-time SIR-based models are probably the most
extended approaches. The Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model was
first proposed by Kermack and McKendrick in 1927 [2], and consists of a
compartmental model where individuals are split into three different states:
(i) Susceptible (S), when they are sane, (ii) Infected (I), when they have
the virus and (iii) Recovered (R). More sophisticated models include more
possible states, such as Deceased (D) in the SIRD model [3] or Exposed
(E) in the SEIR model [4]. The latter model has been extensively applied
to describe the exponential growth of the number of individuals infected by
SARS-CoV-2, the effects of quarantine and confinement measures and, ultimately, to evaluate an adequate way of leaving confinement measures without
increasing the risk of a second outbreak [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. For example,
Peng et al. collected the epidemic data from five different Chinese regions
and estimated the effects of the quarantine over all of them, forecasting the
decrease of the number of infected individuals region by region [5]. On the
other hand, Radulescu et al. introduced a compartmental model consisting
of dividing the population into age groups and analyzing how the number
of infected individuals was related to each age group. With this model, the
effects of several social measures were simulated (closing campuses, schools
or restaurants), showing different impacts at each age group [6]. Regarding the vast (and recent) scientific literature about the SEIR model applied
2

to COVID-19, we can remark one of its significant merits: It can be easily
adapted to describe a diversity of scenarios.
In this manuscript, we present a discrete-time SEIR-type mathematical
model that describes the spreading of the coronavirus during a sports competition. The motivation behind our study is that there has been a lively debate
about whether sports competitions that were not completed before the coronavirus crisis should be re-started or, ultimately, cancelled [12, 13, 15]. On
the one hand, it is not the first time that epidemic diseases have threatened
sports competition. For example, as pointed in [13], the 2014 FIFA World
Cup in Brazil overlapped with a period in which Dengue risk was close to
its maximum at three cities where matches were carried out [14]. Furthermore, attendants and players had to take special precautions due to Zika, a
mosquito-transmitted disease. Despite the risks, the competition continued
without significant problems regarding the number of individuals infected by
Dengue or Zika. On the other hand, many voices have claimed that sports
competitions should be canceled, not only for the high risk of athletes being
infected during a competition but also due to the inability to be adequately
treated in case of injury due to the saturation of hospitals [15].
However, to the best of our knowledge, this debate has not been confronted with mathematical models that describe the propagation of SARSCoV-2 between athletes. Here, we are concerned about the eventual re-start
of the Spanish national league, which is currently suspended with 11 pending
fixtures, and focus on the optimum strategies to minimize the propagation of
COVID-19 among the players in case the competition was re-started after the
current lockdown. We designed a mathematical model that incorporates the
interaction of players during training sessions, leading to intra-club spreading, and during matches, responsible for inter-club contagions. Furthermore,
we incorporated the use of tests to evaluate its consequences in identifying
and confining those players that already have been infected. The model,
whose main parameters were based on the scientific literature concerning the
infection and recovery periods of COVID-19, could be easily adapted to describe other kinds of sports competitions just by modifying the number of
players and teams participating in the tournament.
2. Methodology
In SEIR models [16], a disease propagates through a network of individuals whose dynamical state can be either Susceptible (S, healthy and
3

susceptible to be infected), Exposed (E, infected but in the latent period
–period from infection to infectiousness– and therefore unable to infect other
individuals), Infectious (I, infected and able to infect other individuals), and
Removed (R, which includes (i) recovered individuals after having suffered
the infection and therefore immune and (ii) deceased people).
βtrain

S

βmatch
βext

σ

E
µE

EC

ɣ

I

R

µI
σ

ɣQ
ɣ

IC

Q

S = SUSCEPTIBLE
E= EXPOSED
I = INFECTIOUS
R= RECOVERED
C= CONFINED
Q= QUARANTINED

CONFINEMENT
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the SEIR model adapted to a football competition.
Players can be in different states: Susceptible (S), Exposed (E), Infectious (I) and Quarantined (Q). In case players are detected to be infected by the virus, they remain confined
(indicated by the C suffix). After confinement, players undergo a quarantine before being
eligible to play again. Parameters βtrain , βmatch and βext account for the probability of
becoming Exposed (E) during training, matches or externally (player social circle) respectively. Probability σ describes the transition from Exposed to Infectious (I). Probability γ
controls the transition from Infectious to Recovered (R) or Quarantined (Q). Finally, γQ
is related to the quarantine period a player must follow after recovery.

Figure 1 represents a sketch of our discrete-time model. The time is
discretised in days, and every random event is calculated once a day. The
individuals (players from now on) can be infected at any time (that is, any day
of the season) from people different to the players (technical staff of the team,
family, etc.) with a probability βext . The second source of infection occurs
during the training period, where they can be infected from other players of
their own team with probability βtrain . Finally, during the matches, players
are exposed to infection from the players of their own team and the adversary
team with probability βmatch . 1
1

Note that the infection probabilities βext , βtrain and βmatch are different to the in-

4

Once a player has been infected and becomes exposed, he/she has a probability σ of finishing the latent period and become infectious. Exposed and
infectious players have, respectively, probabilities µE and µI of being detected
as infected by COVID-19 via a virus test or because they show disease symptoms. If this is the case, players will be confined at their homes remaining in
two possible states: exposed EC or infectious IC . Asymptomatic infectious
players (belonging to class I, but not detected by virus tests), and confined
infectious players, overcome the disease with probability γ. Note that confined players that have been recovered will remain quarantined (class Q)
during a convalescence until they are prepared for playing again and become
recovered (R) with probability γQ .
The days between virus tests Ntest and the days between matches Nmatch
are two critical variables for controlling the number of infected players during the championship, and therefore their influence in the model should be
studied carefully. Note that the virus tests should be done in this context via
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) controls. The reason is that fast antibody
or antigen detectors are only reliable more than a week after the infection,
and in many cases even after the patient has already shown symptoms. This
fact would allow the infectious (but not identified as infected) players to
spread the virus for several days, making the control of the disease a hard
task.
Modelling the Spanish national league
Our model can be applied to a diversity of competitions related to team
contact sports, but we have focused on the re-start of the Spanish male
national league. Therefore, we considered a competition with M = 20 teams
composed of L = 25 players, the latter being the upper limit of players
that can be registered by a team in the competition. The generalization
to Liga Iberdrola (Spanish feminine first division football league, with 16
teams), to the masculine or feminine football leagues of other countries, or
even to another team sports (such as basketball, handball, rugby, etc.) is
direct. Every team plays a match every Nmatch days (in particular in days
that are multiples of Nmatch ), and during the Nmatch − 1 days in between
fection rate β typically used in SIR models, which is the average number of contacts per
person per time multiplied by the probability of disease transmission in a contact between
a susceptible and an infectious subject. While β is a rate (and can therefore be larger
than 1), our parameters are probabilities (and ≤ 1 in consequence).

5

the players train at their own stadiums. We supposed no resting days, as
there is a clear interest for finishing the leagues as soon as possible, but
including them in the model is trivial. We represented the training dynamics
of the players, and contacts between them, using social networks instead of
mean-field contacts. In this way, players’ social networks during the team
training followed a random structure of connections (different for each team
but maintained during all simulations) and were generated using an ErdösRényi model [17] with a probability p = 0.2 of connecting two players. This
was done to describe the internal professional and friendship dynamics that
every player has during training times and also during lunch time, etc. During
training time, the infectious players (class I) might infect their neighbours
in the social network with probability βtrain . During the match day, every
infected player on the pitch can infect any other player of its own team or
the adversary with probability βmatch (here we used a mean-field approach
due to the inevitable contact dynamics that players follow during a match).
Note that players cannot avoid voluntarily the contact with other players in
the contest (with the exception, perhaps, of celebrating a goal, that could
be forbidden if necessary), and therefore the contagion probability during a
match might be more significant than expected at first glance. Also, as a
third infection source, players can be infected any day from their social circle
with probability βext . Finally, in order to minimise the spreading of the
disease, a virus test is done to all 500 players every Ntest days (in particular
in days that are multiples of Ntest , and before the match if it coincides with
a match day). Players that yield a positive result are immediately confined.
Estimation of the model parameters
There is a wide range of values in the recent literature regarding each
of the parameters that define the different steps of the disease (see Table
1 for a summary of the parameters of the model). The latent period σ −1
is the average time from infection to infectiousness, the incubation period
is the average time from infection to the appearance of the first symptoms,
and the infectious period γ is the average time that the patient is infectious.
Depending on the virus, the latent period can be shorter or larger than the
incubation period. In the case of COVID-19 the latent period is 1 or 2 days
shorter on average than the incubation period, which makes it especially easy
for the disease to spread among the population during the time in which
people are infectious but asymptomatic. Regarding the mean incubation
period, in [20] it was shown to be around 5 days, similar to that of SARS,
6

Parameter
Value
−1
βtrain (days )
1/10
βmatch (days−1 )
1/100
βexp (days−1 )
1/100000
−1
σ (days )
1/3; Refs. [18, 19]
−1
γ (days )
1/5; Refs. [18, 19]
γQ (days−1 )
1/5
−1
µE (days )
µI /3
−1
µI (days )
[0,1], 0.9
Ntest (days)
[1-7]
Nmatch (days)
[3-7]

Table 1: Summary of the main parameters used in the model: Probability of being
infected during the training period βtrain , during a match βmatch and from the player’s
−1
social circle βexp ; latent period σ −1 , infectious period γ −1 and quarantine period γQ
;
probability of being detected as exposed (by virus test) µE and as infectious (by virus test
or by symptoms) µI ; number of days between virus tests Ntest and matches Nmatch .

and in [21] it was affirmed that it could be as short as four days. Note,
however, that this quantity was not used in our model.
In [18], it was used a mean latent period σ −1 of 3 days and a mean
infection period of γ −1 = 5 days, based on the Wuhan data. We selected
these values because they were also used in other more recent studies [19].
Note, however, that these are mean values: in [22] it was shown that the
probability that patients with mild symptoms infected other people was very
low after a week from the appearance of symptoms, but these means that in
mild cases of COVID-19 patients can be infectious for as much as 10 days.
−1
Furthermore, we have fixed the quarantine period γQ
to be five days, but
varying slightly this quantity would not affect the results substantially.
The probability βext of being infected during a day from the player’s social
circle will slowly decrease as more and more individuals in the country recover
from the disease, but for simplicity we have supposed it constant during the
whole league, and one order of magnitude lower than the expected value
0
βext
based on available Spanish statistics. The reason is that players will
be for sure either quarantined during the rest of the league (and in that
case βexp = 0) or at least their social life will be very restricted during that
7

time. In order to obtain a plausible value for βext , we have used the data
resulted from a mass virus testing campaign developed during the first days
of May 2020 to 62400 Spanish citizens belonging to 30000 different homes.
The main result of that study is that around 5% of the Spanish population
(2.3 × 106 out of 46.9 × 106 citizens) has been infected during the pandemic,
and this represents 10 times the detected cases so far (229540 on 14th May
2020). As at this date around 500 new infections were detected per day,
we can extrapolate that Ninf ≈ 500 × 9 were not detected infected cases,
and therefore Ninf /γ people would be infective during the latent period. In
summary,
(Ninf /γ)R0 γ
0
≈ 10−5 ,
βexp = βexp
/10 =
10NSpain
where the latent period is γ −1 = 5 days and the basic reproductive number
(i.e. the expected number of infections generated by one case in a population
where all individuals are susceptible to infection) is, according to the Spanish
health authorities, R0 ≈ 1 at this time.
On the other hand, there is not available experimental data to obtain
precise values for the infecting probabilities βtrain and βmatch , so we have
fixed them at moderate values and checked that slight variations did not
qualitatively change the results. In particular, as on average each player is
in contact, during the training time, with a fraction p = 0.2 of the total
number of players in the team (L = 25), a first-order basic calculation yields
that he/she will infect around pLβtrain = 0.5 other players per training day,
as far as all other players are susceptible. During a match, nonetheless, an
infectious player can infect any of the other 21 players in the field, and will
infect on average 21βmatch = 0.21 players per match (supposing again that
the rest are susceptible). In summary, at the beginning of La Liga, and
in the improbable situation that an infected player skipped all virus tests,
he/she would infect around two other players during the latent period, and
this quantity would decrease with time as more and more players become
infected and then recovered. We believe this is a plausible result taking into
account that R0 > 4 at the beginning of the pandemic and R0 ≈ 1 after
two months of absolute quarantine of the whole population of the country,
and players would have an intermediate situation with a controlled but not
quarantined behaviour.
The value of the probability µI of being detected as infectious, either
because a player shows disease symptoms or because the virus test yields a
8

positive result, has been considered to be within the window [0,1], being 0 in
case of not doing any test and being asymptomatic, and 1 when tests have
100% sensitivity. However, when the sensitivity of the test is not analysed,
we considered a value of 0.9 which is close to the typical one attributed to
PCR tests. Concerning the probability of detecting an exposed individual,
we set it as µE = µI /3, i.e., three times less than detecting an infected
individual through the same test. The reason is that the viral load of an
exposed individual is lower than that of an infectious one, therefore reducing
the probability of a positive test result.
3. Results
We simulated between 104 and 105 seasons using our discrete-time model
and obtained the main statistics of the accumulated number of infected players at time t, n(t). Importantly, the seed of all simulations contained one
player of the league who is already infected at the first day of the tournament (i.e., n(0) = 1). By doing so, the epidemic spreading begins at day
one instead of any random day of the season, and therefore time t should be
understood as days after the first infection.
Figure 2 analyses the influence that the number of days between tests
and matches, Ntest and Nmatch , have on the accumulated number of infected
players n(t) along the rest of the season (i.e., 11 matches and the training
days in between). 104 independent simulations were performed, and the mean
values of n(t), n̄(t), are plotted in the figure.
In Fig. 2A we see how the mean accumulated number of infected players
n̄(t) changes when the number of days between matches Nmatch is modified
within the interval {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, i.e., we set the minimum and the maximum
number of days between matches to 3 and 7, respectively. Interestingly, we
observe that it is convenient to reduce the time between matches to the
minimum. The reason is twofold. On the one hand, with Nmatch being the
lowest, the competition would last fewer weeks, and therefore the players
would be exposed for less time. On the other hand, the probability of being
infected is higher during a training day than during a match day, since players
are more exposed to physical contact with other players during training. For
these reasons, the higher the number of days between matches, the higher
the slope of the curves of Fig.2A.
In Fig. 2B we show the different evolution of the mean value of the
accumulated number of infected players n̄(t) when PCR tests are or are not
9

A

20
3 days between matches
4 days
5 days
6 days
7 days

mean number of infected players

5.5
5
4.5

B
without PCR tests
1 PCR test every 7 days

18

mean number of infected players

6

4
3.5
3
2.5
2

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

1.5

0

1

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

10

80

C

6
1 day between PCR tests
2 days
3 days
4 days
5 days
6 days
7 days

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

30

40

50

60

70

80

D
test accuracy of 50%
60%
70%
80%
90%

5.5

mean number of infected players

mean number of infected players

5

20

days after re-starting the competition

days after re-starting the competition

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

days after re-starting the competition

1

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

days after re-starting the competition

Figure 2: Dependence of the mean of the accumulated number of players that have been
infected at the end of the season n̄(t) on the main parameters of the system: the days between matches (Nmatch ) (A) and the days between PCR tests (Ntest ) and their sensitivity
(µI ) (B-D). We simulated 104 times the rest of the season, that consists of 11 matches
and the training days in between. Parameters of the simulation are indicated in Table
1, with µI = 0.9, unless specified otherwise. The seed of all simulations contained one
player infected at the first day of the tournament. (A) Influence of the number of days
between two consecutive matches, Nmatch , on n̄(t). In this simulation, PCR tests with
90% sensitivity were carried out every Ntest = 7 days. In (B) we compare the outcome
of not doing any tests during the rest of the season and doing them every Ntest = 7 days
(matches played every 7 days), while in (C) we focus on the number of days Ntest between
each PCR control (matches played every 4 days, closer to the optimum frequency of 1
every 3 days). (D) Influence of test accuracy µI on n̄(t) (PCR tests and matches carried
out every 4 days).

performed. Matches are played with a separation of 7 days, in this case.
We can observe how skipping the tests increases substantially the number of
infected players. These results show that conducting a coronavirus detection

10

test is essential to prevent its spread among La Liga teams. However, it is
necessary to take into account the frequency and reliability of such tests.
To investigate this issue, we assume that it is decided to play, for example,
every 4 days, a measure close to the most favourable scenario of 3 days,
although not so extreme. In Fig. 2C we see how important it is to perform
tests as often as possible, ideally every day. As the tests are more separated
over time, the risk of infecting more players inevitably increases. Finally, it
is possible to simulate how important the accuracy of the tests is and the
consequences of making use of low sensitive methods. Figure 2D shows how
the mean value of infected players n̄(t) increases as the reliability of the tests
µE and µI decreases. These results support the convenience of performing
PCR testing, whose accuracy is estimated to be substantially larger than any
other method.
As mentioned above, the curves shown in Fig. 2 are the mean values
n̄(t) obtained after m = 104 simulations
√ of the model. While the standard
deviation of the mean n̄(t), σn̄ = σn / m, is so small that would be hardly
distinguishable from the curves in any of the plots, the standard deviation of
n(t), σn , is on the contrary very large –in some cases of the order of the mean
n̄– and shows that the evolution of a single process is highly unpredictable.
To cast light on this question, in Fig. 3 we have plotted the probability
function of the accumulated number of infected players n(t) (i.e., probability
of obtaining n(t) = 1, 2, 3... accumulated infected players after t days, calculated as the normalised histogram of 105 simulations of the process) when
matches and PCR controls are carried out every 7 days (green curve in Fig.
2A) after t = 4 days, 20 days, and at the end of the league (t = 78 days). In
the first days of the competition (Fig. 3A), the disease starts to spread in the
team of the so-far unique infected player. As expected, a Poisson distribution approximates accurately its function probability (note that in this and
further calculations of approximations to the data, we subtract the initial
infected individual from the series and shift the obtained curve 1 position in
the X-axis). However, the disease soon spreads towards other teams and the
function distribution becomes more complex: at moderate values of the time
(t = 20, Fig. 3B) the probability function presents a hump that certifies that
the curve is in fact the consequence of several spreading processes, that is,
the addition of intra- and interteam spreading, plus the potential infections
coming from outside the league. Furthermore, when the season reaches its
end (t = 78, Fig. 3C) the curve presents an exponential-like tail, and at
that time the standard deviation σn is almost as large as the mean n̄ (as
11

Figure 3: Probability function of the accumulated number of infected players n(t) at the
beginning of the re-start (A, t = 4 days), after few weeks (B, t = 20 days) and at the
end of the season (C, t = 78 days), and probability function of the accumulated number
of infected teams Minf (t) at the end of the season (D, t = 78 days), when matches
and PCR controls are carried out every 7 days. For these 4 cases, n̄ ± σn = 1.6 ± 0.8,
n̄ ± σn = 4.3 ± 3.6, n̄ ± σn = 5.6 ± 4.8, and M̄inf ± σMinf = 1.4 ± 0.6 respectively.
Approximations to a Poisson distribution of mean n̄, to an exponential distribution of
mean n̄ and to a normal distribution of mean n̄ and standard deviation σn are shown in
(A-C), while an approximation to a Poisson distribution of mean M̄inf is shown in (D).
105 simulations of the league were performed.

it is verified in exponential probability density functions). Note that, while
a normal approximation is not accurate at the end of the league, when t
grows substantially (many weeks after the end of the season, and therefore
not shown) the probability function becomes a Gaussian, as expected from
the Central Limit Theorem.
Finally, let us show that the statistical behaviour of the system at the end
of the season is compatible with that of a compound Poisson process (CP P ),
that is, a stochastic process with jumps, where the jumps arrive randomly
according to a Poisson process. First, the function probability of the number
of infected teams Minf (t) at t = 78 is indeed accurately approximated by a
Poisson distribution (Fig. 3D). Second, the mean and standard deviation of
the number of infected players at the end of the season, obtained numerically,
12

(n̄ = 5.6 and σn = 4.8) agree (with an error of 6% and 8% respectively) with
those obtained by the theoretical expressions typical of Compound Poisson
processes [23] for t = 78:
n̄CP P = 1 + (n̄T eam − 1)M̄inf = 5.9 ,
q
2
σn2 T eam M̄inf + (n̄T eam − 1)2 σM
= 5.3 ,
σCP P =
inf

(1)
(2)

where nT eam ± σnT eam = 4.6 ± 4.1 is the accumulated number of infected
players at the team where the infection started, and M̄inf ± σMinf = 1.4 ± 0.6
is the accumulated number of infected teams. In summary, in spite of the
complex particular details of the model here presented and sketched in Fig. 1,
its statistical behaviour can be described as the addition of several processes,
each of them happening in a different team, and where the infection dynamics
from one team to another follows a random Poisson process.
4. Conclusions
“All models are wrong, but some are useful”. This famous statement,
attributed to the statistician George Box, sums up the usefulness of our
model. Although it is not possible to predict the exact number of infected
individuals, the model allows describing, in a qualitative way, the influence
that different measures can have to mitigate the spreading of the coronavirus
during a competition. Based on the simulations carried out with the epidemiological parameters estimated by the scientific community, the results
of the study can be summarised in five points:
• Reducing the days between matches reduces the risk of spreading COVID19 throughout the season. The more the season is compressed, the less
risk of contagion.
• PCR tests should be performed on all football players participating in
the competition. Antibody and antigen tests should be ruled out in
this context because they are less reliable and are not effective until
the disease is well advanced.
• The tests should be carried out continuously along with the competition, with the optimum scenario being one test per day.

13

• The player’s environment is essential to avoid introducing the disease
into the system. It is necessary that the players try to limit their social
contacts as much as possible, and that their physical interaction with
the technical staff is as distant as possible.
• The process is highly unpredictable. While qualitative results are clear,
obtaining precise predictions for a single realisation (the real case) is
not possible. This is in agreement with recent work that warns about
the strong sensitivity to parameter values in epidemics modelling [24].
We must also note that applying all the measures suggested by the model
involves a cost. On the one hand, reducing the time between matches can
be very physically demanding. The recovery time after a match would be
reduced and the risk of injury would increase. To reduce this risk, teams
should increase player rotations. Regarding the tests, football clubs should
provide the necessary support and means to carry out such a high number
of tests in such a short time. Without an adequate policy in this regard, the
risk of reinfection in a competition would skyrocket. Players will also pay a
personal cost to control the eventual spreading of coronavirus. Minimising
their contacts with other individuals would mean limiting their travels, public
events and, in general, reducing interactions with people outside the family
environment. In fact, maintaining them in confinement during the rest of
the season would be obviously the optimum situation.
Finally, although the results shown here are focused on the resumption
of the men’s Spanish national league, the conclusions are equally valid for
the women’s competition. Furthermore, the model could be adapted to any
competition in which matches involve some physical contact between players,
such as basketball, handball or rugby.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge E. Lázaro and J.A. Sánchez-Brunete for fruitful conversations on virological and pharmaceutical aspects of COVID-19,
respectively, P. Catalán for advice on the statistical analysis of the results,
and J. Iranzo for assistance on the calculation of the model parameters. JMB
acknowledges M. Casals for providing useful references about COVID-19 in
sports. DRA is supported by Comunidad de Madrid, Spain, through project
MPEJ-2019-AI/TIC-13118. JMB is funded by MINECO, Spain (FIS201784151-P). JA is supported by MINECO, Spain (FIS2017-89773-P, MiMevo),
14

and the Spanish State Research Agency (AEI) Project No. MDM-2017-0737
Unidad de Excelencia “Marı́a de Maeztu”-Centro de Astrobiologı́a (INTACSIC).
References
References
[1] https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-sopening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020.
[2] Kermack WO, McKendrick AG, A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics. Proc. R. Soc. London 1927; 115:700.
[3] Matadi MB. The SIRD epidemial model. Far East Journal of Applied
Mathematics 2014; 89;1-14.
[4] Li, MY, Muldowney, JS. Global stability for the SEIR model in epidemiology. Mathematical biosciences 1995, 125; 2:155-164.
[5] Peng L, Yang W, Zhang D, Zhuge C, Hong L. Epidemic analysis of COVID-19 in China by dynamical modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.06563.
[6] Radulescu A, Cavanagh K. Management strategies in a SEIR model of
COVID 19 community spread. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11150.
[7] Hou C, Chen J, Zhou Y, Hua L, Yuan J, He S, Guo Y, Zhang S, Jia Q,
Zhao C, Zhang J, Xu G, Jia E. The effectiveness of the quarantine of
Wuhan city against the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): wellmixed SEIR model analysis. J Med Virol 2020.
[8] Rovetta A, Bhagavathula, AS. Modelling the epidemiological trend and
behavior of COVID-19 in Italy. medRxiv 2020.03.19.20038968; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.19.20038968
[9] De Brouwer E, Raimondi D, Moreau Y. Modeling the COVID19 outbreaks and the effectiveness of the containment measures adopted across countries. medRxiv 2020.04.02.20046375; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20046375

15

[10] Ngonghala CN, Iboi E, Eikenberry S, Scotch M, MacIntyre
CR, Bonds MH, Gumel AB. Mathematical assessment of the
impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on curtailing the
2019 novel Coronavirus. medRxiv 2020.04.15.20066480;
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.15.20066480
[11] Lopez L, Rodó X. The end of the social confinement in Spain and
the COVID-19 re-emergence risk. medRxiv 2020.04.14.20064766; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064766
[12] Halabchi F, Ahmadinejad Z, Selk-Ghaffari M. COVID-19 Epidemic: Exercise or Not to Exercise; That is the Question! Asian J Sports Med.
2020;1(1):e102630.
[13] Duarte Muñoz M, Meyer T. Infectious diseases and football - lessons not
only from COVID-19. Science and Medicine in Football 2020;4:85-86.
[14] Hay S. Football fever could be a dose of dengue. Nature 2013;
503(7477):439.
[15] Corsini A, Bisciotti GN, Eirale C, Volpi, P. Football cannot restart soon
during the COVID-19 emergency! A critical perspective from the Italian
experience and a call for action. Br J Sports Med Epub ahead of print:
[28/04/2020].
[16] Newman M, Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, Inc.;
2010.
[17] Erdös P, Rényi A. On random graphs I. Publicationes mathematicae
1959; 6(26):290–297.
[18] Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak
originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. The Lancet 2020;
395(10225):689–697.
[19] Lin Q, Zhao S, Gao D, Lou Y, Yang S, Musa S et al. A conceptual model
for the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Wuhan, China
with individual reaction and governmental action. International Journal
of Infectious Diseases 2020; 93(26):201–216.

16

[20] Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, Jones FK, Zheng Q, Meredith HR et al. The
incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly
reported confirmed cases: Estimation and application. Ann Intern Med
2020; doi: https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-0504.
[21] Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, Liang W and Ou C, He J et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J Med 2020;
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.
[22] Wölfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Müller M
et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019.
Nature 2020; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x.
[23] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound Poisson process
[24] Castro M, Ares S, Cuesta JA, Manrubia S. Predictability: Can the
turning point and end of an expanding epidemic be precisely forecast?
arXiv:2004.08842; https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08842.

17

