Social network-based distancing strategies to flatten the
COVID-19 curve in a post-lockdown world

arXiv:2004.07052v2 [physics.soc-ph] 27 May 2020

Per Block‡ , Marion Hoffman† , Isabel J. Raabe∗ , Jennifer Beam Dowd‡
Charles Rahal‡,§ , Ridhi Kashyap‡,§,¶ , Melinda C. Mills‡,§
‡

Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, Department of Sociology, University of Oxford
†
Department of Humanities, Social and Political Sciences, ETH Zurich
∗
Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich
§
Nuffield College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
¶
School of Anthropology and Museum Ethnography, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

25th May, 2020
Abstract:

Social distancing and isolation have been introduced widely to counter the COVID-19 pandemic. However, more moderate contact reduction policies become desirable owing to adverse social, psychological, and economic consequences of a complete or near-complete lockdown. Adopting a social network
approach, we evaluate the effectiveness of three targeted distancing strategies designed to ‘keep the curve flat’
and aid compliance in a post-lockdown world. These are limiting interaction to a few repeated contacts, seeking similarity across contacts, and strengthening communities via triadic strategies. We simulate stochastic
infection curves that incorporate core elements from infection models, ideal-type social network models, and
statistical relational event models. We demonstrate that strategic reduction of contact can strongly increase
the efficiency of social distancing measures, introducing the possibility of allowing some social contact while
keeping risks low. This approach provides nuanced insights to policy makers for effective social distancing
that can mitigate negative consequences of social isolation.
Keywords:

COVID-19, social networks, stochastic infection curves, statistical relational events

1. INTRODUCTION
The non-pharmaceutical intervention of social distancing is a central policy to reduce the spread of COVID19, largely by maintaining physical distance and reducing social interactions (Glass et al., 2006). The aim
is to slow transmission and the growth rate of infections to avoid overburdening health-care systems, widely
known as ‘flattening the curve’ (Roberts, 2020). Social distancing includes bans on public events, the closure
of schools, universities and non-essential workplaces, limiting public transportation, travel and movement
restrictions, and urging citizens to limit social interactions.
The majority of existing research on mitigating influenza pandemics focus on the effectiveness of different
individual measures, such as travel restrictions, school closures, or vaccines (Ferguson et al., 2006; Germann
et al., 2006). Few have simultaneously considered interventions and the structure of social networks. When
social networks are examined, it is generally in relation to vaccination (Ventresca and Aleman, 2013), contact
For correspondence: Per Block and Melinda C. Mills, Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, Department of Sociology, University of Oxford, OX1 1JD, United Kingdom. Tel: 01865 286170. Email: per.block@sociology.ox.ac.uk and
melinda.mills@nuffield.ox.ac.uk. The replication files for this paper including customised functions in the statistics environment R and an example script are available on Zenodo, a general-purpose open-access repository developed under the European
OpenAIRE program and operated by CERN (https://zenodo.org/record/3782465).

2

tracing, or analysing the spread of the virus (Sun et al., 2020; Wu and McGoogan, 2020). We outline key
behavioural strategies for selective contact reduction that every individual and organisation can adopt to
maximise the benefits of limiting contact and engaging in strategic social distancing. Applying insights from
social and statistical network science, we demonstrate how changing network configurations of individuals
contact choices and organisational routines can alter the rate and spread of the virus, by providing guidelines
to differentiate between ‘high-impact’ and ‘low-impact’ contacts for disease spread. This can contribute to
balancing public health concerns and socio-economic needs for interpersonal interaction. We introduce and
assess three strategies: contact with similar people, strengthening contact in communities, and repeatedly
interacting with the same people.
Conclusions regarding the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical public health interventions have often been
made on the basis of on expert recommendations rather than scientific evidence (Bell, 2006). During previous
outbreaks (e.g. SARS-CoV), social distancing measures such as workplace closures, limiting public gatherings,
and travel restrictions were implemented. Cancelling public gatherings and long-distance travel restrictions
appears to decrease transmission and morbidity rates (Aledort et al., 2007). There is mixed evidence regarding
the effectiveness of school closures on respiratory infections, possibly because of the timing of school closures,
or since this affects only on school-aged children (Jackson et al., 2013).
There has been considerably less research on the effectiveness of other types of social distancing measures,
such as strategies based on individual’s knowledge of their social surrounding. Existing research has demonstrated that interventions are only effective and feasible when the public deems them acceptable (Aledort
et al., 2007). Our approach recognises the social, psychological, and economic cost of – and potential compliance fatigue with – complete isolation (Morse et al., 2006). Fully quarantining non-infected, psychologically
vulnerable individuals over prolonged periods can have severe mental health consequences. Many facets of
economic and social life require some amount of person-to-person contact. Compliance with recommendations
to strategically reduce contact is more favourable than compliance with complete isolation and, thus, can keep
the curve flat in the long run. We therefore propose a novel approach that assesses the effectiveness of network
adaptations that rely on less confinement and allow some degree of social contact while still ‘flattening the
curve’.
Flattening the (infection) curve represents a decrease in the number of infected individuals at the height
of the epidemic, with the incidence of cases distributed over a longer time horizon (Roberts, 2020). This is
largely achieved by reducing the reproduction number (R), which is how many individuals are infected by
each carrier. Social distancing policies are implicitly designed to achieve this by limiting the amount of social
contact between individuals. By introducing a social network approach, we propose that a decrease in R
can simultaneously be achieved by managing the network structure of interpersonal contact. From a social
network perspective, the shape of the infection curve is closely related to the concept of network distance or
path lengths (Wasserman et al., 1994), which indicates the number of network steps needed to connect two
nodes. Popularised examples of network distance include the six degrees of separation phenomenon (Milgram,
1967), which posits that any two people are connected through at most five acquaintances.
The relation between infection curves and network distance can be illustrated with a simple network
infection model (Figure 1). Panels A and C depict two networks with different path lengths, each with one
hypothetically infected COVID-19 seed node (purple square). At each time step, the disease spreads from
infected nodes to every node to which they are connected; thus, in the first step the disease spreads from
the seed node to its direct neighbours. In the second step, it spreads to their neighbours, who are at network

3

Figure 1: Two example networks A and C. Both networks have the same number of nodes (individuals) and ties

(social interactions) but different structures which imply different infection curves (B and D). Bold ties highlight the
shortest infection path from the infection source to the last infected individual in the respective networks. Network
node colour indicates at which step a node is infected and maps onto colours of histogram bars.

distance 2 from the seed node, and so forth. Over time, the virus moves along network ties until all nodes
are infected. The example shows that the network distance of a node from the infection source (indicated
by node colour in Figure 1 A and C) is identical to the number of time-steps until the virus reaches it. The
distribution of network distances to the source thus directly maps onto the curve of new infections (Figure 1
B and D).
In our example, both networks have the same number of nodes (individuals) and edges (interactions);
however, the network depicted in panel C has a much flatter infection curve than the network in panel A,
even though all nodes are eventually infected in both cases. This is because the latter network has longer
path lengths than the former one – or in other words – more network distance between the individuals due
to a differing structure of interaction, despite the same absolute contact prevalence. Thus, when adopting
a network perspective, flattening the curve is equivalent to increasing the path length from an infected

4

individual to all others, which can be achieved by restructuring contact (besides the generally proposed
reduction of contact). Consequently, one aim of social distancing should be increasing the average network
distance between individuals by smartly manipulating the structure of interactions. Our illustration shows a
viable path to keep the COVID-19 curve flat while allowing some social interaction: we must devise interaction
strategies that make real-life networks look more like network C, and less like network A.
We propose a series of strategies for how individuals can make local decisions to achieve this goal. Understanding which types of strategies of targeted contact reduction and social distancing are more efficient in
increasing path lengths and flattening the curve can inform how to shift from short-term (complete lockdown)
to long-term management of COVID-19 contagion processes. The contact reduction strategies we propose
are based on insights of how items flow through networks, such as diseases, memes, information, or ideas
(Watts et al., 2006; Podolny, 2001; Borgatti, 2005; Centola, 2010). Such spread is generally hampered when
networks consist of densely connected groups with few connections in-between, such as individuals who live
in isolated villages scattered over sparse rural areas (Watts, 1999). In contrast, contacts that bridge large
distances are related to short paths and rapid spread. When commuters travel between these isolated villages,
for instance, network distances decrease substantially (Milgram, 1967; Centola, 2010). Using this knowledge,
we can avoid rapid contagion by encouraging social distancing strategies that increase clustering and reduce
network short-cuts to reap the largest benefit of reducing social contact and limiting disease spread to a
minimum. We propose three strategies aimed at increasing network clustering and eliminating short-cuts.
While more realistic examples of the proposed strategies are simulated in the next section, we first outline
the underlying principles of the model in Figure 2. Panel A depicts a network in which densely connected
communities are bridged by random, long-range ties. This type of network is commonly known as a ‘small
world network’ (Centola, 2010). It is widely used in simulations, as it represents core features of real-world
contact networks, in particular social clustering combined with short network distances, making it particularly
useful for our illustration (Milgram, 1967). Within clusters, individuals are similar to each other, indicated
by their node colour, and live in the same neighbourhood, indicated by node location. The further away
two clusters are in the figure, the further they live from each other and the more dissimilar their members.
Panels A to D illustrate the successive, targeted contact reduction strategies, while the bar-graph depicts the
distribution of distances of all individuals from one of the two highlighted infection sources.
Strategy 1: ‘Seek similarity’ strategy: Reduce geographic and socio-demographic difference to contact
partners (A to B in Fig. 2). In the first strategy, individuals choose their contact partners based on their
individual characteristics. Generally, individuals tend to have contact others who share common attributes,
such as those in the same neighbourhood (geographical), or of similar income or socio-demographic characteristics such as age (Feld, 1981; Rivera et al., 2010; McPherson et al., 2001). The tendency to interact with
similar others is called homophily in the sociological network literature (Rivera et al., 2010) and is a ubiquitous and well-established feature of social networks (thus, we use seek similarity strategy and homophily
strategy interchangeably). Because we are mostly connected to similar others, contact with dissimilar individuals tends to bridge to more distant communities. Restricting ones contact to those most similar helps limit
network bridges that substantially reduce network path lengths. This entails choosing to interact with those
geographically proximate (e.g., living in the same neighbourhood), or individuals with similar characteristics
(e.g., age). Panel B in Figure 2 shows the network structure after the implementation of this strategy of tie
reduction. The associated bar-graph illustrates that following this network-based intervention, a substantial
number of nodes are at a larger distance from the infection source. This strategy will be successful when the

5

Figure 2: Example networks that result from the successive tie reduction strategies. Node colour represents
an individual characteristic, where similarity in node colour represents similarity in this characteristic. Node placement
represents geographic location of residence. A: initial small world network; B: removing ties to dissimilar others that
live far away; C: removing non-embedded ties that are not part of triads or 4-cycles; D: repeating rather than extending
contact. Bar graphs show network distances from the infection sources, highlighted in yellow, for the different scenarios.

characteristic or variable which determines the communities can take on a variety of different (categorical
or continuous) values for different individuals, thereby promoting the formation of small communities. A
broader split, such as along gender or ethnic lines does not promise measurable success but will instead likely
exacerbate the negative consequences of distancing measures. This strategy is supported by epidemiological
modelling which suggests that co-residence and mixing of individuals from different ages strongly increases
the spread of infectious disease, such as COVID-19 (Pellis et al., 2020). Providing a concrete example, if people only interact with others in a 3-block radius (increase geographic similarity), more than 30 transmission
events would be necessary for a virus to travel 100 blocks. Workplaces where many individuals come together
could, for instance, implement routines to decrease contact between groups from different geographic areas
or age-groups.
Strategy 2: ‘Strengthen triadic communities’ clustering strategy: Increase triadic clustering among contact
partners (B to C in Fig. 2). For the second strategy, individuals must consider with whom their contact
partners usually interact. A common feature of contact networks is triadic closure, referring to the fact that
contact partners of an individual tend to be connected themselves (Feld, 1981; Granovetter, 1973; Goodreau
et al., 2009). Tie embedding in triads is a particularly useful topology for containing epidemic outbreaks.
Consider a closed triad of individuals i, j, and h. When i infects j and h, the connection between j and
h does not contribute to further disease spread: it is a ‘redundant’ contact (Burt, 1995). When comparing

6

networks with an identical number of connections, networks with more redundant ties tend to have longer
path lengths. Accordingly, when removing contact to others, one should prioritize removing ties not embedded
in triads, since these ties generally decrease path lengths. In practice, this means that physical contact should
be curtailed with people who are not also connected to ones usual other social contacts. Panel C in Figure 2
illustrates the structure if ties that are not part of closed triads or 4-cycles are removed. In this ideal-type
example, this intervention not only further reduces the network distance of many nodes from the infection
sources, but also creates isolated communities or that cannot be infected by the virus.
Strategy 3: ‘Repeat contact and build micro-communities’ strategy: Repeated contact to same others,
rather than changing interaction partners (C to D in Fig. 2). For the third strategy, individuals need to
consider who they want to regularly interact with and, over time, restrict interaction to those people; this
reduces the number of contact partners rather than number of interactions, which is particularly important
when contact is necessary for psychological well-being. This strategy of limiting contact to very few others
with repeated interactions is in the spirit of a social contract with others to create micro-communities to
only interact within the same group delineated by common agreement. Although this requires coordination,
micro-communities would be difficult for a virus to penetrate, or – importantly – if the infection is contracted
by one contact, for the virus to spread further. Another implication of this strategy includes the repetition
of interaction with others that overlap across more than one contact group. For example, meeting co-workers
outside of work for socializing will have less of an impact on the virus spread relative to a separate group of
friends, since a potential infection path already exists. Having tight and consistent networks of medical or
community-based carers for those more vulnerable to COVID-19 (elderly, pre-existing conditions) limits the
transmission chain. Organisations can leverage this strategy by structuring staggered and grouped shifts so
that individuals have repeated physical contact with a limited group rather than dispersing throughout an
organisation. Panel D in Figure 2 illustrates the resulting network structure.
Strategy 2 and 3 are similar in that they build on pre-existing network structures. However, their difference
lies in the determinants of individual interaction. Strategy 2 relies on a stable and established network
structure of durable relations: who are members of my usual ‘groups’ (e.g., friends, family, co-workers) and
which pairs of individuals among my usual contacts interacts with each other, too? Strategy 3 relies on a
strategic decision to form most convenient and effective “interaction bubbles” and repeat contact to them
over time. In this sense, strategy 2 is easier to implement, since individuals are able to shape their contacts
themselves, while strategy 3 requires coordinated action of everyone involved in a given “bubble”. Until now,
we have illustrated our strategies with an intuitive but stylized model of epidemic spread. We now demonstrate
how our three contact strategies impact infection curves using more formal stochastic infection models that
incorporate core elements from infection models, ideal-type network models and statistical relational event
models. These strategies are compared to a baseline (null) model that represents how the COVID-19 infection
would spread if there was unrestricted contact (i.e., no social distancing).
First, our model draws from classical disease modelling (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927; Anderson and
May, 1992), in which individuals (actors) can be in four states: susceptible, exposed (infected but not yet
infectious), infectious, and recovered (no longer susceptible to infection). Most actors begin in the susceptible
state, while q random actors are in the infectious state (one per thousand in our simulations). This can
represent, for example, the post-lockdown scenario in which only a few cases of COVID-19 remain in the
population; however, variation of q might also be used to determine the levels at which a lock-down can
be eased. During the simulation, susceptible actors can transition to the exposed state by having contact

7

with infectious others (contact partners will be called ‘alters’ from here on). Whether contact between a
susceptible actor and an infectious alter results in contagion is determined probabilistically. A designated
time after becoming exposed, actors become infectious themselves, and later move to the recovered state
after another fixed amount of time.
Second, as in many previous modelling efforts of the dynamics of epidemics such as influenza, we do not
assume homogeneous contact probabilities in an affected population but rather impose a network structure
that limits contact opportunities between actors (Newman, 2002; Halloran et al., 2008; Salathé et al., 2010).
This network represents the typical contact people had in a pre-COVID-19 world. The networks we generate
stochastically for our model follow fairly standard ideal-type network generating approaches. Representing
place of residence, actors are assumed to have a geographic location, determined by coordinates in a twodimensional space. They are members of groups, such as households, institutions like schools or workplaces,
and have individual attributes, such as age, education, or income. Network ties are generated so that actors
have some connections to geographically close alters, some ties to members of the same groups (representing
e.g., co-workers), some ties to alters with similar attributes (e.g., similar age), and, finally, some ties to
random alters in the population. The generated networks represent the structure of alters that an actor can
possibly interact with. They represent the members of their so-called ‘social circles’ (Watts, 1999; Feld, 1981;
Block, 2018) with whom they interact in their normal, pre-COVID life (including family, friends, schoolmates
or co-workers). The exact algorithms which define the networks are described in the Methods section.
In the third component of the model, actors in the network interact at discrete times with alters with which
they have a connection in the underlying network, or in other words, someone they meet from their usual
social contacts. This represents the actual contact people have in their lives during which the disease can be
transmitted from infectious actors to susceptible alters. Notably, in contrast to other modelling approaches,
we do not assume that actors interact with alters in their personal network with uniform probability (i.e. at
random), but, rather, that they are purposeful actors who make strategic choices about interactions. These
strategic choices are at the core of our advice for policy interventions, where individuals can strategically
increase the efficiency of social distancing. In our model, all choices are stochastic; strategies increase the
likelihood of interacting with specific alters but are not deterministic. The exact formulation of with whom
to interact follows a multinomial logit model to choose among possible interaction partners, given by the
network structure. This type of model has previously been used in network evolution (Snijders, 2001) and
relational event models (Butts, 2008; Stadtfeld and Block, 2017).
Our simulations explore the three interaction strategies we propose. First, in our ‘seek similarity’ strategy,
actors choose to interact predominantly with others that are similar to themselves based on one or several
specified attributes used at the network generation stage. Second, actors can adopt our ‘strengthen triadic
community’ or triadic strategy and choose to mostly interact with alters that have common connections in
the underlying network. Third, adopting our ‘repeat contact’ strategy, actors can base their choices on whom
they have interacted with in their previous contacts, both as sender and receiver of an interaction. In each
case, a separate statistical parameter in the multinomial model determines the probabilities of interaction
partners based on the: (i) similarity of alters, (ii) number of common contacts the actor and alter have; and,
(iii) repeat interaction with one of the last j contact partners (see Methods). In our analyses, these three
strategies are compared to a baseline case that mirrors the simple reduction of contact in which individuals
have the same amount of interactions but choose randomly amongst their network contacts (a naı̈ve contact
reduction strategy) and a null model that represents unbridled contact without any social distancing. To

8

make the comparison of interaction strategies independent of the arbitrary size of statistical parameters, we
empirically calibrate parameters so that the average entropy in the probability distribution that represents
the likelihood of different interaction choices is identical for all strategies, as documented in our Methods
section (Snijders, 2004).
Following an initial analysis that represents a benchmark scenario of our disease model, we present a series
of variations in modelling parameters that explore alternative scenarios and ensure our main conclusions are
independent of user-defined parameters and arbitrary modelling choices. Variations are fully described in
the methods section and include: (i) different operationalisations of homophily; (ii) the effect of employing
mixed strategies; (iii) number of actors in the simulation; (iv) varying the underlying network structure in
the simulations; (v) length of the interval in which actors are exposed relative to the time they are infectious;
and (vi) the infectiousness of the virus.
2. RESULTS
The average outcome of the benchmark scenario is presented in Figure 3. The x-axis represents time as
measured in simulation steps per actor and the y-axis the number of individuals infected at this time step
out of a total population of 2,000. Curves are averaged over 40 simulation runs. The first scenario in blue
shows a null or control interaction model in which there is no social distancing and actors interact at random.
The next four strategies all employ a 50% contact reduction relative to the null model and compare different
contact reduction strategies. The black line represents nave social distancing in which actors reduce contact in
a random fashion. The golden line represents the infection curve when actors employ our first ‘seek similarity’
strategy. The green line models our second triadic strategy of ‘strengthening communities’ and represents the
associated infection curve. Finally, the dark red line shows how infections develop when actors employ our
third strategy of ‘repeat contact’.
All three of our strategies substantially slow the spread of the virus compared to either no intervention or
simple, un-strategic social distancing. The most effective is the strategic reduction of interaction with repeated
contacts. In comparison to the random contact reduction strategy, the average infection curve delays the peak
of infections by 37%, decreases the height of the peak by 60%, and results in 30% fewer infected individuals
at the end of the simulation. This is marginally more efficient than the triadic strategy and the homophily
strategy, in this order (delay of peak 18% and 34%, decrease in peak height of 44% and 49%, and reduction
of infected individuals by 2% and 19%, for homophily and triadic strategies, respectively). Note that these
metrics cannot be interpreted as general estimates of the efficiency of these strategies in real-world networks.
Summarizing the sensitivity and robustness analyses carried out, strategic contact reduction has a substantive
effect on flattening the curve compared to simple social distancing consistently across all scenarios. However,
interesting variations occur as discussed below. Full average infection curves and results description for all
model variations are presented in the Supplementary Information.
Different operationalisations of homophily

In the benchmark model, the seek similarity strategy was employed on one demographic attribute. However,
in real-world social networks, individuals are homophilous on multiple attributes (Block and Grund, 2014).
Furthermore, the benchmark model only uses demographic homophily, while we previously also discuss the
importance of geographic homophily. In a variation of the homophily strategy, we show that using geographic

9

Figure 3: Average infection curves. Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social
distancing. Underlying network structure includes 2000 actors and the benchmark network characteristics described
in the main text.

homophily for contact reduction is highly efficient, much more than homophily based on demographic attributes (Figure S1b.). Geographic homophily effectively eliminates contacts to distant others in the network.
In a further analysis, we compare the benefits of using one dimension of demographic homophily or a composite of two dimensions that structure the network. This explores whether we should focus on interacting
with persons similar in one dedicated dimension or seek out others who are as similar as possible in multiple
dimensions. Encouragingly, the focus on one strategic dimension of homophily provides similar outcomes to
reducing overall demographic distance, meaning that homophily should be encouraged on the dimension that
has the least adverse consequences for societal cohesion. Infection curves are presented in Figure S1c.-d.
Employing mixed strategies

Since most individuals in a post-lockdown world need to interact across multiple social circles (e.g., workplace,
extended family), employing only one strategy might not be practical. A mix of different strategies could
therefore be more realistic for everyday use. We tested how four possible combinations of mixing strategies
(three two-way combinations and one three-way combination) compare to the single strategies of seeking
similarity and strengthening communities. We find that the combined strategies are comparably as effective
as single strategies (Figure S2) and can be recommended as alternatives if single strategies are not practicable
in some contexts. Importantly, each combination performs better in limiting infection spread compared to
the nave contact reduction strategy.

10

Varying the number of actors in the simulation
The computational complexity of our simulation prohibits assessing disease dynamics in very large networks
(e.g. 100k+ actors), even on large distributed systems. Nevertheless, we can compare simulations using
the same local network topology as the benchmark model on networks of 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 actors.
Reassuringly, we find no variation of the relative effectiveness of the different interaction strategies by network
size (see Figure S3). While this does not fully allow extrapolation to very large networks, it provides initial
support that disease spread under the model could be similar within differently sized sub-regions of larger,
real-world networks.
Varying the underlying network structure
The generating process of the ideal-type network that provides the opportunity structure among individuals
with whom they can interact contains multiple degrees of freedom. These include the average number of
contacts and the importance of different foci (geography, groups, and attributes) in structuring contact. We
provide infection curves for multiple scenarios in the Supplementary Information (Figure S4 and S5), showing
that our strategies work mostly independent of the underlying structure. A first noteworthy finding from these
simulations is that in networks with fewer connection opportunities, all strategies have much larger benefits
compared to networks with more connection opportunities (panels C and D in Figure S4). In fact, the triadic
strategy does not seem to work anymore in the scenarios with very high average connectivity in the underlying
network most likely because of a large number of closed triangles. This shows that in communities that have
lower connectivity, spread can be contained even better. As a second finding, we see that in the case where
the underlying network is not structured by homophily, the homophily strategy does not work (panel C in
Figure S5), illustrating how the strategy relies on predetermined structural network features.
Variation in infectiousness and the length of the exposed period
Average infection curves under conditions of differences in infectiousness of the virus, and variations of the
time individuals are in the state exposed relative to the time of being in the state infectious do not influence
the relative effectiveness of the different strategies and are presented in Figures S6 and S7 respectively.
3. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In the absence of a vaccine against COVID-19, governments and organisations face economic and social
pressures to gradually and safely open up societies but lack scientific evidence on how to best do so. We
provide clear social network-based strategies to empower individuals and organisations to adopt safer contact
patterns across multiple domains by enabling individuals to differentiate between ‘high-impact and ‘lowimpact contacts. The result may also be higher compliance since actors will hold the power to strategically
adjust their interactions without being requested to fully isolate. Instead of blanket self-isolation policies, the
emphasis on similar, community-based, and repetitive contacts is both easy to understand and implement
thus making distancing measures more palatable over longer periods of time.
How can this be applied to real-world settings? When a firm lock-down is no longer mandated or recommended, it is likely that individuals will want or need to interact in different social circles, e.g. at the
workplace and with the wider family. Consequently, the simple one-at-a-time strategic recommendations we

11

analysed in most simulations might be impossible to follow strictly by some. Our sensitivity analysis using
mixed strategies addresses this concern. For example, does mixing the three strategies still provide benefits
or do they counteract one another in their effect? Reassuringly, a mix of strategies still provided comparable
benefits to single strategies, compared to naı̈ve contact reduction. Further modelling is needed to assess the
implications in a variety of contexts. However, when approaching this issue from a policy perspective, designing steps to ease lockdown can be done with potential behavioural recommendations in mind: if network
structures and demographic characteristics of individuals in particular regions suggest that the use of one
strategy will yield the best results, decisions on which contact opportunities to allow – such as opening schools
or local shops – might be taken so that this strategy can be adhered to most easily.
A second discussion point concerns the potential unintended consequences of recommending our triadic and
homophilous strategies. Advocating the creation of small communities and contact to mostly similar others
can potentially result in the long-term reduction of intergroup contact and an associated rise in inequality
(DiMaggio and Garip, 2012). In our simulations we explored this concern by comparing the scenarios when
homophilous ties in the underlying network are formed following similarity in multiple dimensions, e.g. age and
income. Our test of whether minimising the overall difference in attributes of contacts versus only reducing
homophily on one dimension suggests that choosing one salient attribute can already go a long way. Thus,
policymakers can make smart choices in deciding which attribute people should pay attention to, keeping
the potential social consequences in mind. Nevertheless, understanding the long-term social consequences of
which types of public spaces are opened and, accordingly, which types of interaction are allowed should be a
major policy concern.
A number of concrete policy guidelines can be deduced from our network-based strategies. For hospital or
essential workers, risk is minimized in sustained shifts with similar composition of employees (i.e., repeating
contact) and, to distribute people into shifts based on, for example, residential proximity where possible (i.e.,
homophily). In workplaces and schools, staggering shifts and lessons with different start, end and break-times
by discrete organisational units and classrooms will keep contact in small groups and reduce contact between
them. When providing private or home care to the elderly or vulnerable, the same person should visit rather
than rotating or taking turns, but that person should be the one with fewest bridging ties to other groups and
who lives the closest (geographically). Repeated social meetings of individuals of similar ages that live alone
carry a comparatively low risk. However, in a household of five, when each person interacts with disparate sets
of friends, many short cuts are being formed that are potentially connected to a very high risk of spreading
the disease.
Simple behavioural rules can go a long way in ‘keeping the curve flat’. As the pressure grows throughout a pandemic to ease stringent lockdown measures increases to relieve social, psychological, and economic
burdens, our approach provides insights to individuals, governments and organisations about three simple
strategies: interacting with similar types of people, strengthening interaction within communities, and repeating interaction with the same people.
4. METHODS
Generation of stylised networks

The stylised binary networks x that represent interaction opportunities of individuals are generated as the
composite of four sub-processes. Jointly, the sub-processes create networks that have realistic values of local

12

clustering, path-lengths, and homophily. All ties in the network are defined as undirected. The number of
actors in the network is denoted by n.
The first sub-process represents tie formation based on geographic proximity (Hamill and Gilbert, 2009).
First, all actors in the network are randomly placed into a two-dimensional square. Second, each actor
draws the number of contacts which it forms in this subprocess dgeo,i from a uniform distribution between
dgeo,min and dgeo,max ; for example, if dgeo,min = 10 and dgeo,max =20, every actor forms a random number of
ties between 10 and 20 in this sub-process. Third, the user-defined density in geographic tie-formation ggeo
defines the geographic proximity of contacts drawn, so that actor i randomly forms dgeo,i ties among those
dgeo,i
ggeo

that are closed in Euclidean distance from actor i. For example, if actor i is posed to form dgeo,i =12

ties and ggeo =0.5, the actor randomly chooses 12 out of the 24 closest alters to form a tie to. Across all
simulated networks we set ggeo =0.3. Fourth, unilateral choices (where only i selected j but not vice versa)
are symmetrised so that a non-directed connection exists between the actors.
The second sub-process represents tie formation in organizational foci, e.g. workplaces (Hébert-Dufresne
and Althouse, 2015). First, each actor is randomly assigned to a group so that all groups have on average
m members. Second, each actor forms ties at random to other members within the same groups with a
probability of ggroups . For example, when m=10 and ggroups =0.5, a tie from each actor to every alter in the
same group is formed with a probability of 50%. Third, unilateral ties are symmetrised as above.
The third sub-process represents tie-formation based on homophily, for example similarity in age or income
(Pellis et al., 2020). First, each actor is assigned an individual attribute ai between 0 and 100 with uniform
probability (the scale of ai cancels later in the model). Second, for each actor, the normalized similarity
simi,j to all alters j is calculated, which is one minus the absolute difference between ai and aj for actor j,
divided by 100 (the range of the variable), so that simi,j =1 in case i and j have the identical value of a and
simi,j =0 if they are at opposite ends of the scale. Third, each actor draws the number of contacts it forms
in this subprocess dhomo,i from a uniform distribution between dhomo,min and dhomo,max . Fourth, each actor
creates dhomo,i ties to alters j in the networks with a probability that is proportional to (simi,j )w , where
higher values of w mean that individuals prefer more similar others. Across all reported simulations, we set
w=2. Fifth, unilateral ties are symmetrised as above.
The fourth sub-process represents haphazard ties that are not captured by any of the above processes.
Here simply z ties per actor are created with respect to randomly chosen alters.
Definition of simulation model
Let the binary network x represent the underlying social ties between n individuals, labeled from 1 to
n. Each node i is characterized by a set of attributes aki (such as age or location). Our model aims to
reproduce the process of individuals interacting with some of their social connections. Similar to the classic
SIR model (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927) and its SEIR extension (Anderson and May, 1992), we assume
that individuals can be in four different states: either susceptible to the disease, exposed (infected but not
yet infectious), infectious, or recovered. Infection occurs through social interactions, which are modeled in a
similar fashion to the Dynamic Actor-Oriented Model (Salathé et al., 2010) developed for relational events.
More specifically, our model is comprised of the following steps:
1 At each step of the process, one individual is picked at random and initiates an interaction with probability πcontact .

13

2 An actor initiating an interaction can only pick one interaction partner. Only potential partners as
defined by the network x can be chosen. The decision to interact is unilateral and depends on characteristics of the two persons through a probability model p.
3 An infectious individual infects a healthy person when they interact, who then becomes exposed. This
contagion occurs with the probability πinf ection .
4 After a fixed number of steps (Texposure ), an exposed individual becomes infectious.
5 After becoming infectious, recovery occurs within Trecovery steps. Once recovered, individuals can no
longer be infected.
6 The process ends once there is no longer anyone exposed or infectious.
The steps of the model are illustrated in Figure 4. One can note that the mechanics of the infection align
with previously proposed agent-based versions of the SIR and SEIR models (Chowell et al., 2016; Siettos and
Russo, 2013). Together, the probabilities πcontact and πinf ection play a similar role as the classic infectivity
rate (β) in SIR models. The rate models the average number of contacts per person (modelled here through
πcontact ) and the likelihood of infection (represented by πinf ection ), however the equivalence is not direct due
to the added step of the interaction probability (p). The exposure and recovery times replace the classic
exposure and recovery rates (often traditionally denoted as σ and y) in a straightforward manner. Let us
turn to the definition of the probability model p. Let Ni be the set of potential contacts, or alters, j of a
given individual i in the network x. We define for each step t of the process, Li (j, t) as the number of prior
interactions between i and an alter j, within the last K interactions of i. In our simulations, the number K
was arbitrarily set to 2 but can be easily adjusted in the replication files. For each alter j ∈ N , the value s(i, j)
represents the statistic driving the strategical choice of i to pick j. Specifically, we define three different ways
depending on whether the homophily, the triadic, or the repetition strategy is chosen (however, arbitrary
other statistics can be defined). The statistic shomophily accounts for the level of similarity between i and j
given a set of attributes, striadic corresponds to the number of alters they share, and srepetition is the count
of previous interactions within the last K contacts of i. In practice, these statistics are calculated as:
qP

shomophily (i, j) = 1 −

k
k 2
k (ai − aj )
qP
qP
k − ak )2 ) − min(
k
k 2
max(
(a
i
j
k
k (ai − aj ) )
i,j

striadic (i, j) =

(4.1)

i,j

n
X

xi,k xj,k

(4.2)

srepetition (i, j) = Li (j, t)

(4.3)

k=1

The probability for i to pick j is defined as a multinomial choice probability (McFadden et al., 1973),
following the logic of previous relational event (Block, 2018) and stochastic network models (Halloran et al.,
2008). The intuition behind this distribution is that each potential partner in Ni is assigned an objective
function value, and choosing a partner is based on these values. Mathematically, the objective function is
an exponentiated linear function of the statistic s(i,j), weighted by a parameter α. We further assume that
individuals can reduce a certain percentage of their interactions. Considering the probability (πcontact ) of
initiating an interaction in the first place, the relevant probability distribution becomes:
πcontact exp(α × s(i, j))
p(i → j|πcontact , α) = P
‘
j ‘ ∈Ni exp(α × s(i, j ))

(4.4)

14

Figure 4: Figure 4. Flowchart of the simulation model. Squares indicate updating steps to individuals or the entire

system. Diamond shapes represent decisions that determine the subsequent step in the simulation. In the iterative
part of the model, a random individual i is chosen, to initiate an interactions with probability πcontact . In case an
interaction is initiated, a contact partner j is chosen with probability p(i → j) following a multinomial choice model.
If either interaction partner is infectious and the other is susceptible, contagion occurs with probability πinf ection .
Subsequently, among all individuals in the simulation, those that are in the exposed state for more than Texposure
transition to infectious state and those that are in the infectious state for more than Tinf ection recover. These recursive
steps are repeated until all individual are either in the susceptible or recovered state. The colors red, green, and yellow
relate closely to the steps in the SEIR model, where red squares govern the transition from susceptible to exposed,
the yellow square governs the transitions from exposed to infectious, and the green square governs the transition
from infectious to recovered. The purple square represents the step at which individuals strategically chose interaction
partners to limit disease spread.

These probabilities can be loosely interpreted in terms of log-odd ratios, similarly to logit models. Given
two potential partners j1 and j2 for which the statistic s increases of one unit (i.e. s(i,j2 )=s(i,j1 )+1), the
following log ratio simplifies to:

log

p(i → j2 |πcontact , β)
=α
p(i → j1 |πcontact , β)

(4.5)

For example, if we use s=srepetition and αrepetition = log(2), the probability of picking one alter present in
the last contacts of i is twice as high as picking another alter who is not.

15

Calibration of model parameters
The strategy of picking a neighbor at random corresponds to the model without any statistic s, reducing the
probability distribution to a uniform one. For the three other strategies, the parameters αhomophily , αtriadic ,
and αrepetition are adjusted to keep the models comparable. To this end, we use the measure of explained
variation for dynamic network models devised by Snijders (Snijders, 2004). This measure builds upon the
Shannon entropy and can be applied to our model to assess the degree of certainty in the choices individuals
make. For a given individual i at a step t, this measure is defined as:
P
rH (i, t|πcontact , α) = 1 +

j∈Ni

p(i → j|πcontact , α) × log2 (p(i → j|πcontact , α))
log2 (|Ni |)

(4.6)

Intuitively, this measure equals 0 in the case of the random strategy where the probability of picking any
alter is identical. It increases whenever some outcomes are favored over others and equals 1 if one outcome has
all of the probability mass. Since the model assumes all individuals are equally likely to initiate interactions,
we can average this measure over all actors. Moreover, in the case of the repetition strategy, the measure is
time dependent. In that case, we use its expected value over the whole process. We finally use the following
aggregated measure in order to evaluate the certainty of outcomes of a specific strategy:
n

RH (πcontact , α) =

1X
E[rH (i, t)]
n i=1

(4.7)

For this article, we first fix the parameter αrepetition at a value of 2.5, and calculate an estimated value
R̂H (πcontact , αrepetition ) of this measure. This experience-based parameter choice results in an associated RH
value between 0.3 and 0.5 in the different scenario, which is realistic in terms of size (see definition above).
To compare this model to others, we then define the parameters αhomophily and αtriadic that verify:

R̂H (πcontact , αrepetition ) = RH (πcontact , αhomophily ) = RH (πcontact , αtriadic )

(4.8)

using a standard optimisation algorithm. The average parameters across simulations for the different network scenarios are αtriadic =0.75 and αhomophily =17.6. While that latter parameter appears large, note that
the associated statistic shomophily ranges from 0 to 1, with most realised values close to 1.
Parametrisation of the different simulations
Unless otherwise noted, all simulations use πcontact =0.5 except for the null model, which uses πcontact =1. In all
simulations except the ones that vary the infectiousness, πinf ection =0.8. Unless otherwise noted, Texposure =
1n and Tinf ection = 4n. Given the substantial computational burden involved in conducting the simulations,
48 repetitions were run for networks with n ≤ 1000, with 40 for larger networks. Experiments varying Texposure
and πinf ection used 24 repetitions.
For the experiments that vary the structure of the underlying network and the network size, the parameters
that guide the stochastic network creation are presented in Table S1. Descriptive statistics of these networks
are presented in Table S2. The underlying networks that are used in the other variation experiments are
generated according to the parameters denoted ‘1: Baseline’ in Table S1-S2. The four experiments that vary
the time individuals are in the ‘exposed’ state before becoming ‘infectious’ use values for Texposure of 0, 1n,

16

2n, 3n and 4n. The four experiments that vary the infectiousness of the disease use values for πinf ection of
0.55, 0.65, 0.8, and 0.95.
The experiment that used geography as the basis of the homophily strategy was created according to the
‘1: Baseline’ parameters but used the Euclidean distance in geographic placement as the basis for choosing
interaction partners in the homophily strategy. The two experiments on multidimensional homophily used
underlying networks created following the ‘1: Baseline’ parameters, with the exception that instead of one
homophilous attribute, two attributes were defined and the number of ties created according to the homophily
parameter was split evenly between the two dimensions. The homophily strategy used for the simulated
infection curves in the two scenarios differs in the sense that in the first, individuals interact according to
minimising the absolute difference in both attributes. In the second scenario, only the first attribute was used
as the basis of the homophily strategy and the second attribute was ignored.
For the experiments using mixed strategies, the probability of partner choice p(i → j) can depend on
a vector of statistics and parameters (Stadtfeld and Block, 2017). The entropy based on a set parameter
vector was used to calibrate the parameter for the homophily and triadic closure strategy as comparison
cases. Parameter choices rely on experimentation to result in similar entropy values as when using single
strategies. For the mixed strategy of repetition and homophily, the parameters were set to αhomophily =0.7
and αrepetition =1.6. For the mixed strategy of repetition and triadic closure, the parameters were set to
αtriadic =0.35 and αrepetition =1.6. For the mixed strategy of homophily and triadic closure, the parameters
were set to αhomophily =6 and αtriadic =0.35. For the mixed strategy incorporating all three, parameters were
set to αhomophily =4, αtriadic =0.3, and αrepetition =1.2.
The simulated average infection curves for all experiments can be found in Figures S1-S7. Descriptive
results for the simulations in terms of delay of peak, height of peak and total number infected at the end
of the simulation are presented in Table S3. Note that the descriptive statistics in this table present the
averages of characteristics of the repetitions of the simulated infection curves, which are not the same as the
characteristics of the average infection curves as presented in the supplementary figures.
Acknowledgements: PB, JBM, CR, RK and MCM are supported by The Leverhulme Trust, Leverhulme
Centre for Demographic Science. CR is supported by the British Academy. MCM is supported by ERC Advanced Grant CHRONO (835079). The authors would like to thank Mark Verhagen, Valentina Rotondi, and
Liliana Andriano for feedback.
Author contributions: PB, MH, and IJR conceptualised the study; PB and MH contributed methodology,
implementation and performed analyses; PB, MH, IJR, and MCM wrote initial manuscript and provided
visualisation; all authors (PB, MH, IJR, JBD, CR, RK, and MCM) discussed research design and reviewed
and edited manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

REFERENCES
Aledort, J., N. Lurie, J. Wasserman, and S. Bozzette (2007, 02). Non-pharmaceutical public health interventions for pandemic influenza: An evaluation of the evidence base. BMC public health 7, 208.

17

Anderson, R. M. and R. M. May (1992). Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control. Oxford
university press.
Bell, D. (2006, 02). Nonpharmaceutical interventions for pandemic influenza, national and community measures. Emerging infectious diseases 12, 88–94.
Block, P. (2018, 07). Network evolution and social situations. Sociological Science 5, 402–431.
Block, P. and T. Grund (2014, 08). Multidimensional homophily in friendship networks. Network science
(Cambridge University Press) 2, 189–212.
Borgatti, S. (2005, 01). Centrality and network flow. Social Networks 27, 55–71.
Burt, R. (1995). Structural Holes. Harvard University Press.
Butts, C. (2008, 07). A relational event framework for social action. Sociological Methodology 38, 155 – 200.
Centola, D. (2010, 09). The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment. Science (New York,
N.Y.) 329, 1194–7.
Chowell, G., L. Sattenspiel, S. Bansal, and C. Viboud (2016, 07). Mathematical models to characterize early
epidemic growth: A review. Physics of Life Reviews pii: S1571-0645(16)30064-1.
DiMaggio, P. and F. Garip (2012, 07). Network effects and social inequality. Annual Review of Sociology 38,
93–118.
Feld, S. L. (1981). The focused organization of social ties. American Journal of Sociology 86 (5), 1015–1035.
Ferguson, N., D. Cummings, C. Fraser, J. Cajka, P. Cooley, and S. Burke (2006, 08). Strategies for mitigating
an influenza pandemic. Nature 442, 448–52.
Germann, T., K. Kadau, I. Longini, and C. Macken (2006, 05). Mitigation strategies for pandemic influenza
in the united states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103,
5935–40.
Glass, R., L. Glass, W. Beyeler, and H. Min (2006, 11). Targeted social distancing designs for pandemic
influenza. Emerging infectious diseases 12, 1671–81.
Goodreau, S., J. Kitts, and M. Morris (2009, 03). Birds of a feather, or friend of a friend?: Using exponential
random graph models to investigate adolescent social networks. Demography 46, 103–25.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 78 (6), 1360–1380.
Halloran, M., N. Ferguson, S. Eubank, I. Longini, D. Cummings, B. Lewis, S. Xu, C. Fraser, A. Vullikanti,
T. Germann, D. Wagener, R. Beckman, K. Kadau, C. Barrett, C. Macken, S. Burke, and P. Cooley (2008,
04). Modeling targeted layered containment of an influenza pandemic in the usa. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105, 4639–44.
Hamill, L. and N. Gilbert (2009, 03). Social circles: A simple structure for agent-based social network models.
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 12.
Hébert-Dufresne, L. and B. Althouse (2015, 07). Complex dynamics of synergistic coinfections on realistically
clustered networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112.
Jackson, C., E. Vynnycky, J. Hawker, B. Olowokure, and P. Mangtani (2013, 01). School closures and
influenza: Systematic review of epidemiological studies. BMJ open 3.
Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical
character 115 (772), 700–721.
McFadden, D. et al. (1973). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior.
McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social networks.
Annual Review of Sociology 27 (1), 415–444.

18

Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology today 2 (1), 60–67.
Morse, S. S., R. L. Garwin, and P. J. Olsiewski (2006). Next flu pandemic: What to do until the vaccine
arrives? Science 314 (5801), 929–929.
Newman, M. (2002, 08). Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear,
and soft matter physics 66, 016128.
Pellis, L., S. Cauchemez, N. Ferguson, and C. Fraser (2020, 12). Systematic selection between age and
household structure for models aimed at emerging epidemic predictions. Nature Communications 11.
Podolny, J. (2001, 07). Networks as the pipes and prisms of the market. American Journal of Sociology 107,
33–60.
Rivera, M., S. Soderstrom, and B. Uzzi (2010, 08). Dynamics of dyads in social networks: Assortative,
relational, and proximity mechanisms. Annual Review of Sociology 36.
Roberts, S. (2020, 3). Targeted social distancing designs for pandemic influenza. New York Times.
Salathé, M., M. Kazandjieva, J. W. Lee, P. Levis, M. Feldman, and J. Jones (2010, 12). A high-resolution
human contact network for infectious disease transmission. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 107, 22020–5.
Siettos, C. and L. Russo (2013, 04). Mathematical modeling of infectious disease dynamics. Virulence 4.
Snijders, T. (2001, 02). The statistical evaluation of social network dynamics. Sociological Methodology 31.
Snijders, T. (2004, 03). Explained variation in dynamic network models. Mathmatiques et sciences humaines 168.
Stadtfeld, C. and P. Block (2017). Interactions, actors, and time: Dynamic network actor models for relational
events. Sociological Science 4 (14), 318–352.
Sun, K., J. Chen, and C. Viboud (2020, 02). Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019
outbreak based on crowdsourced data: a population-level observational study. The Lancet Digital Health 2.
Ventresca, M. and D. Aleman (2013). Evaluation of strategies to mitigate contagion spread using social
network characteristics. Social Networks 35 (1), 75 – 88.
Wasserman, S., K. Faust, C. U. Press, M. Granovetter, U. of Cambridge, and D. Iacobucci (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences. Cambridge University
Press.
Watts, D., D. J, Strogatz, and S. H (2006, 01). Collective dynamics of ‘small world’ networks, pp. 301–303.
Watts, D. J. (1999). Networks, dynamics, and the small world phenomenon. American Journal of Sociology 105 (2), 493–527.
Wu, Z. and J. M. McGoogan (2020, 04). Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease
2019 (covid-19) outbreak in china: Summary of a report of 72314 cases from the chinese center for disease
control and prevention. JAMA 323 (13), 1239–1242.

19

Figure S1: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in the
main text. (A) Reference model with standard operationalisation of homophily; (B) model with homophily based on
geographic proximity; (C) underlying network model with homophily based on two dimensions, interaction strategy
minimises the overall difference along both attributes; (D) underlying network model with homophily based on two
dimensions, interaction strategy minimises the difference only on the first attribute.

20

Figure S2: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. (A) Mixed strategy of repetition and triadic closure; (B) mixed strategy of repetition and homophily;
(C) mixed strategy of repetition, homophily, and triadic closure; (D) mixed strategy of homophily and triadic closure.

21

Figure S3: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. (A) 500 actors; (B) 1000 actors; (C) 2000 actors; (D) 4000 actors.

22

Figure S4: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. Names refer to the parametrisation given in Table S1. (A) baseline scenario; (B) random network; (C)
higher degree; (D) lower degree.

23

Figure S5: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. Names refer to the parametrisation given in Table S1. (A) no groups; (B) no geography; (C) small
world-ish.

24

Figure S6: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. (A) πinf ection =0.55; (B) πinf ection =0.65; (C) πinf ection =0.8; (D)πinf ection =0.95.

25

Figure S7: Curves compare 4 contact reduction strategies to the null model of no social distancing, as described in

the main text. (A) Texposed =0; (B) Texposed =1n; (C) Texposed =2n; (D) Texposed =3n; (E) Texposed =4n.

nActors

d geo min

d geo max

g geo

m groups

g groups

d hom min

d hom max

w hom.

z random

1: Baseline scenario

1000

4

12

0.3

8

0.9

4

12

2

0.5

2: Higher degree

1000

8

24

0.3

16

0.9

8

24

2

1

3: Lower degree

1000

2

6

0.3

4

0.9

2

6

2

0.25

4: No groups

1000

10

30

0.3

0

NA

5

15

2

0.5

5: No geography

1000

0

0

NA

20

0.9

5

15

2

0.5

6: Random net.

1000

0

0

NA

0

NA

0

0

NA

32

7: Geography

1000

15

45

0.3

0

NA

0

0

NA

0.5

8: 500 Actors

500

4

12

0.3

8

0.9

4

12

2

0.5

9: 1000 Actors

1000

4

12

0.3

8

0.9

4

12

2

0.5

10: 2000 Actors

2000

4

12

0.3

8

0.9

4

12

2

0.5

11: 4000 Actors

4000

4

12

0.3

8

0.9

4

12

2

0.5

Table S1: Parameters used in the stochastic generation of underlying networks. Full description of procedure is described in the Methods section in the main text.

26

Scenario

27

Scenario

n

deg.

clus.

av. path

dia.

hom.

1: Baseline scenario

1000

38.4

0.11

2.23

3

1.08

2: Higher degree

1000

75.9

0.14

1.93

3

1.08

3: Lower degree

1000

19.4

0.09

2.69

4

1.08

4: No groups

1000

55.4

0.16

2.07

3

1.07

5: No geography

1000

40.2

0.26

2.24

3

1.09

6: Random net.

1000

62

0.06

1.96

3

1

7: Small world-ish

1000

53.9

0.3

2.57

4

1

8: 500 Actors

500

38.11

0.14

2

3

1.08

9: 1000 Actors

1000

38.4

0.11

2.23

3

1.08

10: 2000 Actors

2000

38.72

0.09

2.49

3.4

1.08

11: 4000 Actors

4000

38.85

0.08

2.7

4

1.08

Table S2: Characteristics of the networks created under different scenarios. Descriptive statistics are av-

eraged over 40-48 simulations. Notes: n: number of actors; deg.: average degree / number of connections per actor;
clus.: clustering coefficient / proportion of closed triads over possibly closed triads; av. Path: average network distance
between pairs of nodes; dia.: diameter / maximum distance in between nodes in the network; hom.: average similarity
of interaction partners divided by average similarity among all actors.

28
Variation: network structure
Scenario

Strategy

1: Baseline scenario

Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition

2: Higher degree

3: Lower degree

4: No groups

5: No geography

6: Random net.

7: Small world-ish

Variation: Texposure
Delay

Peak

Inf.

1.30
1.66
1.50
1.59
1.25
1.49
1.52
1.24
1.06
1.85
1.88
2.00
1.34
1.68
1.46
1.24
1.12
0.71
1.38
0.99
1.46
1.38
1.39
1.46
1.11
1.61
1.44
1.30

0.50
0.35
0.23
0.24
0.48
0.48
0.44
0.31
0.40
0.14
0.12
0.06
0.52
0.29
0.38
0.27
0.41
0.01
0.22
0.14
0.59
0.45
0.41
0.32
0.43
0.25
0.45
0.29

75%
73%
71%
57%
71%
79%
80%
56%
62%
51%
52%
24%
77%
72%
77%
54%
63%
2%
65%
32%
90%
72%
73%
63%
65%
66%
74%
56%

1.59
1.83
2.09
1.87
1.30
1.66
1.50
1.59
1.30
1.49
1.60
1.47
1.63
2.20
1.90
2.08

0.62
0.41
0.33
0.34
0.50
0.35
0.23
0.24
0.49
0.28
0.26
0.21
0.63
0.42
0.36
0.29

94%
81%
93%
75%
75%
73%
71%
57%
74%
60%
73%
52%
95%
93%
94%
71%

1.11
0.96
1.25
1.25
1.29
1.34
1.21
1.65
1.30
1.66
1.50
1.59
1.32
1.44
1.33
1.48

0.32
0.10
0.16
0.07
0.42
0.19
0.16
0.17
0.50
0.35
0.23
0.24
0.57
0.33
0.24
0.27

57%
29%
49%
22%
68%
47%
48%
46%
75%
73%
71%
57%
80%
62%
63%
57%

Scenario

Strategy

16: Texposure = 0

Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition

17: Texposure = 1

18: Texposure = 2

19: Texposure = 3

20: Texposure = 4

9: 1000 Actors

10: 2000 Actors

11: 4000 Actors

Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition

21: Homo. + Triad.

22: Homo. + Rep.

23: Rep. + Triad

24: Ho. + Re. + Tr.

13: pinf ect =0.65

14: pinf ect =0.8

15: pinf ect =0.95

Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition

Inf.

1.44
1.69
1.48
1.52
1.30
1.66
1.50
1.59
1.40
1.20
1.54
1.24
1.22
1.58
1.24
1.49
1.11
1.85
1.50
1.11

0.50
0.33
0.27
0.21
0.50
0.35
0.23
0.24
0.54
0.26
0.26
0.19
0.47
0.32
0.21
0.23
0.43
0.34
0.23
0.19

74%
65%
63%
46%
75%
73%
71%
57%
84%
56%
74%
47%
73%
68%
62%
57%
68%
78%
73%
44%

Random
Triads
Homophily
Mixed strat.
Random
Triads
Homophily
Mixed strat.
Random
Triads
Homophily
Mixed strat.
Random
Triads
Homophily
Mixed strat.

1.52
1.86
1.73
1.75
1.39
1.51
1.60
1.52
1.53
1.47
1.67
1.92
1.53
1.51
1.43
1.39

0.69
0.55
0.49
0.58
0.60
0.40
0.37
0.36
0.63
0.34
0.31
0.35
0.63
0.39
0.32
0.34

97%
96%
97%
96%
84%
70%
82%
68%
89%
64%
80%
74%
88%
70%
74%
64%

0.50
0.35
0.23
0.24
0.46
0.30
0.11
0.23
0.50
0.25
0.31
0.26
0.52
0.27
0.36
0.25

75%
73%
71%
57%
69%
62%
50%
54%
75%
61%
53%
52%
78%
67%
68%
50%

Variation: operationalisation homophily
25: Normal homo.

26: Geogr. homo.

Variation: infectiousness
12: pinf ect =0.55

Peak

Variation: mixed strategies

Variation: network size
8: 500 Actors

Delay

27: 2-Dim. abs. diff.

28: 2-Dim. only 1st

Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition
Random
Triads
Homophily
Repetition

1.30
1.66
1.50
1.59
1.20
1.40
2.19
1.55
1.31
1.47
1.00
1.22
1.32
1.63
1.33
1.19

Table S3: Characteristics of average infection curves for different
strategies. All entries denoting averaged results of simulations are relative
to the null model of no contact reduction (blue line in Fig. 3). Delay:
delay of the peak of the infection curve compared to the null model; Peak:
height of the peak of the infection curve compared to the null model; Inf.:
proportion of the population infected compared to the null model.

