Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series
ISSN 2058-8887

No. 2
April 2020

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property:
Findings from the COVID-19
Pandemic
DOI: http://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.51142

Frank Tietze 1, * , Pratheeba Vimalnath 1 , Leonidas Aristodemou 1 ,
Jenny Molloy 1, 2
1

Innovation and Intellectual Property Management (IIPM) Laboratory, Centre for
Technology Management (CTM), Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of
Engineering (CUED), University of Cambridge
2

Open Bioeconomy Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering and
Biotechnology (CEB), University of Cambridge

*Please contact the corresponding author for feedback:

frank.tietze@eng.cam.ac.uk

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

1

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property:
Findings from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Frank Tietze1,*, Pratheeba Vimalnath1, Leonidas Aristodemou1, Jenny Molloy1,2

Abstract — Within national and international innovation
systems a pandemic calls for large-scale action by many actors
across sectors, in order to mobilise resources, developing and
manufacturing Crisis-Critical Products as efficiently and in the
huge quantities needed. Nowadays, this also includes digital
innovations ranging from complex epidemiological models,
artificial intelligence (AI) methodologies, to open data platforms
for prevention, diagnostic and treatment.
Amongst the many challenges during a pandemic, innovation
stakeholders and manufacturing firms particularly find
themselves suddenly engaged in new relationships, possibly even
with firms that have been competitors prior to the pandemic.
Those stakeholders are thus likely to face intellectual property (IP)
related challenges. Unfortunately, to (governmental) decision
makers these challenges might not appear to be of paramount
urgency compared to the many, huge operational challenges to
deploy urgently needed resources. However, if IP challenges are
considered too late, they may cause delays to urgently mobilising
resources effectively. Manufacturing firms could be reluctant to
fully engage in the development and mass manufacturing of CrisisCritical Products.
This paper adopts an IP perspective on the currently unfolding
COVID-19 pandemic to identify pandemic related IP
considerations and IP challenges. The focus is predominantly on
individual challenges and technical aspects related to research,
development and urgent upscaling of capacity to manufacture
Crisis-Critical Products in the huge volumes suddenly in demand.
Its purpose is to provide a structure for those concerned with
steering clear of IP challenges to avoid delays in fighting a
pandemic.
From an ad-hoc patent analysis we identify that the majority of
coronavirus related patents in the field are around organic
chemistry, and development of methodologies and drugs for
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of viruses. We also identify a
time-lag between the outbreak and the materialisation of patent
applications, which is consistent with the processes of the Patent
Office. The large number of references to non-patent literature
published after outbreaks is also an indication of the urgency of
scientists to put the information in the public domain and make
them accessible quickly to a wider audience.

*Corresponding author
Emails: Frank Tietze (frank.tietze@cam.ac.uk), Pratheeba Vimalnath
(pv302@cam.ac.uk), Leonidas Aristodemou (la324@cam.ac.uk), Jenny
Mollroy (jcm80@cam.ac.uk)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.51142
--Version 1 (April 2020)
Centre for Technology Management (CTM) Working Paper Series

We identify four stakeholder groups that are particularly
concerned with IP related challenges during a pandemic. These
include (i) governments, (ii) organisations owning existing CrisisCritical IP (incumbents in Crisis-Critical Sectors), (iii)
manufacturing firms from other sectors normally not producing
Crisis-Critical Products suddenly rushing into Crisis-Critical
Sectors to support the manufacturing of Crisis-Critical Products
(new entrants) in the quantities that far exceed incumbents’
production capacities and (iv) voluntary grassroot initiatives that
are formed during a pandemic, often by highly skilled engineers
and scientists to contribute to the development and dissemination
of Crisis-Critical Products.
This paper discusses IP challenges faced by those stakeholders
during a pandemic related to the development and manufacturing
of technologies and products for (i) prevention (of spread), (ii)
diagnosis of infected patients and (iii) the development of
treatments. We offer an initial discussion of potential response
measures to reduce IP associated risks among industrial
stakeholders during a pandemic.
Keywords — Crisis, Pandemic, Intellectual Property, Licensing,
Patent pledge, Compulsory Licensing, Patent Pools, Open Access,
Incumbents, New Entrants, Coronavirus, COVID-19

I. BACKGROUND
A. The COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, Hubei province, manifested itself as a global health
tragedy. The World Health Organization (WHO) announced it
as a public health emergency of international concern on
January 30, 2020 [1] and as a pandemic on March 11, 2020 [2].
The virus, later named SARS-CoV-2 [3], can cause mild flulike symptoms (or even be asymptomatic) but can progress to
acute pneumonia-like respiratory illness called novel
coronavirus–infected pneumonia (NCIP). The overall clinical
syndrome is known as COVID-19 [4]. Until today, there are no
vaccines or medical cure for the disease yet [5] and the disease

Affiliations:
1
Innovation and Intellectual Property Management (IIPM) Laboratory, Centre
for Technology Management (CTM), Institute for Manufacturing (IfM),
Department of Engineering (CUED), University of Cambridge
2
Open Bioeconomy Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering and
Biotechnology (CEB), University of Cambridge

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

2

Fig. 1 COVID-19 spread (Source: Bloomberg, https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-coronavirus-cases-world-map/, 01.04.2020

has a fatality rate which is unconfirmed but likely to be around
or above 1%.
According to the Centre for Systems Science and
Engineering (CSSE), Johns Hopkins University & Medicine, as
of April 1, 2020 there were about 911,308 confirmed cases
worldwide, 45,497 deaths and 190,710 recovered cases (Fig. 1).
Currently, over 180 countries are affected. Most countries have
seen exponential growth rates in the number of cases with Italy
(13,155), Spain (9,053), the United States (4,484) France
(3,523), and Mainland China (3,312) being the most affected
countries in terms of number of deaths, as of April 1, 2020 [6],
[7]. The virus has a stronger transmission capacity than the
‘conventional’ annually recurring flu. On average, one infected
person passes the virus to 2-2.5 others (that range is subject to
change and can vary largely by geography, age group, and time)
[8], [9].
The urgency of responding to the global threat of the
pandemic has unleashed a plethora of efforts worldwide to
tackle this pandemic as quickly as possible. Health care remains
the utmost priority. Among other activities, research,
technology and innovation efforts are pouring in to support
health care systems through the development and ramping up
the manufacturing of Crisis-Critical Products (CC-Products),
such as Personal Protection Equipment (PPE), diagnostics tests,
treatments, ventilators, vaccines etc.
While this calls for existing manufacturers (incumbents) that
operate in Crisis-Critical Sectors (CC-Sectors) to quickly ramp

up their production capacities, this also draws various other
organisations into CC-Sectors that have not produced CCProducts prior to the pandemic. These ‘new entrants’ include
large manufacturing firms from related and non-Crisis-Critical
Sectors (CC-Sector), but also voluntary initiatives, not-forprofit organisations, scientists, engineers, universities, research
institutions, start-ups and other forms of grassroots initiatives,
etc., within the CC-Sector. Open Innovation efforts involving
incumbents and new entrants become essential to address crisiscritical challenges. Incumbents typically own Crisis-Critical
background IP (CC-IP) relevant for the manufacturing of CCProducts that new entrants lack. On the other hand when
engaging in open innovation for the development and
manufacturing of CC-Products, new entrants are likely to
develop potentially valuable foreground CC-IP during the
pandemic.
The purpose of this first paper is two-fold. First, we hope it
contributes to raising awareness that IP considerations need to
be addressed early rather than later during a pandemic. Second,
we provide a structure (if not conceptual framework) for those
concerned with steering clear of IP challenges, e.g. policy
makers, governments, international organisations, large IP
owners, new entrants, but also the many voluntary initiatives
that are part of the grassroots movement.
This paper contributes to the many efforts to contain the
pandemic as quickly as possible. We explore relevant IP
considerations, provide a relevant terminology, describe the
patent landscape of coronaviruses, systematically conceptualise

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

three scenarios with different IP considerations and provide an
initial discussion of possible approaches to reduce IP associated
risks for relevant stakeholders, thus ensure that IP
considerations do not delay the fight against a pandemic.
We apply an IP and innovation perspective on the enfolding
pandemic and provide a systematic compilation, description
and analysis of IP issues of relevance related to three critical
areas for fighting the COVID-19 pandemic: (i) prevention of
further spreading, including vaccine development, (ii) the
development of diagnostics (i.e. test kits) for determining
whether persons are infected or not and (iii) the (development
of) treatments, i.e. a preventative-diagnostic-treatment
framework.

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

3

planning, quick adjustments to online booking systems, e.g.
rationing certain goods or prioritising delivery slots to the
elderly and vulnerable. Other challenges then relate to the
Information Technology (IT) and infrastructure for connecting
all the people suddenly trying to work at home, i.e. video
conferencing platforms and equipment (e.g. Google and
Microsoft announced free access to their advanced teleconferencing and collaboration tools [13] as well as internet
service providers relieving data caps [14]). And then there are
urgent logistical challenges, for instance, to efficiently
reorganise supply of Crisis-Critical Products (CC-Products),
the repatriation of national citizens stuck abroad, but also
internal operations processes in hospitals as wards have been
repurposed and specific COVID-19 testing pods have been
setup. This list is obviously not exhaustive.

B. Technology Related Pandemic Challenges
C. Innovative and Technology Responses to the Pandemic
Applying an innovation and IP perspective we particularly
focus on five technology related challenges that emerged from
observations during the recent weeks of the pandemic, some
relate to novel technologies highlighted in the WHO’s
Coordinated Global Research Roadmap for COVID-19 [10]
while other have emerged from operations needs in frontline
healthcare.
First and foremost, the challenge of finding a treatment for
the acute respiratory pneumonia caused by COVID-19 has
initiated large-scale R&D efforts. Second, the pandemic has
created a sudden and massive demand for the development and
manufacturing in extremely large volumes of diagnostic testing
kits, not only with high accuracy that can be conducted in high
capacity (e.g. for several weeks Germany alone has carried out
160,000 tests per week [11]) but also new ways of organising
testing to be done (e.g. COVID-19 isolation pods, drive through
testing). Third, the pandemic caused a sudden need to treat a
large number of patients in hospitals requiring an
extraordinarily large ICU capacity, particularly with an
enormous need for certain medical devices particularly
ventilator capacity (e.g. UK ventilator challenge [12]) by far
exceeding the currently available capacity in many hospitals
and countries. Fourth, the pandemic has called for a need of
digital innovation, including epidemic modelling to monitor
and understand the spread and development of the virus across
populations, including tracking of cases and spreaders. Fifth,
the COVID-19 pandemic has caused an exceptional high
demand for skilled medical staff, doctors and nurses,
particularly with ICU experience, such as anaesthetists and
critical care nurses, all of whom need to be equipped with PPE
(personal protective equipment), in this pandemic particularly
protective clothing, face shields, goggles, gloves to protect
health care staff from infection.
Additional challenges not addressed in this paper include the
security of supply chains for essential goods; the impact of
drastically reduced passenger and cargo transport routes and
innovating at a health systems and infrastructure level to cope
with testing and treating huge numbers of people. Also, the
securing of food supply (chains) with supermarket chains play
a major role, including the optimisation of delivery route

During the past weeks we have observed a number of
responses to the five challenges outlined above.
Pharmaceutical, biotechnology firms and universities have
joined forces to develop vaccines [15] and treatments [16], also
testing whether existing antiviral drugs could be repurposed,
e.g. malaria / HIV drugs or the development of novel COVID19 specific drugs [17]. For instance, a collaboration of Clover
and GSK has been announced recently [18]. Another
consortium includes life big Pharmaceutical companies such as
Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb and GSK [19]. Others started to
develop novel diagnostic test, such as BOSCH recently having
announced they had developed their own COVID-19 test kit
[20]. Manufacturing companies from all kind of sectors have
started to repurpose their production lines to support the
production of Crisis-Critical Products, involving large
engineering / manufacturing firms such as those involved in the
UK ventilator challenge consortium (e.g. Airbus, GKN, RollRoyce, Siemens, Smiths group) [12], [21], [22], but also luxury
brands (e.g. French LVHM) using perfume manufacturing
facilities to suddenly make hand sanitisers [23], as well as
SMEs starting to produce sanitisers [24], textile manufacturers
(e.g. ZARA in Spain [25], Trigema in Germany [26], Prada in
Italy [27]) to produce face masks. Various volunteering
initiatives started to emerge run by scientists and engineers to
(i) develop open hardware / source designs of ventilators, (ii)
find new ways of design and manufacture PPE, e.g. 3D printed
face shields [28] and ventilator valves [29].
Last but certainly not least, digital innovations have sprung
up widely, e.g. data / software approaches by scientists for
prevention, diagnostic and treatment. Focusing on preventative
digital innovation, scientists have focused more on open data
platforms, by developing epidemiological models to understand
government responses and forecast the growth curves of the
virus [31], analysing geospatial models to understand the
distribution and spread of the virus [32], and deploying causaleffect models to understand symptoms of the virus and limit its
spread through behavioural science, and tracking applications
[33]. In the diagnostic sphere, scientists utilise AI, and more
specifically Deep Convolutional Neural Networks to detect
COVID-19 from X-Ray Images. This has also been particularly

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

useful in diagnostic analysis of symptoms to predict the
development of a patient’s case [34]. A high number of efforts
have also been concentrated on treatments, where scientists
have developed AI text and data mining tools to help the
medical community develop answers to high priority scientific
questions and potential treatments. Efforts have focused on the
development and summarisation of genome specific medical
protocols of precision medicine and host response, as well as
modelling and simulation of the virus propagation and
efficiency of interventions [35].
From what emerged during this pandemic in the news and
expert discussions, one can categorize the crisis-critical
activities in three categories, most of them related to innovation
or massive capacity building / upscaling to manufacture and
supply CC-Products in sufficient quantities in a short period of
time. The first category is prevention, including digital
innovations to track the virus spread, sanitisers, PPE equipment
etc in order to slow down the spread of the virus, but also
vaccines to control future outbreaks which are currently under
development. The second category is diagnostics
predominantly including the need for an incredible volume of
testing kits, and those that are accurate, but also portable and
deliver speedy results, recently also antibody tests. The third
category is treatment, including development of treatments
through repurposing or existing drugs, development of new
antiviral drugs, but also ventilators for ICU critical care in
hospitals around the world. Those three categories are used
throughout the remainder of this paper.
II. WHY WORRY ABOUT IP DURING A PANDEMIC
A general characteristic of IP is that it is intangible and
remains largely invisible in most day to day operations of
companies and economies. Yet, it is vital for the functioning of
today’s economy in normal but likewise in times of crisis.
For the purpose of this paper we define “Crisis-Critical IP”
(CC-IP) as the set of intellectual property, relevant for the
research, development, manufacturing and distribution of
Crisis-Critical Products, Services and Technologies that are
urgently needed for quickly ending a crisis situation, with crisis
defined as a situation, that threatens the human species and an
approved world body elevates the risk as critical, i.e. in the case
of COVID-19 the WHO has declared this situation a pandemic.
CC-IP includes (i) formal and registered IP, such as patents,
design rights, trademarks, (ii) formal unregistered IP, e.g.
copyrights, design drawings, CAD files, trade secrets for
manufacturing processes, as well as (iii) informal IP, such as
know-how. CC-IP refers both to already existing (background)
IP predominantly owned by incumbents that already operate in
CC-Sectors prior to a crisis as well as novel (foreground) CCIP that is developed during the crisis by various kind of actors,
including incumbents, but also new entrants to CC-Sectors.
Certain CC-Sectors and its related technologies, products and
services have different degrees of formal and informal IP. Some
of these products are more ‘high-tech’ than others. Previous

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

4

studies show that IP appears to be of particular importance in
certain sectors, such as electronics, ICT, high value
manufacturing,
software,
but
also
pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, medical devices and life sciences. Many of
those IP intensive sectors are of particular relevance in today’s
unfolding pandemic. For instance, ventilators are typically
expensive medical devices and the incumbent manufacturing
companies are likely to own alive / active (i.e. not yet expired)
CC-IP, PPE equipment (e.g. face masks) being fairly ‘low tech’,
with a high probability that formally relevant CC-IP has
expired.
While IP issues have hardly surfaced during the beginning of
this pandemic, this has happened quite recently. A few
examples are summarised below. The Wellcome Trust appears
to be among the first prominent organisations that understood
the relevance of IP for this pandemic early on [36]. With a
particular focus on research, on January 31, 2020, the trust
called for journals, publishers etc. to allow widespread sharing
of all potentially relevant research and dataset. This initiative is
geared towards publishers to not put any COVID-19 relevant
publications behind a paywall. The pledge seems to be a huge
success as a wide range of renowned organisations have now
signed up to it, including leading journals, such as Nature and
The Lancet, but also the European Commission, publishers (e.g.
Cambridge University Press), national academies of science
(e.g. Academy of Medical Sciences, The Royal Society),
foundations (e.g. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation), research
councils (e.g. UK Medical Research Council), ministries (e.g.
Indian Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science &
Technology) and a wide range of other organisations, including
companies (e.g. BenevolentAI, Johnson & Johnson). By now
more than 24,000 research papers are available online [37]. In
the past weeks some other organisations have started raising
concerns that IP might be an issue during the pandemic and
have called for the government and private sector to respond.
For instance, on March 27, 2020, Doctors Without Borders
(MSF) publicly announced their concern that firms might try to
profiteer from the crisis [38] and the government of Costa Rica
called the WHO to organise the pooling of relevant IP [39]. By
now, a few governments have passed compulsory license
resolutions for CC-IP, e.g. Chile and Canada [40] and some
even authorized issuance of compulsory license e.g. Israel’s
compulsory licensing for Kaletra [41]. Compulsory licensing
schemes are typically some kind of “last resort” government
measures.
We have also observed some initial approaches that firms
have taken related to IP during this pandemic. For instance,
measures to mitigate the risk of counterfeit products being
distributed in the crisis, e.g. PPE masks [42], [43]. Some
companies enforced IP lawsuits against other companies
developing CC-Products. For instance, Labrador Diagnostics
LLC sued BioFire, a company developing COVID-19 testing
kits for infringing two of its patents [44],but later announced a
royalty free licensing to anyone developing tests [45]. Some
first firms have already filed patents or other forms of
exclusivity, e.g. Gilead applied for “orphan drug” designation,
but dropped it a few days later after criticism [46], Pharma firms

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

filed for repurposing of drugs extending indications e.g.
Remdevir [46], [47].
Very recently we have seen a limited number of firms
adopting at least some selective open IP approaches,
particularly pledging [48] relevant IP, such as Fortress [49],
AbbVie and medical device companies manufacturing
ventilators sharing IP (including design specifications and
files), such as Irish Medtronic [50] and UK based Smiths
Group [51]. A recent initiative of scientists and lawyers has
launched
the
Open
COVID
Pledge
(www.opencovidpledge.org) calling IP owners to not assert
relevant IP during the crisis until one year after the WHO
declares the pandemic to be over [52]–[54].
III. CORONAVIRUS PATENT ANALYSIS
One of the main IP challenges, both in this pandemic, and in
general is the availability of open data for analysing the
progression of the virus [55], as well as the different analysis
types deployed [56]. In an outbreak so severe as the COVID19, where the reported cases to this moment are close to 1
million worldwide, any available dataset is potentially helpful
to derive insights into the disease. We perform an ad-hoc patent
analysis for coronaviruses using an open dataset by Lens.org1,
to enhance our understanding into preventive, diagnostic and
treatment measures for the virus. We focus on the broader
spectrum of coronaviruses to identify patterns from earlier
outbreaks that could be applied in the case of COVID-19. Table
1 shows the descriptive statistics and correlations for the patent
dataset and Fig.2 shows some initial results from the
Coronavirus Patent Analysis.
Fig. 2a shows the top 10 CPC classification distribution at
the subgroup level. It is evident that the highest number of
patents belonging to the primary CPC subgroup classification
are in C07K14/005. This is the organic chemistry subclass, for
peptides with more than 20 amino acids and specifically for
viruses, which constitute viral proteins. This is followed by the
subgroups A61K39/215 (medicinal preparations containing
antigens or antibodies materials for immunoassay for
coronavirus) and C12Q1/701 (measuring or testing processes
involving enzymes, nucleic acids or microorganisms involving
virus specific hybridization probes). These are followed by
C12N7/00
(preparation
of
viruses
bacteriophages
compositions, medicinal viral antigen or antibody
compositions), G01N1 (investigation processes for measuring
or testing other than immunoassay, involving enzymes),
C07K16/08 (investigation of immunoglobulins from RNA
viruses). Within the top 10 classes, we also find a subclass
within section Y (Emerging Cross-Sectional Technology), with
Y02A50/451, which is specific for genetic or molecular
screening of pathogens. This indicates that within the granted
patents, there are some vaccination related patents available.
All the top 10 CPC classifications have to do specifically with
the chemical characteristics of the virus for prevention,
1
Human Coronavirus Innovation Landscape: Patent and Research Works
Open Datasets. Accessed 01.04.2020 at https://about.lens.org/covid-19

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

5

diagnostics and treatment. Also, one could note that granularity
of patent applications in these fields since some of these have
50 CPC subgroups.
Fig. 2b shows the top 10 IPC classification distribution at the
subgroup level. There are 103 unique subgroups referenced
within these patents. While the highest primary IPC sub group
is A61K39/215 (preparation for medical purposes devices or
methods specially adapted for bringing pharmaceutical
products into particular physical or administering forms
chemical aspects of, or use of materials for deodorisation of air,
for disinfection or sterilisation, or for bandages, dressings,
absorbent pads or surgical articles soap compositions for
coronavirus), the highest collective number is for the subgroup,
C12N15/09 (microorganisms or enzymes compositions thereof
propagating, preserving or maintaining microorganisms
mutation or genetic engineering culture media microbiological
testing media recombinant DNA-technology).
Moreover, 64% of the top 10 IPC subgroups, fall within the
A61K subclass [57], which covers the following subject matter
under a mixture composition or process of preparing a
composition or treating process: drug or other biological
compositions which are capable of: preventing, alleviating,
treating or curing abnormal or pathological conditions of the
living body by such means as destroying a parasitic organism,
or limiting the effect of the disease or maintaining, increasing,
decreasing, limiting, or destroying a physiological body
function; diagnosing a physiological condition or state by an in
vivo test; in vitro testing of biological material. The rest of the
subclasses fall within the C12 class, where viruses,
undifferentiated human, animal or plant cells, protozoa, tissues
and unicellular algae are considered as microorganisms. From
both Fig.2a and Fig.2b, it appears evident that the highest
clusters of patents are around the chemical process of
identification, composition and vaccine development for the
coronavirus family.
Fig. 2c shows the distribution of patent applications within
the different jurisdictions. Fig.2d shows the distribution of the
granted patents within different jurisdictions. Immediately,
evident is that the granted patents are lagging behind the patent
applications. There are some old granted patents that fall within
the broad spectrum of the analysis in 1975 about the
development of vaccines, however patent applications before
1975 are not included in the dataset. The majority of patent
applications are filled in the US, followed by the transition to
WO under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT). These are
followed by AU, CN, EP, CA, KO and JP. The distribution of
granted patents follows an upwards trend (greater rate of
increase than that of patent applications), but with significantly
lower numbers (with the peak around 120 granted patents in
2019 relative to an average of 300 patent applications from
Fig.2c). The distribution of these granted patents within the
different jurisdictions are US, EP, AU, CN, KO, RU, and JP. It
is also interesting to note that the conversion rate of patent
applications to granted patents is 32%.

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

Std. Error

Mean

2005

2011

0.08

2010

2004

2008

0.08

2008

6.53

2003

2006

0.08

2007

Application
Earliest
Year Priority Year

13.67

1.99

1.00

1.00

0.02

1.99

Number of
Applicants

7.01

2.48

2.00

3.00

0.03

3.78

Number of
Inventors

0.00

13.22

313.38

16.81

0.00

0.00

0.20

4.78

Forward
Citations

1.00

1.87

4.12

14.18

2.00

9.00

0.17

13.81

Simple
Family Size

1.00

14.88

318.23

47.58

2.00

11.00

0.57

20.58

Extended
Family Size

0.00

35.86

1354.76

12994

0.00

0.00

156.48

465.78

Sequence
Count

3.00

2.60

9.65

5.20

3.00

3.00

0.06

5.97

No. of CPC
Subgroups

0.00

3.22

19.00

6.20

3.00

4.00

0.08

5.88

0.00

6.76

66.04

19.27

0.00

0.00

0.23

5.62

6

Median

6.55
0.93

2.30

Table 1 Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Coronavirus: Broad Keywords Based Patents (Patents = 6896, Patent Families = 2670)2

Mode
6.33
0.93

2.00

No. of IPC NPL Citation
subgroups
Count

Std. Dev.
1.09
3.10

Publication
Year

Kurtosis

0.00

342.00

1972

103.00

-0.60

56.00

1

1

544026.00

1

1173.00

1

0.20

117.00

1

0.04

555.00

1973

22.00

-0.65

18.00

1975
2020

-0.78

2020

Skewness

2020

Min.
Max.

1

-0.01

-0.01

1

Correlations

1

0.34

0.05

Publication Year

0.03

-0.02

0.12

1

1

0.12

0.00

0.94

0.00

0.00

0.26

Application Year

0.03

-0.01

0.14

1

0.12

0.01

0.07

0.96

-0.17

0.03

-0.05

0.05

0.91

-0.15

0.03

0.00

0.00

Earliest Priority Year

-0.18

-0.11

0.12

0.05

1

-0.08

0.03

-0.02

0.00

0.36

-0.21

-0.07

-0.13

0.05

0.13

-0.01

0.02

-0.29

0.04

-0.04

Forward Citations

-0.05

-0.10

0.10

0.12

Simple Family Size

0.02

-0.26

0.04

-0.04

Extended Family Size

-0.10

0.07

0.12

Sequence Count

-0.21

0.05

-0.09

No. of CPC Subgroups

0.08

Number of Applicants

No. of IPC subgroups

0.10

Number of Inventors

NPL Citation Count

Human Coronavirus Innovation Landscape: Patent and Research Works Open Datasets. Accessed 01.04.2020 at https://about.lens.org/COVID-19

Note: Search Query: (title:(Coronavirus) OR abstract:(Coronavirus) OR claims:(Coronavirus)) OR (title:("Severe acute Respiratory syndrome") OR abstract:("Severe acute Respiratory syndrome") OR
claims:("Severe acute Respiratory syndrome")) OR (title:("coronaviridae") OR abstract:("coronaviridae") OR claims:("coronaviridae")) OR claims:("SARS-CoV") OR claims:("MERS-CoV") OR claims:("COVID
19") OR claims:("Wuhan coronavirus") OR claims:("2019-nCoV") OR claims:("Middle East respiratory")

2

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

(a) Top 10 CPC Classification Distribution
(sorted by descending order of primary CPC main group)

(c)

(b) Top 10 IPC Classification Distribution
(sorted by descending order of primary IPC main group)

Patent Applications Distribution vs. Publication Year
(filter by jurisdiction)

Intermune Inc.

(d)

Granted Patents Distribution vs. Publication Year
filter by jurisdiction

73

Wyeth

67

Crucell Hol land BV

65

CSIC

65

Merial

56

Pfizer

54

Pasteur Institute

51

Kineta Inc.

48

Centre Nat Rech Scient

48

ONO Pharmaceutical Co.

47
0

50

100

(e) Top 10 Applicants
(co-applications are also included in the above data)

(f)

Distribution of Patent Characteristics vs. the Publication Year

Fig. 2 Results from the Coronavirus Patent Analysis

7

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

IV. IP CONSIDERATIONS DURING A PANDEMIC
What in normal circumstances are considered typical IP
activities are no more normal during times of pandemics. In this
‘new normal’, our analysis about the IP related considerations
that arise during the efforts to end the COVID-19 pandemic
identifies scenarios with IP relevance involving four main
stakeholder groups shown in
Our analysis finds that during the COVID-19 pandemic a
range
of
non-Crisis-Critical
Product
(CC-Product)
manufacturers entered Crisis-Critical Sectors (CC-Sectors), in
which incumbent manufacturers have developed, produced and
supplied Crisis-Critical Products (CC-Products) already before
the pandemic. Those existing firms had insufficient production
capacities to supply Crisis-Critical Products (CC-Products) in
the huge quantities needed in a timely manner, leading to supply
shortages for customers. Firms from non-Crisis-Critical Sectors
(CC-Sectors), such as 3D printing, automotive, aerospace,
home appliances, fashion and luxury goods, rushed into CCSectors to help cope with the CC-Product supply shortages

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

8

but also voluntary grassroot initiatives, including not-for-profit
communities, start-ups, entrepreneurial scientists, etc (Type 2).
While manufacturing firms entering CC-Sectors are highly
likely to own IP, this might not be relevant CC-IP. In contrast,
voluntary grassroot initiatives typically do not own formal IP
prior to a pandemic as these only form during a pandemic.
Based on that distinction we identify three broad scenarios that
are discussed below.
A. Scenario 1: Type 1 New Entrants – Non CC-Product
Manufacturers
Existing, often large manufacturing firms that did not
produce CC-Products before the start of a pandemic are (i)
either called in (ordered) to help with upscaling the production
of CC-Products by governments (e.g. UK government’s call for
firms to produce ventilators [12], [92]) or (ii) voluntarily switch
their production to CC-Products, e.g. because their usual
products are not in demand during the pandemic (e.g. luxury
company LVHM starting to produce health care products like
sanitisers, hydroalcoholic gel [93]). These firms then become
new entrants into CC-Sectors. There appears to be four kinds of
new entrants that suddenly rush to help with producing CCProducts by repurposing their production lines.
First, despite coming from different sectors, certain
specialized companies at least have manufacturing capacity as
well as a set of valuable resources and capabilities that are
somewhat related and can be readily used with a minimal
change for production of certain CC-Products to meet the
supply shortage. Examples include companies such as LVHM,
which had been producing perfumes before the COVID-19
pandemic, so own manufacturing process equipment to fill
bottles with alcohol containing liquid. During the pandemic
they changed the liquid from perfume to sanitiser.

Fig. 3 Four Main Stakeholder Groups that are concerned with IP during
a Pandemic

Table 2 provides an overview of the IP related considerations
for COVID-19 (with examples) distinguishing (i) the
prevention of COVID-19 (including measures to limit its spread
and vaccines to prevent future outbreak), the (ii) diagnostics
(including professional and self-testing) and (iii) treatment,
with the latter including the direct treatments (e.g. development
of drugs) but also the treatment of symptoms, i.e. related to the
medical equipment needed to keep bodies alive (e.g. ventilators,
ICU beds).
The following conceptual scenarios are built on the
distinction between these groups of stakeholders. First, we label
firms as ‘incumbents’ that already operated in CC-Sectors
before the start of the pandemic developing, manufacturing and
supplying CC-Products. These incumbents are highly likely to
own CC-IP when a pandemic starts. Second, we label those
organisations ‘new entrants’ that suddenly rush to enter the CCSectors after the beginning of a pandemic in order to support
scaling up the development and manufacturing of CC-Products.
New entrants can be industrial manufacturing firms (Type 1),

The second type of manufacturing companies are those that
possess relevant expertise, resources and competence that can
be put in use for developing and manufacturing CC-Product to
address a shortage of certain CC-Products. An example is the
UK company Dyson, which has long been in the air-flow
business for its vacuum cleaners and hair dryers, has expertise
in air purification technologies with some of its technologies
like its digital motor already optimized for safety and
efficiency. Dyson hence was able to develop a new ventilator
design called CoVent in just 10 days [78]. Another example is
GENTL masks, an open source design for masks by EPAM, an
engineering and software solution provider and platform
developer [65]
The third type includes technology giants that possess
diverse capabilities and rich resources that they can deploy to
basically manufacture any product using IP from incumbents in
the CC-Sectors. Those include automotive companies entering
the production of ventilators (e.g. Volkswagen [94]), but also
multinationals like BOSCH starting to produce diagnostic test
kits [20].

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

Table 2 IP Considerations for COVID-19, synthesized with an adapted Intellectual Property (IP) Roadmapping Framework

COVID-19

Prevention
Vaccine:
1) Vaccines to prevent future outbreak (Table 3) [58]–[60]
2) Tools to monitor the spread of the disease [61]
3) Epidemiological models to forecast the growth curves) [31]
4) Analysis of geospatial data of COVID-19 cases [33]
5) Causal Effects and in-depth analysis of COVID-19 causes, and
effects, symptoms; Applying machine learning/AI methods to mitigate
the spread of the COVID-19 [62]
Medical equipment / PPEs:
1) Diagnostics kits ([63], [64] for list of approved rapid and other
COVID-19 test-kits)
2) Masks to prevent disease spread ([66] for list of DIY masks)
3) Sanitizers to avoid spreading of disease [67]–[69]
4) Specialized products to avoid spreading of disease [70]
Incumbents from CC-Sectors:
Medical technology & tool developers:
1) Traditional health incumbents develop test-kits (Everywell [71])
2) Digital health community develop digital tools to monitor spread [61]
3) Big pharma and drug development firms: GSK, J&J, Gilead, Zydus
Cadila, [18], [75]
Medical and healthcare service providers:
1) Testing service providers (telemedicine doctors), PWNHealth [71]
Universities and research institutions:
1) Universities (vaccines, sanitizers) (e.g., Oxford's vaccine [76], IIT
Delhi's Sanitizer)
New entrants from non CC-Sectors (New entrant type 1):
1) Engineering and software solution providers offer open source
designs for masks (e.g. GENTL mask, open source by EPAM [65])
2) IT giants give free platform access to support remote working [13]
3) 3D printing development, hands-free door handle attachments [70]

Diagnostics
Medical equipment/ methods:
1) Testing kits (Self-testing kit/
Professional testing kit):
2) Home testing-kit [71]
3) Rapid testing technology [72]
(e.g.[63], [64] for list of approved
rapid and other COVID-19 test-kits)
4) AI tools - Detection of COVID-19
using Deep CNNs from X-Rays [34]
5) Diagnostic analysis and
forecasting of symptoms [73]

Treatment
Drugs:
1) Existing drugs that can potentially treat COVID-19 (repurposing) - remdesivir,
lopinavir and ritonavir in combination; lopinavir/ ritonavir plus interferon-beta;
and chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine [74]
2) Genome-specific COVID-19 medical protocols, including precision medicine
3) Modeling, simulation, of COVID-19 propagation and efficacy of interventions
[73]
4) Design and sharing of clinical trials for analysis on medications, and therapies
[62]
5) Develop AI text and data mining tools that can help the medical community
develop answers to high priority scientific questions about treatments [35]
Medical equipment:
1) Ventilators (lightweight / portable) valves [22][29]
2) Medical grade masks [27]

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

Incumbents from CC-Sectors:
Medical technology & tool
developers:
1) CC-Sector incumbents
2) Universities (E.g., Oxford's rapid
testing technology) [72]
Medical and healthcare service
providers:
1) Testing service providers
(telemedicine doctors), PWNHealth
[71]

1) Addressing supply shortages of Masks. Free design / DIYs free up the Accelerated development and wider
1)Wider accessibility of medicines through access to patents (e.g., AbbVie has
demand for clinical grade masks for use in hospitals [66]
availability of testing kits through IP
agreed to drop enforcement of Kaletra patents worldwide) [85]
2) Access to critical and relevant knowledge and social awareness
sharing [35]
2) Addressing supply shortages in ventilators, Ventilator Challenge UK
through copyrights waiver and offering free contents [37], [80], [81]
consortium [22]
3) Accelerating vaccine development through consortiums and IP
3) Accelerated development and wider availability, open initiatives for ventilators
pooling and expertise [84]
[86]
IP imitation and risk of counterfeit products [42][43]
1) Patent infringement lawsuits
1) Declining access to existing Crisis-Critical IP may lead to reverse - engineering
attempts delaying development of
by new entrants from non CC-Sectors (e.g., Italian volunteers 3D print reversetesting by existing players (e.g.,
engineered valves after denial of IP)[29].
lawsuit by Labrador Diagnostics
2) Patents as barriers to the production and provision of low-priced treatments [74]
LLC against BioFire) [44]
Monopoly over CC-IP may increase production cost of the COVID-19 related medicines and in turn the price. Proactive measures by governments is the implementation of compulsory licensing [74]

Start-ups from CC-Sector (New entrant type 2): 1) Start-ups developing testing solutions & partnering with medical centres (blood testing by Sight Diagnostics, Israel start-up with Sheba Medical)[79]
New entrants from non CC-Sectors (New entrant type 1): 1) Publishers providing free access to research and technologies (e.g. Springer Nature, PubMed Central, Association of American Publishers,
IEEE [37], [80], [81])
Platform creators/integrators: 1) Platforms to pledge IP (e.g., Open Covid pledge) [52]–[54]
Charity organizations: 1) Research charity organizations and foundations (e.g., Wellcomme trust, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation [82])
Government bodies: 1) WHO (e.g. provides standard for sanitizers, asked to create patent pools); 2) National governments (announcing and considering compulsory licensing) [74]; 3) Governmentindustry engagements (e.g. Johnson & Johnson expanded an existing R&D agreement with the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to develop COVID-19 vaccine) [83]

Incumbents from CC-Sectors:
Drug developers:
1) Big pharmaceutical companies: GSK, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, AbbVie
[19]
Medical technology & tool developers:
1) Digital health community with tools for treatment [61]
Universities:
1) University start-ups make portable ventilators (e.g. University of Toronto) [77]
New entrants from non CC-Sectors:
1) 3D printing companies prototyping and manufacturing ventilators and valves
[29]
2) Aerospace and automotive industry into ventilator manufacturing [12], [21],
[22]
3) Household appliances industry (e.g. Dyson's CoVent applying Dyson's air
purifier expertise to ventilators) [78]
4) Fashion industry for medical masks (e.g. Zara [25], Trigema [26], Prada [27])

Table 2a: IP Considerations for Technologies, Products, Services, IP Ecosystem, Purpose and Challenges
What purpose Consider the different IP ecosystem actors. Which actors are likely to Which technologies are relevant? What
does IP Serve? play important roles? Which roles do they play?
types are these? How are important
platforms developing?
IP Challenges

Technologies, products, services
IP ecosystem stakeholders
IP purpose

Why?
Who and what?

9

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

COVID-19
IP Assets
Which IP strategies are best suited to help achieve
the IP purpose?

Diagnostics
Patents for testing technology
Designs for test-kits

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

10

Treatment
Patents (e.g., drug related patents including product and process patents, patents of
technologies for medical equipment like ventilators, valves); New patents (e.g.,
Isinnova plans to patent Charlotte Valve) [29]

1) Open source design for masks. (e.g., GENTL mask, an open source
1) Royalty free licensing of patentCompulsory licensing:
design by EPAM [65])
protected diagnostics technology
1) Compulsory licensing for COVID-19 treatment drugs (e.g. Canada, Chile,
(e.g., Labrador Diagnostics, a
Israel) [74]
2) Free access for limited time (e.g., IT giants Google & Microsoft
subsidiary of Fortress Investment
providing free access to their conference tools to support remote working) Group)[45]
Free access:
[13]
2) Obtaining new patent protection and giving the patent free for others to use [88];
free access and usage rights to existing patents [85] [50]
3) Bilateral collaborations for vaccine development (e.g., Sanofi with
Translate Bio; GSK with Clover) [18], [87]
Multi sector collaboration:
3) Multi-sector consortia to accelerate ventilator production to address demand4) Consortia for vaccine R&D [84]
supply shortage. E.g., Ventilator Challenge UK consortium involving aerospace,
automotive and medical industry players [22]
4) R&D in non-CC-Sectors to apply expertise from non CC-Sectors to develop
medical equipment (e.g., Dyson's CoVent applying Dyson's air purifier expertise to
develop ventilators) [78]
1) Voluntary pool by governing bodies (e.g., WHO asked to create voluntary pools [39])
2) Consortia among big pharma companies to accelerate the development, manufacture and delivery of vaccines, diagnostics, and treatments for COVID-19' [89]
3) Pledge to give free access to all CC-IP for limited time. Voluntarily or through third-party platforms (e.g., Open Covid pledge) [52], [53]
4) Hackathons to share and generate ideas [90]
5) Open Platform Sharing of Datasets and Source Code [91]

Copyrights - free copyright (open access articles) provides access to relevant, knowledge and research which would otherwise be not available [37], [80], [81]

Prevention
Designs (DIY masks, hand free door handle attachment) [66][70]
Patents (e.g. vaccination related)

Table 2b IP Considerations for IP Assets and IP Strategies

IP Assets and Strategies

Platform
Type of Candidate Vaccine
Developer
Clinical Evaluation Stage
Platform (non-Coronavirus)
1 Non- Replicating Viral Vector
Adenovirus Type 5 Vector
CanSino Biological Inc. and
Phase 1 ; ChiCTR2000030906
Ebola
Beijing Institute of Biotechnology
2 RNA
LNP- encapsulated mRNA
Moderna/NIAID
Phase 1 ; NCT04283461
multiple candidates
3 DNA
DNA plasmid vaccine
Inovio Pharmaceuticals
Pre-Clinical
Lassa, Nipah, HIV, Filovirus, HPV,
Electroporation device
Cancer indications, Zika, Hepatitis B
4 DNA
DNA
Takis/Applied DNA Sciences/Evvivax
Pre-Clinical
5 DNA
DNA plasmid vaccine
Zydus Cadila
Pre-Clinical
6 Inactivated
Inactivated + alum
Sinovac
Pre-Clinical
SARS
7 Inactivated
Inactivated
Beijing Institute of Biological Products/Wuhan
Pre-Clinical
Institute of Biological Products
8 Live Attenuated Virus
Deoptimized live attenuated vaccines
Codagenix/Serum Institute of India
Pre-Clinical
HAV, InfA, ZIKV, FMD, SIV, RSV,
DENV
9 Non- Replicating Viral Vector
MVA encoded VLP
GeoVax/BravoVax
Pre-Clinical
LASV, EBOV, MARV, HIV
10 Non- Replicating Viral Vector
Ad26 (alone or with MVA boost)
Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies
Pre-Clinical
Ebola, HIV, RSV
Note: *DRAFT landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines, URL: https://www.who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/key-action/Novel_Coronavirus_Landscape_nCoV_Mar26.PDF, last accessed [26.03.2020]

Table 3 Vaccine Development Sample, total of 54 Vaccines (2 in phase 1 clinical trials and 52 in pre-clinical)*

How?

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

Fourthly, we see companies that possess a set of particular
skills so they can be agile to speedily develop basically any kind
of complex product, often possessing fairly flexible
manufacturing facilities and equipment, but are often limited to
low volume production. Examples include formula one teams,
such as Williams Racing and McLaren that joined the UK
ventilator challenge consortium [12].
All of these four types of companies typically own formal IP.
These firms, being mostly large, commonly operate their own
inhouse IP departments, thus possess awareness of IP relevance
and understanding of how IP functions. However, their own IP
which they developed before the start of the pandemic might
not be exactly relevant in the CC-Sectors.
When entering CC-Sectors to support the scaling up of CCProduct manufacturing, these new entrants need to understand
quickly how they can start manufacturing CC-Products in large
volume. Essentially, to do this they have three options with
regards to IP.
The first option is not to worry (and care) about incumbents
CC-IP and go ahead, thus (wilfully) infringing existing CCProducts by reverse-engineering incumbent CC-Product.
Under these circumstances, the owners of CC-IP may deny
access to the proprietary information and know-how e.g., Italian
3D printing volunteers were denied access to proprietary
information about ventilator valves forcing them to reverseengineer the design [29] or in some cases enforce their IP and
pursue the new entrants for infringement. So far this has been
rare e.g. the case of Labrador Diagnostics LLC as previously
mentioned, which is understandable during a pandemic due to
potential reputational damages. However, new entrants
choosing this option might become future targets for
infringement claims from incumbents once the pandemic has
ended. While new entrants are often large firms that can
repurpose large manufacturing units, also well-established
SMEs enter the production of CC-Products, e.g. local
distilleries starting to produce sanitisers [24], [67]; 3D printing
companies producing PPE [95]. Given their small scale, they
might not be particularly prone to be attacked by incumbent IP
owners but they would be in a vulnerable position if that
situation did arise.
The second option for new entrants is to start designing CCProducts from scratch, possibly using their own engineering
design competence and ability to procure rapid expert advice.
For example, Dyson’s ventilator design Covent, which was
developed in partnership with MedTech consultancy. The
Technology Partnership (TTP) [78]. Other efforts are being led
by coalitions of large technology consultancies such as
Cambridge Consultants, who typically work on medical device
projects for clients but without holding their own IP [96].
However, starting from the ground up might not be the most
efficient way to achieve impact during a pandemic as
developing and obtaining medical approval for new CCProduct designs is likely to cause further delays. Choosing this
option, new entrants would essentially develop novel CC-IP.
However, if not carrying out careful freedom to operate
analysis, they may infringe on existing background CC-IP

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

11

owned by incumbents. Carrying out freedom to operate analysis
may further delay the quick manufacturing of CC-Products. So
new entrants are left balancing these risks under uncertainty and
rapid changes to the technological, regulatory, economic and
legal landscape.
The third option is to access CC-IP through teaming up with
incumbents to produce some of the existing CC-Products
manufactured prior to the pandemic by the incumbents only.
For instance, the Smiths group and Penlon are incumbents with
own ventilator designs who joined the UK ventilator challenge
consortium [97]. These companies can then grant licenses and
share CC-IP with consortium partners, including new entrants.
Other incumbents, e.g. Medtronic, selectively pledged CC-IP
for their Puritan BennettTM 560 - a basic ventilator model for
which they have made available all designs and manufacturing
details under a permissive license for a limited term [50]. For
new entrants to access CC-IP this way is a way to avoid
infringing existing IP owned by incumbents. For incumbents to
pledge CC-IP is a way to facilitate the adoption of their
technology during the pandemic, potentially with some lasting
benefits beyond the pandemic. For instance, they can share CCIP during a pandemic freely without charging any royalties
using licenses that are time limited. If companies want to
continue using that IP beyond the pandemic, the licensing terms
would either prevent that or these companies would have to pay
royalties.
Whether new entrants start developing designs for CCProducts from scratch, license existing CC-IP or infringe upon
existing CC-IP, when scaling up production using their own
resources new entrants are likely to develop novel (foreground)
CC-IP. Given that they are faced with resource constraints
having to manufacture CC-Products with equipment at their
disposal and with materials they can access quickly through
existing supplier relationships, they very well may end up
adapting existing designs. This may lead them to find inventive
designs or ways to e.g. manufacture CC-Products in a cheaper
way. New entrants could possibly consider formally registering
this new CC-IP, e.g. by filing patents.
Suddenly, incumbents may find themselves confronted with
new entrants in their sector that infringe their CC-IP to some
extent, which they find difficult to enforce during a pandemic,
with new entrants developing subsequently their own CC-IP.
Incumbents may fear that some of the new entrants will
continue to stay in ‘their’ sectors i.e., CC-Sectors even after the
pandemic eventually ends. Having established capabilities to
manufacture CC-Products in innovative ways or using
innovative designs e.g. low cost version for less developed
countries, these new entrants may have few incentives to stop
producing CC-Products and exit CC-Sectors. Incumbents may
find themselves having helped to establish new competitors by
not enforcing CC-IP during a pandemic. The extent to which
this is a concern will depend on the incumbent’s existing
business model and IP strategy and their interaction strategy
with the new entrants, therefore it is difficult to predict at
present the severity of concern or whether it is justified.

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

B. Scenario 2: Type 2 New Entrants - Voluntary Grassroot
Initiatives, not-For Profit Organisations, Start-ups
During the past weeks we observed a large number of newly
launched voluntary grassroots initiatives, not-for-profit
organisations and start-ups joining the development and
production of CC-Products. These initiatives often adopt
explicitly or implicitly open source approaches widely sharing
their designs. It seems we can distinguish two categories of such
initiatives.
First, we have seen that a number of highly innovative
voluntary initiatives got active to help with developing and
manufacturing CC-Products. Those are typically founded by
highly skilled people, such as engineers and scientists, and often
develop fairly complex (high-tech) CC-Products, including
hardware for ventilators, but also data platforms to collate
pandemic data or tracking applications. For instance, a large
number of institutions have developed complex
epidemiological models, and geospatial models to understand
the spread and development of the virus together with
behaviour science, as well discuss the different approaches that
have been used by governments (non-medical interventions) to
slow the pandemic [32]. An important development is the
utilisation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) methodologies, and
specifically Deep Convolutional Neural Networks to detect
COVID-19 from X-Ray images, as well as to identify the
development and stage of the disease.
Quickly, several initiatives have come up with stunning new
and affordable, easy to produce CC-Product designs which have
often undergone highly sophisticated testing with state of the
art equipment to which scientists have access through their labs.
The initiatives then typically share their design drawings, CAD
files as well as testing data through open source approaches,
either through formal adoption of open source hardware and
software licences or informally through statements of intent.
While these initiatives develop novel foreground CC-IP, they
typically build on existing designs and by then adopting
outbound licensing / open IP approaches [98], there is a
potential (residual) risk that their designs may actually infringe
upon existing CC-IP. As those initiatives usually have limited
IP expertise and lack resources to access external legal support
(e.g. patent attorneys), it is unlikely that most initiatives
conduct freedom to operate analysis before launching their
novel CC-Products. This lack of due diligence and IP clearance,
with the open source initiatives probably excluding any
liabilities and warranties for their designs, could lead any
industrial adopter starting to produce an open source design in
volume into trouble, suddenly unwillingly infringing
incumbent CC-IP.
The second category includes the various initiatives that
focus on the redesign or new manufacturing approaches for
‘low-tech’ CC-Products, i.e. with low technical and
manufacturing complexity. Those CC-Products include face

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

12

masks where we have seen numerous initiatives releasing
patterns online calling for home production, i.e. crowdmanufacturing. Most of these initiatives might not be seen as
highly innovative from an industrial standpoint as they produce
fairly mature and ‘dated’ CC-Products, which might not be
protected anymore by any alive IP. For instance, patents that
once protected face mask designs may have long expired.
However, various initiatives focusing on low-tech CCProducts clearly innovate developing novel solutions that go
beyond existing CC-Products. For instance, different initiatives
have started to develop new face shield designs that are
optimised for 3D printing. Those initiatives develop potentially
patentable novel CC-IP, while not necessarily infringing
incumbent owned CC-IP as this has probably already expired.
Overall, those initiatives may not run into particular
infringement risks, however, are likely to create novel
foreground CC-IP. Given that most initiatives adopt open
source licensing approaches they may not formally seek to
protect their novel CC-IP through filing patents. However, we
can possibly expect to see some trademark registrations
appearing from some of the initiatives that become
commercially viable, e.g. those also starting mass 3D printing
production of face shields in Lithuania [99].
C. Scenario 3: Incumbents
Certain expertise like vaccine and drug development are so
unique to the incumbents in CC-Sectors that new entrants are
less or almost unlikely to contribute significantly within the
short time frames available during a pandemic. In these cases,
incumbents in CC-Sectors developing new solutions or
contributing to upscaling may end up infringing CC-IP of other
incumbents. Our analysis shows that incumbents may take one
or more of the following three approaches, each coming with
different IP considerations.
One approach is the development of new technologies and
solutions based on their pre-pandemic technologies and their
expertise unique to CC-Sectors, thereby independently creating
innovative novel CC-IP within their expertise. An example is
the COVID testing developed by BioFire claimed to be based
on its existing technologies (e.g. BioFire Filmarray). A second
approach is that CC-Sector incumbents who were pre-pandemic
component suppliers suddenly establish large scale
manufacturing units to address supply-shortages. An example
is INEOS, a chemical giant, supplier of one of the key
ingredients used in sanitisers, established huge manufacturing
capacities in France to produce about 1 million bottles per
month. The third approach requires incumbents to collaborate
by forming bilateral collaborations (e.g., agreement between Eli
Lilly and AbCellera), establish new consortia (e.g.,
OPENCORONA consortium [84], COVID-19 Therapeutics
Accelerator [82]) or joining existing networks (e.g., CEPI
(Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) and

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

13

Fig. 4 Crisis-Critical IP (CC-IP) during a Pandemic

Europe’s IMI (Innovative Medicines Initiative) [89]) and share
IP among themselves to accelerate the efforts. The consortiums
are likely to include non-commercial entities such as
universities and research centres. Our analysis shows that
consortiums at the prevention stage focus mainly on vaccine
development.
Examples
include
Horizon
2020’s
OPENCORONA consortium [84], consortium among Novartis,
Bristol Myers Squibb and GSK [19], ChAdOx1 consortium
involving universities and research centres. For treatment,
consortiums are for CC-Products (e.g., UK Ventilator
Challenge consortium [12]) and drugs (e.g., see [89] for several
of R&D efforts by incumbents).
Two CC-IP considerations can be identified in the three
approaches taken by incumbents. First, in the efforts by
incumbents to accelerate CC-Product development, they may
not conduct freedom to operate analysis as it is time taking. So,
they may end up facing infringement lawsuits by other
incumbents owning similar CC-IP (e.g., Labrador Diagnostics
LLC’s lawsuit against BioFire [100]). Second, when prepandemic suppliers establish mass production and
manufacturing units, they might generate foreground IP during
a pandemic, and would like to stay in the market post pandemic
as well.
To summarise (Fig. 4), new entrants rushing to help the large
scale production of high-tech CC-Products (e.g. ventilator
production, diagnostic kits), particularly large ones entering
CC-Sectors might be more at a risk to infringe active / alive CCIP owned by incumbents than those entering low tech CCProducts, for which formally relevant IP might have already
expired (e.g. face masks) or free alternatives exit. Overall, large
firms might be more at risk to become targets for future (i.e.

after the pandemic) infringement claims than SMEs and
voluntary initiatives. A particular consideration that should be
mentioned is that while rushing into CC-Product manufacturing
large firms may not perceive IP to be that urgent given a current
crisis, which could turn out to be difficult in the long run as this
could come with considerable IP risks. Incumbent owners of
CC-IP might have a lower probability to sue voluntary
initiatives, because they cannot claim damages, so could only
ask for injunctions, which may cause themselves reputational
damages. An exception might be the case of a CC-Product
developed by a voluntary initiative, which is then produced in
large volumes. However, a voluntary initiative giving away its
IP open source would not make sufficient money to be a
damage claim target. Rather those manufacturing an open
source design without a clean freedom to operate situation
could be targets for infringement claims. One also has to
consider that new entrants, whether large manufacturing firms
or voluntary initiatives, are likely to develop novel CC-IP
during a pandemic, which they could use when continuing to
stay in CC-Sectors.

V. APPROACHES TO ADDRESS CRISIS RELATED
IP CHALLENGES
A pandemic is characterised as a crisis that calls for urgent,
imminent large-scale action by governments, industrial players
as well as a range of other societal actors. Governments take
centre stage to orchestrate the rapid response to a pandemic.
One of their many primary concerns is enabling the large scale
production of Crisis-Critical Products (CC-Products), with the
demand typically far exceeding the manufacturing capacities

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

available from incumbent manufacturers in Crisis-Critical
Sectors (CC-Sectors). This then calls for other firms to enter
CC-Sectors and support the mass manufacturing of CCProducts by repurposing manufacturing lines. This leads to
situations where manufacturing firms find themselves suddenly
engaged in new relationships (e.g. UK ventilator challenge
[22]), possibly even with companies that were competitors
before the pandemic.
A pandemic, such as exemplified by the current COVID-19
crisis, also leads to wide ranging innovation activities, whether
by incumbents or new entrants, being large firms themselves or
various grassroot initiatives, not-for-profit organisations or
start-ups etc. While governments’ priority must be to enable the
mass production of CC-Products, they should not forget to
address potential IP concerns that incumbents or new entrants
may have and think about ways to reduce IP related risks. At
least three possible approaches are available to support the
reduction of IP associated risks.
One legal approach that most governments have stems from
the TRIPS agreement. Compulsory licensing is a tool that
governments have in those countries that have adopted TRIPS
[101]. It allows governments to use IP in crisis situations such
as the COVID-19 pandemic. However, compulsory licenses are
typically seen as a last resort measure. Compulsory licensing
particularly helps governments to access and use CC-IP and
thereby reduce IP associated risks mostly to new entrants, but
are usually not favoured by incumbents, even though
governments typically have to agree to pay a reasonable royalty
for accessing their IP. In the current pandemic, countries that
have already considered compulsory licensing with more to be
expected include Chile, Canada and Israel [40], [41], [102].
Another, voluntary approach is to call owners of CC-IP
(mostly incumbents) to pledge [48], [98], [103] their IP so that
new entrants get non-exclusive licenses to use incumbents’ CCIP at least for the duration of the pandemic. Examples include
firm specific pledges, e.g. by Medtronic [104], AbbVie [85] and
SMITHS [105], but also the Open COVID Pledge
(www.openCOVIDpledge.org) [52], [53] for industrially
relevant IP as well as the Wellcome Trust pledge [36] for
research publications and datasets. The pledge option,
particularly with a time limited license, appears to be more
friendly to incumbents while also de-risking IP challenges for
new entrants. Pledges often also provide license templates that
others can use and adjust to their needs.
Another approach to reduce IP associated risks and thus
avoid any delays in fighting a pandemic are CC-IP pools, which
can then be made available to a restricted group of companies
(e.g., a consortium) only or to all interested firms that want to
use that IP. A formal approach for governments would be to
facilitate the development of patent pools [106], which have
already been used in the pharmaceutical industry (e.g.
Medicines patent pool).

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

14

VI. CONCLUSIONS
Coronavirus is a virus family to which belongs the virus
causing COVID-19. This paper shows that research and IP
protections for coronavirus related inventions is not new. Patent
protection for different forms of coronavirus already exist but
not for the particular coronavirus type, SARS-CoV-2 that
causes the COVID-19 disease. It is also evident that there is a
time-lag between the outbreak and the materialisation of
patents, and high number of citations to Non-Patent Literature,
which shows the urgency of scientists for open data to put the
information in the public domain.
What makes it difficult for IP to be given its required
considerations during the early stage of a pandemic is the
enormous sense of urgency which easily draws decision makers
attention to huge and undoubtedly urgent operational
challenges. With this paper we hopefully contribute to raising
awareness that IP needs to be dealt with rather earlier than later
during a pandemic in order to avoid that IP associated risks
delay the mobilisation of resources so urgently needed for the
research, development and mass manufacturing of CrisisCritical Products.
This paper provides a terminology that helps to conceptualise
IP considerations in times of a pandemic or global crisis that
calls for urgent and large-scale actions from industrial
stakeholders that suddenly find themselves engaged in new
relationships that are associated with various uncertainties, not
the least related to the use and sharing of IP with the particular
problem that negotiating licensing agreements is typically time
consuming.
From analysing the currently unfolding COVID-19
pandemic, we identify IP associated challenges relating to the
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a pandemic. We identify
four types of stakeholders that are mostly concerned with IP
considerations. These include governments (and intergovernmental organisations, such as the WHO, WIPO) who are
called upon to orchestrate pandemic responses, incumbent
manufacturing firms in CC-Sectors as well as new entrants that
enter Crisis-Critical Sectors to assist incumbents. These new
entrants can be manufacturing firms that have not produced
Crisis-Critical Products prior to a pandemic, but also voluntary
grassroot initiatives, start-ups, entrepreneurial scientists, etc.
We identify and analyse three scenarios in which different
considerations around IP emerge. In the first scenario
manufacturing firms enter Crisis-Critical Sectors to assist
incumbents in mass manufacturing the volume required of
Crisis-Critical Products. Those firms possess complementary
capabilities and resources, so they can repurpose production
lines. In the second scenario we discuss IP considerations when
voluntary grassroot initiatives enter Crisis-Critical Sectors. In
the third scenario we discuss R&D and manufacturing
engagements and IP considerations for the incumbents in the
CC-Sectors. We finally provide an initial discussion of three
possible approaches to address IP concerns during a pandemic,
namely compulsory licensing, IP pledges and IP pooling.

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

„Statement on the second meeting of the International Health
Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)“. https://www.who.int/newsroom/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-theinternational-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committeeregarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov) (zugegriffen
Apr. 01, 2020).
„WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on
COVID-19 - 11 March 2020“.
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-sopening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
(zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
P. Zhou u. a., „A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new
coronavirus of probable bat origin“, Nature, Bd. 579, Nr. 7798, S. 270–
273, März 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.
P. Yang und X. Wang, „COVID-19: a new challenge for human
beings“, Cell. Mol. Immunol., März 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41423-0200407-x.
D. Wang u. a., „Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients
With 2019 Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China“,
JAMA, Bd. 323, Nr. 11, S. 1061, März 2020, doi:
10.1001/jama.2020.1585.
„Mapping the Covid-19 Outbreak Globally“, Bloomberg.com.
„COVID-19 Map“, Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center.
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
E. Callaway, D. Cyranoski, S. Mallapaty, E. Stoye, J. Tollefson, und D.
P. Jackman, „From papers published to carbon emissions to confirmed
cases, these data reveal an unprecedented viral outbreak and its impacts
around the world.“, S. 2.
E. Callaway, D. Cyranoski, S. Mallapaty, E. Stoye, und J. Tollefson,
„The coronavirus pandemic in five powerful charts“, Nature, Bd. 579,
Nr. 7800, S. 482–483, März 2020, doi: 10.1038/d41586-020-00758-2.
„WHO | Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) R&D“, WHO.
http://www.who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/key-action/novelcoronavirus/en/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Why is Germany able to test for coronavirus so much more than the
UK?“, Reaction, März 31, 2020. https://reaction.life/why-is-germanyable-to-test-for-coronavirus-so-much-more-than-the-uk/ (zugegriffen
Apr. 03, 2020).
„Ventilator Challenge UK Consortium“, Penlon.
https://www.penlon.com/Blog/March-2020/Ventilator-Challenge-UKConsortium (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
J. Peters, „Google and Microsoft are giving away enterprise
conferencing tools due to coronavirus“, The Verge, März 03, 2020.
https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/3/21163744/google-microsoft-freeaccess-coronavirus-google-hangouts-meet-teams (zugegriffen Apr. 01,
2020).
„Coronavirus: UK broadband data caps removed during pandemic BBC News“. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-52091359
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Cobra Biologics Is Proud To Be Part Of A Consortium To Rapidly
Develop A COVID-19 Vaccine“.
https://www.outsourcedpharma.com/doc/cobra-biologics-proud-to-bepart-of-a-consortium-rapidly-develop-covid-vaccine-0001 (zugegriffen
Apr. 03, 2020).
„Towards a drug against COVID-19 | Co-led by Dr. Nir London, global
consortium aims to accelerate drug development“, WeizmannCompass,
März 30, 2020.
http://www.weizmann.ac.il/WeizmannCompass/sections/briefs/towardsa-drug-against-covid-19 (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Here are some drugs that may be repurposed to treat coronavirus“,
NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/here-aresome-existing-drugs-may-be-repurposed-treat-coronavirus-n1162021
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Clover and GSK announce research collaboration to evaluate
coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccine candidate with pandemic adjuvant
system | GSK“. https://www.gsk.com/en-gb/media/pressreleases/clover-and-gsk-announce-research-collaboration-to-evaluatecoronavirus-covid-19-vaccine-candidate-with-pandemic-adjuvantsystem/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
N. Media, „Novartis and others in ‘unprecedented’ COVID-19
partnership“, Life Sciences IP Review.

[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]

[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

15

https://www.lifesciencesipreview.com/news/novartis-and-others-inunprecedented-covid-19-partnership-3971 (zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
„Bosch develops rapid Covid-19 test“, The Engineer, März 27, 2020.
https://www.theengineer.co.uk/bosch-covid-19-test/ (zugegriffen Apr.
03, 2020).
P. Hollinger, S. Neville, M. Pooler, und L. Hughes, „Big names of UK
engineering in push to make 30,000 ventilators“, März 30, 2020.
https://www.ft.com/content/1125e39e-8a76-4769-b6ca-f482efca5bf5
(zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
„VentilatorChallengeUK“, VentilatorChallenge.
https://www.ventilatorchallengeuk.com (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„Louis Vuitton owner to start making hand sanitiser“, BBC News, März
16, 2020.
„Distillery switches from gin to hand sanitiser“, BBC News, März 18,
2020.
C. Russell, „Zara Owner Starts Making Protective Face Masks To Fight
Coronavirus“, Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/callyrussell/2020/03/19/zara-owner-startsmaking-protective-face-masks-to-fight-coronavirus/ (zugegriffen Apr.
01, 2020).
„Coronavirus – Prada, Trigema, Häftlinge: Krass, wer jetzt alles
Schutzmasken herstellt“, bild.de. https://www.bild.de/bildplus/geld/wirtschaft/wirtschaft/coronavirus-prada-trigema-haeftlingekrass-wer-jetzt-alles-schutzmasken-herstell-69659326.bild.html
(zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
E. V. Bramley, „Prada the latest fashion brand to make medical face
masks“, The Guardian, März 24, 2020.
„UPDATED 30.3. - From Design to Mass 3D printing of Medical
Shields in Three Days“, Prusa Printers, März 18, 2020.
https://blog.prusaprinters.org/from-design-to-mass-3d-printing-ofmedical-shields-in-three-days/ (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
J. Peters, „Volunteers produce 3D-printed valves for life-saving
coronavirus treatments“, The Verge, März 17, 2020.
https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/17/21184308/coronavirus-italymedical-3d-print-valves-treatments (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„Pneumask: Reusable Full-Face Snorkel Mask PPE Project“.
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J22le3dBZBnNDXGlJLRb38z7v
7LaOjKfDeN9f0tFeKY/mobilebasic (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„COVID-19: Imperial researchers model likely impact of public health
measures | Imperial News | Imperial College London“, Imperial News.
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/news/196234/covid-19-imperialresearchers-model-likely-impact/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„COVID-19 reports“, Imperial College London.
http://www.imperial.ac.uk/medicine/departments/school-publichealth/infectious-disease-epidemiology/mrc-global-infectious-diseaseanalysis/covid-19/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Search | Kaggle“.
https://www.kaggle.com/search?q=coronavirus+in%3Anotebooks
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
A. Abbas, M. M. Abdelsamea, und M. M. Gaber, „Classification of
COVID-19 in chest X-ray images using DeTraC deep convolutional
neural network“, ArXiv200313815 Cs Eess Stat, März 2020,
Zugegriffen: Apr. 03, 2020. [Online]. Verfügbar unter:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.13815.
„COVID-19 Dataset Award (4/03/20) | Data Science and Machine
Learning“. a (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„Sharing research data and findings relevant to the novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) outbreak | Wellcome“. https://wellcome.ac.uk/pressrelease/sharing-research-data-and-findings-relevant-novel-coronaviruscovid-19-outbreak (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
K. Hao, „Over 24,000 coronavirus research papers are now available in
one place“, MIT Technology Review.
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/615367/coronavirus-24000research-papers-available-open-data/ (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„No profiteering on COVID-19 drugs and vaccines, says MSF“,
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) International.
https://www.msf.org/no-profiteering-covid-19-drugs-and-vaccines-saysmsf (zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
N. warthmann says, „WHO asked to create voluntary intellectual
property pool for Covid-19 work“, STAT, März 24, 2020.
https://www.statnews.com/pharmalot/2020/03/24/covid19-coronaviruscosta-rica-intellectual-property/ (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„Compulsory Licences on the Horizon for Drugs and Equipment?“
http://www.williamfry.com/newsandinsights/newsarticle/2020/03/27/compulsory-licences-on-the-horizon-for-drugs-and-

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

equipment (zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
[41] „The Worldwide Stakes of Israeli Compulsory Licenses for AntiCoronavirus Drugs“, Pearl Cohen, März 24, 2020.
https://www.pearlcohen.com/the-worldwide-stakes-of-israelicompulsory-licenses-for-anti-coronavirus-drugs/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03,
2020).
[42] J. Kennedy, „Buyer beware: Counterfeit markets can flourish during a
public health crisis“, The Conversation.
http://theconversation.com/buyer-beware-counterfeit-markets-canflourish-during-a-public-health-crisis-134492 (zugegriffen März 31,
2020).
[43] N. Media, „UK man charged with selling counterfeit COVID-19 kits“,
World IP Review. https://www.worldipreview.com/news/uk-mancharged-with-selling-counterfeit-covid-19-kits-19466 (zugegriffen März
31, 2020).
[44] N. Wetsman, „A SoftBank-owned company used Theranos patents to
sue over COVID-19 tests“, The Verge, März 18, 2020.
https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/18/21185006/softbank-theranoscoronavirus-covid-lawsuit-patent-testing (zugegriffen Apr. 02, 2020).
[45] „Labrador Diagnostics Will Grant Royalty-free Licenses for COVID-19
Testing“, März 17, 2020.
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200316005955/en/Labrad
or-Diagnostics-Grant-Royalty-free-Licenses-COVID-19-Testing
(zugegriffen Apr. 02, 2020).
[46] N. Media, „Gilead backs away from antiviral monopoly after criticism“,
Life Sciences IP Review.
https://www.lifesciencesipreview.com/news/gilead-backs-away-fromantiviral-monopoly-after-criticism-3970 (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[47] „UPDATED: Gilead drops remdesivir’s orphan drug designation“,
PMLive, März 25, 2020.
http://www.pmlive.com/pharma_news/gilead_faces_criticism_over_rem
desivirs_orphan_drug_designation_1329985 (zugegriffen Apr. 03,
2020).
[48] J. L. Contreras und M. Jacob, Patent pledges: global perspectives on
patent law’s private ordering frontier. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2017.
[49] „After Theranos suit, Fortress makes patents available on royalty-free
basis for COVID-19 tests | IAM“. https://www.iammedia.com/litigation/after-theranos-suit-fortress-makes-patentsavailable-royalty-free-basis-covid-19 (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
[50] „Medtronic Shares Ventilation Design Specifications to Accelerate
Efforts to Increase Global Ventilator Production“, Medtronic.
http://newsroom.medtronic.com/news-releases/news-releasedetails/medtronic-shares-ventilation-design-specifications-accelerate
(zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
[51] „Smiths Group to produce 10000 ventilators for the UK Government Smiths Group plc“. https://www.smiths.com/news-andmedia/2020/03/smiths-group-to-produce-10000-ventilators-for-the-ukgovernment (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
[52] N. Media, „COVID-19 ‘pledge’ urges rights owners to share IP“, World
IP Review. https://www.worldipreview.com/news/covid-19-pledgeurges-rights-owners-to-share-ip-19493 (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
[53] „No strings Covid-19 IP pledge initiative underlines delicate balance
biopharma businesses must strike | IAM“. https://www.iammedia.com/copyright/new-patent-pledge-underlines-delicate-balancingact-companies-must-strike-in-covid-19 (zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
[54] „Open COVID Pledge“, Unified Patents.
https://www.unifiedpatents.com/open-covid-pledge (zugegriffen März
31, 2020).
[55] L. Aristodemou, F. Tietze, N. Athanassopoulou, und T. Minshall,
„Exploring the future of patent analytics: a technology roadmapping
approach“, 2017.
[56] L. Aristodemou und F. Tietze, „The state-of-the-art on Intellectual
Property Analytics (IPA): A literature review on artificial intelligence,
machine learning and deep learning methods for analysing intellectual
property (IP) data“, World Pat. Inf., Bd. 55, S. 37–51, 2018.
[57] „International Patent Classification (IPC)“.
https://www.wipo.int/classifications/ipc/en/index.html (zugegriffen Apr.
03, 2020).
[58] „A new way of developing vaccines for COVID-19 could help the
world to prepare for future outbreaks | Wellcome“.
https://wellcome.ac.uk/news/new-way-developing-vaccines-covid-19could-help-world-prepare-future-outbreaks (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[59] „Moderna’s Work on a Potential Vaccine Against COVID-19 |
Moderna, Inc.“ https://www.modernatx.com/modernas-work-potentialvaccine-against-covid-19 (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

16

[60] „5 Promising Covid-19 Vaccines and Drugs That Could End
Coronavirus Pandemic“, Observer, März 13, 2020.
https://observer.com/2020/03/5-coronavirus-covid19-vaccine-drugdevelopment/ (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[61] „Roundup: Tech’s role in tracking, testing, treating COVID-19“,
MobiHealthNews, Apr. 02, 2020.
https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/roundup-techs-role-trackingtesting-treating-covid-19 (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[62] „COVID-19 Open Research Dataset Challenge (CORD-19)“.
https://kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-research-challenge
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[63] „FDA approved 2 additional Rapid Antibody Test Kits today, 01 April
2020. Total registered COVID-19 Test Kits for commercial use is now
28.“, Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines, Apr. 01, 2020.
https://www.fda.gov.ph/fda-approved-2-additional-rapid-antibody-testkits-today-01-april-2020-total-registered-covid-19-test-kits-forcommercial-use-is-now-28/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[64] „rapidmicrobiology Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2): Test Kits to Detect the
Causative Agent of COVID-19“.
https://www.rapidmicrobiology.com/test-method/testing-for-the-wuhancoronavirus-a-k-a-covid-19-sars-cov-2-and-2019-ncov (zugegriffen
Apr. 03, 2020).
[65] „EPAM Continuum Launches Open Source Mask Design for COVID19 | EPAM“.
https://www.epam.com/content/epam/en/about/newsroom/pressreleases/2020/epam-introduces-covid-19-protective-mask-designed-byepam-continuum (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[66] „A current list of DIY masks for the COVID-19 pandemic –
Knowm.org“. https://knowm.org/a-current-list-of-diy-masks-for-thecovid-19-pandemic/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[67] „Distilleries Making Hand Sanitizer to Fight COVID-19“, Distilled
Spirits Council of the United States.
https://www.distilledspirits.org/distillers-responding-to-covid19/distilleries-making-hand-sanitizer/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[68] „Bryan Cave Leighton Paisner - FDA Issues Guidance on AlcoholBased Hand Sanitizer Production in Response to COVID-19“.
https://www.bclplaw.com/en-GB/thought-leadership/fda-issuesguidance-on-alcohol-based-hand-sanitizer-production-in-response-tocovid-19.html (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[69] „IIT Delhi prepares alcohol based hand sanitizer as per WHO
parameters | Indian Institute of Technology Delhi“.
http://www.iitd.ac.in/content/iit-delhi-prepares-alcohol-based-handsanitizer-who-parameters-0 (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[70] „Materialise supports global coronavirus containment efforts with 3D
printed hands-free door opener“, 3D Printing Industry, März 17, 2020.
https://3dprintingindustry.com/news/materialise-supports-globalcoronavirus-containment-efforts-with-3d-printed-hands-free-dooropener-169119/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[71] „The First U.S. Company Has Announced an Upcoming Home COVID19 Test“, Time. https://time.com/5805953/home-covid-19-testeverlywell/ (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[72] „Oxford scientists develop rapid testing technology for COVID-19 |
University of Oxford“. http://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2020-03-18-oxfordscientists-develop-rapid-testing-technology-covid-19 (zugegriffen Apr.
01, 2020).
[73] „COVID19 Global Forecasting (Week 2) | Kaggle“.
https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week2/notebooks (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[74] E. ’t Hoen, „Covid-19 and the comeback of compulsory licensing |
Medicines Law & Policy“.
https://medicineslawandpolicy.org/2020/03/covid-19-and-the-comeback-of-compulsory-licensing/ (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[75] N. Media, „Indian drugmaker joins race to find COVID-19 vaccine“,
Life Sciences IP Review.
https://www.lifesciencesipreview.com/news/indian-drugmaker-joinsrace-to-find-covid-19-vaccine-3917 (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[76] „UK, China prep trials of coronavirus vaccine candidates“, PMLive,
März 23, 2020.
https://www.pmlive.com/pharma_news/uk,_china_prep_trials_of_coron
avirus_vaccine_candidates_1329799 (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[77] M. News, „Firm founded by University researchers to manufacture
portable ventilators for COVID-19 patients | Mirage News“, März 21,
2020. https://www.miragenews.com/firm-founded-by-universityresearchers-to-manufacture-portable-ventilators-for-covid-19-patients/,
https://www.miragenews.com/firm-founded-by-university-researchers-

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]
[86]
[87]

[88]

[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

to-manufacture-portable-ventilators-for-covid-19-patients (zugegriffen
Apr. 03, 2020).
P. Jebara, „Dyson Designs Ventilator in 10 Days for COVID-19
Patients“, Architectural Digest.
https://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/dyson-designs-ventilator-10days-covid-19-patients (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
„Blood testing startup partners with Israel’s Sheba Medical Center to
support COVID-19 quarantine measures“, MobiHealthNews, März 18,
2020. https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/europe/blood-testingstartup-partners-israel-s-sheba-medical-center-support-covid-19quarantine (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
„Coronavirus: International Publishers Make COVID-19 Research
Content Freely Available“, Publishing Perspectives, März 16, 2020.
https://publishingperspectives.com/2020/03/coronavirus-internationalpublishers-make-covid-19-research-content-freely-available/
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
P. 30 M. 2020 | 23:06 GMT, „COVID-19 Related Research and
Technologies Free to Access in IEEE Xplore - IEEE Spectrum“, IEEE
Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and Science News.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-institute/ieee-news/covid19-relatedresearch-and-technologies-free-to-access-in-ieee-xplore (zugegriffen
Apr. 01, 2020).
„Wellcome pledges up to $50 million to new initiative to speed
development of COVID-19 treatments | Wellcome“.
https://wellcome.ac.uk/news/wellcome-pledges-50-million-newinitiative-speed-development-covid-19-treatments (zugegriffen Apr. 03,
2020).
B. Orelli, „Johnson & Johnson Expands Pact With U.S. Government to
Seek a Treatment for COVID-19“, The Motley Fool, Feb. 18, 2020.
https://www.fool.com/investing/2020/02/18/johnson-johnson-usgovernment-covid-19-treatment.aspx (zugegriffen Apr. 04, 2020).
S. Price, „Horizon 2020 collaboration to develop COVID-19 vaccine“,
Health Europa, März 30, 2020. https://www.healtheuropa.eu/horizon2020-collaboration-to-develop-covid-19-vaccine/98951/ (zugegriffen
Apr. 01, 2020).
„AbbVie drops patent rights for Kaletra antiviral treatment | Financial
Times“. https://www.ft.com/content/5a7a9658-6d1f-11ea-89df41bea055720b (zugegriffen März 30, 2020).
„OpenSourceVentilator.org“, OpenSourceVentilator.org.
https://opensourceventilator.org (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
„Sanofi: Press Releases, Friday, March 27, 2020“,
https://www.sanofi.com/en/media-room/press-releases/2020/2020-0327-07-00-00. https://www.sanofi.com/media-room/pressreleases/2020/2020-03-27 07-00-00 2007404 (zugegriffen Apr. 01,
2020).
„3D Printing Community responds to COVID-19 and Coronavirus
resources - 3D Printing Industry“.
https://3dprintingindustry.com/news/3d-printing-community-respondsto-covid-19-and-coronavirus-resources-169143/ (zugegriffen Apr. 02,
2020).
„Novel coronavirus (COVID-19) – Industry’s R&D efforts – IFPMA“.
https://www.ifpma.org/subtopics/novel-coronavirus-covid-19-industrysrd-efforts/ (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
„COVID-19-Solutions“, Airtable. https://airtable.com (zugegriffen Apr.
01, 2020).
„COVID-19“, About The Lens. https://about.lens.org/covid-19/
(zugegriffen Apr. 04, 2020).
„The Smiths Group and the Ventilator Challenge UK Consortium
develop thousands of ventilators for the UK“.
https://www.zenopa.com/news/2220/the-smiths-group-and-theventilator-challenge-uk-consortium-develop-thousands-of-ventilatorsfor-the-uk (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
„Luxury brands join Covid-19 fight as they churn out medical supplies“,
South China Morning Post, März 24, 2020.
https://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/3076698/luxurybrands-join-fight-against-covid-19-retailers-use-their (zugegriffen Apr.
02, 2020).
D. Welle (www.dw.com), „Volkswagen explores using 3D printers to
produce ventilators | DW | 21.03.2020“, DW.COM.
https://www.dw.com/en/volkswagen-explores-using-3d-printers-toproduce-ventilators/a-52867155 (zugegriffen März 31, 2020).
H. Canada, „3D printing and other manufacturing of personal protective
equipment in response to COVID-19“, aem, Apr. 03, 2020.
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-healthproducts/medical-devices/covid-19-unconventional-manufacturing-

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

17

personal-protective-equipment.html (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[96] „Cambridge companies unite to meet the COVID-19 ventilator
challenge“, Cambridge Consultants.
https://www.cambridgeconsultants.com/press-releases/cambridgecompanies-unite-meet-covid-19-ventilator-challenge (zugegriffen Apr.
03, 2020).
[97] S. Goodley und I. Sample, „UK government orders more ventilators for
coronavirus crisis“, The Guardian, März 30, 2020.
[98] Vimalnath, P., F. Tietze, E. Eppinger and J. Sternkopf, „Closed, semiopen of fully-open? Towards an intellectual property strategy typology“,
gehalten auf der AOM, Vancouver, 2020.
[99] „Lithuanian libraries start 3D printing face shields for medics“, lrt.lt,
März 30, 2020. https://www.lrt.lt/en/news-inenglish/19/1156410/lithuanian-libraries-start-3d-printing-face-shieldsfor-medics (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[100] K. M. in S. F. 18 M. 2020 at 01:10, „Theranos vampire lives on: Owner
of failed blood-testing biz’s patents sues maker of actual COVID-19testing kit“.
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2020/03/18/theranos_patent_coronavirus_
lawsuit/ (zugegriffen Apr. 01, 2020).
[101] „WTO | intellectual property (TRIPS) - TRIPS and public health:
Compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals and TRIPS“.
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/public_health_faq_e.htm
(zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[102] N. Media, „Canada authorises compulsory licences for COVID-19
shortfalls“, Life Sciences IP Review.
https://www.lifesciencesipreview.com/news/canada-authorisescompulsory-licences-for-covid-19-shortfalls-3972 (zugegriffen März
30, 2020).
[103] J. F. Ehrnsperger und F. Tietze, „Patent pledges, open IP, or patent
pools? Developing taxonomies in the thicket of terminologies“, PloS
One, Bd. 14, Nr. 8, 2019.
[104] „Medtronic Gives Away Ventilator Design Specs In Coronavirus Fight,
Ahead Of Tesla Alliance“.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/alanohnsman/2020/03/30/medtronicgives-away-ventilator-design-specs-in-coronavirus-fight-ahead-of-teslaalliance/#42ea1ae45911 (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[105] N. Media, „Ventilator maker offers up IP to tackle shortage“, Life
Sciences IP Review.
https://www.lifesciencesipreview.com/news/ventilator-maker-offers-upip-to-tackle-shortage-3962 (zugegriffen Apr. 03, 2020).
[106] E. Eppinger, Patentpools: Eigenschaften, Motive und Implikationen.
Springer-Verlag, 2015.

Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Considerations during the COVID-19 Pandemic

© F. Tietze, P. Vimalnath, L. Aristodemou, J. Molloy

18

AUTHORS
Dr. Frank Tietze is a Lecturer in
Technology
and
Innovation
Management at the University of
Cambridge,
Institute
for
Manufacturing. Within the Centre
for
Technology
Management
(CTM), he leads the Innovation and
Intellectual Property Management
(IIPM) Laboratory. He is a steering
group member of Cambridge Global Challenges. His research
has been published widely in leading international journals.
Frank is departmental editor of IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, editorial board member of World
Patent Information, editorial review board member of LES
Nouvelles, and the editor for the CTM working paper series. He
is Affiliated to the Cambridge Centre for Intellectual Property
and Information Law (CIPIL) and a member of the Innovation
and IP research group at Chalmers University of Technology,
Sweden.

Leonidas Aristodemou is a
Doctoral
Researcher
at
the
University of Cambridge.. He has
been an enrichment scholar at The
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
He is supervised by Dr. Frank Tietze
and advised by Prof. Tim Minshall.
He obtained a Master’s in
Engineering
(MEng)
with
Distinction, and a Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Engineering, from
the University of Cambridge. He is an executive board member
of the Cambridge University Engineers Association, a member
of the EU AI Alliance, and a member of St. Edmund’s College

Dr. Pratheeba Vimalnath is a PostDoctoral Research Associate at the
University of Cambridge, Institute
for Manufacturing. She is currently
working for the project IPACST that
aims to study the role of IP strategies
in accelerating sustainability (social,
environmental
and
economic)
transitions. She is also a College
Research Associate at the Wolfson College, Research Data
Champion at the university’s Data Champion programme, and
an Interest Group Champion for the Cambridge Global
Challenges (CGC). Prior to joining the IfM, she worked as an
Oxford Martin Fellow at the University of Oxford to research
on IP aspects of emerging open models for discovery and
development of affordable medicines. She holds a doctorate
degree in Intellectual Property Management, a Master’s degree
in Technology Management and a Bachelor’s degree in
Computer Science and Engineering, from India.

Dr. Jenny Molloy is a Shuttleworth
Fellow at the University of
Cambridge, studying the role and
impact of open approaches to
intellectual
property
for
a
sustainable
and
equitable
bioeconomy. In particular she
researches the potential for local,
distributed
manufacturing
of
enzymes to improve access and build capacity for biological
research. This work combines technical development using
synthetic biology-based platform technologies with qualitative
research on challenges faces by molecular biologists globally
through interviews and case studies.

