Submitted to the Annals of Applied Statistics

BETS: THE DANGERS OF SELECTION BIAS IN EARLY ANALYSES OF
THE CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19) PANDEMIC*
B Y Q INGYUAN Z HAO1 , N IANQIAO J U2,‡ , S ERGIO BACALLADO1,*

AND

R AJEN D. S HAH1,†

1 Statistical Laboratory, Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge,
qyzhao@statslab.cam.ac.uk; * sb2116@cam.ac.uk; † R.Shah@statslab.cam.ac.uk

arXiv:2004.07743v4 [stat.AP] 24 Sep 2020

2 Department of Statistics, Harvard University, ‡ nju@g.harvard.edu

Abstract The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has quickly grown
from a regional outbreak in Wuhan, China to a global pandemic. Early estimates of the epidemic growth and incubation period of COVID-19 may have
been biased due to sample selection. Using detailed case reports from 14 locations in and outside mainland China, we obtained 378 Wuhan-exported cases
who left Wuhan before an abrupt travel quarantine. We developed a generative
model we call BETS for four key epidemiological events—Beginning of exposure, End of exposure, time of Transmission, and time of Symptom onset
(BETS)—and derived explicit formulas to correct for the sample selection. We
gave a detailed illustration of why some early and highly influential analyses
of the COVID-19 pandemic were severely biased. All our analyses, regardless
of which subsample and model were being used, point to an epidemic doubling time of 2 to 2.5 days during the early outbreak in Wuhan. A Bayesian
nonparametric analysis further suggests that about 5% of the symptomatic
cases may not develop symptoms within 14 days of infection and that men
may be much more likely than women to develop symptoms within 2 days of
infection.

1. Introduction. On December 31, 2019, the Health Commission in Wuhan, China,
announced 27 cases of unknown viral pneumonia and alerted the World Health Organization.
The causative pathogen was quickly identified as a novel coronavirus and the disease was
later designated as the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (World Health Organization,
2020). The regional outbreak in Wuhan quickly turned into a global pandemic. As of June 1,
2020, COVID-19 has reached almost every country in the world, infected more than 6 million
people, and killed at least 370,000 (Johns Hopkins University).
Researchers around the world quickly responded to the COVID-19 outbreak. In particular,
many have examined early outbreak data to estimate the initial epidemic growth, using COVID19 cases confirmed in Wuhan or elsewhere. Two early studies published in premier medical
journals by the end of January estimated that the epidemic doubling time in Wuhan was about 6
to 7 days (Li et al., 2020; Wu, Leung and Leung, 2020), but other studies appearing around the
same time found that the doubling time was drastically shorter, about 2 to 3 days (Read et al.,
2020; Sanche et al., 2020; Zhao, Chen and Small, 2020). How the pandemic subsequently
developed around the world seems to suggest that the latter estimates were much closer to
truth. By simply plotting the cumulative cases and deaths over time, it is evident now that
the number of cases (and deaths) grew more than 100 times 20 days after the first 100 cases
(and 10 deaths) in countries most heavily hit by the pandemic such as Italy, Spain, and the
United States (Figure 1). That growth rate almost exactly corresponds to a doubling time of 3
days. Nevertheless, to our knowledge there is no formal explanation for this drastic difference,
and it might have caused confusion during the early phase of containment of COVID-19. For
* Accepted manuscript.

Keywords and phrases: epidemiology, infectious disease, Bayesian nonparametrics, selection bias, epidemic
growth, incubation period.

1

2
1,000,000
United States

United States
Spain
France
United Kingdom

Total cases

Turkey

10,000

Spain
Italy
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Iran

Belgium
Netherlands
Canada
Switzerland
Brazil
Russia
Portugal
Austria
Israel Sweden
Ireland
India
South Korea
Peru
Japan
Chile
Ecuador
Poland
Romania
Norway
Denmark
Australia
Czech
Republic
Pakistan
Mexico
Saudi
Arabia
Philippines
Malaysia
United
Arab
Emirates
Indonesia
Serbia
Panama
Qatar
UkraineLuxembourg
Dominican
Republic
Belarus
Singapore
Finland
Colombia
Argentina
SouthThailand
Africa
Egypt
Greece
Algeria
Moldova
Morocco
Iceland
Croatia
Hungary
Bahrain
Iraq
Estonia
Kuwait
Kazakhstan
Slovenia
Azerbaijan
Uzbekistan
Armenia
New
Zealand
and
Herzegovina
Lithuania
Bangladesh Bosnia

10,000

1,000

100
20

40

Days since 100 cases

(a) Cumulative cases.

60

Brazil
Turkey
Sweden
Canada
Switzerland

1,000

Portugal
Indonesia
Mexico
Ireland
Austria
India
Ecuador
Romania
Philippines
Algeria
Denmark
Poland
Peru
Dominican
Republic
Egypt
Russia
Czech
Republic
Hungary
Colombia
Norway
Morocco
Israel
Pakistan
Argentina
Greece
Ukraine
Panama
Chile
Serbia MalaysiaIraq
SaudiLuxembourg
Arabia
Finland
Australia
Slovenia

100

10
0

Iran

Belgium
Germany
Netherlands

Total deaths

100,000

Italy

South Korea

Japan

Singapore

0

20

40

Days since 10 deaths

(b) Cumulative deaths.

Figure 1: Growth of the COVID-19 pandemic around the world (data retrieved from https:
//www.worldometers.info/ on April 15, 2020).
example, during the UK government’s daily briefing on March 16, it was acknowledged that
“without drastic action, cases could double every five or six days” (UK Government, 2020a).
Less than two weeks later, that number was revised to “three to four days” (UK Government,
2020b).
For infectious diseases, another key epidemiological parameter is the incubation period.
Several studies have attempted to estimate the incubation period distribution of COVID-19
using cases exported from Wuhan (Backer, Klinkenberg and Wallinga, 2020; Lauer et al.,
2020; Linton et al., 2020) and the results have been influential in shaping guidelines to manage
confirmed COVID-19 patients. For example, the interim clinical guidance for managing
COVID-19 patients published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) quoted the results of Lauer et al. (2020) that
“97.5% of persons with COVID-19 who develop symptoms will do so within 11.5 days of
SARS-CoV-2 infection.” However, as we will demonstrate below in Section 4, the design and
statistical inference of these studies are highly susceptible to selection bias.
Accurate estimation of these epidemiological parameters are crucial to the global efforts
to contain and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic. Besides direct implications in patient
management and quarantine policies, they are also inputs to the compartmental models
(Kermack and McKendrick, 1927; Hethcote, 2000) and individual-based models (Willem
et al., 2017) to forecast the epidemic and inform public health policies. In general, there
are several potential sources of bias in early analyses of the COVID-19 pandemic (see also
Table 1):
(i) Under-ascertainment: Because COVID-19 is a new disease, the testing capacity was
very limited during the early stage of the outbreak. The eligibility criterion for testing was
initially very strict. This may explain why Li et al. (2020) under-estimated the epidemic
growth as they only used cases in Wuhan who showed symptoms before January 5, 2020.
(ii) Non-random sample selection: Not all public health agencies reported detailed information of COVID-19 cases. Many stopped doing so after the first few cases. Studies which
only collect complete or conveniently available data may be biased by non-random sample

BETS IN COVID-19

3

selection. For example, it is often impossible to know the exact time when the cases were
infected. If one simply uses cases with known infection time, the incubation period may
be under-estimated because it is more difficult to discern the infection time for cases with
longer incubation period.
(iii) Travel quarantine: Wuhan is a major transportation hub in central China. To control the
spread of the virus, all outbound travels from Wuhan were abruptly halted on January 23,
2020. For studies using cases exported from Wuhan (COVID-19 cases who were infected in
Wuhan and confirmed elsewhere), ignoring the sample selection due to the travel quarantine
leads to biased estimates of the epidemic growth.
(iv) Ignoring epidemic growth: Because the epidemic was rapidly growing, patients were
more likely to be infected towards the end of their exposure period. Ignoring the growth
and using a simple uniform distribution for the infection time over a prolonged exposure
period may lead to over-estimation of the incubation period.
(v) Right-truncation: Early analyses of the epidemic were limited to using cases confirmed
before a certain date, when the number of infections was still growing rapidly. This may
lead to under-estimation of the incubation period, as people with milder symptoms or
longer incubation period are less likely to be included in the study.
In this article, we address these challenges by carefully constructing a study sample and a
statistical model. We collected key epidemiological information for 1,460 confirmed COVID19 cases across 14 locations in and outside mainland China. By focusing on locations where
the local health agencies made great efforts to contain the initial outbreaks and published
detailed case reports, the biases due to (i) under-ascertainment and (ii) non-random selection
are minimized. Section 2 describes how our data were collected and the Wuhan-exported cases
were discerned.
We addressed potential biases due to (iii) the travel quarantine, (iv) ignoring epidemic
growth, and (v) right-truncation by constructing a generative statistical model. We call it
the BETS model, as it models four key epidemiological events: Beginning of exposure, End
of exposure, time of Transmission, and time of Symptom onset. The travel quarantine puts
a constraint on the support of the observed data for Wuhan-exported cases, for which we
carefully worked out the selection probability and used it to adjust the likelihood function.
Epidemic growth is naturally considered in the estimation of the incubation period because
they are estimated jointly using the likelihood functions we derived. Sample selection due to
right-truncation can also be characterized and adjusted for. Details of the generative model
and likelihood inference can be found in Section 3.
We then give a detailed explanation in Section 4 of why some early analyses of the
COVID-19 outbreak were severely biased, including the estimation of epidemic growth by
Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) and the estimation of incubation period by Backer, Klinkenberg
and Wallinga (2020); Lauer et al. (2020); Linton et al. (2020). Because these analyses did not
start from a generative model, they could not correctly adjust for sample selection in their
statistical inference.
In order to obtain closed-form likelihood functions in Section 3, we introduced some
parametric assumptions which necessarily restrict the shape of the tail of the incubation period
distribution. To avoid biased tail estimates, we model the distribution nonparametrically and
also relax the other assumptions in Section 5. Because the likelihood function is no longer
available in closed form, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler is needed for
Bayesian nonparametric inference. Finally, we summarize our findings and discuss potential
limitations of our study in Section 6. All technical derivations can be found in the Online
Supplement; our dataset and statistical programs are publicly available as an R package from
https://github.com/qingyuanzhao/bets.covid19.

4

TABLE 1
Summary of potential biases in analyses of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Bias

Susceptible studies

Direction

Solutions

(i) Under-ascertainment: Symptomatic patients
did not seek healthcare or could not be diagnosed.

All studies using cases confirmed
when testing is insufficient.

Varied, depending on the pattern
of under-ascertainment and parameter of interest.

Use carefully considered and planned study designs.

(ii) Non-random sample selection: Cases included in the study are not representative of the
population.

All studies, as detailed information of COVID-19 cases is sparse,
but especially those without clear
inclusion criteria.

Varied.

Follow a protocol for data collection with a clearly
defined sample inclusion criterion.

(iii) Travel quarantine: Outbound travel from
Wuhan was banned from January 23, 2020 to April
8, 2020.

Studies that analyze cases exported from Wuhan.

Under-estimation of epidemic
growth (Wu, Leung and Leung,
2020) and infection-to-recovery
time (Dorigatti et al., 2020).

Derive tailored likelihood functions to account for
travel restrictions. (See Section 4.1.)

(iv) Epidemic growth: Patients were more likely
to be infected towards the end of their exposure
period.

Studies that treat infections as uniformly distributed over the exposure period.

Over-estimation of incubation
period (Backer, Klinkenberg and
Wallinga, 2020; Lauer et al.,
2020; Linton et al., 2020) and
serial interval (Du et al., 2020;
Nishiura, Linton and Akhmetzhanov, 2020).

Derive tailored likelihood functions to account for
epidemic growth. (See Section 4.2.)

(v) Right-truncation: Cases confirmed after a certain time are excluded from the dataset.

Studies that only use cases detected early in an epidemic.

Under-estimation of incubation
period (Backer, Klinkenberg and
Wallinga, 2020; Lauer et al., 2020;
Linton et al., 2020), serial interval
(Du et al., 2020; Nishiura, Linton
and Akhmetzhanov, 2020), and
disease severity.

1. Collect all cases that meet a selection criterion,
do not end data collection prematurely; 2. Derive
tailored likelihood functions to correct for righttruncation. (See Section 4.2.)

5

BETS IN COVID-19

60°N

50°N

40°N

South Korea
Jinan
Xian (capital of Shaanxi)
Xinyang

30°N

Japan
Yangzhou

Hefei

Wuhan
Taiwan

Guilin
Zhanjiang
20°N

Shenzhen
Macau
Hong Kong

10°N

Singapore

0°
70°E

80°E

90°E

100°E

110°E

120°E

130°E

140°E

150°

Figure 2: Geographical locations of the confirmed cases in our dataset.
2. Data.
2.1. Data Collection. We identified 14 locations where the local health agencies have
published continuous reports for every confirmed COVID-19 case since the first local case.
Out of the 14 locations, 8 are cities/provinces in mainland China: Hefei, Guilin, Jinan, Shaanxi,
Shenzhen, Yangzhou, Xinyang, Zhanjiang and 6 are countries/regions in East Asia: Hong Kong,
Japan, South Korea, Macau, Singapore, and Taiwan (Figure 2). These locations have varied
levels of economic development and patterns of traveling to/from Wuhan. Key information
(close contact, travel history, symptom onset) of the confirmed COVID-19 cases was collected
based on press releases of the official health agencies (Table 2). In total, there are 1,460
COVID-19 cases in the collected dataset.
For the mainland Chinese locations, the dataset included all the cases confirmed as of
February 29, 2020. In Chinese cities outside the Hubei province, local epidemics were
considered to be successfully contained by the end of February. For the international locations,
the dataset included all the cases confirmed before February 15, more than three weeks after
the outbound travel quarantine of Wuhan on January 23. It is thus safe to say that our dataset
contains almost all Wuhan-exported cases confirmed in these locations.
2.2. Discerning Wuhan-exported cases. We define Wuhan-exported cases as those who
were infected in Wuhan and confirmed elsewhere. In total, 614 cases in our dataset are
potentially exported from Wuhan because they had stayed in Wuhan before got diagnosed
elsewhere. Because Wuhan was the first center of epidemic outbreak and traveling from/to
Wuhan was not restricted before January 23, it is reasonable to assume that most of these 614
cases were infected there. However, some uncertainty arises if a case had contact with other
confirmed cases outside their stay in Wuhan, in one of the following scenarios:

6
TABLE 2
A summary of the key columns in the collected dataset. Boxed entries correspond to the recorded values of the
example (HongKong-05). 1 Description of this case in Hong Kong government’s press release on January 24, 2020:
“The other two cases are a married couple of residents of in Wuhan, a 62-year-old female [HongKong-04] and a
63-year-old male [HongKong-05], with good prior health conditions. Based on information provided by the
patients, They took a high-speed train departing from Wuhan at 2:20pm, January 22, and arrived at the West
Kowloon station around 8pm. The female patient had a fever since yesterday with no respiratory symptoms. The
male patient started to cough yesterday and had a fever today. They went to the emergency department at the
Prince of Wales Hospital yesterday and were admitted to the hospital for treatment in isolation. Currently their
health conditions are stable. Respiratory samples of the two patients were tested positive for the novel coronavirus.”
(translated from Chinese). 2 A case is considered to have known epidemiological contact if he/she had contact with
people from the Hubei province or had contact with another case confirmed earlier.3 See the main text for the
criterion we used to classify the cases. 4 The beginning of stay is treated as November 30 if the case resides in
Wuhan and has no known beginning of stay.
Example1

Summary statistics

HongKong-05
Wuhan
Male /Female
63

1460 in total
21.5% reside in Wuhan
52.1%/47.7% (0.2% unknown)
Mean=45.6, IQR=[34, 57]
84.7%/15.3%
32.1% known

Transmitted outside Wuhan?3

Yes /No
Husband of
HongKong-04
Yes/ Likely /No

Begin Wuhan
End Wuhan
Exposure

Begin of stay in Wuhan (B)
End of stay in Wuhan (E)
Period of exposure

30-Nov4
22-Jan
1-Dec to 22-Jan

Arrived

Final arrival date at the location
where confirmed a COVID-19 case
Date of symptom onset (S)
Date of first medical visit/quarantine
Date confirmed as a COVID-19 case

Column name

Description

Case
Residence
Gender
Age

Unique identifier for each case
Nationality or residence of the case
Gender
Age

Known Contact
Cluster

Have known epidemiological contact2 ?
Relationship with other cases

Outside

Symptom
Initial
Confirmed

58.5%/7.7%/33.8%

58.9% known period/date
8.2% known date

22-Jan

40.6% did not travel outside

23-Jan
23-Jan
24-Jan

9.0% unknown
6.5% unknown

• The case already had contact with other confirmed cases before their stay in Wuhan (4
cases);
• The case had contact with other confirmed cases only after they left Wuhan but before they
arrived at their destination, for example in trains or flights (4 cases);
• The case had close contact with other confirmed cases (usually family members who
traveled together from Wuhan) after they reached their travel destination (131 cases).
To discern a dataset of Wuhan-exported cases, the principle we followed is to exclude cases
if there is a “reasonable doubt” that they could be infected outside Wuhan. We assumed in the
first two scenarios above, the cases were transmitted outside Wuhan. For the third scenario, it
is likely that the cases were transmitted outside Wuhan, but at least one of the cases in each
cluster were transmitted in Wuhan. (Two cases are considered to belong to the same cluster if
they are in the family or had other recorded contact.) We used a column called Outside in
our dataset to record our best judgment on whether the cases were transmitted outside Wuhan
using the following rules:
(i) Outside = “Yes”: Cases with no recorded stay in Wuhan between December 1, 2019
and January 23, 2020, and the 8 cases in the first two scenarios above (854 cases).
(ii) Outside = “Likely”: Wuhan-exposed cases who did not show symptoms during the
recorded stay in Wuhan and had recorded contact with another confirmed COVID-19 case
with an earlier symptom onset (112 cases).

7

BETS IN COVID-19
China − Hefei

China − Shaanxi

China − Shenzhen

China − Xinyang

China − Other

International

30
20

Count

10
0

30
20
10
0
Jan 01 Jan 15

Feb 01 Feb 15 Jan 01 Jan 15

Feb 01 Feb 15 Jan 01 Jan 15

Feb 01 Feb 15

Symptom onset
Transmitted outside Wuhan?

No

Likely

Yes

Figure 3: Epidemic curves in different locations stratified by whether the cases were transmitted outside Wuhan. “China - Other” includes four Chinese cities: Guilin, Jinan, Yangzhou,
Zhanjiang; “International” includes six Asian countries/regions: Hong Kong, Japan, Korea,
Macau, Singapore, Taiwan. The dashed vertical lines correspond to the abrupt travel quarantine
of Wuhan from January 23, 2020.
(iii) Outside = “No”: Wuhan-exposed cases who had no recorded contact with other
confirmed cases, or had the earliest symptom onset in their cluster or showed symptoms
during their stay in Wuhan (494 cases).
Figure 3 shows the local epidemic curves stratified by the Outside column in different
locations.
The dataset we collected has relatively few missing values in the key entries needed for
epidemic modeling. Among the Outside = “No” cases, only 6.5% do not have the exact date
they left Wuhan and only 8.1% have missing symptom onset date (including those showing no
symptoms at the time of confirmation). We imputed the missing end of exposure to Wuhan by
the day of the travel quarantine (January 23) and excluded the cases with missing symptom
onset. This left us with 458 cases. We further excluded cases who arrived at the location where
they are diagnosed with COVID-19 after January 23 as they have a different traveling pattern
than the other cases. In the end we obtained 378 cases who were exported from Wuhan.
3. Statistical model and parametric inference.
3.1. BETS: A generative model. On a high level, our goal is to make inference about the
epidemic in Wuhan using its “shadows” observed in other locations. To properly consider the
consequences of sample selection, we will first outline a generative model for (which is also
named after) four key epidemiological events: the beginning of stay in Wuhan B , the end of

8

stay in Wuhan E , the usually unobserved time of transmission T , and the time of symptom
onset S (BETS). These four variables are well defined regardless of whether the person has
been to Wuhan, contracted the pathogenic coronavirus, or showed symptoms of COVID-19.
Even though the observed times are discrete (in days), we will model B, E, T , and S as
continuous random variables (with ∞ reserved for special events). This allows us to simplify
the interpretation of the modeling assumptions and obtain closed-form solutions. When
applying the likelihood functions below on the discretized observations, the results may be
interepreted as an approximation to the model assuming B, E , and S are uniformly distributed
around the discretized measurements. See Section 3.3 for details of the implementation and
Section 5 for how one can directly model the discretized times.
Study population: Exposed to Wuhan. Consider the population of all people who stayed in
Wuhan any time between 12AM December 1, 2019 (time 0) and 12AM January 24, 2020 (time
L when outbound travel from Wuhan was banned, L = 54) in local time. The choice time
0, as long as it is reasonably early, has essentially no effect on our analysis below, because
almost all of the transmissions happened in January. We introduce the following conventions
to define the population with exposure to Wuhan:
• B = 0: The person started their stay in Wuhan before December 2019.
• E = ∞: The person did not arrive in the 14 locations we are considering before the travel
quarantine (time L). For the purpose of this study, we need not differentiate between people
who stayed in Wuhan or went to a location different from the ones we are considering.
• T = ∞: The person did not contract the pathogenic virus during their stay in Wuhan. For
the purpose of this study, we need not differentiate between people who contracted the virus
outside their Wuhan stay and people who never contracted the virus.
• S = ∞: The person did not show symptoms of COVID-19, either because they never
contracted the virus or were asymptomatic.
Because we are only considering people exposed to Wuhan, we have B ≤ L. Two other
natural constraints are B ≤ E and T ≤ S (where we allow ∞ ≤ ∞). Therefore, the support
of (B, E, T, S) for the Wuhan-exposed population is
n
o
(1)
P = (b, e, t, s) | b ∈ [0, L], e ∈ [b, L] ∪ {∞}, t ∈ [b, e] ∪ {∞}, s ∈ [t, ∞] .
Notice that although B has support [0, L], B = 0 is a point mass representing Wuhan
residents and is categorically different from B =  for some small positive . All density
functions of B below are defined with respect to the sum of Lebesgue measure on the real
line and degenerate counting measure for {0}. Similarly, for E , T , and S the dominating
measure is the sum of Lebesgue measure and the counting measure for {∞}. Joint densities
of (B, E, T, S) below are defined with respect to their product measure.
Full data BETS model: Independence of traveling and disease transmission/progression.
In Section 3.2 below we will define the constraints corresponding to our sample selection.
But first, we will introduce a generative statistical model for (B, E, T, S) in the whole study
population P . The joint density of (B, E, T, S) can always be factorized as:
(2)

f (b, e, t, s) = fB (b) · fE (e | b) · fT (t | b, e) · fS (s | b, e, t).

Throughout this article we will maintain two general assumptions about two conditional
densities in this factorization:

9

BETS IN COVID-19

B

E

T

S

Figure 4: Directed acyclic graph (DAG) for the BETS model. B is the beginning of exposure,
E is the end of exposure, T is the time of transmission, and S is the time of symptom onset.
A SSUMPTION 1. The conditional density fT (t | b, e) does not depend on b and e in the
range b ≤ t ≤ e, so it can be written as
(
g(t),
if b < t < e,
Re
(3)
fT (t | b, e) =
1 − b g(x) dx, if t = ∞.
Here g(t) ≥ 0 models the epidemic growth in Wuhan before the citywide quarantine on
January 23; it can be interpreted as the instantaneous probability of being infected in Wuhan
RL
at time t and satisfies the constraint 0 g(x) dx ≤ 1.
A SSUMPTION 2.
can be written as
(4)

The conditional density fS (s | b, e, t) does not depend on b and e, so it
(
ν · h(s − t), if s < ∞,
fS (s | b, e, t) =
1 − ν,
if s = ∞.

Here 1 − ν is the probability of asymptomatic infection, h(s − t) is the conditional density of
the incubation
R ∞ period S − T given that S − T < ∞ (the case is not asymptomatic), so h(·)
satisfies 0 h(x) dx = 1.
Assumptions 1 and 2 essentially mean that the disease transmission and progression are
independent of traveling, which allows us to extend conclusions learned from the Wuhanexported sample to the whole population. Assumption 2 is equivalent to the conditional
independence S ⊥
⊥ (B, E) | T , which can be represented as a directed acyclic graphical (DAG)
model (Figure 4) on the distribution of (B, E, T, S) (Lauritzen, 1996). Assumption 1 further
restricts the dependence of T on (B, E). Under these two assumptions, the BETS model is
then parameterized by two kinds of parameters: the nuisance parameters for the traveling
pattern fB (·) and fE (· | ·), and the parameters of interest for disease transmission g(·) and
progression h(·).
Like any other assumptions in epidemic models, Assumptions 1 and 2 represent approximations to the underlying dynamics. Assumptions 1 and 2 can be violated if, for example,
short-term visitors were exposed to more infectious cases or if people were less likely to
travel if they felt sick. Nevertheless, we think they are reasonable approximations to the reality
during the initial outbreak, when little was known about the new infectious disease.
Parametric assumptions for closed-form likelihood functions. Assumptions 1 and 2 are
general assumptions on the dependence of T and S on B and E . We consider two parametric
assumptions that simplify the interpretation of our results:
A SSUMPTION 3. The probability of contracting the virus in Wuhan was increasing
exponentially before the quarantine:
(5)

∆

g(t) = gκ,r (t) = κ · exp(rt), t ≤ L,

where the baseline attack rate κ and the growth exponent r satisfies

RL
0

gκ,r (t) dt ≤ 1.

10

A SSUMPTION 4. The incubation period T − S , given that it is finite (the case is not
asymptomatic), follows a Gamma distribution with shape α > 0 and rate β > 0:
(6)

∆

h(s − t) = hα,β (s − t) =

βα
(s − t)α−1 exp{−β(s − t)}.
Γ(α)

Assumption 3 says that the epidemic size in Wuhan was growing exponentially before the
quarantine, which is a common assumption for early epidemic outbreaks. We think it is quite
reasonable given that little was known about the novel coronavirus before January 23. One of
the main objectives in early epidemic analysis is to estimate the growth exponent r , which can
be translated to the doubling time by finding the t such that exp(rt) = 2 (i.e. t = log(2)/r ).
The parameter κ is important for measuring the absolute magnitude of the epidemic. It is
possible to estimate κ using Wuhan-exported cases if we have external data on the number of
travellers from Wuhan and the total population of Wuhan (Imai et al., 2020; Wu, Leung and
Leung, 2020). This paper will focus on the estimation of r ; in fact, we will see below that the
selection-adjusted likelihood functions for Wuhan-exported cases do not depend on κ.
Assumption 4 restricts the density function h(·) to the Gamma family, which is commonly
used to model the distribution of the incubation period. Assumptions 3 and 4 will be used later
in this and the next sections to calculate closed-form likelihood functions. Later in Section 5,
we will relax the parametric assumptions to allow more flexible patterns for the epidemic
growth and more general distributions of the incubation period.
3.2. Accounting for sample selection in the likelihood.
Study sample: Wuhan-exported cases. To use Wuhan-exported cases to study the epidemic
growth and incubation period, it is crucial to consider the effect of sample selection on Wuhanexported cases. Using the notation above, the Wuhan-exported cases confirmed in the 14
locations we consider can be written as an event (B, E, T, S) ∈ D where
(7)

D = {(b, e, t, s) ∈ P | b ≤ t ≤ e ≤ L, t ≤ s < ∞}.

Compared to the full population P of people with exposure to Wuhan in (1), the set D makes
three further restrictions:
(i) B ≤ T ≤ E , because we only use cases who contracted the virus during their stay in
Wuhan;
(ii) E ≤ L, because the case can only be observed in the dataset if they left Wuhan before the
travel quarantine;
(iii) S < ∞, because not all locations report asymptomatic cases, which motivates us to only
consider COVID-19 cases who showed symptoms.
Selection-adjusted likelihood functions. In an ideal world where we could take independent observations (Bi , Ei , Ti , Si ), i = 1, . . . , n from the exposed population P , the likelihood
function would be given by a product of the density f (Bi , Ei , Ti , Si ) in (2) over i. However,
that is almost impossible for the initial COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan. Because of limited
testing capacity in the beginning of the outbreak, many COVID-19 patients in Wuhan were
not identified.
Instead, in Section 2 we have obtained a high-quality dataset of Wuhan-exported cases
which can be considered as “shadows” of the epidemic in Wuhan. To use this dataset, it is
crucial that the statistical inference takes into account the sample selection because we do

11

BETS IN COVID-19

not have independent observations from P . Instead, we may view our sample as independent
observations generated from the following density:
(8)

 f (b, e, t, s) · 1{(b,e,t,s)∈D}
∆
 ,
f (b, e, t, s | D) = f b, e, t, s | (B, E, T, S) ∈ D =
P (B, E, T, S) ∈ D

where 1{·} is the indicator function. To reduce cluttering, we will omit the indicator
1{(b,e,t,s)∈D} if it is clear from the context that we are considering sample from the Wuhanexported cases D . We can then use the product
n
Y

(9)


f Bi , Ei , Ti , Si | D ,

i=1

as the likelihood function, under the assumption that we have observed an independent and
identically distributed sample (Bi , Ei , Ti , Si ), i = 1, . . . , n from the density (8).
A further difficulty is that the time of transmission T is usually unobserved in our dataset.
To solve this problem, we can either treat T as a latent variable and maximize the likelihood
over both the modeling parameters and the unobserved Ti , or simply marginalize over T in
the full data likelihood and use the following observed data likelihood,
n Z
Y

(10)
Luncond (θ) =
f Bi , Ei , t, Si | D dt,
i=1

where θ = (fB (·), fE (· | ·), g(·), h(·)) contains all the parameters of interest.
We can also condition on (B, E) to formulate a conditional likelihood function that does
not depend on the marginal distribution of (B, E):
n Z
Y

(11)
Lcond (θ) =
fT,S t, Si | Bi , Ei , D dt,
i=1

where θ = (g(·), h(·)) and
∆

fT,S (t, s | b, e, D) = fT,S t, s | B = b, E = e, (B, E, T, S) ∈ D

(12)
=



fT,S (t, s | b, e)
.
P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b, E = e)

The information about the epidemic growth g(·) and the incubation period h(·) contained
in the density fB,E (b, e | D) is not used in the conditional likelihood, but the benefit is that
it does not require us to specify the nuisance parameters fB (·) and fE (· | ·) to model the
traveling. In other words, the conditional likelihood is less efficient than the unconditional
likelihood but more robust.
Next we derive the likelihood functions (10) and (11). For the unconditional likelihood
function we will make additional parametric modeling assumptions on the traveling pattern
fB (·) and fE (· | ·).
Computing the selection probability. The first technical problem is to compute the denominators in (8) and (12). This is straightforward for the conditional likelihood:
L EMMA 1.

Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for (b, e, t, s) ∈ D ,
P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b, E = e) = ν[G(e) − G(b)], and

(13)

fT,S (t, s | b, e, D) =

g(t)h(s − t)
,
G(e) − G(b)

12

Rt
where G(t) = −∞ g(x) dx. If we additionally assume g(t) is growing exponentially (Assumption 3), we have

r exp(rt)


 exp(re) − exp(rb) h(s − t), for r 6= 0,
(14)
fT,S (t, s | b, e, D) =


 1 h(s − t),
for r = 0.
e−b
An important observation here is that (14) does not depend on ν (proportion of symptomatic
cases) and κ (absolute scale of the epidemic). Conditional likelihood Lcond (θ) can then be
derived by integrating (14) over t and the precise formula can be found in Proposition 1 below.
For the denominator in the unconditional likelihood, we need to integrate P((B, E, T, S) ∈
D | B = b, E = e) in Lemma 1 over the marginal distribution of B and E . We make the
following simplifying assumptions on fB (b) and fE (e | b) which heuristically say that the
travel pattern is stable during the study period:
A SSUMPTION 5. The beginning of stay in Wuhan B , conditioning on 0 < B ≤ L, follows
a uniform distribution from 0 to L. More specifically,
(
1 − π, for b = 0,
(15)
fB (b) =
π/L,
for 0 < b ≤ L,
where 0 ≤ π ≤ 1 is the proportion of visitors (non-residents of Wuhan) in the Wuhan-exposed
population.
A SSUMPTION 6. The end of stay E follows an uniform distribution from B to L given
E ≤ L, with rate depending on whether the person resides in Wuhan:
(
λW ,
if 0 ≤ e ≤ L,
fE (e | b = 0) =
,
1 − LλW , if e = ∞,
(16)
(
λV ,
if b ≤ e ≤ L,
fE (e | b, b > 0) =
1 − (L − b)λV , if e = ∞,
where the parameters λW , λV ≤ 1/L.
For b > 0, Assumption 6 implies that P(E = ∞ | b, b > 0) = bλV + (1 − LλV ) increases
as b increases. This is consistent with our intuition that the later someone arrives in Wuhan,
the more likely that person stays there after the travel quarantine on January 23.
By using the parametric forms (5), (15), (16) when integrating P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D | B =
b, E = e) and using the approximation (1 + rL)/ exp(rL) ≈ 0 for rL > 5, we obtain the
following result.
L EMMA 2.
given by

Under Assumptions 1 to 3, 5 and 6, for r > 5/L, the selection probability is


κ exp(rL)ν h
2 i
(1
−
π)λ
+
πλ
1
−
,
W
V
r2
rL
and for (b, e, t, s) ∈ D , the density in (8) is given by
P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D) ≈

(17)

[1{b=0} + (ρ/L)1{b>0} ] · exp(rt)
i
f (b, e, t, s | D) ≈ r2 · h
· h(s − t),
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL)) · exp(rL)

where 1{·} is the indicator function and ρ = (λV /λW ) · π/(1 − π).

13

BETS IN COVID-19

Similar to (14), the conditional density (17) does not depend on ν and κ. Moreover, it only
depends on the traveling parameters π , λV and λW through a single transformed parameter
ρ. The approximation (1 + rL)/ exp(rL) ≈ 0 is used in the Online Supplement to obtain the
analytical formulae in Lemma 2. It is quite reasonable for rL > 5 (if the doubling time is 4
days, rL = log(2)/4 × 54 = 9.34).
Observed data likelihood. As explained after equation (9), we cannot immediately use
the densities in (14) and (17) for statistical inference because we do not observe the time of
transmission T . The final step in the derivation of our likelihood function is to marginalize
over t in the density functions. The parametric form of h(·) in Assumption 4 allows us to
derive closed-form formulae.
P ROPOSITION 1.
(11) is given by

Under Assumptions 1 to 4, the observed data conditional likelihood

(18)
Lcond (r, α, β)



n
 β nα Y

exp(rSi ) Hα,β+r (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β+r ((Si − Ei )+ )

n

·
,
r


β+r
exp(rEi ) − exp(rBi )

i=1
= n

Y

Hα,β (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β ((Si − Ei )+ )


,


Ei − Bi

for r > 0,

for r = 0,

i=1

where Hα,β (·) is the cumulative distribution function of the Gamma distribution with shape
α and rate β and (x)+ = max(x, 0) is the positive part of x. Under Assumptions 1 to 6, the
observed data unconditional likelihood (10) for r > 5/L is approximately given by
(19)
n 
 β nα Y

1{Bi =0} + (ρ/L)1{Bi >0}
Luncond (ρ, r, α, β) ≈ r
·
exp r(Si − L)
β+r
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL))
2n

i=1




× Hα,β+r (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β+r ((Si − Ei )+ ) .
It is worthwhile to point out that if r = 0 (the epidemic was stationary), our conditional
likelihood function Lcond (r, α, β) reduces to the likelihood function for interval-censored
exposure in Reich et al. (2009). However, COVID-19 was growing quickly during its early
outbreak in Wuhan, so the growth exponent r is very different from 0. It is thus inappropriate
to use the likelihood Lcond (0, α, β) to estimate the incubation period of COVID-19, as done in
some previous analyses also using Wuhan-exported cases (Backer, Klinkenberg and Wallinga,
2020; Lauer et al., 2020; Linton et al., 2020). See Section 4.2 for further discussion and an
illustration of the bias due to ignoring the epidemic growth.
3.3. Results of the parametric inference.
Implementation. To fit the statistical model, we used the 378 Wuhan-exported cases that
satisfy our sample selection criterion and do not have missing symptom onset date. We fitted
separate models for different locations to compare the results across the locations.
As the model in Section 3 is a regular parametric model, we performed the usual frequentist
inference using the likelihood function (19). In particular, point estimators of the parameters

14
TABLE 3
Results of the parametric inference. For each location and parameter, the maximum likelihood estimator and the
95% confidence interval (in brackets) based on inverting the likelihood ratio test are reported.

Location

Sample
size

ρ

Doubling time
(in days)

Incubation period
Median
95% quantile

China - Hefei
China - Shaanxi
China - Shenzhen
China - Xinyang
China - Other
International
All locations
All exc. Xinyang

34
53
129
74
42
46
378
304

Conditional likelihood
Not estimated
2.1 (1.2–3.7)
Not estimated
1.7 (1.0–2.8)
Not estimated
2.2 (1.7–3.0)
Not estimated
2.3 (1.5–3.5)
Not estimated
2.0 (1.1–3.4)
Not estimated
2.1 (1.4–3.4)
Not estimated
2.1 (1.8–2.5)
Not estimated
2.1 (1.7–2.5)

4.3 (2.9–6.0)
4.5 (3.1–6.2)
3.5 (2.8–4.3)
6.8 (5.4–8.2)
5.1 (3.6–6.7)
3.8 (2.5–5.3)
4.5 (4.0–5.0)
4.0 (3.5–4.6)

12.0 (9.1–17.3)
14.6 (11.5–19.8)
11.2 (9.5–13.6)
16.4 (13.8–20.1)
12.3 (9.8–16.4)
10.9 (8.4–15.1)
13.4 (12.2–14.8)
12.2 (11.0–13.7)

China - Hefei
China - Shaanxi
China - Shenzhen
China - Xinyang
China - Other
International
All locations
All exc. Xinyang

34
53
129
74
42
46
378
304

Unconditional likelihood
.40 (.18–.82)
1.8 (1.4–2.4)
.24 (.11–.46)
2.5 (2.0–3.1)
.75 (.52–1.06)
2.4 (2.1–2.8)
.45 (.27–.74)
2.4 (2.0–2.9)
.45 (.22–.86)
2.1 (1.7–2.8)
.14 (.05–.32)
2.0 (1.6–2.6)
.45 (.36–.56)
2.3 (2.1–2.5)
.45 (.35–.57)
2.2 (2.1–2.5)

4.1 (2.8– 5.5)
5.3 (3.9– 6.8)
3.6 (2.9– 4.3)
6.8 (5.6– 8.1)
5.3 (4.0– 6.6)
3.7 (2.5– 5.0)
4.6 (4.1– 5.1)
4.1 (3.7– 4.6)

11.9 (9.0–17.2)
15.0 (12.0–20.0)
11.3 (9.6–13.7)
16.4 (13.9–20.2)
12.4 (10.0–16.4)
10.8 (8.4–15.1)
13.5 (12.3–14.9)
12.3 (11.1–13.8)

(ρ, r, α, β) were obtained by maximizing the likelihood function (19), and confidence intervals
for the parameters were obtained by inverting the likelihood ratio χ2 -test. As we are more
interested in quantiles of the incubation period instead of the shape and rate parameters, we
parametrized the Gamma distribution in Assumption 4 by its median and 95% quantile and
mapped them to α and β when calculating the likelihood function. The growth exponent r
was also transformed to the more interpretable doubling time (in days) using doubling time =
log(2)/r .
Because we only observed the date instead of the exact time for B , E , and S , we applied a
simple transformation before computing the likelihood function. Instead of using the integer
date which corresponds to the end of a day, we used B − 3/4, E − 1/4, and S − 1/2 in places
of B , E , and S to compute (18) and (19). This transformation also avoids a singularity in the
likelihood function when B and E are exactly equal.

Results. Results of the parametric model in Section 3 are reported in Table 3. We give
some remarks about the results:
(i) There is considerable heterogeneity of the estimated ρ (the ratio of outbound travel prevalences between Wuhan visitors and Wuhan residents) using the unconditional likelihood.
This is not surprising given that the locations we are considering are different in many
ways.
(ii) Regardless of the location, our model shows that the epidemic doubling time in Wuhan
was less than 2.5 days. There is no substantial heterogeneity among estimates in different
locations.
(iii) The estimated incubation periods are similar for most locations except Xinyang, a less
developed city neighboring the Hubei province. It is possible that the public health system
in Xinyang had a lower ascertainment rate during the early outbreak.

BETS IN COVID-19

15

(iv) The conditional likelihood (18) and unconditional likelihood (19) give very similar results.
Confidence intervals for the doubling time computed using the unconditional likelihood
are slightly shorter than those computed using the conditional likelihood.
In conclusion, inferences based on our parametric model suggest that the initial doubling
time of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan was between 2 to 2.5 days, the median incubation
period of COVID-19 is around 4 days, and the 95% quantile of the incubation period is
between 11 to 15 days.
4. Why some previous COVID-19 analyses were severely biased.
4.1. Estimating the epidemic growth: Bias due to ignoring the travel quarantine. In this
section we discuss the selection bias in some early COVID-19 analyses. Like the present study,
a highly influential article published in the Lancet in late January also used Wuhan-exported
cases to estimate the epidemic growth during the early outbreak (Wu, Leung and Leung,
2020). However, their estimated doubling time was 6.4 days (95% credible interval: 5.8–7.1),
drastically higher than the estimates in Table 3.
A closer look at the model in Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) shows that the most likely reason
is that their model did not consider how sample selection (in particular, the travel quarantine
of Wuhan) changes the likelihood function. This issue is best illustrated by examining the
marginal distribution of symptom onset in Wuhan-exported cases, which can be obtained by
integrating the conditional density (17) obtained earlier. In the Proposition below we focus on
the exported cases who are Wuhan residents (B = 0), whose marginal distributions of T and
S are slightly cleaner than those who visited Wuhan (B > 0).
P ROPOSITION 2. Under Assumptions 1 to 3, 5 and 6, the marginal density of T given
(B, E, T, S) ∈ D for r > 5/L is approximately given by
fT (t | D, B = 0) ∝
∼ exp(rt)(L − t) · 1{t≤L} ,

(20)

where ∝
∼ means approximately proportional to. If in addition the incubation period S − T
follows a Gamma(α, β) distribution (Assumption 4) and L > 4(α + 5)/(β + r), the marginal
density of S of the exported cases is approximately given by, for s ≥ L/2,
fS (s | D, B = 0)
o
n
(21)
∝ exp(rs) · (L − s)[1 − Hα,β+r ((s − L)+ )] + α [1 − Hα+1,β+r ((s − L)+ )] ,
∼
β+r

As a consequence,
(22)


fS (s | D, B = 0) ∝
exp(rs)
·
L+
∼


α
− s for L/2 ≤s ≤ L.
β+r

The technical assumption L > 4(α + 5)/(β + r) is used to control the tail probability of a
Gamma distribution so we may replace Hα,β+r (s) and Hα+1,β+r (s) by 1 in (21). It is usually
satisfied if L is larger than several times the mean incubation period α/β and is satisfied here
with the maximum likelihood estimator of (r, α, β) in Section 3.3.
Figure 5 shows the histogram of the symptom onset of the exported cases in our dataset
who are Wuhan residents (B = 0) and the theoretical fit based on (21) and the maximum
unconditional likelihood estimator in Table 3 using all the locations (r = 0.30, α = 1.86, β =
0.33). The theoretical density provided good fit to the observed distribution of S (Pearson’s
χ2 goodness-of-fit test: p-value = 0.94).
Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) fitted a Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR)
model using Wuhan-exported cases but did not consider sample selection due to the travel

16

0.100

Density

0.075

0.050

0.025

0.000
Jan 01

Jan 15

Feb 01

Symptom onset

Figure 5: Marginal distribution of symptom onset of exported COVID-19 cases who are
Wuhan residents. Histogram: Density of the symptom onset date of the cases dataset; Orange
curve: Theoretical fit based on (21); Blue dashed line: Date of travel quarantine for Wuhan
(January 23, 2020).
quarantine. In the early phase of epidemic outbreaks, the SEIR model can be well approximated
by an exponential growth for cases in Wuhan:
fS (s) ∝
∼ exp(rs).

However, Proposition 2, in particular equation (22), shows that the marginal distribution of S
for exported Wuhan residents fS (s | D, B = 0) does not follow the same exponential growth
as fS (s).
Equation (22) not only shows that fitting a simple exponential growth to the initial symptom
onsets among Wuhan-exported cases will under-estimate the epidemic growth r , it can also be
used to derive a simple bias-correction formula. We can approximate the log-linear regression
for symptom incidence counts from L − c to L by a first-order Taylor expansion at the
midpoint:


α
log fS (s | D, B = 0) ≈ rs + log L +
− s + constant
β+r


= rs + log α/(β + r) + c/2 + (L − c/2 − s) + constant
 α
c
L − c/2 − s
+
+
+ constant
β+r 2
α/(β + r) + c/2
h
i
1
= r−
s + constant.
α/(β + r) + c/2

≈ rs + log

Therefore the under-estimation bias is about (α/(β + r) + c/2)−1 . As most of the symptom
onsets of Wuhan-exported cases before the travel quarantine happened within two weeks,

BETS IN COVID-19

17

it might be reasonable to choose c = 14. Using our estimate of (r, α, β) in Table 3, the
under-estimation bias is about ((1.86)/(0.3 + 0.33) + 14/2)−1 ≈ 0.1.
Using Wuhan-exported cases confirmed outside Mainland China by January 28, 2020, Wu,
Leung and Leung (2020) estimated that the doubling time of COVID-19 was about 6.4 days,
which corresponds to r = log(2)/6.2 ≈ 0.11. With the above correction, the estimated r would
be 0.11 + 0.1 ≈ 0.21, or doubling time of 3.3 days. In other words, this simple correction
already shows that the epidemic could be doubling twice as fast as estimated by Wu, Leung
and Leung (2020).
The actual bias of the analysis in Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) is more complicated than
the inexact calculations above. This is because Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) fitted their
SEIR model also using symptom onset after January 23 (time L). Our theory in Proposition 2
suggests that the fS (s | D) not only has slower and slower growth as s approaches L but also
decreases eventually. This means that the inclusion of symptom onsets after January 23 may
lead to further under-estimation of r . This also explains why, after the simple correction above,
the epidemic growth estimate of Wu, Leung and Leung (2020) is still not as fast as ours in
Table 3.
4.2. Estimating the incubation period: When two biases do not “balance out”. Like the
present study, several influential articles also estimated the incubation period of COVID-19
using Wuhan-exported cases (Backer, Klinkenberg and Wallinga, 2020; Lauer et al., 2020;
Linton et al., 2020). Their results are roughly in line with our estimates in Table 3 with lighter
tails, but a closer look shows that the existing methods actually suffer from two biases:
(i) Bias due to right-truncation: The three previous studies only used Wuhan-exported cases
confirmed before the end of January. In our dataset, about 70% of the Wuhan-exported cases
were confirmed by that time. However, the other 30% would have an incubation period of
at least 8 days as they must have left Wuhan before January 23. The right truncation, if not
accounted for, leads to under-estimation of the incubation period.
(ii) Bias due to ignoring epidemic growth: The three previous studies all used the intervalcensored likelihood function for the incubation period in Reich et al. (2009). As discussed
after Proposition 1, this likelihood corresponds to our conditional likelihood Lcond (α, β)
with r fixed at 0 and thus does not account for the rapid growth of COVID-19. Intuitively, a
person in Wuhan has a much higher prior probability of contracting the virus on January 20
than on January 1, but the likelihood function in Reich et al. (2009) does not take that into
account. Ignoring the epidemic growth leads to over-estimation of the incubation period.
It is possible to correct for the right-truncation by further conditioning on S ≤ M (M is
some truncation time) in our likelihood function.
P ROPOSITION 3.
(23)

Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for (b, e, t, s) ∈ D and s ≤ M ,

g(t)h(s − t)
fT,S (t, s | b, e, D, S ≤ M ) = R max(e,s)
,
g(t)H(M
−
t)
dt
b

Rs
where H(s) = 0 h(x) dx is the distribution function of the incubation period. Furthermore,
under the exponential growth model (Assumption 3) and Gamma-distributed incubation period
(Assumption 4), the conditional observed data likelihood under the right truncation S ≤ M is

18

given by
(24)
Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M )
 
n

β nα Y exp{r(Si − M )}[Hα,β+r (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β+r ((Si − Ei )+ )]

r n
, if r 6= 0,


β+r
Zr (M − Bi ) − Zr ((M − Ei )+ )

i=1
=
n

Y

Hα,β (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β ((Si − Ei )+ )


,
if r = 0,


Z0 (M − Bi ) − Z0 ((M − Ei )+ )
i=1

where

β α


 β + r Hα,β+r (x) − exp(−rx)Hα,β (x),
Zr (x) =
α


xHα,β (x) −
Hα+1,β (x),
β

if r 6= 0,
if r = 0.

It is straightforward to show that Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M ) reduces to the conditional likelihood
Lcond (r, α, β) without the right truncation in (18) when M → ∞.
We demonstrate the two kinds of biases in the estimation of the incubation period using
a retrospective experiment. In this experiment, we assumed the incubation period follows a
Gamma distribution and estimated its median and the 95% quantile by maximizing one of the
following three likelihood functions:
(i) Adjusted for nothing: This is the likelihood function in Reich et al. (2009) that is equal
to our Lcond (0, α, β) by setting r = 0.
(ii) Adjusted for growth: This is our conditional likelihood function Lcond (r, α, β).
(iii) Adjusted for both growth and right-truncation: This is our conditional likelihood
Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M ) with adjustment for sample selection due to the right-truncation
S ≤ M.
For each day from January 23 to February 18, we estimated the incubation distribution using
Wuhan-exported cases in our dataset confirmed by that day. For the third method, we choose
M to be a week prior to the truncation date for confirmation, as most Wuhan-exported cases
were confirmed within a week of symptom onset. Figure 6 shows the estimated medians and
95% quantiles of the incubation period of COVID-19, with pointwise confidence intervals in
the plot computed using the basic nonparametric bootstrap with 1000 resamples (Efron and
Tibshirani, 1994).
The bias due to not accounting for right-truncation can be clearly visualized from the dotted
blue curves in Figure 6. Had we fitted our conditional likelihood function Lcond (r, α, β) using
cases confirmed by January 31 (265 cases), the estimated median incubation period would be
3.5 days and the 95% quantile would be 9.5 days. In comparison, when the entire dataset is
used, the estimated median and 95% quantile are 4.6 days and 13.5 days (Table 3).
The over-estimation due to ignoring the epidemic growth is even more dramatic. Had we
fitted the incubation period using the likelihood function in Reich et al. (2009) (the same as
setting r = 0 in our conditional likelihood) to all the cases in our dataset (387 cases), the
estimated median incubation period would be 9.2 days and the 95% quantile would be a
whopping 24.9 days!
The truncation-corrected conditional likelihood Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M ) derived in Proposition 3 successfully corrected for the right-truncation bias. The estimated median and 95%
quantile of the incubation using Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M ) were roughly unbiased starting from
the end of January. Had we fitted this likelihood using all cases confirmed by January 31 and

19

BETS IN COVID-19
Median

95% Quantile
Linton

Incubation period

Backer

20

Lauer

●

●
●

10

●

●

0

●

Linton
Jan 25

Lauer
Feb 01

Feb 08

Feb 15

Backer
Jan 25

Feb 01

Feb 08

Feb 15

Cases confirmed
Likelihood adjusted for

a Nothing a Growth a Growth and truncation
●

●

●

Figure 6: An illustration of two kinds of biases in the estimation of the incubation period
of COVID-19. The curves (region) in the plot are maximum likelihood estimators (and
bootstrap confidence intervals) using three likelihood functions and cases confirmed by
each day. Likelihood functions used in this experiment are: Lcond (0, α, β) (dashed orange),
Lcond (r, α, β) (dotted blue), and Lcond,trunc (r, α, β; M ) (solid green). Results of some previous
studies (Backer, Klinkenberg and Wallinga, 2020; Lauer et al., 2020; Linton et al., 2020)
(essentially using our conditional likelihood with r set to 0 on different datasets) are also
shown in this plot.
(Note: Lauer et al. (2020) did not report an estimated 95% quantile of the incubation period. Here
we imputed it based on the reported median and 97.5% quantile, assuming a Gamma distribution for
the incubation period. Although Lauer et al. (2020) used COVID-19 cases confirmed as late as late
February, only 4 out of their 181 cases were confirmed in February. In this Figure it is thus treated as
using cases confirmed up till February 1.)

having shown symptoms a week prior (220 cases), the estimated median incubation period
would be 4.8 days (95% CI: 3.0 to 6.0) and the estimated 95% quantile would be 14.4 days
(95% CI: 6.7 to 18.5). These estimates are less precise than the estimates obtained using the
entire dataset (Table 3), but they correctly reflect the uncertainty due to the right-truncation. In
contrast, using the wrong likelihood functions not only results in biased point estimates but
also narrow and misleading confidence intervals.
Because the right-truncation bias and epidemic growth bias are towards opposite directions,
coincidentally they were almost “balanced out” in the previous studies. As a consequence,
their estimates were not drastically different from ours. To be fair in our criticism, the previous
studies did acknowledge that under-ascertainment of mild cases could bias their analyses.
Backer, Klinkenberg and Wallinga (2020) mentioned the over-estimation due to ignoring
epidemic growth in their discussion. Linton et al. (2020) attempted to use a formula to
correct for right-truncation which bears some similarity to (23), which resulted in slightly
longer estimates of the incubation period. However, Linton et al. (2020) did not give any

20

justification to the formula and we could not derive it from our generative model. In any case,
our experiments in Figure 6 clearly show that these early estimates of the incubation period
(especially their tail estimates) are unreliable to guide health policies.
5. Nonparametric inference. So far we have used parametric assumptions (e.g. Gammadistributed incubation period) to explicitly derive likelihood functions for the observed data.
To assess the robustness of our results, we next relax some of these parametric assumptions.
In particular, we will model the distribution of the incubation period nonparametrically so
there are fewer restrictions on the tail probabilities. By a nonparametric model, we mean the
inference is not based on any particular parametric family of probability distributions. This is
slightly different from the standard notion of a “Bayesian nonparametric model” that involves
modeling an infinite-dimensional parameter (e.g. a function on the real line). Because analytic
forms of the sample selection probabilities P((b, e, t, s) ∈ D | b, e) and P((b, e, t, s) ∈ D) are
generally unavailable, we will put prior distributions on the model parameters and use Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to compute their posterior distributions.
5.1. Time discretization. We start by discretizing all the time variables in the model,
which are measured in days. This will simplify the Bayesian computation. Instead of working
with continuous time (B, E, T, S) ∈ P , we use the discretization:
B ∗ = dBe, E ∗ = dEe, T ∗ = dT e, S ∗ = dSe,

where d·e is the ceiling function (dxe is the smallest integer larger than x). The support of
(B ∗ , E ∗ , T ∗ , S ∗ ) is then P , the set of all 4-tuples of integers and ∞. The general continuous
distributions in Assumptions 1 and 2 can be modified accordingly:
(
g ∗ (t∗ ),
if b∗ ≤ t∗ ≤ e∗ ,
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
Pe∗
P(T = t | B = b , E = e ) =
1 − t∗ =b∗ g ∗ (t∗ ), if t∗ = ∞;
(
ν · h∗ (s∗ − t∗ ), if t∗ ≤ s∗ < ∞,
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
P(S = s | B = b , E = e , T = t ) =
1 − ν,
if s∗ = ∞,
PL
∗ ∗
∗
where g ∗ (·) satisfies
x∗ =0 g (x ) ≤ 1 and h (·) is a probability mass function on nonnegaP∞
∗
∗
tive integers: x∗ =0 h (x ) = 1.
5.2. Relaxing the parametric assumptions. Our parametric assumptions (Assumptions 3
to 6) on the distribution of (B, E, T, S) can be translated to the following assumptions on
(B ∗ , E ∗ , T ∗ , S ∗ ) after discretization:
g ∗ (t∗ ) ≈ gκ,r (t∗ ) = κ exp(rt∗ ), h∗ (t∗ − s∗ ) ≈ hα,β (t∗ − s∗ ),

(
(1 − π), for b∗ = 0,
P(B ∗ = b∗ ) =
π/L,
for b∗ = 1, . . . , L,
and
(
λb∗ ,
for b∗ ≤ e∗ ≤ L,
P(E = e | B = b ) =
1 − (L − b∗ + 1)λb∗ , for e∗ = ∞.
∗

∗

∗

∗

where λ0 = λW and λ1 = · · · = λL = λV .
In the nonparametric model we consider the following relaxations:

21

BETS IN COVID-19

(i) Nonparametric distribution for the incubation period: Besides putting a prior to encourage smoothness and log-concavity, we do not put any parametric restrictions on the
distribution of the incubation period.
(ii) Two-stage exponential growth: Human-to-human transmissibility of COVID-19 is first
confirmed to the public in the evening of January 20. We modify the exponential growth
model to allow for a different growth exponent after January 20:
(
κ exp(r1 t∗ )
if t ≤ L1 ,
∗
∗
g ∗ (t∗ ) = gκ,r
(t
)
=
1 ,r2
∗
∗
κ exp(r2 (t − L1 ) + r1 L1 ) if L1 < t ≤ L2 ,
where L1 = 51 (January 20) and L2 = L = 54 (January 23). The simple exponential growth
model is a special case of this model with both L1 and L2 set to L.
(iii) Geometric distribution for E ∗ | B ∗ : As a sensitivity analysis to our assumption that
E ∗ | B ∗ is uniformly distributed between B ∗ and L, this relaxation assumes a geometric
distribution for E ∗ | B ∗ :
(
ηB ∗ ,1 if e∗ < Lchunyun ,
P(E ∗ = e∗ | E ∗ ≥ e∗ , B ∗ ) =
ηB ∗ ,2 if e∗ ≥ Lchunyun ,
where Lchunyun = 41 corresponds to January 10, the start of the Chinese New Year travel
season known as “chunyun”. We assume η0,i = ηW,i and η1,i = · · · = ηL,i = ηV,i , for
i = 1, 2.
(iv) Gender-specific and age-specific incubation periods: To assess whether the distribution of incubation period varies with gender, we use different densities, h∗M (·) for men and
h∗F (·) for women. Like in (i), we put no parametric restrictions on these distributions apart
from the same prior that encourages smoothness and log-concavity. Similarly, we can use
different densities for different age groups. To avoid fitting incubation period with too few
observations, we only consider two age groups: above 50 years old and below 50 years old.
Notice that the same exponential growth model for g is used for different gender or age
groups, as we expect the growth of the chance of infection is the same for all strata.
Under these different modeling assumptions, likelihood functions for the parameters can be
computed in the same way as in Section 3.2, with integrals replaced by finite sums. We omit
the details here.
5.3. Prior distributions and details of the implementation. To simplify the computation,
we assume the incubation period of COVID-19 is less than 30 days. It is common to use a
unimodal distribution with a smooth density function to model the incubation period. We use
the following prior distribution on h∗ (·) to encourage smoothness and log-concavity:
29

  Y
∗
π h (0), . . . , h (29) ∝
h∗ (x∗ )µ·h0 (x )−1
∗

∗

x∗ =0

(25)
× exp

28
nX

2 log h∗ (x∗ ) − log h∗ (x∗ − 1) − log h∗ (x∗ + 1)

 o
.
−

x∗ =1

where (·)− is the negative part function. The first part of the right hand side of (25) is
proportional to the density of a Dirichlet distribution with concentration parameters {µ ·
h0 (0), . . . , µ · h0 (29)}. We choose h0 (·) to be a discretization of Gamma(9, 1.5), whose tail
probability of ≥ 14 days is less than 0.01. The second part of the right hand side of (25) is an
exponential tilt which penalizes lack of log-concavity.

22

We put uninformative priors on other parameters in the model:
r1 ∼ Exp(1), r2 ∼ N(0, 4), κ ∼ Unif(0, 1), λW , λV ∼ Unif(0, 1/L).

Note that r2 is allowed to be negative (exponential decrease after January 20). For the model
with a geometric distribution for E ∗ | B ∗ , we put Unif(0, 1) priors on ηW,1 , ηW,2 , ηV,1 , ηV,2 .
A random walk Metropolis–Hastings algorithm targeting the posterior distribution of h∗ (·)
and r1 , r2 was implemented using the TensorFlow Probability library in Python (Dillon
et al., 2017). We simulated chains of 80, 000 steps, discarding a burn-in period of 50%. The
convergence of the sampler was assessed by simulating 8 parallel Markov chains with initial
values overdispersed with respect to the target distribution, and computing the potential
of scale reduction factor (Gelman et al., 1992) for r1 , the mean of the incubation period
distribution, and the probability of an incubation period of 14 days or more. In every case, the
statistic was confidently below 1.1.
5.4. Results of Bayesian nonparametric inference.
Aggregated results. Table 4 reports the results of the Bayesian nonparametric inference
in 7 different scenarios. Overall, they are not too dissimilar to the results of the parametric
model in Table 3. Without restricting the tail to follow that of a Gamma distribution, the
estimated tail probabilities are slightly higher than those in Table 3. The posterior mean
for P(S ∗ − T ∗ ≥ 14 days) exceeds 0.03 in all scenarios, even when we exclude the cases
confirmed in Xinyang who seemed to have longer incubation periods in Table 3.
Moreover, prior and posterior distributions of P(S ∗ − T ∗ ≥ 14 days) show a large discrepancy (Figure 7b), indicating that the posterior estimates of the tail probabilities are driven by
the data instead of the prior. Employing the two-stage epidemic growth model suggests that
the epidemic growth may have slowed down after January 20, but this more flexible model did
not alter the estimated doubling time and incubation period distribution substantially. Taken
together, our nonparametric models suggest that the probability of an incubation period of at
least 14 days (among symptomatic cases) may be about 5%.
Gender-specific and age-specific incubation periods. The gender-specific and age-specific
estimates of the incubation period can be found in Table 5 and Figure 8a. The estimated distributions of incubation periods for men and women are notably different, with the distribution
of men peaking earlier and having a heavier tail than women. In particular, men seem to be
much more likely than women to develop symptoms within two days of infection. A related
phenomenon can be directly seen from the raw distribution of S − E (days from leaving
Wuhan to symptom onset; can be negative if a person showed symptoms during the stay in
Wuhan) for the cases exported from Wuhan (Figure 8b). The difference S − E appears to
be more spread out in men. A nonparametric Ansari-Bradley test for the dispersion gives a
p-value ≈ 0.0025, while the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for the location gives a p-value ≈ 0.48
(Hájek, Šidák and Sen, 1999).
The difference of incubation period distributions for older and younger cases seem less
pronounced in Figure 8a. Their distributions of S − E also appear to be quite similar in
Figure 8b (Ansari-Bradley test for dispersion: p-value ≈ 0.56; Wilcoxon test for location:
p-value ≈ 0.1).

23

BETS IN COVID-19

0.3

●

Density

0.2

●

0.1

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

0.0

●

0

●

●

●

10

●

●

●

●

●

●

20

●

●

●

●

●

30

Incubation period (days)
Model

●

Nonparametric

●

Parametric

(a) A comparison of the estimated parametric and nonparametric
incubation period distributions. Orange curve: Gamma distribution with median = 4.5 and 95% quantile = 13.4. Blue error bars:
Posterior mean and 95% credible interval, computed in the model
with a two-stage exponential growth, and geometric E ∗ | B ∗ , with
µ = 10.
mu = 1

mu = 10

Density

90

60

30

0
0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

P(Incubation >= 14 days)
Posterior

Prior

(b) A comparison of the prior and posterior P(Incubation ≥ 14 days) in the first two simulation scenarios of Table 4. Two panels corresponds to two choices for the prior distribution
(25) of h∗ (·).

Figure 7: An illustration of the nonparametric Bayesian fit to the incubation period distribution.

24

0.5

0.3

Density (days)

Density (days)

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1
0.1

0.0

0.0
0

10

20

30

0

10

Incubation period
Gender

Men

20

30

Incubation period
Age

Women

<50

>=50

(a) Gender-specific (left) and age-specific (right) distributions of the incubation period.
●

●

0.15
●

0.15

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

Density

Density

0.10
0.10
● ●
●
●

●

●

●
● ●
●
●

●

0.05

●

0.05

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

● ●

●
●
●

0.00

●
● ● ● ●
●
● ● ●
● ●

−10

●

●

●

●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ●

●

0

10

●

20

● ● ●

0.00

●

●

F

●
●

●

●
●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

−10

● ●
●
●
●
●

0

10

S−E
Gender

●
● ●

●

●
●

● ●
● ●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●
● ●

●
●
●

●

● ● ●
● ● ● ● ●

20

S−E
●

M

Age

●

<50

●

>=50

(b) Gender-specific (left) and age-specific (right) distributions of S − E (days from leaving Wuhan to
symptom onset). Dots represent the exact proportions in the dataset and the curves are kernel density
estimates with bandwidth set to 1 day.

Figure 8: Results of the Bayesian nonparametric inference after stratification by gender and
age. Blue solid curves are for men and cases younger than 50 and orange dashed curves are
for women and cases older than 50.

TABLE 4
Results of the nonparametric Bayesian inference where we do not impose a parametric form for the distribution of the incubation period. As sensitivity analyses, we also vary the study
sample, model for the epidemic growth, distribution of E ∗ given B ∗ , and the hyperprior parameter µ. Numbers reported in the table are posterior means and 95% credible intervals
(in brackets).

All
r1
Uniform
µ=1

All
r1
Uniform
µ = 10

Shenzhen
r1
Uniform
µ=1

Wuhan residents
r1
Uniform
µ=1

All except Xinyang
r1
Uniform
µ = 10

All
r1 , r2
Uniform
µ=1

All
r1 , r2
Geometric
µ=1

Doubling days for r1
r2 (Growth in Jan. 21–23)

2.4 (2.2–2.6)
–

2.4 (2.2–2.6)
–

2.5 (2.2–2.9)
–

2.3 (2.1–2.6)
–

2.4 (2.2–2.6)
–

2.2 (2.0–2.4)
.01 (-.23–.22)

2.2 (1.9–2.4)
-.12 (-.40–.12)

5.5 (5.0–5.9)
.31 (.25–.38)
.19 (.14–.24)
.05 (.02–.08)
.00 (.00–.01)

5.4 (5.0–5.9)
.31 (.25–.37)
.18 (.14–.22)
.04 (.02–.07)
.00 (.00–.00)

4.4 (3.7–5.1)
.22 (.13–.31)
.10 (.05–.17)
.03 (.01–.06)
.01 (.00–.03)

5.6 (5.0–6.1)
.30 (.22–.38)
.21 (.14–.28)
.04 (.01–.07)
.01 (.00–.02)

5.0 (4.6–5.5)
.26 (.19–.32)
.14 (.10–.19)
.03 (.01–.06)
.00 (.00–.01)

5.6 (5.1–6.1)
.05 (.02–.08)
.19 (.14–.23)
.05 (.02–.08)
.00 (.00–.01)

5.6 (5.2–6.1)
.06 (.03–.08)
.19 (.15–.24)
.06 (.03–.08)
.00 (.00–.01)

Incubation
period

Mean
P(≥ 7)
P(≥ 10)
P(≥ 14)
P(≥ 21)

TABLE 5
Estimated distributions of incubation period in different subgroups.

Subgroup

Men

Women

Difference

Age < 50

Age ≥ 50

Difference

Mean
P(≥ 2)
P(≥ 4)
P(≥ 7)
P(≥ 10)
P(≥ 14)
P(≥ 21)

5.8 (5.1–6.6)
.82 (.73–.92)
.59 (.50–.69)
.37 (.29–.46)
.20 (.13–.28)
.07 (.04–.12)
.01 (.00–.03)

5.3 (4.7–5.9)
.97 (.91–1.00)
.55 (.42–.69)
.24 (.17–.32)
.17 (.11–.23)
.03 (.01–.07)
.00 (.00–.02)

0.5 (-0.4–1.5)
-.15 (-.25—.04)
.04 (-.13–.20)
.13 (.01–.24)
.03 (-.06–.14)
.04 (-.01–.09)
.00 (-.01–.02)

5.4 (4.7–6.1)
.90 (.78–.97)
.53 (.41–.65)
.31 (.22–.40)
.20 (.13–.28)
.03 (.01–.07)
.01 (.00–.03)

5.8 (5.2–6.5)
.89 (.81–.96)
.62 (.50–.72)
.34 (.26–.42)
.18 (.13–.24)
.07 (.04–.11)
.01 (.00–.01)

-0.5 (-1.4–0.4)
.01 (-.11–.13)
-.09 (-.25–.07)
-.03 (-.14–.09)
.01 (-.08–.11)
-.03 (-.08–.01)
.00 (-.01–.02)

BETS IN COVID-19

Sample
Growth
E∗ | B∗
µ

25

26

6. Discussion. In this article, we have proposed the generative BETS model for four
key epidemiological events: beginning of exposure, end of exposure, time of transmission,
and time of symptom onset. Under parametric models, we have derived the sample inclusion
probability for exported cases and used it to correct for selection bias in the likelihood
functions. Across different sub-samples and modeling assumptions, the initial epidemic
doubling time for COVID-19 in Wuhan is consistently estimated to be between 2 to 2.5 days.
Our nonparametric Bayesian analysis suggests that the parametric fit likely under-estimated
the tail of the incubation period, and among all the COVID-19 patients who develop symptoms,
about 5% of them could develop the symptoms at least 14 days after contracting the pathogenic
virus. Gender-specific analysis shows that men may have a more variable incubation period
than women. In particular, more men appear to show symptoms within two days of infection,
which could be related to the men’s higher death rate across the world (Global Health 5050).
We hope the generality of our model makes it extensible in further studies of the current
pandemic and other outbreaks in the future.
A key epidemiological parameter we decided not to study in this article is the basic
reproduction number, commonly denoted by R0 . Intuitively, R0 is the expected number of
secondary infections produced by a typical case in a population where everyone is susceptible.
In early outbreak analysis, R0 can be estimated from the epidemic growth exponent r by R0 =
1/M (−r) (Wallinga and Lipsitch, 2007), where M (·) is the moment generating function for
the distribution of the serial interval (time between successive cases in a chain of transmission).
Several studies have attempted to estimate the serial interval of COVID-19 in Wuhan by using
observed pairs of infector-infectees (Li et al., 2020; Nishiura, Linton and Akhmetzhanov,
2020; Du et al., 2020). The reported point estimate of the mean serial interval ranging from
4.0 (Du et al., 2020) to 7.5 days (Li et al., 2020). However, for most COVID-19 cases it
seems impossible to ascertain the infector, so these early estimates of the serial interval could
be severely biased by sample selection just like the early estimates of epidemic growth and
incubation period as seen in Section 4.
Our findings in this article should be viewed together with the limitations of our methodology. First of all, symptom onset time were usually reported by patients, who could be under
social pressure to report a later symptom onset (for example, so they did not travel when showing symptoms). This can make estimated incubation longer than the truth. Second, although
the contact tracing for travelers from Wuhan was intensive in the locations included in our
dataset, some degree of under-ascertainment of Wuhan-exported cases is perhaps inevitable.
If patients who showed symptoms earlier were less likely to be ascertained, our analysis may
have over-estimated the speed of the epidemic growth. Third, the discernment of Wuhanexported cases in Section 2.2 is not perfect; for example, there is ambiguity about where
some COVID-19 cases were infected if they both had stayed in Wuhan and were exposed to
other confirmed cases after their stay. Another potential limitation is the core assumptions
that the disease transmission and progression are independent of traveling. This assumption is
necessary to extend the conclusions from a “shadow” of the epidemic (Wuhan-exported cases)
to the center of the outbreak, but it can be violated if, for example, some people canceled
travel plans due to feeling sick. Finally, it is possible that the population of travelers is not
representative of the general population in a meaningful way.
Nevertheless, these limitations are perhaps minor compared to the selection bias identified
in this article. Several authors have warned about selection bias and other statistical issues
in COVID-19 studies (Lipsitch, 2020; Lipsitch, Joshi and Cobey, 2020; Niehus et al., 2020;
Gelman, 2020; Wong and Bergstrom, 2020). By constructing a generative model and deriving
the likelihood functions from first principles, we gave a quantitative assessment of the selection
bias in several high-impact studies. We found that the biases were indeed startling. This
highlights the lesson that data quality and methodical consideration of selection bias are often

BETS IN COVID-19

27

much more important than data quantity and specific models. This is especially important
in high-stakes decisions like the ones for the COVID-19 pandemic. In a world where data
science is playing an ever-larger role in policy making, ignoring selection bias could become
the most costly of bets.
Acknowledgement. We thank Cindy Chen, Yang Chen, Yunjin Choi, Hera He, Michael
Levy, Marc Lipsitch, James Robins, Andrew Rosenfeld, Dylan Small, Yachong Yang, and Zilu
Zhou for their helpful suggestions. We thank citizens living in the first author’s hometown,
Wuhan, whose enduring adherence to the travel quarantine not only saved many lives but also
made our analysis possible.
REFERENCES
G LOBAL H EALTH 5050 COVID-19 sex-disaggregated data tracker. https://globalhealth5050.org/
covid19/. Retrieved: April 28, 2020.
BACKER , J. A., K LINKENBERG , D. and WALLINGA , J. (2020). Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) infections among travellers from Wuhan, China, 20–28 January 2020. Eurosurveillance 25.
D ILLON , J. V., L ANGMORE , I., T RAN , D., B REVDO , E., VASUDEVAN , S., M OORE , D., PATTON , B., A LEMI , A.,
H OFFMAN , M. and S AUROUS , R. A. (2017). Tensorflow distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10604.
D ORIGATTI , I., O KELL , L., C ORI , A., I MAI , N., BAGUELIN , M., B HATIA , S., B OONYASIRI , A., C UCUNUBÁ , Z.,
C UOMO -DANNENBURG , G., F ITZ J OHN , R. et al. (2020). Report 4 - Severity of 2019 novel coronavirus (nCoV)
Technical Report, Imperial College London, MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis.
D U , Z., X U , X., W U , Y., WANG , L., C OWLING , B. J. and M EYERS , L. A. (2020). The serial interval of
COVID-19 from publicly reported confirmed cases. Emerging Infectious Diseases 26.
E FRON , B. and T IBSHIRANI , R. J. (1994). An Introduction to the Bootstrap. CRC press.
C ENTERS FOR D ISEASE C ONTROL AND P REVENTION Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with
Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.html. Retrieved: April 15, 2020.
G ELMAN , A. (2020). Concerns with that Stanford study of coronavirus prevalence. https:
//statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2020/04/19/fatal-flaws-in-stanford-studyof-coronavirus-prevalence/.
G ELMAN , A., RUBIN , D. B. et al. (1992). Inference from iterative simulation using multiple sequences. Statistical
science 7 457–472.
UK G OVERNMENT (2020a). Boris Johnson Coronavirus Speech Transcript: UK PM Tells UK to Avoid
Non-Essential Travel & Contact. https://www.rev.com/blog/transcripts/boris-johnsoncoronavirus-speech-transcript-uk-pm-tells-uk-to-avoid-non-essentialtravel-contact. Retrieved: April 15, 2020.
UK G OVERNMENT (2020b). Michael Gove: rate of coronavirus infection in UK doubling every three to four days –
video. https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2020/mar/27/michael-gove-rateof-coronavirus-infection-in-uk-doubling-every-three-to-four-days-video.
Retrieved: April 15, 2020.
H ÁJEK , J., Š IDÁK , Z. and S EN , P. K. (1999). Theory of Rank Tests. Academic Press.
H ETHCOTE , H. W. (2000). The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review 42 599–653.
I MAI , N., D ORIGATTI , I., C ORI , A., R ILEY, S. and F ERGUSON , N. M. (2020). Report 1: Estimating the potential
total number of novel Coronavirus cases in Wuhan City, China Technical Report, Imperial College London,
MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis.
K ERMACK , W. O. and M C K ENDRICK , A. G. (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the royal society of London (Series A) 115 700–721.
L AUER , S. A., G RANTZ , K. H., B I , Q., J ONES , F. K., Z HENG , Q., M EREDITH , H. R., A ZMAN , A. S.,
R EICH , N. G. and L ESSLER , J. (2020). The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from
publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of Internal Medicine.
L AURITZEN , S. L. (1996). Graphical Models. Clarendon Press.
L I , Q., G UAN , X., W U , P., WANG , X., Z HOU , L., T ONG , Y., R EN , R., L EUNG , K. S., L AU , E. H., W ONG , J. Y.
et al. (2020). Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New
England Journal of Medicine.
L INTON , N. M., KOBAYASHI , T., YANG , Y., H AYASHI , K., A KHMETZHANOV, A. R., J UNG , S.- M ., Y UAN , B.,
K INOSHITA , R. and N ISHIURA , H. (2020). Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019
novel coronavirus infections with right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available case data. Journal
of Clinical Medicine 9 E538.

28
L IPSITCH , M. (2020). Estimating case fatality rates of COVID-19. Lancet Infectious Diseases.
L IPSITCH , M., J OSHI , K. and C OBEY, S. E. (2020). Comment on "Association of Public Health Interventions
With the Epidemiology of the COVID-19 Outbreak in Wuhan, China " by Pan et al. https://github.com/
keyajoshi/Pan_response.
N IEHUS , R., M ARTINEZ DE S ALAZAR M UNOZ , P., TAYLOR , A. and L IPSITCH , M. (2020). Quantifying bias of
COVID-19 prevalence and severity estimates in Wuhan, China that depend on reported cases in international
travelers Technical Report, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
N ISHIURA , H., L INTON , N. M. and A KHMETZHANOV, A. R. (2020). Serial interval of novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) infections. International Journal of Infectious Diseases.
W ORLD H EALTH O RGANIZATION (2020). WHO statement regarding cluster of pneumonia cases in
Wuhan, China. https://www.who.int/china/news/detail/09-01-2020-who-statementregarding-cluster-of-pneumonia-cases-in-wuhan-china. Retrieved: April 15, 2020.
R EAD , J. M., B RIDGEN , J. R., C UMMINGS , D. A., H O , A. and J EWELL , C. P. (2020). Novel coronavirus
2019-nCoV: early estimation of epidemiological parameters and epidemic predictions. medRxiv.
R EICH , N. G., L ESSLER , J., C UMMINGS , D. A. T. and B ROOKMEYER , R. (2009). Estimating incubation period
distributions with coarse data. Statistics in Medicine 28 2769-2784.
S ANCHE , S., L IN , Y., X U , C., ROMERO -S EVERSON , E., H ENGARTNER , N. and K E , R. (2020). High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerging Infectious Diseases
26.
J OHNS H OPKINS U NIVERSITY COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE)
at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html. Retrieved: April 15,
2020.
WALLINGA , J. and L IPSITCH , M. (2007). How generation intervals shape the relationship between growth rates
and reproductive numbers. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274 599–604.
W ILLEM , L., V ERELST, F., B ILCKE , J., H ENS , N. and B EUTELS , P. (2017). Lessons from a decade of individualbased models for infectious disease transmission: a systematic review (2006-2015). BMC infectious diseases 17
612.
W ONG , J. C. and B ERGSTROM , C. (2020). ’There is no absolute truth’: an infectious disease expert on
Covid-19, misinformation and ’bullshit’. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/
28/there-is-no-absolute-truth-an-infectious-disease-expert-on-covid-19misinformation-and-bullshit. Retrieved: May 3, 2020.
W U , J. T., L EUNG , K. and L EUNG , G. M. (2020). Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet 395
689–697.
Z HAO , Q., C HEN , Y. and S MALL , D. S. (2020). Analysis of the epidemic growth of the early 2019-nCoV outbreak
using internationally confirmed cases. medRxiv.

29

BETS IN COVID-19

APPENDIX A: TECHNICAL PROOFS
A.1. Derivation of Lemma 1. Using eqs. (3) and (4), it is straightforward to show that
P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b, E = e)
= P(b ≤ T ≤ e, T ≤ S < ∞ | B = b, E = e)
Z
Z
=
fT (t | b, e)
fS (s | b, e, t) ds dt
t∈(b,e)

s∈(t,∞)

Z
fT (t | b, e)

=

nZ

t∈(b,e)

o
ν · h(s − t) ds dt

s∈(t,∞)

Z
fT (t | b, e) · ν dt

=
t∈(b,e)

=ν[G(e) − G(b)].

A.2. Derivation of Lemma 2. By Assumption 3, Gκ,r (t) =
Thus for b > 0, we have

Rt

−∞ gκ,r (s) ds = (κ/r) exp(rt).

P((b, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b)
Z


=ν
fE (e | b) Gκ,r (e) − Gκ,r (b) de
e∈(b,L)

Z

L

λV (κ/r) {exp(re) − exp(rb)} de

=ν
b

(26)

i

λV κν h 1
exp(rL) − exp(rb) − (L − b) exp(rb)
r
r
λV κν
λV κν −1
= 2 exp(rL) −
(r + L − b) exp(rb)
r
r
h
i
λV κν
= 2 exp(rL) 1 − (1 + r(L − b)) exp(−r(L − b)) .
r
For b = 0, we can replace λV in the above equation by λW .
The idea is that, if rL is much larger than 1 (in our preliminary analysis rL ≈ 0.25 × 54 =
13.5), then
=

Right hand side of (26) ≈

νλW κ
exp(rL) when b = 0.
r2

Using this approximation, we obtain
P((B, E, T, S) ∈ D)
Z
=
P((b, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b) fB (b) db
0≤b<L

Z
= P(B = 0) · P((b, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = 0) +

P((b, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b) fB (b) db
0<b<L

(1 − π)λW κν
≈
exp(rL) +
r2

Z
P((b, E, T, S) ∈ D | B = b) fB (b) db
0<b<L

(1 − π)λW κν
=
exp(rL) + π
r2

Z
0

L

h
i
1 λV κν
exp(rL)
1
−
(1
+
r(L
−
b))
exp(−r(L
−
b))
db
L r2

30

=

≈

πλV κν
π λV κν
(1 − π)λW κν
exp(rL) +
exp(rL) −
exp(rL)
2
2
r
r
L r2
κ exp(rL)ν h
r2

(1 − π)λW

Z
|0

Lh

i
(1 + r(L − b)) exp(−r(L − b)) db
{z
}
A1

i
+ πλV (1 − 2/(rL)) .

In the last step we used the approximation erL  1 + rL:
Z L
exp(−rx)(rx + 2) x=L 2 exp(−rL)(rL + 2) 2
≈ .
A1 =
(1+rx) exp(−rx) dx = −
= −
r
r
r
r
x=0
0
Therefore, the density is given by
f (b, e, t, s | D) ≈

[(1 − π)λW 1{b=0} + (π/L)λV 1{b>0} ] · κ exp(rt) · νh(s − t)
h
i
r−2 κ exp(rL)ν (1 − π)λW + πλV (1 − 2/(rL))

[(1 − π)λW 1{b=0} + (π/L)λV 1{b>0} ] · exp(rt)
i
=r2 · h
· h(s − t)
(1 − π)λW + πλV (1 − 2/(rL)) · exp(rL)
[1{b=0} + (ρ/L)1{b>0} ] · exp(rt)
i
· h(s − t),
=r2 · h
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL)) · exp(rL)

where ρ = (λV /λW )π/(1 − π).
A.3. Derivation of Proposition 1. The following Lemma is useful to marginalize over
T when the incubation period follows a Gamma(α, β) distribution:
For any r > 0 and b ≤ e ≤ s,
 β α
min(s,e)


exp(rt) hα,β (s − t) dt =
exp(rs) Hα,β+r (s − b) − Hα,β+r ((s − e)+ ) .
β+r
b
L EMMA 3.

Z

P ROOF. By a change of variables,
Z min(s,e)
exp(rt) hα,β (s − t) dt
b
min(s,e)

βα
(s − t)α−1 exp{−β(s − t)} dt
Γ(α)
b
Z min(s,e)
 β α
(β + r)α
=
exp(rs)
(s − t)α−1 exp{−(β + r)(s − t)} dt
β+r
Γ(α)
b
 β α


=
exp(rs) Hα,β+r (s − b) − Hα,β+r ((s − e)+ ) .
β+r

Z

=

exp(rt)

The time of contraction T is not observed. Should it be observed, the full data unconditional
likelihood is given by

Luncond ρ, r, h(·); T

31

BETS IN COVID-19

=

n
Y

f (Bi , Ei , Ti , Si | (Bi , Ei , Ti , Si ) ∈ D)

i=1

≈r2n ·

n
n
Y
1{Bi =0} + (ρ/L)1{Bi >0} Y
·
1{Bi ≤Ti ≤min(Ei ,Si )} · exp(r(Ti − L)) · h(Si − Ti ) .
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL))
{z
}
|
i=1
i=1
A2,i

If we assume h(·) is the density of a Gamma distribution:
h(x) = hα,β (x) =

β α α−1
x
exp(−βx)
Γ(α)

(x > 0),

then we can marginalize over Ti using Lemma 3:
Z
 β α 


A2,i dTi = exp r(Si − L)
· Hα,β+r (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β+r ((Si − Ei )+ ) ,
β+r
In conclusion, the unconditional observed data likelihood is given by
n 
 β nα Y
1{Bi =0} + (ρ/L)1{Bi >0}
·
Luncond (ρ, r, α, β) ≈ r2n
β+r
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL))
i=1



× exp r(Si − L) Hα,β+r (Si − Bi ) − Hα,β+r ((Si − Ei )+ ) .




The conditional observed data likelihood can be derived in the same way. Details are omitted.
A.4. Derivation of Proposition 2. By integrating the conditional density (17) over
(b, e, s), the marginal distribution of T conditional on (B, E, T, S) ∈ D is given by
Z Z Z
fT (t | D, B = 0) ∝
f (b, e, t, s | D) · 1{(b,e,t,s)∈D} · 1{b=0} db de ds
LZ ∞

Z tZ
≈
0

Z

t

t

r2 · h

1{b=0} · exp(rt)
i
· h(s − t) ds de db
1 + ρ(1 − 2/(rL)) · exp(rL)

LZ ∞

∝

exp(rt) h(s − t) ds de
t

Z
=

t
L

exp(rt) de
t

= (L − t) exp(rt).

Assumption 2 says that the distribution of the symptom onset S only depends on the
time of transmission T (S ⊥
⊥ B, E | T ). Therefore the marginal distribution of S in exported
Wuhan resident cases is given by convolving the distribution of T with the distribution of the
incubation period S − T :
Z min(L,s)
fS (s | D, B = 0) =
fT (t | D, B = 0)h(s − t) dt
0

32

Under the parametric assumption that S − T follows a Gamma distribution (Assumption 4),
we have, for s ≥ L/2,
Z min(L,s)
∝
fS (s | D, B = 0) ∼
(L − t) exp(rt) · (s − t)α−1 exp{−β(s − t)} dt
0

min(L,s)

Z

[(L − s) + (s − t)](s − t)α−1 exp{−(β + r)(s − t)} dt

= exp(rs) ·
0

Z

s

[(L − s)xα−1 + xα ] exp{−(β + r)x} dx

= exp(rs) ·
(s−L)+

n

Γ(α) 
= exp(rs) · (L − s)
Hα,β+r (s) − Hα,β+r ((s − L)+ )
α
(β + r)
o
Γ(α + 1) 
H
(s)
−
H
((s
−
L)
)
+
+
α+1,β+r
α+1,β+r
(β + r)α+1
n


∝ exp(rs) · (L − s) Hα,β+r (s) − Hα,β+r ((s − L)+ )
o
α 
+
Hα+1,β+r (s) − Hα+1,β+r ((s − L)+ ) .
β+r
n
o
α
≈ exp(rs) · (L − s)[1 − Hα,β+r ((s − L)+ )] +
[1 − Hα+1,β+r ((s − L)+ )] .
β+r
The last step uses the approximation that
1 ≈ Hα+1,β+r (L/2) ≤ Hα+1,β+r (s) ≤ Hα,β+r (s).

We next show that this is reasonable under the technical assumption L > 4(α + 5)/(β + r) in
Proposition 2. Suppose X ∼ Gamma(α + 1, β + r). The Chernoff tail bound says that
1 − Hα+1,β+r (L/2) = P(X > L/2) ≤

E[exp(cX)] (1 − c/(β + r))−(α+1)
=
for a < β + r.
exp(cL/2)
exp(cL/2)

By choosing c = (1 − exp(−1))(β + r) ≈ 0.63(β + r), we have
1−Hα+1,β+r (L/2) ≤

exp(α + 1)
exp(α + 1)
<
< exp(1−0.31×20) < 0.01.
exp{0.31(β + r)L} exp{0.31 × 4(α + 5)}

A.5. Derivation of Proposition 3. Let e− = min(e, M ). Then under Assumptions 1
and 2, for (b, e, t, s) ∈ D and s ≤ M ,

(27)

fT,S (t, s | b, e, D, S ≤ M ) = R R

fT,S (t, s | b, e, D)
fT,S (t, s | b, e, D) ds dt

= R e−

g(t)h(s − t)
RM
g(t) t h(s − t) ds dt

b

= R e−
b

g(t)h(s − t)
,
g(t)H(M − t) dt

33

BETS IN COVID-19

Rs

where H(s) = 0 h(x) dx is the distribution function of the incubation period. Assuming
g(t) = κ exp(rt) and using integration by parts, for r 6= 0,
Z e−
Z e−
g(t)H(M − t) dt =κ
exp(rt)H(M − t) dt
b

b

κ
=
r
=

Z

e−

H(M − t) d exp(rt)
b

κh
exp(rt)H(M − t)
r

t=e−
t=b

e−

Z
+

i
exp(rt)h(M − t) dt .

b

By using h(·) = hα,β (·) and using Lemma 3, we have
Z e−
 β α
i
κh
g(t)Hα,β (M −t) dt =
exp(rt)Hα,β (M −t)−
exp(rM )Hα,β+r (M −t)
r
β+r
b

t=e−

.
t=b

Now we integrate t in (27) from b to e− and get
fS (s | b, e, D, S ≤ M )

α


β
r β+r
exp(rs) Hα,β+r (s − b) − Hα,β+r ((s − e)+ )
=h

α
i t=e− .
β
exp(rt)Hα,β (M − t) − β+r exp(rM )Hα,β+r (M − t)
t=b

Z

For r = 0, using integration by parts,
Z M −b
e−
g(t)Hα,β (M − t) dt =κ
Hα,β (x) dx
(M −e)+

b

h

=κ xHα,β (x)

h
=κ xHα,β (x)

x=M −b
x=(M −e)+
x=M −b
x=(M −e)+

Z

M −b

−

xhα,β (x) dx
(M −e)+

Z

M −b

x·

−
(M −e)+

x=M −b

α
=κ xHα,β (x)
−
β
x=(M −e)+

Z

α
Hα+1,β (x)
β

i

h

h

=κ xHα,β (x) −

i

M −b

(M −e)+

i
β α α−1
x
exp(−βx) dx
Γ(α)
i
β α+1
xα exp(−βx) dx
Γ(α + 1)

x=M −b

.
x=(M −e)+

We can similarly integrate t out and obtain the full data likelihood. Details are omitted.

