Technical report

Second waves, social distancing, and the
spread of COVID-19 across America
Karl J. Friston1, Thomas Parr1, Peter Zeidman1, Adeel Razi2, Guillaume Flandin1, Jean Daunizeau3, Oliver
J. Hulme4,5, Alexander J. Billig6, Vladimir Litvak1, Cathy J. Price1, Rosalyn J. Moran7 and Christian
Lambert1
1

The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, UK
Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health & Monash Biomedical Imaging, Monash University, Clayton, Australia
3
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, INSERM UMRS 1127, Paris, France
4
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional and Diagnostic Imaging and Research,
Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, Kettegaard Allé 30, Hvidovre, Denmark.
5
London Mathematical Laboratory, 8 Margravine Gardens, Hammersmith, UK
6
Ear Institute, University College London, UK
7
Centre for Neuroimaging Science, Department of Neuroimaging, IoPPN, King's College London, UK
2

E-mails: Karl Friston, k.friston@ucl.ac.uk; Thomas Parr, thomas.parr.12@ucl.ac.uk; Peter Zeidman,
peter.zeidman@ucl.ac.uk; Adeel Razi, adeel.razi@monash.edu; Guillaume Flandin, g.flandin@ucl.ac.uk; Jean
Daunizeau, jean.daunizeau@googlemail.com; Ollie Hulme, oliverh@drcmr.dk; Alexander Billig, a.billig@ucl.ac.uk;
Vladimir Litvak, v.litvak@ucl.ac.uk; Rosalyn Moran, rosalyn.moran@kcl.ac.uk; Cathy Price, c.j.price@ucl.ac.uk;
Christian Lambert, christian.lambert@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We recently described a dynamic causal model of a COVID-19 outbreak within a single region. Here, we combine
several of these (epidemic) models to create a (pandemic) model of viral spread among regions. Our focus is on a
second wave of new cases that may result from loss of immunity—and the exchange of people between regions—and
how mortality rates can be ameliorated under different strategic responses. In particular, we consider hard or soft
social distancing strategies predicated on national (Federal) or regional (State) estimates of the prevalence of infection
in the population. The modelling is demonstrated using timeseries of new cases and deaths from the United States to
estimate the parameters of a factorial (compartmental) epidemiological model of each State and, crucially, coupling
between States. Using Bayesian model reduction, we identify the effective connectivity between States that best
explains the initial phases of the outbreak in the United States. Using the ensuing posterior parameter estimates, we
then evaluate the likely outcomes of different policies in terms of mortality, working days lost due to lockdown and
demands upon critical care. The provisional results of this modelling suggest that social distancing and loss of
immunity are the two key factors that underwrite a return to endemic equilibrium.
Key words: coronavirus; epidemiology; compartmental models; dynamic causal modelling; variational; Bayesian

1

Technical report

Contents
Abstract..........................................................................................................................................................................1
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................................2
Dynamic causal modelling ............................................................................................................................................6
Results .........................................................................................................................................................................15
Mitigation strategies ....................................................................................................................................................25
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................................................................30
Software note ......................................................................................................................................................32
Acknowledgements .............................................................................................................................................32
References...........................................................................................................................................................33

Introduction
This technical report describes a dynamic causal model of how COVID-19 spreads among regions by
combining multiple models of an epidemic within a single region. This (epidemic) model was introduced
recently to showcase the potential of variational Bayesian procedures in fitting mechanistic or generative
models of an epidemic to measurable outcomes (Friston et al., 2020).
Mechanistic or generative models enable forecasting based upon epidemiological parameters estimated
from empirical data (Wu et al., 2020), e.g., serial interval estimates (Nishiura et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020).
Models of this sort have been applied to the initial outbreak in Wuhan, China (Sun et al., 2020; Wang et
al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020c) to predict new cases or clinical resources (Moghadas et al., 2020) and the
effects of various interventions (Prem et al., 2020; Wells et al., 2020). Such models are invaluable when
predicting the demand for critical care (Ferguson et al., 2020; Moghadas et al., 2020). The particular
contribution of this report is to illustrate the use of variational procedures to compare different models of
the same data—and the inherent latitude for building large multifactorial models that can handle different
kinds of outcomes.
The (dynamic causal) model (DCM) used in this report has a degree of predictive validity (Friston et al.,
2020) and Bayesian model comparison suggests that it provides a simpler and more accurate account than
equivalent single factor (e.g., SEIR) models (Moran et al., 2020). However, the DCM only considered a
single outbreak in a single region and therefore precluded epidemiological trajectories that feature things
like second waves. In this technical report1, we build upon this epidemic model to create a pandemic model
1

This technical report is a follow-up to an original report prepared in anticipation of the RAMP (Rapid Assistance in
Modelling the Pandemic) initiative (https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/Health-and-wellbeing/ramp/). It should
be read as a proof of concept whose main aim is didactic; namely, to explain how variational procedures enable
highly parameterised compartmental models to be inverted and compared quickly and efficiently. As such, it
2

Technical report

that comprises multiple epidemic (single region) models. In what follows, we apply this model to explain
regional timeseries from the United States, treating each State as a region and modelling the exchange of
people—who may or may not be infected—among States. Our focus is on the interplay between regional
outbreaks in the evolution of the pandemic and how this evolution informs strategic responses, such as
social distancing. Models of the international spread of COVID-19—such as the Global Epidemic and
Mobility Model (GLEAM)—usually partition the world into regions centred on major transportation hubs
(e.g., airports). These regions are then connected by the flux of people travelling daily among them
(Chinazzi et al., 2020). See also (Steven et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). In what follows, we apply the same
idea to daily travel between the United States of America, equipping each State with its own epidemiology
that becomes coupled through reciprocal exchange of their denizens. This creates a loosely coupled
(nonlinear) oscillator model, of the sort that is used widely in other settings: e.g., (Jafri et al., 2016; Kaluza
and Meyer-Ortmanns, 2010; Ladenbauer and Obermayer, 2019; Lizarazu et al., 2019; Schumacher et al.,
2015).
Often, the first wave of a pandemic, so-called “herald waves” (Simonsen et al., 2018), are followed some
months later by a second or third waves of infection (see Figure 1) that may, in some instances, be more
severe than the first, such as those seen in the influenza pandemics of 1918 (H1H1), 1957 (H2H2), 1968
(H3N2), and 2009 (H1N1). If one commits to the idea that a generative model of measurable outcomes is
necessary to properly predict systemic dynamics, then the natural question is: what causes a second wave?
One answer is that a regional population is re-exposed to infection by an influx of infected people from
another—that may itself have been caused by the first. Clearly, the degree to which an outbreak in another
region induces a second wave in the first will depend sensitively on the level of herd immunity inherited
from the first wave. It is therefore important to consider the degree to which herd immunity is lost following
the first wave; either through an endogenous loss of immunity within the first population or a renewal of
that population with people who are not immune. For example, about 0.5% of the American population
move between States every day2. This movement ‘mixes’ the total population, with consequent loss of herd
immunity.
Heuristically, the picture that emerges can be likened to a Californian or Australian wildfire with embers
seeded throughout a large territory. One ember may gain a sufficient hold to cause the first flareup and
become the epicentre of a bushfire. As the fire rages through the locale, consuming combustible material,
it will eventually burn itself out. However, if the right conditions prevail—and embers are carried to another
locale—a second fire will start and thereby elicit a chain of fires. In this analogy, the second wave
corresponds to a reignition of the first by embers from the second. However, there is a natural fire retardant
in the first locale (i.e., herd immunity) that offers some protection (i.e., there is nothing left to burn).
provides the technical details that allow people to reproduce the modelling at home. Alternatively, it could
complement epidemiological modelling with Approximate Bayesian Computation. Although the authors of the
current report are involved in the clinical management of COVID-19 patients—and are experts in biological
timeseries modelling—they are not virologists or epidemiologists. As such, the validity of the model described in this
report may or may not be endorsed by experts in the appropriate fields.
2

According to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (http://www.transtats.bts.gov/), a total of 631,939,829
passengers boarded domestic flights in the United States in the year 2010. This corresponds to 1.73 million passenger
flights per day. The population of the United States is about 327.2 million; a ratio of 190.
3

Technical report

Crucially, this protection will decline over time as new growth furnishes more combustible material (i.e., a
loss of immunity). So, what causes a second wave—is it the recursive spread of the fire (i.e., pandemic) or
is it susceptibility to reignition (i.e., herd immunity)?
These considerations highlight the importance of herd immunity and the factors that underwrite resistance
to infection. After the first wave, immunity in any given population may be lost for several reasons. These
include a natural loss of immunity of the sort seen in seasonal influenza—mediated by viral mutation or the
prevalence of different viral serotypes. For COVID-19, this is an area of active research that has yet to
provide definitive answers. However, empirical evidence suggests that neutralising antibodies to COVID19 can be raised fairly quickly (Bao et al., 2020; Bendavid et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2013). Furthermore,
instances of reinfection are sufficiently low to suggest that immunity to COVID-19 may be long lasting, at
least over a period of months. Furthermore, studies in nonhuman primates suggest it is difficult to elicit the
symptoms of COVID-19 after an initial infection (Bao et al., 2020)3. However, this does not necessarily
guarantee an enduring herd immunity.
The transmission of SARS-CoV-2 depends on many factors, including seasonal variation in transmission
strength, the duration of immunity, and cross-immunity with other coronaviruses. SARS-CoV-2 belongs to
the betacoronavirus genus, which includes the SARS, MERS, and two other human coronaviruses, HCoVOC43 and HCoV-HKU1 (Kissler et al., 2020; Su et al., 2016). HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1 infections
may be asymptomatic or produce mild to moderate upper respiratory tract symptoms; namely, a common
cold (Kissler et al., 2020). Accumulating evidence suggests that primary SARS-CoV-2 infection causes a
mild illness in the majority of cases with a minority progressing to severe lower respiratory infection,
interstitial pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiple organ failure. The primary
infections may also be further complicated by additional insults, such as secondary bacterial infections or
thromboembolic events 4 . Immunity to HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1 appears to be lost over a few
months. However, betacoronaviruses can induce immune responses against each another. For example,
SARS can generate neutralizing antibodies against HCoV-OC43 that can endure for years (Chan et al.,
2013), while HCoV-OC43 infection can generate cross-reactive antibodies against SARS (Chan et al.,
2013). Now, the question is: does SARS-CoV-2 behave like SARS, conveying long-lasting immunity or
does it behave like HCoV-OC43, conferring immunity for just a few months? In what follows, we will
consider both scenarios and the implications for how we live with COVID-19—or not.
This report tries to characterise the interplay between population fluxes and the waning of immunity using
a compartmental model of ensemble dynamics. Typically, these kinds of models employ a sparse coupling
3

After seroconversion, asymptomatic monkeys were challenged with a second dose of SARS-CoV-2. Neither viral
loads in nasopharyngeal and anal swabs nor viral replication in primary tissue compartments was evident in reexposed monkeys. On the basis of follow-up virologic, radiological and pathological assessment, monkeys with reexposure showed no recurrence of COVID-19. Bao, L., Deng, W., Gao, H., Xiao, C., Liu, J., Xue, J., Lv, Q., Liu, J., Yu, P.,
Xu, Y., Qi, F., Qu, Y., Li, F., Xiang, Z., Yu, H., Gong, S., Liu, M., Wang, G., Wang, S., Song, Z., Zhao, W., Han, Y., Zhao, L.,
Liu, X., Wei, Q., Qin, C., 2020. Reinfection could not occur in SARS-CoV-2 infected rhesus macaques. bioRxiv,
2020.2003.2013.990226.
4

See https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/04/how-does-coronavirus-kill-clinicians-trace-ferocious-rampagethrough-body-brain-toes for an accessible summary of COVID-19’s reach beyond the lungs.
4

Technical report

between nonlinear systems (here a compartmental model of a regional outbreak). In the present setting, the
sparse coupling is a small exchange of people between States that can be parameterised in terms of the daily
probability that ‘I will leave one State for another’. Clearly, this will depend upon whether I can leave
home, which depends upon any social distancing currently in play.
This brings us to the second focus of the current modelling; namely, how does social distancing mitigate
interregional influences? To answer this question, one has to have a formal model of social distancing.
There are two attributes of any social distancing—its functional form and its argument, i.e., what is social
distancing a function of? In what follows, we consider functional forms based on dual criteria: namely, the
prevalence of measurable infection, and demand upon critical care. In brief, these functions can be regarded
as adaptive strategies. In other words, they are social distancing responses to changes in measurable
quantities. These responses may be mediated via governmental advice, social media, behavioural
dispositions, and other affordances 5 that we can lump together in terms of a propensity to avoid
interpersonal contact—or not.
We will consider two threshold-based responses to the prevalence of infection in the population. This
prevalence is fairly straightforward to estimate on the basis of currently available tests for the presence of
the virus on mucosa. This does not require exhaustive or comprehensive testing; provided these measures
are modelled appropriately (e.g., using a generative model of the sort considered below). Although offering
a straightforward model of social distancing there remains an outstanding issue: do I (or the government)
base my social distancing on the prevalence of infection in my region, or is it driven by the experience of
other regions in my country. In other words, should social distancing be based upon regional or national
criteria, and therefore enacted at a regional or national level? In what follows, we fit a pandemic model to
regional data from the United States and ask what would happen if a national (i.e., Federal) social distancing
strategy was adopted, as opposed to a regional (i.e., State) approach.
This report comprises three sections. The first rehearses the dynamic causal model presented previously,
with an emphasis on the extension to multiple regions—and implicit coupling among regions. The second
section presents the results of model fitting to timeseries from States in America6. This section considers
the sensitivity of cumulative deaths to various model parameters, with a focus on the connectivity among
States that shapes the overall progression of the pandemic. The final section considers social distancing
strategies by simulating what would happen under regional and national approaches, with hard (e.g.,
lockdown) and soft (e.g., partial) social distancing.

5

In the sense of Gibson, J.J., 1977. The theory of affordances, in: R, S., Bransford, J. (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and
knowing: Toward an ecological psychology. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 67-82. For example, seeing the person on
the pavement affords the opportunity to circumnavigate them by 6 feet.
6

Available from https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19.
5

Technical report

F IGURE 1
Figure 1: second waves in China. This figure illustrates a secondary wave of new cases in reports from China. The
dots represent empirical records of new cases and deaths as a function of weeks from the onset of the outbreak. The
lines correspond to the predicted incidences, under a (single region) model described in (Friston et al., 2020). These
data are presented to illustrate a resurgence of new cases (orange arrow), several weeks after the first wave that is not
accompanied by a marked increase in death rates. We will see a similar phenomenology in predictions of new cases
and deaths for the United States in subsequent figures.

Dynamic causal modelling
The dynamic causal model used in this report is an extension of a compartmental model of a regional
outbreak detailed in (Friston et al., 2020). This (epidemic) model is a factorial extension of a conventional
SEIR (susceptible, exposed, infected, and recovered) model in which the four states7 of the SEIR model
are unpacked into four factors (location, infection, symptoms, and testing), each with four states. This
furnishes a 44 = 256-compartmental model that allows for different combinations of states to generate data.
For example, being infected does not necessarily mean that one has to manifest symptoms. Conversely, one
can be severely ill without having a viral infection8. Similarly, including a testing factor allows for people

7

We will use State to indicate a State of the United States and state to denote a level of a factor in the generative
model.
8

For example, acute respiratory distress due to secondary bacterial pneumonia, which may itself be antimicrobial
resistant: https://www.southcentre.int/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/RP-104.pdf.

6

Technical report

to be contagious but not reported as testing positive for SARS-CoV-29.
The factorial structure of this model exploits conditional independencies among the factors to provide a
relatively straightforward parameterisation. Technically, it uses a mean field approximation to certain
dependencies. For example, the probability of developing symptoms depends on, and only on, whether I
have an infection. However, the probability of becoming infected does not depend on whether I am
symptomatic or not. The four factors in question are shown schematically in Figure 2 in the form of a
compartmental model. The accompanying parameters of this compartmental model (that mediate the
conditional dependencies) are listed in Table 1. This model is described in detail in (Friston et al., 2020)
and used subsequently to look at herd immunity and lockdown cycles in (Moran et al., 2020). Here, the
model is equipped with two further features: namely, a loss of immunity over time and a distinction between
susceptible and non-susceptible members of the population. We equipped the model with a loss of
immunity, with the following parameter:

imm = exp(−1  imm )

(1.1)

This controls a slow flux from a state of immunity to a state of susceptibility, under the infection factor. We
made the provisional assumption that immunity to SARS-CoV-2 resembles the immunity to SARS-CoV1. Operationally, we modelled this as a period of immunity with a time constant of 32 months: c.f., (Kissler
et al., 2020). This parameter was included to repeat simulations under more pessimistic conditions, in which
immunity could be lost within a few (four) months (c.f., a common cold human coronavirus, HCoV-OC43).
The distinction between susceptible and non-susceptible was modelled by assigning people to a susceptible
or resistant state, such that they did not participate in the spread of the virus if they were resistant. We
assumed a priori that half of the total population would be susceptible to infection and estimated the
proportion of resistant cases under the model10. This can be regarded as a crude approximation to varying
levels of susceptibility in the population at large and could be further refined as more is learnt about the
susceptibility to COVID-19 infection; for example, by leveraging regional demographic data.
Numerous viral-evasion mechanisms are known. For example, mutations in the 'resistome' cause
susceptibility to infection, and other (yet to be identified) mutations cause resistance to infection. (Beutler
et al., 2007). Though age and comorbidity contribute substantially to fatality rates, the host factors that
influence resistance or susceptibility to infection with pathogenic human coronaviruses (CoVs) are largely
unknown but might involve several mechanisms. For example, innate immune responses to CoVs are
initiated by recognition of double-stranded RNA and induction of interferon, which turns on gene
expression programs that inhibit viral replication (Heer et al., 2020). Furthermore, epidemiological

9

Undocumented infections may be the source of infection for 79% of documented cases Li, R., Pei, S., Chen, B.,
Song, Y., Zhang, T., Yang, W., Shaman, J., 2020. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid
dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science, eabb3221.
10

This parameter determines the initial conditions and specifies the proportion of the population that do not
participate in epidemiological transitions. As such, we omit the state of resistance from subsequent figures, for
clarity.
7

Technical report

evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 infection in children is less frequent and severe than in adults: agerelated ACE2 receptor expression might be a relevant host factor (Cristiani et al., 2020). Including a
distinction between susceptible and resistant enables the model to explain data from the total population,
as opposed to a susceptible population. This is important when considering models of how the virus is
spread among regions by movement of people who may or may not be susceptible and therefore capable of
infecting—and being infected by—others.

F IGURE 2
Figure 2: the dynamic causal (LIST) model. This schematic summarises the dynamic causal model that is used to
explain timeseries data in a single region. In brief, it comprises four factors, each with four states (listed in the key on
the left), giving 256 states or compartments. Regional factors include location, infection, symptom, and testing status
(the infection state of resistance has been omitted from the schematic for simplicity). The small arrows denote
transitions among states that are parameterised in terms of the probability of moving from one state to another, every
day. Black or unlabelled arrows denote a unit probability. Coloured arrows designate transitions that are determined
by the model parameters (ϴ—please see Table 1). To suppress visual clutter, the expressions for transition
probabilities are colour-coded within each factor. The quantities pi are marginal probabilities over the states of the ith factor. Crucially, transitions among the states of one factor depend upon other factors. These conditional
dependencies (highlighted by broken arrows) are illustrated by showing the transition probabilities among the states
of one factor under the levels of another. For example, the probability that I will move from a state of being
asymptomatic (Sa) to being symptomatic (Ss) depends upon whether I am infected (Ii and Ic) or not (Is and Im).
Furthermore, the probability that I will move from ARDS (Sr) to being deceased (Sd) depends upon whether I am
located in a critical care unit (Lc) or at home (Lh)—and so on. The parameters of the implicit transition probabilities
are listed in Table 1 and are described in detail in (Friston et al., 2020). A particularly important transition is the
8

Technical report

probability that I will leave home (i.e., expose myself to more potentially contagious contacts) on any given day;
namely, social distancing. This is denoted by (1.2), corresponding to equation (1.3) in the main text.

Figure 3 illustrates how a single-region (epidemic) model can be used to construct a (pandemic) model that
encompasses several regions. The key aspect of this factorial extension (i.e., including a region factor) rests
upon the coupling among regions. Here, people who are not confined in self-isolation (i.e., at home) are
available to travel with a certain daily probability from one state to another. A priori, this probability is
based upon the probability that any American citizen will fly from one state to another every day. This can
be written down as the following transition probability

N = N i − N k
N k = P ( workt | regionk , asymptomatic )  N k  ik
N i  P ( workt | regioni , asymptomatic ),

s.t .,

 N =  N
i

k

(1.2)

P ( workt +1 | regioni , asymptomatic ) = P ( workt | regioni , asymptomatic) − N N i
P ( workt +1 | regionk , asymptomatic) = P ( workt | regionk , asymptomatic ) + N N k
Here, Ni corresponds to the number of people in the i-th State and N corresponds to the relative number
of people that are exchanged between States i and k. This construction ensures that the total number of
people in each state does not change over time. In turn, this constraint means that the flux of people between
any two States can be parameterised with a single coupling or connectivity parameter,  ik .

9

Technical report

F IGURE 3
Figure 3: a multi-region model. This schematic summarises the dynamic causal model used to explain timeseries
data from multiple regions. This (pandemic) model is composed of several regional (epidemic) models. In brief, the
model for a single region comprises four factors, each with four states, giving 44 = 256 states or compartments per
region. These regional models are then assembled to model the coupling among eight regions giving 256 8
compartments. However, due to conditional independencies, this can be treated as a collection of 256 compartmental
models; providing one links the states of one region to the states of another carefully. Here, this linking or connectivity
is parameterised in terms of a probability flux or exchange of people among regional populations. The probability that
I will move from one region to another depends upon whether I am at work (i.e., not at home, Lh) and do not consider
myself to be ill (i.e., I am asymptomatic, Sa). In short, the exchange between different regional populations is limited
to the people who are not at home and are consequently in a position to travel. This is illustrated by the arrows in the
figure that connect the appropriate states. The parameters of interregional coupling correspond to rate constants or
effective connectivity that ensure the conservation of total numbers in each region. For example, the probability of
moving to New York from New Jersey is the same as a probability of moving from New Jersey to New York; however,
the number of people commuting in either direction will depend on the respective population sizes of New Jersey and
New York.

Usually, in these kinds of connectivity models, one considers different sparsity constraints on the coupling
architecture. One could use Bayesian model comparison based upon the variational free energy (a.k.a.
evidence lower bound) to test for different connectivity structures (Friston et al., 2015); e.g., full
connectivity, a serial connectivity based upon spatial distance between states, the time of onset and so on.
However, for simplicity, we elected to use a model with full connectivity and eliminate redundant
10

Technical report

connections post hoc, using Bayesian model reduction (Friston et al., 2018).
The second important extension to the epidemic model was the inclusion of a dual criteria social distancing
process, parameterised as follows:
infection
location
P( workt +1 | homet , asymptomatic) = out   ( pinfected
, sde )   ( pCCU
, sde cap  8)
infection
location
P( workt +1 | homet , asymptomatic) = out   (qinfected
, sde )   (qCCU
, sde cap  8)

(1.3)

The first equality parameterises the probability of going to work in the morning as a function of the marginal
probabilities of certain states for the region in question, p, while the second has the same functional form
but takes the marginal probability from all regions, q. These can be regarded as a regional (State) and
national (Federal) social distancing responses, respectively. It would also be possible to respond based on
a linear combination of these two formulations, however we limit the simulations presented here to one or
other of the extremes. The states in question are the probability that any member of the population is
currently infected or requires critical care. The form of the decreasing threshold (sigmoid) functions that
constitute this model of social distancing is illustrated in Figure 4.
Intuitively, this models social distancing as the probability of leaving home, which only attains normal
levels when two criteria are met. First, the proportion of the population infected with coronavirus must be
below some threshold and second, the number of people in critical care must be less than some fraction of
maximum capacity. Equation (1.3) lumps the thresholds together so that there is a single social distancing
threshold that is applied to both criteria. When the threshold is low (say 1/32) we effectively have a
lockdown policy that will remain in place until less than 1/32 of the population are deemed to be infected
and the occupancy of critical care facilities has fallen below 8/32 = ¼ of total capacity. A more liberal
threshold could be interpreted as a softer social distancing strategy, where certain (non-vulnerable) people
are allowed to return to school (or work) and some degree of social distancing is maintained when
commuting or at work (e.g., wearing face masks).
Note that social distancing is modelled as a part of the epidemiological dynamics generating data. In other
words, it is not an exogenous input or strategic response that enters the model. Rather, it is installed as a
reactive and adaptive process that best explains the observed data. An interesting twist here is that the
optimisation of the parameters that shape social distancing are those that best explain the data; namely, the
social distancing that has been achieved. They are not optimised to minimise some cost function (e.g.,
mortality rates)—they are a measure of what a population actually does when confronted with a pandemic.
Later, we will simulate different levels of social distancing—by increasing or decreasing the estimated
threshold—to see what mitigates morbidity; either in terms of cumulative deaths or economic morbidity
(as measured in terms of lost working days under the location factor).
Finally, we included a back-to-work parameter that allowed people who were immune to be exempt from
social distancing and return to work. This is a fictive aspect of the model, in the sense that it would rest
upon knowing whether somebody was immune or not. This enabled us to model the potential benefits of
being able to measure seroconversion and allow people back to work if they had detectable (and hopefully
neutralising) antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
11

Technical report

F IGURE 4
Figure 4: threshold strategies. This figure illustrates the different kinds of social distancing functions that could be
adopted to model social distancing responses. Both parameterise the degree of social distancing as a function of the
proportion of the population that are currently infected (and are currently occupying critical care facilities). This
proportion can, in principle, be estimated directly or indirectly, given current testing capabilities. These social
distancing functions are decreasing functions of the prevalence of infection (or critical care occupancy). In other
words, as prevalence increases, the probability of leaving home (e.g., self-isolation) decreases. The two examples
above are distinguished by the form of this decrease. The (threshold) strategy used in this report is based upon a
threshold, afforded by the reverse sigmoid function (solid line). Conversely, the (exponent) strategy used in previous
models (Friston et al., 2020) decreases smoothly as a power function of prevalence (broken line). The functional forms
are given by the equations in the figure. Please see main text for further details.

With this pandemic model in place, we modelled the eight States in America with the greatest number of
cases of COVID-19, using standard (variational Laplace) Bayesian methods (Friston et al., 2020). We chose
to analyse eight States because the key information in the accompanying timeseries lies in the form of the
transients or fluctuations in new cases and deaths. This form is better evinced by larger numbers. Put simply,
including States that have yet to experience an epidemic provides no useful information that would inform
the parameters that are shared between States.
One advantage of modelling data from the United States of America is that one can, a priori, assume that
many factors are conserved from State to State, given the homogeneity of the medical infrastructure within
America. Unlike the epidemic model, the population size of each state serves as an informative prior on the
susceptible population size. In other words, previously we estimated the number of people affected by an
epidemic as an unknown quantity. Here, we try to explain the data in terms of all the population who are
caught up in the pandemic—an unknown proportion of which may be resistant to infection. Technically,
this involves placing very precise shrinkage priors on the population size, corresponding to the population
12

Technical report

of each State. Finally, because each state is likely to have been seeded with one or two infected individuals
at different times, we modelled the pandemic as ensuing from the epicentre; namely, New York State11.
This involves estimating the number of people in New York who were infected eight days after records
began.
To expedite model inversion, we used a further mean field approximation, by assuming conditional
independence between the between-region (i.e., connectivity) parameters in Table 1A and the within-region
parameters in Table 1B. This allowed us to estimate the parameters for each region (i.e., State) separately
and then use the ensuing State-specific estimates to infer the connectivity parameters (and initial case load
at the epicentre). This greatly finesses the numerics; however, it comes at the price of ignoring conditional
dependencies between the two sorts of parameters. This completes our description of the model. The next
section turns to the results of fitting multivariate timeseries of new cases and deaths under this model.

T ABLE 1 A
Parameters of the pandemic (multiple region) model, N ( , C)
(NB: prior means are for scale parameters  = exp() )
Number

Parameter

Mean

Variance

Description

1

n

exp(-4)

1/4

Number of initial cases in the epicentre

2

ik

exp(-8)

1/16

Population flow between regions

T ABLE 2 B
Parameters of the epidemic (LIST) model and priors, N ( , C)
(NB: prior means are for scale parameters  = exp() )
Number

Parameter

Mean

Variance

Description

1

n

exp(-4)

1/4

Number of initial cases

2

r

1/2

1/16

Proportion of resistant cases

3

out

1/3

1/64

Prob(work | home): probability of going out

4

sde

1/32

1/128

Social distancing threshold

5

cap

16/100000

1/64

CCU capacity threshold (per capita)

Location

Infection

11

We considered a series of models with sparse connectivity and full connectivity (entertaining initially infected
cases in one State or all States). We chose to report the full connectivity model to showcase the use of subsequent
Bayesian model reduction.
13

Technical report

6

Rin

4

1/64

Effective number of contacts: home

7

 Rou

48

1/64

Effective number of contacts: work

8

trn

1/4

1/64

Prob(contagion | contact)

9

inf = exp(−  1 )

 inf = 4

1/64

Infected (pre-contagious) period (days)

 con = exp(−  1 )

 con = 4

1/64

Contagious period (days)

imm = exp(−  1 )

 imm = 32

1/64

Period of immunity (months)

12

1 −  dev = exp(−  inc1 )

 inc = 8

1/64

Incubation period (days)

13

 sev

1/128

1/64

Prob(ARDS | symptomatic)

14

sym = exp(−  1 )

 sym = 5

1/64

Symptomatic period (days)

rds = exp(−  1 )

 rds = 12

1/64

Acute RDS period (days)

16

 fat

1/2

1/64

Prob(fatality | CCU)

17

sur

1/16

1/64

Prob(survival | home)

18

tft

1/1024

1/4

Threshold: testing capacity (per capita)

19

sen

1/1024

1/4

Prob(being tested) (per day)

20

del = exp(−  1 )

 del = 2

1/4

Delay in reporting test results (days)

tes

1/4

1/4

Prob(tested | uninfected) (per day)

inf

10

con

11

imm

Symptoms

sym

15

rds

Testing

del

21

Secondary sources (Huang et al., 2020; Kissler et al., 2020; Mizumoto and Chowell, 2020; Russell et al., 2020; Verity
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020b) and:
•
•
•

https://www.statista.com/chart/21105/number-of-critical-care-beds-per-100000-inhabitants/
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/coronavirus-COVID-19-information-for-the-public
http://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/COVID-19/

These prior expectations should be read as the effective rates and time constants as they manifest in a real-world
setting. For example, a four-day period of contagion is shorter than the period that someone might be infectious
(Wölfel et al., 2020)12, on the (prior) assumption that they will self-isolate, when they realise they could be contagious.
Although the scale parameters are implemented as probabilities or rates, they are estimated as log parameters, denoted
by  = ln  .

12

Shedding of COVID-19 viral RNA from sputum can outlast the end of symptoms. Seroconversion occurs after 612 days but is not necessarily followed by a rapid decline of viral load.
14

Technical report

Results
This section reviews the within and between-State parameters following model inversion under a regional
social distancing response. We then use these parameters to predict outcomes that have yet to be observed.
In the final section, we will repeat these predictions under different social distancing strategies. Our focus
in this section is on how the second wave, if any, is shaped by social distancing responses and the
acquisition—and subsequent loss—of immunity.
Figure 5 reports the differences among States in terms of selected parameters for each State, ranging from
the population size, through to the probability of testing its denizens. The blue bars report the posterior
expectations, while the pink bars are 90% Bayesian credible intervals. Notice that there is no uncertainty
about the population sizes because these are known quantities. From the current perspective, the interesting
thing to note here is the social distancing threshold that varies among States, around 0.03. In other words,
each State is behaving as if lockdown is invoked when either 3% of the population become infected or
critical care occupancy approaches 8 · 3% = 24% of total capacity. Interestingly, California appears to have
the most stringent social distancing response so far, with the lowest threshold. This may be relevant later
when trying to explain differential mortality rates.

15

Technical report

F IGURE 5
Figure 5: differences among States. This figure reports the differences among States in terms of selected parameters
of the generative (epidemic) model, ranging from population size, through to the probability of testing. The blue bars
represent the posterior expectations, while the pink bars are 90% Bayesian credible intervals. Notice that these
intervals are not symmetrical about the mean because we are reporting scale parameters—as opposed to log
parameters. For each parameter, the States showing the smallest and largest values are labelled. For example, New
Jersey and New York behave as if they had a relaxed social distancing threshold, when compared to California. Please
see next figure for a key to the States.

Figure 6 summarises the estimated connectivity or population exchange between States. The upper right
panel shows the connectivity among States as an adjacency matrix. The key thing to take from this analysis
is that nearly all the connections among states have been removed following Bayesian model reduction,
leaving only reciprocal exchange with New York. Clearly, this is not what is happening in the field.
However, it is the simplest account of the data at hand. In other words, it is sufficient to describe the current
data in terms of one epicentre (New York) exchanging infected individuals with the remaining States. In
this analysis, the greatest flux of people appears to be between New York and California. The question now
is whether these fluxes have a material impact on cumulative deaths or mortality rates. This sort of question
can be addressed using a sensitivity analysis.

F IGURE 6
Figure 6: connectivity and viral spread. This figure reports the connectivity among states, following Bayesian model
reduction of a full connectivity model. The upper left panel shows the log evidence of the 256 models with the greatest
16

Technical report

evidence. A model here constitutes a reduced model in which various combinations of connectivity parameters have
been removed. The upper right panel shows the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates of the ensuing Bayesian model
average, as an adjacency matrix. The elements of this matrix quantify the rate or probability that a State in each column
will deliver a proportion of its (out-of-home) population to a State in the rows. For example, the greatest flux of people
is between New York and California. The lower right panel shows the posterior probability of a model with and
without each of these parameters, based upon Bayesian model comparison. For the connectivity parameters involving
New York, we can be nearly 100% certain that the model that includes this coupling parameter has greater evidence
than a model that does not. The insert on the lower left provides a schematic representation of the connectivity, based
upon these estimates. The heavier connectors correspond to a greater probability of moving between States.

A sensitivity analysis involves changing each of the parameters by a small value and measuring the
consequent change in cumulative deaths, while holding all the other parameters constant. Figure 7 shows
the results of this analysis for the connectivity parameters of the model that survived Bayesian model
reduction. Interestingly, the effects of movement between States does not appear to have a consistent effect
on cumulative deaths. Sometimes increasing commuter traffic decreases overall mortality and sometimes
it is increased. Having said this, the flux that has the greatest (mitigating) effect on overall mortality is the
exchange between New York and California. In other words, mixing the populations in New York and
California would, under this model, save lives. The explanation for these complicated effects rests upon the
intricate dynamics of latent states that constitute the underlying causes of the pandemic.

F IGURE 7
Figure 7: sensitivity analysis. This figure reports the effect of changing each connectivity parameter on
cumulative deaths over an 18-month period. The upper panel shows the rate of increase (or decrease) in
cumulative deaths per unit change in the (log) parameters. These sensitivity metrics are based upon a first
17

Technical report

order Taylor expansion about the maximum a posteriori values shown in the lower panel. The blue bars
correspond to the most likely estimate and the pink bars report the 90% credible intervals. Interestingly, the
effects of connectivity or coupling among States are mixed. In some instances, increasing the exchange
between one State and another will increase or decrease overall death rates; presumably, based upon the
respective capacity of different states to respond to pressure on their clinical care capacities.

Figure 8 provides a prediction of the future course of the pandemic in each of the eight States. The picture
that emerges here is what one might expect from a loosely coupled oscillator model (here, a factorial
compartmental model of ensemble dynamics). Notable aspects of these predictions are that New York
experiences a marked peak in death rates early in the epidemic, whereas other States follow after a week or
so. In terms of the epidemiology, an interesting feature of these predictions is a second peak in death rates
at around 38 weeks (i.e., 28 weeks after the first peak). Another aspect of these predictions is the large
variability in death rates between States. Much of this variability can be accounted for by differences in
populations; however, as shown in the lower right panel, mortality rates (as estimated by the expected
number of deaths in one year divided by the population of each State) still show a substantial variation. For
example, the mortality rate in New York is estimated to be just over 0.1%, while it is much smaller in
California. Recall that these predictions are entirely conditioned upon the model and available data. Having
said this, the currently available peak death rates in New York and California testify to some difference that
cannot be explained in terms of population sizes, e.g., climactic effects on transmission strength that
mediate seasonal influences (Kissler et al., 2020). Alternatively, the differential social distancing estimates
in New York and California (see Figure 5) may speak to regional or cultural differences (e.g., the prevalence
of high density, low-cost housing or ethnic differences in communal activities).
The cumulative deaths under this particular model are consistent with predictions based upon other
modelling work. For example, at 20 weeks, the cumulative deaths in the United States has—on some
conservative estimates—been reported in the media to be around 60,00013. The eight States here constitute
119 million people (about a third of the population). The cumulative deaths within these States are estimated
to be about 48,000, under the current model. One potentially reassuring aspect of these results is that
predicted (annual) mortality rates in most States is, overall, less than that attributable to seasonal influenza
(0.1%) (Paget et al., 2019). Indeed, typical mortality rates appear to be in the order of 0.05% or less. This
is in line with projections based upon global data and countries who experienced an early epidemic, such
as Italy.

13

Consistently, across countries, excess death is higher than reported COVID-19 deaths: in many cases deaths in
care homes or in the home are not reported systematically as COVID-19 related. For example,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/21/world/coronavirus-missing-deaths.html
18

Technical report

F IGURE 8
Figure 8: predicted mortality rates. This figure reports the predicted trajectory of death rates for each State. The
upper panels show the predicted time course of death rates per day under a social distancing strategy based upon
regional estimates of prevalence. The expected rates are shown as blue lines, while the shaded blue areas correspond
to 90% Bayesian credible intervals. The dots report empirical data observed to date. The same data are shown in the
upper right panel after scaling the Y axis. This enables the second wave of deaths—predicted under this model—to
be seen more clearly, about 28 weeks following the first wave. The lower left panel shows the cumulative deaths in
each State, based upon these predictions, in terms of the total expectation (blue bars) and accompanying 90% credible
intervals (pink bars). These projections reflect differences among the States in terms of their population—and their
response to the influx and subsequent explosion of infected cases. The middle right panel adjusts for differences in
the population by expressing mortality rates (per year) as a percentage of the population of each state. The broken
horizontal line corresponds roughly to the mortality rate of seasonal influenza. The lower panel shows the cumulative
deaths over all States, in terms of the posterior expectation (blue line) and confidence intervals (shaded area). The
(black dots) correspond to empirical data. The confidence intervals in these figures should not be overinterpreted: they
were approximated (under large-number assumptions) by a Poisson distribution. This approximation was used purely
19

Technical report

for computational expediency (and was not used during model inversion).

The underlying causes of the (predicted) outcomes in Figure 8 are shown in Figure 9. The predicted
outcomes are reproduced in the upper panels, in terms of rates per day (upper left panel) and cumulative
cases and deaths (upper right panel). In addition, the model has generated the occupancy of critical care
unit beds that accompanies these State-specific predictions. The lines correspond to the predicted numbers
under a model with a regional social distancing strategy. The dots correspond to the data observed so far.
These trajectories are generated by fluctuations in the probability of being away from home (i.e., denoted
by the state work, Lw), whether one is infectious or not, the clinical expression of the infection and the
probability that one tests negative or positive. A key aspect of these results is the rapid acquisition of herd
immunity to levels of about 30% at the peak of the first wave (see yellow lines in the middle right panel of
Figure 9). This rise is most pronounced during the early phase of the pandemic that shows subsequent
fluctuations due to movement between states and a mild loss of immunity.
One can see two sorts of second wave, in terms of new cases and deaths in the upper left panel. The first is
an early secondary peak about four weeks after the first peak (orange arrow). This is particularly evident in
the new cases predicted for New York. This coincides with a relaxation of social distancing and a
concomitant influx of people from other States (compare this with the second wave of new cases in Figure
1). However, there is a more protracted and pronounced second wave after 28 weeks (blue arrow) that
induces a fluctuation in social distancing behaviour; again, most evident in New York. The mechanism for
this second peak is due to the endogenous loss of immunity. Increasing the period of immunity from 32
months to 8 years delays this peak by about 20 weeks (data not shown). As we will see next, decreasing the
period of immunity to 4 months accelerates the second peak so that it encroaches on the first.
Finally, note that social distancing never disappears, i.e., the blue lines reporting the probability of leaving
home (left middle panel) never quite return to their pre-pandemic levels. In other words, there is a persistent
failure to return to levels of work prior to the pandemic. This persistent change in social distancing
behaviour is an integral part of the endemic equilibrium simulated in these analyses. Put simply, there is an
equilibrium that constitutes the endpoint of any ‘exit strategy’—and this equilibrium will be attained at
about 40 weeks (i.e., 10 months) following the onset of the pandemic. However, this will not be a return to
normal life; it will be a way of ‘living with COVID-19’. This way of living is comfortably within the
resources of our ability to provide critical care for those people who need it. Furthermore, as noted above,
this endemic equilibrium entails mortality rates due to COVID-19 that are less than half those due to
seasonal influenza. It should be reiterated that these are just model predictions and should not be taken
literally. They should be read as the kind of predictions that can be made with suitable modelling14.
A key aspect of the simulation results is that new cases in the second wave are not necessarily accompanied
by marked increases in daily death rates. Furthermore, the amplitude of the second wave, under this model,
is much less than that of the first. This reflects the immunity acquired during the first wave. In other words,
the context in which the second wave emerges is contextualised by the immunological memory of the first
exposure to the virus. In these simulations, herd immunity is between 40% and 70%. These simulations can
14

Note also that we have not included any therapeutic advances or vaccination programs in this model.
20

Technical report

be compared with the predictions of seasonal re-emergencies of COVID-19, based upon models that factor
in seasonal variations in transmission, of the kind associated with seasonal influenza. For example, short
term immunity on the order of 10 months (similar to HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1) would engender
annual SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks, while longer-term immunity (24 months) favours biennial outbreaks
(Kissler et al., 2020).
The simulations above should be compared with the corresponding simulations in Figure 10 under short
term immunity. Here, we repeated the analysis but changed the period of immunity from 32 months to 4
months. In this scenario, herd immunity declines rapidly, and endemic equilibrium is reached almost as
soon as the first wave subsides. This endemic equilibrium is probably not sustainable: although the demand
for critical care does not exceed total capacity, this demand is mitigated by persistent social distancing. In
turn, this social distancing precludes any meaningful return to work (in the majority of States simulated,
only 8% or less of the population returns to work). On the assumption that the ensuing damage to social
and economic infrastructure is untenable, the scenario of losing immunity within months is difficult to
countenance.

F IGURE 9
21

Technical report

Figure 9: the pandemic under long-term immunity (32 months). This figure reports the predicted outcomes and
underlying latent states generating those outcomes over a one-year period, under a regional social distancing strategy.
The upper panels show some key outcomes, some of which are measurable. Here, daily death rates are shown in blue,
new cases in red and CCU occupancy in orange. The lines correspond to the predictions of the model, while the dots
are empirical data available at the time of writing (18th of April 2020). The dotted line in the upper left panel
corresponds to the typical critical care capacity of a large city. The same results are shown on the upper right panel in
terms of cumulative new cases (red) and deaths (blue). The underlying or latent causes of this mortality are shown in
the lower panels. These are organised according to the four factors of the generative model. In each panel, the latent
states are plotted for the eight States considered in this analysis. The location factor shows that, under this strategy,
the number of people away from the home (or equivalent location) decreases sharply at the onset of the outbreak and
then recovers slowly over the ensuing weeks. In terms of infection, there is a rapid acquisition of immunity, to varying
levels between 40% and 80% over the first months of the pandemic. At any one time, about 18% or less of the
population is either infected or infectious. In terms of the clinical expression of these infections, 8% percent or less of
people will experience symptoms and a small minority will progress to acute respiratory distress, from which they
may recover or die. Under this model, positive test results for the virus (based on buccal swabs) accumulate over time
as more and more people are tested. In the initial phases of the outbreak, most people are negative. However, during
the onset of the pandemic about a half to a third of people tested are positive. This proportion declines over the ensuing
months.

22

Technical report

F IGURE 10

Figure 10Figure 9: the pandemic under short-term immunity (4 months). This figure uses the same format as the
previous figure. The only difference here is that we decreased the period of immunity from 32 months to 4 months.

The emerging picture is that two things are crucially important in shaping the long-term trajectory of the
pandemic. First, the acquisition of herd immunity and second, the rate at which immunity is lost. At present,
the second factor is difficult to assess empirically, which is why cases of reinfection would be so telling15.
Documented cases of reinfection speak to a short-term immunity. At the time of writing, there is little
evidence to suggest reinfection is a characteristic of COVID-19. Indeed, the evidence points in the other
direction (Bao et al., 2020). So, is there any evidence for a rapid acquisition of herd immunity? At the time
of writing, there are no published reports; however, preprints and local media have identified apposite
studies in California. These studies are in a position to provide important data that will endorse or constrain
the modelling of immunity. Figure 11 shows the predicted immunity for people in California shown in
15

Note that that a confirmed reinfection is distinct from a second positive test, which might be expected given the
false positive (and negative) rates of many tests.
23

Technical report

Figure 9. These predictions are not inconsistent with early reports of antibody testing in California based
upon preprints (Bendavid et al., 2020)16 and local media reports17, shown as confidence intervals (vertical
bars) and point estimates (red dot) respectively. Although the consilience should not be overinterpreted,
these provisional findings are in line with the model predictions; although the Santa Clara prevalence of
antibodies is about half what would have been predicted on the basis of the current model. As noted in the
LA Times, these results suggest:
“[t]he fatality rate may be much lower than previously thought. But although the virus may be more
widespread, the infection rate still falls far short of herd immunity that, absent a vaccine, would be key to
return to normal life.” (https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-04-20/coronavirus-serologytesting-la-county)

In fact, on the current reading of the model predictions, this prevalence of seropositive cases in California
is consistent with the acquisition of herd immunity over the next few weeks. Clearly, it would be
reassuring—if not imperative—to have more definitive data from other States (or countries) to track herd
immunity as it develops.

F IGURE 11

16

The authors measured the seroprevalence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in Santa Clara County on the third and
fourth of April 2020, using a lateral flow immunoassay. Under three scenarios for their test performance, the
population prevalence of COVID-19 in Santa Clara ranged from 2.49% (95CI 1.80-3.17%) to 4.16% (2.58-5.70%).
17

Initial results from the first large-scale study tracking the spread of the coronavirus in LA county found that 4.1%
of adults have antibodies. This translates to roughly 221,000 to 442,000 adults who have recovered from an
infection. LA county had reported fewer than 8,000 cases at that time. Our thanks to Virginia Webber for forwarding
this material.

24

Technical report

Figure 11: predicted and observed levels of immunity. This figure reproduces the results of Figure 9, with a focus
on the states of the infection factor. The blue line reports the expected percentage of the population who are infected
in California, up until the date of writing. The red line shows the prevalence of contagious or infectious people that
follows a few days later. The yellow line reports the acquisition of immunity; namely, the number of people who have
moved from a contagious state to an immune state. The two bars represent the 90% confidence intervals from an early
report from Santa Clara. The red dot corresponds to the estimated prevalence of immunity according to a local media
report. Please see main text for details.

In summary, the acquiring and maintaining critical levels of immunity are crucial factors in determining
the course of the pandemic over the next few months. Put simply, the rate at which we move to (a potentially
catastrophic) endemic equilibrium will be much faster if immunity is lost quickly (via antigenic drift or
mixing of the immune pool)— sufficiently quickly to preclude a second wave. This concludes our summary
of the results under models of regional social distancing. In the next section, we turn to other aspects of
strategic responses and ask what are the best mitigation strategies, under the current model?

Mitigation strategies
In this section, we use the parameter estimates from the DCM to integrate 18 months into the future and
record various outcomes under distinct social distancing strategies. The parameters of these strategies are
estimated from empirical data; however, their functional form is a question of model selection. Having said
this, given that there is only data from the initial phase of the pandemic, model comparison may be best left
until after the epidemic has run its course. In the interim, we can examine the effect of strategic responses
on metrics of interest; here, the total number of deaths, the total number of working days and the peak
occupancy of critical care facilities. We will consider mitigation strategies that are driven by the prevalence
of infection in any given State or whether national (i.e., Federal) measures of prevalence inform our
behaviour. First, we look at the effect of relaxing social distancing (by increasing the social distancing
threshold) and then repeat the analysis under a Federal policy.
Figure 12 shows the results of simulations under 16 levels of social distancing based upon regional
prevalence. The different levels were simulated by scaling the social distancing threshold of about 3% in
Figure 5 from very small values (around 0.05%) to very large values (around 100%). Figure 12 uses the
same format as previous figures to quantify the rate of new cases and deaths per day (upper left panel),
cumulated cases (upper right panel) and the underlying or latent causes (lower four panels). Here, the lines
report the average rates and probabilities over States, for different levels of social distancing. With stringent
social distancing (i.e., a low threshold) the initial relaxing of the lockdown after the first wave is quickly
reversed as new cases start to accumulate. The probability of returning to work peaks at about 20% and
then falls to negligible levels as the months pass. In this scenario, the second wave is delayed until about
60 weeks following the first wave. As social distancing is relaxed by increasing the threshold to its posterior
estimate from the original model estimation, the return to work approaches endemic equilibria at
successively higher levels, until, at low levels of social distancing (high thresholds) there is hardly any
fluctuation in the probability of being found at work. At the same time, a second peak at around 40 weeks
25

Technical report

(30 weeks after the first peak) emerges and cumulative cases and deaths rise more quickly over the months.
This spectrum of long-term trajectories is summarised by the green and blue arrows illustrating the
suppression of a second wave at 70 weeks and the emergence of an earlier wave at 40 weeks.
The key aspect of these simulations is that there is a balance between an overzealous lockdown that
precludes any meaningful return to work and a capricious social distancing strategy that releases a second
wave a few months after the first. This effect of social distancing is illustrated more explicitly in Figure 13

F IGURE 12
Figure 12: the effect of social distancing. This figure shows the results of simulations under different levels of social
distancing, based upon regional prevalence. This figure uses the same format as previous figures, to illustrate the rate
of new cases and deaths per day (upper left panel), accumulated cases (upper right panel) and the underlying or latent
causes (lower four panels). Here, the lines report the average rates and probabilities over States, for different levels of
social distancing. These levels were evaluated in 16 steps by scaling the posterior expectation of the social distancing
thresholds from exp(-4) to exp(4) = 54.6. The key effects of this scaling are summarised in the next figure.
26

Technical report

Figure 13 plots the cumulative deaths, working days and lost weeks as a function of the (logarithmic)
deviation from an estimated social distancing threshold of about 3%. As one might intuit, increasing the
threshold monotonically increases the number of working days at the expense of cumulative deaths, ranging
across the eight states from about 48,000 to 62,000, over a period of 18 months. Changing the threshold for
social distancing has a nonlinear aspect. This can be evinced more clearly by plotting the weeks lost due to
lockdown as a function of the (logarithmic) changes in threshold. Weeks lost was quantified in terms of the
number of weeks, over 18 months, during which the probability of being at work was less than 8%. The
lower left panel of Figure 13 highlights the switch from lockdown strategies—which preclude a long-term
return to work—to those that permit near-normal social distancing in the long term. Interestingly, the
empirical (posterior expectation) estimate of social distancing based upon the data is characterised by a
threshold that is close to the transition between the two kind of strategies. Again, as one might intuit, these
simulations speak to a trade-off between lives and weeks lost due to the pandemic—and our adaptive
response (see lower right panel).

F IGURE 13
Figure 13: lost lives and weeks. This figure summarises the key effects of social distancing on cumulative deaths
and working days lost due to the virus. The upper panels plot the cumulative deaths and days at work under different
levels of social distancing. As in the previous figure, social distancing was evaluated over 16 levels by scaling the
threshold estimated for each State. In terms of log parameters, this corresponds to adding or subtracting a change
(between -4 and +4 natural units). In this figure, social distancing is expressed in terms of these changes, where zero
27

Technical report

corresponds to no change from the (posterior) estimates of the previous section. The lower panel provides another
perspective on working days lost by calculating the number of lost weeks—defined operationally as the number of
weeks during which the probability of going to work was less than 8%. The final (lower right) panel plots cumulative
deaths against weeks lost. This illustrates the trade-off between the loss of life and working weeks—reflected in the
decreasing monotonic relationship between these two outcomes.

Finally, we repeated the above analysis under regional and national strategies, using high (1/4) and low
(1/32) social distancing thresholds. Figure 14 (upper row) shows the effects of the four kinds of strategy on
cumulative deaths, total number of working days and peak CCU occupancy. It is apparent that a hard (low
threshold) strategy reduces deaths and frees up working days to a greater extent than soft (high threshold)
strategies. Interestingly, a regional response strategy based on local prevalence rates incurs fewer deaths
with a slight increase in CCU occupancy. There is no discernible difference between a regional and national
strategy on working days.
The middle row shows the same results but when immunity is lost over four months, as opposed to 32
months. As one might intuit, increasing the rate at which immunity is lost substantially increases death rates
and other costs. In this scenario, the impact of a hard (low threshold) lockdown strategy on cumulative
deaths is more marked. And the relative benefit of a regional versus national policy is more pronounced.
This is at the expense of damage to the economy, in terms of the relative number of days lost. Total CCU
occupancy is largely unaffected with short-term immunity (because the loss of immunity only affects the
epidemiology after it is acquired during the first peak).
The lower row reproduces the upper row, with the inclusion of a back-to-work policy, in which people who
were seropositive are allowed to leave the home. The point made by these simulations is that a back-towork policy has limited effects on mortality rates18 or peak CCU occupancy but greatly ameliorates the
economic damage entailed by the lost working days.

18

Although it appears to reverse the effect of a regional versus national policy.
28

Technical report

F IGURE 14
Figure 14: different strategies evaluated. These bar charts report the effects of different strategies on cumulative
deaths (left column), total number of working days (middle column) and peak occupancy of CCU (right column). The
top row shows simulation results based upon the parameters used in the previous figures. One can see that a low
threshold (lockdown) strategy generally reduces cumulative deaths and working days lost to the economy, while
augmenting peak CCU occupancy. The middle row reproduces the same analysis but under more pessimistic
assumptions about the retention of immunity. Specifically, we reduced the time constant for retaining immunity from
32 months to 4 months. Under this scenario, death rates increase dramatically (approximately doubling), with an
accompanying loss of working days. Peak CCU is largely unaffected, because this parameter determines long-term
outcomes or trajectories as opposed to initial responses. The lower row shows the equivalent results when including
a back-to-work policy based upon serological testing. The only effect of this, under the current model, is to exacerbate
the effect of a hard versus relaxed social distancing strategy on the number of working days lost. This follows because
returning people who are immune to the community has no effect on morbidity or for critical care; however, it does
take the pressure off the economy.

29

Technical report

Conclusion
This report describes an extension of a single region (epidemic) model that furnishes a (pandemic) model
of regions that collectively participate in a pandemic. Our focus has been on the genesis of a second wave
of new cases—and potential deaths—due to the loss of immunity within a regional population and the influx
of people from other regions. We have showcased this model by applying it to statistics from the United
States, treating each State as a separable region. When using the optimised model parameters one can
simulate the impact of various strategies or (non-pharmaceutical) responses.
If one subscribes to the modelling in this report, then there are several narratives one could entertain. These
depend sensitively on the rate at which the immunity is lost. If SARS-CoV-2 confers immunity that lasts
for years, the following narrative might be appropriate:
“Endemic equilibrium will be reached by the end of the year, by which time COVID-19 will become
‘another way to die’. COVID-19 will account for a small proportion of deaths—with mortality rates that
are less than seasonal influenza (approximately 1/3). This state of affairs rests upon an adaptive (i.e.,
reactive) response to intervening fluctuations in the prevalence of infection (and demands upon critical
care). Operationally, this response could be characterised by social distancing when either the prevalence
of infection in the population exceeds 3% for the number of COVID-19 patients in critical care surpasses
a quarter of maximum capacity. Comprehensive social distancing (i.e. lockdown) is currently in force and
will last, on average, about 7.5 weeks in each affected region. For most countries, at the time of writing,
this suggests a relaxing of lockdown in 3 weeks.
However, this relaxation will not return to pre-pandemic levels of interpersonal contact. In other words,
there will be an enduring pressure to reduce interpersonal contact, which will reduce the time spent in the
company of others by 5% or less. The road to equilibrium will be relatively smooth with a slight bump
(second wave) at about seven months following the initial outbreak (i.e., November). This will not require
lockdown but there will be an appreciable increase in the number of cases and critical care uptake. This
second wave should last for about five weeks and may be confounded by the onset of a flu season.”
Under this narrative, social distancing will become ‘a way of living’ with COVID-19 and reflect changing
attitudes to prosocial behaviour; very much like our attitudes to recycling, smoking or outdated and
dangerous practices, such as the use of laudanum or mercury in the Victorian age. For example, unnecessary
commuting and international meetings may be seen as antisocial and unhygienic. Similarly, shaking hands
may become as socially sanctioned as frotteurism. In short, changing attitudes, affordances and dispositions
may be sufficient social distancing mechanisms to guarantee an endemic equilibrium. Note that the above
narrative makes no mention of ‘exit strategies’, vaccination, or anti-viral therapy. This is because strategic
responses are modelled as an inherent part of the epidemiology. In other words, they are treated as part of
the process as a reactive strategy, as opposed to a proactive strategy. This does not mean that governments
are under no pressure to declare their exit strategies. Rather, this declaration is part of the process of
changing attitudes to social behaviour.
As in (Friston et al., 2020), this narrative is not a prediction. It is a concrete example of the kind of prediction
on offer, with a suitably formulated and informed epidemiological model that installs social behaviour into
30

Technical report

the dynamics. This particular narrative depends on long-lasting immunity. A different story would be told
if immunity to SARS-CoV-2 is lost within months. This speaks to two pressing issues. First, has the first
wave induced a substantive herd immunity predicted by the DCM? Second, if this immunity has been
induced, how long will it last? The answer to the first question should be available within the next few
weeks, as studies assessing community levels of seroconversion appear. The answer to the second question
is more vexed because—from a purely epidemiological perspective—one might have to wait and see (given
the many factors that determine the loss of immunity and potential variation within different cohorts). In
the final report of this series, we will estimate the period of immunity by comparing models over a range
of short-term immunity, in terms of their model evidence. At some point over the next month or so, there
should be sufficient data to render this model comparison sufficiently definitive to estimate the effective
period of immunity one can expect.
As with all dynamic causal modelling studies, everything is entirely conditioned upon the models that have
been evaluated in terms of their evidence. In this report, the aim of the modelling is not to provide
predictions or guidance per se—it is to show that such predictions are possible under a suitably configured
model using state-of-the-art variational Bayesian model inversion and reduction. In other words, one can
reproduce these analyses under different models or prior assumptions in a few minutes on a personal
computer. This allows one to explore different models in an efficient fashion; thereby treating the modelling
as hypotheses testing, as more data becomes available. Being able to identify the best hypothesis or model—
in terms of its parameterisation of structure—is potentially important. This is because the model and
(maximum a posteriori) parameters can then form the basis of a prediction about data that has not yet been
observed, i.e., the future. In this light, we will not list the shortcomings of this particular model. Any
‘shortcoming’ is just a statement of an alternative model that can be included in the model comparison
procedure to optimise the model in and of itself.
Perhaps the most important aspect of this modelling is its focus on herd immunity and the notion of an
adaptive or reactive strategy. As in our provisional modelling of a single outbreak in a single region, the
passage from the onset of an outbreak to endemic equilibrium depends on establishing herd immunity to a
greater or lesser extent. This underwrites the repeated call for a greater understanding of the virology and
immunology of COVID-19. Not only will this speak to therapeutic interventions, but simply being able to
measure the proportion of individuals in a population who are immune would provide informative
constraints on modelling—and subsequent projections. The second aspect—of adaptive social distancing—
can be contrasted with other formulations that prescribe a fixed pattern of social distancing. For example,
a sawtooth or intermittent social distancing that enables the acquisition of herd immunity without
overwhelming critical care capacity (Ferguson et al., 2006). Both adaptive and proactive schedules (e.g.,
encouraging the use of facemasks) have their merits and could be evaluated using the procedures outlined
above.
Adaptive strategies provide a quantitative and formal guideline for personal and governmental responses
as the pandemic develops. In other words, the response becomes part of the ensemble dynamics that
determine the eventual outcome. A pragmatic advantage of adaptive strategies (see Figure 4) is that they
can be operationalised given available estimates of the prevalence. For a threshold strategy, one can simply
revert to one mode of social distancing or another, whenever a particular threshold is passed. An interesting
perspective on adaptive strategies follows from the fact that—in the model—they are an integral part of the
31

Technical report

process. In other fields, this corresponds to the notion of Chaos control; e.g., (Rose, 2014) and may yield
to an optimal control theoretic treatment (Fleming and Sheu, 2002; Kappen, 2005; Todorov and Jordan,
2002). In other words, the optimal policy can be treated very much like an engineering problem or, indeed,
an active inference problem. This brings us to our last point.
In closing, there is one perspective on applications of generative models to pandemics that touches on
(unrelated) work in theoretical neurobiology. This work tries to understand the behaviour of sentient
systems, such as ourselves, in terms of active inference and the optimisation of variational free energy
associated with our internal world models (Parr and Friston, 2018). On this view, using a generative model
of a pandemic to inform policies becomes formally identical to the imperatives that underwrite active
inference (Clark, 2016; Hohwy, 2013). In brief, these imperatives are to bring about those situations that
we find the least surprising; namely, that we all elude death and return to normal.

Software note
The figures in this report can be reproduced using annotated (MATLAB/Octave) code that is available as
part of the free and open source academic software SPM (https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/), released
under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 or later. The routines are called by a
demonstration script that can be invoked by typing >> DEM_COVID_X at the MATLAB prompt. At the
time of writing, these routines are undergoing software validation in our internal source version control
system—that will be released in the next public release of SPM (and via GitHub
at https://github.com/spm/). In the interim, please see https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/COVID-19/.
The data used in this technical report are available for academic research purposes from the 2019 Novel
Coronavirus COVID-19 (2019-nCoV) Data Repository by Johns Hopkins CSSE, hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. The time series tables from States in America used in
this
report
are
stored
in
files
time_series_COVID19_confirmed_US.csv
and
time_series_COVID19_deaths_US.csv.

Acknowledgements

This work was undertaken by members of the Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology. The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging is supported by core
funding from Wellcome [203147/Z/16/Z]. A.R. is funded by the Australian Research Council (Refs:
DE170100128 and DP200100757). A.J.B. is supported by a Wellcome Trust grant WT091681MA. CL is
supported by an MRC Clinician Scientist award (MR/R006504/1).
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

32

Technical report

References

Bao, L., Deng, W., Gao, H., Xiao, C., Liu, J., Xue, J., Lv, Q., Liu, J., Yu, P., Xu, Y., Qi, F., Qu, Y., Li, F., Xiang, Z.,
Yu, H., Gong, S., Liu, M., Wang, G., Wang, S., Song, Z., Zhao, W., Han, Y., Zhao, L., Liu, X., Wei, Q., Qin, C.,
2020. Reinfection could not occur in SARS-CoV-2 infected rhesus macaques. bioRxiv, 2020.2003.2013.990226.
Bendavid, E., Mulaney, B., Sood, N., Shah, S., Ling, E., Bromley-Dulfano, R., Lai, C., Weissberg, Z., Saavedra, R.,
Tedrow, J., Tversky, D., Bogan, A., Kupiec, T., Eichner, D., Gupta, R., Ioannidis, J., Bhattacharya, J., 2020. COVID19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County, California. medRxiv, 2020.2004.2014.20062463.
Beutler, B., Eidenschenk, C., Crozat, K., Imler, J.L., Takeuchi, O., Hoffmann, J.A., Akira, S., 2007. Genetic analysis
of resistance to viral infection. Nature reviews. Immunology 7, 753-766.
Chan, K.H., Chan, J.F., Tse, H., Chen, H., Lau, C.C., Cai, J.P., Tsang, A.K., Xiao, X., To, K.K., Lau, S.K., Woo, P.C.,
Zheng, B.J., Wang, M., Yuen, K.Y., 2013. Cross-reactive antibodies in convalescent SARS patients' sera against the
emerging novel human coronavirus EMC (2012) by both immunofluorescent and neutralizing antibody tests. The
Journal of infection 67, 130-140.
Chinazzi, M., Davis, J.T., Ajelli, M., Gioannini, C., Litvinova, M., Merler, S., Pastore y Piontti, A., Mu, K., Rossi, L.,
Sun, K., Viboud, C., Xiong, X., Yu, H., Halloran, M.E., Longini, I.M., Vespignani, A., 2020. The effect of travel
restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science, eaba9757.
Clark, A., 2016. Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford University Press.
Cristiani, L., Mancino, E., Matera, L., Nenna, R., Pierangeli, A., Scagnolari, C., Midulla, F., 2020. Will children reveal
their secret? The coronavirus dilemma. European Respiratory Journal, 2000749.
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cucunuba
Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., 2020. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand.
Ferguson, N.M., Cummings, D.A., Fraser, C., Cajka, J.C., Cooley, P.C., Burke, D.S., 2006. Strategies for mitigating
an influenza pandemic. Nature 442, 448-452.
Fleming, W.H., Sheu, S.J., 2002. Risk-sensitive control and an optimal investment model II. Ann. Appl. Probab. 12,
730-767.
Friston, K., Parr, T., Zeidman, P., 2018. Bayesian model reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07092.
Friston, K., Zeidman, P., Litvak, V., 2015. Empirical Bayes for DCM: A Group Inversion Scheme. Frontiers in
systems neuroscience 9, 164.
Friston, K.J., Parr, T., Zeidman, P., Razi, A., Flandin, G., Daunizeau, J., Hulme, O.J., Billig, A.J., Litvak, V., Moran,
R.J., Price, C.J., Lambert, C., 2020. Dynamic causal modelling of COVID-19. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2004.04463.
Gibson, J.J., 1977. The theory of affordances, in: R, S., Bransford, J. (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward
an ecological psychology. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 67-82.
Heer, C.D., Sanderson, D.J., Alhammad, Y.M.O., Schmidt, M.S., Trammell, S.A.J., Perlman, S., Cohen, M.S., Fehr,
A.R., Brenner, C., 2020. Coronavirus Infection and PARP Expression Dysregulate the NAD Metabolome: A
Potentially Actionable Component of Innate Immunity. bioRxiv, 2020.2004.2017.047480.
Hohwy, J., 2013. The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Huang, C.L., Wang, Y.M., Li, X.W., Ren, L.L., Zhao, J.P., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G.H., Xu, J.Y., Gu, X.Y., Cheng,
Z.S., Yu, T., Xia, J.A., Wei, Y., Wu, W.J., Xie, X.L., Yin, W., Li, H., Liu, M., Xiao, Y., Gao, H., Guo, L., Xie, J.G.,
Wang, G.F., Jiang, R.M., Gao, Z.C., Jin, Q., Wang, J.W., Cao, B., 2020. Clinical features of patients infected with
2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet (London, England) 395, 497-506.
Jafri, H.H., Singh, R.K.B., Ramaswamy, R., 2016. Generalized synchrony of coupled stochastic processes with
multiplicative noise. Physical Review E 94, 052216.
Kaluza, P., Meyer-Ortmanns, H., 2010. On the role of frustration in excitable systems. Chaos 20, 043111.
Kappen, H.J., 2005. Path integrals and symmetry breaking for optimal control theory. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment 11, P11011.
Kissler, S.M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y.H., Lipsitch, M., 2020. Projecting the transmission dynamics of
SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science, eabb5793.
Ladenbauer, J., Obermayer, K., 2019. Weak electric fields promote resonance in neuronal spiking activity: Analytical
results from two-compartment cell and network models. PLoS Comput Biol 15, e1006974.
Li, R., Pei, S., Chen, B., Song, Y., Zhang, T., Yang, W., Shaman, J., 2020. Substantial undocumented infection
facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science, eabb3221.
33

Technical report

Lizarazu, M., Lallier, M., Molinaro, N., 2019. Phase-amplitude coupling between theta and gamma oscillations adapts
to speech rate. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
Mizumoto, K., Chowell, G., 2020. Estimating Risk for Death from 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease, China, JanuaryFebruary 2020. Emerging infectious diseases 26.
Moghadas, S.M., Shoukat, A., Fitzpatrick, M.C., Wells, C.R., Sah, P., Pandey, A., Sachs, J.D., Wang, Z., Meyers,
L.A., Singer, B.H., 2020. Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the United States.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Moran, R.J., Fagerholm, E.D., Cullen, M., Daunizeau, J., Richardson, M.P., Williams, S., Turkheimer, F., Leech, R.,
Friston, K.J., 2020. Estimating required 'lockdown' cycles before immunity to SARS-CoV-2: Model-based analyses
of susceptible population sizes, 'S0', in seven European countries including the UK and Ireland. arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2004.05060.
Nishiura, H., Linton, N.M., Akhmetzhanov, A.R., 2020. Serial interval of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infections.
International journal of infectious diseases.
Paget, J., Spreeuwenberg, P., Charu, V., Taylor, R.J., Iuliano, A.D., Bresee, J., Simonsen, L., Viboud, C., Global
Seasonal Influenza-associated Mortality Collaborator, N., Teams*, G.L.C., 2019. Global mortality associated with
seasonal influenza epidemics: New burden estimates and predictors from the GLaMOR Project. J Glob Health 9,
020421-020421.
Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2018. The Anatomy of Inference: Generative Models and Brain Structure. Frontiers in
computational neuroscience 12.
Prem, K., Liu, Y., Russell, T.W., Kucharski, A.J., Eggo, R.M., Davies, N., Flasche, S., Clifford, S., Pearson, C.A.,
Munday, J.D., 2020. The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic
in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health.
Rose, N.R., 2014. Learning from myocarditis: mimicry, chaos and black holes. F1000prime reports 6, 25.
Russell, T.W., Hellewell, J., Jarvis, C.I., van Zandvoort, K., Abbott, S., Ratnayake, R., Cmmid Covid-Working, G.,
Flasche, S., Eggo, R.M., Edmunds, W.J., Kucharski, A.J., 2020. Estimating the infection and case fatality ratio for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) using age-adjusted data from the outbreak on the Diamond Princess cruise ship,
February 2020. Euro surveillance : bulletin Europeen sur les maladies transmissibles = European communicable
disease bulletin 25.
Schumacher, J., Wunderle, T., Fries, P., Jakel, F., Pipa, G., 2015. A Statistical Framework to Infer Delay and Direction
of Information Flow from Measurements of Complex Systems. Neural Comput 27, 1555-1608.
Simonsen, L., Chowell, G., Andreasen, V., Gaffey, R., Barry, J., Olson, D., Viboud, C., 2018. A review of the 1918
herald pandemic wave: importance for contemporary pandemic response strategies. Annals of epidemiology 28, 281288.
Steven, S., Yen Ting, L., Chonggang, X., Ethan, R.-S., Nick, H., Ruian, K., 2020. High Contagiousness and Rapid
Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerging Infectious Disease journal 26.
Su, S., Wong, G., Shi, W., Liu, J., Lai, A.C.K., Zhou, J., Liu, W., Bi, Y., Gao, G.F., 2016. Epidemiology, Genetic
Recombination, and Pathogenesis of Coronaviruses. Trends in microbiology 24, 490-502.
Sun, K., Chen, J., Viboud, C., 2020. Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak based
on crowdsourced data: a population-level observational study. The Lancet Digital Health.
Todorov, E., Jordan, M.I., 2002. Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination. Nat Neurosci. 5, 12261235.
Verity, R., Okell, L.C., Dorigatti, I., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Imai, N., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Thompson, H.,
Walker, P.G.T., Fu, H., Dighe, A., Griffin, J.T., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cori, A., Cucunuba, Z.,
FitzJohn, R., Gaythorpe, K., Green, W., Hamlet, A., Hinsley, W., Laydon, D., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Riley, S., van
Elsland, S., Volz, E., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Xi, X., Donnelly, C.A., Ghani, A.C., Ferguson, N.M., 2020. Estimates of
the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The Lancet. Infectious diseases.
Wang, C., Liu, L., Hao, X., Guo, H., Wang, Q., Huang, J., He, N., Yu, H., Lin, X., Pan, A., 2020a. Evolving
Epidemiology and Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions on the Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in
Wuhan, China. medRxiv.
Wang, D., Hu, B., Hu, C., Zhu, F., Liu, X., Zhang, J., Wang, B., Xiang, H., Cheng, Z., Xiong, Y., Zhao, Y., Li, Y.,
Wang, X., Peng, Z., 2020b. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus–
Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 323, 1061-1069.
Wang, H., Wang, Z., Dong, Y., Chang, R., Xu, C., Yu, X., Zhang, S., Tsamlag, L., Shang, M., Huang, J., 2020c.
Phase-adjusted estimation of the number of coronavirus disease 2019 cases in Wuhan, China. Cell Discovery 6, 1-8.
34

Technical report

Wells, C.R., Sah, P., Moghadas, S.M., Pandey, A., Shoukat, A., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., Meyers, L.A., Singer, B.H.,
Galvani, A.P., 2020. Impact of international travel and border control measures on the global spread of the novel 2019
coronavirus outbreak. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 7504-7509.
Wölfel, R., Corman, V.M., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M., Zange, S., Müller, M.A., Niemeyer, D., Jones, T.C.,
Vollmar, P., Rothe, C., Hoelscher, M., Bleicker, T., Brünink, S., Schneider, J., Ehmann, R., Zwirglmaier, K., Drosten,
C., Wendtner, C., 2020. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature.
Wu, J.T., Leung, K., Leung, G.M., 2020. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread
of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet (London, England) 395, 689-697.
Yang, Z., Zeng, Z., Wang, K., Wong, S., Liang, W., Zanin, M., Liu, P., Cao, X., Gao, Z., Mai, Z., 2020. Modified
SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in China under public health interventions. Journal of
Thoracic Disease 12.

35

