arXiv:2004.07947v8 [physics.soc-ph] 15 Nov 2020

The socio-economic determinants of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic*
†

Viktor Stojkoski1,2, , Zoran Utkovski3,2, Petar Jolakoski1,
Dragan Tevdovski1, and Ljupco Kocarev2,4
1 Faculty

of Economics, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje
2 Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts
3 Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, Berlin
4 Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering,
Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje
November 17, 2020

Abstract
Besides the biological and epidemiological factors, a multitude of social and economic
criteria also govern the extent of the coronavirus disease spread within a population. Consequently, there is an active debate regarding the critical socio-economic determinants that contribute to the impact of the resulting pandemic. Here, we leverage Bayesian model averaging
techniques and country level data to investigate the potential of 31 determinants, describing a
diverse set of socio-economic characteristics, in explaining the outcome of the first wave of the
coronavirus pandemic. We show that the true empirical model behind the coronavirus outcome
is constituted only of few determinants. To understand the relationship between the potential
determinants in the specification of the true model, we develop the coronavirus determinants
Jointness space. The extent to which each determinant is able to provide a credible explanation
varies between countries due to their heterogeneous socio-economic characteristics. In this
aspect, the obtained Jointness map acts as a bridge between theoretical investigations and empirical observations and offers an alternate view for the joint importance of the socio-economic
determinants when used for developing policies aimed at preventing future epidemic crises.

1 Introduction
In order to reduce the potential enormous impact of the coronavirus disease spread (COVID-19),
most governments implemented social distancing restrictions such as closure of schools, airports,
* This is a preliminary report.
† Corresponding author: vstojkoski@eccf.ukim.edu.mk

1

borders, restaurants and shopping malls [1]. In the most severe cases there were even lockdowns –
all citizens were prohibited from leaving their homes. This subsequently led to a major economic
downturn: stock markets plummeted, international trade slowed down, businesses went bankrupt
and people were left unemployed. While in some countries the implemented restrictions had a
significant impact on reducing the expected shock from the coronavirus, the extent of the disease
spread in the population greatly varied from one economy to another.
A multitude of social and economic criteria have been attributed as potential determinants for
the observed variety in the coronavirus outcome during this first wave of the pandemic. Some
experts say that the hardest hit countries also had an aging population [2, 3], or an underdeveloped
healthcare system [4, 5]. Others emphasize the role of the natural environment [6, 7]. Having in
mind the ongoing debate, a comprehensive empirical study of the critical socio-economic determinants which contributed to the country level outcome of the first wave of the pandemic would
not only provide a glimpse on their potential impact, but would also offer a guidance for future
policies that aim at preventing the emergence of future epidemic crises.
Motivated by this observation, here we perform a detailed statistical analysis on a large set
of potential socio-economic determinants and explore their potential to explain the variety in the
observed coronavirus total cases/deaths among countries in the first wave of the virus spread. To
construct the set of potential determinants we conduct a thorough review of the literature describing the social and economic factors which contribute to the spread of an epidemic. We identify a
total of 31 potential determinants that describe a diverse ensemble of social and economic factors,
including: healthcare infrastructure, societal characteristics, economic performance, demographic
structure etc. To investigate the performance of each variable in explaining the coronavirus outcome in 106 countries, measured either via the number of coronavirus cases per million population
(p.m.p.) or the number of coronavirus deaths p.m.p., we utilize the technique of Bayesian model
averaging (BMA). BMA allows us to isolate the most important determinants by calculating the
posterior probability that they truly regulate the process. At the same time, BMA provides estimates for their relative impact, while also accounting for the uncertainty in the selection of potential
determinants [8–10].
Based on the studied data, we observe patterns which suggest that there are only few determinants that are strongly robust predictors of the coronavirus outcome. These factors are related to
the effect of density and international influence in social interactions, as well as the overweight
prevalence within the population. However, the primary analysis does not take into account for
the inhomogeneity of the socio-economic nature of the countries, and thus cannot capture (potentially) significant interactions between the potential determinants. To deal with this problem, we
develop the coronavirus determinants Jointness space. The Jointness space models the interrelation between the potential determinants in explaining the coronavirus outcome, and acts as a bridge
between theoretical investigations and empirical observations focused at understanding the role of
the social and economic factors when developing policy recommendations for preventing future
epidemic crises. Using this space, we find that there may be two efficient routes which can be
used for advancing social and economic measures aimed at preventing the impact of such crises,
depending on how we measure the outcome. The first one is by focusing on reducing the disease
spread and improving the aspects of the demographic structure and the natural environment of
the country. The second one suggests focusing solely on decreasing the prevalence of overweight
people in the population. This will reduce both the registered cases and the observed deaths due
to the COVID-19 disease. We believe in the absence of realistic models that adequately cover all
2

relevant aspects; this study provides the first step towards a more comprehensive understanding of
the relationship between the socio-economic determinants of the coronavirus pandemic.

2 Results
2.1 Preliminaries
In a formal setting, both the log of the overall registered COVID-19 cases p.m.p. and the log
of the total COVID-19 deaths p.m.p. are a result of a disease spreading process [11, 12]. The
extent to which a disease spreads within a population is uniquely determined by its reproduction
number. This number describes the expected number of cases directly generated by one case in a
population in which all individuals are susceptible to infection [13, 14]. Obviously, its magnitude
depends on various natural characteristics of the disease, such as its infectivity or the duration of
infectiousness [15], and the social distancing measures imposed by the government [1]. Also, it
depends on a plethora on socio-economic factors that govern the behavioral interactions within a
population [16, 17].
In general, we never observe the reproduction number, but rather the disease outcome, i.e., the
number of cases/deaths. Thus, it is mathematically complex and computationally expensive to try
and infer the reproduction number. To circumvent this problem, we utilize its known characteristics
and derive a much simpler statistical model for the COVID-19 outcome. Here we choose a specific
formulation where the disease outcome is modeled through the linear regression framework where
the dependent variable is either the log of accumulated number of registered COVID-19 cases
p.m.p. or the log of the accumulated number of COVID-19 deaths p.m.p. of the country. We
focus on registered quantities normalized on per capita basis for the dependent variable instead
of raw values to eliminate the bias in the outcomes arising from the different population sizes in
the studied countries. The accumulation of the registered cases and deaths spans from the day of
observation of the first case in the country, up until the last day of the first wave of the pandemic
in that country. The last day is, in general, different for each country and is inferred on the basis of
the level of daily government response. The estimation procedure used to infer the last day of the
first wave will be discussed in more detail in the next section.
The linear regression framework is the simplest tool used for quantifying the relationship between a given outcome and a set of potential determinants. Its advantage lies in the efficient and
unbiased analytical inference of the strength of the linear relationship. As such it has been widely
used in modeling the outcome of epidemiological phenomena (See for example Refs. [18–20]).
A central question which arises in the model specification is the selection of the independent
variables. While the literature review offers a comprehensive overview of all potential determinants, in reality we are never certain in their credibility. To reduce our uncertainty, we resort to
BMA. BMA leverages Bayesian statistics to account for model uncertainty by estimating each
possible specification, and thus evaluating the posterior distribution of each parameter value and
probability that a particular model is the correct one [21].

3

2.2 Baseline model
The BMA method relies on the estimation of a baseline model that is used for evaluating the performance of all other models. In our case, this is the model which encompasses only variables for
the state of the epidemic dynamics within the country and effect of government policies regarding
social distancing, contact tracing and testing procedures.
We use two variables to quantify the possibility that countries are in a different state of the
disease spreading process. The first variable simply measures the duration of epidemics in a country as the number of days since the first registered case. In addition, we evaluate the time which
the country had to prepare for the first wave of coronavirus. This is given as the number of days
between the first registered case worldwide and the first case in the country.
In order to assess the effect of government policies regarding social distancing and testing we
construct an aggregated government response index. The index quantifies the average daily variation in government responses to the epidemic dynamics. As a measure for the daily variation,
we take the Oxford COVID-19 government response index [22]. The Oxford COVID-19 government response index is a composite measure that combines the daily effect of policies on social
distancing, testing and contact tracing in an economy. For each country, we construct a weighted
average of the index from all available data since their first registered coronavirus case, up until
the end date, i.e., the date when the government response index is at its maximum value. This
threshold is chosen as a means to capture the moment when a country gains the ability to control
and stabilize the propagation of the disease. To emphasize the effect of policy responses implemented on earlier dates, we construct a weighted average by putting a larger weight on those dates.
This is because earlier responses are supposed to have a bigger impact on the prevention of the
spread of the virus. The procedure implemented to derive the average government response index
is described in Section S1 of the Supplementary Material (SM).
Fig 1 visualizes the results from the baseline model. We observe that the countries which had
more detailed response policies also had less COVID-19 cases and deaths, as expected. In addition,
the countries with longer duration of the crisis registered more cases and deaths p.m.p., whereas
the countries which had more time to prepare for the crisis also had less cases and deaths.
It is apparent that the baseline model already has a large coefficient of determination (R2 ) and
can significantly explain a certain amount of the cross country variations in registered COVID
cases/deaths p.m.p.. However, there is still a large amount of variation which, we believe, can be
attributed to various socio-economic determinants present within a society.

2.3 Socio-economic determinants
To derive the set of potential determinants we conduct a comprehensive literature review. From
the literature review we recognize a total of 31 potential socio-economic determinants, listed in
Table 1. For a detailed description of the potential effect of the determinants we refer to the
references given in the same table, and the references therein. In what follows, we only describe
in short, the set of potential socio-economic determinants on the basis of their characteristics.
Healthcare Infrastructure: The healthcare infrastructure essentially determines both the quantity and quality with which health care services are delivered in a time of an epidemic. As measures,

4

Figure 1: Explained variation in COVID-19 cases due to government response.

we include 2 variables which capture the quantity of hospital beds, nurses and medical practitioners, as well as the quality of the coverage of essential health services. On the one hand, studies
report that well-structured healthcare resources positively affect a country’s capacity to deal with
epidemic emergencies [23–30]. On the other hand, the healthcare infrastructure also greatly impacts the country’s ability to perform testing and reporting when identifying the infected people.
In this regard, economies with better structure are able to easily perform mass testing and more
detailed reporting [31–33].
National health statistics: The physical and mental state of a person play an important role
in the degree to which the individual is susceptible to a disease. In countries where a significant
proportion of the population suffer from diseases highly associated with the spread of an infectious
disease as well as its fatal outcomes, we would expect more severe consequences of the emergent
epidemics [34–37]. Specifically, metabolic disorders such as diabetes may intensify epidemic
complications [38, 39], whereas it has been observed that communicable diseases account for the
majority of deaths in complex emergencies [40]. In addition, there is empirical evidence that
adequate hygiene greatly reduces the rate of mortality, whereas Overweight prevalence increases
the fatality of epidemic diseases [41,42]. To quantify the national health characteristics, we include
5 variables that assess the general health level in the studied countries.
Economic performance: We evaluate the economic performance of a country through 5 variables. This performance often mirrors the country’s ability to intervene in a case of a public
health crisis [43–48]. Variables such as GDP per capita have been used in modeling health outcomes, mortality trends, cause-specific mortality estimation and health system performance and
finances [49–51]. For poor countries, economic performance appears to improve health by providing the means to meet essential needs such as food, clean water and shelter, as well access to basic
health care services. However, after a country reaches a certain threshold of development, few
health benefits arise from further economic growth. It has been suggested that this is the reason
why, contrary to expectations, the economic downturns during the 20th century were associated
with declines in mortality rates [52, 53]. Observations indicate that what drives the health in in-

5

dustrialized countries is not absolute wealth or growth but how the nation’s resources are shared
across the population [54]. The more egalitarian income distribution within a rich country is associated with better health of population [55–58]. Finally, it is also known that in better economies
there are greater trade interactions and people mobility, which may enhance the propagation of an
transmitted disease [17, 23, 48, 59, 60].
Societal characteristics: The characteristics of a society often reveal the way in which people
interact, and thus spread the disease. In this aspect, properties such as education and the degree of
digitalization within a society reflect the level of a person’s reaction and promotion of self-induced
measures for reducing the spread of the disease [61–65]. Governing behavior such as control of
corruption, rule of law or government effectiveness further enhance societal responsibility [66,67].
There are findings which identify the religious view as a critical determinant in the health outcome [68, 69]. Evidently, the religion drives a person’s attitudes towards cooperation, government,
legal rules, markets, and thriftiness [70]. Finally, the way we mix in society may effectively control the spread of infectious diseases [17, 60, 71–73]. To measure the societal characteristics, we
identify 8 variables.
Demographic structure: Similarly, to the national health statistics, the demographic structure
may impact the average susceptibility of the population to a disease. Certain demographic groups
may simply have weaker defensive health mechanisms to cope with the stress induced by the
disease [74–77]. In addition, the location of living may greatly affect the way in which the disease
is spread [78, 79]. To express these phenomena, we collect 7 variables.
Natural environment: A preserved natural environment ensures healthy lives and promotes general well-being. Numerous studies indicate that there is a correlation between air pollution and
COVID-19 outcomes [7, 80, 81]. In addition, countries where natural sustainability is deteriorated,
are also more vulnerable to epidemic outbreak [6]. On the other hand, healthy natural environments may attract more tourists, which could drive the disease spread. We gather the data for 4
variables which capture the essence of this socio-economic characteristic [31].

6

Determinant
Medical resources
Health coverage
Death Rate
Life expectancy
Mortality
Immunization
Overweight
Economic development
Labor market
Government spending
Income inequality
Trade
Social connectedness
Digitalization
Education
Governance
Religion

Household size
Elderly population
Young population
Gender
Population size
Rural population
Migration
Population density
Sustainable development
Air Pollution
Air transport
International Tourism

Measure
Healthcare Infrastructure
Medical resources index
UHC service coverage index
National health statistics
Death rate, crude p.c.
Life expectancy at birth
Non-natural causes mortality index
Immunization index
Prevalence of overweight (% of adults)
Economic performance
GDP p.c., PPP $
Employment to population ratio
Gov. health spending p.c., PPP $
GINI index
Trade (% of GDP)
Societal characteristics
Social connectedness index (PageRank)
Digitalization index
Human capital index
Governance index
60%+ catholic population
60%+ christian population
60%+ muslim population
Avg. no. of persons in a household
Demographic structure
Population age 65+ (% of total)
Population ages 0-14 (% of total)
50%+ male population (% of total)
Population, total
Rural population (% of total)
Int. migrant stock (% of population)
People per sq. km
Natural environment
Ecological Footprint (gha/person)
Yearly avg P.M. 2.5 exposure
Yearly passengers carried
Number of tourist arrivals

Table 1: List of Potential determinants of the COVID–19 pandemic.

7

Source

Refs.

WDI
WDI

[23–33]
[23–33]

WDI
WDI
WDI
WDI
ESG

[34–37]
[34–37]
[38–42]
[23]
[82–84]

WDI
WDI
WDI
WDI
WDI

[43–46, 49–51]
[23, 43, 47, 48]
[31, 43–46]
[54–58]
[23, 48, 59]

DFG
WDI
WDI
WGI
NM
NM
NM
UN

[85, 86]
[23, 61–65]
[34, 61–65]
[66, 67]
[68–70]
[68–70]
[68–70]
[17, 60, 71–73]

WDI
WDI
WDI
WM
WDI
WDI
WDI

[74–77]
[74–77]
[74–77]
[78, 79]
[78, 79]
[78, 79]
[78, 79]

GFN
SGA
WDI
WDI

[6]
[7, 80, 81]
[31]
[31]

Figure 2: BMA results. Bars for the posterior inclusion probability (PIP), posterior mean (Post. Mean) and
the posterior standard deviation (Post. Std.) of each potential determinant. The determinants are ordered
according to their PIP. The Post. Mean is in absolute value. The signs next to the bar of each determinant
indicate the direction of its impact. The horizontal lines divide the determinants into groups according to
their evidence for being included in the “true” model. Moreover, the horizontal axis is on a logarithmic
scale. The setup used to estimate the results is described in SM Section S3.

3 Results
3.1 BMA estimation
We use this set of determinants and estimate two distinct BMA models. In the first model the dependent variable is the log of COVID-19 cases p.m.p., whereas in the second model we investigate
the critical determinants of the log of the mortality rate due to the coronavirus. For the estimation
procedure we use data on 106 countries. This is the maximal set of countries for which the data on
all 31 potential determinants could be attained. The summary statistics and the data gathering and
preprocessing procedures are described in SM Section S2. The mathematical background of BMA
together with our inference setup is given in SM Section S3.
Fig. 2 displays the respective results. In both situations, the determinants are ordered according
to their posterior inclusion probabilities (PIP), given in the second column. PIP quantifies the posterior probability that a given determinant belongs to the “true” linear regression model. Besides
this statistic, we also provide the posterior mean (Post mean) and the posterior standard deviation (Post Std). Post mean is an estimate of the average magnitude of the effect of a determinant,
whereas the Post Std evaluates the deviation from this value.
In the inference procedure we assumed that the “true” model of the coronavirus outcome is
a result of the baseline specification and 3 additional variables. Our prior belief stems from the
general observation which suggests that economies are heterogeneous, and a small number of
complementing factors may contribute to the extent of the coronavirus spread, while the other
8

potential determinants may simply behave as substitutes in terms of socio-economic interpretation
within a country1 . This implies that the prior inclusion probability of each potential determinant
is around 0.1. We use this attribute, together with the posterior inclusion probability of each
determinant, to divide the determinants into four disjoint groups:
Determinants with strong evidence: (PIP > 0.5). The first group describes the determinants
which have by far larger posterior inclusion probability than prior probability, and thus there is
strong evidence to be included in the true model. We find three such variable related to explaining
the coronavirus cases, the overweight prevalence in the country, the population density and the
number of international tourist arrivals. The overweight prevalence and the population density are
positively related with the number of registered COVID-19 cases p.m.p., whereas the international
tourist arrivals have a negative relationship. When investigating the critical determinants of the
coronavirus deaths, it appears that the overweight prevalence is the only determinant for which
there is strong evidence to explain the outcome and has a positive impact.
Determinants with medium evidence: (0.5 ≥ PIP > 0.1). The fraction of elderly population
in the country is the only variable for which there is medium evidence to be a determinant of
the coronavirus cases, with a positive effect. There are no variables for which there is medium
evidence to be a determinant of the coronavirus deaths outcome.
Determinants with weak evidence: (0.1 ≥PIP> 0.05). These are determinants which have
lower posterior inclusion probability than their prior one, but still may account for some of the
variations in the coronavirus outcome. For the cases per million population there are two such
determinants, the average household size and the fraction of young population in the country, both
with a negative Post Mean. Again, there are no variables with weak evidence for being a true
determinant of the observed COVID-19 deaths.
Determinants with negligible evidence: (PIP≤ 0.05). All other potential determinants have
negligible evidence to be a true determinant of the coronavirus outcome. In total, we find negligible
evidence for explaining the coronavirus cases in 25 determinants and for explaining the coronavirus
deaths in 30 potential determinants.
The division of the determinants into groups allows us to assess the robustness of each determinant – those belonging to a group described with a larger PIP also offer more credible explanation
for the coronavirus outcome. Nonetheless, we point out that although the comparison between
posterior inclusion probabilities and prior inclusion probabilities is a common approach, its interpretation must be taken with care. As said in [87], even if the posterior inclusion probability
is lower than the prior inclusion probability for a given variable, it might be that this particular
variable is important to decision makers under certain circumstances. This is exactly the case with
the inhomogeneous nature of the coronavirus dynamics. Therefore, even if useful for presentation
purposes, the mechanical application of a threshold, or a simple comparison between the prior and
the posterior, should often be avoided in practice.
1 Nevertheless,

we found that our results do not depend on the prior assumption of the size of the true model.

9

Definitely, there were several countries which were either extremely affected by the coronavirus
or displayed great immunity to the epidemic crisis. These countries are outliers and may greatly
influence our results. To check the robustness of our results against the presence of such data
we implement the following strategy. First, we remove a country from the sample. Then, we
re-perform the BMA procedure with the resulting countries. We repeat this procedure for every
country and recover the median results for each potential determinant. The results, shown in SM
Section S4, indicate that the findings presented here are valid even in the presence of potential
outliers. In the same section, we display the economies which contributed most and least to the
credibility of a particular determinant. These are the countries which, when excluded, lead to the
minimum, respectively maximum, posterior inclusion probability of the given determinant. The
investigation suggests that there are multiple countries which are significant contributors to the PIP
value of each determinant, thus indicating that there is indeed heterogeneity in the socio-economic
features of the countries.

3.2 “Jointness space” of the COVID-19 determinants
The next step in deriving the true socio-economic model behind the coronavirus outcome is to find
its dimension, i.e., the number of explanatory variables included in the model. As a measure for
this quantity, BMA provides the posterior size, formally defined as the posterior belief for the true
dimension of the model. We find that, for the coronavirus cases p.m.p. the posterior model size is
3.4 whereas for the coronavirus deaths p.m.p. it is 1.2.
After discovering the model size, we need to specify the explanatory variables. This raises the
issue of how to construct the appropriate model. One possible solution is to use the determinants
with the highest PIP value and regress them on the dependent variable. However, this neglects the
interdependence of inclusion and exclusion of determinants in a same model. A standard approach
for resolving this issue is to conduct a statistical jointness test. The concept of jointness has been
introduced within the BMA framework with the aim to capture dependence between explanatory
variables in the posterior distribution over the model space [88]. By emphasizing dependence and
conditioning on a set of one or more other variables, jointness moves away from marginal measures
of variable importance and investigates the sensitivity of posterior distributions of parameters of
interest to dependence across regressors. For example, if two variables are complementary in their
posterior distribution over the model space, models that either include or exclude both variables
together receive relatively more weight than models where only one variable is present. In our
context, jointness tests will allow us to infer whether two socio-economic determinants are complements, i.e., tend to be included together in models with high posterior probability, or substitutes,
i.e., models with high posterior probability tend to exclude the joint inclusion of both determinants.
To better understand the properties of the coronavirus outcome, we perform the jointness test
developed by Hofmarcher et al. [89]. Using this test we can estimate a metric between each
pair of determinants and quantify their relationship in a range between −1 and 1. In the two
extremes, −1 indicates that the two determinants behave as perfect substitutes in the true model,
whereas 1 indicates that they are included in the true model together. The resulting jointness metric
between pairs of determinants can be used to construct a network (graph), which we refer to as the
jointness space of the COVID-19 determinants. In this network, the nodes are the potential socioeconomic determinants, whereas the jointness values represent the edge weights. In other words,
two arbitrary determinants are linked with each other by the posterior belief that both of them
10

belong to the same linear regression model governing the coronavirus outcome.
In theory, many possible factors may cause complementarity between the determinants, such
as national culture [90], the type of healthcare system [91] or political priorities [92]. All of these
are a priori notions of what dimension drives the relatedness between the potential determinants
and assume that there is little flexibility in choosing the correct model. Instead, the jointness
space follows an agnostic approach and uses a data-driven measure, based on the idea that, if
two determinants are related because they offer contrasting information regarding the coronavirus
outcome they will tend to be included in the true model in tandem, whereas determinants that give
similar information are less likely to be included together. Hence, the developed network acts as a
bridge between theoretical foundations and empirical observations and may be used as an alternate
view for the importance of the socio-economic determinants when developing policies aimed at
reducing the impact of epidemic crises.
The networks depicted in Fig. 3 visualize the jointness space of the determinants included
in our BMA framework. To emphasize the complementarity between the variables, we connect
only determinants with positive jointness. The full description for the procedure implemented for
constructing the jointness space is given in SM Section S5. In the networks, the determinants
which can be included in multiple models take a more central position whereas the periphery
is constituted of determinants whose credibility in explaining the coronavirus outcome mostly
substitutes the effect of other variables.
We observe that the topological form of the jointness space is significantly determined by how
we specify the outcome of the coronavirus pandemic. In the case when the outcome is the registered cases p.mp., there is one large connected component coupled with two isolated nodes. The
large component forms a cluster of tightly connected determinants where the central role is played
by the population density and international tourism. The two isolated nodes are the overweight
prevalence and income inequality. The former variable is the one with the largest PIP, whereas
the latter has one of the lowest PIPs. When we specify the outcome as the observed coronavirus
deaths p.m.p., the jointness space is constructed of a single large connected component, with the
hub being the overweight prevalence.
The discovered patterns may be potentially useful for defining policy recommendations in a
subsequent phase aimed at reducing the potential impact of future epidemics: improving the features of the determinants belonging to a same cluster might yield a synergistic effect, thus significantly reducing the risk of a negative outcome. Concretely, the obtained maps suggest that there are
two routes for the specification of the true linear-regression model behind the coronavirus outcome
depending on how we measure it. The first one is by constructing a model where the dependent
variable is the registered cases. In this specification, the socio-economic determinants are chosen
in such a way that the model is predominantly focused on utilizing the aspects of the demographic
structure and the natural environment. The second route is by constructing a model that involves
our baseline specification and solely the fraction overweight persons in a society. In this model the
dependent variable can be both the registered cases or the death rate.

4 Discussion
Our analysis suggests that government response policies, such as testing procedures, tracking of
individuals and social distancing measures, and the state of the dynamics of the disease spread can
11

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Death rate
Life expectancy
Young population
Elderly population
Population size

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Econ. development
Population density
Rural population
Income inequality
Int. tourism

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Node labels
Education
16. Air transport
Labor market
17. Sus. development
Health coverage 18. Trade
Migration
19. Gov. spending
Air pollution
20. Household size

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Overweight
Catholic religion
Christian religion
Muslim religion
Gender

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

Governance
Digitalization
Medical resources
Immunization
Mortality
Soc. connectedness

Figure 3: Jointness space of the COVID-19 determinants. The color of the edge between a pair of
determinants is proportional to their Jointness metric. To visualize the network, we use the Force-Layout
drawing algorithm.

significantly explain the variety in the coronavirus outcome between the countries. Aside from
these variables, only a handful of additional socio-economic determinants are able to robustly
explain the extent of the coronavirus pandemic. The sole determinant strongly related to the coronavirus deaths is the overweight prevalence. Countries with a larger fraction of overweight population also show greater susceptibility to fatal virus outcomes. Interestingly, besides the overweight
prevalence, the population density and the international tourist arrivals are strong determinants of
the registered coronavirus cases per million population. More densely populated countries have a
higher number of infected persons, whereas countries with more international tourist arrivals were
less affected by the negative impact of the coronavirus.
A plentiful of reasons can be used as a possible interpretation for these results. For instance, it is
known that the degree of disease spread scales proportionally with population density [93]. This is
because, everything else considered, in denser populations it is more difficult to identify and target
the critical individuals that are susceptible to the disease because of the much more emphasized
social mixing [17]. With respect to this, population density can be optimized in various ways. A
good start is for countries to disperse the quality of the local goods and focus on promoting equal
socio-economic development between its regions.
12

In addition, a plausible explanation for the potential effect of international tourism on the number of registered cases could be as follows. As the pandemic unfolded, nearly every country closed
their borders as a means to stop the fast spread of the virus. This led to a major decrease on both
within and across countries travels, which obviously, directly reduced the magnitude of the registered cases. Obviously, the economies which were more open to international tourism in the past
years were also the ones where the closure of borders should have had a larger impact. Thus, contrary to the popular belief, promoting tourism might have a beneficial effect on lessening the virus
spread, once the country is open to international travelers.
In a similar fashion, various explanations can be found for the observed effect of overweight
prevalence. In particular, the prevalence of overweight people is closely related to unhealthy habits
of living and, hence, larger susceptibility to both disease infections and fatal outcomes. A classical way for reducing the fraction of overweight people in a population is to introduce national
educational campaign for nutritional habits.
Clearly, the exact interpretation of our analysis is predicated on a more detailed background
on the specific socio-economic features within the countries. We observed this characteristic when
we discovered that the “true”’ model of the coronavirus outcome is constituted of only few determinants but argued that different models may offer a credible explanation for it. In the absence
of a unifying framework covering the relevant aspects of the interrelation between the potential
determinants, the jointness analysis performed here (and the resulting jointness space) provide the
starting point for the development of a more comprehensive understanding of the socio-economic
factors of the coronavirus pandemic. We believe that with the improved understanding of the dynamics of the coronavirus pandemic, the insights obtained from this analysis can influence the
development of appropriate policy recommendations.

References
[1] Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc
Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina CuomoDannenburg, et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce
covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. 2020.
[2] William Gardner, David States, and Nicholas Bagley. The coronavirus and the risks to the
elderly in long-term care. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, pages 1–6, 2020.
[3] Carlos Kennedy Tavares Lima, Poliana Moreira de Medeiros Carvalho, Igor de Araújo Silva
Lima, José Victor Alexandre de Oliveira Nunes, Jeferson Seves Saraiva, Ricardo Inácio
de Souza, Claúdio Gleidiston Lima da Silva, and Modesto Leite Rolim Neto. The emotional impact of coronavirus 2019-ncov (new coronavirus disease). Psychiatry Research,
page 112915, 2020.
[4] Janice Hopkins Tanne, Erika Hayasaki, Mark Zastrow, Priyanka Pulla, Paul Smith, and
Acer Garcia Rada. Covid-19: how doctors and healthcare systems are tackling coronavirus
worldwide. Bmj, 368, 2020.
[5] Ehab Mudher Mikhael and Ali Azeez Al-Jumaili. Can developing countries alone face corona
virus? an iraqi situation. Public Health in Practice, page 100004, 2020.
13

[6] Moreno Di Marco, Michelle L Baker, Peter Daszak, Paul De Barro, Evan A Eskew, Cecile M
Godde, Tom D Harwood, Mario Herrero, Andrew J Hoskins, Erica Johnson, et al. Opinion: Sustainable development must account for pandemic risk. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 117(8):3888–3892, 2020.
[7] Xiao Wu, Rachel C Nethery, Benjamin M Sabath, Danielle Braun, and Francesca Dominici.
Exposure to air pollution and covid-19 mortality in the united states. medRxiv, 2020.
[8] Adrian E Raftery, David Madigan, and Jennifer A Hoeting. Bayesian model averaging for
linear regression models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(437):179–191,
1997.
[9] Jennifer A Hoeting, David Madigan, Adrian E Raftery, and Chris T Volinsky. Bayesian model
averaging: a tutorial. Statistical science, pages 382–401, 1999.
[10] Xavier Sala-i Martin, Gernot Doppelhofer, and Ronald I Miller. Determinants of long-term
growth: A bayesian averaging of classical estimates (bace) approach. American economic
review, pages 813–835, 2004.
[11] Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, and Gabriel M Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential
domestic and international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in wuhan, china: a
modelling study. The Lancet, 395(10225):689–697, 2020.
[12] Adam J Kucharski, Timothy W Russell, Charlie Diamond, Yang Liu, John Edmunds, Sebastian Funk, Rosalind M Eggo, Fiona Sun, Mark Jit, James D Munday, et al. Early dynamics of
transmission and control of covid-19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 2020.
[13] Norman TJ Bailey et al. The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its applications.
Charles Griffin & Company Ltd, 5a Crendon Street, High Wycombe, Bucks HP13 6LE.,
1975.
[14] P Van den Driessche and James Watmough. Further notes on the basic reproduction number.
In Mathematical epidemiology, pages 159–178. Springer, 2008.
[15] Ashleigh R Tuite, Amy L Greer, Michael Whelan, Anne-Luise Winter, Brenda Lee, Ping Yan,
Jianhong Wu, Seyed Moghadas, David Buckeridge, Babak Pourbohloul, et al. Estimated
epidemiologic parameters and morbidity associated with pandemic h1n1 influenza. Cmaj,
182(2):131–136, 2010.
[16] Matt J Keeling and Pejman Rohani. Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals.
Princeton University Press, 2011.
[17] Petra Klepac, Adam J Kucharski, Andrew JK Conlan, Stephen Kissler, Maria Tang, Hannah
Fry, and Julia R Gog. Contacts in context: large-scale setting-specific social mixing matrices
from the bbc pandemic project. medRxiv, 2020.

14

[18] Youfa Wang and May A Beydoun. The obesity epidemic in the united states—gender, age,
socioeconomic, racial/ethnic, and geographic characteristics: a systematic review and metaregression analysis. Epidemiologic reviews, 29(1):6–28, 2007.
[19] Alessandra Fogli and Laura Veldkamp. Germs, social networks and growth. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
[20] Aisling S Carr, Chris R Cardwell, Peter O McCarron, and John McConville. A systematic
review of population based epidemiological studies in myasthenia gravis. BMC neurology,
10(1):46, 2010.
[21] Enrique Moral-Benito. Model averaging in economics: An overview. Journal of Economic
Surveys, 29(1):46–75, 2015.
[22] Thomas Hale, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips, and Samuel Webster. Variation in government
responses to covid-19. Blavatnik school of government working paper, 31, 2020.
[23] Stelios H Zanakis, Cecilia Alvarez, and Vivian Li. Socio-economic determinants of hiv/aids
pandemic and nations efficiencies. European Journal of Operational Research, 176(3):1811–
1838, 2007.
[24] Ralf L Itzwerth, C Raina MacIntyre, Smita Shah, and Aileen J Plant. Pandemic influenza
and critical infrastructure dependencies: possible impact on hospitals. Medical journal of
Australia, 185(S10):S70–S72, 2006.
[25] Richard J Whitley and Arnold S Monto. Seasonal and pandemic influenza preparedness: a
global threat. The Journal of infectious diseases, 194(Supplement 2):S65–S69, 2006.
[26] Robert F Breiman, Abdulsalami Nasidi, Mark A Katz, M Kariuki Njenga, and John Vertefeuille. Preparedness for highly pathogenic avian influenza pandemic in africa. Emerging
infectious diseases, 13(10):1453, 2007.
[27] B Adini, A Goldberg, R Cohen, and Y Bar-Dayan. Relationship between equipment and
infrastructure for pandemic influenza and performance in an avian flu drill. Emergency
Medicine Journal, 26(11):786–790, 2009.
[28] Andrew L Garrett, Yoon Soo Park, and Irwin Redlener. Mitigating absenteeism in hospital
workers during a pandemic. Disaster medicine and public health preparedness, 3(S2):S141–
S147, 2009.
[29] Hitoshi Oshitani, Taro Kamigaki, and Akira Suzuki. Major issues and challenges of influenza
pandemic preparedness in developing countries. Emerging infectious diseases, 14(6):875,
2008.
[30] Theodora-Ismene Gizelis, Sabrina Karim, Gudrun Østby, and Henrik Urdal. Maternal health
care in the time of ebola: a mixed-method exploration of the impact of the epidemic on
delivery services in monrovia. World Development, 98:169–178, 2017.

15

[31] Parviez Hosseini, Susanne H Sokolow, Kurt J Vandegrift, A Marm Kilpatrick, and Peter
Daszak. Predictive power of air travel and socio-economic data for early pandemic spread.
PLoS One, 5(9), 2010.
[32] Sandra Crouse Quinn and Supriya Kumar. Health inequalities and infectious disease epidemics: a challenge for global health security. Biosecurity and bioterrorism: biodefense
strategy, practice, and science, 12(5):263–273, 2014.
[33] Daniel R Hogan, Gretchen A Stevens, Ahmad Reza Hosseinpoor, and Ties Boerma. Monitoring universal health coverage within the sustainable development goals: development and
baseline data for an index of essential health services. The Lancet Global Health, 6(2):e152–
e168, 2018.
[34] Michael Marmot. Social determinants of health inequalities. The lancet, 365(9464):1099–
1104, 2005.
[35] S-C Chen and C-M Liao. Modelling control measures to reduce the impact of pandemic
influenza among schoolchildren. Epidemiology & Infection, 136(8):1035–1045, 2008.
[36] Elaine Kelly. The scourge of asian flu in utero exposure to pandemic influenza and the
development of a cohort of british children. Journal of Human resources, 46(4):669–694,
2011.
[37] Jonathan S Nguyen-Van-Tam and Alan W Hampson. The epidemiology and clinical impact
of pandemic influenza. Vaccine, 21(16):1762–1768, 2003.
[38] Dieren Susan van, Joline WJ Beulens, Schouw Yvonne T. van der, Diederick E Grobbee, and
Bruce Nealb. The global burden of diabetes and its complications: an emerging pandemic.
European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation, 17(1 suppl):s3–s8, 2010.
[39] Robert Allard, Pascale Leclerc, Claude Tremblay, and Terry-Nan Tannenbaum. Diabetes and
the severity of pandemic influenza a (h1n1) infection. Diabetes care, 33(7):1491–1493, 2010.
[40] Máire A Connolly, Michelle Gayer, Michael J Ryan, Peter Salama, Paul Spiegel, and David L
Heymann. Communicable diseases in complex emergencies: impact and challenges. The
Lancet, 364(9449):1974–1983, 2004.
[41] Carol W Bassim, Gretchen Gibson, Timothy Ward, Brian M Paphides, and Donald J DeNucci. Modification of the risk of mortality from pneumonia with oral hygiene care. Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society, 56(9):1601–1607, 2008.
[42] F Müller. Oral hygiene reduces the mortality from aspiration pneumonia in frail elders.
Journal of dental research, 94(3 suppl):14S–16S, 2015.
[43] John Strauss and Duncan Thomas. Health, nutrition, and economic development. Journal of
economic literature, 36(2):766–817, 1998.
[44] Guillem López i Casasnovas, Berta Rivera, Luis Currais, et al. Health and economic growth:
findings and policy implications. Mit Press, 2005.
16

[45] Jeffrey Sachs. Macroeconomics and health: investing in health for economic development.
World Health Organization, 2001.
[46] Quamrul H Ashraf, Ashley Lester, and David N Weil. When does improving health raise
gdp? NBER macroeconomics annual, 23(1):157–204, 2008.
[47] Peter Wobst and Channing Arndt. Hiv/aids and labor force upgrading in tanzania. World
Development, 32(11):1831–1847, 2004.
[48] Sara Markowitz, Erik Nesson, and Joshua Robinson. The effects of employment on influenza
rates. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.
[49] Samuel H Preston. The changing relation between mortality and level of economic development. Population studies, 29(2):231–248, 1975.
[50] Spencer L James, Paul Gubbins, Christopher JL Murray, and Emmanuela Gakidou. Developing a comprehensive time series of gdp per capita for 210 countries from 1950 to 2015.
Population health metrics, 10(1):12, 2012.
[51] Hitoshi Nagano, Jose A Puppim de Oliveira, Allan Kardec Barros, and Altair da Silva Costa
Junior. The ‘heart kuznets curve’? understanding the relations between economic development and cardiac conditions. World Development, 132:104953, 2020.
[52] Stephen Bezruchka. The effect of economic recession on population health.
181(5):281–285, 2009.

Cmaj,

[53] José A Tapia Granados and Edward L Ionides. The reversal of the relation between economic growth and health progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th centuries. Journal of health
economics, 27(3):544–563, 2008.
[54] Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett. The spirit level. Why equality is better for everyone,
2010.
[55] Majid Ezzati, Ari B Friedman, Sandeep C Kulkarni, and Christopher JL Murray. The reversal
of fortunes: trends in county mortality and cross-county mortality disparities in the united
states. PLoS medicine, 5(4), 2008.
[56] Arjumand Siddiqi and Clyde Hertzman. Towards an epidemiological understanding of the
effects of long-term institutional changes on population health: a case study of canada versus
the usa. Social science & medicine, 64(3):589–603, 2007.
[57] Ichiro Kawachi and Bruce P Kennedy. Income inequality and health: pathways and mechanisms. Health services research, 34(1 Pt 2):215, 1999.
[58] Kim Krisberg. Income inequality: When wealth determines health: Earnings influential as
lifelong social determinant of health, 2016.
[59] Jérôme Adda. Economic activity and the spread of viral diseases: Evidence from high frequency data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):891–941, 2016.
17

[60] Kiesha Prem, Alex R Cook, and Mark Jit. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries
using contact surveys and demographic data. PLoS computational biology, 13(9):e1005697,
2017.
[61] Robert Putnam. Social capital: Measurement and consequences. Canadian journal of policy
research, 2(1):41–51, 2001.
[62] Sherman Folland. Does “community social capital” contribute to population health? Social
science & medicine, 64(11):2342–2354, 2007.
[63] Chul-Joo Lee and Daniel Kim. A comparative analysis of the validity of us state-and countylevel social capital measures and their associations with population health. Social indicators
research, 111(1):307–326, 2013.
[64] David P Baker, Juan Leon, Emily G Smith Greenaway, John Collins, and Marcela Movit. The
education effect on population health: a reassessment. Population and development review,
37(2):307–332, 2011.
[65] Johan P Mackenbach, Irina Stirbu, Albert-Jan R Roskam, Maartje M Schaap, Gwenn Menvielle, Mall Leinsalu, and Anton E Kunst. Socioeconomic inequalities in health in 22 european countries. New England journal of medicine, 358(23):2468–2481, 2008.
[66] Elinor Ostrom. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action.
Cambridge university press, 1990.
[67] Jane Mansbridge. The role of the state in governing the commons. Environmental Science &
Policy, 36:8–10, 2014.
[68] Linda M Chatters. Religion and health: Public health research and practice. Annual review
of public health, 21(1):335–367, 2000.
[69] George K Jarvis and Herbert C Northcott. Religion and differences in morbidity and mortality. Social science & medicine, 25(7):813–824, 1987.
[70] Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. People’s opium? religion and economic
attitudes. Journal of monetary economics, 50(1):225–282, 2003.
[71] Niel Hens, Girma Minalu Ayele, Nele Goeyvaerts, Marc Aerts, Joel Mossong, John W Edmunds, and Philippe Beutels. Estimating the impact of school closure on social mixing
behaviour and the transmission of close contact infections in eight european countries. BMC
infectious diseases, 9(1):187, 2009.
[72] Joël Mossong, Niel Hens, Mark Jit, Philippe Beutels, Kari Auranen, Rafael Mikolajczyk,
Marco Massari, Stefania Salmaso, Gianpaolo Scalia Tomba, Jacco Wallinga, et al. Social
contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases. PLoS medicine,
5(3), 2008.
[73] Alessia Melegaro, Mark Jit, Nigel Gay, Emilio Zagheni, and W John Edmunds. What types
of contacts are important for the spread of infections? using contact survey data to explore
european mixing patterns. Epidemics, 3(3-4):143–151, 2011.
18

[74] Jacco Wallinga, Peter Teunis, and Mirjam Kretzschmar. Using data on social contacts to estimate age-specific transmission parameters for respiratory-spread infectious agents. American
journal of epidemiology, 164(10):936–944, 2006.
[75] Anton Erkoreka. The spanish influenza pandemic in occidental europe (1918–1920) and
victim age. Influenza and other respiratory viruses, 4(2):81–89, 2010.
[76] Gregory L Armstrong, Laura A Conn, and Robert W Pinner. Trends in infectious disease
mortality in the united states during the 20th century. Jama, 281(1):61–66, 1999.
[77] Martha Ainsworth and Julia Dayton. The impact of the aids epidemic on the health of older
persons in northwestern tanzania. World Development, 31(1):131–148, 2003.
[78] Rossana Mastrandrea, Julie Fournet, and Alain Barrat. Contact patterns in a high school:
a comparison between data collected using wearable sensors, contact diaries and friendship
surveys. PloS one, 10(9), 2015.
[79] Adam J Kucharski, Kin O Kwok, Vivian WI Wei, Benjamin J Cowling, Jonathan M Read,
Justin Lessler, Derek A Cummings, and Steven Riley. The contribution of social behaviour
to the transmission of influenza a in a human population. PLoS pathogens, 10(6), 2014.
[80] AL Braga, A Zanobetti, and J Schwartz. Do respiratory epidemics confound the association
between air pollution and daily deaths? European Respiratory Journal, 16(4):723–728, 2000.
[81] Karen Clay, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini. Pollution, infectious disease, and mortality: evidence from the 1918 spanish influenza pandemic. The Journal of Economic History,
78(4):1179–1209, 2018.
[82] Jennifer Lighter, Michael Phillips, Sarah Hochman, Stephanie Sterling, Diane Johnson, Fritz
Francois, and Anna Stachel. Obesity in patients younger than 60 years is a risk factor for
covid-19 hospital admission. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[83] Naveed Sattar, Iain B McInnes, and John JV McMurray. Obesity a risk factor for severe
covid-19 infection: multiple potential mechanisms. Circulation, 2020.
[84] Norbert Stefan, Andreas L Birkenfeld, Matthias B Schulze, and David S Ludwig. Obesity
and impaired metabolic health in patients with covid-19. Nature Reviews Endocrinology,
pages 1–2, 2020.
[85] Michael Bailey, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Social
connectedness: Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
32(3):259–80, 2018.
[86] Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. The geographic spread of covid19 correlates with structure of social networks as measured by facebook. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[87] Enrique Moral-Benito. Determinants of economic growth: a bayesian panel data approach.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2):566–579, 2012.
19

[88] Gernot Doppelhofer and Melvyn Weeks. Jointness of growth determinants. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(2):209–244, 2009.
[89] Paul Hofmarcher, Jesus Crespo Cuaresma, Bettina Grun, Stefan Humer, and Mathias Moser.
Bivariate jointness measures in bayesian model averaging: solving the conundrum. Journal
of Macroeconomics, 57:150–165, 2018.
[90] Ludwien Meeuwesen, Atie van den Brink-Muinen, and Geert Hofstede. Can dimensions
of national culture predict cross-national differences in medical communication? Patient
education and counseling, 75(1):58–66, 2009.
[91] Elias Mossialos, Martin Wenzl, Robin Osborn, and Dana Sarnak. 2015 international profiles
of health care systems. Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 2016.
[92] Taylor C Boas and F Daniel Hidalgo. Electoral incentives to combat mosquito-borne illnesses: Experimental evidence from brazil. World Development, 113:89–99, 2019.
[93] Moez Draief, Ayalvadi Ganesh, and Laurent Massoulié. Thresholds for virus spread on
networks. In Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Performance evaluation
methodolgies and tools, pages 51–es, 2006.
[94] Seema Vyas and Lilani Kumaranayake. Constructing socio-economic status indices: how to
use principal components analysis. Health policy and planning, 21(6):459–468, 2006.
[95] Phillip Bonacich. Some unique properties of eigenvector centrality.
29(4):555–564, 2007.

Social networks,

[96] Carmen Fernandez, Eduardo Ley, and Mark FJ Steel. Model uncertainty in cross-country
growth regressions. Journal of applied Econometrics, 16(5):563–576, 2001.
[97] Carmen Fernandez, Eduardo Ley, and Mark FJ Steel. Benchmark priors for bayesian model
averaging. Journal of Econometrics, 100(2):381–427, 2001.
[98] Eduardo Ley and Mark FJ Steel. On the effect of prior assumptions in bayesian model averaging with applications to growth regression. Journal of applied econometrics, 24(4):651–674,
2009.

20

Supplementary material
S1

Government response index

To calculate our government response measure, we make use of Oxford’s daily government response index. Oxford’s daily government response index measures on a scale of 1-100 the variation in daily government responses to COVID-19 by accumulating ordinal data on country social
distancing measures on school, workplace and public transport closure; cancellation of public
events; restrictions of internal movement; control of international travel and promotion of public
campaigns on prevention of coronavirus spread; testing policies and procedures implemented for
tracing contacts of infected individuals. We refer to [22] for a detailed overview on how the daily
index is constructed.
To calculate the overall government response index ci (di∗ ) at the final date di∗ from the provided
daily indexes we implement the following procedure. Let Ci (t) represent the government response
on day t, where t = 1, 2 . . .di∗ , then our index can be estimated as
ci (di∗ ) =

di∗

∑ wi(s)Ci(s),

(S1)

s=1

where wi (s) are the weights given to each day since the first registered case. We use a simple
inverse weight procedure by giving larger weights to earlier dates, i.e.,
d∗

1 i 1
wi (s) = / ∑ .
s k=1 k

(S2)

We choose the last date di∗ to be the last day at which the daily government response index
Ci (t) is at its maximum value.

S2

Data description

The data for the dependent variable are taken from Our World in Data coronavirus tracker. The
tracker offers daily coverage of country coronavirus statistics, by collecting data mainly from the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Because national aggregates often lag behind
the regional and local health departments’ data, an important part of the data collection process
consists in utilizing thousands of daily reports released by local authorities. The results were made
with data gathered on 13th November 2020.
The data used for measuring the possible socio-economic determinants are gathered from 9
various sources. In particular, the collection is as follows: 21 determinants are from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), 3 determinants are from the Nationmaster database
(NM) and there is 1 determinant from the World Governance Indicators (WGI), World Bank’s
Environmental, social and governance data (ESG), the Worldometers database (WM), Data For
Good (DFG), the State of Global Air (SGA), the Global footprint network (GFN) and from the
United Nations (UN) database. Five of the potential determinants were constructed by deriving
our own index with data taken from the described source. The construction procedures for each

21

of these variables are described in the following subsection. The full list of sources together with
links to their websites is given in Table S1.
Source
Covid cases/deaths
DFG
ESG
GFN
Gov. Response
NM
SGA
UN
WDI
WGI
WM

Link
ourworldindata.org/coronavirus
dataforgood.fb.com
datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/environment-social-and-governance-data
data.footprintnetwork.org
covidtracker.bsg.ox.ac.uk
www.nationmaster.com
www.stateofglobalair.org/engage
data.un.org
data.worldbank.org/
info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi
/www.worldometers.info/world-population

Table S1: List of data sources.

To reduce the noise from the data we restrict to using only countries with population above 1
million. In addition, we only use countries for which there is data on all of the potential socioeconomic determinants. Table S2 gives the countries for which all of these data was available.
Country
Albania
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Benin
Burkina Faso
Bangladesh
Bulgaria
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bolivia
Brazil
Botswana
Canada
Switzerland
Chile
Côte d’Ivoire
Cameroon
Congo
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cyprus
Czechia
Germany
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Spain
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon

First Date
9-Mar
4-Mar
25-Jan
26-Feb
29-Feb
4-Feb
17-Mar
11-Mar
9-Mar
8-Mar
6-Mar
12-Mar
26-Feb
1-Apr
26-Jan
26-Feb
4-Mar
12-Mar
7-Mar
16-Mar
7-Mar
7-Mar
10-Mar
2-Mar
28-Jan
27-Feb
2-Mar
1-Mar
15-Feb
1-Feb
28-Feb
14-Mar
30-Jan
25-Jan
13-Mar

End Date
31-May
25-Apr
27-Aug
13-Apr
5-Aug
4-May
10-May
4-May
30-May
30-Apr
23-Apr
23-Jun
28-Jul
7-May
11-Aug
29-May
4-Oct
7-May
30-Apr
17-May
5-May
30-Apr
3-May
1-Apr
2-May
21-May
17-May
3-May
6-Jun
16-May
7-May
10-Sep
13-Apr
25-May
15-Oct

Country
UK
Georgia
Ghana
Gambia
Greece
Guatemala
Honduras
Croatia
Hungary
Indonesia
India
Ireland
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Jordan
Japan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kyrgyzstan
Korea
Laos
Lithuania
Latvia
Morocco
Moldova
Madagascar
Mexico
Myanmar
Mongolia
Mozambique
Mauritius
Malawi
Malaysia

First Date
1-Feb
27-Feb
13-Mar
18-Mar
27-Feb
15-Mar
12-Mar
26-Feb
5-Mar
2-Mar
30-Jan
1-Mar
25-Feb
22-Feb
31-Jan
12-Mar
3-Mar
15-Jan
15-Mar
14-Mar
19-Mar
20-Jan
25-Mar
28-Feb
3-Mar
3-Mar
8-Mar
21-Mar
14-Jan
18-Mar
10-Mar
23-Mar
20-Mar
3-Apr
25-Jan

Table S2: List of countries and estimation period.

22

End Date
3-Nov
26-Apr
17-Apr
11-Oct
13-Sep
26-Jul
7-Jun
26-Apr
3-May
2-May
19-Apr
29-Oct
26-Aug
16-Apr
3-May
30-May
20-Apr
13-May
10-May
22-Jun
29-Apr
17-Apr
3-May
13-Apr
11-May
10-Jun
15-May
19-Apr
26-Oct
24-Oct
7-May
12-Jul
14-May
31-Aug
9-Jun

Country
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Netherlands
Norway
Nepal
New Zealand
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Paraguay
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Senegal
Singapore
El Salvador
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sweden
Togo
Thailand
Turkey
Tanzania
Uganda
Ukraine
USA
Venezuela
Vietnam
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe

First Date
15-Mar
21-Mar
28-Feb
28-Feb
27-Feb
25-Jan
28-Feb
27-Feb
10-Mar
7-Mar
30-Jan
4-Mar
3-Mar
8-Mar
27-Feb
1-Feb
15-Mar
3-Mar
24-Jan
19-Mar
7-Mar
7-Mar
5-Mar
1-Feb
7-Mar
13-Jan
12-Mar
17-Mar
22-Mar
4-Mar
21-Jan
15-Mar
24-Jan
6-Mar
19-Mar
21-Mar

End Date
4-May
12-May
3-May
10-May
19-Apr
18-Aug
27-Apr
3-Jun
11-Oct
10-May
30-Apr
1-Nov
3-May
24-May
10-May
31-May
3-May
10-May
1-Jun
1-Jun
20-Apr
29-Oct
19-Apr
12-Jun
7-Jun
2-May
20-Sep
17-May
17-May
21-May
14-Jun
1-Nov
14-Apr
31-May
7-May
4-Jun

Altogether, we end up with data on 31 variables and 106 countries. Table S3 reports the summary statistics of each variable. We hereby point out that as a measure of the determinant the
log of the last observed value is taken (the value in 2019), unless otherwise stated in Table S3.
This prevents the possible problem of endogenous independent variables in the specification of the
regression.

23

Variable
Coronavirus outcome
Government response
Epidemic duration

Medical resources
Health coverage
Death Rate
Life expectancy
Mortality
Immunization
Overweight
Economic development
Labor market
Government spending
Income inequality
Trade
Social connectedness
Digitalization
Education
Governance
Religion

Household size
Elderly population
Young population
Gender
Population size
Rural population
Migration
Population density
Sustainable development
Air Pollution
Air transport
International Tourism
Table S3: Summary statistics.
a Raw values.
b Individual calculations.
c 10 year averages.

Measure
Coronavirus cases p.m.p.
Coronavirus deaths p.m.p.
Government response index
Days since first registered local casea
Days since first global casea
Healthcare Infrastructure
Medical resources indexb
UHC service coverage index
National health statistics
Death rate, crude p.c.
Life expectancy at birth, (years)
Non-natural causes mortality indexb
Immunization indexb
Overweight prevalence (% of adults)
Economic performance
GDP p.c., PPP $
Employment to population ratio (%)
Gov. health spending p.c., PPP $c
GINI index
Trade (% of GDP)c
Societal characteristics
Social connectedness index (PageRank)b
Digitalization indexb
Human capital index
Governance indexb
60%+ catholic population
60%+ christian population
60%+ muslim population
Avg. no. of persons in a household
Demographic structure
Population age 65+ (% of total)
Population ages 0-14 (% of total)
50%+ male population
Population, total
Rural population (% of total)
Int. migrant stock (% of population)
People per sq. km
Natural environment
Ecological Footprint (gha/person)
Yearly avg P.M. 2.5
Yearly passengers carried
Number of tourist arrivals

24

Mean
5.93
6.23
−1.84
100.47
58.42

Std.
2.20
1.96
0.37
61.83
19.22

0.08
4.17

1.06
0.25

2.04
4.29
−0.27
0.16
3.80

0.31
0.10
1.05
0.64
0.39

9.55
4.02
5.80
3.61
4.30

1.10
0.20
1.73
0.21
0.48

−0.79
0.08
−0.55
0.14
0.28
0.37
0.16
1.25

1.30
0.96
0.27
0.95
0.45
0.48
0.37
0.32

2.09
3.18
0.25
16.69
3.38
1.13
4.33

0.76
0.41
0.44
1.40
1.21
1.45
1.31

0.95
3.03
8.15
15.19

0.65
0.64
2.77
1.53

S2.1

Individual indices

Medical resources index: The Medical resources index is estimated as a Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) weighted index of the logs of three variables [94]. These are:
- Physicians (per 1,000 people)
- Nurses and midwives (per 1,000 people).
- Hospital beds (per 1,000 people).
Non-natural causes mortality index: The Non-natural causes mortality index is calculated as a
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) weighted index of the logs of these four variables found in
WDI:
- Mortality rate attributed to household and ambient air pollution, age-standardized (per 100,000 population).
- Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions (% of
total).
- Mortality from CVD, cancer, diabetes or CRD between exact ages 30 and 70, female (%).
- Mortality rate attributed to unsafe water, unsafe sanitation and lack of hygiene (per 100,000 population).

Immunization index: The Immunization index is estimated as a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
weighted index of the logs of two variables:
- Immunization, DPT (% of children ages 12-23 months).
- Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months).

Digitalization index: The Immunization index is estimated as a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
weighted index of the logs of four variables:
- Individuals using the Internet (% of population).
- Fixed broadband subscriptions (per 100 people).
- Fixed telephone subscriptions (per 100 people).
- Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people).

Governance index: The Governance index is calculated as a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
weighted index of the six individual measures describing the world governance indicators. These are
- Control of corruption.
- Government effectiveness.
- Political Stability and Absence of Violence.

25

- Regulatory Quality.
- Rule of law.
- Voice and Accountability.

Social connectedness index: The original social connectedness index (SCI) was introduced in [85] as
a measure of the magnitude of Facebook connections between pairs of countries i and j. Formally, the i j-th
index is estimated as
Social Connectedness i j =

FB Connections i j
,
FB Usersi × FB Users j

(S3)

where FB Connections i j is the total number of Facebook connections between i and j and FB Usersl is the
number of Facebook users in country l. Combining all pairs, this results in an N × N dimensional matrix.
We transform it to be an only one-country measure by estimating the log of the PageRank (eigenvector
centrality) of each country in the original SCI matrix [95].

S3

Bayesian model averaging

We specify our linear regression model Mm for the coronavirus outcome as
yi = β0 + βmT Xm
i + γ si + δ di + ui ,

(S4)

where for simplicity we denote both the log of registered COVID-19 cases per million population and the
log of COVID-19 deaths per million population of country i as yi . In the equation, Xm
i it is a km dimensional
vector of socio-economic explanatory variables that determine the dependent variable, βm is the vector
describing their marginal contributions, β0 is the intercept of the regression, and ui is the error term. The
si term controls for the impact of government responses, and γ is its coefficient. Finally, we also include
the term di , with δ capturing its marginal effect, that measures the duration of the pandemics within the
economy. This allows us to control for the possibility that the countries are in a different state of the disease
spreading process.
BMA leverages Bayesian statistics to account for model uncertainty by estimating each possible model
Mm , and thus evaluating the posterior distribution of each parameter value and probability that a particular model is the correct one [21]. More precisely, in BMA, the posterior probability for the parameters
g(βm |y, Mm ) is calculated using Mm as:
g(βm |y, Mm ) =

f (y|βm , Mm )g(βm |Mm )
.
f (y|Mm )

(S5)

It is clear that the posterior probability is proportional to f (y|βm , Mm ), - the likelihood of seeing the data
under model Mm with parameters βm , and g(βm |Mm ) – the prior distribution of the parameters included in
the proposed model. By assuming a prior model probability P(Mm ) we can implement the same rule to
evaluate the posterior probability that model Mm is the true one, as
P(Mm |y) =

f (y|Mm )P(Mm )
f (y|Mm )P(Mm )
.
= 2k
f (y)
∑n=1 f (y|Mn )P(Mn )

(S6)

The term f (y|Mm ) is called the marginal likelihood of the model and is used to compare different models

26

to each other. The posterior model probability can also be written as
P(Mm |y) =

Bm0 P(Mm )
,
2k
∑n=1 Bn0 P(Mn )

(S7)

where Bm0 is the Bayes information criterion between model Mm and the baseline model M0 . In our case
this is the model including government social distancing measures and the length of the coronavirus crisis
in the country.
With this setup, we can define the posterior distribution of β as a weighted average of the posterior
distributions of the parameters under each model using the posterior model probabilities as weights
2k

g(β |y) =

∑ g(β |y, Mm )P(Mm |y).

(S8)

j=1

Here, we are interested only in some parameters of the posterior distribution, such as the posterior mean
and variance of each parameter. Using equation (S8) we can calculate the posterior mean as:
2k

E [(β |y] =

∑ E [(β |y, Mm ] P(Mm|y),

(S9)

m=1

and the posterior variance as:
2k

var [(β |y] =

2k

∑ var [(β |y, Mm ] P(Mm |y) + ∑

m=1

m=1


2
P(Mm |y) E [(β |y, Mm ] − E [(β |y, ] .

(S10)

Since the posterior mean is a point estimate of the average marginal contribution, we use it as our
measure of the effect of the determinant on the COVID-19 impact.
Another interesting statistic is the posterior inclusion probability PIPh of a variable h, which measures
the posterior probability that the variable is included in the ‘true’ model. Mathematically, PIPh is defined as
the sum of the posterior model probabilities for all of the models that include the variable:
2k

PIPh = (P(βh 6= 0) =

∑

P(Mm |y).

(S11)

m:βh 6=0

Posterior inclusion probabilities offer a more robust way of determining the effect of a variable in a
model, as opposed to using p-values for determining statistical significance of a model coefficient because
they incorporate the uncertainty of model selection.
According to equations (S5) and (S6), it is clear that we need to specify priors for the parameters of
each model and for the model probability itself. To keep the model simple and easily implemented here
we use the most often implemented priors. In other words, for the parameter space we elicit a prior on the
error variance that is proportional to its inverse, p(σ 2 ) ≈ 1/σ 2 , and a uniform distribution on the intercept,
p(α ) → 1, while the Zellner’s g-prior is used for the βm parameters, and for the model space we utilise the
Beta-Binomial prior. To estimate the posterior parameters we use a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampler, and report results from a run with 200 million recorded drawings and after a burn-in of 100 million
discarded drawings. Finally, before we perform the inference the data for each variable is transformed into
its z-score, in order to normalize the measuring unit. The theoretical background behind our setup can be
read in Refs. [21, 96–98].

27

Figure S1: BMA outliers check. Bars for the posterior inclusion probability (PIP), posterior mean (Post.
Mean) and the posterior standard deviation (Post. Std.) of each potential determinant. The determinants are
ordered according to their PIP. The Post. Mean is in absolute value. The signs next to the bar of each
determinant indicate the direction of its impact. The horizontal lines divide the determinants into groups
according to their evidence for being included in the “true” model. Moreover, the horizontal axis is on a
logarithmic scale. The setup used to estimate the results is described in SM Section S3.

S4

BMA outliers check

As said in the main text, we check the robustness of our results against the presence of outliers by removing
a country from the sample and re-performing the BMA procedure with the resulting countries. We repeat
this procedure for every country and recover the median results for each potential determinant. The results
can be seen in Fig. S1. They are nearly identical to the ones presented in the main text, thus suggesting that
our results are robust to outliers.
Table S4 outlines the countries which had the biggest impact on the observed credibility of a given determinants. We define two types of countries, i) the weakest contributor, this is the country which when
excluded from the sample leads to the largest PIP for the studied determinant; and ii) the strongest contributor – i.e., the country which when excluded we observe the lowest PIP for the studied determinant. We find
numerous countries which can be significant contributors for each determinant, thus indicating that there is
indeed heterogeneity in the socio-economic features of the countries.

28

Variable
Medical resources
Health coverage
Death Rate
Life expectancy
Mortality
Immunization
Overweight
Economic development
Labor market
Government spending
Income inequality
Trade
Social connectedness
Digitalization
Education
Governance
Catholic religion
Christian religion
Muslim religion
Household size
Elderly population
Young population
Gender
Population size
Rural population
Migration
Population density
Sustainable development
Air Pollution
Air transport
International Tourism

COVID-19 Cases p.m.p.
Weakest
Strongest
contributor
contributor
Healthcare Infrastructure
Pakistan
Mongolia
Namibia
Brazil
National health statistics
Australia
Nigeria
Nigeria
Vietnam
Mongolia
Australia
Mongolia
Venezuela
Vietnam
100 countries
Economic performance
Singapore
Niger
Jordan
Vietnam
Singapore
Russia
Venezuela
Mongolia
Jordan
Japan
Societal characteristics
Australia
Bangladesh
Mongolia
Kazakhstan
Singapore
Mongolia
Venezuela
Russia
Jordan
Venezuela
Jordan
Senegal
Mongolia
United Kingdom
Thailand
Senegal
Demographic structure
Mexico
Japan
Mexico
Mongolia
Bangladesh
Senegal
Australia
Brazil
Singapore
Australia
Vietnam
Jordan
Australia
Brazil
Natural environment
Australia
Mongolia
Mongolia
Niger
Mongolia
Senegal
Mexico
Venezuela

Table S4: Contributors to the credibility of a determinant.

29

COVID-19 Deaths p.m.p.
Weakest
Strongest
contributor contributor
Jordan
Japan

India
Australia

Jordan
Zimbabwe
Jordan
Singapore
Japan

Georgia
Thailand
Japan
Venezuela
Jordan

Jordan
Japan
Jordan
Belgium
Singapore

Singapore
Zimbabwe
Japan
Slovakia
Netherlands

Japan
Japan
Jordan
Venezuela
Belgium
Australia
Japan
Jordan

Botswana
Mozambique
Singapore
Australia
Slovakia
Netherlands
Bangladesh
Gambia

Jordan
Jordan
Japan
Thailand
Singapore
Singapore
Australia

Thailand
Thailand
Sweden
Brazil
Belgium
Japan
Singapore

Jordan
Jordan
Japan
Moldova

Singapore
Australia
Malawi
Spain

S5

Construction of the coronavirus determinants Jointness space

To construct the coronavirus determinants Jointness space we utilize a network approach. In this network,
the nodes represent the potential socio-economic determinants, whereas the edge between a pair of determinants is given by a Jointness measure of the posterior probability that the pair is included in the same model
explaining the coronavirus outcome. As a Jointness measure we utilize the the Hofmarcher et al. Jointness
test. This test is a regularised version of the well-known Yule’s Q association coefficient and is derived
based on an augmented contingency table of variable inclusion. The table allows us to avoid the problems
that arise due to zero counts [89]. The test statistic, Jhk between variables h and k, is calculated as
Jhk =

(a + 21 )(d + 21 ) − (b + 12 )(c + 21 )
(a + 12 )(d + 21 ) + (b + 12 )(c + 21 )

,

(S12)

where a,b,c and d are the empirical counts of the MCMC drawings in which, respectively, h and k are
included together; h is included and k is excluded; h is not included and k is included; and both h and k are
excluded. The main advantage of this test over other jointness measures is that it is appropriately defined as
long as one of the studied variables is included in the true model with positive probability. Moreover, it is
monotonic, with larger values implying that the two variables are complements; commutative,i.e. Jhk = Jkh ;
it is bounded between −1, and 1, and has an adequate limiting behavior.
To visualize the resulting network we use only the positive links (those that are greater than 0). To set
the coordinates of each node we use the Force-Layout drawing algorithm.

30

