OBSERVED MOBILITY BEHAVIOR DATA REVEAL “SOCIAL
DISTANCING INERTIA”
Sepehr Ghader, Research Scientist
Maryland Transportation Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, Email: sghader@umd.edu
Jun Zhao, Graduate Research Assistant
Maryland Transportation Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, Email: jzhao124@umd.edu
Minha Lee, Graduate Research Assistant
Maryland Transportation Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, Email: minhalee@umd.edu
Weiyi Zhou, Graduate Research Assistant
Maryland Transportation Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, E-mail: wyzhou93@umd.edu
Guangchen Zhao, Graduate Research Assistant
Maryland Transportation Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, Email: gczhao@umd.edu
Lei Zhang, Herbert Rabin Distinguished Professor (Corresponding Author)
Director, Maryland Transportation Institute
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, Email: lei@umd.edu

1

ABSTRACT
The research team has utilized an integrated dataset, consisting of anonymized location data,
COVID-19 case data, and census population information, to study the impact of COVID-19 on
human mobility. The study revealed that statistics related to social distancing, namely trip rate,
miles traveled per person, and percentage of population staying at home have all showed an
unexpected trend, which we named “social distancing inertia”. The trends showed that as soon as
COVID-19 cases were observed, the statistics started improving, regardless of government actions.
This suggests that a portion of population who could and were willing to practice social distancing
voluntarily and naturally reacted to the emergence of COVID-19 cases. However, after about two
weeks, the statistics saturated and stopped improving, despite the continuous rise in COVID-19
cases. The study suggests that there is a natural behavior inertia toward social distancing, which
puts a limit on the extent of improvement in the social-distancing-related statistics. The national
data showed that the inertia phenomenon is universal, happening in all the U.S. states and for all
the studied statistics. The U.S. states showed a synchronized trend, regardless of the timeline of
their statewide COVID-19 case spreads or government orders.

2

1. INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW
COVID-19 pandemic caused various societies to deviate from their normal. Many societies faced
an unprecedented situation, for which they were not prepared. This event was the first to cause
such a large-scale halt on people’s normal behavior. Decision makers were not fully aware about
people’s reaction to new stay-at-home or social distancing orders, as there was no sufficient
previous evidence. Now, many weeks into the pandemic, we have learned a lot, not just about the
virus, but also about societies’ reaction to such events. We need to learn from this experience, so
that we can be better prepared as individuals, communities, or societies, the next time such a
disastrous event happens. There are a lot to learn on the subject of human behavior amid a
pandemic. In this paper, we focus on American’s reaction to social distancing. For the first time in
history, large scale national evidence is available on this subject. Reaction to social distancing can
be studied in-depth through detailed surveys. However, such surveys are costly, and timeconsuming to design, collect, and analyze. Furthermore, respondents may have reservations
against reporting discord with social distancing orders. Thanks to the technology, a massive
amount of data has been passively collected from mobile devices, which can provide observed
evidence on how people reacted to social distancing. We used daily feeds of mobile device location
data, representing movements of more than 100 Million anonymized devices, integrated with
COVID-19 case data from John Hopkins University and census population data to monitor the
mobility trends in United States and study social distancing behavior 1.
Mobile device location data are becoming popular for studying human behavior, specially mobility
behavior. Earlier studies with mobile device location data were mainly using GPS technology,
which is capable of recording accurate information including, location, time, speed, and possibly
a measure of data quality 2. Later, mobile phones and smartphones gained popularity, as they could
enable researchers to sudy individual-level mobility patterns 3-5. Other emerging mobile device
location data sources such as call detail record (CDR) 6-8, Cellular network data 9, and social media
location-based services 10-14 have also been used by the researchers to study mobility behavior.
Mobile device location data has proved to be a great asset for decision-makers amid the current
COVID-19 pandemic. Many companies such as Google, Apple, or Cuebiq have already utilized
location data to produce valuable information about mobility and economic trends 15-17.
Researchers have also utilized mobile device location data for studying COVID-19- related
behavior 18,19. Our paper utilizes mobile device location data to study social distancing behavior.
Non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing are important and effective tools for
preventing virus spread. Researchers have highlighted the importance of social distancing in
disease prevention through modeling and simulation 20-23. The simulation models assume a level
of compliance, which can now be validated through observed data. One of the most recent studies
projected that the recurrent outbreaks might be observed this winter based on pharmaceutical
estimates on COVID-19 and other coronaviruses, so prolonged or intermittent social distancing
may be required until 2022 without any interventions 24, highlighting the importance of improving
our understanding about individual’s reaction to social distancing.
In order to study the impact of COVID-19, we have processed a set of national mobile device
location data and created an online platform 25. The next section describes the platform. Section 3
briefly describes the methodology for processing location data and producing the statistics of
interest. The analysis of the results from the platform showed an interesting trend, which we

3

named “social distancing inertia”. Section 4 introduces this phenomenon. Section 5 discusses the
universality of the observed phenomena. The last section is dedicated to discussion and conclusion.
2. UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND COVID-19 IMPACT ANALYSIS PLATFORM
The COVID-19 Impact Analysis Platform, available at data.covid.umd.edu provides
comprehensive data and insights on COVID-19’s impact on mobility, economy, and society with
daily data updates. Researchers at the University of Maryland (UMD) are exploring how social
distancing and stay-at-home orders are affecting travel behavior, spread of the coronavirus, and
local economies. We are also studying the multifaceted impact of COVID-19 on our lives, health,
economy, and society. Through this interactive analytics platform, we are making our data and
research findings available to other researchers, agencies, non-profits, media, and the general
public. The platform will evolve and expand over time as new data and impact metrics are
computed and additional visualizations are developed. Table 1 shows the current metrics available
in the platform at the national, state, and county levels in the United States with daily updates.
Table 1. List of metrics available on the COVID-19 impact analysis platform
Current Metrics

Description

social distancing
index

An integer from 0~100 that represents the extent residents and visitors are practicing social
distancing. “0” indicates no social distancing is observed in the community, while “100”
indicates all residents are staying at home and no visitors are entering the county.

% staying home

Percentage of residents staying at home

#trips/person

Average number of trips taken per person.

% out-of-county
trips

The percent of all trips taken that travel out of a county. Additional information on the origins
and destinations of these trips at the county-to-county level is available, but not currently shown
on the platform.

miles
traveled/person

Average person-miles traveled on all modes (car, train, bus, plane, bike, walk, etc.)

#work
trips/person

Number of work trips per person (where a “work trip” is defined as going to or coming home
from work)

#non-work
trips/person

Number of non-work trips per person. (e.g. grocery, restaurant, park, etc.). Additional
information on trip purpose (restaurant, shops, etc.) is available, but not currently shown on the
platform.

#COVID-19
cases

Number of new confirmed COVID-19 cases from the Johns Hopkins University’s GitHub
repository.

population

Number of residents in a nation, state, or county as reported from the national Census database.

3. METHODOLOGY
The research team first integrated and cleaned location data from multiple sources representing
person and vehicle movements in order to improve the quality of our mobile device location data
panel. We then clustered the location points into activity locations and identified home and work

4

locations at the census block group (CBG) level to protect privacy. We examined both temporal
and spatial features for the entire activity location list to identify home CBGs and work CBGs for
workers with a fixed work location. Next, we applied previously developed and validated
algorithms 26 to identify all trips from the cleaned data panel, including trip origin, destination,
departure time, and arrival time. If an anonymized individual in the sample did not make any trip
longer than one-mile in distance, this anonymized individual was considered as staying at home.
A multi-level weighting procedure expanded the sample to the entire population, using devicelevel and trip-level weights, so the results are representative of the entire population in a nation,
state, or county. The data sources and computational algorithms have been validated based on a
variety of independent datasets such as the National Household Travel Survey and American
Community Survey, and peer reviewed by an external expert panel in a U.S. Department of
Transportation Federal Highway Administration’s Exploratory Advanced Research Program
project, titled “Data analytics and modeling methods for tracking and predicting origin-destination
travel trends based on mobile device data” 26. Mobility metrics were then integrated with COVID19 case data, population data, and other data sources. Figure 1 shows a summary of the
methodology. Additional details can be found in a separate paper by the authors.

Data Processing

Clustering and Identification

Data Quality Check
Anonymized
Location Data

Home and Work CBG
Data Cleaning
Trip Identification

Data Fusion

National All-Trip Roster from
Observed Data Sample

Stay-Home Devices

Multi-Level
Weighting

Census Population
Datasets
COVID19 Case Data

Baseline Control
Totals from
National Surveys

Comprehensive Trip Data Validation

University of
Maryland
COVID-19
Dashboard
Metrics and
Analytics

Data Integration and Aggregation

Figure 1. Methodology
4. THE PHENOMENON OF SOCIAL DISTANCING INERTIA
The analysis of data from the COVID-19 impact analysis platform showed a notable trend. We
could observe that as soon as COVID-19 cases first began to appear in significant numbers (i.e.,
early to mid-March), measures related to social distancing (index, %staying home, #trips per
5

person, trip distance, out-of-town trips, etc.) began to improve quickly, with or without
government social distancing orders, suggesting that those who wanted and were able to limit their
interactions with others quickly and naturally responded to the emergence of new cases and
adopted social distancing practices. However, after about two weeks into the pandemic (mid to
late-March), measures related to social distancing stopped improving despite continuously
increasing COVID-19 case numbers and government stay-at-home orders. The trends showed that
all measures related to social distancing saturated and stopped improving, revealing a phenomenon
we name “Social Distancing Inertia.” For instance, as observed in Figure 2 the percentage of
people staying home nationwide rapidly increased from 20% to 35% at the onset of COVID-19
and then has stagnated at 35% for three weeks as of April 10. Digging deeper, we observed that
the same trend is also observable in the states with the highest number of cumulative cases (Figure
2). Here, we focus on three selected statistics of interest related to social distancing. The first is
percentage of people staying home, which shows the proportion of population that did not make
any trips longer than one mile on a given day (Figure 2). The second is number of trips per person,
which shows on average how many trips are observed per person on a given day (Figure 3). The
third is miles traveled per person, which shows on average how many miles is taken per person on
a given day (Figure 4). In the three figures below, the red curve shows the normalized trend of
new confirmed COVID-19 cases, based on the John Hopkin’s COVID-19 database 1. The other
curve in each graph shows one of the statistics of interest. The left axis shows the values for the
statistics of interest. We have removed weekends to have a consistent comparison. We have also
used three day moving averages to remove the day-to-day noises. We can see that in all three
figures, in both national and state level results, the static of interest has started increasing around
the same time and reached a plateau after about two weeks.
It is also worthwhile to see the effect of government stay-at-home orders. The date of government
stay-at-home orders are identified with a black line in the figures. No significant improvement can
be observed in any of the statistics after government orders. In fact, the trends have stopped
increasing after the orders. Government advisories and stay-at-home orders have not accomplished
expected changes in mobility behavior according to our data analysis. The analysis suggests that
those who were able to adopt social distancing practices had already done so before government
intervention. Those who could not or did not want to stay home showed significant behavior inertia
and rendered government stay-at-home orders less effective than expected. The average increase
of percentage of people staying at home one week after the order compared to one week before the
order is 4.3 percentage points.

6

Figure 2. Inertia for percentage of people staying home

Figure 3. Inertia for number of trips per person

Figure 4. Inertia for miles traveled per person
5. THE UNIVERSALITY OF SOCIAL DISTANCING INERTIA
Another interesting observation was the universality of social distancing inertia. Despite the fact
that COVID-19 case emergence had a different timeline in each state and government advisory
orders were issued in different dates, all states were synchronized in their trends. Figure 5 shows
the percentage of people staying at home. The curves for all states are plotted together to show the

7

universality of the phenomenon, and highlight how synchronized the curves are. Figure 6 and
Figure 7 are plotted similarly for number of trips per person and miles traveled per person
respectively. In these figures, the scales vary between the states, as the mobility behavior is
generally different between states that have more urban regions and those that are mainly suburban and rural, but the trends are similar. The figures suggest that the phenomenon is nationwide.
The synchrony suggests that people reacted to national emergence of cases or the national
emergency declaration on March 13th, not the trend of cases in their own region.

Percentage of People Staying Home
60

0
1/1

1/15

1/29

2/12

2/26

3/11

3/25

DC

NY

NJ

AL

AR

MS

4/8

Figure 5. Universality of inertia for percentage of people staying home

Number of Trips per Person

5

2
1/1

1/15

ME

1/29

2/12

2/26

MI

PA

NM

3/11

WY

3/25

4/8

CO

Figure 6. Universality of inertia for number of trips per person

8

Miles Traveled per Person

70

10
1/1

1/15

HI

1/29

DC

2/12

2/26

3/11

NJ

NM

UT

3/25

4/8

WY

Figure 7. Universality of inertia for miles traveled per person
6. DISCUSSION
The results showed that the improvements in statistics related to social distancing were smaller
than expected. They also showed that the trends reached a plateau after about two weeks. Even
though all aspects of our results are suggesting the inertia, they cannot prove that people are not
conforming with social distancing orders. One can still argue that the remaining trips are essential
trips; or people that are not staying home are essential workers or are people traveling for their
essential needs. However, digging deeper can provide further evidence suggesting inertia. The
drop in the number of work trips per person was about 50%, which shows that even amid the
pandemic, about 50% of people are going to their routine work place. The drop in number of nonwork trip was limited to 22%, suggesting that people have not significantly decreased their nonwork trip rate. One may argue that the nature of the non-work trips happening amid pandemic may
be different from the non-work trips happening before, and the trips amid pandemic may be short
walks in the neighborhood. However, looking into the drop in average miles traveled per person,
the national drop is limited to 40%. We can see that people are still traveling significant miles. A
recent analysis of PlaceIQ data during pandemic showed that foot traffic to groceries has only
decreased 27% 27. Altogether, the result suggest that a significant part of the nation is showing
inertia toward social distancing.
Social distancing is very important to slow down the spread of COVID-19. However, performing
social distancing is quite different from peoples’ habitual behavior. Social distancing policy
clashes with the deep-seated human instinct to connect with others in order to regulate emotions,
cope with stress, and remain resilient during difficult times 28,29. Therefore, without enforcement,
incentives, or proper knowledge about the risks involved, people have an inertia to keep their
habitual behavior. Even though staying home may help prevent disease spread, people tend to
repeat previous behaviors 30. The inertia is common in other aspects of human behavior. In stock
market, investors who missed an opportunity to leave a ‘bear market’ are less likely to sell their
stocks at a later opportunity 31. In consumer purchase decisions, customers showing inertia refrain
from making new purchase 32. In travel behavior, travelers are more likely to stick to their habitual
mode, routes and departure time 33-35. The inertia is also observed in the studies of disease spread
and prevention. The influence of inertia is even considered in some SIR models 36. In a pandemic
9

study focused on the Spanish Flu, the cognitive inertia has been shown as a main reason for the
lack of preparation among unaffected areas (Dicke, 2015). The study suggested that cognitive
inertia grew from the traditional view that seasonal flu would run for a brief period, and has no
threat on healthy group. A recent paper by an infectious disease research team showed the
existence of inherent inertia toward social distancing through a game theory model, and stated the
important role of national public statements in overcoming the social distancing inertia 37. Our
study provided evidence from observed data on this phenomenon. Answering why such inertia
exists is outside the scope of this paper. A future paper can dig deeper and study device-level
results to further investigate inertia and learn more about possible causes. Such analysis needs to
conform with privacy rules and regulations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank and acknowledge our partners and data sources in this effort: (1) Amazon
Web Service and its Senior Solutions Architect, Jianjun Xu, for providing cloud computing and
technical support; (2) computational algorithms developed and validated in a previous USDOT
Federal Highway Administration’s Exploratory Advanced Research Program project; (3) mobile
device location data provider partners; and (4) partial financial support from the U.S. Department
of Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics.

10

REFERENCES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Dong, E., Du, H. & Gardner, L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19
in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases (2020).
Stopher, P., Clifford, E., Zhang, J. & FitzGerald, C. Deducing mode and purpose from
GPS data. Institute of Transport and Logistics Studies, 1-13 (2008).
Bachir, D., Khodabandelou, G., Gauthier, V., El Yacoubi, M. & Puchinger, J. Inferring
dynamic origin-destination flows by transport mode using mobile phone data.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 101, 254-275 (2019).
Huang, Z. et al. Modeling real-time human mobility based on mobile phone and
transportation data fusion. Transportation research part C: emerging technologies 96,
251-269 (2018).
Cui, Y., Meng, C., He, Q. & Gao, J. Forecasting current and next trip purpose with social
media data and Google Places. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
97, 159-174 (2018).
Pappalardo, L. et al. Returners and explorers dichotomy in human mobility. Nature
communications 6, 8166 (2015).
Song, C., Koren, T., Wang, P. & Barabási, A.-L. Modelling the scaling properties of
human mobility. Nature Physics 6, 818 (2010).
Çolak, S., Lima, A. & González, M. C. Understanding congested travel in urban areas.
Nature communications 7, 10793 (2016).
Nyhan, M., Kloog, I., Britter, R., Ratti, C. & Koutrakis, P. Quantifying population
exposure to air pollution using individual mobility patterns inferred from mobile phone
data. Journal of exposure science & environmental epidemiology 29, 238 (2019).
Bao, J., Lian, D., Zhang, F. & Yuan, N. J. Geo-social media data analytic for user
modeling and location-based services. SIGSPATIAL Special 7, 11-18 (2016).
Liu, Q., Wu, S., Wang, L. & Tan, T. in AAAI. 194-200.
Riederer, C. J., Zimmeck, S., Phanord, C., Chaintreau, A. & Bellovin, S. M. in
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on Conference on Online Social Networks. 185-195
(ACM).
Gu, Y., Yao, Y., Liu, W. & Song, J. in Computer Communication and Networks
(ICCCN), 2016 25th International Conference on. 1-9 (IEEE).
Liao, Y., Lam, W., Jameel, S., Schockaert, S. & Xie, X. in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
International Conference on the Theory of Information Retrieval. 271-280 (ACM).
Google. See how your community is moving around differently due to COVID-19,
<https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/> (2020).
Apple. Mobility Trends Reports, <https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility> (2020).
Cuebiq. COVID-19 Mobility Insights, <https://www.cuebiq.com/visitation-insightscovid19/> (2020).
Gao, S., Rao, J., Kang, Y., Liang, Y. & Kruse, J. Mapping county-level mobility pattern
changes in the United States in response to COVID-19. Available at SSRN 3570145
(2020).
Warren, M. S. & Skillman, S. W. Mobility Changes in Response to COVID-19. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.14228 (2020).
Chinazzi, M. et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science (2020).

11

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Kelso, J. K., Milne, G. J. & Kelly, H. Simulation suggests that rapid activation of social
distancing can arrest epidemic development due to a novel strain of influenza. BMC
public health 9, 117 (2009).
Greenstone, M. & Nigam, V. Does Social Distancing Matter? University of Chicago,
Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper (2020).
Li, D. et al. Estimating the scale of COVID-19 Epidemic in the United States:
Simulations Based on Air Traffic directly from Wuhan, China. medRxiv (2020).
Kissler, S., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. & Lipsitch, M. Projecting the
transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the post-pandemic period. (2020).
Zhang, L. et al. An interactive COVID-19 mobility impact and social distancing analysis
platform (2020).
Zhang, L. et al. Data Analytics and Modeling Methods for Tracking and Predicting
Origin-Destination Travel Trends Based on Mobile Device Data. (Federal Highway
Administration Exploratory Advanced Research Program, 2020).
PlaceIQ.
Jetten, J. et al. Advancing the social identity approach to health and well-being:
Progressing the social cure research agenda. European Journal of Social Psychology 47,
789-802 (2017).
Williams, W. C., Morelli, S. A., Ong, D. C. & Zaki, J. Interpersonal emotion regulation:
Implications for affiliation, perceived support, relationships, and well-being. Journal of
personality and social psychology 115, 224 (2018).
Alós-Ferrer, C., Hügelschäfer, S. & Li, J. Inertia and decision making. Frontiers in
psychology 7, 169 (2016).
Tykocinski, O., Israel, R. & Pittman, T. S. Inaction inertia in the stock market 1. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology 34, 1166-1175 (2004).
Rao, V. R. Handbook of pricing research in marketing. (Edward Elgar Publishing,
2009).
Srinivasan, K. K. & Mahmassani, H. S. Modeling inertia and compliance mechanisms in
route choice behavior under real-time information. Transportation Research Record
1725, 45-53 (2000).
Chorus, C. G. & Dellaert, B. G. Travel choice inertia: the joint role of risk aversion and
learning. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy (JTEP) 46, 139-155 (2012).
Zhang, J. & Yang, H. Modeling route choice inertia in network equilibrium with
heterogeneous prevailing choice sets. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 57, 42-54 (2015).
Misicu, S. Beginning of the end of the Pandemic? A comparison between Italy and
Romania. (2020).
Shadmehr, M. & de Mesquita, E. B. Coordination and Social Distancing: Inertia in the
Aggregate Response to COVID-19. Available at SSRN 3568535 (2020).

12

