Identifying highly influential travellers for spreading
disease on a public transport system
Ahmad El Shoghri∗† , Jessica Liebig† , Raja Jurdak†‡ , Lauren Gardner§¶ , Salil S. Kanhere∗
∗ School

arXiv:2004.01581v1 [cs.SI] 3 Apr 2020

of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA
ahmad.elshoghri@student.unsw.edu.au
† Data61, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Brisbane, QLD, AUSTRALIA
‡ School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, AUSTRALIA
§ Department of Civil and Systems Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
¶ Research Center for Integrated Transport Innovation (rCITI), UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA

Abstract—The recent outbreak of a novel coronavirus and its
rapid spread underlines the importance of understanding human
mobility. Enclosed spaces, such as public transport vehicles (e.g.
buses and trains), offer a suitable environment for infections to
spread widely and quickly. Investigating the movement patterns
and the physical encounters of individuals on public transit
systems is thus critical to understand the drivers of infectious
disease outbreaks. For instance previous work has explored the
impact of recurring patterns inherent in human mobility on
disease spread, but has not considered other dimensions such
as the distance travelled or the number of encounters. Here,
we consider multiple mobility dimensions simultaneously to uncover critical information for the design of effective intervention
strategies. We use one month of citywide smart card travel data
collected in Sydney, Australia to classify bus passengers along
three dimensions, namely the degree of exploration, the distance
travelled and the number of encounters. Additionally, we simulate
disease spread on the transport network and trace the infection
paths. We investigate in detail the transmissions between the
classified groups while varying the infection probability and the
suspension time of pathogens. Our results show that characterizing individuals along multiple dimensions simultaneously
uncovers a complex infection interplay between the different
groups of passengers, that would remain hidden when considering
only a single dimension. We also identify groups that are more
influential than others given specific disease characteristics, which
can guide containment and vaccination efforts.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Human mobility continues to play a vital role in spreading infectious diseases within a population [1][2]. Ongoing
population growth and the high reliance of individuals on
public transport services in highly populated cities provide a
suitable platform for contagious diseases, such as measles, the
recently emerged coronavirus and influenza, to spread widely
and rapidly [3][4][5]. For example, individuals travelling on
a bus are in close enough proximity to infect each other and
can carry the infection to distant locations across the public
transport network [6][4]. Additionally, some pathogens may
remain in the environment (e.g. a bus) for a prolonged period
and can infect susceptible individuals after the infectious
person has left the area [1][7]. Furthermore, transport services
shorten distances and times and strongly connect different
suburbs, potentially exposing communities to a high infection
risk [4]. The risk of disease spread due to human movement is

evident from the current novel coronavirus outbreak in China
and internationally, with Chinese authorities shutting down
public transportation within the affected area [5].
The recent uptake of smart travel cards and the availability
of this data have created an unprecedented proxy to elicit
different travelling behaviours and to study their effects on
disease spread [8][9]. The analysis of such data is critical
to understand the spreading dynamics of a disease and consequently to develop effective containment strategies [10].
Previous studies investigated several spreading dynamics of
infectious diseases, however, to the best of our knowledge
none of the studies has incorporated different aspects and
dimensions of mobility behaviour simultaneously.
In this paper we study three aspects of mobility behaviour,
i.e. the degree of exploration, the distance travelled and the
number of encounters of passengers using the Sydney bus
network in the context of infectious disease spread. By considering the three dimensions simultaneously, we identify previously unknown mobility behaviours. The high spatiotemporal
resolution of the dataset allows us to construct a time resolved
physical human contact network to simulate disease spread.
Specifically, we trace the infection flows between groups
of passengers who display different mobility behaviours to
investigate the change in the spreading dynamics. In addition,
we investigate how changes in the infection probability and
the time pathogens remain suspended in the environment
affect the spreading of the disease. This study identifies the
most influential passenger groups in a disease spread scenario
for different disease characteristics and types. Our simulation
results identify four dominant transmission paths between the
mobility groups that should become a focus of containment
efforts. In addition, we find that highly connected passengers
who regularly visit the same places have the highest spreading
power when pathogens do not remain in the environment.
However, with an increase in the suspension time of pathogens,
highly connected passengers who visit new locations become
the most efficient spreaders. An increase in the infection
probability on the other hand, amplifies the spreading power
of all mobility groups, especially for passengers who regularly
visit the same places and travel short distances, until reaching
a saturation point at a probability of 0.5.

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: We
begin by discussing relevant previous work in Section II.
In Section III we present our framework for modelling infectious diseases on human contact networks. We explain
the approach for classifying the individuals based on their
movement behaviour and introduce the dataset that we use for
our case study. In Section IV we run extensive trace driven
simulations to investigate the underlying interactions and
disease transmission dynamics between the different groups
of passengers. Furthermore, we study the effect of changing
the infection probability and the time pathogens remain in
the environment on the transmission dynamics. Finally, we
identify the most influential mobility behaviours for various
disease characteristics, which can guide intervention strategies.
Section V concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Studies of epidemiology have long recognized that human
mobility plays a key role in fostering severe disease epidemics
that may result in high rates of morbidity and mortality [4].
Furthermore, these studies have acknowledged the importance
of identifying the most influential individuals, as it can aid
to predict outbreaks before their occurrence [10][11]. Health
related datasets and detailed patient mobility profiles present
informative data that may be used to reflect the status of a
disease and its progression [8][12]. However, accessing such
information is challenging due to privacy concerns and other
related issues [10][12].
In the absence of health related data, previous work has
studied alternative data sources. An important body of research has explored the use of call detail records (CDRs)
and data from the global positioning system (GPS) to build
epidemiological models and to study the spatial transmission
of various diseases in a population at both city and country
levels [13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20].
In [20] CDR and GPS datasets were exploited to extract two
types of mobility behaviours. The authors used the recurrent
mobility and the total mobility characteristics to group individuals into returners and explorers. Returners are individuals
who can be characterized by their most visited locations as
these dominate their movement behaviour, whereas explorers
are individuals who often visit new places and cannot be
characterized by their most frequently visited locations. The
statistical measure used to compute the total mobility of an
individual is the total radius of gyration rg , defined as [20]:
s
1 X
ni (ri − rcm )2 ,
(1)
rg =
N
i∈L

where L is the set of all visited locations by the individual, ri
is the coordinates of the visited location i, ni is the individuals
visitation frequency of location i, rcm is the centre of mass
of all visited locations and N is the total number of visited
locations. The authors also defined the k-radius of gyration,
denoted rg (k) , which is similar to the overall mobility formula,
with the difference that the set of locations L is reduced to the

k most visited locations. The value of rg (k) represents the recurrent mobility of the individual. The correlation between the
recurrent and the total mobility values distinguishes between
the two mobility patterns, namely returners and explorers. If
the recurrent mobility of an individual dominates the total
mobility, that is rg (k) > rg /2, the individual is classified as a
returner. Otherwise, the individual is an explorer.
The authors of [20] found that explorers have more impact
on disease spread than returners. Their experiments consisted
of 10,000 individuals chosen randomly from a pool of 46,000
individuals. To study the impact of each mobility behaviour on
the spreading, different proportions of returners and explorers
were used. The extent of disease spread is computed through
the global invasion diffusion threshold R∗. This experimental
setup presents three main limitations. First, changing the
proportion of the mobility groups alters the topology and
the characteristics of the network being studied. Second, the
contact links connect geographical areas rather then actual
human physical encounters. Third, their study of spreading
power was performed on a static network in which if a link
existed at any point in time that link is considered present
during the entire period of study. These limitations make the
experiments theoretical as they study a snapshot of a possibly
unrealistic contact network.
Several other limitations emerge when CDR and GPS
datasets are used in the context of disease spread [17][21].
Most importantly, these datasets lack accurate localization of
the individuals due to the distant positioning of cellular towers
and poor satellite signals [22]. Hence, these datasets do not
guarantee the existence of real physical encounters between
the individuals [22]. In addition, individuals who are tracked
via GPS may be driving a car and hence are not in physical
contact with other individuals [22].
Recent studies of epidemiology showed an increasing interest in dynamic networks that guarantee the existence of real
physical human contact when studying disease spread [23]. A
well suited source of data to study the spreading dynamics of
diseases in dense cities are public transit records [4]. Several
studies have confirmed the presence of a risk factor between
the use of bus transportation services and the spreading of
many airborne diseases such as tuberculosis, measles and
influenza [24][4]. The authors of [24] stated that bus routes
“are veins connecting even the most diverse of populations”
and showed that individuals who reported regular use of buses
are more likely to be infected by tuberculosis. In fact, the
congregated and enclosed setting of buses presents a suitable
environment for any contagious respiratory disease to spread
widely. The infectious pathogens can easily be transmitted
onward among passengers through coughing and sneezing [4].
In addition, natural and artificial air flow can move suspended
pathogens through space. This makes all individuals in an
enclosed space like a bus susceptible.
In our previous work [25] we confirmed the existence of
explorers and returners in the public bus transit dataset of
Sydney, Australia. Furthermore, through extensive simulations,
we showed that explorers are generally more influential in

spreading a disease through the network in comparison to
returners. Also, long distance travellers were found to be
more influential than short distance travellers. However, when
only long distance travellers are considered returners showed
a greater propensity in spreading the disease over explorers.
The work proved the presence of a deeper and more complex
interplay between various mobility aspects when it comes
to spreading a disease on a public transport system. In our
previous work we did not consider the connectivity aspect
of the individuals, which holds critical information in contact based spreading scenarios. Further, our simulations only
considered direct encounters between passengers and assumed
an infection probability of 1. While disease transmission is
possible through direct encounters (i.e. the infected and the
susceptible individual are present in the same place at the
same time), pathogens can remain in the environment for
an extended period of time [1][7]. Therefore, an infectious
person can infect susceptible individuals without a direct
encounter. Contact networks where only direct encounters
are considered are commonly called SPST (same place same
time) networks. Networks that in addition to direct contacts
capture indirect encounters caused by suspended pathogen are
called SPDT (same place different time) networks. Previous
studies have shown that considering the suspension time of
pathogens changes the underlying topology of the contact
network and alters the spreading dynamics of contagious
diseases significantly [1][7].
This paper addresses the limitations of our previous work
through the addition of the connectivity dimension and by
considering different suspension times of particles and infection probabilities. We identify groups of passengers that
have a high potential to spread a disease through a public bus
network. Although there are several studies that recognized
the importance of human mobility data to identify the most
influential individuals in a network, none of the studies tried
to use a comprehensive mobility dataset to extract patterns
along different movement aspects simultaneously and study
the detailed interaction between the different patterns. In
particular, we consider the passengers’ total mobility, recurrent
mobility and connectivity. The impact of each group on the
spreading will be evaluated as all the infectious activities
occurring in the background of the simulations are traced.
III. D ISEASE SPREAD MODELLING
To understand the disease spread dynamics on a public
transport network we construct SPST and SPDT contact
networks from the smart card data and run a SusceptibleInfected-Recovered (S-I-R) disease spread model on top. At
the beginning of the simulation all bus passengers, except
a given number of randomly chosen seed nodes, are susceptible. The seed nodes are infectious and able to transmit
the disease to susceptible individuals. When a susceptible
individual encounters an infectious individual or, in the case
of SPDT networks, comes in contact with pathogens that
remain in the environment, the susceptible individual moves
to the infectious state with a given probability. The individual

remains infectious for a given period of time before recovering
from the disease. Once in the recovered state the individual
is no longer susceptible and remains in the recovered state
until the end of the simulation. Figure 1 exemplifies the S-I-R
disease spread simulation on the bus network.
We demonstrate how the spreading dynamics are affected
by changing two key parameters, namely the probability of
infection, denoted β and the suspension time of pathogens,
denoted dt . The case dt = 0 corresponds to an SPST disease
spread scenario and hence a susceptible passenger will be
infected only if both individuals meet on the same bus at the
same time. When dt > 0 the infectious particles remain on the
bus for an additional time dt , allowing the infectious passenger
to infect susceptible individuals after disembarking.
While simulating the empirical movements of individuals,
we track all encounters and infection transmissions. At every
encounter the identification number of the two passengers
in contact are recorded. Similarly, when an infection is
transmitted the identification numbers of the infectious and
the susceptible individuals are recorded. To understand how
different mobility behaviours influence the transmission paths
of the simulated disease we classify the bus passengers into
different mobility groups.
We modified the Opportunistic Network Environment
(ONE) simulator [26] to carry out our trace driven simulations
and spread a disease on a large scale real-world transport
network.
A. Classification of bus passengers
Before running the disease simulations on the constructed
networks, we cluster the bus passengers into different groups,
based on their mobility behaviour. To do so, we simultaneously
consider the degree of exploration, the distance travelled and
the number of encounters during the period of study. First, we
plot passengers’ mobility profiles in three-dimensional space,
with the x-axis corresponding to the passenger’s total radius of
gyration, the y-axis corresponding to the k-radius of gyration
(i.e. the recurrent mobility) and the z-axis corresponding to
the number of encounters.
Next, we cluster the individuals into two groups along each
dimension. The degree of exploration is divided into returners and explorers, the distance travelled into short distances
and long distances and the number of encounters into low
connected and highly connected individuals. Classifying our
passengers along the three dimensions results in 23 = 8
different types of movement behaviours. In order to identify
each of the groups, we normalize the values of the three
dimensions between [0,1] and use the approaches detailed in
the following subsections.
1) Returners and explorers: To split the population based
on the degree of exploration, we project all the points onto
the xy-plane and use the bisector method to differentiate between returners and explorers. When plotting the passengers’
total mobility and recurrent mobility values on the Cartesian
plane, points along the x-axis correspond to explorers as their
recurrent mobility does not dominate their total mobility and

Fig. 1: The model overview: At time t1, infectious person P5 enters a bus that previously has three susceptible and one recovered
individuals embarked. At t2, P1 and P3 get infected through the infectious pathogens disposed by P5 (SPST infection), P2
remains susceptible. At t3, all travellers except P4 have left the bus, however the pathogens disposed by P5 remain inside the
bus. P6 enters the bus later and gets infected (SPDT infection). Note that P4 is in the recovered state and has no role in the
spreading.

points along the y = x line correspond to returners whose total
mobility can be well represented by their recurrent mobility as
rg (k) ≈ rg . Our clustering approach results in 35.4% explorers
and 64.7% returners.
2) Short distances and long distances: To cluster the passengers based on their travelled distance, we project the points
onto the x-axis and apply a standard K-means clustering
algorithm [27] with K=2. This results in two groups, namely,
passengers who travel short distances and have a relatively
low radius of gyration (87%) and passengers who travel long
distances and have a relatively high radius of gyration (13%).
3) Low connected and highly connected individuals: In
order to cluster the passengers based on their degree centrality
(i.e. the number of encounters) we use a similar approach as in
the previous section. We project the points onto the z-axis and
apply the standard K-means clustering algorithm [27] with
K=2, which splits the population in low connected passengers
(39.3%) and highly connected passengers (60.7%). Specifically, we differentiate between passengers who encounter a
high number of other passengers and those who experience
fewer encounters with other passengers during the month of
study.
B. Public Transit Traveller Data
The public transport dataset consists of 20,295,908 trips
made by 2 million bus users. The dataset is recorded in the
greater Sydney area of New South Wales, Australia during the
month of April in 2017. Each trip record records the following
information: the passenger’s smart card identification, the bus
number in use and the time and location the passenger entered
and exited the bus.

Fig. 2: (a) The full distribution of trip frequencies. (b) The
frequencies for the range [1,2]. (c) The frequencies for the
range [1,15].

Figure 2 shows the distribution of the trip frequencies
for April 2017 indicating that a high number of travellers
use Sydney’s bus network infrequently during the month of
April and few travellers commute by bus on a regular basis.
Approximately 700,000 individuals did not travel by bus more
than twice during April. These individuals are likely infrequent
travellers who use the bus occasionally, visitors who stayed in

Fig. 3: The change in the population size with the change
of the minimum number of trips made. The dotted red line
corresponds to the population size for 15 minimum trips.

a giant component and several smaller components. There are
fewer components of size one in the resulting network, which
can be attributed to the fact that the original network contained
many infrequent travellers who were isolated from the rest
of the network. This observation also applies to the isolated
components consisting of less than eleven individuals.
Figure 4.b shows the degree distribution of the original and
the resulting networks. The degree of a passenger is the total
number of direct encounters experienced during the month of
April. We notice that the degree distributions of the original
and the resulting networks increase linearly until reaching
maximum values of 9,726 and 5,521 respectively. Then both
distributions drop exponentially. The drop in the frequencies
of the resulting network is due to the removal of passengers
who travelled less than 15 trips. The difference between the
two distributions is especially clear at low degree values as
passengers with few number of trips are less likely to have
higher number of contacts.
IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, we present the identified mobility patterns
and discuss the results of our disease spread simulations.
A. Classification results

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: (a) The frequency distribution of the sizes of connected
components. (b) The degree distribution.

Sydney for a short time or travellers who lost or damaged their
card. As infrequent travellers cannot be classified accurately
due to the lack of sufficient data records, we remove these
passengers from our analysis. In order to explore how a
threshold on the number of trips affects the total number of
passengers included in our analysis, we plot in Fig. 3 the
population size against varying threshold values between 1
and the maximum number of trips observed in the data. The
population size drops rapidly with the increase of the threshold
especially at low values. This is due to the high number of
passengers who use the bus only occasionally (see Fig. 2). For
our analysis, we set the threshold to 15 trips per month. That
is, individuals who travelled less than 15 times with the bus
during April are excluded from the analysis. The threshold
of 15 trips is chosen so that the passengers have travelled at
least on half of the days of the month. The final dataset has
36,013,436 records belonging to 424,290 bus passengers.
In Fig. 4 we compare some key topological aspects of
the original and the resulting networks. Figure 4.a shows the
distribution of connected component sizes for both networks.
We notice that the two networks have similar structures, with

The different groups resulting from our classification and
clustering tasks are visualized in Fig. 5. All subfigures display
the same plot from a different angle. Each point in Fig. 5
corresponds to one individual in the dataset and its coordinates
represent the values of the three-dimensional movement behaviour of the corresponding passenger. In the coming figures
and tables we refer to the groups using the notation {degree
of exploration} {connectivity} {distance travelled}.
The pie chart in Fig. 6 summarizes the percentage of each
of the eight classified groups of passengers in the network.
We notice that highly connected returners who travel short
distances constitute the major portion (36.8%) of the population. This group of individuals are regular commuters who
tend to use public transportation to commute between home
and work during peak hours and rarely explore or visit other
places during the month. 20.9% of public transport users
are classified as low connected returners who travel short
distances. We believe that these individuals regularly travel
to specific locations that are less crowded or during off-peak
hours, for example people who go to shopping malls in the
afternoon. On the other hand, explorers are individuals who
in addition to their regular commute visit other places, for
example going to malls to shop or going to touristic attractions
for leisure.
The following subsections present and discuss our simulation results. For every experiment, we randomly choose
500 individuals who are infectious at the beginning of the
simulation and can transmit the disease to susceptible individuals. Individuals remain infectious for five days (which
is the average infectious period for influenza [28]) before
recovering. Every experiment is simulated 100 times and the
results averaged.

(a) The view from the x-axis side

(b) The view from the diagonal

(c) The view from the y-axis side

(d) top view

Fig. 5: Three-dimensional visualization of the clustered groups.

B. Experiment 1: SPST scenario
In our first experiment we set the infection probability β to
1 and the pathogen suspension time dt to 0, corresponding to
an SPST disease spread scenario. This experiment serves as
a baseline for comparison to other parameter settings that are
explored in further simulations.
In Table I, we present the total number of encounters and the
total number of infections that were transmitted and received
by every mobility group. In addition, we compute the average
number of encounters, the average number of transmissions
and the average number of infections received per individual
for each group. Dividing the total number of infections caused
by a given group by its population size results in the average
number of infections that one individual from that group
causes during the simulation period. This average value of
infections is not constrained to a specific target group but to
all groups in the network. Similarly, dividing the total number

of infections received by a given group by its population
size, results in the average number of infections that one
individual of that group receives during the simulation period.
Interestingly, the averages of received infections per individual
is nearly the same across all the groups with a value ' 1.
This indicates that at the end of the simulation almost every
individual is infected. On the other hand, the average number
of infections caused per individual vary from one group to
another. Highly connected explorers who travel long distances
have the greatest spreading power with an average value of 1.7
transmissions per individual, while low connected explorers
who travel short distances have the least spreading power
with an average value of 0.6 transmissions per individual.
Although highly connected explorers who travel long distances
have the highest average infection transmission per individual,
this group ranks 4th in the average number of encounters
per individual. This result shows that it is important to not

Group
exp high long
exp high short
exp low long
exp low short
ret high long
ret high short
ret low long
ret low short

Total
number of
encounters
4872186
33944532
1601377
10126446
11288809
80726848
1012537
16136071

Total
transmitted
infections
17332
90029
9459
50881
27994
197235
6544
94149

Total
received
infections
9625
68844
12892
76733
20946
158711
9655
138217

Average
encounter per
individual
478.415
489.685
122.457
130.465
535.801
506.248
129.912
114.791

Average
transmission
per individual
1.701
1.298
0.723
0.655
1.328
1.236
0.839
0.669

Average
reception per
individual
0.945
0.993
0.985
0.988
0.994
0.995
0.982
0.983

TABLE I: Summary of the simulation results showing total and average values of the number of encounters, infections
transmitted and infections received for each group at the end of the simulation period.

just divide individuals into explorers and returners, but to
distinguish them further along other dimensions such as the
distance travelled and the connectivity as their spreading
abilities differ.

Fig. 6: A pie chart showing the percentage of each of the eight
classified groups of passengers in the network.
In order to visualise the disease transmission dynamics
between the groups we use a chord diagram (see Fig. 7). The
diagram shows cumulative disease flows between the different
groups. The eight different groups are represented by circle
segments, with each group being associated to a unique colour.
For example, the red segment corresponds to highly connected
explorers who travel long distances (see label “A” in Fig.
7). The links indicate the volume of disease transmissions
between any two groups and are assigned the same colour as
the source group. The thickness of each link is proportional
to the average number of people that one individual from the
source group infects in the target group. For example, the link
labeled “B” shows the volume of disease flow transmitted from
the group of highly connected explorers who travel long distances (red segment) to the group of highly connected returners
who travel short distances (blue segment). Links that start
and end at the same segment represent disease transmissions
between individuals of the same mobility group. For scaling
purposes, we multiply all average number of infections caused

per individual by 1000 and show the resulting values in the
chord diagram.
The diagram in Fig. 7 clearly identifies four dominant infection paths. These occur amongst highly connected returners
who travel long distances (cyan segment) with individuals
causing on average 0.52 infections within their own mobility group and highly connected returners who travel short
distances (blue segment) with individuals causing on average 0.57 infections within their own mobility group. Highly
connected explorers who travel long distances (red segment)
infect on average 0.5 highly connected returners who travel
short distances (blue segment) during the simulation period.
Highly connected explorers who travel short distances (orange
segment) infect on average 0.47 highly connected returners
who travel short distances (blue segment). Furthermore, low
connected returners who travel short distances form a group
that is prone to receive infections, but less likely to infect
individuals from other groups (see the incoming non-pink links
that occupy the majority (77%) of the pink segment in Fig. 7
and Table I). On the other hand, highly connected explorers
who travel long distances have caused the greatest number
of infections per individual on average. However, this group
is less likely to get infected in comparison to other groups
(see red segment in Fig. 7). We observe that the disease
transmissions from highly connected explorers who travel long
distances dominate this group’s activity as the red outgoing
links going to all other groups constitute the majority of the
segment with more than 90%. That is, even a low number
of infected individuals of this group would be sufficient to
infect other groups and spread the disease through the entire
network. Highly connected explorers who travel long distances
infect 1.7 individuals on average during the simulation period.
Highly connected returners who travel short distances receive a
high number of infections and mostly infect individuals within
their own group (see blue segment in Fig. 7). This behaviour
is expected, as this group consists of regular commuters
who display consisted movement behaviour. Highly connected
returners who travel long distances (see cyan segment in Fig.
7) display a similar behaviour of mostly infecting individuals
within their own group. Highly connected explorers who travel

Fig. 7: A chord diagram showing the disease flows between the different mobility groups resulting from the simulations with
parameters β = 1 and dt = 0. The mobility groups are represented by differently coloured circle segments (e.g. the red
segment, labelled “A”, corresponds highly connected explorers travelling long distances). Links represent disease flow between
mobility groups and are coloured by the source group. The link with label “B” shows the average number of infections that
highly connected explorers who travel long distances transmit to highly connected returners who travel short distances. “C”
refers to the start of the link coloured by the receiving group. “D” refers to the end of the link coloured by the transmitting
group. “E” refers to the relative infection transmissions, receptions and overall total for each segment.

long distances spread infections to all other groups (see red
segment in Fig. 7), although the average number of encounters
is lower than groups who infect specific target groups.
Our results highlight important interactions between the
eight identified groups and shed light on disease spread dynamics that should be given more attention while monitoring a
disease and applying prevention measures. To understand how
different disease types and characteristics change the spreading
dynamics between the eight groups, we perform two additional
experiments.
C. Experiment 2: SPDT scenario
In this experiment, we run the simulations with different
suspension times of pathogens, i.e. dt = 15, 30, 60 and 120
minutes, while keeping β = 1. For each value of dt we construct a matrix that shows the difference in the average number
of infections caused and received by each mobility group in
comparison to experiment 1 (β = 1, dt = 0). Positive values

refer to a gain in disease transmissions, whereas negative
values indicate a loss. The rows of the matrix correspond to the
groups that cause the infections and the columns correspond
to the groups that receive the infections.
Figures 8.a and 8.b show the matrices for a suspension time
of 15 minutes and 30 minutes, respectively. The matrix in Fig.
8.a shows that the average number of infections caused per
individual increased or remained the same for the four groups
of explorers (top four rows of the matrix). The spreading
potential of the four groups of returners (bottom four rows
of the matrix) generally decreased. As the suspension time
is increased to 30 minutes, we observe further increases in
the average number of infections caused by explorers and
further decreases for returners (see Fig. 8.b). We highlight
that the increase in dt weakens the spread of infections within
(self-loops) the two groups of highly connected returners.
The loss in the infection power of returners coincides with
an increase in infections caused by explorers, especially for

To understand the effect of the infection probability on the
disease spread we construct matrices that show the differences
in the average number of infections caused per individual
between each two consecutive values of β. The average
number of infections caused per individual increases rapidly
for all groups with an increase of β from 0.05 to 0.25. This
result is visualised in Fig. 9 with all matrix elements being
positive. When β is increased from 0.25 to 0.5 we see only a
slight increase in the spreading power of all groups. Further
increases of β to 0.75 and 1 do not result in significant changes
in spreading powers.

(a)

Fig. 9: A matrix representation showing the difference in
the average number of infections caused when the infection
probability is changed from 0.05 to 0.25.

(b)

Fig. 8: Matrix representations showing the difference in the
average number of infections caused when the suspension time
is changed: (a) from 0 to 15 minutes, (b) from 0 to 30 minutes.

highly connected explorers who travel long distances. Since
almost every individual of the population is infected at the
end of the simulation period, we conclude that an increase in
the time that pathogens remain in the environment favours the
infection power of explorers. That is, explorers are even more
influential in an SPDT disease spread scenario. We only show
the results for dt = 15 and 30 as no change in the behaviour
was seen for dt = 60 and 120, the values for explorers keep
increasing and those of returners decrease.
D. Experiment 3: impact of the infection probability
In the third experiment, we vary the infection probability
β, while setting the pathogen suspension time dt = 0. The
considered probabilities are 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75
and 1.

Figure 9 shows that all individuals who travel short distances experienced the most increase in the number of received
infections, whether they are low or highly connected. This
pattern can be seen through the dark coloured columns of the
short distances groups. The observation is due to these groups
constituting the highest percentages in the network allowing
them to have the highest total number of encounters (see Fig.
6 and Table I). In addition, the increase in the probability of
infection strengthens the self-loops of the groups (infections
within the same group), especially those of the short distance
returners. We conclude that increasing the infection probability
favours the spreading power all mobility groups. The increase
of spreading power is relative to the interaction between each
pair of mobility groups. For increasing infection probabilities
each element in the matrix increases until ultimately reaching
the values presented in Section IV-B in which the probability
is set to 1.
V. C ONCLUSION
This is the first study to identify mobility patterns along
three dimensions simultaneously, namely the degree of exploration, the distance travelled and the number of encounters.
We found previously unknown mobility patterns that were
thoroughly investigated to understand the spreading dynamics

of contagious diseases on a city wide public transport system.
We ran extensive disease spread simulations with varying
values for the infection probability and the suspension time
of pathogens. Our results show that characterizing individuals
along multiple dimensions simultaneously uncovers a complex
infection interplay between the different groups of travellers.
Furthermore, the infection probability and the suspension time
of pathogens play different roles in the spread. Highly connected passengers who regularly return to the same places play
the most important role in the spreading when pathogens do
not remain in the environment. However, with an increase in
the suspension time of pathogens, highly connected passengers
who visit new locations are the most influential. Unlike the
suspension time, increasing the infection probability does not
affect particular mobility groups, but increases the infection
power of all groups especially for returners who travel short
distances. Our simulation experiments are abstractions of the
real-world and flexible to adapt to different contexts. We
presented a framework that can be applied to model any
disease that is spread through a physical contact network. Our
findings are especially beneficial to advise health authorities
on the design of more efficient intervention and containment
strategies depending on the characteristics of the emerging
diseases. We plan to open-source the modified simulator in
order to be used broadly for similar types of datasets and
scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Bernard Mans, Ahmad El Shoghri, and
Frank De Hoog. Impact of indirect contacts in emerging infectious
disease on social networks. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pages 53–65. Springer, 2018.
[2] R Mansell Prothero. Disease and mobility: a neglected factor in
epidemiology. International Journal of Epidemiology, 6(3):259–267,
1977.
[3] Kang Liu, Ling Yin, Zhanwu Ma, Fan Zhang, and Juanjuan Zhao.
Investigating physical encounters of individuals in urban metro systems
with large-scale smart card data. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and
its Applications, page 123398, 2019.
[4] Annie Browne, Sacha St-Onge Ahmad, Charles R Beck, and Jonathan S
Nguyen-Van-Tam. The roles of transportation and transportation hubs
in the propagation of influenza and coronaviruses: a systematic review.
Journal of travel medicine, 23(1):tav002, 2016.
[5] BBC NEWS. Coronavirus: Wuhan shuts public transport over outbreak.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-51215348, 2020. [Online;
accessed 02-February-2020].
[6] Zaheer Ahmad Nasir, Luiza Cintra Campos, Nicola Christie, and Ian
Colbeck. Airborne biological hazards and urban transport infrastructure:
current challenges and future directions. Environmental Science and
Pollution Research, 23(15):15757–15766, 2016.
[7] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Bernard Mans, and Frank de Hoog. Indirect
interactions influence contact network structure and diffusion dynamics.
Royal Society Open Science, 6(8):190845, 2019.
[8] Amy Wesolowski, Caroline O Buckee, Kenth Engø-Monsen, and CJE
Metcalf. Connecting mobility to infectious diseases: the promise and
limits of mobile phone data. The Journal of Infectious Diseases,
214(suppl 4):S414–S420, 2016.
[9] Shweta Bansal, Gerardo Chowell, Lone Simonsen, Alessandro Vespignani, and Cécile Viboud. Big data for infectious disease surveillance and
modeling. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 214(suppl 4):S375–S379,
2016.
[10] Stefania Rubrichi, Zbigniew Smoreda, and Mirco Musolesi. A comparison of spatial-based targeted disease containment strategies using mobile
phone data. EPJ Data Science, 7, 06 2017.

[11] Amy Wesolowski, Caroline O Buckee, Linus Bengtsson, Erik Wetter,
Xin Lu, and Andrew J Tatem. Commentary: containing the Ebola
outbreak-the potential and challenge of mobile network data. PLoS
Currents, 6, 2014.
[12] Liqiang Nie, Luming Zhang, Yi Yang, Meng Wang, Richang Hong,
and Tat-Seng Chua. Beyond doctors: Future health prediction from
multimedia and multimodal observations. In Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages 591–600. ACM,
2015.
[13] Amy Wesolowski, Nathan Eagle, Andrew J Tatem, David L Smith, Abdisalan M Noor, Robert W Snow, and Caroline O Buckee. Quantifying
the impact of human mobility on malaria. Science, 338(6104):267–270,
2012.
[14] Andrew J Tatem, Zhuojie Huang, Clothilde Narib, Udayan Kumar,
Deepika Kandula, Deepa K Pindolia, David L Smith, Justin M Cohen,
Bonita Graupe, Petrina Uusiku, et al. Integrating rapid risk mapping and
mobile phone call record data for strategic malaria elimination planning.
Malaria Journal, 13(1):52, 2014.
[15] Amy Wesolowski, Taimur Qureshi, Maciej F Boni, Pål Roe Sundsøy,
Michael A Johansson, Syed Basit Rasheed, Kenth Engø-Monsen, and
Caroline O Buckee. Impact of human mobility on the emergence of
dengue epidemics in Pakistan. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 112(38):11887–11892, 2015.
[16] Linus Bengtsson, Jean Gaudart, Xin Lu, Sandra Moore, Erik Wetter,
Kankoe Sallah, Stanislas Rebaudet, and Renaud Piarroux. Using mobile
phone data to predict the spatial spread of cholera. Scientific Reports,
5:8923, 2015.
[17] Amy Wesolowski, CJE Metcalf, Nathan Eagle, Janeth Kombich, Bryan T
Grenfell, Ottar N Bjørnstad, Justin Lessler, Andrew J Tatem, and
Caroline O Buckee. Quantifying seasonal population fluxes driving
rubella transmission dynamics using mobile phone data. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(35):11114–11119, 2015.
[18] Augustino Isdory, Eunice W Mureithi, and David JT Sumpter. The
impact of human mobility on HIV transmission in Kenya. PloS One,
10(11):e0142805, 2015.
[19] Sanja Brdar, Katarina Gavrić, Dubravko Ćulibrk, and Vladimir Crnojević. Unveiling spatial epidemiology of HIV with mobile phone data.
Scientific Reports, 6:19342, 2016.
[20] Luca Pappalardo, Filippo Simini, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Dino Pedreschi,
Fosca Giannotti, and Albert-László Barabási. Returners and explorers
dichotomy in human mobility. Nature Communications, 6:8166, 2015.
[21] Gonzalo M Vazquez-Prokopec, Donal Bisanzio, Steven T Stoddard,
Valerie Paz-Soldan, Amy C Morrison, John P Elder, Jhon RamirezParedes, Eric S Halsey, Tadeusz J Kochel, Thomas W Scott, et al.
Using GPS technology to quantify human mobility, dynamic contacts
and infectious disease dynamics in a resource-poor urban environment.
PloS One, 8(4):e58802, 2013.
[22] Michele Tizzoni, Paolo Bajardi, Adeline Decuyper, Guillaume Kon Kam
King, Christian M Schneider, Vincent Blondel, Zbigniew Smoreda,
Marta C González, and Vittoria Colizza. On the use of human
mobility proxies for modeling epidemics. PLoS Computational Biology,
10(7):e1003716, 2014.
[23] Lijun Sun, Kay W Axhausen, Der-Horng Lee, and Manuel Cebrian.
Efficient detection of contagious outbreaks in massive metropolitan
encounter networks. Scientific Reports, 4:5099, 2014.
[24] Marsha L Feske, Larry D Teeter, James M Musser, and Edward A
Graviss. Giving tb wheels: Public transportation as a risk factor for
tuberculosis transmission. Tuberculosis, 91:S16–S23, 2011.
[25] Ahmad El Shoghri, Jessica Liebig, Lauren Gardner, Raja Jurdak, and
Salil Kanhere. How mobility patterns drive disease spread: A case
study using public transit passenger card travel data. In 2019 IEEE
20th International Symposium on” A World of Wireless, Mobile and
Multimedia Networks”(WoWMoM), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[26] Ari Keränen, Jörg Ott, and Teemu Kärkkäinen. The one simulator for dtn
protocol evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Simulation Tools and Techniques, page 55, 2009.
[27] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent
Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[28] New South Wales Government Health. Influenza factsheet. https://www.
health.nsw.gov.au/Infectious/factsheets/Pages/influenza factsheet.aspx,
2019. [Online; accessed 03-February-2020].

