arXiv:2004.04819v1 [q-bio.PE] 8 Apr 2020

Some fractal thoughts about
the COVID-19 infection outbreak
Massimo Materassi∗
April 13, 2020

Abstract
Some ideas are presented about the physical motivation of the apparent
capacity of generalized logistic equations to describe the outbreak of the
COVID-19 infection, and in general of quite many other epidemics. The
main focuses here are: the complex, possibly fractal, structure of the locus
describing the “contagion event set”; what can be learnt from the models
of trophic webs with “herd behaviour”.

1

Introduction

In these days of worldwide mourning for the human tragedy due to the COVID19 pandemic, while experiencing the heavy lockdown, in the fear of a possible forthcoming economical and social crisis, I think every scientist is thinking
about how to be of help, in terms of her/his ideas and technical culture. Besides
humbly admitting this to be, first of all, the work of doctors, nurses, virologists,
biologists and epidemiologists, not to mention the engineers who design medical and life-saving devices, each of us wonders what technical tools among ours
might either help the fight, or at least teach something about how the pandemic
appears to work. Speaking for myself, I am doing some job on the biomathematics of epidemics partly for scientific curiosity and intellectual challenge, and
partly (I’m sure) just to do something in contact with what is happening out
there, be it the epical tragedy or the difficult clash against the virus. The antidote my research is looking for is, at least, the one against the feeling of personal
powerlessness.
I felt the need to publish these notes when I went through the paper [1], in
which the authors perform a deep investigation about the behaviour with time
of the “total number C (t) of people infected so far”, for the Chinese Province
of Hubei, the other Chinese Provinces, and few other countries undergoing the
outbreak of COVID-19, i.e. South Korea, Japan, Iran and Italy. The fact
∗ Institute for Complex Systems of the National Research Council CNR-ISC, via Madonna
del Piano 10, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino (Florence), Italy, e-mail: massimo.materassi@isc.cnr.it,
massimomaterassi27@gmail.com, web: www.materassiphysics.com

1

attracting my attention, among the various results reported, was the apparent
good performance, in fitting the contagion data, of the law C (t) solving the
Generalized Richards Model (GRM) [2]; this is a modification of the logistic
equation


C
Ċ = rC 1 −
,
(1)
K
in which the population variable appears with powers different from 1, typically
between zero and 1:

 α 
C
, p, α ∈ [0, 1] , α ≥ p
(2)
Ċ = rC p 1 −
K
(despite they are omonimous, the coefficients r in (1) and (2) are not the same
quantity: in particular, in (1) one has [r] = t−1 , while in (2) one has [r] =
C 1−p t−1 ).
The Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) (2) has been largely and succesfully employed in epidemiology, so there is no real surprise in its applicability
to the COVID-19 outbreak. However, as theorists usually do, I wonder which
“first principle meaning” should be given to those powers p and α in (2). In
the literature, those parameters appear to be mostly guessed/adapted empirically, in order to fit the experimental curve C (t) a posteriori, once the epidemic
is completely developed. Some study noticeably put the (p, α) values in relationship with the “microscopic contagion dynamics” [3]: it is shown that these
constants depend on the geography of contagion (whether the epidemic develops in regions with or without clusters of population and communications, like
towns of various size, or not) and on the sociology of contagion (in the case of
HIV, for instance, whether this takes place via sexual intercourse, or via needle
sharing); these “microscopic conditions” appears to be what gives the contagion
networks a different topology. Recently, the specific study [4] on the COVID-19
outbreak argued how the scale-free complex clusterization of contagion events
could motivate a fractional kinetics for C (t); I am myself involved, together
with Giuseppe Consolini, in a study about fractional ODEs possibly solved by
the COVID-19 C (t) best fit in Italy [5].
All in all, it is clear that deviations of C (t) from the pure logistic ODE
(1) points towards the departure of the real laws governing the infection spread
from the hypotheses one has to assume to think a population C satisfies (1).
One of the most important assumptions of the logistic equation, and of all ODEs
regulating the kinetics of population growth, is the so called mass hypothesis
[6, 7]: one assumes that the mixing of individuals is such, that all the microscopic
actions represented in the ODE are taken (on the average) by all the elements
of that population. This, roughly, gives rise to integer powers of population
variables in the ODEs. In a certain sense, one might expect equation (2) to be
a consequence of mass hypothesis violation by the statistics of the microscopic
actions (contagion events), of which it represents a mean field description.
Why should that take place?
The answer I suggest here in inspired by the Trophic Web Theory (TWT),
where the dynamics of interacting populations in ecosystems are represented
2

via coupled ODEs, in which a form of segregation may take place, namely herd
behaviour : this assumption, that represents a topological correction to the mass
hypothesis, leads the population variables to appear in their ODEs with real,
possibly non-integer, powers, exactly as in the GRM that the authors of [1]
claim to fit well the curves of the COVID-19 epidemic.
Here I present a personal vision on how to interpret the powers p and α in
(2), according to the idea of herd behaviour in TWT: my suggestion is that the
“abstract geometrical locus of contagion events” may have a fractal dimension,
under the assumption that the network of human contacts giving contagion may
be a scale-free network, with clusters of links on many scales, just reflecting those
geographical and sociological aspects evoked by the authors of [3].
The paper is organized as follows.
In § 2 the logistic ODE is recalled, and its non-integer power generalizations
are presented. In § 3 the concept of herd behaviour in TWT is introduced, with
some examples from ecology. Then, its interpretation of the parameters p and
α is presented.
Conclusions, and possible developments of these ideas, are given in § 4.
Before starting, I would like to stress how this work is not about fitting
the contagion curve, or predicting anything; rather, it is an exercise about the
possible theoretical motivations for (2) to describe well various cases of epidemic;
this does not mean these reasonings to be completely useless in applicative
terms.

2

Logistic, and generalized logistic, equations

As stated in the § 1, the ODE (2) is a form of generalized logistic ODE, because
it extends the original law (1), to which it reduces for p = α = 1. The dynamics
(1) describes a population C that may grow from arbitrarily small positive
amounts up to an equilibrium value for Ceq so that Ċ (Ceq ) = 0, that is realized
for Ceq = K: this parameter K is referred to as carrying capacity.
In order to understand a little bit more the roles of the various terms in (1),
it is better to re-write it as
r
(3)
Ċ = rC − C 2 :
K
in this expression, one may distinguish the competition between an exponential
r
C 2 . The expression (3) is of help
growth term rC and a self-limitation term − K
in understading the rationale of (1): as made clear in the expression (3), we
have a population dynamics in which all the C individuals take part to both
the exponetial growth and the the self-limitation. The term rC means that, for
each of the C units, one more unit will be “created”, in a “reaction” of the form
C −→ C + C,

(4)

r
C 2 means that, whenever
every ∆t+1 = 1r units of time; meanwhile, the term − K
each of the C individuals meets another one of the C individuals, one individual

3

is destroyed in a process
C + C −→ C,

(5)

K
units of time (this ∆t−1 becomes smaller and
that takes place every ∆t−1 = rC
smaller as the amount C increases). Before closing the simple reasoning about
(3), let me stress that r is the effectiveness of the +1 production process, while
r
K measures the effectiveness of the −1 destruction process. Expression (3) is
often referred to as Verhulst Equation (VE) [8].
It is important to underline the relationship between the mass hypothesis,
and the mathematical way how the two “reactions” (4) and (5) are implemented
in the kinetics (3) of the population C. Indeed, the fact that the creation rate
reads rC means that all of the C individuals of the population do take part to
r
C 2 for the destruction rate means that
(4); in the same way, the expression − K
there is a possible “annihilation” for each
 and every couple of the C individuals,
being those couples as many as O C 2 , because each of the C units competes
with all its fellows.
Having these considerations about (1) in mind, we may re-write the generalized logistic equation (2) as follows

Ċ = rC p −

r p+α
C
:
Kα

(6)

we now have a production term rC p , with p < 1, and a destruction (selfcompetition) term − Krα C p+α , with p + α < 2. The interpretation of (2) under
the point of view of (fractal) herd behaviour, that is described in § 3, starts
from here.

3

Herd behaviour and fractals

Let us consider, for instance, two populations X and Y , respectively of preys
and predators, living on a surface, e.g. the savnnah, or a regular portion of
the seabed, i.e., 2-dimensional environments. The predator-prey interaction,
consisting of simple predation, gives rise to a term
ẊY = −kXY

(7)

in a simple Lotka-Volterra model, or to tomething like
ẊY = −

h
XY,
b+X

(8)

if the model is more sophisticated and a Holling Type II response function is
adopted to describe predation, as in [9] (k and h are constants). In ẊY (X, Y )
the number of preys and predators appears to the first power: in (7), each
of the X preys may “couple” with each of the Y predators with the same deh
struction rate k; in (8), this happens, but with a rate b+X
decreasing with the
total amount of preys. Under the idea that every prey can be reached by every
predator, there is clearly the mass hypothesis discussed in § 1.
4

In TWT a condition has been introduced [10], that changes this hypothesis
and, accordingly, modifies the response terms, the so called herd behaviour. Let’s
suppose that the X preys move in compact groups of finite size, that cannot
be penetrated by predators: each of the Y predators can only pick preys from
the border of those groups. The right hypothesis is, then, not that each prey is
attacked by each predator, but that just the X∂ preys along the group border
will be. So, in the place of X in ẊY (X, Y ), one has to put the number of
preys really involved in this predation, i.e. those X∂ ones sitting on the group
border. Because the scene is 2-dimensional, under the hypothesis of homogeneos
surface density (that must be done if we want to discuss space-implicit models,
describing everything via ODEs), comparing the number of individuals along
the border of a geometrical figure with that of all the ones all over the figure is
just as comparing the length of the perimeter with the measure of the surface.

2
If the figure athand
 has a “size” `, clearly the surface has a measure A = O ` ,
1

so that ` = O X 2 , while the perimeter scales as P = O (`): one may conclude
 1
X∂ = O X 2 .

As the preys move just in compact, predator-impenetrable groups, i.e. as they
show herd behaviour, while predators are free to move all over the 2d space
aoutside these groups, the predation terms in (7) and (8) will be re-written as
√
√
h0 X
0
√ Y
ẊY = −k XY and ẊY = −
(9)
b0 + X
respectively.
That of the savannah is an R2 example, but the herd behaviour can be generalized to other geometrical enrivonments: for instance, if preys and predators
move in R3 , as it happens to nekton animals in the sea, then one may state
X = O `3 and X∂ = O `2 , so that the predation terms (9) will read:
2

2

ẊY = −k”X 3 Y, ẊY = −

h”X 3

2

b” + X 3

Y.

More in general, if those species live in some Rn , but the preys that can be
preyed on are segregated in a sub-ambient Eact of dimension dim Eact = m ≤ n,
clearly some terms as
ẊY = −k̂X η Y, ẊY = −

ĥX η
b̂ +

Xη

Y, / η =

m
≤1
n

(10)

will appear in the prey population ODE. Note that, in the expressions from (7)
to (10), a mass hypothesis is still active on predators, that are supposed to be
“very mobile” and “enough mixed” outside the groups of preys. If, instead, also
the predators are scarcely mobile or slow, possibly packs of predators interact

5

with herds of preys just via their borders [11], so that, for instance, one should
write
√
√
h̃ XY
√
ẊY = −k̃ XY and ẊY = −
b̃ + X
instead of (9), and so on.
Applying these concepts to the epidemic growth given by equation (6) requires some generalization of the ecological examples just described. Suppose
to deal with a population of infected people C occupying an environment E of
dimension dim E = ν: this number can be, in principle, any real, positive number, as we are imaging populations living in any fractal subset of Rn . Suppose
that these individuals undergo processes as (4) and (5): if all the individuals
living in E take part to both these processes, clearly the Verhulst equation (3)
will be solved by C. Instead, suppose that, in order to be “active” pruducing
new individuals (when an infected unit meets a susceptible one), or limiting
each other (because when two infected units meet, no new one appears), those
units have to be segregated in a sub-environment of E, namely some Eact ⊂ E,
so that dim Eact = µ ≤ ν. It is straightforward to convince ourselves that the
active portion of population is
Cact = O (C p ) , p =

µ
≤ 1.
ν

It is then obvious to write the generalization of (3) to which such a species would
undergo:
r
(11)
Ċ = rC p − p C 2p ,
K
that is precisely the same as (6), or (2), with α = p.
Now, what if α 6= p in (6)?
Typically, one has α > p as in [1], so it is sensible to put α = p + δ, with
δ > 0, and then re-write (6) as:
Ċ = rC p −

rC δ 2p
C .
K p+δ

(12)

The only true difference between this case and the ODE (11) is the fact that the
coefficient of C 2p depends on C itself. This can be interpreted in two equivalent
ways: on the one hand, one may say that the effectiveness of the −1 limiting
process depends on the population itself as
def

∆eff (C) =

r
K p+δ

Cδ,

(13)

so that the larger the poulation is, the more destructive the self-limitation turns
out to be among the individuals in Eact ; on the other hand, one might as well
state that there is an C-local effective carrying capacity Keff (C) decreasing with
C
p+δ
def K
Keff (C) =
,
(14)
Cδ
6

so that, as the population increases, its dynamics “sees” a smaller and smaller
carrying capacity (even if the asymptotic value is still C = K: the only difference
with respect to the cases (1) and (11) is that in (6), and hence in (12), the rush
towards the limit C = K gets slower and slower, with respect to the logistic ODE
tempo, while the total population C increases). Another possibile interpretation
of the self-competition term in (6) could be that, next to the infected people
able to infect the others, i.e. Cact = O (C p ), there is a class of infected people
with whom those Cact come in contact uneffectively, that is some Clim = O (C α )
limiting the contagion, as − Krα C p C α . In this vision, one should define some
geometric locus Elim , with Hausdorff dimension α, to which the uneffective
contacts are restricted (it is very likely that we well have Eact ∩ Elim 6= ∅).
Now, the crucial point is to understand why the COVID-19 contagion growth,
together with other epidemics well studied in the past, should behave in this
way, in terms of the segregation of the various classes of individuals: a point of
view on this, is given in the following § 4.

4

Conclusions and possible applications

About the interpretation of the powers appearing in (2), for sure one may state
that the truely active portion of the infected people Cact si a very particular
function of the whole number of infected ones, as:
Cact ∝ C p .
Similarly, the self-competition term limiting the growth of C according to (2)
is a power law in terms of the total of infected persons, i.e. Ċlim ∝ C p+α .
The possible physical interpretation of p and α, the one I am suggesting in
this note, is that those non-integer powers should represent the geometric locus
where “contagion reactions” take place.
In the herd behaviour of TWT, real powers of population variables represent
a measure of the physical places where predators and preys meet, or where
competition takes place, but here such powers must be attributed a more subtle
meaning. While animals in the savannah move in a 2-dimensional space, see
(9), so that one could state dim E = 2, and dim Eact = 1 (being Eact the locus
where preys can be caught by predators, the border of prey groups), things are
different for humans infecting each other. The locus E “where infected humans
live” must be understood as a subset of the place where people live, work and
move, i.e., of the network of inhabited centers and the links connecting them.
Let us put dim E = ν (consider this is far from being easily defined). Moreover,
a sub-locus of this E, i.e. where contagion events really take place, is indicated
as Eact : attributing a value dim Eact = µ ≤ ν to the “dimension” of Eact means
understanding which part of the total infected people is really in contact with
susceptible ones, being able to “produce new infectious people”. Once this Eact
is identified, its “size” should be expressed as a function of the “size” of the whole
E, so to be able to write the expression Cact (C): provided things work as in the

7

herd behaviour case, i.e. provided Eact is a non-space-filling subset of E, hence
of Hausdorff dimension smaller than dim E, one may state
Cact ∝ C

dim Eact
dim E

µ

def

= C ν = C p.

(15)

The explanation for the case of α = p is just given by the foregoing assumption
(15), while, in order to understand the case p < α = p + δ one may either
think that the “active” contagious people Cact will interact with “slightly” more
infected people than themselves alone, so that the limiting locus will be Elim ⊃
Eact / dim Elim = αν: this gives rise to the competition term − Krα C p · C α in the
ODE; or think that the coefficient of C 2p term in a “regular” competition term
α−p
with a coefficient depending on C explicitly, as Ċlim = − rCK α C 2p , be this a
competition strength growing as O (C α−p ), or a carrying capacity decreasing as
O (C p−α ).
The great question is, then, how to compute dim E, dim Eact and dim Elim ,
provided it makes sense at all to represent the behaviour of infected humans and
of the contagion via fractal geometrical loci. In this vision, the locus E should
depend on the human behaviour and society: in particular, it must retrace the
locus where people are concentrated, i.e. the web of the inhabited centers and
communications H. As a fantasy, we could say dim H = ρ ≤ 2, since we can
at most occupy the 2-dimensional surface of a country: so E ⊆ H will mean
ν ≤ ρ < 2. An indication about dim H, in agreement with the arguments here,
may be found in [12], for example. When one goes from dim E = ν to the value
of dim Eact , things become more complicated, because now we have to consider
not only the distribution and behaviour of humans, but also the “contagion
dynamics”, a contribution given by the nature of the virus. For COVID-19, the
contagion seems to take place via rather close contact, so that particles of the
breath of an infected person are received by the susceptible individual: one may
imagine to select Eact considering the sub-locus of E of the close contacts of
the single individual, i.e. possibly the “network of personal relationships” and
“of casual encounters”. Possibly, this will give dim Eact = µ ≤ ν, and hence p.
Similar considerations will lead to figuring out what α could be.
As it is understandable from the aforementioned arguments, “predicing” the
numbers ν, µ, p and α from what we may study about the distribution and communications of humans, their relationship networks, and from what we know
about the behaviour of COVID-19, will be a very tough interdisciplinary task.
What one can say by intuition is that, as the locus Eact is more sparse, the
behaviour of the outbreak C (t) will be slower and slower. For instance: considering K = 15 × 104 and r = 0.8 people1−p · day−1 , the curve C (t) solving the
ODE with p = α = 1 is the one illustrated in Figure 1: looking at that plot, one
sees that the maximum value of infected people is reached in practice between
the 20th and the 30th day. If one puts, instead, p = 0.7 and α = 1, the result
is that of Figure 2: in this case, we see that the value C ' K is reached not
before t = 140 days, i.e. the growth is much slower as p decreases.
The slowness of C (t) towards K, increasing with decreasing p, teaches that,
with smaller p, the outbreak of contagion gives much more time to the public
8

Figure 1: A curve solving the ODE (1), i.e. with p = α = 1 and r = 0.8 day−1 .
The initial value of infected individuals is C (0) = 100.

Figure 2: A curve solving the ODE (1), i.e. with p = 0.8 and α = 1, and
r = 0.8 people0.2 · day−1 . The initial value of infected individuals is C (0) = 100.

9

healthcare administration to take anti-contagion measures. The faster the reach
of K is, the more crowded the hospitals will be, the more difficult will be to
assist ill people, and the larger the number of dead can be, and this can be
mitigated acting precisely on p. Clearly, also acting on α may modify the shape
of the curve C (t).
Provided equation (2) describes COVID-19 outbreak with time, acting on
the exponents in (2) may regulate the time given to a national healthcare administration to confront it. As argued before, the exponents p and α depend on
the physical distribution of people, on their behaviour and on their relationship
network: under this point of view, one has to hope that the lockdown meaures
taken by many Governments are acting in the direction of diminishing p, and
increasing δ in (13), so to render less and effective the “creation” term rC p and
more and more rapid the “cancellation” term −∆eff (C) C 2p .

References
[1] Ke Wu, Didier Darcet, Qian Wang and Didier Sornette, Generalized logistic
growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak in 29 provinces in China and
in the rest of the world, ArXiv: 2003.05681.
[2] Chowell G, Hincapie-Palacio D, Ospina J, Pell B, Tariq A, Dahal S, Moghadas S, Smirnova A, Simonsen L, Viboud C. Using
Phenomenological Models to Characterize Transmissibility and Forecast Patterns and Final Burden of Zika Epidemics. PLOS Currents Outbreaks. 2016 May 31 . Edition 1. doi:
10.1371/currents.outbreaks.f14b2217c902f453d9320a43a35b9583.
[3] Balázs Szendroi and Gábor Csányi, Polynomial epidemics and clustering in
contact networks, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B (Suppl.) 271, S364–S366 (2004),
DOI 10.1098/rsbl.2004.0188.
[4] Anna
L.
Ziff,
Robert
M.
Ziff,
Fractal
kinetics
of
COVID-19
pandemic,
ArXiv:
2020.02.16.20023820v1.full,
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023820.
[5] Giuseppe Consolini and Massimo Materassi, Fractional kinetics for the
Covid-19 contagion in Italy, in prepration.
[6] Thomas House, Modelling Epidemics on Networks, Pages 213-225 | Received 01 Nov 2011, Accepted 22 Nov 2011, Published online: 31 Jan 2012.
[7] Fanelli, D., Piazza, F., Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading in
China, Italy and France, preprint arXiv:2003.06031.
[8] Bacaër N. (2011) Verhulst and the logistic equation (1838). In: “A Short
History of Mathematical Population Dynamics”. Springer, London

10

[9] Massimo Materassi, Giacomo Innocenti, Duccio Berzi, Stefano Focardi,
Kleptoparasitism and complexity in a multi-trophic web, Ecological Complexity Volume 29, March 2017, Pages 49-60.
[10] Valerio Ajraldi, Marta Pittavino and Ezio Venturino, Modeling herd behavior in population systems, Nonlinear Analysis Real World Applications
12(4): 2319-2338, August 2011.
[11] M. Materassi, D. Collini, L. Barletti, S. Dalmazzone, V. Frontuto and L.
Tamburello, Inter-algal competition via a space-implicit dynamical model
with derd behaviour, in preparation.
[12] Isabelle Thomas and Pierre Frankhauser, Fractal dimensions of the built-up
footprint: buildings versus roads. Fractal evidence from Antwerp (Belgium),
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 2013, volume 40, pages
310 – 329.

11

