Advancing computerized cognitive training for early Alzheimer’s disease
in a pandemic and post-pandemic world

Kaylee Bodner, Terry E. Goldberg, D. P. Devanand, P. Murali Doraiswamy

Neurocognitive Disorders Program, Departments of Psychiatry and Medicine,
Duke University School of Medicine
Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Department of
Psychiatry, Columbia University Irving Medical Center

Address correspondence to: kaylee.bodner@duke.edu

Disclosures: Please see disclosures at the end

Introduction
Worldwide, some 40 million adults have Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and several hundred
million may be at elevated risk for AD by virtue of genetic risk, cerebrovascular disease,
comorbid illnesses such as diabetes or depression, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and/or
silent buildup of cortical AD pathology (1). Despite extensive research, there are no
pharmacological treatments with more than minimal efficacy for mild AD, and prevention
strategies are not established.
The COVID-19 pandemic has transformed mobile health applications and telemedicine
from nice to have tools into essential healthcare infrastructure (2-4). This need is particularly
great for the elderly who, due to their greater risk for infection, may avoid medical facilities or
be required to self-isolate. These are also the very groups at highest risk for cognitive decline.
For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic artificially intelligent conversational agents were
employed by hospitals and government agencies (such as the CDC) to field queries from
patients about symptoms and treatments (3). Digital health tools also proved invaluable to
provide neuropsychiatric and psychological self-help to people isolated at home or in
retirement centers and nursing homes (2-4).
Computerized Cognitive Training
Computerized cognitive training (CCT) is one such application of digital health in which
individuals can access gamified, engaging, cognitive exercises from their own computers or
mobile devices anytime anywhere (5-15). These exercises can be targeted to improve overall
cognition or specific domains (such as learning and memory, attention, speed, executive
functioning), as well as daily living skills such as financial knowledge or driving performance (515). They can potentially be adjusted based on response via self-administered cognitive tests,
and adherence supervised remotely, as needed, by a physician or psychologist. There are over
two-dozen CCT programs on the market and consumer demand is large – tens of millions of
people in dozens of countries have accessed CCT to date (5).
While popular, scientific opinion regarding CCT has at times been divided. In 2014, two
groups with expertise in the field expressed conflicting opinions on the effectiveness of CCT
based on the same evidence (6, 7). While one group claimed there was “little evidence that
playing brain games improved underlying broad cognitive abilities”, the other retorted that "a
substantial and growing body of evidence shows that certain cognitive training regimens can
significantly improve cognitive function, including in ways that generalize to everyday life.”
Subsequently, Simons et al. criticized many of the industry-sponsored CCT studies on various
methodological limitations (8). In a rebuttal, Harvey et al. noted that the critics may have
prematurely come to a wrong conclusion – they cited factors such as incorrect definitions of
CCT and described supportive evidence from meta-analyses and large RCTs (8). Likewise, while
an initial online study by Owen et al (9) did not find any benefits of CCT in younger adults, a

subsequent study of 2912 older adults by the same group reported that CCT had benefits on
both cognition and daily activities (10).
Clinical Trials of CCT in Aging and MCI
The scientific rationale to develop CCT for treating MCI is sound – a large body of
observational research suggest that being cognitively active may reduce the risk for dementia
and experimental studies show that aging brains retain a capacity for neuroplasticity (reviewed
in 5, 11-14).
There is now evidence from relatively large well-controlled trials to support both
efficacy and safety. For example, the NIH-funded, Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent
and Vital Elderly (ACTIVE) Trial of 2,832 older people, assigned people to 3 forms of training –
memory, reasoning and speed – versus a control. The memory group showed no benefits. But
five years after initial training, the reasoning group self-reported fewer daily-living problems,
whereas speed-of-processing training resulted in fewer at-fault automobile accidents and a
smaller decline in health-related quality of life (12). Further, at 10-year follow up, those on the
computerized speed training arm had a 29% reduction in incident dementia rates (13). A metaanalyses of 52 studies comprising 4,885 cognitively healthy older adults, noted small to
moderate beneficial effect sizes for CCT in comparison to control groups in the domains of
verbal memory, nonverbal memory, working memory, processing speed, and visuospatial skills
(14). This study also found that group-based training was more efficacious than home-based
training - suggesting that future home based CCT may need to be augmented with greater
remote supervision and interactions via social media (14). A meta-analysis of 18 studies of
CCT for MCI (N=690) found small to moderate improvements in global cognition, memory and
working memory (11). The largest effect size was on working memory. Whether these
improvements result in long-term transfer to clinically meaningful benefits and lowered rates of
progression to dementia is not known and require further study. (11).
There is also evidence that the effectiveness of CCT in subjects at risk for AD could be
improved by supplementing cognitive training with other tools such as physical exercise, diet,
vascular risk reduction, neuromodulation or pharmacotherapy. For example, Lenze et al
reported that the addition of a serotonin modulator/stimulator drug, vortioxetine, could
improve the efficacy of CCT in MCI (17). Two studies that examined the effects of combining
physical and cognitive training in MCI reported mixed results (15, 16). Singh et al, using a 2x 2
design, found that CCT improved memory in MCI at 6 months but did not augment the effects
of exercise (15). In contrast, the 40-week population study by Shimada et al (16) of 945 MCI
subjects reported that combined CCT and physical exercise improved memory and nonmemory
domains, and reduced medial temporal lobe atrophy in amnestic MCI (16). Lastly, the two-year
FINGER randomized controlled trial of 1260 older adults showed that a multi-domain lifestyle
intervention, comprising CCT as one of the components, slowed cognitive decline (18).

Software as a Medical Device
The International Medical Device Regulators Forum (IMDRF) for software as a medical
device (SaMD) proposed consensus guidelines for what constitutes a mobile medical app (i.e.
digital therapeutic) versus a wellness app (19). These guidelines stated that a software app
intended to treat or prevent a serious disease would have to conduct well-controlled clinical
trials to prove efficacy and seek pre-marketing authorization (PMA) from a regulatory agency.
Recently, prescription digital therapeutics have been cleared by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for use in substance abuse and sleep disorders, and apps for other
diseases are in development (20). Per these guidelines, CCT that is marketed for treating MCI or
preventing AD would be viewed as a medical device and subject to pre-marketing regulatory
oversight. CCT intended for use as a general wellness tool to improve mental speed would likely
not be subject to such oversight.
Advancing CCT as a Digital Brain Therapeutic
We believe the most efficient regulatory path for CCT is to seek a marketing indication
for the symptomatic treatment of MCI or very mild AD dementia. Such a path would be
supported by the large public health threat posed by AD, the high failure rate of investigational
drug trials and the urgent need for scalable, low risk, cost-effective, home-based preventive
treatments. The small to moderate effect sizes seen in MCI CCT trials to date are likely to be
similar to those expected in ongoing anti-amyloid or anti-tau trials. Further, the safety of CCT is
superior to most biologics/drugs being studied for MCI and the risk is minimal.
While regulatory approaches for devices often differ from that of drugs, recent FDA
draft guidelines for acceptable outcomes in early AD trials of investigational drugs (21) provide
a roadmap for CCT. The FDA guidance categorizes early AD into three stages – Stage 1
(pathological changes but no clinical deficits), Stage 2 (mild cognitive deficits but no measurable
functional deficits), and Stage 3 (measurable cognitive and functional deficits). Stages 2 and 3
are analogous to early MCI and late-MCI.
The above guidance suggests that in Stage 1 one or more biomarkers could serve as a
primary basis for accelerated approval with the requirement for a post-approval confirmatory
clinical study. In Stage 2, one or more neuropsychological tests (either effect on multiple tests
or a large effect on a single test) could serve as the basis for approval. In Stage 3, a single
integrated scale that measures both daily function and cognitive effects (e.g. Clinical Dementia
Rating Scale) could serve as evidence of efficacy.
Although the overall literature shows CCT to be safe with a high likelihood of cognitive
efficacy in aging and MCI, the lack of positive, regulatory quality trials is the major limitation.
The bar for clearance of a software device is often lower than that of a drug; hence it is likely
regulatory agencies may view the existing studies of CCT in aging and MCI (such as those cited
in 5-17) as supportive and may require only a single, methodologically rigorous, relatively short
(e.g. 24-week) trial to gain such an indication. Given the lack of a predicate or product code,
CCT for MCI would likely be viewed by the FDA as a Class III device (22); however, we believe
that a de-novo application to request re-classification of CCT as a lower risk Class II device could

be successful. CCT manufacturers should seek advice from regulatory agencies before and
during this process as is done with drugs (19). Alternatively, CCT manufacturers seeking an MCI
indication could also utilize the FDA’s digital software pre-certification (Pre-Cert) program.
Such a path would increase trust among clinicians, consumers and payers.
To date, however, CCT products aimed at the elderly have chosen the less risky path of
going directly to consumers as a “wellness” product – suggesting the need for incentives such
as market exclusivity or preferential formulary access. Alternatively a regulatory quality trial
could also be conducted in the public interest through a public-private partnership involving
one or more CCT companies or via a government grant. For example, our group is currently
conducting an 18-month randomized trial of CCT versus active control in carefully selected MCI
patients with clinically meaningful cognitive (ADAS-Cog), functional (FAQ, UPSA), neuronal loss
(hippocampal volume) and disease modifying (progression to dementia) outcomes (23).
Given the millions of elderly already doing CCT at home, it would also be insightful to
analyze existing large registries to examine real world outcomes consistent with the FDA’s total
product lifecycle approach (22). Three areas of real world health analytics (RWHA) would be
relevant for CCT – 1) patient reported outcomes such as daily activities; 2) user experience
analytics such as engagement and compliance; 3) product performance (reliability, privacy and
cybersecurity). Updates on real world performance could be provided quarterly to public and
regulators.
For clinicians and the general public to be willing to use CCT as a primary treatment
modality, convincing evidence in well-controlled trials with a clear focus on MCI, for example,
would be helpful. Future research to clarify the role of augmenting agents, such as off-label
medications (e.g. vortioxetine), cholinesterase inhibitors, physical exercise and other nonpharmacologic interventions, for CCT to achieve maximum efficacy as a cognitive enhancing
strategy would also be useful. Future studies could also examine it’s utility in combination with
anti-amyloid or anti-tau agents.
The COVID-19 pandemic has illustrated the demand for digital tools across the entire
spectrum of healthcare. Reimbursement and regulatory burdens faced by digital tools before
the pandemic have begun to diminish. Post-pandemic, companies that integrate digital
therapeutics with other modalities (e.g. digital diagnostics, digital pharmacy, live consults via
tele-medicine) will best provide a seamless experience for consumers. A patient-centered, real
world health data sharing platform that can collect and aggregate siloed data sources across
multiple health systems has recently been demonstrated (24). These lessons are highly
relevant to optimize CCT as a clinical tool in MCI.
In summary, we believe that it is an important time for the field to advance CCT from a
wellness product to a well-integrated, digital brain therapeutic via an appropriate regulatory
pathway. If efficacy is established in MCI, then CCT could be combined with specific self-rated
cognitive and functional assessment scales as well as other clinical care options to help millions
of elderly both during pandemics and in normal times.

Acknowledgments:
The authors are funded by an NIA grant which is evaluating the efficacy of CCT in MCI. KB
receives salary support from an NIA grant. TG has received research grants from the NIA and
receives royalties for the use of the Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS) in
clinical trials. DD has received research grants from the NIH and honoraria as a scientific
adviser to Acadia, Genentech, BXCel, Grifols, and Corium. PMD has received grants from the
NIH, DOD, ONR, ADDF, Cure Alzheimer’s Fund, and the Karen L. Wrenn Trust. PMD has received
advisory or board fees from several health and technology companies; PMD owns shares in
several companies and is a co-inventor on patents whose products are not discussed here.

References:
1. Dementia statistics. Alzheimer's Disease International.
https://www.alz.co.uk/research/statistics. Accessed April 28, 2020.
2. Gordon J, Doraiswamy PM. High anxiety calls for innovation in digital mental health. World
Economic Forum, 2020. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/high-anxiety-calls-forinnovation-in-digital-mental-health-6b7b4e7044
3. Torous J, Myrick KJ, Rauseo-Ricupero N, Firth J. Digital Mental Health and COVID-19: Using
Technology Today to Accelerate the Curve on Access and Quality Tomorrow. JMIR Mental
Health. 2020;7(3). doi:10.2196/18848.
4. Webster P. Virtual health care in the era of COVID-19. The Lancet. 2020;395(10231):11801181. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30818-7.
5. Sternberg DA, Ballard K, Hardy JL, Katz B, Doraiswamy PM, Scanlon M. The largest human
cognitive performance dataset reveals insights into the effects of lifestyle factors and
aging. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2013;7. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00292.
6. A Consensus on the Brain Training Industry from the Scientific Community. Max Planck
Institute for Human Development and Stanford Center on Longevity. 2014.

http://longevity.stanford.edu/a-consensus-on-the-brain-training-industry-from-thescientific-community-2/
7. Harvey PD, Mcgurk SR, Mahncke H, Wykes T. Controversies in Computerized Cognitive
Training. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging. 2018;3(11):907915. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2018.06.008.
8. Simons DJ, Boot WR, Charness N, Gathercole SE, Chabris CF, Hambrick DZ, Stine-Morrow
EAL. Do ‘brain training’ programs work? Psychological Science in the Public Interest.
2016:17(3):103-186.
9. Owen A, Hampshire A, Grahn J et al. Putting brain training to the test. Nature 465, 775–778
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09042
10. Corbett A, Owen A, Hampshire A, et al. The Effect of an Online Cognitive Training Package in
Healthy Older Adults: An Online Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American
Medical Directors Association. 2015;16(11):990-997. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2015.06.014.
11. Zhang H, Huntley J, Bhome R, et al. Effect of computerised cognitive training on cognitive
outcomes in mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open.
2019; 9(8): e027062.
12. Tennstedt SL, Unverzagt FW. The ACTIVE study: study overview and major findings. J Aging
Health. 2013;25(8 Suppl):3S–20S. doi:10.1177/0898264313518133
13. Rebok GW, Ball K, Guey LT, et al. Ten-year effects of the advanced cognitive training for
independent and vital elderly cognitive training trial on cognition and everyday functioning
in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(1):16–24. doi:10.1111/jgs.12607
14. Lampit A, Hallock H, Valenzuela M. Computerized Cognitive Training in Cognitively Healthy
Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Effect Modifiers. PLoS Medicine.
2014;11(11). doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001756.
15. Singh MAF, Gates N, Saigal N, et al. The Study of Mental and Resistance Training (SMART)
Study—Resistance Training and/or Cognitive Training in Mild Cognitive Impairment: A
Randomized, Double-Blind, Double-Sham Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical
Directors Association. 2014;15(12):873-880. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2014.09.010
16. Shimada H, Makizako H, Doi T, et al. Effects of Combined Physical and Cognitive Exercises on
Cognition and Mobility in Patients With Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Randomized Clinical
Trial. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association. 2018;19(7):584-591.
doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2017.09.019.
17. Lenze EJ, Stevens A, Waring JD, et al. Augmenting Computerized Cognitive Training With
Vortioxetine for Age-Related Cognitive Decline: A Randomized Controlled Trial. American
Journal of Psychiatry. 2020. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19050561.
18. Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Solomon A, et al. A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise,
cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline
in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet.
2015;385(9984):2255-2263. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)60461-5.
19. Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Software as a Medical Device (SaMD). U.S. Food
and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/digital-health/softwaremedical-device-samd. Accessed April 6, 2020.
20. Makin S. The emerging world of digital therapeutics. Nature News. 2019.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-02873-1.

21. Early Alzheimer's Disease: Developing Drugs for Treatment Guidance for Industry. US Food
and Drug Administration. 2018:1-7. https://www.fda.gov/media/110903/download.
22. Developing Software Precertification Program. US Food and Drug Administration. 2018;2:145. https://www.fda.gov/media/113802/download.
23. D’Antonio J, Simon-Pearson L, Goldberg T, et al. Cognitive training and neuroplasticity in
MCI: protocol for a 2-site blinded randomized controlled treatment trial. BMJ Open.
2019;9:e028536. doi:10.1136/
24. Dhruva SS, Ross JS, Akar JG, et al. Aggregating Multiple Real-World Data Sources using a
Patient-Centered Health Data Sharing Platform: an 8-week Cohort Study among Patients
Undergoing Bariatric Surgery or Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation. February 2019.
doi:10.1101/19010348.

