1

A Smartphone enabled Approach to Manage
COVID-19 Lockdown and Economic Crisis
Halgurd S. Maghdid, *Kayhan Zrar Ghafoor

Abstract—The emergence of novel COVID-19 causing an overload in health system and high mortality rate. The key priority
is to contain the epidemic and prevent the infection rate. In this
context, many countries are now in some degree of lockdown to
ensure extreme social distancing of entire population and hence
slowing down the epidemic spread. Further, authorities use case
quarantine strategy and manual second/third contact-tracing to
contain the COVID-19 disease. However, manual contact tracing
is time consuming and labor-intensive task which tremendously
overload public health systems. In this paper, we developed a
smartphone-based approach to automatically and widely trace
the contacts for confirmed COVID-19 cases. Particularly, contacttracing approach creates a list of individuals in the vicinity and
notifying contacts or officials of confirmed COVID-19 cases. This
approach is not only providing awareness to individuals they are
in the proximity to the infected area, but also tracks the incidental
contacts that the COVID-19 carrier might not recall. Thereafter,
we developed a dashboard to provide a plan for government
officials on how lockdown/mass quarantine can be safely lifted,
and hence tackling the economic crisis. The dashboard used to
predict the level of lockdown area based on collected positions
and distance measurements of the registered users in the vicinity.
The prediction model uses K-means algorithm as an unsupervised
machine learning technique for lockdown management.
Index Terms—COVID-19, contact-tracing, GPS positioning,
Smartphone.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In an unprecedented move, China locks down the megacity
named Wuhan, in which the novel coronavirus was first reported, in the hopes stopping the spread of deadly coronavirus.
During the lockdown, all railway, port and road transportation
were suspended in Wuhan city. With the increasing number
of infections and fast person-to-person spreading, hospitals
are overwhelmed with patients. Later, the disease has been
identified in many other countries around the globe [1],
[2]. Subsequently, the World Health Organization (WHO)
announced that the virus can cause a respiratory disease with
clinical presentation of cough, fever and lung inflammation. As
more countries are experienced dozens of cases or community
transmission, WHO characterized COVID-19 disease as a
pandemic.
Halgurd S. Maghdid is with the Department of Software Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Koya University, Kurdistan Region-F.R.Iraq.
First.Last@koyauniversity.org.
Kayhan Zrar Ghafoor is with the Department of Software Engineering,
Salahaddin University-Erbil, Iraq; School of Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Wolverhampton, Wulfruna Street, Wolverhampton,
WV1 1LY, UK. kayhan@ieee.org.
*Kayhan Zrar Ghafoor is the corresponding author. kayhan@ieee.org.
The researchers can access the implementation and programming code
in https://github.com/halgurd18/lockdown COVID19

In such unprecedented situation, doctors and health care
workers are putting their life at risk to contain the disease.
Further, in order to isolate infected people and combatting
the outbreak, many hospitals are converted to COVID-19
quarantine ward. Moreover, a surge of COVID-19 patients
has introduced long queues at hospitals for isolation and
treatment. With such high number of infections, emergency
responders have been working non-stop sending patients to the
hospital and overcrowded hospitals refused to in more patients.
For instance, recently in Italy medical resources are in short
supply, hospitals have had to give priority to people with a
significant fever and shortness of breath over others with less
severe symptoms [3].
As the COVID-19 continues to spread, countries around the
glob are implementing strict measures intensify the lockdown,
from mass quarantine to city shutdown, to slow down the
fast transmission of coronavirus [4]. During the lockdown,
people are only allowed to go out for essential work such
as purchasing food or medicine. Ceremonies and gatherings
of more than two people are not permitted. These strict rules
of quarantine that only allows few to move around the city
including delivery drivers providing vital lifeline. On the other
hand, few countries, such as Japan, has declared a state of
emergency in many cities in an attempt to tackle the spread
of the virus. Although COVID-19 started as a health crisis, it
possibly acts as a gravest threat to the world economy since
2008 global financial crisis [5].
COVID-19 epidemic affect all sectors of the economy
from manufacturing and supply chains to universities. It is
also affect businesses and daily lives especially in countries
where the COVID-19 has hit the hardest. The shortage of
supply chain has knock-on effects on economic sector and the
demand side (such as trade and tourism). This makes a supply
constraint of the producer and causing a restraint in consumer’s
demand, this may lead to demand shock due to psychological
contagion. In order to prevent such widespread fallout, central
banks and government have been rolling out emergency measures to reassure businesses and stabilize financial markets to
support economy in the phase of COVID-19. Currently, most
countries are in the same boat with leading responsibility of
Group Twenty and international organizations [5]. To meet
the responsibility, many companies and academic institutions
around the world made efforts to produce COVID-19 vaccine.
But, health experts stating that it may take time to produce an
effective vaccine.
As an effective vaccine for COVID-19 isn’t probably to be
in market until the beginning of next year, management of
lockdown is an imperative need. Thus, public health officials

2

combat the virus by manual tracking of recent contacts history
of positive COVID-19 cases. This manual contact tracing is
very useful at the early spreading stage of the virus. However,
when the number of confirmed cases was increased tremendously in some countries, manual contact tracing of each
individual is labor-intensive and requires huge resources [6].
For example, an outbreak of the COVID-19 at a funeral
ceremony in an avenue in Erbil, Kurdistan Region left regional
government with hundred of potential contacts. This situation
or many other scenarios of massive number of cases burden
the government on trying to manual tracking all contacts [7].
It is risky that health authorities cannot easily trace recent
COVID-19 carrier cases so that its probability of occurrence
and its impact can hardly be measured.
Technology can potentially be useful for digital contacttracing of positive coronavirus cases. Smartphone can use
wireless technology data to track people when they near each
other. In particular, when someone is confirmed with positive
COVID-19, the status of the smartphone will be updated and,
then the app will notify all phones in the vicinity. For example,
if someone tests positive of COVID-19 and stood near a person
in the mall earlier that week. The COVID-19 carrier would not
be able to memorize the person’s name for manual contact
tracing. In this scenario, the smartphone contact-tracing app
is very promising to notify that person [8]. This automated
virus tracking approach could really transform the ability
governments and health authorities to contain the and control
the epidemic. In this situation, a dashboard is required to assist
governments and health authorities to predict when lockdown
and self-quarantine will end.
This research first reviews the state-of-the-art solutions
to combat COVID-19. Then, we developed a smartphonebased approach to automatically and widely trace the contacts
for confirmed COVID-19 cases. Particularly, contact-tracing
approach creates a list of individuals in the vicinity and
notifying contacts or officials of confirmed COVID-19 cases.
This approach is not only providing awareness to individuals
they are in the proximity to the infected area, but also tracks
the incidental contacts that the COVID-19 carrier might not
recall. Thereafter, we developed a dashboard to provide a plan
for government officials on how lockdown/mass quarantine
can be safely lifted, and hence tackling the economic crisis.
From a technical standpoint, we summarise the most important contributions of this paper as follows:
1) We build a tracking model based on positional infor-

mation of registered users to conduct contact-tracing of
confirmed COVID-19 cases.
2) We propose a smart lockdown management to predict a
duration of lockdown.
3) In order to notify contacts for confirmed cases, we
also developed a notification model to cluster lockdown
regions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provide the literature review on recent advances of developed
AI systems for COVID-19 detection. This is followed by
presenting an overview of the proposed approach and details
of the designed algorithm in section III. Section IV presents

Fig. 1. Identifying and alerting people (black color) who have come into
contact with a person (red color) infected with COVID-19

the experiments which are conducted in the paper. Finally,
Section IV concludes the paper.
II. B ACKGROUND
In [9] the authors modeled on how COVID-19 spreads over
populations in countries in terms of the transmission speed and
containing its spreading. In the model, R is representing the
reproduction number, which is defined the ability of the virus
in infecting other people as a chain of contagious infection.
Infected individuals rapidly infect a group of people over very
short period of time, which then yields an outbreak. On the
contrary, the infection would be in control if the probability
gets closer of one person to infect less than one other person.
This is exactly happening in Fig. 1; when people (black color)
who have come into contact with an infected person (red
color), the infection would be spread rapidly.

Fig. 2. Community-driven contact-tracing based on Bluetooth signal

One important aspect is how the number of infected people
looks like depends on several factors, such as the number
of vulnerable people in the communities, The time takes
to recover a person without symptoms, the social contacts
and possibility of infecting them with coronavirus. Further,
another factor will affect fast spreading of coronavirus is the
frequency of visiting crowded places such as malls and minimarkets. Thus, governments and public health authorities are
responsible to manage and plan a convenient way to contain
the epidemic. Moreover, countries at the early stage of virus
spreading need to control the epidemic by typically isolating
and testing suspected cases tracing their contact and quarantine
those people in case they are infected. Testing and contact
tracing at wide scale, the better the chance of containment.

3

Fig. 3. A framework of contact-tracing using smartphone-based approach

In the case of COVID-19, research studies have been
conducted for containment or controlling the fast spreading,
and hence helping governments and societies in ending this
epidemic. In [10], the authors have investigated the importance of confirmed COVID-19 case isolation that could play
a key role in controlling the disease. They have utilized
a mathematical model to measure the effectiveness of this
strategy in controlling the transmission speed of COVID19. To achieve this goal, a stochastic transmission model is
developed to overcome the fast person-to-person transmission
of COVID-19. According to their research study, controlling
virus transmission is within 12 weeks or by a threshold of
accumulative 5000 cases. However, controlling the spread of
the virus using this mathematical approach is highly correlated
to other factors like pathogen and the reaction of people.
One key role to track infected people and predict ending
lockdown is contact-tracing. When a patient is diagnosed
with infectious disease like COVID-19, contact-tracing is
an important step to slowing down the transmission [11].
This technique seeks to identify people who have had close
contact with infected individuals and who therefore may be
infect themselves. This targeted strategy reduces the need
for stay at home periods. However, manual contact tracing
is subject to a person’s ability to recall everyone they have
come in contact over a two week’s period. In [11], the authors
exploited the cellphone’s Bluetooth to constantly advertise the
presence of people. These anonymous advertisements, named
chirps in Bluetooth, are not containing positional or personally
identifiable information. Every phone stores all the chirps that
it has sent and overheard from nearby phones. Their system
uses these lists to enable contact-tracing for people diagnosed
with COVID-19. This system is not only traces infected
individuals, but it also estimates distance between individuals
and amount of time they spent in close proximity to each

other. When a person is diagnosed with COVID-19, doctors
would coordinate with the patient to upload all the chirps sent
out by their phone to the public database. Meanwhile, people
who have not been diagnosed can their phones do a daily
scan of public database, to see if their phones have overheard
any of the chirps used by people later diagnosed by COVID19. This indicates that they were in close prolonged contact
with that anonymous individual. Fig. 2 shows the procedure
of exchanging anonymous ID among users for contact-tracing.
III. P ROPOSED SMARTPHONE -BASED CONTACT-TRACING
As stated in the aforementioned section, manual contacttracing is labor-intensive task. In this section, we detail out
each part of the proposed smartphone-based digital contacttracing shown in Fig. 3. The main idea of the proposed
framework in Fig. 3 to enable digital contact-tracing to end
lockdown and the same time preventing the virus from
spreading. The best thing to do seems to be let people go out
for their business, but any body tests positive of COVID-19,
we would be able, through proposed framework, to trace
everybody in contact with the confirmed case and managing
the lockdown and mass quarantine. This will confirm
preventing the spread of the virus to the rest of the people.
The first step of the proposed contact-tracing model is
registration of users. There is no doubt registration and coverage of high percentage of population are very significant for
effective pandemic control. Users provide information such
as name, phone number, post code, status of the COVID19 disease (Positive, Negative or recovered). Effectiveness of
the application and digital contact tracing depends on two
factors speed and coverage. For the proposed framework, we
utilize Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) receiver for
outdoor environment whereas Bluetooth low energy is used in
indoors. Speed depends on how to reduce the time required

4

(a) Registration Process

(b) Map Tracking

(c) Received Notification

(d) Alert Dialog Eaxmple

Fig. 4. The consequent steps of the smartphone application.

for contact tracing from few days to hours or minutes. The
more people register in the system, the better performance of
the system in terms of both speed and coverage of contact
tracing.
In the second step, Global Positioning System (GPS)
receiver is used by the proposed model to track either
individuals or a group of people visiting to a common place.
The GPS service class updates user coordinates to the
database in every few seconds. Once a registered user reports
gets infected with COVID-19, his test result would be send
to the public database in central computer server. Other
registered users will regularly check those central server
provider for possible positive COVID-19 cases they were in
contact in the past 2 weeks. Server is responsible to compare
the infected ID with its list of stored IDs. A push notification
will be send, by
the server, to those who were in contact
with a person tests positive. It is important to note that the
information would be revealed to the central server is an ID
of the phone.
Firebased cloud messaging is used to send push notification
to multiple devices even the apps are paused or running in
the background. Many apps send push notification, which
indicate an alert to the users. This is happen when a person
is approaching someone who is infected with COVID-19 or
nearby a lockdown area. In order to protect the privacy of those
who have the coronavirus, we only include an alerting message
into the push notification. This certainly would be very useful
for entire population to make informed decision about not
getting close to COVID-19 area. However, this notification
would help the public health professionals rather than replace
it.
The proposal is also including a lockdown prediction model.

The model is working based on the collect geographic information and crowding level of the registered users in the
system. In this study, K-means as an unsupervised machine
learning algorithm is used to cluster the users’ positions
information and predict that the area should be locked down or
not based on same empirical thresholds. Both scenarios results
are shown in fig. 5.

Fig. 5. The results of the prediction model for both scenarios.

IV. E XPERIMENTS AND D EPLOYMENT
This section presents the details of how the proposed
approach will be implemented. The proposal includes two
main parts. First, deploying an application on Android-based
smartphone which will be used by the users and track/send
mobility information of the users to the system. While the

5

second side is a web-portal (including a comprehensive dashboard) to monitor and predict the visited area that should be
locked down or not.

updated based on how the positions are nearest to each them.
The pseudo code of the K-means clustering algorithm is shown
in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 K-Means Clustering
Input: A specific region r & position information x
1- An Android application is implemented on the smartOutput: cluster k
phone. The application lets the users to register their infor- 1 while k1, k2, k3 ...k j ∈ r do
mation into the proposed system including name, postcode
2
for i ← x1 to xi do
or zip code, phone number, age, Bluetooth MAC address,
3
-find the nearest centroid(c 1 , c 2 ..c k )
gender, and COVID-19 status. The Bluetooth MAC address
4
-assign the position to that cluster
is automatically captured through the application without user
for j ← k 1 to k N do
interaction. The COVID-19 status includes three options which 56
new centroid = mean of all positions assigned to that
might be COVID-19, None COVID-19, and recovered. Fig. 4a
cluster
shows a snapshot of the application form for the registration

A. Smartphone Application

process.
2- Once the users have completed the registration process, they
can enter into the position tracking model. The tracking model
is to send user’s position information into the database of the
system as well as shows the google map regarding to their
positions, as shown in Fig. 4b.
3- Beside this, the users are also can receive the notification or
alert about the areas which have been visited by infected users.
The notification is working in the background, i.e. the user
may be paused the application and uses other application on
the smartphone. However, when the user opens the application
and enters the infected area will receive the alert dialog.
Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d show an example of the notification and
alert dialogue. The notification and dialogue alert models are
also configure both outdoors and indoors. For example, for
outdoors, the GNSS position information of the users is used
to measure the distance between any two users’ positions and
then if the distance is less than 5 meters then the notification
or the alert dialog would be raised. However, for indoors, the
application scans for Bluetooth devices in the vicinity, and then
the result of the scan is matching with pre-registered MAC
addressed in the system. If the matched MAC addresses have
COVID-19 or recovered cases then the notification model and
the alert dialog will notify the users about having COVID-19
or recovered users in the scan area.
B. System Dashboard/Portal
A web portal for the system’s administrators is designed
and implemented using HTML5, PHP, JAVAScript, and google
Map API. This part of the system is to monitoring and tracing
the registered users only in terms of how the areas (which have
been visited by users) should be lockdown or not? To this end,
an unsupervised machine learning (UML) algorithm has been
implemented in the system. There are several UML algorithms
including Neural networks, Anomaly detection, Clustering and
etc. However, for this system, K-means Clustering algorithm
is used to predict the lockdown approach for the visited area.
The K-means algorithm, first, reads the tracked users’ position
information and their status COVID-19. Then, in the next
step will calculate the centroid position of the areas based
on the DASV seeding method. The DASV method is a good
algorithm to select the best centroid position of a set of nearest
positions in the vicinity. Then, the centroid positions will be

(a) Scenario 1

(b) Scenario 2

Fig. 6. Tracing five users in two different scenarios

Once, the process of the clustering of the tracked users’
positions information has completed, a set of clusters will
be produced. Then for each cluster, the distances between
the positions of the different users are calculated. This is
to calculate how many times the users, in the vicinity, are
approaching to each other (from now called AEO). For this
study, five users (user A, user B, user C, user D, and user
E) are participated into the system in two different areas in
USA. Therefore, two different scenarios via the five users are
conducted for the K-means algorithm, as shown in figure 3. In
the first scenario the users are walking and they are located in
Denver area in Colorado-USA, while in the second scenario
they are located in Aspen area in Colorado-USA.
A threshold for the approaching distance has been initialized
to 5 meters, i.e. if user A has been approached around 5 meters
to user B, or C, or D, or E, it means the users are too near

6

to other users. For the two scenarios, if AEO is greater than
10, the system assumes this area is too crowed and the system
will predict that the area should be locked down. However,
if the value of AEO is less than 10 times, it means the area
should not be locked down.
For 10 trial experiments, the model predicts that the Denver
area in the first scenario should be locked down, since the
five users during the walking in the area are approaching to
each other for 55 times and they passed the threshold (i.e. 5
meters). However, in the second scenario, the same trials have
been tested parallel with the second scenario, and the model
predicted that the Aspen area doesn’t need to be locked down,
since the users are walked far to each other. Both scenarios
results are shown in figure 4.
V. C ONCLUSION
At the emergence of COVID-19, many countries worldwide
are commonly practiced social distancing, mass quarantine
and even strict lockdown measures. Smart lockdown management is a pressing need to ease lockdown measures in
places where people are practicing social distance. In this
paper, we developed a smartphone-based approach to inform
people when they are in proximity to an infected area with
COVID-19. We also developed a dashboard to advise health
authorities on how specific area safely get people back to their
normal life. The proposed prediction model is used positional
information and distance measurements of the registered users
in the proximity. The government and public health authorities
would be able to take benefit from the proposed dashboard
to get latest statistics on COVID-19 cases and lockdown
recommendation in different areas. The weak point of this
study is the privacy issue of tracking position information of
the users. This issue would be solved by applying encryption
algorithms, in near future. However, such proposed system is
significant to mitigate economic crisis and easing lockdown
issues.
VI. C OMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no
conflict of interest. Moreover, this research was not funded by
any funding agency.
REFERENCES
[1]J. Chen, L. Wu, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Gong, Y. Zhao, S. Hu, Y. Wang,
X. Hu, B. Zheng et al., “Deep learning-based model for detecting 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia on high-resolution computed tomography:
a prospective study,” medRxiv, 2020.
[2]M. Holshue, C. DeBolt, and L. S. First, “Novel coronavirus in the united
states,” N Engl J Med, vol. 2020, p. 31, 2019.
[3]Canada broadcast cooperation. (2020, March). [Online]. Available:
https://www.cbc.ca/player/play/1709650499517
[4]S. Boseley. Lockdowns can’t end until covid-19 vaccine found, study
says. [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/
08/lockdowns-cant-end-until-covid-19-vaccine-found-study-says,note=
[5]M.-O. Strauss-Kahn. Can we compare the covid-19 and 2008 crises?
(2020, Appril). [Online]. Available: https://atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/
new-atlanticist/can-we-compare-the-covid-19-and-2008-crises/
[6]B.
N.
Wetsman,
“What
is
contact
tracing?”
https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/10/21216550/contact-tracingcoronavirus-what-is-tracking-spread-how-it-works, April,2020.

[7]H. Shelani. Number of covid-19 cases reaches 176 in kurdistan region;
iraq’s total now 703. [Online]. Available: https://www.kurdistan24.net/
en/news/64f6c6f0-6416-471f-b018-47c133ecc8c3note=
[8]F.
Sainz.
Apple
and
google
partner
on
covid19
contact
tracing
technology.
(
April,
2020).
[Online]. Available: https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2020/04/ appleand-google-partner-on-covid-19-contact-tracing-technology/
[9]What we scientists
have discovered about how each
age
group
spreads
covid-19.
(2020,
March).
[Online].
Available: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/17/
scientists-age-groups-covid-19-workplaces-shops-restaurants
[10]J. Hellewell, S. Abbott, A. Gimma, N. I. Bosse, C. I. Jarvis, T. W.
Russell, J. D. Munday, A. J. Kucharski, W. J. Edmunds, F. Sun et al.,
“Feasibility of controlling covid-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and
contacts,” The Lancet Global Health, 2020.
[11]M. News. Safe paths: A privacy-first approach to contact
tracing. (2020, April). [Online]. Available: http://news.mit.edu/2020/
safe-paths-privacy-first-approach-contact-tracing-0410

