Deciphering the Protein Motion of S1 Subunit in

arXiv:2004.05256v1 [q-bio.BM] 10 Apr 2020

SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein Through
Integrated Computational Methods
Hao Tian and Peng Tao∗
Department of Chemistry, Center for Scientific Computation, Center for Drug Discovery,
Design, and Delivery (CD4), Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas, United States
of America
E-mail: ptao@smu.edu

Abstract
The novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a major worldwide public health emergency that has infected over 1.5 million people. The
partially open state of S1 subunit in spike glycoprotein is considered vital for its infection with host cell and is represented as a key target for neutralizing antibodies.
However, the mechanism elucidating the transition from the closed state to the partially open state still remains unclear. Here, we applied a combination of Markov state
model, transition path theory and random forest to analyze the S1 motion. Our results
explored a promising complete conformational movement of receptor-binding domain,
from buried, partially open, to detached states. We also numerically confirmed the
transition probability between those states. Based on the asymmetry in both the dynamics behavior and backbone Cα importance, we further suggested a relation between
chains in the trimer spike protein, which may help in the vaccine design and antibody
neutralization.

1

1

Introduction

As of April 9 2020, there has been over 1.5 million confirmed cases of the newly discovered
coronavirus, named as SARS-CoV-2, causing over 90, 000 cases of death, according to the
World Heath Organization (WHO). SARS-CoV-2 is related to bats-derived coronaviruses
and the SARS-CoV, reported in the Guangdong province of China in 2002, and identified as
a new member of betacoronavirus. 1,2 Due to its fast spreading though human contacts, the
WHO declared it as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).
SARS-CoV-2 is known to infect human through the interaction between its spike (S)
protein and human host receptors. 3–5 The S protein is a trimer (chain A, B and C) and
each chain is formed by S1 and S2 subunits that are related with host receptors binding and
membranes fusion, respectively. 6–8 The S1 subunit consists of a N-terminal domain (NTD),
receptor-binding domain (RBD) and two subdomains (SD1 and SD2). 9 It is reported that
RBD undergoes a conformational change from stable close state to dynamically-less-favorable
partially open state in chain A. 7,10 In the closed state, the determinants of receptor binding
are buried and inaccessible to receptors, while in the partially open state are exposed and is
expected to be necessary for the interaction with host cells. 11,12 In the cases of SARS-CoV-2
and SARS-CoV, S glycoprotein is found to inherently sample closed and open states and this
behavior is suggested to exist in the most pathogenic coronaviruses. 6,13 While the partially
open state plays an important role in human cell infection, little study is done illustrating
this protein motion on residue level, which could potentailly facilitate the prevention and
treatment.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can provide atomic scale information and are
widely used in sampling protein movement and structure landscape. 14 Two kinds of trajectories from closed and open states of SARS-CoV-2 S protein initiating from close state
(PDB 6VXX) and partially open state (PDB 6VYB) are available from D E Shaw Research 15 . However, the timescale (10 microseconds) is still relatively trivial compared with
the timescale of biological processes in the real world. To gain more information from the
2

result of MD simulation, Markov state model (MSM) is applied to catch long-time kinetic
information given time-limited simulation trajectories. 16,17 Another advantage of MSM is
that it can divide a large number of protein structures from simulation into subspaces based
on the extracted kinetic information, and differences among those spaces can be calculated
and used for comparison.
Machine learning techniques have achieved great accomplishments in chemistry and biology including material discovery, 18 structure representation 19 and computation acceleration 20 . The great contributions from machine learning mainly come from its ability to deal
with large scale data and its accurate and explainable models, 21,22 which provide a new opportunity to decipher protein. In this study, tree-based machine learning models were used
to identify important residues. Specifically, random forest model was applied as a classification model to classify different structures and calculate the contribution of each residue and
structure importance for the close-open transition process.
The transition from close state to partially open state of S1 subunits of SARS-CoV-2
S protein is investigated in this research though a series of Markov state model, transition
path theory and random forest. Our results numerically confirmed the close-open transition
probability through estimated transition matrix, showed a complete transition path from
close to open state and identified a relationship between the motion of chain A and two
other chains.

2
2.1

Methods
Analysis of Simulation Trajectories

The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) is used to measure the overall conformational
change of each frame with regard to a reference structure in a MD simulation trajectory.
For a molecular structure represented by Cartesian coordinate vector ri (i = 1 to N ) of N
atoms, the RMSD is calculated as following:
3

s
RMSD =

PN

0
i=1 (ri

− U ri )2
N

(1)

ri0 represents the Cartesian coordinate vector of the ith atom in the reference structure.
The transformation matrix U is defined as the best fit alignment between the protein structures along trajectories with respect to the reference structure.
The root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) is used to measure the fluctuation of each
atom in each frame with regard to a reference structure in a MD simulation trajectory.
v
u
T
u1 X
t
RMSFi =
(v j − v̄i )2
T j=1 i

(2)

Where T is the total frames and ri is the average position of atom i in the given trajectory.

2.2

Feature Processing

Distances between pairs of backbone Cα were chosen as representative features for one structure. Specifically, each distance pair of one Cα carbon and all other Cα carbon in all amino
acids was calculated. A protein contact map technique is normally built by transforming
each pair-wised distance value into 1 if that feature value is below a threshold or 0 otherwise 23 . However, this feature preprocessing technique risks to ignore potentially useful
spacial information forcing a boolean value on the features. Therefore, inspired by ReLU
activation function 24 in neural network, which the equation is shown below, we proposed
a revised feature transformation method by transforming each feature value into 0 if that
feature is above a threshold and keep it the same value otherwise. Compared with reference
feature transformation rule, our proposed technique can still build a protein contact map
while can differentiate local features with the least local information loss.

f (z) = max (0, z)

4

(3)

2.3

Random Forest Model

Random forest is a machine learning technique that can be used for classification. 25,26 A
random forest is composed of several decision trees, 27 which are trained based on given
training data. The final classification output of a random forest model is a collection of
classes predicted by each decision tree model. The random forest algorithm carried out in
this study is implemented in scikit-learn 28 program package version 0.20.1. The number of
decision trees used was 50. One advantage of random forest model over decision tree model
is that employing multiple decision tree models mitigates the overfitting problem suffered by
single decision tree model.

2.4

Feature Importance

In a random forest model, a quantitative evaluation of the importance for each feature used
for training is calculated through training process. This feature importance is calculated
using Gini impurity:

Gini impurity =

C
X

−fi (1 − fi )

(4)

i=1

where fi is the frequency of a label at a node of being picked to split the data set and C is
the total number of unique labels. A random forest model is a collection of several decision
tree models. The importance of node i in decision tree is calculated as:

ni = wi Ci −

m
X

wm(i) Cm(i)

(5)

i

where wj is the weighted number of samples reading node i, Ci is the impurity value of
node i and m is the number of child nodes. The feature importance of feature i is calculated
as

5

Ps
fi = P

l

nj

k∈all nodes

(6)

nk

where s is the times of node j split on feature i. Feature importance within a decision
tree is further normalized by:

normfi = P

fi
j∈all features

fj

(7)

The feature importance in random forest is the averaged importance of feature i in all
decision tree models:
P
Fi =

j∈all decision trees

N

normfi

(8)

where norm fi is the normalized feature importance of one single decision tree and N is
the number of decision trees. 29
Feature importance of all pairwise Cα distances were calculated using the above methods.
The feature importance of an amino acid is the summation of importances of features that
are related with that amino acid. The relative accumulated feature importance of each amino
acid shows the distinguishability and contribution of that amino acid among all amino acids
in differentiating states.

2.5

Markov State Model

Markov state model (MSM) is used to construct long-timescale dynamics behavior 30 . MiniBatch k-means clustering was used to classify each simulation frame to microstates. Perroncluster cluster analysis (PCCA) 31 was applied to cluster microstates into macrostates. Macrostates
are considered as equilibrium or steady states. Transition matrix and transition probability were calculated to quantitatively show the transition dynamics between macrostates. A
specific time interval, referred to as lag time, needs to be determined to construct transition
matrix. The value of the lag time, as well as the number of macrostates, is selected based
6

on the result of estimated relaxation timescale. 32 MSMBuilder 33 version 3.8.0 was employed
to build markov state models in this study.

2.6

Transition Path Theory

Transition path theory (TPT) 34,35 is used to calculate the probability of transitioning from
one state to another within the framework of a MSM. In the current study, the most representative structure of closed state was chosen among the 4 macrostates in the closed state
and defined as macrostate 2 due to the reason that it was the most probable macrostate
to transfer to other open macrostates. The open state was chosen based on the stability of
each open macrostates and macrostate 8 was chosen as representative open state. All other
states are treated as intermediate states. Possible transition pathways from the closed to the
open state were explored. The committor probability qi+ is defined as the probability from
state i to reach the target state rather than initial state. Based on definition, qi+ = 0 for all
microstates in initial state and qi+ = 1 for all microstates in target state. The committor
probability for all other microstates are calculated by the following equation:

−qi+ +

X

Tik qk+ = −

k∈I

X

Tik

(9)

k∈target state

where Tik is the transition probability from state i to state k. Sequentially, the effective
flux is calculated as:

fij = πi qi− Tij qj+

(10)

where πi is the equilibrium probability of normalized transition matrix Tπ and qi− is the
backward-committor probability calculated as qi− = 1 − qi+ . However, backward flux fji
should also be considered and subtracted when calculating net flux. Therefore, the net flux
fij+ = max(0, fij − fji ). Total flux can then be calculated as:

7

Figure 1: Simulations of SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein: (A) RMSD of the trajectories in the
close (red) and open (blue) states. (B) RMSF of simulation trajectories in the close (red)
and open (blue) states. The protein is divided into three chains separated by grey dashed
lines. Atom number was counted from 0.

F =

X

X

πi Tij qj+

(11)

i ∈ initial state j ∈
/ initial state

The flux from initial state to target state can be decomposed to individual pathways
pi . Dijkstra algorithm is implemented in MSMBuilder for pathway decomposition. A set of
pathways pi can be generated along fi , which provides a relative probability by:
fi
pi = P
j

3

fj

(12)

Results

Simulation trajectory analysis shows dynamical activity
Two 10 microseconds simulation trajectories of the trimeric SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein
were treated as reference and backbone alpha carbons (Cα) of the trimer were chosen and
extracted as representative features of structures.

8

To probe the dynamical stability of two structures, the time evolution of the RMSD were
plotted in Figure 1 (A). All RMSD values were calculated with reference to the first frame
of each trajectory. The average RMSD values in two states are 5.9Å and 10.6Å, respectively.
The plot suggested that the close state is relatively stable while the partially open state is
dynamically active and undergoes significant conformational changes after 1 microsecond.
However, the simulation of open state after 6 microseconds suggested a convergence in the
RMSD value and a relatively stable structure, which corresponds to the detached S1 subunit
from S2 fusion machinery.
RMSF results were plotted in Figure 1 (B). The asymmetry in protein motion was noticed
by comparing the individual dynamics behavior among three chains. Corresponding to the
RMSD result in chain A, the RMSF result showed a similar high-degree conformational
change in the RBD domain. However, through the detachment in chain A, chain B and
C showed different movements that both NTD and RBD in chain B are more dynamically
active than those in chain C. while in closed state the chains B and C displayed similar
dynamics.

Markov state model and transition path theory elucidates the closeopen transition
Simulation trajectories were projected onto a two-dimensional (2D) plot in RMSD of Cα
atoms with reference to the close and open state structures, respectively (Figure 2A). To
apply MSM analysis, MiniBatch k-means clustering was applied to divide the simulation
sampling space into 300 microstates based on the reduced-dimension plot, shown in S1. The
estimated relaxation timescale was plotted in Figure 2 B. The trend of implied relaxation
timescale showed that the estimated timescale is converged after 15 ns, which was chosen as
the lag time for markov state model. The number of macrostates were determined based on
the band gap in estimated relaxation timescale plot.
Total of 8 macrostates were chosen to divide simulations into kinetically separate macrospaces.
9

Figure 2: Distribution of SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein simulations: (A) 2D protein conformation space using RMSD values with references both closed and partially open states. (B)
Implied relaxation timescale of top 20 variables based on the data coordinates in the reduced
map regarding with the different lag time as interval.
Table 1: The probability of top 5 channels.
Channels
Probability
2,3,5,6,8
23.7%
2,3,4,7,5,6,8
15.8%
2,5,6,8
11.0%
2,3,7,5,6,8
9.6%
2,3,4,7,8
8.0%
Top 10 channels
88.7%
PCCA was applied to map microstates onto macrostates based on the eigenfunction structure
of transition probability matrix. The resulting macrostates with transition probability are
shown in Figure 3 (A). Close state and open state were equally divided into 4 macrostates, as
states 2, 3, 4, 7 belonging to the close state and states 1, 5, 6, 8 belonging to the open state.
The close state is stable with 95.5% probability to stay within close macrostates. Macrostate
2 was found important due to its high probabiltity of 9.9% to transfer from itself to open
macrostates. The average transition from closed macrostates to open macrostates is 4.5%.
The first frame of the close state, which locates at State 2 and the last frame of the
partially open state, at State 8, were chosen as the representative structures for the close and
open states, respectively. Transition path theory was applied to calculate possible transition
10

Figure 3: Markov state model based on the simulation: (A) Macrostates and estimated
transition probabilities among them; (B) Representative structures of macrostate 2 (blue),
3 (red), 5 (green), 6 (orange) and 8 (yellow).
pathway connecting these two states. Total of 2, 317 pathways were generated and divided
as 51 distinct channels floating from the State 2 to the State 8. The probability of each
channel was calculated based on net flux from initial state to the target state. Overall, the
probability of top 5 channels was listed in the Table 1, with the contribution from the top 10
channels accounting for 88.7% of total population. The most probable path was from State
2 → State 3 → State 5 → State 6 → State 8, and the representative structures were plotted
in Figure 3B to show a series of transition processes.

Random forest identifies important residues and structures
To better understand the shift between close and open states in S1 subunit, the pair wised Cα
distances of S1 were extracted as features representing the character of protein configurations.
There are 540 residues on each chain, residue ID from 27 to 676, and total of 1620 ∗ 1619/2 =
1, 311, 390 Cα distances were collected as features. Before further analysis, features were
transformed into contact map with our proposed feature transformation technique described
in Methods section. Considering the non-bonded chemical interactions length, we pick 10.0Å

11

Figure 4: Random forest classification model using pair-wised Cα distances in S1 subunit:
(A) Classification accuracy using different depths of trees. Depth 7 (shown in grey dashed
line) was chosen with 92.18% accuracy; (B) Classification accuracy regarding different depths
of trees using pair-wised Cα distances within chain B and C. Depth 8 (shown in grey dashed
line) was chosen with 88.04% accuracy.
as threshold for feature transformation.
Supervised machine learning model was applied to extract the key residues that are
vital during allosteric process and study the structural differences among macrostates. For
each simulation trajectory, frames were saved for every 1.2 nanoseconds (ns), resulting in
8, 334 frames. Therefore, 16, 668 samples with 1, 311, 390 features were extracted from the
trajectories. Each sample was labeled based on the above macrostate result. Full dataset
was further split into training set(70%) and testing set(30%). After the preparation of
data, random forest model was applied to distinguish the intrinsic conformational differences
among macrostates. Training scores and testing scores were plotted in Figure 4A. 7 was
chosen for the depth with corresponding testing accuracy of 92.18%, which indicated that the
random forest model was able to catch the conformational characteristics of each macrostate
only using pair-wised Cα distances. To further investigate the relationship between chain
A and two other chains, the original Cα distances related with chain A was excluded as
reduced features and applied to another random forest model. Training and testing results

12

Figure 5: (A) Residue sequence with tertiary structure in S1 subunit, referenced to the
released structure in the prefusion conformation 9 . NTD (blue), N-terminal domain; RBD
(green), receptor-binding domain; SD1 and SD2 (orange), subdomains. The sequence starts
with residue Ace 26 to Thr 676. (B-C) The position of top 20 important residues are shown
in red color. Accumulated tertiary structure importance in chain B and chain C are shown
in numbers, respectively.
Table 2: Top 5 Cα distances.
Cα distances
Chain C Phe 342, Chain C Asp 442
Chain C Ala 419, Chain C Tyr 423
Chain B Thr 323, Chain B Thr 333
Chain C Cys 136, Chain C Gly 142
Chain B Leu 390, Chain B Gly 545

Importance
0.86%
0.83%
0.76%
0.71%
0.60%

are shown in Figure 4B. The top 500 features accounted for 74.8% percent of the overall
feature importance, shown in Figure S2. The testing accuracy with reduced features reached
88.04% at depth 8.
The top five important Cα distances were listed in Table 2. In order to identify key
residues along the transition from the closed to the partially open state, the feature importance of each Cα distance was added and accumulated to the two related residues. S1
subunit structure was plotted in Figure 5A as reference. Top 20 important residues on chain
B and C, with corresponding structure and accumulated structure importance under each
figure, were plotted in Figure 5 (B-C). Full results of residue importance on chain B and C
are shown in S3.

13

4

Discussion

The significance of the partially open state of receptor-binding domain (RBD) in SARS-CoV2 for interacting with the host cell receptor has been extensively studied. 36,37 The opening of
S1 subunit, thus exposing RBD, is necessary for engaging with ACE2 and following cleavage
0

of S2 site. 38 While the RBD exhibits inherently flexibility enabling itself recognized by the
receptor 39 , the motion of this close to open state shift still needs indepth study.
It is reported that the SARS-CoV-2 S trimer shows a C3 symmetry at close state and
asymmetry with chain A at open state. 9 Through the RMSF result, we noticed the asymmetry in dynamics at both close and open states. The S1 subunit in chain B and the S2
subunit in chain C are more dynamically active than the corresponding structures in the
close state, respectively. The S1 domain in chain B is also more flexible than that in chain
C in the open state. This implied the asymmetrical biological functions among the three
chains.
This implication is supported by the random forest model results. Random forest model
reached high accuracy in predicting macrostates based on the pair-wised Cα distances on S1
subunit. The reason for the good performance in macrostates prediction is that the input
feature contains the motion of chain A, which is sufficient to identify the main conformational
change from the close to the open state. There is only a small drop of 4.14% in the prediction
accuracy with reduced features, which does not include the motion of chain A. Combined
with the finding of asymmetric dynamics in RMSF result, we hypothesized that there is a
correlation between the chain A and two other chains, causing the asymmetrical dynamics
behavior. Moreover, Moreover, in order to focus on the tertiary structure, the importance
of Cα distances was accumulated to S1 domain structure and we numerically identified key
structure correlated with RBD in chain B, NTD in chain C, RBD in chain B and NTD
in chain B in descending order. This relationship may come from the chain B and C’s
contribution to the protein motion in chain A. This could also originate from the proteinprotein interaction along the opening movement of chain A. Further investigation of this
14

mutual influence is warranted for a detailed clarification.
Markov state model showed a great difference in transition probability in macrostate
2 (78.0%) and 1 (54.0%), which are in closed state and partailly open state, respectively.
This result implies that S1 subunit is more likely to stay in closed state, which agrees with
the experimental finding that the close state is more dynamically stable than the partially
open state . However, macrostate 8 exihibited a high probability (97.9%) to stay within
itself, where the RBD is detached from the S2 fusion machinery. This showed a possible
dynamically stable state followed by the partially open state of the RBD and could be
important in the close-open transition. Transition path theory further provided potential
channels from macrostate 2 to 8 with the top one of 23.7% probability. This channel is
considered important in representing the transient shifting and can be treated as the typical
protein movement. A rational design affecting the close-to-open transition can be developed
through this key channel along with the important residue pairs and key tertiary structure
domains.

5

Conclusion

The spike protein is essential for SARS-CoV-2 as it destabilizes the trimer structure, causing
the detachment of S1 subunit and exposing the RBD domain to host cell membrane. In
this study, we used publicly available simulation trajectories of S protein and studied the
asymmetric dynamics nature of the trimer structure. Markov state model was applied to
divide the conformational space into 8 macrostates. The representative structures along the
most probable channel in transition path theory are shown to present a clear route from
the close state to the partially open state. Transition matrix was calculated to determine
the probability of close-open transitions, with maximum of 9.9% from the close macrostate
2 to the open macrostates. The little difference between prediction accuracy results in two
random forest models, where one includes the movement of chain A and the other does not,

15

implied a relationship between chain A and two other chains. Yet, whether this relation
originates from the mutual influence among chains or the intrinsic asymmetry in biological
functions needs further investigation. Overall, our study quantitatively analyzed the motion
of S1 subunit in S protein with important Cα distances and residues. Possible prevention
and cure searching progress could be facilitated combining with these vital findings, which
provide new opportunities for potential drug research and vaccine development.

Acknowledgement
Computational time was generously provided by Southern Methodist University’s Center for
Scientific Computation. The authors thank D. E. Shaw for sharing the SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein trajectories.

16

References
(1) Wu, F.; Zhao, S.; Yu, B.; Chen, Y.-M.; Wang, W.; Song, Z.-G.; Hu, Y.; Tao, Z.-W.;
Tian, J.-H.; Pei, Y.-Y., et al. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory
disease in China. Nature 2020, 579, 265–269.
(2) Lu, R.; Zhao, X.; Li, J.; Niu, P.; Yang, B.; Wu, H.; Wang, W.; Song, H.; Huang, B.;
Zhu, N., et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus:
implications for virus origins and receptor binding. The Lancet 2020, 395, 565–574.
(3) Cavanagh, D. The coronaviridae; Springer, 1995; pp 73–113.
(4) Lu, G.; Wang, Q.; Gao, G. F. Bat-to-human: spike features determining ’host jump’ of
coronaviruses SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and beyond. Trends in microbiology 2015, 23,
468–478.
(5) Wang, Q.; Wong, G.; Lu, G.; Yan, J.; Gao, G. F. MERS-CoV spike protein: Targets
for vaccines and therapeutics. Antiviral research 2016, 133, 165–177.
(6) Walls, A. C.; Park, Y.-J.; Tortorici, M. A.; Wall, A.; McGuire, A. T.; Veesler, D.
Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell 2020,
(7) Li, F. Structure, function, and evolution of coronavirus spike proteins. Annual review
of virology 2016, 3, 237–261.
(8) Li, F. Receptor recognition mechanisms of coronaviruses: a decade of structural studies.
Journal of virology 2015, 89, 1954–1964.
(9) Wrapp, D.; Wang, N.; Corbett, K. S.; Goldsmith, J. A.; Hsieh, C.-L.; Abiona, O.;
Graham, B. S.; McLellan, J. S. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the
prefusion conformation. Science 2020, 367, 1260–1263.

17

(10) Bosch, B. J.; van der Zee, R.; de Haan, C. A.; Rottier, P. J. The coronavirus spike
protein is a class I virus fusion protein: structural and functional characterization of
the fusion core complex. Journal of virology 2003, 77, 8801–8811.
(11) Gui, M.; Song, W.; Zhou, H.; Xu, J.; Chen, S.; Xiang, Y.; Wang, X. Cryo-electron
microscopy structures of the SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein reveal a prerequisite conformational state for receptor binding. Cell research 2017, 27, 119–129.
(12) Pallesen, J.; Wang, N.; Corbett, K. S.; Wrapp, D.; Kirchdoerfer, R. N.; Turner, H. L.;
Cottrell, C. A.; Becker, M. M.; Wang, L.; Shi, W., et al. Immunogenicity and structures
of a rationally designed prefusion MERS-CoV spike antigen. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 2017, 114, E7348–E7357.
(13) Shang, J.; Zheng, Y.; Yang, Y.; Liu, C.; Geng, Q.; Tai, W.; Du, L.; Zhou, Y.; Zhang, W.;
Li, F. Cryo-electron microscopy structure of porcine deltacoronavirus spike protein in
the prefusion state. Journal of virology 2018, 92, e01556–17.
(14) Prinz, J.-H.; Wu, H.; Sarich, M.; Keller, B.; Senne, M.; Held, M.; Chodera, J. D.;
Schütte, C.; Noé, F. Markov models of molecular kinetics: Generation and validation.
The Journal of chemical physics 2011, 134, 174105.
(15) ”Molecular Dynamics Simulations Related to SARS-CoV-2,” D. E. Shaw Research
Technical Data, 2020. http://www.deshawresearch.com/resources_sarscov2.html,
Accessed: 2020-04-05.
(16) Suárez, E.; Adelman, J. L.; Zuckerman, D. M. Accurate estimation of protein folding
and unfolding times: beyond Markov state models. Journal of chemical theory and
computation 2016, 12, 3473–3481.
(17) Adelman, J. L.; Ghezzi, C.; Bisignano, P.; Loo, D. D.; Choe, S.; Abramson, J.; Rosenberg, J. M.; Wright, E. M.; Grabe, M. Stochastic steps in secondary active sugar transport. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2016, 113, E3960–E3966.
18

(18) Raccuglia, P.; Elbert, K. C.; Adler, P. D.; Falk, C.; Wenny, M. B.; Mollo, A.; Zeller, M.;
Friedler, S. A.; Schrier, J.; Norquist, A. J. Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery
using failed experiments. Nature 2016, 533, 73–76.
(19) Faber, F.; Lindmaa, A.; von Lilienfeld, O. A.; Armiento, R. Crystal structure representations for machine learning models of formation energies. International Journal of
Quantum Chemistry 2015, 115, 1094–1101.
(20) Botu, V.; Ramprasad, R. Adaptive machine learning framework to accelerate ab initio
molecular dynamics. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2015, 115, 1074–
1083.
(21) Kotsiantis, S. B.; Zaharakis, I.; Pintelas, P. Supervised machine learning: A review
of classification techniques. Emerging artificial intelligence applications in computer
engineering 2007, 160, 3–24.
(22) Jing, Y.; Bian, Y.; Hu, Z.; Wang, L.; Xie, X.-Q. S. Deep learning for drug design:
an artificial intelligence paradigm for drug discovery in the big data era. The AAPS
journal 2018, 20, 58.
(23) Doerr, S.; Ariz-Extreme, I.; Harvey, M. J.; De Fabritiis, G. Dimensionality reduction
methods for molecular simulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10629 2017,
(24) Nair, V.; Hinton, G. E. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines.
Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-10). 2010;
pp 807–814.
(25) Liaw, A.; Wiener, M., et al. Classification and regression by randomForest. R news
2002, 2, 18–22.
(26) Wang, F.; Shen, L.; Zhou, H.; Wang, S.; Wang, X.; Tao, P. Machine Learning Clas-

19

sification Model for Functional Binding Modes of TEM-1 β-Lactamase. Frontiers in
molecular biosciences 2019, 6, 47.
(27) Utgoff, P. E. Incremental induction of decision trees. Machine learning 1989, 4, 161–
186.
(28) Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V., et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of machine learning research 2011, 12, 2825–2830.
(29) Breiman, L. Random forests. Machine learning 2001, 45, 5–32.
(30) Wang, F.; Zhou, H.; Wang, X.; Tao, P. Dynamical Behavior of β-Lactamases and
Penicillin-Binding Proteins in Different Functional States and Its Potential Role in
Evolution. Entropy 2019, 21, 1130.
(31) Deuflhard, P.; Weber, M. Robust Perron cluster analysis in conformation dynamics.
Linear algebra and its applications 2005, 398, 161–184.
(32) Bowman, G. R.; Huang, X.; Pande, V. S. Using generalized ensemble simulations and
Markov state models to identify conformational states. Methods 2009, 49, 197–201.
(33) Harrigan, M. P.; Sultan, M. M.; Hernández, C. X.; Husic, B. E.; Eastman, P.;
Schwantes, C. R.; Beauchamp, K. A.; McGibbon, R. T.; Pande, V. S. MSMBuilder:
statistical models for biomolecular dynamics. Biophysical journal 2017, 112, 10–15.
(34) Noé, F.; Schütte, C.; Vanden-Eijnden, E.; Reich, L.; Weikl, T. R. Constructing the
equilibrium ensemble of folding pathways from short off-equilibrium simulations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009, 106, 19011–19016.
(35) Metzner, P.; Schütte, C.; Vanden-Eijnden, E. Transition path theory for Markov jump
processes. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 2009, 7, 1192–1219.

20

(36) Walls, A. C.; Xiong, X.; Park, Y.-J.; Tortorici, M. A.; Snijder, J.; Quispe, J.;
Cameroni, E.; Gopal, R.; Dai, M.; Lanzavecchia, A., et al. Unexpected receptor functional mimicry elucidates activation of coronavirus fusion. Cell 2019, 176, 1026–1039.
(37) Yuan, Y.; Cao, D.; Zhang, Y.; Ma, J.; Qi, J.; Wang, Q.; Lu, G.; Wu, Y.; Yan, J.;
Shi, Y., et al. Cryo-EM structures of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV spike glycoproteins
reveal the dynamic receptor binding domains. Nature communications 2017, 8, 15092.
(38) Kirchdoerfer, R. N.; Wang, N.; Pallesen, J.; Wrapp, D.; Turner, H. L.; Cottrell, C. A.;
Corbett, K. S.; Graham, B. S.; McLellan, J. S.; Ward, A. B. Stabilized coronavirus
spikes are resistant to conformational changes induced by receptor recognition or proteolysis. Scientific reports 2018, 8, 1–11.
(39) Kirchdoerfer, R. N.; Cottrell, C. A.; Wang, N.; Pallesen, J.; Yassine, H. M.;
Turner, H. L.; Corbett, K. S.; Graham, B. S.; McLellan, J. S.; Ward, A. B. Pre-fusion
structure of a human coronavirus spike protein. Nature 2016, 531, 118–121.

21

Supporting Information Available

Figure S1: MiniBatch k-means clustering results of 300 microstates shown in red dots.

22

Figure S2: Accumulated feature importance of top 500 Cα distances.

23

Figure S3: Accumulated residue importance in chain B (blue) and C (orange), respectively.

24

