1

Research Article Summary:
Inferring change points in the COVID-19 spreading
reveals the effectiveness of interventions
Jonas Dehning,1∗ Johannes Zierenberg,1∗ F. Paul Spitzner,1∗
Michael Wibral,2 Joao Pinheiro Neto,1 Michael Wilczek,1∗ Viola Priesemann1∗
1

2

arXiv:2004.01105v3 [q-bio.PE] 4 May 2020

∗

Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany,
Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks, University Göttingen, Germany

Authors contributed equally. Correspondence should be addressed to viola.priesemann@ds.mpg.de.

Introduction. When faced with the outbreak of a novel
epidemic like COVID-19, rapid response measures are
required by individuals as well as by society as a whole
to mitigate the spread of the virus. During this initial,
time-critical period, neither the central epidemiological
parameters, nor the effectiveness of interventions like
cancellation of public events, school closings, and social
distancing are known.
Rationale. As one of the key epidemiological parameters, we infer the spreading rate λ from confirmed COVID19 case numbers at the example of Germany by combining Bayesian inference based on Markov-Chain MonteCarlo sampling with a class of SIR (Susceptible-InfectedRecovered) compartmental models from epidemiology.
Our analysis characterizes the temporal change of the
spreading rate and, importantly, allows us to identify potential change points and to provide short-term forecast
scenarios based on various degrees of social distancing.
A detailed description is provided in the accompanying
paper, and the models, inference, and predictions are
available on github. While we apply it to Germany, our
approach can be readily adapted to other countries or
regions.
Results. In Germany, interventions to contain the outbreak were implemented in three steps over three weeks:
Around March 9, large public events like soccer matches
were cancelled. On March 16, schools and childcare facilities as well as many non-essential stores were closed.
One week later, on March 23, a far-reaching contact ban
(“Kontaktsperre”), which included the prohibition of even
small public gatherings as well as the further closing of
restaurants and non-essential stores, was imposed by the
government authorities.
From the observed case numbers of COVID-19, we can
quantify the impact of these measures on the disease
spread (Fig. 0). Based on our analysis, which includes
data until April 21, we have evidence of three change
points: the first changed the spreading rate from λ0 = 0.43
(95 % credible interval (CI: [0.35, 0.51])) to λ1 = 0.25 (CI:
[0.20, 0.30]), and occurred around March 6 (CI: March 2 to
March 9); the second change point resulted in λ2 = 0.15
(CI: [0.12, 0.20]), and occurred around March 15 (CI:
March 13 to March 17). Both changes in λ slowed the
spread of the virus, but still implied exponential growth
(Fig. 0, red and orange traces). To contain the disease
spread, and turn from exponential growth to a decline

of new cases, a further decrease in λ was necessary. Our
analysis shows that this transition has been reached by
the third change point that resulted in λ3 = 0.09 (CI:
[0.06, 0.12]) around March 23 (CI: March 20 to March
25).
With this third change point, λ transitioned below the
critical value where the spreading rate λ balances the recovery rate µ, i.e. the effective growth rate λ∗ = λ − µ ≈ 0
(Fig. 0, gray traces). Importantly, λ∗ = 0 presents the
watershed between exponential growth or decay. Given
the delay of approximately two weeks between an intervention and first inference of the induced changes in λ∗ ,
future interventions such as lifting restrictions warrant
careful consideration.
Our detailed analysis shows that, in the current phase,
reliable short- and long-term forecasts are very difficult
as they critically hinge on how the epidemiological parameters change in response to interventions: In Fig. 0
already the three example scenarios quickly diverge from
each other, and consequently span a considerable range
of future case numbers. Thus, any uncertainty on the
magnitude of our social distancing in the past two weeks
can have a major impact on the case numbers in the next
two weeks. Beyond two weeks, the case numbers depend
on our future behavior, for which we have to make explicit
assumptions. In the main paper we illustrate how the
precise magnitude and timing of potential change points
impact the forecast of case numbers (Fig. 2).
Conclusions. We developed a Bayesian framework to
infer central epidemiological parameters and the timing
and magnitude of intervention effects. Thereby, the efficiency of political and individual intervention measures
for social distancing and containment can be assessed
in a timely manner. We find evidence for a successive
decrease of the spreading rate in Germany around March
6 and around March 15, which significantly reduced the
magnitude of exponential growth, but was not sufficient
to turn growth into decay. Our analysis also shows that
a further decrease of the spreading rate occurred around
March 23, turning exponential growth into decay. Future
interventions and lifting of restrictions can be modeled as
additional change points, enabling short-term forecasts
for case numbers. In general, our analysis code may help
to infer the efficiency of measures taken in other countries
and inform policy makers about tightening, loosening and
selecting appropriate rules for containment.

2

COVID-19 analysis Germany (as of April 21, 2020)
Mar 8
Effective growth
rate

A
0.4

*

Mar 15

Mar 22

**

Mar 29

*
**
***

0.2

Apr 19

Start of
interventions:
mild distancing
strong distancing
contact ban

0.0
15 k

New reported cases
per day

Apr 12

***

Reporting
delay

B

Apr 5

Data, reported cases
current inference —
three change points (c.p.)

10 k

Evidence
accumulation

~11.5 days

Inference

Forecast

Forecasts with limited data (95% CI)
until March 25 — one c.p.
until April 1 — two c.p.
until April 9 — three c.p.

5k

0k
Mar 8

Mar 15

Mar 22

Mar 29
Date

Apr 5

Apr 12

Apr 19

FIG. 0. Bayesian analysis of the German COVID-19 data (blue diamonds) reveals three change points that match the timing
of publicly announced interventions. A: The inferred effective growth rate (difference between spreading and recovery rate,
λ∗ = λ − µ) for an SIR model with weekly reporting modulation and reporting delay that includes scenarios with one, two or
three change points (red, orange, green; fitted to case reports until March 25, April 1 and April 9, respectively). The timing of
the inferred change points in growth rate is consistent with the timing of German governmental interventions (depicted as ∗, ∗∗,
and ∗ ∗ ∗). B: Comparing inferred models with the actual new reported cases per day reveals the effectiveness of governmental
interventions. After the first two interventions, the number of new cases still grew exponentially (red, orange); only after the
third intervention did the number of new cases start to saturate (green) or even to decline (gray, data until April 21). This
illustrates that the future development strongly depends on our distancing behavior. Note the delay between a change point and
the observation of changes in the number of new cases of almost two weeks — a combination of reporting delay and a minimal
period of evidence accumulation.

Inferring change points in the COVID-19 spreading
reveals the effectiveness of interventions
Jonas Dehning1∗ , Johannes Zierenberg1∗ , F. Paul Spitzner1∗ , Michael
Wibral2 , Joao Pinheiro Neto1 , Michael Wilczek1∗ , and Viola Priesemann1∗
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany and
Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks, University of Göttingen, Germany
(Dated: May 5, 2020)

As COVID-19 is rapidly spreading across the globe, short-term modeling forecasts provide timecritical information for decisions on containment and mitigation strategies. A main challenge for
short-term forecasts is the assessment of key epidemiological parameters and how they change when
first interventions show an effect. By combining an established epidemiological model with Bayesian
inference, we analyze the time dependence of the effective growth rate of new infections. Focusing
on the COVID-19 spread in Germany, we detect change points in the effective growth rate that
correlate well with the times of publicly announced interventions. Thereby, we can quantify the
effect of interventions, and we can incorporate the corresponding change points into forecasts of
future scenarios and case numbers. Our code is freely available and can be readily adapted to any
country or region.

INTRODUCTION

During the initial outbreak of an epidemic, reliable short-term forecasts are key to estimate required medical
capacities, and to inform and advice the public and decision makers [1]. During this initial phase, three tasks are of
particular importance to provide time-critical information for crisis mitigation: (1) establishing central epidemiological
parameters, such as the basic reproduction number, that can be used for short-term forecasting; (2) simulating the
effects of different possible interventions aimed at the mitigation of the outbreak; (3) estimating the actual effects of
the measures taken — to rapidly adjust them and to adapt short-term forecasts. Tackling these tasks is challenging
due to the large statistical and systematic errors that are present during the initial stages of an epidemic with its low
case numbers. This is further complicated by the fact that mitigation measures are taken rapidly, while the outbreak
unfolds, but they take an effect only after an a priori unknown delay. To obtain reasonable parameter estimates
for short-term forecasting and policy evaluation despite these complications, any prior knowledge available needs
to be integrated into modeling efforts to reduce uncertainties. This includes knowledge about basic mechanisms of
disease transmission, recovery, as well as preliminary estimates of epidemiological parameters from other countries,
or from closely related pathogens. The integration of prior knowledge, the quantitative assessment of the remaining
uncertainties about epidemiological parameters, and the principled propagation of these uncertainties into forecasts is
the domain of Bayesian modeling and inference [2, 3].
Here, we draw on an established class of models for epidemic outbreaks: The Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR)
model [4–7] specifies the rates with which population compartments change over time, i.e., with which susceptible
people become infectious, or infectious people recover. This simple model can be formulated in terms of coupled
ordinary differential equations (in mean field), which enable analytical treatment [8, 9] or fast evaluation (ideally
suited for Bayesian inference). Accordingly, SIR-like models have been used to model epidemic spreads, from Bayesian
Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) parameter estimation [10–12] to detailed scenario discussions [13–16]. Recently,
this family of models also played a dominant role in the analyses of the global corona virus (SARS-CoV-2) outbreak,
from inference [17–19] to scenario forecast [20–27] to control strategies [28, 29].
We combine the SIR model (and generalizations thereof) with Bayesian parameter inference and augment the
model by a time-dependent spreading rate. The time dependence is implemented via potential change points that
reflect changes in the spreading rate driven by governmental interventions. Based on three distinct measures taken in
Germany, we detect three corresponding change points from reported COVID-19 case numbers. Already on April 1 we
had reported evidence for the first two change points, and predicted the third one [30]. Now, with data until April
21, we have evidence for all three change points. First, the spreading rate decreased from 0.43 (with 95% credible
interval, CI [0.35, 0.51]) to 0.25 (CI [0.20, 0.30]), with this decrease initiated around March 6 (CI [2, 9]). This matches
the cancellation of large public events such as trade fairs and soccer matches. Second, the spreading rate decreased
further to 0.15 (CI [0.12, 0.20]) initiated around March 15 (CI [13, 17]). This matches the closing of schools, childcare
facilities, and non-essential stores. Third, the spreading rate decreased further to 0.09 (CI [0.06, 0.13]) initiated around

4
March 23 (CI [20, 25]). This corresponds well to the strict contact ban, which was announced on March 22. While the
first two change points were not sufficient to switch from growth of novel cases to a decline, the third change point
brought this crucial reversal.
Our framework is designed to infer the effectiveness of past measures and to explore potential future scenarios along
with propagating the respective uncertainties. In the following, we demonstrate the potential impact of timing and
magnitude of change points, and report our inference about the three past governmental interventions in Germany.
Our framework can be readily adapted to any other country or region. The code (already including data sources from
many other countries), as well as the figures are all available on Github [31].

BACKGROUND: INFERENCE OF CENTRAL EPIDEMIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS AND THE
EFFECTS OF INTERVENTIONS

In order to simulate the general effect of different possible interventions on the spread of COVID-19 in Germany, we
first focus on the initial phase of the outbreak when no serious mitigation measures were implemented. In the absence
of interventions, an epidemic outbreak can be described by SIR models with constant spreading rate (Methods). In
Germany, first serious interventions occurred around March 9 and affected the case reports with an observation delay
(a combination of incubation period with median 5–6 days [32]) and a test delay (time until doctor is visited plus
test-evaluation time) that we assume to be both about 2–3 days. Hence, in order to infer central epidemiological
parameters, we consider as the initial phase the time period from March 2 to March 15. In order to simulate the effect
of different possible interventions, we then model the effects of interventions as change points in the spreading rate
(Methods).

Bayesian inference for central epidemiological parameters during the initial phase of the outbreak

We perform Bayesian inference for the central epidemiological parameters of an SIR model using Markov-Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling (Fig. 1). The central parameters are the spreading rate λ, the recovery rate µ, the
reporting delay D and the number of initially infected people I0 . We chose informative priors based on available
knowledge for λ, µ and D, and we chose uninformative priors for the remaining parameters (Methods). Also, we
intentionally kept the informative priors as broad as possible such that the data would constrain the parameters
(Fig. 1).
As median estimates, we obtain for the spreading rate λ = 0.41, µ = 0.12, D = 8.6, and I0 = 19 (see Fig. 1 C–H for
the posterior distributions and the 95% credible intervals). Converted to the basic reproduction number R0 = λ/µ,
we find a median R0 = 3.4 (CI [2.4, 4.7]), which is consistent with previous reports that find median values between
2.3 and 3.3 [18, 33, 34]. Overall, the model shows good agreement with both new cases (Fig. 1 A) and cumulative
cases (Fig. 1 B) that show the expected exponential growth (linear in log-lin plot). The observed data are clearly
informative about λ, I0 and σ (indicated by the difference between the priors (gray line) and posteriors (histograms) in
Fig. 1 D,E,F). However, µ and D are largely determined by our prior choice of parameters (histograms match gray line
in Fig. 1 C,H). This is to be expected for the initial phase of an epidemic outbreak, which is dominated by exponential
growth.
In order to quantify the impact of possible interventions, we concentrate on the effective growth of active infections
before and after the intervention. As long as the number of infections and recoveries are small compared to the
population size, the number of active infections per day can be approximated by an exponential growth (Fig. 1A,B)
with effective growth rate λ∗ = λ − µ (see Methods). As a consequence, λ and µ cannot be estimated independently.
This is further supported by a systematic scan of the model’s log-likelihood in the λ–µ space that shows an equipotential
line for the maximum likelihood (Fig. 1 I). This strongly suggests that the growth rate λ∗ is the relevant free parameter
with a median λ∗ = 28% (Fig. 1 G). The control parameter of the dynamics in the exponential phase is thus the
(effective) growth rate: If the growth rate is larger than zero (λ > µ), case numbers grow exponentially; if the growth
rate is smaller than zero (λ < µ), the recovery dominates and the new cases decrease. The two different dynamics
(supercritical and subcritical, respectively) are separated by a critical point at λ∗ = 0 (λ = µ) [35].

5

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Prior

Posterior

FIG. 1. Inference of central epidemiological parameters of the SIR model during the initial onset period, March 2–15. A: The
number of new cases and B: the total (cumulative) number of cases increase exponentially over time. C–H: Prior (gray) and
posterior (orange) distributions for all model parameters: estimated spreading rate λ, recovery rate µ, reporting delay D between
infection date and reporting date, number of cases I0 at the start of the simulation, scale-factor σ of the width of the likelihood
distribution, and the effective growth rate λ∗ = λ − µ. I: Log-likelihood distribution for different combinations of λ and µ. A
linear combination of λ and µ yields the same maximal likelihood (black line). White dot: Inference did not converge.

Magnitude and timing of interventions matter for the mitigation of the outbreak

We simulate different, hypothetical interventions following the initial phase in order to show that both, the amount
of change in behavior (leading to a change in spreading rate λ, Fig. 2 A) and the exact timing of the change (Fig. 2 B)
determine the future development. Hypothetical interventions build on the inferred parameters from the initial
phase (Fig. 1, in particular median λ0 = 0.41 and median µ = 0.12) and were implemented as change points in the
spreading rate from the inferred λ0 to a new value λ1 . With such a change point, we model three potential scenarios of
public behavior: (I) No social distancing; Public behavior is unaltered and the spread continues with the inferred
rate (λ1 = λ0 with median λ1 = 0.41 > µ). (II) Mild social distancing; The spreading rate decreases to 50%,
(λ1 = λ0 / 2 with median λ1 = 0.21 > µ). Although people effectively reduce the number of contacts by a factor of two
in this second scenario, the total number of reported cases continues to grow alongside scenario (I) for the time period
of the reporting delay D (median D = 8.6 from initial phase, see below for a more constrained estimation). Also, we
still observe an exponential increase of new infections after the intervention becomes effective, because the growth rate
remains positive, λ∗1 = λ1 − µ > 0. (III) Strong social distancing; Here, the spreading rate decreases to 10%,
(λ1 = λ0 / 10 with median λ1 = 0.04 < µ). The assumptions here are that contacts are severely limited, but even
when people stay at home as much as possible, some contacts are still unavoidable. Even under such drastic policy
changes, no effect is visible until the reporting delay D is over. Thereafter, a quick decrease in daily new infections
manifests within two weeks (delay plus change point duration), and the total number of cases reaches a stable plateau.

A

Spreading
rate

6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Daily new reported
cases in Germany

40 000

14

20 000
10 000

200 000

7

0

7

14

21

C
14

Reported cases
No social distancing
Mild social distancing
Strong social distancing

30 000

0
Total reported
cases in Germany

B

7

0

7

0

7

14

21

14

Reported cases
Strong social distancing:
starting at day 0
starting at day 5
starting at day -5

Start of intervention
14

7

7

0

7

14

21

Reported cases
Mild social distancing
with long transient
with intermediate transient
with immediate change

Start of intervention
14

21

14

7

0

7

14

21

14

7

0
7
14
Days since intervention

21

14

7

0

7

14

21

0
7
14
Days since intervention

21

150 000
100 000

Start of intervention

Start of intervention

50 000
0

14

7

0
7
14
Days since intervention

21

14

7

FIG. 2. The timing and effectiveness of interventions strongly impact future COVID-19 cases. A: We assume three different
scenarios for interventions starting on March 16: (I, red) no social distancing, (II, orange) mild social distancing, or (III, green)
strict social distancing. B: Delaying the restrictions has a major impact on case numbers: strict restrictions starting on March
16 (green), five days later (magenta) or five days earlier (gray). C: Comparison of the time span over which interventions ramp
up to full effect. For all ramps that are centered around the same day, the resulting case numbers are fairly similar. However, a
sudden change of the spreading rate can cause a temporary decrease of daily new cases, although λ > µ at all times (brown).

Only in this last scenario a plateau is reached, because here the growth rate becomes negative, λ∗ < 0, which leads to
decreasing numbers of new infections.
Furthermore, the timing of an intervention matters: Apart from the strength of an intervention, its onset time has
great impact on the total case number (Fig. 2 B,C). For example, focusing on the strong intervention (III) — where a
stable plateau is reached — the effect of advancing or delaying the change point by just five days leads to more than a
three-fold difference in cumulative cases.
While we find that the timing of an intervention has great effect on case numbers, the duration over which the
change takes place has only minor effect — if the intervals of change are centered around the same date. In Fig. 2 C
we illustrate the adjustment of λ0 → λ1 for mild social distancing with durations of 14, 7 and 1 day(s). The change
point duration is a simple way to incorporate variability in individual behavior, and is not linked to the reporting
delay D. As an interesting effect, a sudden change in the spreading rate can lead to a temporary decrease of new case
numbers, despite the fact that the effective growth rate remains positive at all times.

RESULTS

In order to model real-world data, we further refined the SIR model. Most importantly, we account for systematic
variations of case reports throughout the week, in particular lower case numbers on the weekend, by explicitly modeling
a weekly reporting modulation (see Methods). Indeed, model comparisons confirm that models with this correction
outperform those without (see Table S2). In the supplemental material, we further generalize our model to include an
explicit incubation period (SEIR-like, Fig. S3) that yields results consistent with our main model.
We incorporate the effect of governmental interventions into our models by introducing flexible change points in the
spreading rate (see Methods). During the COVID-19 outbreak in Germany, governmental interventions occurred in
three stages from (i) the cancellation of large events with more than 1000 participants (around March 9), through (ii)
closing of schools, childcare facilities and the majority of stores (in effect March 16), to (iii) the contact ban and closing
of all non-essential stores (in effect March 23). The aim of all these interventions was to reduce the (effective) growth
rate λ∗ = λ − µ. As soon as the growth rate becomes negative (λ∗ < 0), the number of new confirmed infections
decreases after the respective reporting delay.

7

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

Weekend, amplitude Weekend, offset
of modulation
from sunday

D

fw 0.6

0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

0k

300 k
200 k

Recovery rate

0.13

F

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate
0

0.43

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G Spreading rates
1

0.0 0.2 0.4
2

0.15

[0.12, 0.20]

0.0 0.2 0.4
3

0.09

[0.06, 0.13]

0.0 0.2 0.4

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

8.0

[5.9, 11.1]

5 10 15
Initial infections

I0 36.1

Reporting delay

D 11.4
[9.1, 13.6]

[8.9, 109.3]

0 100200300

Change times

t1 5.7

[0.20, 0.30]

104

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

0.25

0.4

1 0 1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

[0.09, 0.18]

0.0 0.2 0.4

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

E

[0.35, 0.51]

5 k Mar 8

w

[-0.2, 0.7]

[0.4, 0.7]

0.0

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

[2.5, 8.8]

Mar 1

Mar 8

t2 15.2

[13.6, 16.9]

Mar 15

t3 22.6

[20.8, 24.5]

Mar 22

5

10 15

Change duration

t1 3.0

[1.7, 5.2]

0 2 4 6

t2 3.0

[1.7, 5.3]

0 2 4 6

t3 4.0

[2.0, 7.8]

0 2 4 6

FIG. 3. Bayesian analysis of the German COVID-19 data (blue diamonds) until April 21 reveals three change points that are
consistent with three major governmental interventions. A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective spreading rate
λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of daily new reported cases and the model (green solid line for median fit with 95% credible intervals,
dashed line for median forecast with 95% CI); inset: same data in log-lin scale. C: Comparison of total reported cases and the
model (same representation as in B). D–F: Priors (gray lines) and posteriors (green histograms) of all model parameters; inset
values indicate the median and 95% credible intervals of the posteriors. For the same model with one or two change points,
please see the corresponding figures in the SI (Fig. S1, S2, Table S2).

Detecting change points in the spreading rate — and quantifying the amount of change as quickly as possible —
becomes a central modeling challenge when short-term forecasts are required. To address this challenge, we assume an
initial spreading rate λ0 (the exponential growth phase, cf. Fig. 1) and up to three potential change points motivated
by the German governmental interventions: The first change point (λ0 → λ1 ) is expected around March 9 (t1 ) as a
result of the official recommendations to cancel large events. A second change point (λ1 → λ2 ) is expected around
March 16 (t2 ), when schools and many stores were closed. A third change point (λ2 → λ3 ) is expected around March
23 (t3 ), when all non-essential stores were closed, and a contact ban was enacted. We model the behavioral changes
that are introduced at these change points to unfold over a few days ∆ti , but the changes in duration can be partly
compensated by changes in the onset time ti (see Fig. 2 C, scenarios). We chose priors for all parameters based on
the information available to us up to March 28 (see Methods). In addition, we performed a sensitivity analysis by
employing wider priors in the supplemental material (Figs. S5, S6, S7, Table S2), which yielded consistent results. On
March 28, the data were already informative about the first change point, and thereby helped to inform our forecast
scenarios.
The inferred parameters for the models with change points are consistent with the inferred parameters from the
exponential onset phase (Figs. 1, 3 & Figs. S1, S2). In particular, all estimated λ0 -values from models with multiple
change points are compatible with the value of the model without change points (during the exponential onset phase,
λ0 = 0.41, CI [0.32, 0.51], assuming a stationary λ until March 15, Fig. 1 E). Also the scale factor σ and the number

8
TABLE I. Model comparison shows that the three-change-point model describes the data best: leave-one-out (LOO) crossvalidation for main models (SIR with weekend correction) and a different number of change points. Lower LOO-scores represent
a better match between model and data.
LOO-score Effective number of parameters (pLOO)
Model
zero change points 927 ± 9
8.31
one change points 819 ± 16 13.46
two change points 796 ± 17 12.53
three change points 787 ± 17 13.42

of initial infections I0 for the models with change points are consistent with the initial model inference during the
exponential onset phase (Fig. 1 D,F).
The models with two or three change points fit the observed data better than those with fewer change points

The models with three change points describe the data better than models with fewer change points, as indicated by
the leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation-based Bayesian model comparison [36] (lowest LOO-score in Table I). However,
the LOO-scores of the model with two and three change points differ by less than one standard error. This originates
from an extended duration of the second change point in the two-change-point model, which partially captures the
effect of the third intervention. As expected, the models with none or a single change point have LOO-scores that are
at least one standard deviation higher (worse) than those of the best models, and we will not consider them further.
When comparing our inference based on three change points to the number of confirmed cases, we find them to
largely match (Fig. 3 B,C). The dominant periodic change in the daily new reported cases (Fig. 3 B) is well described
by the weekday modulation. In addition to the periodic change, the daily new case numbers also reflect the fairly
sudden change of the spreading rate at the change points (cf. Figs. 2 and S4 for the effect of change points without the
modulation). Most importantly, the cumulative effect of change points manifests in an overarching decay in new case
numbers that is visible after April 5 and follows the third change point (with reporting delay).
Change point detection quantifies the effect of governmental interventions on the outbreak of COVID-19 in
Germany

Ideally, detected changes can be related to specific mitigation measures, so that one gains insights into the effectiveness
of different measures (Fig. 3). Indeed, we found clear evidence for three change points in the posterior distributions of
the model parameters: First, λ(t) decreased from λ0 = 0.43 (with 95% credible interval, CI [0.35, 0.51]) to λ1 = 0.25
(CI [0.20, 0.30]). The date of the change point was inferred to be March 6 (CI [2, 9])]; this inferred date matches the
timing of the first governmental intervention including cancellations of large events, as well as increased awareness.
After this first intervention, the (effective) growth rate λ∗ (t) = λ(t) − µ decreased by more than a factor 2, from
median λ0 − µ = 0.3 to median λ1 − µ = 0.12, given that the recovery rate was inferred as µ = 0.13 (CI [0.09, 0.18]).
Second, λ(t) decreased from λ1 = 0.25 to λ2 = 0.15 (CI [0.12, 0.20]), which is larger than our prior assumption. The
date of the change point was inferred to be March 15 (CI [13, 17])]; this inferred date matches the timing of the second
governmental intervention including closing schools and some stores. After this second intervention, the median growth
rate became λ∗ (t) = λ2 − µ = 0.02 ≈ 0 and is thus in the vicinity of the critical point, yet still positive. The first two
interventions in Germany thereby mitigated the spread by drastically reducing the growth rate, but the spread of
COVID-19 remained exponential. Third, λ(t) decreased from λ2 = 0.15 to λ3 = 0.09 (CI [0.06, 0.13]). The date of the
change point was inferred to be March 23 (CI [20, 25])]; this inferred date matches the timing of the third governmental
intervention including contact ban and closing of all non-essential stores. Only after this third intervention, the median
(effective) growth rate, λ∗ (t) = λ3 − µ = −0.03 < 0 (CI [−0.05, −0.02])], finally became negative, indicating a decrease
in the number of new infections. We can thus clearly relate the change points to the governmental interventions and
quantify their mitigation effect.
DISCUSSION

We presented a Bayesian approach for a timely monitoring of the effect of governmental interventions on the spread
of an epidemic outbreak. At the example of the COVID-19 outbreak in Germany, we applied this approach to infer

9
the central epidemiological parameters and three change points in the spreading rate from the number of reported
cases. We showed that change points in the spreading rate affect the confirmed case numbers with a delay of about
two weeks (median reporting delay of D = 11.4 days plus a median change-point duration of 3 days). Thereby, we were
able to relate the inferred change points to the three major governmental interventions in Germany: We found a clear
reduction of the spreading rate related to each governmental intervention (Fig. 3), (i) the cancellation of large events
with more than 1000 participants (around March 9), (ii) the closing of schools, childcare centers and the majority of
stores (in effect March 16), and (iii) the contact ban and closing of all non-essential stores (in effect March 23).
Our results suggest that the full extent of governmental interventions was necessary to stop exponential growth.
The first two governmental interventions brought a reduction of the growth rate λ∗ from 30% to 12% and down to 2%,
respectively. However, these numbers still implied exponential growth. Only with the third intervention — the contact
ban — we found that we have crossed the transition in new case numbers from growth to decay. However, the decay
rate of about −3% (CI [−5%, −2%]) remains close to zero. Hence, even a minor increase in the spreading rate may
again switch the dynamics to the unstable regime with exponential growth.
We used a formal Bayesian model comparison in order to validate the presence of change points. Our model
comparison ruled out models with fewer than two change points (Table I, S2). While this may seem trivial, it has
important consequences for making short-term forecasts that decision makers rely on: Demonstrating and quantifying
the effect of past change points can be used to formulate priors for the effects of future, similar change points. These
priors help to project the effects of more recent change points into future forecasts, even when these change points are
not apparent in the reported case numbers yet. Consequently, it is important to look out for and identify potential
change points as early as possible to incorporate them into forecasts.
The detection of change points and their interpretation depend crucially on an accurate estimate of the reporting
delay D. Therefore, the validity of its estimate should be evaluated. In our model, D contains at least three distinct
factors: the biological incubation period (median 5–6 days) [32], an additional delay from first symptoms to symptoms
motivating a test (1–3 days) and a possible delay before a testing results come in (1–4 days). The sum of these
delays seems compatible with our inferred median delay of D = 11.4 days, especially given the wide range of reported
incubation periods.
We chose to keep our main model comparatively simple, because of the small number of data points initially available
during an epidemic outbreak. With such a low number of data points, only a limited number of parameters can be
effectively constrained. Hence, we chose to approximate a time-dependent spreading rate λ(t) by episodes of constant
spreading rates λi that are separated by three change points where a transition occurs. Our results show that this main
model is currently sufficient for Germany: While we introduced fairly broad priors on the spreading rates, we obtained
comparably narrow posterior distributions for each spreading rate λi (Fig. 3). We additionally evaluated extensions
of our main model with three change points, e.g., by explicitly taking into account the incubation period (Fig. S3).
These models yield consistent results for the three change points, and all have LOO scores within one standard error
of each other. Thus, we consider our main model to be sufficient for case numbers in Germany at present.
Our framework can be easily adapted to other countries and enables one to incorporate future developments. For
other countries, or for forecasts within smaller communities (e.g. federal states or cities), additional details may
become important, such as explicit modeling of incubation time distributions [17, 37] (i.e. as done in Fig. S3), spatial
heterogeneity [17, 21], isolation effects [20, 37], subsampling effects hiding undetected cases even beyond the reporting
delay [38, 39], or the age and contact structure of the population [26]. In countries where drastic changes in test
coverage are expected, this will have to be included as well. The methodology presented here is capable in principle of
incorporating such details. It also lends itself to modeling of continuous drifts in the spreading rate, e.g. reflecting
reactions of the public to news coverage of a catastrophic situation, or people growing tired of mitigation measures.
Such further adaptations, however, can only be performed on a per-country basis by experts with an intimate knowledge
of the local situation. Our code provides a solid and extensible base for this. For Germany, several developments in
the near future may have to be included in the model. First, people may have transiently changed their behavior over
the Easter holidays; second, we expect a series of change points, as well as continuous drifts, with governments trying
to ease and calibrate mitigation measures. Third, extensions to hierarchical models will enable regional assessments,
e.g. on the level of federal states.
Even after the three major governmental interventions in Germany, effective growth rates remain close to zero and
warrant careful consideration of future measures. At present, estimates of effective growth rates dropped to −3%
and thereby remain close to zero – the watershed between exponential growth or decay. Together with the delay of
approximately two weeks between infection and case report this warrants caution in lifting restrictions for two reasons:
First, lifting restrictions too much will quickly lead to renewed exponential growth; second, we would be effectively
blind to this worsened situation for nearly two weeks in which it will develop uninhibited. This may result in unwanted
growth in case numbers beyond the level that the health system can cope with – especially when the active cases have

10
not gone down close to zero before lifting restrictions, thus re-initiating growth from a high base level. Therefore, it is
important to consider lifting restriction only when the number of active cases are so low that a two-week increase will
not pose a serious threat.
In conclusion, the presented Bayesian approach allows to detect and quantify the effect of recent governmental
interventions and – combined with potential subsequent interventions – to forecast future case number scenarios. Our
analysis highlights the importance of precise timing and magnitude of interventions for future case numbers. It also
stresses the importance of including the reporting delay D between the date of infection and the date of the confirmed
case in the model. The delay D, together with the time required to implement interventions causes a total delay
between an intervention and its visibility in the case numbers of about two weeks for COVID-19 in Germany. This
means that changes in our behavior today can only be detected in confirmed cases in two weeks. Combined with the
current spreading rate that is still around zero, the inferred spreading and observation dynamics warrant an extremely
careful planning of future measures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

As a basis for our Bayesian inference and the forecast scenarios, we use the differential equations of the well-established
SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model. We also test the robustness of our results by means of more sophisticated
models, in particular an SEIR-like model that explicitly incorporates an incubation period (Fig. S3). While the SIR
model-dynamics is well understood in general, here our main challenge is to estimate model parameters specifically
for the COVID-19 outbreak, and to use them for forecasting. To that end, we combined a Bayesian approach — to
incorporate prior knowledge — with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling — to compute the posterior
distribution of the parameters and to sample from it for forecasting. Put simply, we first estimate the parameter
distribution that best describes the observed situation, and then we use many samples from this parameter distribution
to evolve the model equations and thus forecast future developments.
The data used comes from the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering (JHU CSSE)
dashboard [40]. The JHU CSSE provides up-to-date data on COVID-19 infections, usually a few days ahead of official
German sources. The exact version of the data and code is available at [31]. Data were incorporated until April 21.
Note that after this cutoff date, additional modeling of the effects of behavioral changes over the Easter holidays
becomes necessary.
Simple model: SIR model with stationary spreading rate

We consider a time-discrete version of the standard SIR model. In short, we assume that the disease spreads at
rate λ from the infected population compartment (I) to the susceptible compartment (S), and that the infected
population compartment recovers (R) at rate µ. This well-established model for disease spreading can be described by
the following set of (deterministic) ordinary differential equations (see, e.g., Refs [5, 6, 20]). Within a population of
size N ,
dS
dt
dI
dt
dR
dt

= −λ SI
N
= λ SI
N − µI

(1)

= µI .

As a remark, during the onset phase of an epidemic only a very small fraction of the population is infected (I) or
recovered (R), and thus S ≈ N  I such that S/N ≈ 1. Therefore, the differential equation for the infected reduces
to a simple linear equation, exhibiting an exponential growth
dI
= (λ − µ)I solved by I(t) = I(0) e(λ−µ)t .
(2)
dt
Because our data set is discrete in time (∆t =1 day), we solve the above differential equations with a discrete time
step (dI/dt ≈ ∆I/∆t), such that
St − St−1 = −λ∆t St−1
N It−1

µ∆tIt−1
=: Rtnew

new
− Rtnew .
= λ St−1
N − µ ∆tIt−1 = It

Rt − Rt−1 =
It − It−1

=: −Itnew



(3)

11
Importantly, It models the number of all (currently) active infected people, while Itnew is the number of new infections
that will eventually be reported according to standard WHO convention. Importantly, we explicitly include a reporting
delay D between new infections Itnew and newly reported cases (Ct ) as
new
Ct = It−D
.

(4)

We begin our simulations at time t = 0 with I0 infected cases and start including real-word data of reported cases Ĉt
from day t > D (see below for a parameterization).
In our model we do not explicitly incorporate the inflow of additional infected people by travel for two reasons.
First, we implicitly model the initial surge of infections with I0 . Second, previous work showed that travel during the
outbreak has only modest effects on the dynamics, e.g., travel restrictions in China merely delayed the exponential
spread if not combined with reductions of spreading [41].

Full model: SIR model with weekly reporting modulation and change points in spreading rate

Our change point detection builds on a generalization of the simple SIR model with stationary spreading rate. We
now assume that the spreading rate λi , i = 1, ..., n, may change at certain time points ti from λi−1 to λi , linearly over
a time window of ∆ti days. Thereby, we account for policy changes to reduce λ, which were implemented in Germany
step by step. Thus, the parameters ti , ∆ti , and λi are added to the parameter set of the simple model above, and the
differential equations are augmented by the time-varying λi .
In addition, we include a weekly modulation to account for lower case reports around the weekend which subsequently
accumulate during the week. To model the systematic variation of case reports during the week, we adapted the newly
reported cases by a reporting fraction
new
Ct = It−D
(1 − f (t)) ,

f (t) = (1 − fw ) · 1 − sin

with
π
7t

− 21 Φw



,

(5)

where fw and Φw will also be constrained by the data.

Estimating model parameters with Bayesian MCMC

We estimate the set of model parameters θ = {λi , ti , µ, D, σ, I0 , fw , Φw } using Bayesian inferencewith Markov-chain
Monte-Carlo (MCMC). The parameter σ is the scale factor for the width of the likelihood P Ĉt θ between observed
data and model (see below). Our implementation relies on the python package PyMC3 [42] with NUTS (No-U-Turn
Sampling) [43] using multiple, independent Markov chains. The structure of our approach is the following:
Initialization of the Markov chains via variational inference. The posterior is approximated by Gaussian distributions
ignoring correlations between parameters through automatic differentiation variational inference (ADVI) [44], which is
implemented in PyMC3. From this distribution, four starting points for four chains are sampled.
Burn-in phase: Each chain performs 1000 burn-in (tuning) steps using NUTS, which are not recorded. This serves
as equilibration in order to sample from an equilibrium distribution in the next step.
Sampling phase: Each chain performs 4000 steps, which are used to approximate the posterior distribution. To
ensure that the Chains are equilibrated and sampled from the whole posterior distribution (ergodicity), we verified
that the R-hat statistic is below 1.05, which is implemented in PyMC3. The rank normalized R-hat diagnostic tests
for lack of convergence by comparing the variances within chains and between chains: For identical within-chain and
between-chain variances R-hat becomes 1, indicating convergence. For well-converged chains the resulting samples will
describe the real-world data well, so that consistent forecasts are possible in the forecast phase.
Forecast using Monte Carlo samples. For the forecast, we take all samples from the MCMC step and continue
time integration according to different forecast scenarios explained below. Note that the overall procedure yields an
ensemble of forecasts — as opposed to a single forecast that would be solely based on one set of (previously optimized)
parameters.
MCMC sampling details Each MCMC step requires to propose a new set of parameters θ, to generate a (fully
deterministic)
time series of new infected cases C(θ) = {Ct (θ)} of the same length as the observed real-world data
n o
Ĉ = Ĉt , and to accept or reject θ. In our case, the NUTS implementation (in PyMC3) first proposes a new set of

12
parameters θ based on an advanced gradient-based algorithm and subsequently accepts or rejects it such that the
resulting samples reflect the posterior distribution
p(θ|Ĉ) ∝ p(Ĉ|θ)p(θ),
where p(Ĉ|θ) is the likelihood for the data given the parameters and p(θ) is the prior distribution of the parameters
(see below). The likelihood quantifies the similarity between model outcome and the available real-world time series.
Here, the likelihood is the product over local likelihoods


p

p Ĉt θ ∼ StudentTν=4 mean = Ct (θ), width = σ Ct (θ) .
quantifying the similarity between the model outcome for one time point t, Ct (θ), and the corresponding real-world
data point Ĉt . We chose the Student’s t-distribution because it resembles a Gaussian distribution around the mean
but features heavy tails, which make the MCMC more robust with respect to outliers [45], and thus reporting noise.
The case-number-dependent width is motivated by observation noise through random subsampling [38], resulting in a
variance proportional to the mean. Our likelihood neglects any noise in the dynamic process, as the SIR model is
deterministic, but could be in principle extended to incorporate typical demographic noise from stochastic spreading
dynamics [35, 46].

Priors that constrain model parameters

As short-term forecasts are time-critical at the onset of an epidemic, the available real-world data is typically not
informative enough to identify all free parameters, or to empirically find their underlying distributions. We therefore
chose informative priors on initial model parameters where possible and complemented them with uninformative priors
otherwise. Our choices are summarized in Tab. II for the simple model, i.e. the SIR model with stationary spreading
rate for the exponential onset phase, and in Tab. III for the full model with change points, and are discussed in the
following.
TABLE II. Priors on the model parameters for the SIR model with stationary spreading rate.
Parameter Variable Prior distribution
Spreading rate
λ
LogNormal(log(0.4), 0.5)
µ
LogNormal(log(1/8), 0.2)
Recovery rate
Reporting delay
D
LogNormal(log(8), 0.2)
Initially infected
I0
HalfCauchy(100)
Scale factor
σ
HalfCauchy(10)

Priors for the simple model (Table II): In order to constrain our simple model, an SIR model with stationary
spreading rate for the exponential onset phase, we chose the following informative priors. Because of the ambiguity
between the spreading and recovery rate in the exponential onset phase (see description of simple model), we chose a
narrow log-normal prior for the recovery rate µ ∼ LogNormal(log(1/8), 0.2) with median recovery time of 8 days [20].
Note that our implementation of µ accounts for the recovery of infected people and isolation measures because it
describes the duration during which a person can infect others. For the spreading rate, we assume a broad log-normal
prior distribution λ ∼ LogNormal(log(0.4), 0.5) with median 0.4. This way, the prior for λ − µ has median 0.275 and
the prior for the base reproduction number (R0 = λ/µ) has median 3.2, consistent with the broad range of previous
estimates [18, 33, 34]. In addition, we chose a log-normal prior for the reporting delay D ∼ LogNormal(log(8), 0.2) to
incorporate both the incubation time between 1–14 days with median 5 [32] plus a delay from infected people waiting
to contact the doctor and get tested.
The remaining model parameters are constrained by uninformative priors, in practice the Half-Cauchy distribution [47].
The half-Cauchy distribution HalfCauchy(x, β) = 2/πβ[1 + (x/β)2 ] is essentially a flat prior from zero to O(β) with
heavy tails beyond. Thereby, β merely sets the order of magnitude that should not be exceeded for a given parameter.
We chose for the number of initially infected people in the model (16 days before first data point) I0 ∼ HalfCauchy(100)
assuming an order of magnitude O(100) and below. In addition, we chose the scale factor of the width of the likelihood
function as σ ∼ HalfCauchy(10); this choice means that the variance in reported numbers may be up to a factor of 100
larger than the actual reported number.

13
TABLE III. Priors on the model parameters for the SIR
Parameter Variable
Change points
t1
t2
t3
Change duration
∆ti
λ0
Spreading rates
λ1
λ2
λ3
Recovery rate
µ
D
Reporting delay
Weekly modulation amplitude
fw
Weekly modulation phase
Φw
Initially infected
I0
Scale factor
σ

model with change points and weekly reporting modulation.
Prior distribution
Normal(2020/03/09, 3)
Normal(2020/03/16, 1)
Normal(2020/03/23, 1)
LogNormal(log(3), 0.3)
LogNormal(log(0.4), 0.5)
LogNormal(log(0.2), 0.5)
LogNormal(log(1/8), 0.5)
LogNormal(log(1/16), 0.5)
LogNormal(log(1/8), 0.2)
LogNormal(log(8), 0.2)
Beta(mean = 0.7, std = 0.17)
vonMises(mean = 0, κ = 0.01) (nearly flat)
HalfCauchy(100)
HalfCauchy(10)

Priors for the full model (Table III): In order to constrain our full model, an SIR model with weekly reporting
modulation and change points in the spreading rate, we chose the same priors as for the simple model but added the
required priors associated with the change points. In general, we assume that each set of governmental interventions
(together with the increasing awareness) leads to a reduction (and not an increase) of λ at a change point. As we
cannot know yet the precise reduction factor, we adhere to assume a reduction by ≈ 50%, but always with a fairly
wide uncertainty, so that in principle even an increase at the change point would be possible. We model the time
dependence of λ as change points, and not as continuous changes because the policy changes were implemented in
three discrete steps, which were presumably followed by the public in a timely fashion.
For the spreading rates, we chose log-normal distributed priors as in the simple model. In particular, we chose for the
initial spreading rate the same prior as in the simple model, λ0 ∼ LogNormal(log(0.4), 0.5); after the first change point
λ1 ∼ LogNormal(log(0.2), 0.5), assuming the first intervention to reduce the spreading rate by 50% from our initial
estimates (λ0 ≈ 0.4) with a broad prior distribution; after the second change point λ2 ∼ LogNormal(log(1/8), 0.5),
assuming the second intervention to reduce the spreading rate to the level of the recovery rate, which would lead to
a stationary number of new infections. This corresponds approximately to a reduction of λ at the change point by
50%; and after the third change point λ3 ∼ LogNormal(log(1/16), 0.5), assuming the third intervention to reduce the
spreading rate again by 50%. With that intervention, λ3 is smaller than the recovery rate µ, causing a decrease in new
case numbers and a saturation of the cumulative number of infections.
For the timing of change points, we chose normally distributed priors. In particular, we chose t1 ∼
Normal(2020/03/09, 3) for the first change point because on the weekend of March 8, large public events, like
soccer matches or fairs, were cancelled. For the second change point, we chose t2 ∼ Normal(2020/03/16, 1), because on
March 15, the closing of schools and other educational institutions along with the closing of non-essential stores were
announced and implemented on the following day. Restaurants were allowed to stay open until 6 pm. For the third
change point, we chose t3 ∼ Normal(2020/03/23, 1), because on March 23, a far-reaching contact ban (Kontaktsperre),
which includes the prohibition of even small public gatherings as well as complete closing of restaurants and non-essential
stores was imposed by the government authorities. Further policy changes may occur in future; however, for now, we
do not include more change points.
The change points take effect over a certain time period ∆ti for which we choose ∆ti ∼ LogNormal(log(3), 0.3) with
a median of 3 days over which the spreading rate changes continuously as interventions have to become effective. The
precise duration of the transition has hardly any affect on the cumulative number of cases (Fig. 2 E-F). We assumed
a duration of three days, because some policies were not announced at the same day for all states within Germany;
moreover, the smooth transition also can absorb continuous changes in behavior.
The number of tests that are performed and reported vary regularly over the course of a week and are especially low
during weekends. To account for this periodic variation, we modulated the number of inferred cases by the absolute
value of a sine function with in total a period of 7 days. We chose this function as it is a non-symmetric oscillation,
fitting the weekly variation of cases on a phenomenological level. For the amplitude of the modulation we chose a
weakly informative Beta prior: fw ∼ Beta(mean = 0.7, std = 0.17) and for the phase a nearly flat circular distribution:
Φw ∼ vonMises(mean = 0, κ = 0.01).

14
Model comparison

Since change point detection entails evaluating models with different numbers of parameters, some form of fair
model comparison is needed. This is necessary to compensate for the higher flexibility of more complex models, as
this flexibility carries the risk of overfitting and overconfident forecasts. The standard approach to avoid over-fitting
in machine learning is cross-validation, and cross validation has recently also been advocated for Bayesian model
comparison (e.g. [3, 36]), especially for models employed for predictions and forecasts. Thus, one would ideally like to
compare the models with different numbers of change points by the probability they assign to previously unobserved
data points. Technically this is measured by their out-of-sample prediction accuracy, i.e. their log pointwise predictive
density (lppd):
lppd =

N
X

Z
log

p(yios |θ)ppost (θ)dθ


,

(6)

i=1

where the vector [y1os , . . . , y1os ] is a an out-of-sample dataset of N new data points, and where ppost (θ) = ppost (θ|y, Mj )
is the posterior distribution of the parameters, given the in-sample data y and the model Mj . In practice, the integral
is approximated using a sufficient amount of samples from ppost (θ). However, this approach is only reasonable if a
sufficient amount of out-of-sample data is available, which is not the case in the early stages of a disease outbreak.
Therefore, the pointwise out-of-sample prediction accuracy was approximated using Leave-one-out cross-validation
(LOO) in PyMC3 to compute equation 6 individually for each left out data point based on the model fit to the other
data points. The sum of these values, multiplied by a factor of −2 then yields the leave-one-out cross-validation
(LOO-CV) score. Thus, lower LOO-CV scores imply better models.

∗

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

viola.priesemann@ds.mpg.de; Authors contributed equally
M. Enserink, K. Kupferschmidt, Science 367, 1414 (2020).
E. T. Jaynes, Probability Theory: The Logic of Science (Cambridge University Press, 2003).
A. Gelman, et al., Bayesian Data Analysis, Third Edition (CRC Press, 2013).
W. O. Kermack, A. G. McKendrick, G. T. Walker, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers
of a Mathematical and Physical Character 115, 700 (1927).
H. Hethcote, SIAM Rev. 42, 599 (2000).
J. Anderson, I. Lampl, I. Reichova, M. Carandini, D. Ferster, Nat. Neurosci. 3, 617 (2000).
N. C. Grassly, C. Fraser, Nat Rev Microbiol 6, 477 (2008).
R. Parshani, S. Carmi, S. Havlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 258701 (2010).
T. Harko, F. S. N. Lobo, M. K. Mak, Applied Mathematics and Computation 236, 184 (2014).
T. Britton, P. D. O’Neill, Scand J Stat 29, 375 (2002).
J. Lourenço, et al., eLife 6, e29820 (2017).
N. R. Faria, et al., Sci Rep 7, 1 (2017).
B. Shulgin, L. Stone, Z. Agur, Bull. Math. Biol. 60, 1123 (1998).
O. N. Bjørnstad, B. F. Finkenstädt, B. T. Grenfell, Ecol. Monogr. 72, 169 (2002).
L. Hufnagel, D. Brockmann, T. Geisel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15124 (2004).
A. Pandey, et al., Science 346, 991 (2014).
R. Li, et al., Science (2020).
A. J. Kucharski, et al., The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).
J. Lourenco, et al., medRxiv p. 2020.03.24.20042291 (2020).
B. F. Maier, D. Brockmann, Science (2020).
P. Bittihn, R. Golestanian, arXiv:2003.08784 (2020).
R. M. Anderson, H. Heesterbeek, D. Klinkenberg, T. D. Hollingsworth, The Lancet 395, 931 (2020).
J. R. Fauver, et al., medRxiv p. 2020.03.25.20043828 (2020).
A. Arenas, et al., medRxiv p. 2020.03.21.20040022 (2020).
O. Mitjà, et al., The Lancet (2020).
S. L. Chang, N. Harding, C. Zachreson, O. M. Cliff, M. Prokopenko, arXiv:2003.10218 (2020).
W. Bock, et al., medRxiv p. 2020.03.25.20043109 (2020).
C. Gros, R. Valenti, K. Valenti, D. Gros, arXiv:2004.00493 (2020).
V. Zlatić, I. Barjašić, A. Kadović, H. Štefančić, A. Gabrielli, arXiv:2003.08479 (2020).
J. Dehning, et al., ArXiv200401105 Version 1 (2020).
J. Dehning, et al., https://github.com/Priesemann-Group/Covid19_inference_forecast v2020.05.01, Zenodo (2020).
S. A. Lauer, et al., Ann Intern Med (2020).

15
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]

J. Zhang, et al., medRxiv p. 2020.03.19.20039107 (2020).
Y. Liu, A. A. Gayle, A. Wilder-Smith, J. Rocklöv, J Travel Med 27 (2020).
M. A. Muñoz, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 031001 (2018).
A. Vehtari, A. Gelman, J. Gabry, Stat Comput 27, 1413 (2017).
L. Peng, W. Yang, D. Zhang, C. Zhuge, L. Hong, arXiv:2002.06563 (2020).
J. Wilting, V. Priesemann, Nat. Commun. 9, 2325 (2018).
Y.-C. Chen, P.-E. Lu, C.-S. Chang, T.-H. Liu, arXiv:2003.00122 (2020).
E. Dong, H. Du, L. Gardner, The Lancet Infectious Diseases 0 (2020).
M. Chinazzi, et al., Science 368, 395 (2020).
J. Salvatier, T. V. Wiecki, C. Fonnesbeck, PeerJ Comput. Sci. 2, e55 (2016).
M. D. Hoffman, A. Gelman, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15, 1593 (2014).
A. Kucukelbir, D. Tran, R. Ranganath, A. Gelman, D. M. Blei, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18, 430 (2017).
K. L. Lange, R. J. A. Little, J. M. G. Taylor, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 84, 881 (1989).
S. di Santo, P. Villegas, R. Burioni, M. A. Muñoz, Phys. Rev. E 95 (2017).
A. Gelman, Bayesian Anal. 1, 515 (2006).
Johns Hopkins data snapshot is available at https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/
bda67e3db0e8dca4540297633d431a8021c035c8/csse_covid_19_data/csse_covid_19_time_series/time_series_
covid19_confirmed_global.csv.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Tim Friede, Theo Geisel, Knut Heidemann, Moritz Linkmann, Matthias Loidolt, and Vladimir Zykov for
carefully and promptly reviewing our work internally. We thank the Priesemann group - especially Daniel Gonzalez
Marx, Fabian Mikulasch, Lucas Rudelt & Andreas Schneider - for exciting discussions and for their valuable comments.
We thank the colleagues of the Göttingen Campus, with whom we were discussing the project and the COVID-19 case
forecast in the past weeks very intensively: Heike Bickeböller, Eberhard Bodenschatz, Wolfgang Brück, Alexander
Ecker, Andreas Leha, Ramin Golestanian, Helmut Grubmüller, Stephan Herminghaus, Reinhard Jahn, Norbert Lossau
& Simone Scheithauer. We thank Nils Bertschinger for stimulating discussion on Bayesian modeling and model
comparison. Funding: All authors received support from the Max-Planck-Society. JD and PS acknowledge funding
by SMARTSTART, the joint training program in computational neuroscience by the VolkswagenStiftung and the
Bernstein Network. JZ received financial support from the Joachim Herz Stiftung. MW is employed at the Campus
Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks funded by the VolkswagenStiftung. Author contributions: JD, JZ,
MW, MW, VP designed research. JD, JZ, PS conducted research. JD, JZ, PS, JPN, MW, MW, VP analyzed the data.
JD, PS, JPN created figures. All authors wrote the paper. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing
interests. Data and materials availability: Both data [48] and analysis code [31] are available online. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. To view a copy of this
license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. This license does not apply to figures/photos/artwork
or other content included in the article that is credited to a third party; obtain authorization from the rights holder
before using such material.

LIST OF SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS:

Table S1 – S2
Fig S1 – S7

16
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS:

TABLE S1. Overview of model parameters.
Parameter
Variable
λ
Spreading rate
Recovery rate
µ
λ∗ = λ − µ
Effective spreading rate
λi
Spreading rate after i-th intervention
Time of i-th intervention
ti
fw
Amplitude of weekend corrections
Φw
Phase shift of weekend correction
Scale factor of the width of Student’s t-distribution
σ
N
Population size (83.000.000)
Susceptible at time t
St
It
Infected at time t
Rt
Recovered at time t
∆t
Time step
Rtnew = µ∆tIt−1
New recoveries at time t
S
I
Itnew = λ∆t t−1
t−1 New infections at time t
N
new
Ct = It−D
New reported cases at time t
D
Delay of case detection

TABLE S2. Model comparison: Using leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation, we compare our original “SIR main” model that
features a weekend modulation (to account for fewer reported cases during weekends) with other model variants. Remarkably,
the median inferred effective growth rate λ∗ after the last change-point is very similar for all model variants. For full details on
the model variants, see the figure captions in the SI: (i) SEIR-like with explicit incubation time, Fig. S3. (ii) SIR excluding
the weekend modulation, Fig. S4. (iii) Sensitivity analysis by applying wider priors to different parameters, Figs. S5, S6, S7.
Lower LOO-scores represent a better match between model and data (pLOO is the effective number of parameters). † For the
SEIR-like model, the magnitude of the effective growth rate is not directly comparable because of the explicit incubation period.
Model
# c-pts. λ∗0 λ∗1
λ∗2
λ∗3 LOO-score pLOO
SIR main
0
0.03
927 ± 9
8.31
SIR main
1
0.21 -0.03
819 ± 16 13.46
2
0.30 0.11 -0.03
796 ± 17 12.53
SIR main
SIR main
3
0.30 0.12 0.02 -0.03 787 ± 17 13.42
SIR without weekend modulation
3
0.31 0.13 0.04 -0.03 807 ± 17 9.65
SIR with wider delay prior
3
0.30 0.12 0.02 -0.04 787 ± 17 14.15
3
0.30 0.12 0.02 -0.04 787 ± 17 14.29
SIR with wider change point priors
SIR with wider transient length prior
3
0.29 0.12 0.02 -0.04 785 ± 17 13.92
SEIR-like†
3
1.95 0.45 0.05 -0.12 782 ± 17 10.71

17

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

amplitude
D Weekend,
of modulation

fw 0.6

Weekend, offset
from sunday
w

0.3

[-0.4, 0.9]

[0.4, 0.8]

0.0
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

5 k Mar 8
0k

300 k
200 k

E

Recovery rate

0.19

2 0 2
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

11.0

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

0

0.40

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

[7.7, 15.5]

[0.13, 0.26]

F

5 10 15 20
Initial infections

I0 87.6

[0.32, 0.50]

[18.7, 332.0]

Reporting delay

D 9.9

[6.6, 14.3]

106
104

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

G

0.0 0.2 0.4

0

500 1000

5 10 15

Spreading rates Change times Change duration

Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

1

0.16

[0.10, 0.23]

0.0 0.2 0.4

t1 12.7
[6.4, 17.8]

Mar 8 Mar 15

t1 7.4

[2.4, 19.5]

0 2 4 6

FIG. S1. Model comparison: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (three change points, main text) with the same model
“SIR main” but only one change point. With only one change point, the model cannot describe the data well after April 1.
A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Forecast and comparison of daily new reported cases
with the model fit, inset: Same on log-lin scale. C: Same as B but for cumulative (total) cases. D–G: Posterior distributions
from the change point detection (red) compared to prior distributions (gray). Please refer to Fig. 1 (main text) for a more
detailed description of the distributions.

18

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

amplitude
D Weekend,
of modulation

fw 0.6
[0.4, 0.7]

0.0

0.4 0.6 0.8
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

5 k Mar 8
0k

300 k
200 k

Recovery rate

0.16

[0.12, 0.23]

F

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate
0

0.46

[0.38, 0.57]

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

Weekend, offset
from sunday
w

0.2

[-0.4, 0.6]

1 0 1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

8.9

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

[6.7, 12.1]

5 10 15
Initial infections

I0 33.9

[7.9, 112.1]

Reporting delay

D 11.5
[8.9, 14.5]

0.0 0.2 0.4

0 100 200 300

Spreading rates

Change times Change duration

1

0.27

[0.21, 0.34]

104

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

E

0.0 0.2 0.4
Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

2

0.13

[0.09, 0.19]

0.0 0.2 0.4

t1 5.8
[2.4, 9.0]

Mar 1 Mar 8

t2 15.9

[14.1, 17.8]

Mar 8 Mar 15

10

15

t1 3.0

[1.6, 5.3]

0 2 4 6

t2 6.4

[2.8, 11.1]

0 2 4 6

FIG. S2. Model comparison: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (three change points, main text) with the same model
“SIR main” but with two change points. With two change points, the onset time of the second change point is close to the
(middle) one inferred when using the 3-c.p. model. However, the effective growth rate λ∗ after the respective last c.p. is the same
in both cases, λ∗ = −0.03 (see also Table S2). A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). Two change
points are clearly visible. B: Forecast and comparison of daily new reported cases with the model fit, inset: Same on log-lin
scale. C: Same as B but for cumulative (total) cases. D–G: Posterior distributions from the change point detection (orange)
compared to prior distributions (gray). Please refer to Fig. 1 (main text) for a more detailed description of the distributions.

B

Weekend, amplitude Weekend, offset
of modulation
from sunday

fw 0.6

0.4 0.6 0.8

0
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

E

300 k
200 k

0.35

F

0

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G

2.31

0 1 2 3 4 0

Spreading rates
1

[0.48, 1.29]

0 1 2 3 4
2

104

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

0.79
0.40

[0.23, 0.82]

0 1 2 3 4
3

0.22

[0.13, 0.40]

0 1 2 3 4

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

7.9

[6.0, 10.6]

0 1 2 3 4 5.0 7.5 10.012.5
Initial rate
Initial infections
[1.42, 3.73]

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

Recovery rate

E0 4.4

0.3

0
1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

[0.21, 0.58]

5 k Mar 8
0k

w

Initial scale
of exposed

[-0.2, 0.6]

[0.5, 0.7]

2

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

D

4

Density

A

Effective
growth rate (t)

19

I0 26.7

0

50 100
Median
incubation delay

Dinc 5.4
[3.6, 7.2]

4

6

8

Reporting delay

D 6.0
[4.0, 8.4]

[1.5, 106.0]

200

[0.2, 23.4]

400

5

10

Change times Change duration

t1 7.3

t1 2.9

[4.2, 10.5]

Mar 8

[1.6, 5.1]

0

2

t2 15.3

[1.7, 5.6]

0

2

t3 22.0

4

6

t3 3.1

[20.1, 24.0]

Mar 22

6

t2 3.2

[13.5, 17.1]

Mar 15

4

[1.7, 5.7]

0

2

4

6

FIG. S3. Model comparison: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (three change points, main text) but with a more involved
SEIR-like model and three change points, code available online [31]. Arguably, the SEIR-like model provides are more
realistic (but also more complex) description of virus propagation. It yields a slightly better (lower) LOO-score than our “SIR
main” model in the cross-validation, Table S2. However, inferred parameters are compatible with the simpler model and the
inferred dynamics are similar. Model details: The SEIR-like model builds on our “SIR main” model (which includes a weekend
correction, see Methods). The SEIR-like model features an explicit log-normal incubation period and a lognormal reporting delay.
The incubation period is implemented as a discrete convolution of multiple exposed pools with a lognormal kernel. The discrete
lognormal kernel is parameterized as follows (to match the characteristic incubation time of COVID-19 [32]): median Dinc , scale
parameter 0.418 and normalized to 1. The median is a free parameter with prior Normal(5, 1) (days) [32]. The reporting delay is
implemented in a similar manner: as a convolution of the number of new cases with a lognormal kernel and the scale parameter
is fixed to 0.3. In order to match the total delay of the main model (between the infection and the observation), the median D
is a free parameter with prior LogNormal(5, 0.2) (days). Note that because of the lognormal-distributed incubation period in
the SEIR-like model, the spreading and recovery rates are not directly comparable to the SIR models. We correspondingly
adapted the respective priors [17]: We adapted the prior median of the recovery rate µ to 1/3 with a scale factor of 0.3, and the
prior median for λ0 , λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 to 2.0, 1.0, 0.5 and 0.25, respectively, with a scale parameter of 1 each. A: Time-dependent
model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of daily new reported cases and the model (inset: log-lin
scale). C: As B but for total (cumulative) reported cases. D–G: Prior and posterior distributions of all free parameters.

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

B

constrained unconstrained due
by data to reporting delay

0.2
0.0

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Data until April 21

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

5 k Mar 8
0k

300 k
200 k

Recovery rate
[0.09, 0.17]

E

0.0

0.12

0.2 0.4
Initial rate
0

0.43

0.2

0.4

1

0.25

0.2

0.4

2

0.17

0.2

0.4

3

0.09

0.2

0.4

Scale (width)
of the likelihood

10 15 20
Initial infections

I0 18.8

[0.35, 0.52]

0.0

F Spreading rates

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

0.0

106
104

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

[0.13, 0.21]

0.0

[0.06, 0.13]

0.0

Data until
April 21

11.5

[8.8, 15.4]

Prior
Posterior

Reporting delay

D[8.6, 10.3
12.1]

[4.2, 68.5]

0 200 400 600

10

15

Change times Change duration

t1 7.0

[0.21, 0.31]

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

D
Density

20

t1 2.8

[4.1, 9.6]

Mar 1

Mar 8

[1.6, 4.9]

0

2

t2 15.3

[1.6, 4.9]

0

2

t3 22.3

4

6

t3 3.0

[20.7, 23.9]

Mar 15 Mar 22

6

t2 2.8

[13.6, 16.9]

Mar 8 Mar 15

4

[1.7, 6.1]

0

2

4

6

FIG. S4. Model comparison: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (three change points, main text) with an SIR model
that excludes the weekend modulation but features the three change points. In this version of the model, we excluded
the assumption that daily new reported cases depend on the weekday (which is modeled as an absolute sine with an amplitude
and a phase shift as inferred parameters in the main model). While the inferred parameters from the model that excludes the
weekend modulation (in particular rates and onset times of change points) match the model that includes the modulation, the
LOO-scores of the cross-validation are worse, Table S2. Especially in panel B it becomes clear that the (empirically motivated)
dependence of reported on cases on the weekday is justified. Without the modulation, the model fit does not capture the
periodic changes in the data. A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of daily
new reported cases and the model (inset: log-lin scale). C: As B but for total (cumulative) reported cases. D–F: Prior and
posterior distributions of all free parameters.

21

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

D

Weekend, amplitude
of modulation

fw 0.5
[0.4, 0.7]

0.4 0.6 0.8

0.0
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

E

300 k
200 k

F

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate
0

0.42

[0.35, 0.51]

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G

0.0 0.2 0.4

Spreading rates
1

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

0.24

[0.20, 0.29]

0.0 0.2 0.4
2

104

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

0.13

[0.09, 0.17]

5 k Mar 8
0k

Recovery rate

0.14

[0.11, 0.19]

0.0 0.2 0.4
Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

3

0.09

[0.06, 0.13]

0.0 0.2 0.4

Weekend, offset
from sunday
w

0.4

[-0.1, 0.7]

1 0 1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

7.9

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

[5.9, 10.7]

5 10 15
Initial infections

I0 49.3

[12.9, 143.8]

0 200 400

Reporting delay

D 12.5
[9.9, 15.0]

10 15

Change times Change duration

t1 4.8
[1.7, 8.0]

Mar 1 Mar 8

t2 14.8

[13.0, 16.5]

Mar 8 Mar 15

t3 22.6

[20.8, 24.4]

Mar 15 Mar 22

t1 2.9

[1.6, 5.1]

0 2 4 6

t2 2.9

[1.7, 5.1]

0 2 4 6

t3 3.9

[2.0, 7.2]

0 2 4 6

FIG. S5. Sensitivity analysis: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (main text, three change points, same model) but with
a prior for the reporting delay that is 4 times wider (panel F, third column). All parameters and change points are
constrained by data. In particular, the posterior distribution of the reporting delay is slightly wider than with the original prior,
but it is well constrained by data. A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of
daily new reported cases and the model (inset: log-lin scale). C: As B but for total (cumulative) reported cases. D–G: Prior
and posterior distributions of all free parameters.

22

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

D

Weekend, amplitude Weekend, offset
of modulation
from sunday

fw 0.5
[0.4, 0.7]

0.4 0.6 0.8

0.0
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

E

Recovery rate

0.12

[0.09, 0.17]

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate

F

0

0k

300 k
200 k

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G

0.0 0.2 0.4

Spreading rates
1

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

0.24

[0.20, 0.29]

0.0 0.2 0.4
2

104

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

0.42

[0.35, 0.52]

5 k Mar 8

0.14

[0.11, 0.20]

0.0 0.2 0.4
Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

3

0.09

[0.06, 0.12]

0.0 0.2 0.4

w

0.3

[-0.2, 0.7]

Data until
April 21

1 0 1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

Prior
Posterior

7.9

[5.9, 10.7]

5
10 15
Initial infections Reporting delay

I0 21.3

D 9.2

[6.2, 13.2]

[4.4, 81.6]

0 100 200

5

10 15

Change times Change duration

t1 7.6

[2.8, 11.6]

Mar 1 Mar 8

t2 18.1

[13.7, 27.6]

Mar 15Mar 22

t3 27.0

t1 3.1

[1.7, 5.5]

0 2 4 6

t2 3.2

[1.8, 6.2]

0 2 4 6

t3 3.3

[17.3, 31.1]

[1.8, 6.4]

Mar 22Mar 29

0 2 4 6

FIG. S6. Sensitivity analysis: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (main text, three change points, same model) but with a
prior for the change times that is 14 days wide, instead of ∼ 2 days, (panel G, second column). All parameters and change
points are constrained by data but the change points occur at later times compared to the original priors. A: Time-dependent
model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of daily new reported cases and the model (inset: log-lin
scale). C: As B but for total (cumulative) reported cases. D–G: Prior and posterior distributions of all free parameters.

23

B

constrained unconstrained
by data due to
reporting delay

0.2

D

Weekend, amplitude
of modulation

fw 0.6

0.4 0.6 0.8
Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
104
103

10 k

Data
Fit
Forecast

E

300 k
200 k

Recovery rate

0.12

F

0.0 0.2 0.4
Initial rate
0

0.42

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
106

G

0.0 0.2 0.4

Spreading rates
1

0.0 0.2 0.4
2

104

Mar 8 Mar 22 Apr 5 Apr 19 May 3
Date

0.24

[0.07, 0.30]

0.14

[0.07, 0.19]

0.0 0.2 0.4
3

0.08

[0.03, 0.13]

0.0 0.2 0.4

0.3

1 0 1
Scale (width)
of the likelihood

Data until
April 21

Prior
Posterior

7.9

[5.8, 10.6]

5 10 15
Initial infections

I0 22.4

[0.34, 0.51]

102
100 k Mar 8 Apr 19
0k

w

[-0.2, 0.7]

[0.09, 0.18]

5 k Mar 8
0k

Weekend, offset
from sunday

[0.4, 0.7]

0.0

15 k

Daily new reported
cases in Germany
Total reported
cases in Germany

C

0.4

Density

Effective
growth rate (t)

A

Reporting delay

D 9.0

[5.7, 12.3]

[4.0, 78.8]

0

100 200

5

10

15

Change times Change duration

t1 7.4

[3.2, 11.5]

Mar 1 Mar 8

t2 15.2

[13.3, 17.1]

Mar 8 Mar 15

t3 21.9

[19.9, 23.8]

Mar 15 Mar 22

t1 3.4

[0.3, 20.6]

0 2 4 6

t2 6.3

[0.6, 35.4]

0 2 4 6

t3 9.5

[0.4, 33.3]

0 2 4 6

FIG. S7. Sensitivity analysis: Change-point detection as in Fig. 3 (main text, three change points, same model) but with
a prior for the change duration that is 4 times wider (panel G, third column). The duration of the first change point
∆t1 is robust to the wider prior; the data constrains the posterior. The durations of the second and third change point, ∆t2
and ∆t3 are not constrained by the data but they depend on our chosen priors. This is also visible in the lack of plateaus in
the effective growth, panel A. However, the inferred spreading rate λ and the forecast are not sensitive to the wider priors.
A: Time-dependent model estimate of the effective growth rate λ∗ (t). B: Comparison of daily new reported cases and the
model (inset: log-lin scale). C: As B but for total (cumulative) reported cases. D–G: Prior and posterior distributions of all
free parameters.

