Power-law distribution in the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases
Bernd Blasius∗
Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment,
University of Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany
ORCID: 0000-0002-6558-1462
and

arXiv:2004.00940v2 [q-bio.PE] 30 Apr 2020

Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity (HIFMB),
Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany
(Dated: May 1, 2020)

Abstract
COVID-19 is an emerging respiratory infectious disease caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
It was first reported on in early December 2019 in Wuhan, China and within three month spread
as a pandemic around the whole globe. Here, we study macro-epidemiological patterns along the
time course of the pandemic. We compute the distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases and
deaths for countries worldwide and for counties in the US, and show that both distributions follow
a truncated power-law over five orders of magnitude. We are able to explain the origin of this
scaling behavior as a dual-scale process: the large-scale spread of the virus between countries and
the small-scale accumulation of case numbers within each country. Assuming exponential growth on
both scales, the critical exponent of the power-law is determined by the ratio of large-scale to smallscale growth rates. We confirm this theory in numerical simulations in a simple meta-population
model, describing the epidemic spread in a network of interconnected countries. Our theory gives
a mechanistic explanation why most COVID-19 cases occurred within a few epicenters, at least
in the initial phase of the outbreak. Assessing how well a simple dual-scale model predicts the
early spread of epidemics, despite the huge contrasts between countries, could help identify critical
temporal and spatial scales of response in which to mitigate future epidemic threats.

∗

blasius@icbm.de; http://staff.uol.de/bernd.blasius

1

INTRODUCTION

COVID-19 is an emerging infectious disease caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. It
was first reported on in Hubei, mainland China on 31 December 2019 and has spread well
outside China in a matter of a few weeks, reaching countries in all parts of the globe within a
time span of three month. As of 29 March 2020, the disease has arrived in 177 countries, with
more than 700,000 confirmed cases and 30,000 deaths worldwide [39]. Despite the drastic,
large-scale containment measures implemented in most countries these numbers are rapidly
growing every day - posing an unprecedented threat to the global health and economy of
interconnected human societies.
One of the most powerful tools to understand the laws of epidemic growth is mathematical
modeling, going back to Daniel Bernoulli’s work [5] on the spread of smallpox in 1760.
Epidemiological models can be roughly divided into two classes. The first class of models
is focused on describing the temporal development of the epidemic within a localized region
or country. These models are often variants of the well known SIR-model [21, 22] and have
recently been adapted to the situation of COVID-19, taking into account non-pharmaceutical
interventions (e.g., quarantine, hospitalization, and containment policies) and allowing first
predictions of healthcare demand [14, 24, 37].
The second class of models is concerned with the geographic spread of the epidemic
around the globe. For these aims spatially explicit models have been developed that leverage
information on the topology of transport networks. For example, the global network of cargo
ship movements [20] was used to model the dispersal of invasive species [34]. Similarly for
infectious diseases, in a pioneering study, the 2003 spread of SARS in the global aviation
network [38] was modeled [19]. Based on these approaches, conceptual frameworks have been
developed to estimate epidemic arrival times as effective distances [8]. At the same time,
these models have been refined to highly detailed simulation frameworks for predicting the
spread of disease and are able to include factors such as vaccination, multiple susceptibility
classes, seasonal forcing, and the stochastic movement of individual agents [12, 40]. Reacting
rapidly to the emergent pandemic, spatial epidemiological models have been developed to
describe and anticipate the spread of COVID-19 [2, 9, 15, 30]. These models allow to predict
the incidence of the epidemics in a spatial population through time, permitting to study the
impact of travel restrictions and other control measures.
2

Despite this theoretical progress, not much is known about the biogeography of COVID19, neither from empirical studies nor from mathematical models. This is astonishing, as one
prominent characteristic of the pandemic is the huge variation in the number of cases that
have been reported from different countries of the world. As of March 2020, some few countries - the epicenters of the pandemic - were already badly affected by the pandemic, while
others at the same time had just confirmed the first few cases. This geographic variation in
COVID-19 prevalence might be explained by several arguments: A first obvious possibility
would be that the variation is caused by the idiosyncratic circumstances of the individual
countries which differ largely in their geography and population size, but also in the way
they are combatting the disease. Alternatively, parts of the variation could simply be due to
reporting errors, reflecting disparate national testing regimes, with countries such as China,
Japan, South Korea, or Germany having high testing rates, in contrast to other countries
with much poorer testing. Here, we argue, however, that a dominant part of this variation
may be a direct consequence of the dynamics of the spreading process itself. Thereby, the
epidemic prevalence in a country should be directly correlated to the arrival time of the
disease: countries that were invaded very early by the virus have accumulated many cases
in time, while countries with a late invasion naturally still have smaller prevalence.
To test this hypothesis, we use empirical data [10] to compute the country-level distribution, P , of confirmed COVID-19 cases, n, on end of March 2020 worldwide and find that it
is closely approximated by a truncated power-law
P (n) ∼ n−µ ,

1 ≤ n ≤ nmax

(1)

over five orders of magnitude.
Power-law distributions characterize a large range of phenomena in natural, economic,
and social systems, which is known as Zipf- or Pareto law [11, 25, 27, 36]. Examples range
from the number of species in biological taxa [43], the number of cities with a given size [44],
the number of different words in human language [44], the frequency of earthquakes [17],
the distribution of wealth [29], the number of scientific citations [31, 33], the step length in
animal search patterns [41], and the popularity of chess openings [7]. Our study shows that
epidemic prevalence, at least in the emerging stage of a pandemic, is another system that
falls into this class, suggesting that the spatial distribution of COVID-19 case numbers is a
fractal [18].
3

The appearance of a power-law distribution often points to the nature of the underlying
processes. It might, for example, be an indication that the system operates close to criticality
[3, 27], it might hint at the presence of a multiplicative stochastic process with certain
boundaries [7, 36], or a rich-get-richer process [4, 35]. Here, we provide a conceptual dualscale model that explains the emergence of the power-law distribution by the ’superposition’
of two concurrent processes: large-scale spread of the virus between countries and smallscale snowballing of case numbers within each country. Assuming exponential growth on
both scales, the critical exponent is simply determined by the ratio of large-scale to smallscale growth rates. We confirm this theory in numerical simulations in a simple metapopulation model, describing the epidemic spread in a network of interconnected countries.
By combining real world data, modeling, and numerical simulations we make the case that
that the distribution of epidemic prevalence, and possibly that of spreading processes in
general, might follow universal rules.

RESULTS

Power-law distribution in empirical data

Our research builds on the COVID-19 data repository operated by the Johns Hopkins
University Center for Systems Science and Engineering (JHU CSSE) [10]. The database
contains information about the daily number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and confirmed
deaths in various countries worldwide. Using this data we computed the distribution PC (n)
of confirmed cases and the distribution PD (n) of confirmed deaths at a given date (see
Methods). The country-level prevalence distribution on March 22, 2020 is shown in Fig. 1 a,
b. On that day 168 countries were invaded by the coronavirus and 86 countries already had
reported fatalities. The number of confirmed cases varied between 81,435 cases in China
(followed by 59,138 cases in Italy) and 1 case in 16 countries. The number of confirmed
deaths varied between 5,476 in Italy (followed by 3,274 in China) and one or zero deaths in
many countries. Figs. 1a,b clearly demonstrate that the frequency P of countries that have
a certain number n of COVID-19 cases follows a broad, long-tailed distribution that in very
good approximation can be described by a power-law, spanning five orders of magnitude for
the confirmed number of cases and four orders of magnitude for the confirmed number of
4

Figure 1. Power-law scaling in the distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases. Left column: Estimated probability Px (n) (blue lines and circles) for a country to have a certain number n of (a)
confirmed cases (x = C) and (b) confirmed deaths (x = D) on 22 March, 2020. Right column:
the same for the 2160 US counties that have been invaded by the coronavirus on March 31, 2020.
Histogram bins are spaced equally on a logarithmic axis and only bins with a positive number of
entries are shown. Black solid lines show straight-line fits with slope µ, indicated in the figure
PN
labels. Insets: Cumulative fraction C(n) =
m=n+1 P (m) of countries, or counties, with case
number m > n. Solid lines show the cumulative distribution Eq. (7) of a truncated power-law
distribution with critical exponent µ and cut-off value (a) nmax = 1 · 105 , (b) nmax = 1.5 · 104 , (c)
nmax = 7 · 104 , and (d) nmax = 3 · 103 .

deaths.
To illustrate the robustness of our hypothesis to spatial scale, in Fig. 1c, d we depict the
same analysis for the distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases in US counties on March 31,
2020. On this day 2160 counties were invaded by the virus and 514 counties reported at least
5

on death. Epidemic prevalence varied between 43,119 confirmed cases and 922 confirmed
deaths in New York City and one confirmed case in 455 counties and one confirmed death
in 253 counties. Again, we find that the distribution of confirmed cases follows a power-law
over several orders of magnitude. Thus, although the two data sets differ greatly in spatial
scale and resolution (168 invaded countries in Fig. 1a,b vs. 2160 invaded US counties in
Fig. 1c,d) we obtain very similar patterns of prevalence distribution.
A crude estimation of the critical exponent can be obtained by measuring the slope of a
regression line through the data on a double-logarithmic plot. Applying this method to the
country-level distribution (Fig. 1a,b), we obtain a value of µC = 1.18 (slope of the distribution of confirmed cases) and µD = 1.35 (confirmed deaths). For the US-county distribution
(Fig. 1c,d) we obtain somewhat larger slopes of µC = 1.58 and µD = 1.83. A more accurate
estimation of the critical exponent is provided by a maximum likelihood estimation (see
Methods). Applying this approach to the country-level COVID-19 distribution yields critical exponents of µ̂C = 1.14 ± 0.01 and µ̂D = 1.50 ± 0.05. For the US-county distribution we
obtain the value µ̂C = 1.49 ± 0.01 and µ̂D = 2.31 ± 0.06. These exponents slightly deviate
from those obtained from the regression analysis, but are still in the same ballpark.
Given an unbounded power-law distribution P (n), the cumulative distribution function
R∞
C(n) = n P (n0 )dn0 should also follow a power-law C(n) ∼ n1−µ . As shown in the insets in
Fig. 1, this is not the case for the distribution of COVID-19 cases, for which the cumulative
P
fraction C(n) = N
m=n+1 P (m) of countries, or counties, with case number m > n do not
really follow a straight line in a double logarithmic plot. Instead, they are better described
by the cumulative distribution function Eq. (7) of a truncated power-law, that is, a powerlaw distribution with an upper bound nmax for the number of cases, Eq. (1) (see Methods
and Appendix Fig. 5). This indication for the presence of a truncated power-law distribution
is also conform with our theoretical analysis below.
However we note that although the shape of the empirically obtained C(n) in overall
follows the curve of a truncated power-law distribution, there is a considerable wavering
around the theoretical curve (compare blue circles and black lines in Fig. 1 insets). Thus,
a rigorous hypothesis testing with Monte Carlo simulations [11, 13], which does not take
disturbances due to additional irregularities (e.g., heterogeneities in country sizes or containment measures) fully into account, will always reject the hypothesis of a perfect truncated
power-law as the true underlying distribution.
6

The presence of a power-law distribution means that global COVID-19 prevalence patterns are characterized by a small number of countries with huge epidemic prevalence (the
long tail of the distribution) and a large number of countries that are (yet) barely affected by
the disease. In between these two extremes there is a smooth transition and this transition is
scale free, that is, the amplification in the number of countries (or counties) with decreasing
number of cases is the same at all scales. In general, the obtained critical exponents are
rather small. While for most natural power-law distributions critical exponents are around
µ ≈ 2, here we estimate exponents that are clearly below two, µ < 2, indicating a very broad
distribution for which in the absence of an upper bound the mean value diverges.

Temporal development during the pandemic spread

While the present analysis considers the distribution of case numbers at a temporal snapshot, in reality the pandemic is a dynamic process successively invading countries worldwide.
In Fig. 2 we investigate the temporal development of the COVID-19 distribution. The figure
shows that the country-level distribution of confirmed cases is formed already within a few
weeks from the start of the outbreak and remains roughly stationary over the considered
time interval of 75 days. A closer inspection (see inset in Fig. 2b) reveals that the critical
exponents in fact are not constant, but in general are decreasing functions of time, indicating
that the case distributions tend to broaden over the course of the pandemic.
Fig. 2b further investigates the spatial spread of COVID-19 across countries worldwide
more systematically. The figure plots the number of countries that were invaded by the
coronavirus (i.e., having the first confirmed COVID-19 case) at a particular day in the time
span from January 22 to April 5, 2020. On January 22, the first entry in the database,
six countries (China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, US) were already invaded by
the virus. From this day, within roughly two months the pandemic spread to nearly every
country in the world.
Interestingly, the invasion speed was not constant. Instead Fig. 2b clearly indicates two
broad modes in the arrival time distribution. A first group of countries was invaded by the
disease in the end of January. In the first three weeks of February nearly no new arrivals
were reported. Starting from February 24, a second wave of invasions appeared which lasted
until end of March, after which the number of new arrivals began to fall again, probably
7

reflecting the fact that the pandemic had reached basically all countries of the world. As of
April 5, a total 185 countries were invaded by the coronavirus.
There are several possible reasons why the disease arrival is not more evenly distributed.
One explanation for the bimodal shape is related to the lockdown of airline transportation
in China in the end of January 2020. According to this hypothesis, after the first pandemic
bubble in January, the further spread of the pandemic came to a temporary standstill with
the onset of travel restrictions, only to resurface in a second wave, starting end of February.
Alternatively, it may be that many arrivals of the virus in countries all over the world
simply went undetected during the first weeks of February and were detected only later
with the increasing awareness and increased testing. This hypothesis is corroborated by the
observation that end of February is also the time when the first PCR based tests became
available. In general, the strong irregularity in the arrival time distribution points to the
high level of stochasticity of the worldwide spreading process.

Mechanistic explanation of the power-law distribution

Fig. 2 would suggest that the temporal development of the pandemic is characterized by
two complementary processes: the successive invasion of more and more countries and the
increasing number of cases within each affected country. Here we argue that the emergence
of the power-law distribution could be related to the concurrent ’superposition’ of these two
processes. Thereby, on a large geographic scale, the pandemic is driven by the spread of
the virus in the network of interconnected countries. On a small scale, case numbers are
snowballing within each country, once it has been invaded, thereby further increasing the
epidemic imbalance due to different arrival times between countries.
In the simplest approximation, at the begin of the pandemic both of these processes
developed exponentially in time. A straightforward calculation shows that the combination
of the two exponential processes generically yields a truncated power-law distribution in
the number of cases in countries: Consider an epidemic outbreak that started (the first case
reported in a country) at time t = 0. We are interested in the case distribution at time t > 0.
Let us first assume that at this day the probability for a country to have been invaded by
the virus at some former time τ grows exponential in τ with spreading rate s,
P (τ ) ∼ esτ ,
8

0 ≤ τ ≤ t.

(2)

This exponential growth in the geographic distribution of the pandemic would be the expectation if one modeled the spread in a network where nodes are countries (neglecting
saturation when the pandemic has reached most countries). Note, that the distribution is
truncated from two sides because arrivals of the disease can only have occurred after the
start of the pandemic, τ ≥ 0, and in the past, τ ≤ t.
Second, we assume that in each country the number of confirmed cases has grown exponentially with the time since invasion t − τ with growth rate r (neglecting containment
measures and saturation after the epidemic peak)
n(t) ∼ er(t−τ ) .

(3)

Combining these two equations, the probability distribution of confirmed cases P (n) can be
calculated as (see [27])
P (n) = P (τ )

esτ
dτ
∼ −rτ ∼ n−(1+s/r) ,
dn
e

with 1 ≤ n ≤ nmax

(4)

which is a truncated power-law with critical exponent
s
µ=1+ .
r

(5)

Thus, the critical exponent is simply determined by the ratio of large-scale to small-scale
growth rates. In the symmetric case that both growth rates are identical, s = r, we would
expect a power law with µ = 2. In the limiting case that the large-scaling spreading process
is linear in time, s = 0, we obtain a border-line distribution with critical exponent µ = 1.
Note, that from the truncation of τ in the arrival time distribution, Eq. (2), the admissible
range of case numbers in the power-law distribution Eq. (4) necessarily is restricted between
the lower bound n = 1 (the epidemic prevalence in a newly invaded country) and the cut-off
value nmax ∼ ert (the epidemic prevalence at time t in the country with the first confirmed
case) - justifying the observation of a truncated power-law in the empirical data as shown
in Fig. 1.
Obviously, this simple theory far from accurately describes a real-word pandemic. First
of all, the theory is valid only in the initial phase of the pandemic, while both geographical
spread and within-country epidemic growth are still exponential. As soon as saturation
processes set in, the derivation of the power law breaks down. Next, as shown in Fig. 2b the
arrival time distribution during the COVID-19 pandemic is not exponential, as discussed
9

above. In gross oversimplification we may nevertheless fit an exponential function P (t) ∼ est
through the data, yielding an ’average’ spreading rate of s = 0.03 d−1 (black dashed line in
Fig. 2b). Finally, epidemic growth rates during the COVID-19 pandemic have not been not
identical in all countries (even in the initial stages). They have also not remained constant
in time, but in most countries have fallen in the course of the epidemic. Furthermore, most
countries were invaded multiple times, leading to different epidemic foci within countries.
Neglecting all these observations, for the sake of argument, let us assume an average doubling
time of case numbers of T1/2 = 3.5 d in all countries, yielding an exponential growth rate of
r = log(2)/T1/2 = 0.2 d−1 and a maximal case number of nmax = e0.2∗60 = 1.6 · 105 after 60
days. Then, according to our simple theory Eq. (5) we would expect a critical exponent of
µ = 1 + 0.03/0.2 ≈ 1.15, in rather good agreement to the fitted exponents in Fig. 1.

Results from a meta-population model

To test the theory of the previous section, we developed a dual-scale meta-population
model (see Methods). The first level describes the large-scale stochastic spread of the virus
in a network of N interconnected countries. The second level describes the small-scale
increase in case numbers within a country; it is started in each country from the time point
of invasion by the virus and the follows a simple deterministic SIR-dynamics (see Methods).
The motivation for this model design was not to predict the worldwide spread of COVID19, but rather to quantitatively test the emergence of heterogeneous case distributions in a
conceptual model framework that incorporates the ideas from the previous section.
Fig. 3 shows a typical model outcome. The large-scale spreading process is captured
in the arrival time distribution which exhibits a unimodal dependency on time (Fig. 3d).
Correspondingly, the number of invaded countries grows stochastically and roughly follows
a sigmoidal shape. In accord to our theory, Eq. (2), this arrival time distribution starts
to grow exponentially in the build-up phase of the pandemic. The highest invasion rates
occur after about 50 days, while after a simulation time of 80 days 196 out of the N = 200
countries are already invaded by the virus.
Combining the large-scale and small-scale model components allows to simulate the epidemic prevalence in each country as a function of time. Fig. 3a,b shows the resulting distribution of cases and deaths after a simulation time of 62 days (vertical red line in Fig. 3d).
10

Again, the distributions are well characterized by a truncated power-law. Comparison with
Fig. 1 shows that the model is able to describe the characteristics of the empirical distribution of COVID-19 cases rather well. The log-likelihood estimation of the critical exponents
yields values of µ̂C = 1.18 ± 0.01 and µ̂D = 1.40 ± 0.06. These exponents can be compared
to our theory Eq. (5). From Fig. 3d we estimate a spatial spreading rate of s = 0.037 d−1
in the build-up phase of the pandemic. The initial growth rate of infected in the SIR-model
equals r = 0.23 d−1 (see Methods). Thus, according to Eq. (5) we would expect a critical
exponent of µ = 1 + 0.037/0.23 = 0.16, in good agreement to the estimated value from the
numerical simulation.

We want to note that the nearly ideal power-law scaling in the case distribution holds only
in the initial phase of the pandemic and is lost when the spatial spreading starts to saturate.
This can be seen in the simulated case distribution P (n) for different time instances (Fig. 3c).
While P (n) remains roughly stationary for the first 50 to 60 days of the simulation, a first
plateau begins to emerge at the left end of the distribution for larger times. This plateau
reflects the fact that when the number of newly invaded countries is reduced, these countries
with just a few cases are missing in the left end of the case distribution (reminiscent to the
behavior exhibited in the empirical case distribution, Fig. 2a). Additionally, the estimated
critical exponents exponents are decaying in time (Fig. 3d inset), similar to that of the
empirical data (Fig. 2b inset). Thus, the first sign that the outbreak has reached most
countries in the network is the reduction in the scaling range and a simultaneous broadening
of the case distribution. Eventually, in the limit of large time, when the epidemic has
come to an end in every country, scaling is lost and the distribution of cases must converge
towards a delta function P (n) = δ(n − f Npop ), with f the fraction of susceptible out of
a population of Npop individuals in a country that will be infected (or it would approach
the country size distribution in a meta-population with heterogeneously distributed country
sizes). Interestingly, in our numerical simulations, we still obtained power-law distribution
when the contact rate β was set to a large value, so that the dynamics within a country
rapidly reach a stationary state. In this case, with increasing β (and thus increasing initial
epidemic growth rates r) the critical exponents tended to µ → 1.
11

DISCUSSION

It is well known from the literature (e.g., [11, 27]) that caution is in order when trying
to identify power-law distributions in real data and, in particular, that a straight line in a
double-logarithmic plot does not suffice to prove the existence of a power law distribution.
For this reason, the aim of this study is not to prove that the COVID-19 case distribution
is a perfect power-law, an undertaking that would require sophisticated statistical analysis
and a much larger sample size [11]. We also do not intend to rule-out other likely candidate
distributions (e.g., log-normal or stretched exponential distributions). Instead, our claim is
merely to demonstrate that the empirical data are highly consistent with the hypothesis that
the number of reported cases are taken from a truncated power-law distribution of the form
Eq. (1).
Nevertheless, the scaling relations in the distributions shown in Figs. 1 are remarkably
constant over the whole range of case numbers, stretching several orders of magnitude with
no obvious signs of saturation for either the range of small or large case numbers. One
might argue that the bend in the cumulative distribution function is a sign that the growth
in some countries (e.g., China, Korea) had already become sub-exponential. However, this
is contradicted by the observation that a similar bend is also exhibited by the cumulative
distribution function obtained from the meta-population model (Fig. 3 and). Thus, the most
likely explanation is that the case distribution follows a truncated power-law (see also Fig. 5),
suggesting the hypothesis that the spatial distribution of COVID-19 cases is a fractal [18].
This is further corroborated by our simple theory which provides a mechanistic explanation
for why we would a expect a truncated power-law in the first place.
Our finding of power-law distributions in the number of reported cases has important
consequences for epidemiology. Most notably, the small values of the estimated critical
power-law exponents are related to the strong inequality of case numbers that was frequently
observed all over the world in the initial phase of the COVID-19 outbreak. Following a
power law distribution means that this pattern prevails even as numbers grew and the scale
of infection expanded globally. In particular, during the course of the pandemic, most cases
were reported to have occurred in a few countries, sometimes even a single country - the
so-called epicenters of the pandemic. The distribution of cases within countries followed a
similar pattern. Often COVID-19 was peaking in a few localized foci (local regions or cities),
12

while other parts of the country at the same time had experienced only a moderate number
of cases. Our theory provides a mechanistic explanation why this might have been the case.
A graphical representation for the inequality of a distribution is given by the Lorenz curve
[27] which in the case of the COVID-19 case distribution is a plot of the fraction of the total
number of confirmed cases in dependence of the fraction of the most affected countries. This
is shown in the Appendix Fig. 7 for the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and confirmed
deaths on 22 March 2020. The Lorenz curve shows that on this day 95.7% of confirmed cases
and 97.6% of the confirmed deaths had been reported in the 20% most affected countries
(while the top 5% most affected countries had accumulated 82.3% of all confirmed cases
and 84.4% of all confirmed deaths). With 81,435 out of 336,953 confirmed cases on that
day China alone had accumulated a fraction of 24% of all cases. The two most affected
countries, China and Italy, together had accumulated a fraction of 41% of the worldwide
reported cases.
This inequality can also be measured by the Gini-coefficient G [16], which ranges between
G = 0 for perfect equality, i.e., all countries having the same number of cases, and G =
1, corresponding to maximal inequality, where all cases appear in a single country. For
the distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases on March 22 (Fig. 1a,b) we obtain a Ginicoefficient of G = 0.92 and for the number of confirmed death of G = 0.94. These large
values are a direct consequence of the small critical exponents of the estimated power-law
distributions. In fact, for an unbounded power-law distribution with µ < 2 one would
theoretically expect a Gini-coefficient of G = 1 [27].
The emergence of power-law distributions with a small critical exponent and the associated inequality of the distribution, with Gini coefficients close to one is also observed in the
developed meta-population model. Consequently, also in the model case numbers are mostly
concentrated in a few countries. In the simulations, these epicenters of the pandemic, i.e., the
countries with most cases, are always the countries in which the diseases originated or which
were first invaded by the virus. In other words, the prevalence rank order among countries
remains unchanged during the course of the pandemic. This is akin to the "rich-get-richer
process" or "first-mover-advantage" [28, 35], a well-studied process to generate power-law
distributions. In the real COVID-19 pandemic, this was not the case. During the begin of
the pandemic most cases were observed in China, later the "leading role" changed next to
Italy and finally to the USA. This reflects different mitigation strategies and circumstances
13

in different countries, a factor that is not considered in the simple model. Nevertheless,
despite these changes in the rank order, the distribution of cases in the empirical data was
always closely represented by a power-law.
We would like to remark that the available database only provides information on the
reported COVID-19 cases in each country. In all likelihood, the real number of cases will
be much larger. Not much is known about the reporting rates, but first estimates indicate
that a substantial fraction (possible 86%) of infections might go undetected [23]. Reporting
rates probably vary strongly between countries and may change in time with the awareness
of national health institutions and available testing capabilities. Further uncertainties arise
because the criteria by which a person is classified as active case (and even more so for being
classified as recovered) vary between countries and not uncommonly have been modified
during the course of the pandemic within a country.
Remarkably, we obtained power-law distributions in the absolute number of cases in each
country. At first guess, one might have expected such scaling only after case numbers have
been normalized by population sizes. Our preliminary investigations show that such normalized case numbers become even more unequally distributed, with even smaller estimated
values of the critical exponent, and the distributed values do not line-up any more so well on a
straight line on a double logarithmic plot. Thus ’folding’ the distribution of population sizes
over the COVID-19 case distribution does not flatten, but rather tends to further increase,
the inequality of the resulting distribution. This indicates that absolute (non-normalized)
case numbers may be the natural variables to describe the patterns of the pandemic in its
initial stage. In all likelihood, the role of country sizes and population numbers will become
increasingly important with the further spread of the pandemic.
We have shown that a simple conceptual model yields an accurate description of the
COVID-19 prevalence distribution in the initial phase of the pandemic. This is remarkable
in that many important epidemiological aspects of the spreading process are not captured by
the model. Most notably, the model does not neither take into account variability in country sizes, population numbers, or testing rates, heterogeneity of intra- and inter-country
connectivity, as well as the corresponding changes due to social distancing, lock-down measures, closing of airline connections and shut-down of borders. These simplifications leave
much room for future investigations and model improvements. Obvious model improvements
would be to consider a meta-population with heterogeneously distributed country sizes or
14

to make the initial number of infected individuals a random number, as would be a better
description of what happened in many countries.
One basic assumption of the developed model is the separation of the pandemic into
two spatial scales, the large-spatial spread over a rather small number (N < 200) of interconnected countries and the small-scale growth within a population of much larger size
(N = 5 · 107 ). This separation, obviously is somewhat arbitrary. For the virus countries are,
of course, quasi-arbitrary entities. Therefore, it would be important to check whether both
the data analysis (Fig. 1) and the mathematical model are robust to arbitrarily subdividing
or lumping countries. The very similar scaling observed among US counties (Fig. 1c,d) lends
credence to the model’s generality. Similarly, one can readily ascertain that the model result
is not an artifact of artificial lumping. Suppose a virus that is spreading in an all-to-all,
or randomly coupled, network of a number of N · Npop individuals. If we would artificially
subdivide individuals into a small number N of classes (or countries), at the time point
when the disease has spread to all countries, within each country we would still have only
a few cases (of the order of N  Npop ). Thus, the assumed simultaneous spread on both
spatial scales requires a real physical separation in the network structure. It would be an
interesting perspective for future research to study the spread in multi-scale hierarchies or
in more realistic models of interconnected societies.
One important model application would be the simulation of interim COVID-19 lockdown
or containment measures, as were introduced in many countries in the world in March and
April 2020. Such measures might inhibit the increase of case numbers within local regions
(the small-scale part of our theory) but they would not necessarily suppress also the largescale diffusion of infections across regions. Thus, under the guise of suppressed case numbers
during the mitigation period there could be a dangerous "invisible" homogenization in the
spatial distribution of the virus. This would have tremendous implications in a scenario
where the measures are suddenly lifted in many places. In this case our theory would
predict the emergence of a very different case number distribution than shown in Fig. 1.
Instead of the previous power-law distribution resurfacing, the most likely situation would
be the synchronous initiation of increasing in case numbers everywhere. Thus, situations as
they appeared only in the epicenters during the beginning phase of the pandemic could be
the rule in most parts where mitigation measures are lifted. In this sense, the long-tail of
the case distribution, characterized by the many regions with only mild epidemic prevalence,
15

that was observed in the initial phase of the pandemic, could create a false sense of security.
Finally, we would like to remark that the model’s strong simplicity is at the same time a
strength: being rather generic, it should be applicable to very different systems, to describe
the spread of commodities as a process with two spatial scales. The fact that the distribution
of COVID-19 resembles a model where only the initial infection ’counts’ reflects the intrinsic
difficulty in containing epidemics at global and local scales when unilateral measures (e.g.,
travel bans and lockdowns) are impractical or non-enforceable, i.e., where other countries or
regions will step up and continue the spread. Thus, assessing how a well simple dual-scale
model predicts the early spread of epidemics, despite the huge contrasts between countries,
could help identify critical temporal and spatial scales of response in which to mitigate future
epidemic threats.

METHODS
Estimating parameters of a truncated power-law distribution

Assume a truncated power-law (or Pareto) distribution of the random variable n
P (n) = Cn−µ , 1 ≤ n ≤ nmax
(6)
R
(1−µ)
with upper bound nmax . Normalization P (n)dn = 1 yields C = (1 − µ)/(nmax − 1).
The cumulative distribution function reads
Z nmax
(1−µ)
n(1−µ) − nmax
.
(7)
P (n0 )dn0 =
C(n) =
(1−µ)
1 − nmax
n
In the limit nmax → ∞ (a power-law distribution without upper bound) the cumulative
distribution function also follow a power-law C(n) ∼ n1−µ .
A synthetic sample of the distribution (6) can be obtained by the formula
1

 1−µ
ni = 1 − ui (1 − n(1−µ)
max )

(8)

where ui are random numbers taken from a uniform distribution in the range [0, 1]. The
inverse problem is to estimate the parameters of the distribution given a random sample
n(1 , n2 , . . . , nN ) of N data points. The log-likelihood for the distribution Eq.˜(6) can be
defined as [1, 13, 42]
L(µ) =

N
X


ln P (ni ) = N ln

i=1

16

1−µ
(1−µ)

nmax − 1


−µ

N
X
i=1

ln ni .

(9)

Then, an estimator for the cut-off value is obtained by n̂max = max(ni ) [1] and an estimator
µ̂ for the critical exponent is obtained by maximizing L(µ), yielding a standard error [13]
− 21


(µ̂−1)

1
n̂max ln2 n̂max 
1 
−
σ=√ 

2 
(µ̂−1)
N (µ̂ − 1)2
1 − n̂max

.

(10)

In these expressions, the ’hat’ means that we refer to an estimated value. The maximization
of L(µ) must be computed numerically (here we use Brent’s method from the Julia package Optim.jl [26]). In the limit of an unbounded power-law distribution nmax → ∞, the
maximization can be calculated analytically, yielding [27]
!−1
µ̂ = 1 + N

X

ln ni

.

(11)

i

To estimate the distribution P (n) of case numbers that vary over many orders of magnitude, we used a histogram with logarithmic binning. That is, we placed a discrete number
of bins, k, at positions of integer powers of two nk = 2k (i.e., 1,2,4,8,16, etc) and for each
bin counted the number Hk of countries (or US counties) that under the day of investigation
reported a number n of cases that was falling into this bin (nk ≤ n < nk+1 ). To obtain the
probability distribution, the resulting histogram counts were divided by the varying bin sizes
P
P (nk ) = cHk /(nk+1 − nk ) and the normalization constant c fixed so that k P (nk ) = 1. For
visualization we plotted the distribution on double-logarithmic axes, excluding bins without
entries.
To confirm the robustness of the histogram estimation, we also used an alternative algorithm, where we first computed the histogram of log-transformed case numbers ν = log(n)
using equally-spaced bins, which, after normalization, yielded the distribution P̃ (ν). Next,
we used the back-transform P (n) = P̃ (exp(ν))/n to obtain the probability distribution P (n)
of non-logarithmic case numbers. This procedure also yields a distribution with bins that
are equally spaced on a logarithmic scale and and the resulting distributions, shown in the
Appendix Fig. 4, are very similar to that from the logarithmic binning method described
above. We have checked that the resulting distribution is largely independent to the choice
and number of used histogram bins and other numerical parameters.
P
We also computed the cumulative fraction C(n) = N
m=n+1 P (m) of countries with case
number m > n. This was obtained by taking a rank-plot of case numbers and inverting axes,
17

i.e., sorting the array of case numbers in descending order and plotting for each country the
rank as a function of the sorted case number on double-logarithmic axes [27].

The metapopulation model

To describe the spatio-temporal evolution of epidemic prevalence during the course of
a pandemic we developed a conceptual dual-scale meta-population model. The large-scale
model component allows to simulate the spread of the virus in a network of N interconnected
countries. The state of a country is given as a Boolean value, being either invaded by the
virus or non-invaded. The model starts with a single invaded country. The geographic
spread runs in discrete time, each step corresponding to one day of the time-continuous
small-scale model. In each time step, every non-invaded country becomes infected by an
invaded country with probability p. Thus, if at time t a number of m countries have already
been invaded, the probability for a non-invaded country to receive the virus in this time step
equals 1 − (1 − p)m . As soon as a country has been invaded by the virus in this process,
the small-scale model for this country is initiated. Parameter values were taken as follows:
number of countries N = 200 and invasion probability p = 6 · 10−4 .
The small-scale model is time-continuous and deterministically describes the epidemic
dynamics within a country. The model determines the time course of susceptible S, infected
I, recovered R, and dead D from a standard SIR-model [21, 22]

Ṡ = −β

S
S
I, I˙ = β
I − γI, Ṙ = (1 − m)γI, Ḋ = mγI.
Npop
Npop

(12)

Here, Npop is the constant population size in the country, β is the contact rate, 1/γ the
infectious period, and m the case fatality rate. The total number of cases is determined as
C = I + R + D. In the small-scale model countries are simulated independently from each
other and are only coupled by the unique invasion event for each country, which starts the
epidemic growth in that country with initial values S(0) = 5 · 107 , I(0) = 1 and R(0) =
D(0) = 0. All infection state variables in a country are zero before invasion by the virus,
I = R = D = 0. The resulting well-known SIR-dynamics in a single country is shown
in the Appendix Fig. 6. With the chosen parameterization, it takes roughly 80 days until
the epidemic peak is reached. After this time, the assumption of an exponential increase,
Eq. (3), breaks down. Parameter values were taken as follows: country population size
18

Npop = 5 · 107 , case fatality rate m = 0.01, infectious period 1/γ = 6d, and contact rate
β = 0.4d−1 . This yields a growth rate r = β − γ = 0.23d−1 , corresponding to a doubling
time of T1,2 = log(2)/r = 3d and a basic reproduction number R0 = β/γ = 2.4.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Christoph Feenders, Thilo Gross, Alastair Jamieson-Lane, Cora
Kohlmeier, James McLaren, and Alexey Ryabov for helpful comments regarding the
manuscript.

Software and data availability

Code for data analysis and numerical simulations was written in Julia [6]. The differential
equations were solved with the package DifferentialEquations.jl [32], the maximization of the
log-likelihood function with package Optim.jl [26]. The source code of the used algorithms
will be made publicly available at https://github.com/berndblasius/Covid19. The used
data are available at https://github.com/CSSEGISandData.

19

Figure 2.

Temporal development of the COVID-19 pandemic. a) Evolution of the distribution

of confirmed cases per country. The same as Fig.1a, but for six different time instances separated
by 2 weeks (see figure legend) during the pandemic. The inset shows the cumulative number of
countries N · C(n), where N is the total number of countries with confirmed cases at that date.
b) Distribution of arrival times. The histogram shows the number of countries that were invaded
by the virus on a certain day between Jan 22, 2020 and April 5, 2020 (blue bars). Further shown
is an exponential increasing function, exp(st) (black dashed line) with growth rate s = 0.03 d−1 ,
obtained by a least square fit to the histogram during the first 61 days. The inset shows the critical
exponents µ̂C (t) (black) and µ̂D (t) (blue, only shown from 16 February, the first days with at least
5 confirmed deaths), estimated by maximizing the log-likelihood function Eq. (9), as a function of
time. The vertical red line indicates 22 March, the date of the distribution shown in Figs. 1a,b.

20

Figure 3.

Power-law scaling in the meta-population model. (a,b) Same as Fig. 1, but for model

simulations after transient of 62 days. Shown is the estimated probability P (n) (blue lines and
circles) with straight-line fits (black lines) for the simulated cases (a) and deaths (b). Insets show
the cumulative fraction C(n) of countries (blue circles) and the cumulative distribution function
(black lines) of a truncated power-law distribution with cut-off values (a) nmax = 5 · 106 and (b)
nmax = 5 · 104 . (c,d) Same as Fig. 2, showing the spatial spread in the meta-population model.
(c) Evolution of the distribution of cases. as in (a), but for five different time instances separated
by 15 days (see figure legend). (d) Histogram of arrival times, showing the number of countries
that were invaded on a certain day. Simulation time: 80 days. The black dashed line shows an
exponentially increasing function, exp(st) with spreading rate s = 0.037 d−1 , obtained by a least
square fit to the data during the first 62 days. The inset shows the time dependence of the critical
exponents µ̂C (t) (black) and µ̂D (t) (blue) for the distribution of the number of cases and deaths,
estimated by maximizing the log-likelihood function Eq. (9) for all days where at least 5 cases were
reported. The red vertical line indicates day 62, the time of the distribution in (a,b). See Methods
for model description and parameter values.

21

Figure 4.

Alternative calculation of the distribution of COVID-19 case numbers in countries

worldwide and counties in the US. Same as Fig. 1, but for the alternative histogram algorithm,
using a histogram of log-transformed case numbers (see Methods).

22

Figure 5.

Robustness of the algorithm for estimating parameters of a truncated power-law.

The same as Fig. 1 but for 200 random numbers ni that were generated from a truncated powerlaw distribution with µ = 1.2 and cut-off value nmax = 1 · 105 (see Methods). The estimated
distribution roughly follows a straight line on the double-logarithmic plot with equally spaced
bins. Note, that even though only 200 random numbers were drawn, the estimated probabilities
vary over many orders of magnitude (which is numerically possible since in order to compute the
probability distribution, the histogram counts are divided by the variable bin sizes). Log-likelihood
estimation of critical exponent (Methods) yields µ̂ = 1.21 ± 0.01 in good agreement with the
actually used exponent. In contrast, the estimator for an unbound power-law, Eq. (11), yields
µ̂ = 1.28 ± 0.01, strongly overestimating the true exponent. The estimation by a regression line,
yielding µ = 1.24, also is slightly too large. The inset shows that the cumulative fraction is well
described by the cumulative distribution function C(n) of a truncated power law with critical
exponent µ̂ and nmax = 8.4 · 104 , the maximal ni value of the sample.

23

Figure 6.

Simulation of the SIR-model (12) within a country. The plot shows the numerically

obtained values of the total number of cases C (black), the number of susceptible S (green), and the
number of recovered R (blue) on the left axis, as well as the number of infected I (red) and deaths
D (magenta) and the right axis as a function of time. For the used initial values of S(0) = 5 · 107 ,
I(0) = 1 and R(0) = D(0) = 0, the epidemic peak is reached after 77 days. See methods for
parameter values.

24

Figure 7. Lorenz curves, depicting the inequality in the distribution of confirmed COVID-19 cases.
The plots show the fraction of the number of confirmed cases (a) and of the number of confirmed
deaths (b) as a function of the fraction of most affected countries on March 22, 2020 (compare
to Fig. 1). This inequality corresponds to a Gini-coefficient of G = 0.92 for the distribution of
confirmed cases and of G = 0.94 for the number of confirmed deaths.

25

[1] Aban IB, Meerschaert MM, Panorska AK (2006) Parameter estimation for the truncated Pareto
distribution. Journal American Statistical Association 10: 270-7.
[2] Arenas A, Cota W, Gomez-Gardenes JG, Gomez S, Granell C, Matamalas JT, Soriano D,
Steinegger B (2020) A mathematical model for the spatiotemporal epidemic spreading of
COVID19. medRxiv 2020.03.21.20040022.
[3] Bak P, Tang C, Wiesenfeld K (1987) Self-organized criticality: An explanation of the 1/f noise.
Physical Review Letters 59: 381.
[4] Barabasi AL, Albert R, (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286: 509-512.
[5] Bernoulli, D. (1760) M’em. Math. Phys. Acad. R. Sci. Paris, 1?45
[6] Bezanson J, Edelman A, Karpinski S, Shah VB (2017) Julia: A fresh approach to numerical
computing. SIAM Review 59: 65-98.
[7] Blasius B, Tönjes R. (2009) Zipf’s law in the popularity distribution of chess openings. Physical
Review Letters 103: 218701.
[8] Brockmann D, Helbing D (2013) The hidden geometry of complex, network-driven contagion
phenomena. Science 342: 1337-42.
[9] Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova M, Merler S, Piontti AP, Rossi L, Sun
K, Viboud C, Xiong X, Yu H, Halloran ME, Longini IM, Vespignani A (2020) The effect of
travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak. medRxiv
2020.02.09.20021261. Science eaba9757. DOI: 10.1126/science.aba9757.
[10] Dong E, Du H, Gardner L (2020) An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in
real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020 Feb 19. Doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1
[11] Clauset A, Shalizi CR, Newman ME (2009). Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM
Review 51:661-703.
[12] Colizza V, Barrat A, Barthelemy M, Vespignani A (2006) The role of the airline transportation
network in the prediction and predictability of global epidemics. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 103: 2015-20.
[13] Deluca A, Corral A (2013) Fitting and goodness-of-fit test of non-truncated and truncated
power-law distributions. Acta Geophysica 6: 1351-94.

26

[14] Ferguson NM, Laydon D, Nedjati-Gilani G, Imai N, Ainslie K, Baguelin M, Bhatia
S, Boonyasiri A, Cucunuba Z, Cuomo-Dannenburg G, Dighe A (2020) Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand.
preprint, Doi:10.25561/77482.
[15] Gilbert M, Pullano G, Pinotti F, Valdano E, Poletto C, Boelle PY, D’Ortenzio E, Yazdanpanah Y, Eholie SP, Altmann M, Gutierrez B (2020) Preparedness and vulnerability of African
countries against importations of COVID-19: a modelling study. The Lancet.
[16] Gini C (1912) Variabilita e mutabilita. Reprinted in Memorie di metodologica statistica (Ed.
Pizetti E, Salvemini, T). Rome: Libreria Eredi Virgilio Veschi.
[17] Gutenberg B, Richter CF (1944) Frequency of earthquakes in California. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 34: 185-8.
[18] Bunde A, Havlin S (2012) Fractals and disordered systems. Springer Science & Business Media.
[19] Hufnagel L, Brockmann D, Geisel T (2004) Forecast and control of epidemics in a globalized
world. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101: 15124-9.
[20] Kaluza P, Kölzsch A, Gastner MT, Blasius B (2010) The complex network of global cargo ship
movements. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 7: 1093-103.
[21] Keeling MJ, Rohani P (2008) Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals. Princeton
University Press, Princeton. OCLC: ocn163616681.
[22] Kermack WO, McKendrick AG (1927) A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings Royal Society of London A 115: 700-21.
[23] Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, Shaman J (2020) Substantial undocumented
infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science. 2020
Mar 16.
[24] Maier BF, Brockmann D (2020) Effective containment explains subexponential growth in recent confirmed COVID-19 cases in China. Science, Apr 8.
[25] Mitzenmacher M (2004) A brief history of generative models for power law and lognormal
distributions. Internet Mathematics 1: 226-51.
[26] Mogensen PK, Riseth AN (2018) Optim: A mathematical optimization package for Julia.
Journal of Open Source Software 3: 615. doi: 10.21105/joss.00615.
[27] Newman ME (2005) Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf’s law. Contemporary Physics
46: 323-351.

27

[28] Newman ME (2009) The first-mover advantage in scientific publication. EPL (Europhysics
Letters) 86: 68001.
[29] Pareto V (1964) Cours d’economie politique. Librairie Droz.
[30] Pullano G, Pinotti F, Valdano E, Boelle PY, Poletto C, Colizza V (2020) Novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) early-stage importation risk to Europe, January 2020. Eurosurveillance: 25.
[31] DeSolla Price DJ (1965). Networks of scientific papers. Science 149: 510-515.
[32] Rackauckas C, Nie Q (2017) DifferentialEquations. jl ? a performant and feature-rich ecosystem
for solving differential equations in Julia. Journal of Open Research Software May 25;5(1).
[33] Redner S (1998) How popular is your paper? An empirical study of the citation distribution.
European Physical Journal B 4:131-4.
[34] Seebens H, Gastner MT, Blasius B (2013) The risk of marine bioinvasion caused by global
shipping. Ecology Letters 6: 782-90.
[35] Simon HA, (1955). On a class of skew distribution functions. Biometrika 42: 425-440.
[36] Sornette D (2003) Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences. Springer, Heidelberg, 2nd edition.
[37] Wang C, Liu L, Hao X, Guo H, Wang Q, Huang J, He N, Yu H, Lin X, Pan A, Wei S (2020)
Evolving Epidemiology and Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions on the Outbreak of
Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China. medRxiv. 2020. Doi: 10.1101/2020.03.03.20030593
[38] Woolley-Meza O, Thiemann C, Grady D, Lee JJ, Seebens H, Blasius B, Brockmann D (2011)
Complexity in human transportation networks: a comparative analysis of worldwide air transportation and global cargo-ship movements. The European Physical Journal B 84: 589-600.
[39] World

Health

Organization,

Coronavirus

disease

(COVID-2019)

situation

reports;

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/
[40] Van den Broeck W, Gioannini C, Goncalves B, Quaggiotto M, Colizza V, Vespignani A (2011)
The GLEaMviz computational tool, a publicly available software to explore realistic epidemic
spreading scenarios at the global scale. BMC Infectious Diseases 11: 37.
[41] Viswanathan GM, Afanasyev V, Buldyrev SV, Murphy EJ, Prince PA, Stanley HE (1996)
Levy flight search patterns of wandering albatrosses. Nature 381:413-5.
[42] White EP, Enquist BJ, Green JL (2008) On estimating the exponent of power?law frequency
distributions. Ecology 89: 905-12.
[43] Yule GU (1925). A mathematical theory of evolution based on the conclusions of Dr. J. C.
Willis. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London B 213: 21-87.

28

[44] Zipf GK (1949) Human behavior and the principle of least effort. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.

29

