Review of strategies for the reuse of N95 and N99 respiratory masks during the
COVID-19 pandemic
Hans Joachim Schöpe and Miriam Klopotek
Institute for Applied Physics, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
Corresponding author e-mail: hans-joachim.schoepe@uni-tuebingen.de
The COVID-19 pandemic presents a strain of unprecedented scale on health systems
around the world. We are currently witnessing catastrophic bottlenecks in the supply of
essential medical products as a result of major disturbances in the global economic system.
In addition to medical ventilators, personal protective equipment is in extreme shortage and,
hence, currently in the spotlight of the media. N95 and N99 (European FFP2 and FFP3)
respiratory masks play an especial role. In order to reliably protect medical personnel, and
thus to contain the spread of the pandemic, it is essential to provide at least N95 respiratory
masks (FFRs). The WHO estimates that about 89 million FFRs are needed each month to
combat the COVID-19 pandemic – with such estimates rising [1]. Meeting this demand
implies not only a ~40% increase in the global production of FFRs, but also ultra-rapid
delivery of the masks to hospitals, given the current situation. Both are rather improbable.
One way to relax this precarious situation is to reuse existing masks several times. Of
course, they would thereunto have to be decontaminated after each use. This procedure is
not at all ubiquitous in the medical system, as FFRs are intended for single use by
manufacturers. However, in recent years the scientific literature has laid out various
possibilities to decontaminate FFRs and reuse them several times [2,3,4,5,6,7]. All these
methods must meet the following requirements: the masks must be decontaminated, the
effectiveness of the mask must not be damaged, the user must not be endangered in any
other way (e.g. poisoning) and the masks should be ready for reuse quickly. In addition, the
methods should avoid the usage of disinfectants, as these are in short supply in the current
situation.
Some of the methods examined in the above-cited articles meet these criteria. In the
following we classify these methods according to their mode of operation and the availability
of the corresponding equipment as follows:
1. UVc-radiation (disinfection on an industrial scale using professional UV-sterilization
systems)
2. Heat treatment with moist heat (heat treatment by means of ovens or dryers)
3. Microwave-generated steam (microwave ovens, on-site application with minimum effort)

1

The SARS-CoV-2 virus does not differ dramatically from other viruses in its chemical and
physical resistance. First investigations show that SARS-CoV-2 can be eliminated in a few
minutes with the usual disinfectants, UVc irradiation, or temperatures above 56°C
[8,9,10,11]. The results for the SARS-CoV-2 virus are comparable with those of the more
recent pathogens of the last years (SARS-CoV-1, H1N1, H5N1) [4,6,7,12,13,14,15]. The
table summarizes some of the existing (preliminary) results and compares them directly with
data of the influenza-A pathogen H1N1. The disinfectants used included, among others,
ethanol (75%), hand soap solution (2%), Clorox (10%), acetone and household bleach [8,9].
Disinfection method

SARS-CoV-2

H1N1

Disinfectant

less than 5 min

less than 2 min

Temperature

ca. 15 min at 56°C

5 min at 70°C

ca. 1 min at 70°C
UVc-radiation (256nm)

A few minutes1

A few minutes*

required dose: ~ 1 J/cm2

required dose: ~ 1 J/cm2

Table: Times required to kill the viruses on surfaces using the listed methods.
It is therefore clear that, in principle, the methods described in the literature for FFR
decontamination of H1N1, H5N1 or SARS-CoV-1 can be used successfully in the COVID-19
pandemic with the aim of re-using FFRs several times. In the following, three different
methods are introduced briefly and further procedures are discussed.
1) UV-disinfection
UVc light has been utilized for the sterilization of liquids, gases and solid surfaces since the
middle of the 20th century. It is used widely in the life sciences, but also intensively in the
food industry and for drinking water purification [16]. To decontaminate FFRs, the masks
must be illuminated on both sides with a sufficiently high radiation dose by means of one or
more UVc lamp(s). In the simplest version (e.g. Ref. 4), an 80W UVc lamp with 256nm
wavelength of about 1m length is used for illumination at a distance of 25cm. The
investigations showed that influenza pathogens (H1N1 and H5N1) are removed up to 99.9%
when using a dose of about 1J/cm2. Using this simple set-up, this dose is reached within a
few minutes. The required decontamination dose for SARS-CoV-2 does not differ

1

The irradiation time required to achieve a dose of 1J/cm2 depends on the output power of the UVc light
source and the geometry of the set-up.

2

significantly from that for the influenza pathogens [10]; thus, UV disinfection can be used in a
fully analogous way during the COVID-19 pandemic. The decontamination time can be
reduced massively when using several UVc lamps with higher output power simultaneously,
as in the food industry, and decontamination can be processed in “production line mode” [7].
The UVc disinfection units located in hospitals could be put to use for this purpose: It would
be an on-the-spot solution. Research laboratories often have such facilities, too.
Furthermore, it would be highly desirable to use the existing high-throughput UVc disinfection
systems from other industrial branches (e.g. sterilization of cans or yogurt cups) for FFR
disinfection. To this end, used masks would have to be collected and delivered to an
appropriate company in order to disinfect them on a large scale. The UVc procedure should
disinfect the FFRs from nearly all common bacteria and for a large number of common
viruses [16].
2) Warm moist heat
The germicidal effect of heat is widely known – the addition of moisture accelerates this.
Steam condenses on colder objects until these have reached the temperature of the steam.
To decontaminate FFRs, the masks must be exposed to a warm, humid atmosphere for a
sufficiently long time. Several studies have shown that influenza pathogens (H1N1 and
H5N1) can be removed up to 99.9% using a rather simple procedure [3,4,6]. In one of the
publications, a sealable 6l vessel was filled with 1l of tap water and heated to 65°C in an
oven. The container was then removed from the oven and a respirator mask was positioned
above the water surface using a rack. The container was then closed again and placed back
into the oven for a 20-minute treatment. The samples were then air-dried overnight. This
method can also be used in the COVID-19 pandemic to remove SARS-CoV-2. Upscaling the
method is straightforward. To shorten the drying time, placing the treated masks in a drying
cabinet is useful.
Comment: There is a risk of contaminating the room in which the oven is placed, especially if
the oven has a ventilator when turned on. Hence it is absolutely necessary that the container
within which the mask is placed is sealed!
3) Microwave-generated steam
This method is related to the one above, as it includes steam used for disinfection. Two
different procedures are described in the literature. In the first [3,4,6], two small plastic
containers with perforated surfaces (e.g. storage boxes for pipette tips) are filled with 50ml
tap water and placed side-by-side in a microwave oven. The FFR is placed face-down on the
pipette tip boxes and is then irradiated using a power of 1250 W for 2 minutes. After
treatment, the pipette tip boxes are refilled with fresh tap water and the next FFR is
3

decontaminated. In the second procedure [5], the FFR is placed in a 2l microwave steam
bag, pouring 60ml tap water into it. These microwave bags are commonly used for steam
cooking as well as for disinfecting infant pacifiers or drinking bottles. The bag is sealed and
then irradiated with 1100 W for 90 seconds in a microwave oven. It has been shown that
these simple procedures can remove 99.9% of influenza pathogens. Limitations: These
methods are not easily applicable to all FFRs. If metal parts are installed in the mask, then
there is a risk that the mask could be damaged due to strong local heat generation. It would
be possible to remove the metal part (nasal clamp) temporarily given this can be done easily.
The methods listed have been known for rather long and have been published in scientific
journals about ten years ago. They offer the possibility to decontaminate the currently most
urgently needed FFRs, and thus to use them repeatedly. Furthermore, modifications are
possible for the listed processes. The following example demonstrates a modification that is
realizable in a timely manner and uses devices available on the market without major,
additional developments: For disinfection with moist heat, standard heat pump tumble dryers
for laundry could also be used, as many models work at a temperature of approximately
655°C. The FFRs are first moistened with tap water and then dried in the tumble dryer. A
drying temperature above 56°C ensures that SARS-CoV-2 viruses are removed, but the
temperature is low enough to avoid damage to the FFRs. This would be the case for vented
or condenser tumble dryers, as their working temperature is around 100°C. Professional
laundries – some of which are affiliated with hospitals – may have suitable dryers and could
carry out the disinfection of a larger quantity of FFRs directly on site.
A recent technical bulletin from the FFR manufacturer 3M [17] indicates that treatment similar
to that described above may compromise the mask fitting: The nosefoam may deform and
the elastic straps may lose elasticity. Similar observations were reported in the investigations
cited above, where a strong dependence on the particular mask model, however, was
indicated. There is agreement among the investigations that the filtering function of the FFRs
is not compromised at all after such treatments. To restore the fitting function, the nosefoam
and straps could be replaced after the disinfection procedure.
In this paper, we reviewed strategies for disinfecting FFP2, FFP3, N95 and N99 respiratory
masks (FFRs) for their reuse based on the existing scientific literature. These methods are
intended as emergency solutions only – for situations where there is a critical shortage of
the single-use respiratory masks. The methods described here can be done on-site within
e.g. a hospital or a medical office, given there is sufficient equipment available, or up-scaled
with the help of existing infrastructure in the industry. In particular, two of the described the
4

methods (warm moist heat and microwave-generated steam) require essentially standard
kitchen appliances. All three methods were shown to be successful for disinfecting masks
from pathogens. The method using UVc radiation seems to offer a very robust and very
effective solution, but requires more technical skills to calculate the correct irradiation time to
achieve the required dose.
The strategies reviewed in this work could help ease the current precarious situation globally
– and thus save lives.
Disclaimer: The methods and procedures outlined here are intended for “self-help” in
emergency situations only and are not certified in any way. Anyone choosing to execute on
these methods does so at his/her own risk.
It would be highly desirable for a governing instance to validate or officially recommend any
of these methods for the time of the pandemic.

References
1

World Health Organization: Shortage of personal protective equipment endangering health

workers worldwide (03.03.2020), https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/03-03-2020-shortageof-personal-protective-equipment-endangering-health-workers-worldwide (accessed March
2020)
2

Dennis J. Viscusi, Michael S. Bergman, Benjamin C. Eimer and Ronald E. Shaffer:

Evaluation of Five Decontamination Methods for Filtering Facepiece Respirators, Annals of
Occupational Hygiene 53, 815–827 (2009)
3

Michael S. Bergman et al.: Evaluation of Multiple (3-Cycle) Decontamination Processing for

Filtering Facepiece Respirators, Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics 5,33-41 (2010)
4

Brian K. Heimbuch et al.: A pandemic influenza preparedness study: Use of energetic

methods to decontaminate filtering facepiece respirators contaminated with H1N1 aerosols
and droplets, American Journal of Infection Control 39, e1-9 (2011)
5

Edward M. Fisher, Jessica L. Williams, Ronald E. Shaffer: Evaluation of Microwave Steam

Bags for the Decontamination of Filtering Facepiece Respirators, PLOS ONE 6, e18585
(2011)
6

Michael B. Lore et al.: Effectiveness of Three Decontamination Treatments against

Influenza Virus Applied to Filtering Facepiece Respirators, Annals of Occupational Hygiene
56, 92–101 (2012)
7

Devin Mills et al.: Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation of influenza-contaminated N95 filtering

facepiece respirators, American Journal of Infection Control 46, e49-e55 (2018)
5

8

World Health Organization: First data on stability and resistance of SARS coronavirus

compiled by members of WHO laboratory network (30.03.2020),
https://www.who.int/csr/sars/survival_2003_05_04/en/ (accessed March 2020)
9

Alex W.H. Chin et al.: Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in different environmental conditions,

medRxiv preprint, doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036673
10

Kyle J. Card et al.: UV Sterilization of Personal Protective Equipment with Idle Laboratory

Biosafety Cabinets During the COVID-19 Pandemic, medRxiv preprint, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489
11

https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-registration/list-n-disinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2

(accessed March 2020)
12

Miriam E.R. Darnell, Kanta Subbara, Stephen M. Feinstone, Deborah R. Taylor:

Inactivation of the coronavirus that induces severe acute respiratory syndrome, SARS-CoV,
Journal of Virological Methods 121, 85–91 (2004)
13

Eun Kyo Jeong, BS, Jung Eun Bae, BS, and In Seop Kim: Inactivation of influenza A virus

H1N1 by disinfection process, American Journal of Infection Control 38, 354 (2010)
14

Neeltje van Doremalen et al.: Aerosol and surface stability of HCoV-19 (SARS-CoV-1 2)

compared to SARS-CoV-1, medRxiv preprint, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.09.20033217
15

Wai Szeto, W. C. Yam, Haibao Huang and Dennis Y. C. Leung, The efficacy of vacuum-

ultraviolet light disinfection of some common environmental pathogens, BMC Infectious
Diseases 20, 127 (2020)
16

Wladyslaw Kowalski: Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation Handbook, ISBN 978-3-642-01998-

2, Springer-Verlag 2009
https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/1816576O/disinfection-of-disposable-respiratorstechnical-bulletin.pdf (accessed March 2020)
17

6

