Modelling the role of media induced fear conditioning in mitigating
post-lockdown COVID-19 pandemic: perspectives on India
Spandan Kumar1† , Bhanu Sharma2† , Vikram Singh3∗
1

School of Social Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, India.
2

Department of Biophysics, University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, India.
3

Centre for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,

arXiv:2004.13777v2 [q-bio.PE] 25 May 2020

Central University of Himachal Pradesh, Dharamshala, India.
Abstract Several countries that have been successful in constraining the severity of COVID19 pandemic via “lockdown” are now considering to slowly end it, mainly because of enormous socio-economic side-effects. An abrupt ending of lockdown can increase the basic
reproductive number and undo everything; therefore, carefully designed exit strategies are
needed to sustain its benefits post upliftment. To study the role of fear conditioning on mitigating the spread of COVID-19 in post-lockdown phase, in this work, we propose an age and
social contact structures dependent Susceptible, Feared, Exposed, Infected and Recovered
(SFEIR) model. Simulating the SFEIR model on Indian population with fear conditioning
via mass media (like, television, community radio, internet and print media) along with
positive reinforcement, it is found that increase in fraction of feared people results in significant decrease in the growth of infected population. The present study suggests that,
during post-lockdown phase, media induced fear conditioning in conjunction with closure of
schools for about one more year can serve as an important non-pharmaceutical intervention
to substantially mitigate this pandemic in India. The proposed SFEIR model, by quantifying
the influence of media in inducing fear conditioning, underlies the importance of community
driven changes in country specific mitigation of COVID-19 spread in post-lockdown phase.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Originating in the Wuhan city of China with its first case reported in December 2019 [1], the
recently emerged pandemic COVID-19 due to novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus has claimed more than 340,000 human lives worldwide as of 25th May, 2020
[2]. By now, this pandemic has severely affected various countries across the globe forcing more
than one-third of the world population into a condition of lockdown, i.e. suppression of people
gatherings in any form that includes shutting down of schools, workplaces and public transports
etc.. Although, lockdown is playing a very important role in controlling the number of infections
and mitigating the epidemic, it is not an economically viable solution, and therefore can not be
sustained for long. Designing of strategies about the implementable exit scenarios and developing
a blueprint of the social life in post-lockdown phase, until vaccine or treatment becomes available,
∗

Electronic address: vikramsingh@cuhimachal.ac.in, †Equal contribution

2
is the utmost need of the hour [3, 4].
Human behaviour is thought to play an important role in spread of a pandemic [5, 6]. One of
the important factors that affect behavior is fear [7]. Modelling studies has shown that fear has
significant effect on reducing the severity of a pandemic [8–10]. Fear has been shown to directly
correlate with increase in social distancing behaviour as well as taking more precautions [11, 12].
It is reported that both social interactions and anxiety levels are controlled by projections from
basolateral amygdala to medial prefrontal cortex [13]. Inhibition of this projection via opto-genetics
is found to decrease anxiety levels and increase social interactions in mice. Thus, information
based fear conditioning can serve as an important method in conjunction with other methods
that can increase social distancing and precautionary behaviour. Fear conditioning, a subtype of
classical conditioning [14], is defined as a relationship developed between aversive events and an
environmental stimuli by an individual [15, 16]. For example, in case of COVID-19, an individual
can be considered fear conditioned if he establishes relationship between illness and touching of
surfaces in public place. Thus, he starts considering exposure to surfaces in public place as an
exposure to virus itself. For fear conditioning to happen, an unconditional stimuli (exposure to
virus in the current example) is to be paired with a conditional stimuli (touching surfaces in
public space). Once this learning has taken place, conditional stimuli (surfaces in public place)
will also elicit the same response in an individual even in the absence of unconditional stimuli. If
the individual is subjected to conditional stimuli without unconditional stimuli for long time, the
learned behavior starts diminishing. Therefore, a term “fear-time” is defined as the time it takes
for behaviour due to fear conditioning to get extinct. Operant conditioning is defined as a kind of
learning in which a behavior is enhanced or reduced by methods of punishment or reinforcement.
Positive reinforcement happens when a person is rewarded for a certain behavior and is thereby
encouraged to repeat the same behavior [17]. For example, in case of COVID-19, if an individual
having a belief that ‘touching surfaces in public places’ is wrong is rewarded can increase the
fear-time.
In this work, we propose a model to examine the role of fear in managing the COVID-19
spread in post-lockdown phase, with media induced fear conditioning in conjunction with operant
conditioning as one such prospective method. Fear, in the present work, is defined as learning of
relationship between COVID-19 (aversive event) and the various ways through which it can spread
(stimuli). Fear can be learned by individuals through various means, like, seeing a person who
is suffering from COVID-19, but the fastest way for such conditional learning to spread across
population is through mass media [18]. Media influence plays a significant role in spreading useful
information through various sources, like, television, community radio, internet and print media
(such as, newspapers, magazines) etc., resulting in changed behaviour of a community [19], thereby
influencing the progression of a pandemic [20, 21]. It has been showed that if media publicity is
focussed on guiding people’s behaviour, it can have significant effect on spread of pandemic [22].
Individuals who interact quite frequently have stronger connection to influence others, and pass on

3
the similar information among them [23]. Therefore, the model developed in this paper examines
the media induced fear on epidemic progression by hypothesizing that inducing fear conditioning
and increasing its fear time by operant conditioning via mass media (television, community radio,
internet and print media) will have a negative effect on progression of COVID-19. As we are
only considering positive reinforcement; three terms, operant conditioning, reward, and positive
reinforcement have been used interchangeably throughout this paper.
Rest of the paper is organized as follows: in the Methods section, we detail the design principles of proposed age- and contact-structure dependent SFEIR (Susceptible, Feared, Exposed,
Infected and Recovered) model and discuss about the data sources, assumptions made as well
as the simulation protocol. In the Results section, simulation outcomes of the developed SFEIR
model incorporating fear conditioning via mass media in Indian population are presented and their
implications are elaborated. We first compare the simulations of SFEIR model with the classical
SEIR models (not having fear conditioning) with or without lockdown, and then study the effect of
varying the impact of fear conditioning and reward parameters. We then study the effect of school
closure and increased fear conditioning. Finally, we conclude with the discussions and potential
policy perspectives of the present work on the influence of media on collective psychology of a
community to counter COVID-19 progression in the post-lockdown phase.

II.

METHODS

FIG. 1: Flow diagram of the proposed SFEIR model. It consists of 5 compartments viz,
Susceptible, Feared, Exposed, Infected and Recovered, and in each compartment, people
belonging to all the 16 age groups may exist.

A.

Construction of SFEIR model

To study the effects of fear conditioning via mass media in countering post-lockdown spread of
COVID-19 infections, we have developed an age- and contact-structured Susceptible Feared Ex-

4
posed Infected Recovered (SFEIR) model shown in Fig. 1. A susceptible person can be exposed to
infection either directly or after moving into the fear compartment [10]. Feared individuals are less
social [13] and take more precautions, and therefore will have lower probability of transmission (βF )
as compared to individuals in susceptible group (β). Feared individuals recover from fear with fear
recovery rate γF and move back into susceptible compartment. γF is inversely proportional to fear
time T . Once exposed, the rate of getting infected by pathogen is γE and the rate of recovery is γP .
While formulating the SFEIR model, age- and social contact-structures are incorporated as
detailed in [24, 25]. In the age-structured population, first group consists of individuals of age
(0 − 4) years, second group is of age (5 − 9) years, and so on, till group 16th that consists of
individuals of age (75 − 79) years. It is considered that susceptible individuals can develop fear
through various media platforms, like, television, community radio, internet, print media etc. in
the post-lockdown phase. Considering Si , Fi , Ei , Ii and Ri as the variables representing the number
of individuals belonging to ith age group in Susceptible, Feared, Exposed, Infected and Recovered
compartments, respectively, the generalized age- and social contact-structured SFEIR model is
given as:
dSi
dt
dFi
dt
dEi
dt
dIi
dt
dRi
dt

= −λi Si − µi Si + γF (t)Fi
= µi Si − λFi Fi − γF (t)IFi
(1)

= λi Si + λFi Fi − γE Ei
= γE Ei − γP Ii
= γP Ii

where,
µi =

M
X

κim (t) ∗ ρim (t) ∗ σim (t)

m=1

βF = βF min + (β − βF min )e−µi .(t−t1 )
1
γF =
−t
TC + [r ∗ τ ∗ (1 − e τ )]

λi = β

N
X

H
W
S
O
[Cij
+ Cij
+ Cij
+ Cij
]∗(

j=1

λF i = βF

N
X

Ij
)
Nj

H
W
S
O
[Cij
+ Cij
+ Cij
+ Cij
]∗(

j=1

Ni = Si + Fi + Ei + Ii + Ri

Ij
)
Nj

5
The rate of fear conditioning in age group i, µi , is considered as a product of following three
terms,
(i) κim : fraction of people who are fear conditioned by media m in age group i out of people
who trust media m in age group i.
(ii) ρim : fraction of people who trust media m in age group i out of people who are exposed to
media m in age group i.
(iii) σim : fraction of people who are exposed to media m in age group i per day out of total
population in age group i.
and is given as,
µi =

M
X

κim (t) ∗ ρim (t) ∗ σim (t)

(2)

m=1

where, m represents the type of mass media (i.e. television, community radio, internet or print
media) and M represents the number of mass media types. Since in this work four types of mass
media are considered, so M =4. Under condition µi = 0, i.e. if rate of fear conditioning is zero,
for every group i, SFEIR will get reduced to an age- and contact-structured SEIR model which
will be a variant of classical SIR model [24, 26]. In this scenario, variables βF and γF will have no
effect on the resulting dynamics.
Susceptible person in group i can move into exposed group after coming in contact with infected
individual with probability of transmission β and contact matrix Cij defined as per [24]. Fearful
individual in group i will be exposed with a reduced probability of transmission βF . Probability
of transmission of feared individual to the exposed group is taken as time-dependent along the
lines of [27, 28], as it shall decrease with the increase in the number of individuals in fear group.
Hence, rate of decrease in probability of transmission (βF ) should be proportional to the rate of
fear conditioning (µi ). We model the βF as,
βF = βF min + (β − βF min )e−µi .(t−t1 )

(3)

where,
βF min =  ∗ β
 is a constant, having value between 0 and 1, which converts the minimum probability of transmission from fear group to exposed group in terms of β. For example, if  = 0.1, it means that
minimum probability of transmission from fear group is 10% to that from susceptible group.
Fear time T is defined as the average time-interval an individual spends being fear conditioned
i.e. the average time from induction of fear conditioning to its extinction. Reinforcement is
known to modulate conditioned behaviour [17], and therefore it is considered that if fear beliefs
are rewarded, fear time will increase. Fear time (T ) is the sum of following two components:

6
(i) A constant term, in the absence of any reinforcement, (TC ), and,
(ii) A variable term, depending on the positive reinforcement through reward of beliefs, (TR ).

T = TC + TR

(4)

Rewards can increase the frequency of a desired behavior as well as prohibit it from getting
extinct, and are quantified by a reward (utility) function [29]. A reward (utility) function, r(t),
maps the effect of reward on the behavior of an individual in a physical world to the real numbers
(IR). In this work, behavioral response is quantified using fear time (T ), which has two parts: TC
and TR . Fear time of individuals will be directly proportional to the rewards associated with their
beliefs e.g. a praise from social, religious or political leaders for maintaining social distancing. We
define a reward function, r(t), that has the capability to modulate reinforced fear time, TR . In its
general formulation, a reward function will be time-dependent function because effect of rewards
are also dependent on several factors, like, when it is given, how it is given, expectation of reward,
etc. [17, 29, 30]. However, for simplicity, the reward function r(t) is used as a time-independent
constant parameter in the SFEIR model and is termed as a reward parameter r. As no particular
method of reinforcement is used in this paper, the reward parameter r is treated as an abstract
quantity that can modulate TR in following three ways:
(i) Reinforced fear time (TR ) increases if r is present, therefore the change in TR is considered
to be directly proportional to r.
(ii) Even if r is present for indefinite time, TR cannot continuously keep on increasing and must
saturate at some level.
(iii) If reward parameter r becomes zero at time t, TR should start decreasing from time t onwards
with time constant τ .
Therefore, TR is modelled using the following differential equation:
TR
dTR
=r−
dt
τ

(5)

Solving the above equation returns the following expression of TR ,

TR = r ∗ τ ∗ (1 − e

−t
τ

)

(6)

And, the rate of recovery from fear conditioning, γF , becomes:
γF (t) =

1
1
=
−t
(TC + TR (t))
TC + [r ∗ τ ∗ (1 − e τ )]

(7)

Partitioning the social contacts of individuals into home, workplace, school and other categories
[24], following contact matrices are used in the SFEIR model (eq 1):

7
H = Contact matrices between age groups i and j for Home
• Cij
W = Contact matrices between age groups i and j for Workplace
• Cij
S = Contact matrices between age groups i and j for Schools
• Cij
O = Contact matrices between age groups i and j for Others
• Cij
W = C S is equal to 0. C H remains the
During lockdown, work and schools are closed, thus, Cij
ij
ij
O is assumed to decrease as a function of time after lockdown begins.
same as before lockdown. Cij

Therefore, to fit to data (number of active cases), λi during lockdown is modelled as:
N
X

Ij
H
O
λi = β
[Cij
+ α1 − α2 ∗ (t − to ) ∗ Cij
] ∗ ( ),
Nj

(8)

j=1

where, α2 is the rate of decrease of probability of transmission and to is the time at which
O.
lockdown starts. α1 .β is probability of transmission at t = to for Cij

TABLE I: Values of parameters used in SFEIR model.
Parameter

Value

References

σim for m= television

0.631

[31]

σim for m= community radio

0.29

[32]

σim for m= internet

0.234

[33]

σim for m= print media

0.148

[34]

ρim for m= television

0.41

[35]

ρim for m= community radio

0.41

[35]

ρim for m= internet

0.34

[35]

ρim for m= print media

0.55

[35]

TC

2 days

Assumed

τ

2 days

Assumed

β

0.0598 ± 0.0011

Fitted

α1

0.3105 ± 0.0312

Fitted

α2

0.0073 ± 0.0005

Fitted

−1
γE
γP−1

5.2 days

[36]

7 days

[27]

B.

Assumptions used for simulation of SFEIR model

1. ρim across all age groups is taken to be equal to average for total population due to nonavailabilty of data. Similarly, σim across all age groups is also taken equal to average for
total population, for same reasons. To get the effect of fear conditioning because of inter
group contacts, κ was varied to simulate the model as detailed in Results section 3.5.

8
2. κ and r are taken independent of time to reduce the complexity of model.

C.

Simulating SFEIR model on India specific COVID-19 data

First case of COVID-19 in India was reported on 30th January, 2020. Number of cases increased
to 3 by 3rd February, all of them were recovered by 20th February. There was no new case of infection
till 2nd March, after which number of cases started increasing rapidly. Therefore, 0th day in SFEIR
model is taken as 3rd March, 2020.
Time series for active cases was taken from [37]. Model was fitted to data using non-linear
square fit method. Differential equations were solved using RK4 method [38] for time period of 500
days with step size of 0.05. Age structure population data was taken from [39]. Values of ρim and
σim were taken from references mentioned in Table I. All simulations were performed in python
programming language.

III.
A.

RESULTS

Comparing the three variants of SFEIR model

As discussed in the Methods section, whole population of India was divided into 16 classes of
different age groups. Simulations were performed for three cases, namely;
(I) without lockdown and without fear,
(II) with lockdown (for fixed number of days) but without fear, and,
(III) with lockdown (for fixed number of days) and with fear.
Case I is represented by green curve showing simulation results in the absence of lockdown. Case
II is represented by blue curve, and shows the results of lockdown intervention starting from 21st
day (March 24th ) and continuing till 75th day (17th May, 2020), after which contact matrix was set
to as it was before. Case III is represented by red curve, in which lockdown is implemented from 21st
day to 75th day along with SFEIR model implementation starting from 75th day. The simulation
was done for 500 days. A comparison among these cases indicates that lockdown has reduced the
number of new infections substantially, but there is an abrupt rise in number of infectious cases if
lockdown is lifted at one go. By implementing the SFEIR model from 75th day, the curve flattens
considerably resulting in further decrease of number of infections and its peak shifts to about 220th
day. Results are summarized in Fig. 2.

9

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2: Effect of fear conditioning on infection dynamics in post-lockdown phase: (a)
Comparative simulation results among three cases, with x-axis representing the number of days
starting 3rd March and y-axis representing the number of infected individuals. Green colored curve
represents the scenario of simple SEIR model in the absence of lockdown, blue colored curve shows
SEIR model with lockdown implemented from day 21st to day 75th and red colored curve represents
the SFEIR model results with fear conditioning being implemented at 75th day. (b) Zoomed-in
portrayal of the results of three cases in smaller time scale with same color coding. Values of κ
and r are kept 0.6 and 10, respectively, in both the Figures.

B.

Effect of varying κ and r

Variation of parameters

Here, we have analysed the role of κ (fraction of people who

are fear conditioned by media) and r (reward parameter) on the number of infected individuals.
For this, we varied κ from 0.1 to 0.6 with the step size of 0.1 and the value of r was fixed at 10.
Values of all other parameters were kept constant as described in Table I. Decrease in peak height
and flattening of curve is observed as shown in Fig. 3a and 3b. This shift in peak arises mainly
due to the fact that feared population becomes infected with lesser probability than the unfeared
susceptible population. Along with κ, different values of r were also varied and analysed. We
varied the value of r from 5 to 30 with the step size of 5 and keeping the value of κ constant at
0.3. Flattening and profound shifting of curve is again observed with the increase in r values that
happens mainly because increase in reward increases the time of stay in fear compartment. These
results are shown in Fig. 3b.
Effects of varying the parameters κ and r on feared population are shown in the Fig. 3c and 3d,
respectively. An increase in values of κ and r, increases the fraction of people in feared compartment
during post-lockdown phase, thereby, reducing the number of infections.

10

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 3: Impact of varying κ and r (regulating fear-conditioning and reward, respectively) on infection dynamics: (a) Simulation results for different κ values with r fixed at 10
showing that the peak height is decreasing with increasing κ values. (b) simulation results for
different r values with κ fixed at 0.3. Flattening and profound shifting of curve is apparent with
increase in r. Increase in the number of feared people with varying the values of κ and r can be
seen clearly in (c) and (d), respectively. Vertical blue line at 75th day represents the lifting of
lockdown. 0th day is 3rd March, 2020.

Phase space: To quantify the effect of simultaneously varying κ, r and  on infection dynamics, two phase diagrams corresponding to variables W and H are plotted as shown in Fig. 4a and
Fig. 4b, respectively. Variables W and H are defined as,
W = F ull width at half maxima

(9)

H = P eak height of curve
κ and  values were varied from 0.01 to 1 in the steps of 0.05, and r values were varied from 1
to 100 in the steps of 5. By looking at plots, it can be seen that W divides the phase space into 3
parts: Region I, II and III. Region II corresponds to the large values of variable W represented as
yellow-green spheres in Fig. 4a. For the corresponding values of κ, r and  in Fig. 4b, variable H
has moderate values.
On both sides of region II in Fig. 4a, variable W has small values. In the left side part of region
II in Fig. 4a, variable W has small values and for the corresponding values of κ, r and  in Fig.

11
4b, variable H is also small. This part of phase space is termed as Region I. While in the right
side part of region II in Fig. 4a, variable W has small values and for the corresponding values of
κ, r and  in Fig. 4b, variable H is high. This part of phase space is termed as Region III.
Thus, the three regions (Region I, II and III) are defined on the basis of values of W and H as
follows:
Region I: Small W , small H
Region II: Large W , moderate H
Region III: Small W , large H

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 4: Phase space of SFEIR model: (a) In terms of variable W of infection curve, calculated
as full width at half maxima of curve for that value of , κ and r, and (b) in terms of peak height
H of curve for that value of , κ and r. (c) and (d) represent the 2-dimensional phase space in
terms of W and H corresponding to variables κ and r. Value of  was kept fixed at 0.1.

Region I (small W values, small H values) corresponds to conditions in which number of infections are very less and pandemic ends swiftly. Region II corresponds to conditions under which
rise in number of cases is slow (curve is flat), but it takes more time for pandemic to mitigate.
Region III corresponds to high severity of pandemic. Although, Region I looks desirable but it
can not be reached as it corresponds to very less number of infections (in the range of 105 only)
in India. One has to focus on developing strategies to avoid reaching into the Region III, and to

12
remain particularly in Region II.
As region II corresponds to value of  in range 0.05 to 0.15. For the rest of study,  was fixed
to 0.1. To ascertain the effect of r and κ on infection dynamics, 2-D version of Fig. 4a and 4b
are plotted in Fig. 4c and 4d, respectively. The three regions can be clearly seen in Fig. 4c. The
red-white curve has large W values and corresponds to region II, the upper-right blue quadrant
corresponds to region I and lower-left blue quadrant corresponds to region III of Fig. 4a.

C.

Effect of keeping schools closed in post-lockdown phase

Closure of schools is one of the most often considered non-pharmaceutical intervention to control
a pandemic [40]. In this section, we first analyse the effect of keeping schools closed after the
lockdown is over i.e. on 75th day (17th May in present scenario), in the absence of fear. This is
S = 0. As seen in Fig. 5a, this step, while
done by keeping the values of contact matrix of school, Cij

shifting the peak of the curve, reduces the height of peak very little ascompared to original curve.
Hence, it may be concluded that by just keeping schools closed and opening all other places after
the lockdown will not have substantial effect on the containment of epidemic.
In order to decipher the effect of media induced fear, we simulated the effect of closing schools
in the proposed SFEIR model and observed a drastic reduction in number of infected individuals.
The curve becomes considerably flat.
Variation of κ

We tried to analyse the effect of varying κ while keeping the schools closed.

We first kept r fixed at value of 10 and varied κ from 0.1 to 0.6 with step size of 0.1. As the
value of κ increases, curve almost becomes flat with curve peak height at around 175 days for κ
=0.2 (shown in Fig. 5a). The peak height of curve shifts further to around 200 days with further
flattening as κ increases to 0.3. Thus, keeping schools closed in post-lockdown simultaneously with
the fear induced conditional learning can have drastic effect in reducing the number of infected
individuals. Fig. 5c shows the smaller time frame of Fig. 5a, in which it can be clearly seen that
the slope of curve decreases sharply as the value of κ increases.
Variation of r

To see the effect of r in conjunction with keeping schools closed, we kept κ

at a constant value of 0.3 and varied r from 5 to 30 with the step size of 5. The curve peak for r
= 5 shifts to 180th day and raising r to 10 further shifts the peak to around 200th day as well as
flattens it significantly as shown in Fig. 5b. In smaller time frame, in Fig. 5d, it can be easily seen
that as r increases, slope of the curve decreases.

13

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 5: Forecast of post-lockdown epidemic progression in schema of fear conditioning
with closed schools: While keeping the schools closed, (a) simulation results for different κ values
with r fixed at 10 and (b) simulation results for different r values with κ fixed at 0.3. Both (c) and
(d) shows the smaller time plot of (a) and (b), respectively. 0th day is 3rd March and vertical blue
line at 75th day (17th May) signifies the day of lockdown ending.

D.

Comparative analysis of fear conditioning with schools closure for different time periods

Here, we have analysed the time needed to keep schools closed along with the intensity of
fear conditioning (characterized by κ and r) required for controlling the COVID-19 pandemic in
post-lockdown phase in India. We chose two set of values of κ and r from Fig. 3c and 3d one
belonging to high peak region and and the other belonging to low peak region.  was kept fixed
to 0.1. Thus, four cases were designed:
Case I (Fig. 6a) : κ (high peak region) = 0.2 and r (high peak region) = 10
Case II (Fig. 6b) : κ (low peak region) = 0.6 and r (high peak region) = 10
Case III (Fig. 6c) : κ (high peak region) = 0.2 and r (low peak region) = 60
Case IV (Fig. 6d) : κ (low peak region) = 0.6 and r (low peak region) = 60
For each case, different time periods of keeping schools closed were plotted starting from 75
days (i.e. 17th May, in present scenario) to 465 days with step size of 30 days. In case I, severity

14
of pandemic is still substantial and schools closure does not have much effect. In cases II and
III, if schools are kept closed, exponential increase in number of infections is halted. This will
constraint the growth of pandemic but as soon as schools are repopened, number of infections will
spike upward. Therefore, schools need to be kept closed for very long period of time, which is not
at all practical. However, this combination can control the epidemic spread till the vaccines and
medicines are available. Results are summarized in Fig. 6b and 6c . In case IV, as shown in Fig.
6d, the curve has a negative slope if schools are kept closed. The number of cases reduces to less
than 100 if schools are opened after about 420 days from 3rd March, 2020. Therefore, κ and r
values both in low peak region can have a significant effect in constraining the pandemic.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 6: Comparative simulations of schools closure duration and fear conditioning
intensity for different time periods. Simulation results show when κ and r were kept at 0.2
and 10 in (a), κ and r were kept at 0.6 and 10 in (b), κ and r were kept at 0.2 and 60 in (c) and
κ and r were kept at 0.6 and 60 in (d). 0th day is 3rd March and 75th day (17th May) signifies the
day of lockdown ending. In each panel, differently colored trajectories correspond to the infection
dynamics on that day of schools opening. It can be seen in panel (d) that closing schools upto 420
days can bring the number of infections below 100.

15
E.

Effect on infections due to fear conditioning on specific age-groups

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 7: Infections in old age people when middle aged are fear conditioned: (a) Simulation results of varying κ in G2 on infections in G3 , r was kept fixed at 10 in G2 and G3 and 0 in
G1 , κ was kept fixed at 0 in G1 and 0.1 in G3 . (b) Effect of keeping schools closed and varying κ
in G2 on population in G3 . All other parameters were kept same as in (a). (c) Simulation results
of varying r in G2 on infections in G3 , κ was kept fixed at 0.1 in G2 and G3 and 0 in G1 , r was
kept fixed at 0 in G1 and 10 in G3 . (d) Effect of keeping schools closed and varying r in G2 on
population in G3 . All other parameters were kept same as in (b).

Effect of varying κ among young and middle age population on old age population
Across the world, critical care admission and mortality rate have been highest in people with age
greater than 60 [41–44]. Hence, we checked what will be the effect of increasing fear conditioning
among young and middle aged people on the infections in old individuals. For this, we divided the
number of infected individuals into three groups: G1 , 0- 9 years old; G2 , 10-59 years old; G3 , 60-79
years old.
To realise the same, we fixed the values of κ to 0 for G1 and 0.1 for the G3 , and varied κ for G2
keeping the reward r equal to 0 for group G1 (as κ is zero for this group, it doesn’t matter what
value of r is used) and 10 for other two groups.
In Fig. 7a, it can be seen that increasing the κ in G2 reduces the number of infections in G3 .
If schools are also kept closed, infection numbers reduced further as shown in 7b. Thus, keeping

16
schools closed and inducing information based fear conditioning among young and middle-age group
population can significantly reduce the infections among older population in post-lockdown period.
Reduction in peak height and flattening of curve expound the effect of fear.
Effect of varying r among young and middle age population on old age population
Lastly, effect of varying reward r among young and middle age group was evaluated on infections
among old age people. κ for G1 was kept at 0, for G3 at 0.1 and for G2 at 0.3. Reward parameter r
was kept 0 for G1 , 10 for G3 and was varied from 5 to 30 in steps of 5 for G2 . Number of infectious
individuals among members of G3 reduces as seen in Fig. 7c and 7d. When supplemented with
keeping schools closed in post lock-down phase, number of infections among G3 were observed to
be further reduced, as shown in Fig. 7d.

IV.

DISCUSSION

Fear is an emotion that plays an important role in the survival of an individual. Mass media
(like, television, community radio, internet and print media etc.), having ability to disseminate the
information to a lot of people even in remote areas, can also very easily propagate the fear about
a disease among masses. Thus, its proper usage can affect the course of progression of COVID-19
as was observed during polio vaccination programs [45]. To highlight the importance of media in
order to make community driven changes rather than forced interventions from government, in this
work, we modelled the media induced fear conditioning supplemented by positive reinforcement in
the Indian population. Reward parameter r, quantifying the effect of positive reinforcement via
various media platforms, was used as an abstract parameter that can represent various methods of
positive reinforcement, like, praise for having certain beliefs that may be accorded by the social,
religious and political leaders. The simulation results show that if more people become fearful, the
number of COVID-19 infections will decrease significantly. This manifests mainly because fearful
people will socialize less [13], and will take more precautions in their daily life. Excessive fear
conditioning can result in abnormal behaviours, like, specific phobias [46] and obsessive compulsive
disorder [47]. Therefore, care must be taken while developing practical methods of implementing
fear conditioning so as to minimize the risk of such abnormal behaviors.
The SFEIR model also predicted that only keeping schools closed in post-lockdown phase while
opening everything else will not substantially reduce the total number of infections, a finding that
has also been reported in [48]. However, SFIER model suggests that if paired with moderately
high fear conditioning, schools closure can have a significant effect on mitigating COVID-19 spread.
This can be explained by the fact that keeping the schools closed decreases the number of contacts
significantly for younger generation aged 0-30 [24] but does not alter the probability of infection.
Fear conditioning on the other hand works by reducing the probability of transmission as well
as the number of contacts. Therefore, when two of these are used simultaneously, probability of

17
infection transmission decreases significantly.
Against COVID-19 pandemic, people in the age group G3 have been found to have the highest
propensity of being admitted to ICUs and also have the highest mortality rate [41]. One of the
important predictions of the model is that if people in age-group 10-59 (G2 ) are fearful, this will
have a substantial effect on number of infections in age group 60-79 (G3 ). In India, people of all
the generations interact with each other within home (as depicted in Fig. 8). So, if people in
age group (10-59) are sufficiently fear conditioned, the probability of maintaining physical distance
among these two groups will increase leading to effectively decreasing the number of infections in
older generation even if older generation is not highly fear conditioned. In conjunction to this,
keeping the schools closed in the post-lockdown phase can further reduce the number of infections
among group G3 . This can be explained by the fact that India has higher probability of contact
between people in age group 0-29 and age group 60-79 as seen for the contact data at home shown
in Fig. 8 below.

FIG. 8: Age structured home interactions in India. At home, people of all generations
interact with each other in India. Data taken from [24].

Limitations of the present study:

First, lack of proper age-structured data on media

consumption limits the scope of model simulation. Second, standard deviation in fear time can be
huge as it is also dependent upon personality of an individual. Third, reward parameter, r and
fraction of people developing fear κ both should ideally be time dependent, but we have taken
these as constant parameters.

18
V.

CONCLUSION AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES

To the best of our knowledge, the SFEIR model developed in this work is the first attempt to
incorporate media induced fear conditioning in mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic. The model
predicts that fear conditioning via mass media might be a helpful strategy in reducing the COVID19 infections in post-lockdown phase. Increasing fraction of people in fear compartment by classical
conditioning and increasing fear time by operant conditioning reduced the number of infections
significantly. If used in conjunction with keeping schools closed in post-lockdown phase, substantial
reduction in number of infections was observed. We also examined the differential fear conditioning on different age groups in controlling the infections in elderly people. If fear conditioning is
increased on individuals of age 10-59 years (group G2 ) and exempted on kids of age 0-9 years
(group G1 ), number of infections in senior citizens of age 60-79 (group G3 ), known to have highest
mortality and hospitalization rate, is found to be reduced significantly. This condition of media
induced fear conditioning supplemented with closed schools in post-lockdown phase can further
decrease the number of infections in elderly people.
We propose that the presented schema of media induced fear conditioning augmented with closing of schools (including colleges and universities) in post-lockdown phase can serve as an important
non-pharmaceutical intervention to prevent healthcare system from getting overburdened.
At the same time, along the lines of [49], we would like to state that modelling results should not
be interpreted as the policy guidelines too strictly. We would like to add one more precaution that,
although, it is being proposed to keep the schools and universities closed for long time alongwith
media induced fear conditioning, it should not be construed as proposing that other places of mass
gatherings can be opened immediately. We would like to further state that our results may be
treated as the guiding factor for making policy interventions but it does not mean to say that
media should start showing COVID-19 news 24x7 hours. Of course, it will have a positive effect
on smoothening the curve but maintaining a balance in media streaming is necessary so as to not
induce fear psychosis in the citizens. Social, religious as well as political leaders have the capability
and responsibility to supplement positive reinforcement for this media induced fear.

VI.

DECLARATION OF COMPETING INTEREST

The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest.

[1] WHO.

World

health

organization.

https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/

08-04-2020-who-timeline---covid-19, 2020. Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[2] Worldometer. Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/,
2020. Accessed: 2020-05-25.

19
[3] A. Zhigljavsky et al. Comparison of different exit scenarios from the lock-down for covid-19 epidemic
in the uk and assessing uncertainty of the predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04583, 2020.
[4] M. Gilbert et al. Preparing for a responsible lockdown exit strategy. Nature Medicine, pp. 1–2, 2020.
[5] S. Funk et al. The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic outbreaks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(16):6872–6877, 2009.
[6] S. Del Valle et al. Effects of behavioral changes in a smallpox attack model. Mathematical biosciences,
195(2):228–251, 2005.
[7] M. A. Riva et al. Pandemic fear and literature: observations from jack london’s the scarlet plague.
Emerging infectious diseases, 20(10):1753, 2014.
[8] P. Poletti et al. The effect of risk perception on the 2009 h1n1 pandemic influenza dynamics. PloS one,
6(2), 2011.
[9] N. Perra et al. Towards a characterization of behavior-disease models. PloS one, 6(8), 2011.
[10] J. M. Epstein et al. Coupled contagion dynamics of fear and disease: mathematical and computational
explorations. PLoS One, 3(12), 2008.
[11] Y. Kim et al. Public risk perceptions and preventive behaviors during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic.
Disaster medicine and public health preparedness, 9(2):145–154, 2015.
[12] B. J. Cowling et al. Community psychological and behavioral responses through the first wave of the
2009 influenza a (h1n1) pandemic in hong kong. The Journal of infectious diseases, 202(6):867–876,
2010.
[13] A. C. Felix-Ortiz et al. Bidirectional modulation of anxiety-related and social behaviors by amygdala
projections to the medial prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience, 321:197–209, 2016.
[14] P. I. Pavlov. Conditioned reflexes: an investigation of the physiological activity of the cerebral cortex.
Annals of neurosciences, 17(3):136, 2010.
[15] S. Maren. Neurobiology of pavlovian fear conditioning. Annual review of neuroscience, 24(1):897–931,
2001.
[16] M. Davis. The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annual review of neuroscience, 15(1):353–375,
1992.
[17] B. F. Skinner. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. BF Skinner Foundation, 2019.
[18] S. Towers et al. Mass media and the contagion of fear: the case of ebola in america. PloS one, 10(6),
2015.
[19] M. A. Wakefield et al. Use of mass media campaigns to change health behaviour. The Lancet,
376(9748):1261–1271, 2010.
[20] S. Collinson and J. M. Heffernan. Modelling the effects of media during an influenza epidemic. BMC
public health, 14(1):376, 2014.
[21] S. Collinson et al. The effects of media reports on disease spread and important public health measurements. PloS one, 10(11), 2015.
[22] Q. Yan et al. Media coverage and hospital notifications: Correlation analysis and optimal media impact
duration to manage a pandemic. Journal of theoretical biology, 390:1–13, 2016.
[23] E. Bakshy et al. The role of social networks in information diffusion. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 519–528, 2012.
[24] K. Prem et al. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys and demographic
data. PLoS computational biology, 13(9):e1005697, 2017.
[25] R. Singh and R. Adhikari. Age-structured impact of social distancing on the covid-19 epidemic in india.

20
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12055, 2020.
[26] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical
character, 115(772):700–721, 1927.
[27] B. Tang et al. An updated estimation of the risk of transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov).
Infectious disease modelling, 5:248–255, 2020.
[28] S. E. Eikenberry et al. To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general
public to curtail the covid-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease Modelling, 2020.
[29] W. Schultz. Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of reward. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 57:87–115,
2006.
[30] L. G. Humphreys. The effect of random alternation of reinforcement on the acquisition and extinction
of conditioned eyelid reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25(2):141, 1939.
[31] BARC. Broadcast audience research council india. https://www.barcindia.co.in/resources/pdf/
BARC%20India%20Universe%20Update%20-%202018.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[32] AMS. Study on listenership, reach and effectiveness of community radio stations in india. https:
//mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/AMS%20Report%20on%20CRS.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[33] IAMAI.

India

internet

2019.

https://cms.iamai.in/Content/ResearchPapers/

d3654bcc-002f-4fc7-ab39-e1fbeb00005d.pdf, 2019. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[34] MRUC.

Indian

readership

survey.

https://mruc.net/uploads/posts/

195a27e70e0ddae2aa3601970e191531.pdf, 2019. Accessed: 2020-05-12.
[35] IPSOS. Trust in the media. https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/
2019-06/global-advisor-trust-in-media-2019.pdf, 2019. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[36] A. J. Kucharski et al. Early dynamics of transmission and control of covid-19: a mathematical modelling
study. The lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
[37] COVID-19. Covid-19 india. www.covid19india.org, 2020. Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[38] V. Singh. Modelling methodologies for systems biology. In Systems and Synthetic Biology, pp. 43–62.
Springer, Dordrecht, 2015.
[39] PopulationPyramid.

Population pyramids of the world from 1950 to 2100.

https://www.

populationpyramid.net/india/2019/, 2019. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[40] S. Cauchemez et al. Estimating the impact of school closure on influenza transmission from sentinel
data. Nature, 452(7188):750–754, 2008.
[41] G. Onder et al. Case-fatality rate and characteristics of patients dying in relation to covid-19 in italy.
Jama, 2020.
[42] CDC. Centers for disease control and prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid19/
index.htm, 2020. Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[43] WHO.

World

health

organisation.

https://www.who.int/publications-detail/

report-of-the-who-china-joint-mission-on-coronavirus-disease-2019-(covid-19),

2020.

Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[44] J. B. Dowd et al. Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of covid-19.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(18):9696–9698, 2020.
[45] R. Obregón et al. Achieving polio eradication: a review of health communication evidence and lessons
learned in india and pakistan. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 87:624–630, 2009.
[46] D. J. Stein and H. Matsunaga. Specific phobia: a disorder of fear conditioning and extinction. CNS

21
spectrums, 11(4):248–251, 2006.
[47] M. R. Milad et al. Deficits in conditioned fear extinction in obsessive-compulsive disorder and neurobiological changes in the fear circuit. JAMA psychiatry, 70(6):608–618, 2013.
[48] R. M. Viner et al. School closure and management practices during coronavirus outbreaks including
covid-19: a rapid systematic review. The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 2020.
[49] A. Dhar.

A critique of the covid-19 analysis for india by singh and adhikari.

arXiv:2004.05373, 2020.

arXiv preprint

