A kinetic model for qualitative understanding and analysis of the effect of
‘complete lockdown’ imposed by India for controlling the COVID-19 disease
spread by the SARS-CoV-2 virus
Raj Kishore1, Prashant Kumar Jha1, Shreeja Das1, Dheeresh Agarwal1, Tanmay Maloo1, Hansraj
Pegu1, Devadatta Sahoo2, Ankita Singhal3, Kisor K. Sahu1,4*
1. School of Minerals, Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Bhubaneswar, India 752050
2. NetTantra Technologies (India) Pvt. Ltd. Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751021, India
3. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India – 247667
4. Virtual and Augmented Reality Center of Excellence (VARCoE), Indian Institute of
Technology Bhubaneswar, India 752050
*Email: kisorsahu@iitbbs.ac.in

Abstract
The present ongoing global pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus is creating havoc
across the world. The absence of any vaccine as well as any definitive drug to cure, has
made the situation very grave. Therefore only few effective tools are available to contain
the rapid pace of spread of this disease, named as COVID-19. On 24th March, 2020, the the
Union Government of India made an announcement of unprecedented ‘complete
lockdown’ of the entire country effective from the next day. No exercise of similar scale
and magnitude has been ever undertaken anywhere on the globe in the history of entire
mankind. This study aims to scientifically analyze the implications of this decision using a
kinetic model covering more than 96% of Indian territory. This model was further
constrained by large sets of realistic parameters pertinent to India in order to capture the
ground realities prevailing in India, such as: (i) true state wise population density
distribution, (ii) accurate state wise infection distribution for the zeroth day of simulation
(20th March, 2020), (iii) realistic movements of average clusters, (iv) rich diversity in
movements patterns across different states, (v) migration patterns across different
geographies, (vi) different migration patterns for pre- and post-COVID-19 outbreak, (vii)
Indian demographic data based on the 2011 census, (viii) World Health Organization
(WHO) report on demography wise infection rate and (ix) incubation period as per WHO
report. This model does not attempt to make a long-term prediction about the disease spread
on a standalone basis; but to compare between two different scenarios (complete lockdown
vs. no lockdown). In the framework of model assumptions, our model conclusively shows
significant success of the lockdown in containing the disease within a tiny fraction of the
population and in the absence of it, it would have led to a very grave situation.

Introduction
In December, 2019 some doctors at Wuhan city in Hubei province of the People's Republic of
China (PRC) started noticing peculiar profiles of some pneumonia patients [1-2]. These patients
did not respond to the standard medical treatment protocol for pneumonia and some of their
conditions deteriorated rapidly despite the best efforts of the doctors and sometimes even leading
to fatalities. Later it was found to be caused by a new virus, named as SARS-CoV-2 [3], because
of its relation to the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) during the years 2002–
04 primarily in PRC and to a lesser extent in Canada, Singapore, Vietnam etc. SARS was caused
by SARS coronavirus (abbreviated as SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-1). It is so named because of the
arrangement of the spike proteins of the virus that is reminiscent of a ‘corona’. Since the virus for
the present outbreak belonged to the same family as that of SARS, so it was named as SARS-CoV2 (the number ‘2’ denotes the second member of the same virus family, i.e., they are genetically
connected) [4-5].
The initial outbreak was unfortunately followed by the new-year as per Chinese lunar calendar,
when one of the largest human migration on planet earth happens because of the festivity
associated with it in the world’s most populous nation. Since Wuhan city is one of the most
prominent industrial hub in the world’s second largest economy, the virus silently followed the
human traffic routes and dispersed across the entire globe. There are two classes of prime factors
that stands out about the ‘success’ of this virus that cause such a serious global pandemic
unforeseen in the modern, post-internet connected world. The first class of factors are biological
and closely connected to the evolution of the virus itself. Let us very briefly gloss over it since this
will not be the focus of this article, but very important to justify some of the assumptions made in
this study. The SARS-CoV-2 virus has RNA as a genetic material which is chemically less stable
than DNA. The RNA therefore is more susceptible to mutation and there is a chance that it might
become less serious because of some random mutations. However, the SARS-CoV-2 RNA, that
has approximately thirty thousand base-pairs [6] has an error correcting mechanism in-built and
partly responsible for its success. The other biological factor is that the spike proteins in SARSCoV-2 strongly binds to the Angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors in human. The
ACE2 receptor provides the access to the virus inside human cells, where it highjacks the cell
machineries and forces them to make the virus parts. Therefore the effective strong binding with
ACE2 receptor is another key to its success. The third factor in this class is clinical. The SARSCoV-2 affect both the upper and lower respiratory track. At the first stage, when the upper
respiratory track is infected, the persons only has very mild or no symptom and unsuspected carrier
becomes highly dangerous because that person does not even realize that he is a carrier and
spreading the virus to the larger population. When the infection goes down the respiratory track,
the symptoms becomes serious at times often with undesirable consequences even leading to
fatalities.
However the second class of factors responsible for the ‘success’ of the virus is connected to its
accidental capacity to exploit the human migration pattern and this will be the central theme of
this article. As we have already discussed that, at the early stage when the infection is largely

limited to the upper respiratory track, the affected person mostly mistake its symptom as that of a
mild flu and become contagious. In the absence of any clinical preventive mechanism (such as
vaccine) or any effective drugs to cure the infected persons, containment of the disease through
clinical interventions is still largely an unsolved puzzle. Therefore, the only possibility to contain
the rapid spreading of the disease in communities is identifying and isolating such type of carriers
by clinical diagnosis, which WHO referred to as “Test, test and test” [7]. Such type of strategy is
effectively adopted by countries like South Korea and Singapore. However, for a large and highly
populated country like India, there are operational, clinical, infrastructural and financial limitations
towards adopting this kind of strategy at least at the very early stage. So the other option is to deny
an easy route to the virus that it can thrive on. Therefore, the Union Government of India took an
unprecedented step of announcing a country wide ‘complete lockdown’ for 21 days, starting from
25th March, 2020 for its entire population of roughly 1.35 billion [8-9]. Meaning that, during this
period the entire population were asked to remain confined within their homes, or wherever they
stayed at that point of time and all kinds of movements were largely prohibited except only for a
tiny fraction responsible for providing essential services. No exercise of similar scale and
magnitude has been ever undertaken anywhere on the globe in the history of entire mankind. This
study aims to scientifically analyze the implications of this decision using a kinetic theory model
(discussed later) covering more than 96% of Indian territory (for some territories, reliable data are
not available and therefore not included in the analysis; discussed later).
It has already been discussed that the disease is very effectively spread by unsuspecting carrier at
the initial stage of infection limited at the upper respiratory tract. At this stage the virus is spread
by droplet transmission by sneezing and coughing of the carrier. Moreover, very tight and effective
binding of the virus with the ACE2 receptor of human, makes a facile human-to-human
transmission. Therefore, this can be effectively modelled by the following protocol: a carrier or
infected person coming in close contact with a heathy person will transmit the disease and make
him also infected. There are some examples, where the spread of this virus is simulated using the
same protocol [10-12]. Although this is not completely accurate, because it will depend on many
other extraneous factors, but as a first approximation this is a satisfactory model, particularly in
the absence of precise quantification of these extraneous factors at this early stage of analysis.
Once we make this assumptions, we can use a readily available model: the molecular motion of
gas which is closely connected to the kinetic theory of gas. In this model, each person will be
represented by an ‘atom’ with significant differences, which will be discussed later. When an
‘infected’ (say color-coded by red) person come in contact with a healthy person (color coded by
green), the healthy persons also get infected. It is imperative to mention here that, there are no
available data source (at least to us) that may provide us accurate trajectory of each individual in
the country. On the top of that, it will be computationally too expensive to model minute-by-minute
movements of 1.35 billion individuals. Therefore, the best possible way out is to use the method
of statistical representation. It is important to appreciate that the main objective of this study is to
understand the disease spread in a local community, which we will refer in this article as ‘clusters’.
These clusters are very crucial from the viewpoint of ‘containment zone’ and developing
operational plans for the high risk areas. For simplicity, we will distribute the Indian population in
29918 clusters each representing a population of ~ 4.51 thousands (rational for the choice of these
numbers are provided in the ‘methods’ section). Now, there are two competing ways to reflect the

true population density across the country: (i) using different sized clusters (or ‘atoms’ of different
radius using the kinetic theory analogy) or, (ii) using same cluster size but disperse them according
to population density. In this article the second method has been opted because of the following
reasons:
a.
If different sized clusters are used, then size of each clusters would need to be tracked,
which is computationally expensive.
b.
Each time a cluster is moved from one place to other, its size has to be rescaled based on
the population density difference between these two locations, which is again expensive
computationally.
c.
In the second method, only care need be taken about setting the initial distribution, which
should reflect the true population distribution of India. And since this article simulates the effects
only for 60 days, during which India’s population distribution is not expected to change
significantly, therefore we need no expensive recalibration.
Although, the Union Government of India announced ‘complete lockdown’ of the entire country
only for 21 days, we did simulate it for 55 days for academic interest. Deciding this kind of policy
measures require serious considerations about multitude of other issues concerning societal,
economic, law and order, emergency services, security, etc. just to name a few. Clearly, none of
them are under the purview of present study.
We will make one more very important assumption: even if one person is infected in a cluster, we
will assume the entire cluster is infected. There are two primary reason for this assumption: (i)
Because of the close proximity, the other members in the same community are more vulnerable
and all the other members in that cluster will be termed as ‘high risk category’ and, (ii) An
individual cluster is the smallest representation of the population (we have no sub-cluster
resolution). We are aware that this will lead to some overestimation and therefore, it might be
perceived that it represents kind of a ‘worst case scenario’. Since the aim is to qualitatively
understand the effect of ‘complete lockdown’ by simulation the scenarios with and without the
imposition of lockdown, the use of exactly same cluster distribution for both the case make it a
case for fair comparisons. The starting point of this simulation is the prevailing situation as on 20th
March, 2020.
Methods
Before describing the model in details, let us discuss some of the key features of this model, what
this model does not aim to achieve and a word of caution.
Salient features of the model in the present study:




It accurately represents the state wise population density distribution
It accurately represents the state wise infection distribution for the zeroth day (20 th March,
2020)
It attempts to realistically represent movements of average clusters








It attempts to capture the rich diversity in movements patterns across different states as per
OLA’s ‘Ease of moving index’
It aims to capture the different migration patterns across different geographies
It also captures the different migration patterns of pre- and post-COVID-19 outbreak
Effect of age on the probability of getting infected has been captured based on World
Health Organization (WHO) report
The Indian demographic data for each state is considered based on the 2011 census
Capturing the effect of the incubation period of five days as mentioned in WHO report

What this model does NOT aim to achieve:







Make a long-term prediction about the disease spread on a standalone basis [but to compare
between two different scenarios (complete lockdown vs. no lockdown)]
Make a verifiable and quantifiable estimation of disease dynamics
Capture the effects of clinical interventions
Capture the effects of long distance travels by individual using long-haul air/rail routes
Capture the effects of primitive, but very effective, measures such as increased frequent
proper washing of hand
Capture the effects of stray events

A word of caution: This model is strictly for qualitative comparisons only based on the
assumption made.
In order to maintain computational complexity to a somewhat reasonable level, we decided to have
at most 5000 clusters in the most populous state, Uttar Pradesh (UP). Therefore each clusters
represent a population of ~ 4.51 thousands, which leads to a total number of 29918 human clusters
for the country as depicted in Fig. 1(a). The grey color zone indicates the areas for which data are
not available to us, therefore not included in this study. The size and number of infected clusters
are very small, it is difficult to visualize, therefore in order to visualize some of these clusters, a
portion of the state of Kerala is zoomed and shown as an inset of figure of Fig. 1(a). The state
and union territory (UT) wise distribution of the total 29918 clusters are presented in table 1. These
cluster have significant different properties when compared to the ‘atoms’ of a gas: (i) gas atoms
do not overlap, but two human clusters can mingle intensely with each other, therefore, even
complete ‘overlaps’ are allowed, (ii) atoms conserves momentum during collision, whereas no
such thing is applicable for hum clusters and finally, (iii) angular momentum is conserved for
atomic systems (if explicitly modelled) which is again not applicable for human clusters. Needless
to mention that the present simulations are confined in 2-dimensinal space bounded by the
boundaries of Indian territories. As on 20th March (the zeroth day of simulation), there were 258
infected persons and according to our protocol, therefore, out of total 29918 clusters, we denoted
258 as infected clusters. The state and UT wise distribution of these infected clusters can be found
in Table 1. At this point, one might argue that, because of initial concentrated distribution of
infections, there could have been more than one infected persons in a given cluster. While that is
true, we did not have the exact coordinates of each of these infected individuals, so we had no way
to know the exact distribution. So while the state-wise distribution of both the parameters, the total

population [13] as well as the total infected persons [14] are accurate to the best of our knowledge
and available data, their distribution within a state are random. Therefore, it is imperative to realize
that, this simulation will not reflect the accurate disease dynamics within the states. This is really
not a serious concern at this point, since the goal of this article is NOT to make a long-term
prediction about the disease spread but to scientifically analyze the implications of ‘complete
lockdown’. Therefore it is imperative to create an unbiased and representative distribution of both
healthy population and infected persons, which has been achieved in this article. It is known [15]
that an average Indian commuter transit ~35 kilometer daily, and that has been taken as a reference
point about the daily movement of each healthy cluster in the absence of any other better estimate.
While this is a tad overestimation for average Indian, but not a serious issue since we are simulating
‘a worst case scenario’ as described earlier. Moreover, the daily movement pattern was assumed
to follow a normal distribution with the standard deviation values, which is based on the ‘Ease of
moving index’. This index is published by OLA [16] for the capital cities of each states, (with few
exceptions, for which the data are not available, the national average was used), which was used
as a representative for that state. Again, this is not an accurate representation for the entire state,
but this is the best representation than can be achieved, rather than using trivially the same number
(35 kilometer) for all the clusters for all the states, moreover at the initial phase, the disease spread
is city (state capital) centric, therefore it gives some credence to this argument. This OLA ratings
for the different cities of the Indian states are based on the local human behavior, transportation
infrastructure, traffic rules, etc. in the corresponding cities therefore they capture a rich data
diversity. Some fraction of human clusters (for example the migrant laborers) in a state are prone
to migrate. Thus, in order to model this inter-state movement, we have considered the migration
data available at [17] of each state and UT. The symptoms of this disease does not appear on the
same day when the virus enters in the human body but it appears after few days which is called
incubation period. We have used the incubation period of five days as mentioned in WHO report
[18]. The pattern of the movements of migrant populations are different in pre- and post-COVID19 outbreak and this has also been taken in account as depicted in Fig. 1(b). While, during the preCOVID-19 the migration pattern follows the normal pattern of migration, during COVID-19
period, the migration patterns are reversed, to reflect the returning of migrant population to home.
While, during incubation period, the movement of both heathy and infected clusters are identical,
the movement of infected clusters, post the incubation period is reduced by 50 times that of normal
movement, in order to capture the reduced movement once the disease (or the symptoms of the
disease) are identified. During lockdown, the movement of all the clusters (healthy as well as
infected clusters) are reduced with the same factor. We have also considered the effect of age on
the probability of getting infected. This probability data is based on World Health Organization
(WHO) report which published the demographic characteristic of COVID-19 outbreak in China
during 16-24 February 2020 [18]. The Indian demographic data for each state is taken from the
census 2011 [19].

Fig. 1: The distribution of 29918 human cluster on the Indian map. The number of human clusters
in each states are provided in Table 1 and calculated using the population density of the
corresponding state. There are total 258 infected and 29660 healthy clusters, which are represented
in red and green color respectively (see inset figure). The number of infected cluster in each state
is taken based on the number of registered COVID-19 patients till 20th March 2020 in India [14],
which is also the zeroth day of simulation.

Table 1: The number of human cluster and infected clusters (as on 20th March, 2020) considered
in each state and UT at the start of the simulation.

The flow chart of the simulation is depicted in figure 2. The complexity of the simulation is of the
order of O (N2), where N is the number of human clusters considered. Although the complexity
can be reduced by utilization of clever computational algorithms, but the main focus of this work
was to make quickest implementation, so deliberate attempts were made not to use any such tricks
to minimize unwarranted mistakes. The simulation is mainly divided into three steps:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Initialization: In the initialization step, while the numbers of clusters inside a state truly
represents its area and density distribution the spatial distribution of the clusters within
a state is assigned randomly. The number of infected cluster ID is also assigned
randomly based on the number of active cases in the corresponding state or UT.
Selection of movement distance: The cluster will move either a distance Mh (distance
travelled by a healthy cluster) or Mi (distance travelled by an infected cluster). The
selection of this distance, depends on mainly three criteria:
(a) Whether the lockdown is imposed or not?
(b) Whether the cluster is infected or healthy?
(c) Whether the incubation period (after which symptoms appears) of infected cluster
is over or not?
Neighbor detection: After moving the cluster, its neighbor is detected based on the
Euclidian distance between their geometrical centers. If the distance is less than the

2.01*R, where, R is the radius of the cluster (assuming a 5% uncertainty factor in
distance estimation). The value of R is 5.3 km, which is based upon pan India
population density value.

Fig. 2: Flow chart of the algorithm used in the COVID-19 simulator. The distance Mh (movement
of healthy cluster) and Mi (movement of infected cluster) distribution is shown in supplementary
figure S1_A and S1_B.
We have calculated the radius of the cluster, R as
1 𝑃

𝐴

𝑅 = √𝜋 (𝐶 × 𝑃)

(1)

Where, P and A are the total population and area (in km2) of India respectively. C is the total
number of clusters considered (29918 in the present study). The P/C ratio gives the number of
people represented by one cluster (~4.51 thousands people) whereas the A/P ratio gives the area
(in km2) covered by a single person. Thus the multiplication of these two ratios gives the area
covered by each cluster. The distance between two clusters (D) is the Euclidean distance between
their centers (Fig. 3). If any one of the infected clusters come in contact to a healthy cluster and
the distance D, between them are led than 2.01*R, then both the clusters will be labeled as infected
cluster.

Fig. 3: The pictorial representation of healthy and infected cluster. Each cluster represent ~45100
people (obtained by dividing the total Indian population by number of clusters considered here).
If a single person inside the cluster is infected, then we considered the entire cluster as infected
cluster. The radius of both the clusters is R calculated by using Eq. (1).

Results
The spread of the infected cluster in the entire country for the next sixty days (from the zeroth day:
20th March) are simulated using the kinetic model as detailed in the method section for two
different scenarios: (i) under complete lockdown on 5th day (25th March; when a nationwide
‘complete lockdown’ starts under the order of the Union Government of India) from the start of
the simulation and (ii) without lockdown throughout the simulation. The result of 5th, 15th, 25th,
35th, 45th and, 60th day spread of COVID-19 under these two different scenarios are shown in Fig.
5, 6 and, 7. The effect of lockdown is clearly visible. There are very few new cases reported after
lockdown imposed. Whereas, in other scenario, where the lockdown is not imposed, the disease
outbreaks is rampant and almost entire map is filled with large number red (infected) clusters.
Though in the second scenario also, the movement of infected clusters are restricted but the real
cause of the disease outbreak is the frequent movement of the healthy as well as of those infected
clusters in which symptoms are not visible (asymptotic during the incubation period). Whereas,
during lockdown, the movement of all the clusters are restricted, thus preventing the outbreak of
the disease on a far greater scale. Therefore, our analysis clearly presents this (identifying
infection) as a great challenge and contact tracing at the earliest stage is the best possible strategy
and the only available option at this stage. This, will significantly alter the disease spread dynamics
and to a large extent will determine the final outcome. In the Fig. 4, the average movement of each
cluster drops drastically from ~34 km per day to ~0.73 km per day (a drop of ~46 times) after
lockdown imposed (at 5th day), whereas the movement in the scenario without lockdown is
decreasing very slowly. The reason of the slowdown is not voluntary: as the clusters becomes
progressively infected, they keep transmitting the infection during incubation, but postincubations, the symptoms become prominent and the worried population restrict the movement
(this has been incorporated in the modelling strategy and discussed in the ‘methods’ section). The
effect of the drastic drop in the average movement in lockdown scenario is clearly visible in Fig.

8, where the number of active cases becomes almost constant after 14th day of the simulation (9th
day from the lockdown).
There are few additional stray incidents that are not considered in the present simulation primarily
because of lack of precise data. Although during the post-lockdown period large scale unnecessary
movements were banned, there are several cases in which people denied/disobeyed the lockdown
and kept continuously moving. Some of the prime examples are: (i) The construction and migrant
workers from New Delhi and Mumbai started walking/moving by all sorts of available means to
reach their homes mainly in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar) [20] (ii) There are several other cases also
where people gathered and did not followed the social distancing rules. (iii) Many other stray
incidents of not following the directives. It is pertinent to note that long distance travels by
individual using long-haul air/rail routes were not modelled in this study. Therefore, the results
presented in this article is not expected to represent the exact disease dynamics, but it provides an
immensely useful tool to compare, assess and analyze the two scenarios (with and without
lockdown) within the limits of assumptions made. Some of these factors are very important to
determine the course of true dynamics, could not be captured in the present simulation for the lack
of precise data at this stage and that is the primary reason for our assertion not to use this study as
a long-term prediction on a standalone scenario. Additionally, few other factors have not been
considered for the present study but can be easily implemented when the difficult time is over and
data can be carefully mined for a more precise calculation such as: we have considered the uniform
cluster distribution inside a state or UT based on its population density but in reality, most of the
population of a state or UT lives in the Hi-Tech residential cities (e.g. Mumbai, Kolkata, New
Delhi, Bengaluru, Pune, Bhubaneswar, etc.). The rest areas are either very sparsely populated or
no one allowed to live there (like Forest, deserts, water lands, etc.). Same is true for the movement
patterns. These can be taken care of at a later point of time for far higher accuracy. For example,
though currently the Maharashtra has the highest registered positive COVID-19 cases (1135 till
8th April 2020 [8]), but ~95% of the cases are from the Mumbai, Pune and Thane which are either
capital or economic cities of the state. This situation is nearly true for almost all states across the
country, where most of the cases are from capitals and cities of economic importance. Thus for a
more realistic kinetic model, the clusters should be distributed based on the district wise population
density. The second main reason for this difference is the size of the cluster. Here, we have
considered the same size of the cluster but in reality the size of these clusters should be very small,
ideally speaking, one cluster should reflect one individual family. However sourcing the data for
such a detailed model is a very serious undertaking both from the data mining point of view as
well as from the required computational resources for such a simulation. However, if achieved, it
will reflect the true disease dynamics both for highly populated regions like Hi-Tech cities (e.g.
Mumbai, New Delhi, Kolkata, etc.) as well as for sparsely populated regions (e.g. Ladhak and
Arunachal Pradesh, etc.).

Fig. 4: The variation of the average movement per cluster in km with time in lockdown and without
lockdown scenario.

Fig. 5: The spread of COVID-19 clusters across the country on (a) 5th (b) 15th day, the lockdown
imposed on 5th day onwards of the spread. The corresponding spread on (a*) 5th (b*) 15th day
without lockdown in the entire duration

Fig. 6: The spread of COVID-19 clusters across the country on (c) 25th and (d) 35th day, the
lockdown imposed on 5th day onwards of the spread. The corresponding spread on (c*) 25th and
(d*) 35th day without lockdown in the entire duration

Fig. 7: The spread of COVID-19 clusters across the country on (e) 45th and (f) 60th day, the
lockdown imposed on 5th day onwards of the spread. The corresponding spread on (e*) 45th and
(f*) 60th day without lockdown in the entire duration

Fig. 8: The variation of the number of infected clusters with time in lockdown and without
lockdown scenario. Secondary y axis represent the % of population in high risk category.

Figure 8 shows that, with complete lockdown in place, the infection could be restricted to ~1000
clusters while, without the lockdown it can be as high as ~12000 cluster after elapse of 60 days
from zeroth day (20th March) or 55 days since lock down. This is equivalent to saying that, with
complete lockdown in place, only less the 4% of population will be exposed to the ‘high risk’.
Here, ‘high risk’ indicates that: if there is at least one infected member in a community, all the
other members in that community are at very high risk of getting infected if proper care are not
taken, which is very difficult anyway because of the invisibility of the virus by the naked eye and
therefore it cannot be known a priori which areas are contaminated and need to be disinfected.
Without the lockdown in place, as high as 40% of the population will be exposed to the high risk,

and worse still, that is not even the peak. While, the first scenario (‘complete lockdown’ enforced)
did show an early peak (Fig. 8) that means the containment of the disease is successful to a great
extent. This is a no mean feat for combating the disease, when modern medical interventions such
as vaccine and curative drugs are not available and we had to resort to only primitive, but very
effective, measures such as increased frequent proper washing of hand, following the social
distancing rules. It is therefore heartening to see, how a policy measure, the ‘complete lockdown’
can effectively save a big populous country in this asymmetric war. The results produced by the
kinetic model presented in this article demonstrate, beyond any reasonable doubt, the great efficacy
of the ‘complete lockdown’ towards containing the disease COVID-19 caused by the SARS-CoV2 virus in India.

Conclusion
The effect of unprecedented policy measure adopted by the Union Government of India for
‘complete lockdown’ of the entire country to contain the spread of COVID-19 has been analyzed
scientifically with the help of a kinetic model. Extreme care were taken to choose large number of
parameters from multitude of sources to reflect the prevailing ground realities in India. It was
aimed to accurately represent state wise information in a statistical sense. The primary purpose of
the present study is to compare the likely spread of COVID-19 in two different scenarios: (i) with
complete lockdown in place from 25th March, 2020 as it happened and, (ii) without any lockdown
imposed. The simulation were run for 60 days starting from 20th March, 2020, considered as the
zeroth day. The simulation results conclusively shows that, in the first scenario, only a tiny fraction
of population (less than 4%) are exposed to high risk category while in the second scenario more
than 40% of population are exposed to high risk category. The difference is significant and
therefore our detailed simulations very conclusively support the great efficacy of ‘complete
lockdown’ as an effective tool for keeping the COVID-19 infection within a tolerable limit. This
is an extremely important policy success for fighting COVID-19 disease in the absence of any
preventive measures, such as a vaccine or any definitive drug for curing it.

References
[1]

Wu, J.T., Leung, K., Bushman, M., Kishore, N., Niehus, R., de Salazar, P.M., Cowling,
B.J., Lipsitch, M. and Leung, G.M., 2020. Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from
the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nature Medicine, pp.1-5.

[2]

Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., Ren, R., Leung, K.S., Lau, E.H.,
Wong, J.Y. and Xing, X., 2020. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel
coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine.

[3]

Naming the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it. Accessed: 30
March 2020. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus2019/technical-guidance/naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-thatcauses-it

[4]

Zou, L., Ruan, F., Huang, M., Liang, L., Huang, H., Hong, Z., Yu, J., Kang, M., Song, Y.,
Xia, J. and Guo, Q., 2020. SARS-CoV-2 viral load in upper respiratory specimens of
infected patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(12), pp.1177-1179.

[5]

Walls, A.C., Park, Y.J., Tortorici, M.A., Wall, A., McGuire, A.T. and Veesler, D., 2020.
Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell.

[6]

LeMieux J., Mining the SARS-CoV-2 Genome for Answers. Accessed: 30 March 2020.
https://www.genengnews.com/news/mining-the-sars-cov-2-genome-for-answers/

[7]

Atwoli L., Test, test, and test to effectively control Covid-19. Accessed: 30 March 2020.
https://www.nation.co.ke/oped/opinion/Test--test--and-test-to-effectively-control-Covid19/440808-5507216-3l2saxz/index.html

[8]

Vaidyanathan G., People power: How India is attempting to slow the coronavirus, Nature
April 2020. Accessed: 12 April 2020.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01058-5

[9]

Kannan S., What India did -- and what it didn't -- in Covid-19 battle. Accessed: 8 April
2020.
https://www.indiatoday.in/news-analysis/story/what-india-did-and-what-it-didn-t-in-covid19-battle-1663064-2020-04-03

[10] Stevens H., Why outbreaks like coronavirus spread exponentially, and how to “flatten the
curve”. March 2020. Accessed: 30 March 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/world/corona-simulator/
[11] Cleve Moler (2020). COVID19 Simulator.
(https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/74601-covid19-simulator),
MATLAB Central File Exchange. Retrieved April 12, 2020.
[12] Chen, B., Shi, M., Ni, X., Ruan, L., Jiang, H., Yao, H., Wang, M., Song, Z., Zhou, Q. and
Ge, T., Visual Data Analysis and Simulation Prediction for COVID-19. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.07096.
[13] List of states and union territories of India by population. Accessed: 20 March 2020.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_states_and_union_territories_of_India_by_population
[14] India COVID-19 tracker. www.covid19india.org
[15] Gupta N. S., Indian commuters travel 35km/day says survey. Accessed: 20 March 2020.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/indian-commuters-travel-35km/day-sayssurvey/articleshow/63140954.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm
_campaign=cppst

[16] Ease of moving index-2018, OLA mobility institute. Accessed: 20 March 2020
https://ola.institute/ease-of-moving/
[17] Migration Tables, Census of India 2001. Accessed: 20 March 2020
http://censusindia.gov.in/Data_Products/Data_Highlights/Data_Highlights_link/data_highli
ghts_D1D2D3.pdf
[18] Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid19-final-report.pdf
[19] Population composition, Census of India.
Accessed: 20th March 2020
http://censusindia.gov.in/vital_statistics/SRS_Report/9Chap%202%20-%202011.pdf
[20] Slater J., Masih N., In India, the world’s biggest lockdown has forced migrants to walk
hundreds of miles home. Accessed: 30 March 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/india-coronavirus-lockdown-migrantworkers/2020/03/27/a62df166-6f7d-11ea-a156-0048b62cdb51_story.html

Supplementary Information
S1: The distribution of Mh and Mi for each cluster
The distribution of distance travelled by each cluster of a state/UT under unrestricted scenario is
shown in Fig. S1_A and Fig. S1_B for all the states/UT considered in the present study. As
mentioned in the “method” section, the distribution for all the states and UT is normal distribution
with mean value at 35 km but the standard deviation for each state is different. The histogram plots
for each states is also depicting the same distribution. Although the restricted movement distance
Mi is reduced by a factor of 50 but its distribution is again a normal distribution with mean distance
value of 0.7 km and standard deviation for each state is same as used for Mh.

Fig. S1_A: The distribution of distance travelled by all the healthy clusters in unrestricted scenario,
Mh of Kerala, Goa, Gujrat, Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana (each panel is for one state/UT; name of state
is mentioned at top-left corner of the panel).

Fig. S1_B: The distribution of distance travelled by all the healthy clusters in unrestricted scenario,
Mh of, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, New Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Odisha
Jharkhand, Bihar, Ladhak, Jammu and Kashmir, West Bengal and Arunachal Pradesh (each panel
is for one state/UT; name of state is mentioned at top-left corner of the panel)

