Dynamical Theory and Cellular Automata Simulations of Pandemic Spread:
Understanding Different Temporal Patterns of Infections
Saumyak Mukherjee,1 Sayantan Mondal,1 and Biman Bagchi1

arXiv:2004.14787v1 [q-bio.PE] 30 Apr 2020

1

Solid State and Structural Chemisry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru-560012, India

Here we propose and implement a generalized mathematical model to find the time evolution of
population in infectious diseases and apply the model to study the recent COVID-19 pandemic.
Our model at the core is a non-local generalization of the widely used Kermack-McKendrick (KM)
model where the susceptible (S) population evolves into two other categories, namely infectives
(I) and removed (R) where R consists of cured (C) and dead (D) population. This is the wellknown SIR model in which we further divide both S and I into high and low risk categories. We
first formulate a set of non-local dynamical equations for the time evolution of distinct population
distributions under this categorization in an attempt to describe the general scenario of infectious
disease progression. We then solve the non-linear coupled differential equations- (i) numerically by
the method of propagation, and (ii) a more flexible and versatile cellular automata (CA) simulation
which provides a coarse-grained description of the generalized non-local model. In order to account
for multiple factors such as role of spreaders before containment, we introduce a time dependent
rate which appears to be essential to explain the sudden spikes before the plateau observed in
many cases (for example like China). We demonstrate how this generalized approach allows us to
handle the effects of (i) time-dependence of the rate-constants of spread, (ii) different population
density, (iii) the age ratio, (iv) quarantine, (v) lockdown, and (vi) social distancing. Our study
allows us to make certain predictions regarding the nature of spread with respect to several external
parameters, treated as control variables. The inherent demographic heterogeneities in a population
distribution tend to become magnified in the disease prediction due to the non-linearity in the
system of equations. Analysis of the model clearly shows that due to the strong heterogeneity in
the epidemic process originating from the distribution of initial infectives, the theory must be local
in character but at the same time connect to a global perspective.

I.

INTRODUCNTION

The extremely unfortunate appearance of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19 or SARS-Cov2) has taken the
entire world aback.[1] On March 11th, 2020 the world
health organisation (WHO) has declared COVID-19 a
pandemic. During the last one and half months, the situation has progressively become worse, making the world
forcing a challenge we did not face in recent times. At
this juncture, it is not clear how we shall come out of
this misfortune and its aftereffects. Under this extremely
terrifying and frustrating situation we need to look for
solutions that might help in effective planning and policymaking. This is extremely demanding especially for
countries with limited resources.
Healthcare professionals, sociologists and politicians
strive to find out an optimised plan to cure and contain the disease. On the other hand, scientists attempt
to understand and analyse different aspects of this problem with respect to different natural and imposed conditions to predict the future of the pandemic.[2, 3] A
molecular level microscopic understanding of the virus
has already emerged that has accelerated the process of
vaccine preparation.[4, 5] However, detailed theoretical
and simulation based studies from the demographic and
topographic viewpoints are still being pursued.
There are several mathematical models which have
been employed in the context of epidemic modelling.[6]
For example, Kermack-McKendrick (KM) model has
been used extensively to study the spread of infectious

diseases like measles, small pox etc.[7–9] At the core of
this model lies a system of three coupled differential equations for susceptible (S), infected (I) and removed (R)
(cured and dead) populations, that is, the famous SIR
model [Eq. 1]. At the onset of an epidemic S becomes I
and I eventually becomes R, but R can never become S
or I because of acquired immunity.

dS
= −kS→I SI
dt
dI
= kS→I SI − kI→R I
dt
dR
= kI→R I
dt

(1)

Eq. 1 describes the three coupled non-linear differential equations of the KM model where kS→I is the rate
of infection and kI→R is the rate of removal (recovery
and death). In the conventional SIR model kS→I and
kI→R are written as β and γ respectively. In principle
the rate constants should be time and space dependent,
that is, non-local in nature. However, this model is applicable for a homogeneous population distribution and
mass transmission at a large scale.[8]
In Fig. 1 we provide a schematic timeline of the propagation of the infection for an individual. We note that
this situation is exactly similar to that of a consecutive
chemical reaction like radioactive decay kinetics.[10]

2
the strategic moves and do not contain clinically implementable results.
II. MATHEMATICAL MODELLING:
TIME-DEPENDENT RATE CONSTANT

FIG. 1. Schematic representation of the propagation of an
infectious disease. A susceptible person (S) can become infected (I) by exposure to the virus. The virus incubates for a
certain time inside the body and the symptoms appear after
the incubation period. However for certain individuals symptoms might not appear (known as asymptomatic carriers).
After the infection period a patient might recover (and gain
immunity) or die.

There are several existing modelling and simulation
studies which have showed a way to the policy makers
and strategists to take proactive measures.[11–14] Recently a number studies have emerged which have both
qualitatively and semi-quantitatively demonstrated the
advantages of social distancing and lockdown.[15, 16] Few
of them have attempted to predict the optimum duration of the lockdown and social distancing policies.[17]
However, such mathematical model based studies fail in
many aspects because of the complexity of the real life
situation, stochastic nature crowd dynamics, herd mentality of humans, and inherent time-dependence of rate
processes. Hence the predictive power of these models
becomes limited.
In this work we employ a modified and generalised version of the KM model and incorporate several other parameters to mimic some real life social requirements with
certain degree of specificity. Countries like Italy, where
the average age is higher and population density is low,
are expected to respond differently compared to countries
like India where the average age is far lower and population density is high. Moreover the different weather
conditions and of tropical countries might play a role.[18]
However, the sensitivity of COVID to the weather and
immunity against other diseases is under investigation
and yet to be confirmed. All these situations should,
in principle, modulate the transmission probabilities and
rate of spread.
We organise the rest of the paper as follows. In section II we detail the mathematical modelling and cellular
automata simulation protocols. Section III contains the
numerical results and analyses. This section is further
divided into several subsections that show the effect of
different control parameters (for example, probability of
transmission, ratio of young and old people, population
density etc.) on the total fraction of S, I and R from
CA simulations. We note that the present study and
related mathematical model based studies might exhibit
high sensitivity to the parameter space and underlying
assumptions. Such studies are aimed to help understand

Our model is a generalization of the celebrated
Kermack-McKendrick (KM) model or SIR theory for epidemic modelling.[7, 19–21] Accordingly, we divide the entire population of a region into the following categories.
1. Susceptible (S): These are the initially healthy fraction
of the population who are susceptible to get infected.
2. Infectives (I): These are
3. Removed (R): These people either get cured from
the disease or die. The cured population develop the
required anti-body in their system so that they are safe
from a second chance of infection. We neglect the reinfection scenario which is extremely rare.
Based on this classification, the time total population
(Ntot ) can be written as a summation of the numbers
people in each category (Eq. 2).
Ntot = NS (t) + NI (t) + NR (t)

(2)

Here, NX (t) is the fraction of population in each category (X = S, I, R). For any pandemic, the rate of conversion from S to I is nonlinear. There is an inherent spatiotemporal dependence of the rate constants. We generalize the conventional SIR model by introducing this dependence, by expressing the rate constants as functions
of time and space. This is schematically demonstrated
by a contour map in Fig. 2. Here, red denotes regions
with higher rate of disease spread, while green denotes a
lower rate. The patterns in the map experience temporal evolutions denoting the time-dependence of the rate
constants. Hence, a realistic model of the spread of an infectious disease requires rate constants that depend both
on time and space.
We first formulate the non-local space-time dependent
generalisation of the KM equations [Eq. 3 - 6] where the
rates (k) as are expressed as integrations over space and
time.
∂
NS (r, t) = −NS (r, t)
∂t

Z

dr0 dt0 kS→I (r − r0 )NI (r0 , t0 )
(3)

Z
∂
NI (r, t) =NS (r, t) dr0 dt0 kS→I (r − r0 )NI (r0 , t0 )
∂t
(4)
− (kI→C + kI→D )NI (r, t)
∂
NR (r, t) = kI→R NI (r, t)
∂t

(5)

Further integration of NX (t) over all space gives us
a set of 3 non-local equations which represent a more

3

FIG. 2. A schematic contour map to demonstrate the nonlocal behaviour and time-dependence of the rate of disease
spread. Here, red denotes regions with high rate constants
while green represents lower rates. The pattern portrayed in
this map is time-dependent and may change accordingly.

general model with time-dependent mean field description of rate constants. The solution of these equations is
however highly non-trivial. This can be simplified if we
neglect the non-local nature of the disease spread. Hence
we can reduce the above equations to the following forms
(Eq. 6-8).
dNS (t)
= −kS→I NS (t)NI (t)
dt

(6)

dNI (t)
= kS→I NS (t)NI (t) − kI→R NI (t)
dt

(7)

dNR (t)
= kI→R NI (t)
dt

(8)

with the constraint
dNtot
d
= [NS (t) + NI (t) + NR (t)] = 0
dt
dt

(9)

Here, ki is the rate constant for the ith process. The
arrow (→) in the subscript of the rate constant denotes
the direction of the respective process. One important
parameter is the reproductive ratio (R0 ) as defined in
Eq.10.[22]

R0 =

kS→I
kI→R


NS

(10)

The value of R0 determines the number of secondary
infections from a primary infection.[23] For COVID-19

the value average of R0 has been determined as approximately 2.2.[24] We consider the time dependence of R0
in our model. Accordingly kS→I evolves over time but
kI→R remains same as it depends on the nature of the
disease.
However, the position of the individuals in the system
is also important. For example, the factors like social
distancing, lock down, quarantine etc. are explicitly position dependent. KM model is strictly applicable for homogeneous population distribution and lacks this spacedependence.[8]
In this work we adopt two different approaches for
reasons discussed below. The first is a quasi-analytical
method where we perform numerical integration to solve
the local coupled equations. This takes into account the
time dependence of rate constants. This does not involve simulations, but also ignores non-locality. In the
second approach we carry out cellular automata simulations, where the non-locality is partly implemented as
necessary to address features like lockdown and quarantine.

III.

STOCHASTIC CELLULAR AUTOMATA
SIMULATION

The Eqs. 6-8 are approximations of the more general
non-local partial differential equations 3-5. In a realworld scenario, the non-local description may often become important in determining the fate of a pandemic
in a given geographical region. In such a case, the population parameters are space-dependent. Moreover, the
rate constants also have a spatial distribution. Hence,
solutions of these equations are highly non-trivial. As a
means of incorporating this non-local behaviour of the
system into our model, we seek the help of stochastic cellular automata (CA) simulations. CA simulation techniques are often used to model several physical phenomena.[25–31] Unlike the mathematical model,
CA simulations present a more microscopic view into
the problem and directly establish a physical map of the
disease-spread. Moreover, the generality of this scheme
lies in the fact that we incorporate several parameters,
individual exploration of which allow us to specifically
understand the role of different factors that are important for the spread of a disease. These parameters can
be classified into three primary categories:
1. Region specific: These are the parameters that
define the geographic and demographic characteristics
of the region in which the disease is spreading. These
include (a) population density, (b) fraction of initial
healthy and infected individuals, and (c) age distribution
in the population.
2. Disease specific: These parameters are characteristics of the disease that has caused the epidemic (viz.
COVID-19, SARS, Ebola, Cholera, Influenza etc.). This
includes (a) transmission rate, (b) mortality rate, (c)
probability of recovery/death according to age, and (d)

4
incubation period of the virus.
3. Disease control: The parameters that are important
for the control of the spread of the disease are the fractions of the population abiding by the norms of (a) social
distancing and (b) quarantine/lock down as put forward
by the government.
We use the Moore definition [32] to define the neighbourhood of an individual. It should be noted that the
von Neumann neighbourhood [32] definition neglects the
isotropic nature of infection in a disease transmission.
Several previous CA simulations used to model epidemic
spread have also used Moore neighbourhood.[33–35] For
a pandemic, it is often difficult to obtain the rates of
the processes (S to I or I to C/D) with respect to the
individual factors mentioned above. This may be due
to lack of proper information or an inherent difficulty in
addressing a particular factor. However, from the average available data, it is easier to estimate probabilities
pertaining to the concerned factors. Hence, rather than
modelling the CA simulation based on rate constants, we
employ a probabilistic approach. The salient features of
our simulation are noted below.
1. We divide the removed (R) category of the SIR
model into cured (C) and dead (D). Hence an SICD
model of stratified population is used in these simulations. Further, the susceptibles are classified into high
risk and low risk categories, depending on their probability of getting infected.
2. We start with a stretch of land with fractions of
it covered by healthy/susceptible (S) people and infected
(I) people. The total area for the simulation is given by
an N1 × N2 matrix of boxes. Each cell (point) is either
a vacant land (V) or a human being. The positions of
the individuals are initialized randomly within the given
area. The initial fractions of S and I determine the population density of the region. Note that an initial non-zero
fraction of I is important for this simulation as it acts as
the trigger for the spread of the disease. Moreover, there
are nor cured (C) or dead (D) people in the beginning.
3. When an infective comes in the neighbourhood
of a susceptible, the latter gets infected with a certain transmission probability. This probability is time
dependent and is defined by a given function (logistic/exponential/oscillatory). For individuals with low
susceptibility to infection the value of transmission probability is lower. This fraction of people include individuals who practise social distancing, have high disease resistance or are extremely cautious about their surroundings.
4. Since infectives are initially present in the population, a fraction of the susceptible group is assigned to be
quarantined (or locked down) from the beginning. This
is achieved by fixing them at their respective positions
throughout the simulation. It is assumed that these people cannot be infected as they cannot come in contact
with the infectives.
5. An age between 0 and 100 is assigned to each
individual in the entire population at the beginning of
the simulation. A threshold age is taken to determine

whether an individual is young or old. Accordingly, a
fraction of young people is defined. In this simulation
the young individuals represent the people with higher
immunity. This has been seen in several cases.[36–38]
6. In a given step propagation in the simulation, an
infective can either die or recover or remain infected. A
probability determines whether the individual continues
to remain infective of not. If not, we define two recovery probabilities for the young and the old. The latter
is much lower than the former. These 3 probabilities
together determine the duration in which an individual
remains infected and is potentially dangerous for the susceptible fraction of the population. This time duration
relates to the incubation period of the virus.
7. A recovered/cured person becomes immune to further infection.
In Table I we provide the definitions of the notations
related to the above description used in our CA simulations.
We employ all these conditions and run our simulations
for a given number of steps (N). It should be noted that
the time unit (∆t) is at our liberty to choose. Hence,
comparison with real data is important for prediction of
the time-scale of the epidemic. Additionally, this simulation can be applied to a wide range of diseases and
geographical regions by using the right parameters.
The population mapped out by a representative cellular automata simulation is shown in Fig 3. The initial
population consists of 5 % of the total available land
(light yellow) covered with susceptibles (blue) and 0.1 %
by infectives (red). There are only four infectives at t = 0
(marked by transparent red circles). With the advance
of time, the infectives transmit the disease to the susceptibles. The infected people can either recover (green) of
die (removed from the population). At the end, most of
the population is infected and they have either recovered
or died.

IV.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

From the theoretical layout discussed above, we can get
the time evolution of the four categories in a population
(susceptibles, infectives, cured and dead) for given rates
of the respective processes. Hence, from the available
data, if we are able to extract the said rates of conversion,
we can predict the future scenario of the COVID-19 pandemic for different regions in the world. Let us take the
example of India. The case in India was reported on 30th
January, 2020. From then, the count of infection has seen
an exponential increase reaching 24,434 on 24th April,
2020. The death toll has reached 780 the first one being
reported on 12th March (source: www.covid19india.org).
However, the number of patients recovering also increases
exponentially, although at a lower rate as compared to
the infection. From the data we extract the rate constants as given in Table II.

5
TABLE I. Definitions of the notations in this work.
Notation Definition
0
FX

FX

FY

PT r

PRY
PRO
PI

FQ
FS D

PTSD
r

F Saturation
FImax
tmax
I

Initial fraction of individuals
in the category X (S, I, C, D)
with respect to the available land area
Time dependent fraction of individuals
in the category X (S, I, C, D)
with respect to the total initial population
Fraction of the S strata consisting of
young individuals (people with higher
immunity in general) The term young is
defined by a threshold age A.
Probability of transmission of
the disease when an infective comes
in contact with a susceptible individual
Probability of recovery
of a young infective
Probability of recovery
of an old infective
Probability that an infective remains
infected without recovery or death
in a simulation time step
Fraction of susceptibles
in quarantine or lock-down
Fraction of people with
low susceptibility to infection
(SD denotes social distancing)
Transmission probability of disease
for an individual within
the fraction FSD
The value at which a given
time-dependent fraction gets saturated
The height (fraction) of the maxima of FI
The position (time) of the maxima of FI

TABLE II. Values of rate constants of respective processes in
India (up to 24th April 2020).

FIG. 3. Snapshots of the population map at different time
steps from CA simulation according to the protocol explained
above. The colours blue, red and green denote susceptible,
infective and cured respectively. The dead are taken out of
the population. Starting with a very few infectives (marked at
t = 0) within a society dominated by susceptibles, the disease
spreads throughout the population. In the final frame most
of the population is infected and is either cured or dead.

A.

Solution of SIR model with time-dependent rate

We numerically propagate and solve the SIR model
[Eq.6-8] and obtain the time evolution of NS , NI , and
NR [Fig. 4a, 4b and 4d]. We implement three different
kinds of time dependence in R0 so that it varies between
7.0 to 2.0 (i) exponentially decaying [Eq.11], (ii) a sigmoidal/logistic function [Eq.12], and (iii) periodic [Eq.
13]. We choose the upper and lower limits keeping in
mind that the infection rate is higher in the beginning
and eventually comes down to the average value at longer
times. The time evolution plots are supplied in the insets
of Fig. 4.

Rate constant Value (day −1 )



kS→I
kI→C
kI→D

0.116
0.016
0.004

t
R0 (t) = 2.0 + 5.0exp −
50.0

R0 (t) = 2.0 +
We use these values to estimate R0 to be ∼6. Nevertheless, the value of R0 evolves over time as the people
and government take protective measures. As mentioned
above the span of the values of rate constants can depend
on region, average age of population and other important
factors.


(11)

5.0
h
4 i
t
1 + exp 50.0

2

R0 (t) = 2.0 + 5.0cos



t
−
20.0

(12)


(13)

6



5t
PT r (t) = 0.1 + 0.9exp −
T

PT r (t) = 0.1 +



0.9
i
h
/2)
1 + exp − t−(T
T /15



10t
PT r (t) = 0.1 + 0.9cos2 −
T

(14)

(15)

(16)

Here, T = total number of simulation steps. The value
of PT r is varied from 1.0 to 0.1 with the time evolution of
the simulation according to these functions. The numerical values of the parameters mentioned in the equations
are obtained by trial and error to compare with the mathematical solution of the SIR model. Under comparable
set of parameters, we find similar patterns of temporal
evolution of population from both the generalized SIR
model and CA simulation. The striking similarity of the
results obtained from the two formalisms helps in validation of our CA simulation protocol. The following sets
of parameters (Tab. III) were used in each of the three
simulations.
FIG. 4. Time evolution of the S (susceptible), I (infective)
and R (removed) fractions of the population as observed from
the generalized SIR mathematical model (left column) and
stochastic cellular automata simulation (right column). These
time dependencies are obtained by using different functional
forms to define the time dependent rate (R0 ) in the mathematical model and transmission probability in the simulations
(PT r ). The functions used are exponential (a, b), logistic (c,
d) and square cosine (e, f). The temporal variations of the
rates/probabilities are shown in the insets of each graph.

From Fig. 4 we can see that the behaviour of the
evolution of S, I and R changes with the changing nature
of the time-dependence of infection rate. Interestingly,
with the periodic variation of R0 we can see a bimodal
nature in the I vs time plot. This mimics the data from
China. The periodic variation in the rate might happen
when after a certain time the preventive measures are
relaxed.
We verify the evolution of the stratified population as
obtained from the mathematical model by our stochastic
cellular automata simulations. The results are presented
in the right hand side column of Fig. 4(b, d, f). Three
functional forms of the transmission probability (PT r ) are
used to define its time dependence. These are exponential
[Eq. 14], logistic [Eq. 15] and square cosine [Eq. 16]
functions as used in the previous mathematical analysis.

TABLE III. Values of the set of parameters used in the CA
simulations mentioned above.
Notation Definition
FS0
FI0
FY
PRY
PRO
PI
FQ
FS D
PTSD
r

0.05
0.0005
0.6
0.9
0.6
0.99
0.0
0.5
0.3

Another important and relatively less discussed quantity is the fraction of new infection (Inew ). In Fig. 5
we show the time evolution of total active infected population [I(t)] and newly infected population [Inew (t)] for
three different kinds of time dependent R0 . These analyses show that the maxima in the new cases peak before
the maxima of the total number of active infections. We
observe a second peak in Inew (t) when R0 varied periodically with time. This can be attributed to the second
pandemic wave.[39] One is free to incorporate other kinds
of temporal variation of the rate constants to explain the
date of a specific reigion.

7

FIG. 5. The time evolution of total active infected population
[red trace, I(t)] and newly infected population [purple trace,
Inew (t)] for three different kinds of time dependent R0 namely
(a) exponentially decaying [Eq. 11], (b) a sigmoidal/logistic
function [Eq. 12], and (c) periodic [Eq. 13]. The peak of
Inew (t) always appears before the peak of I(t). For a periodic
time-dependence we see a second peak in Inew (t) which is
known as a second wave. These results are obtained from the
numerical solutions of the SIR model.

B.

Observations from CA simulations: Dependence
of epidemic outcome on different parameters

Here, we study the temporal evolutions of the different categories of the society as functions of the different
parameters defined in the CA simulation. All the results
presented here are averaged over 100 individual simulations.

1.

Initial fraction of susceptibles and infectives

The spread of any infectious disease shows strong sensitivity towards the population density of a region. It
also depends on the fraction of susceptible (healthy) and
infected population already present in that region. We
first vary FS0 in the range 0.01 to 0.50 by keeping FI0
fixed at 0.001. The meanings of the notations are given
in Table I.
We keep an order of magnitude difference between FS0
and FI0 . In all these simulations we have not imposed any
social distancing or other proactive measures. In the real
scenario the number of infected people in a region would
depend on the delay of closure of geographical border to
prevent immigration. We note that increase in either of
FS0 or FI0 would result in an increased population density
as the area in the CA simulation has been kept fixed.
In Fig. 6a, we plot the saturated (or steady state)
values from the plots of FS , FC and FD against FS0 .
The time evolution is given in the supporting information [Fig. S1]. We see a surprising non-linear behaviour.
When FS0 is higher than 0.04 the whole population becomes infected after a certain time. However, the number of deaths does not vary substantially. 6b and 6c respectively show the variations of the peak height (FImax )
and peak position (tmax
) against FS0 from the FI vs time
I
plot. It is clear that the fraction of infected population
increases with increasing FS0 . The time at which the infection becomes a maximum decreases with increasing
FS0 . Both the scenarios have negative impact on a society and its healthcare resources.

FIG. 6. (a) Dependence of the saturated values of the S, C
and D population fraction on FS0 . (b) Variation of the peak
maxima of FI vs. time plot with FS0 . (c) Variation of the
position of the peak maxima of the same. These temporal
patterns are obtained from CA simulations.

Next we vary FI0 for a fixed value of FS0 = 0.05 and
plot the time dependence of S, I, C and D [Fig. S2]. In
Fig. 7 we perform similar analyses as those in Fig. 6.
We see that the infected peak height increases and shifts
to lower values in the time axis in a non-linear fashion
with increasing FI0 . These results clearly demonstrate the
importance of an early ban on international or domestic
travels which directly increases the value FI0 .

FIG. 7. Variation of the (a) height and (b) position of the
peak maxima of FI vs. time graph with FI0 as obtained from
CA simulations.

2.

Fraction of young population

The prognosis of patients with infectious diseases such
as -19, Spanish flu etc. often shows strong sensitivity
towards the age of the patient. For example the novel
coronavirus has proven to be fatal for older population,
especially for people above 50 years and beyond. Importantly, the age distribution is widely different for different
countries. For European countries like Italy the average
age is way higher than that in India. Keeping this in

8
mind, we vary the fraction of younger population (FY )
from 0.1 to 0.9 in our simulations while the other parameters are fixed. By the term young we indicate the
population below 50 years of age especially in the context
of COVID-19.
In Fig. 8 we plot the fraction of cured and dead population after temporal saturation from the plots shown
in Fig. S3. We discover a linear variation for both with
changing FY .

and 0.3 respectively, considering that the young people
have a greater chance of recovery.
Fig. S4 a, b, c and d show the time evolution of S, I,
C and D respectively for the different values of PI . As
expected, the rate of infection increases with an increase
in the value of PI . FS is found to decrease initially as
FI increases. After a certain amount of time, FS attains
saturation and FI reaches a maximum after which it decreases to 0 gradually. FC and FD finally take over after
an initial increase and ultimately reach saturation.
For PI = 1.0, the disease is continuously carried forward without any death or recovery. Hence, we do not
have any data for FC and FD in this case. This however
is unphysical. We plot the saturation values of FS , FC
and FD and the maxima height and position of FI with
respect to the control parameter (which is PI in this case)
in Fig. 9.

FIG. 8. Dependence of the fraction of cured and dead population on the fraction of young population as obtained from
CA simulations.

3.

Duration of infection

One of the most important parameters that determine
the effectiveness of the spread of an epidemic is the time
duration for which an individual remains infected before
death or recovery. A person may or may not develop
symptoms in this incubation period. For the latter case,
it is most often not possible to determine whether a person has been infected or not. Hence, the probability of
transmission from this section of the society is high.
Fixing the values of PRY , PRO and A (Table I), we vary
the value of PI from 0.90 to 1.00 to study the time evolution of the different categories of the population (Fig.
S4). This gives us an idea about the effect of the infection period for a particular disease. Here we neglect the
effects of quarantine and social distancing to minimize
the artefacts introduced by multiple parameters in the
simulation. The probability of transmission PT r is taken
to be time-independent in this case (PT r = 1.0).
Each of the above results are obtained by averaging
over 100 individual simulations. The initial population
density in each case is given by 2 % of the total available land covered by susceptibles and 0.1 % covered by
infectives. The threshold age for defining young and old
is taken to be 50, wherein 60 % of the total population is
considered to be young. PRY and PRO are taken to be 0.8

FIG. 9. Dependence of the saturated values of (a) FS , FC , FD ,
(b) peak height and (c) peak position of FI on PI obtained
from CA simulations. A distinct non-linearity is observed at
higher values of the control parameter.

After an initial linear progression a non-linearity is observed in the fractions as the value of the control parameter is increased. We observe that the epidemic is
more aggressive for PI > 0.97. This is where the nonlinearity sets in significantly. The exponential growth of
FI and subsequent decrease in FS for higher values of PI
denotes that for diseases in which death/recovery is seen
after a long period of remaining infected are more likely
to spread to a wider section of the community although
the fatality rate might be low. This directly relates to
the incubation period of the virus causing the disease. It
should be noted that fatality rate and incubation period
are two competing factors that determine the range of
spread of a pandemic. Hence, for a virus to have a widespread effect like that of COVID-19, PI > 0.97, while PD
for the major fraction of the society is much lower.

9
4.

Quarantine and Social Distancing

As a way to counter the spread of a pandemic, such
as the present COVID-19 crisis, governments around the
world have implemented nationwide lock down to some
extent. Social distancing is being prescribed as an important tool that is expected to break the chain of virus
spread and flatten the curve of infection. From our cellular automata simulations we quantify the importance
of these two factors. Starting with the same population
density, age distribution and recovery probability as mentioned in the previous section, a fraction (FQ ) of the susceptible part of the population is fixed in their positions
throughout the simulation. This simulates the people
who are quarantined or locked down in their homes. It is
assumed that they do not go outside and has zero contact
with infectives. Hence, they never get infected. These are
immobile and remain healthy throughout the simulation.
We take the value of PI to be 0.99 considering that the
virus can spread widely. Taking the transmission probability (PT r ) to be 1 (time-independent), we vary the value
of FQ from 0.0 to 1.0 to see the effect of quarantine on
the state of the population. FQ = 0 means that no one
is maintaining home quarantine, while FQ = 1 denotes
complete lock down of the entire healthy population.
From our CA simulations we see that the fraction of
people locking down themselves in their homes has a remarkable effect on the rate at which the virus spreads
throughout the society (Fig. S5). The decay of the FS
curve is much faster for lower values of FQ . Also the infection maximum becomes flatter as the value of FQ is
increased. The predicted rate of death is always lower
than the rate of recovery. To understand these dependencies we plot the values of the fractions of S, C and
D at which they become constant against the fraction of
quarantined people in Fig. 10a. We also plot the height
and position of the maxima of the fraction of infected
people against the control parameter in Fig. 10b and c
respectively.
Examining Fig. 10 the role of quarantine and lock
down in defeating the spread of a pandemic becomes
clear. For higher values of FQ the dependencies become
non-linear. For FQ > 0.7, the effect diminishes to a certain extent because of this non-linearity. Interestingly,
the saturation values of FC and FD converge to almost
0 along with the onset of the said non-linearity. This
denotes that with a decrease in the rate of infection the
rates of both recovery and death become very low hinting
towards a healthy overall society. The time taken by the
infection to reach its peak is also significantly dependent
of the factor of quarantine.
Though home quarantine is an effective measure to
break the chain of a pandemic, it is not always feasible
for everyone to strictly maintain the norms. For example, a person has to go to the market or medicine shop to
obtain essential commodities for sustaining life at home.
The doctors, nurses, police, sweepers and others who are
actively involved in serving the society in the period of a

FIG. 10. Dependence of the saturated values of (a) FS , FC ,
FD , (b) peak height and (c) peak position of FI on FQ obtained from CA simulations. Higher quarantined fraction denotes lesser spread of infection.

pandemic also fall under this category. In addition, there
are people who are indifferent to the seriousness of the
situation and deliberately come out of their homes breaking the laws of lock-down put forward by the government.
Hence a 100 % quarantine (FQ = 1.0) is unphysical.
The people belonging to this (1 − FQ ) fraction of the
society try to avoid infection by maintaining social distancing and remaining careful about their surroundings.
Hence, probability of transmission is drastically lowered
for them. We vary the fraction of these individuals (FSD )
and monitor the change in the population with the spread
of the disease. We consider the probability of transmission for the low susceptible people as PTSD
r = 0.2
(much lesser than the general transmission probability,
PT r = 1.0). As in the previous cases, the fractions of
S, C and D attain a saturation after some time, while I
reaches a maximum and decays thereafter (Fig. S6). We
plot the respective saturation values, peak height and
position as functions of FSD in Fig. 11.
In Fig. 11, the dependence of the time evolution of the
different sections of the population is not as remarkable
as in the previous case of quarantine (Fig. 10). Additionally, the time taken by the infection to reach the
maximum is also weakly dependent on this control parameter. This weak dependence is observed even with
a value of PTSD
r as low as 0.2. For higher values of this
probability, the dependencies are further lower.
Hence, from our analysis, it becomes clear that to flatten the curve of infection, home quarantine is the most
effective tool. Even with utmost caution while going out,
the rate of infection can be high enough to affect a considerable section of the society in a smaller timescale.

10

FIG. 11. Dependence of the saturation values of (a) FS , FC ,
FD , (b) peak height and (c) peak position of FI on FSD obtained from CA simulations.

V.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

While COVID-19 has certain similarities with earlier
epidemics (measles, small pox), there are certain remarkable features that distinguish the former from other pandemics. One important difference is that the immunity
or the probability of getting infected depends on several
factors that can be identified. Clearly, the accumulation
of data across countries has become more accessible to
general public and scientists alike. Secondly, the presence of a large number of asymptotic carriers which pose
a serious threat to other less fortunate. In addition, there
are certain similarities across the countries, as there are
differences. Many of the emerging patterns are yet to
be understood. It appears that modelling needs to be
more generalized than those usually employed. There is
an urgent need for understanding the dependencies.
The most common model used in modelling epidemics
is the SIR model, already discussed here. We have discussed why this model might not be appropriate for the
COVID-19 pandemic. In this work we have employed
two generalized schemes to model COVID-19 pandemic:
(i) a modified SIR model and (ii) a stochastic cellular
automata simulations to understand the spatio-temporal
evolution of a population undergoing a pandemic crisis.
The key outcomes from the present study are as follows.
1. The time evolution of the fractions of S, I and R in a
population is dependent on the time-dependence of rate
of infection. This is represented here in terms of kS→I (t).
This in turn get translated to Similar dependence is also
seen in the CA simulations where the transmission probabilities (PT r ) are made time dependent. When a pandemic starts in a region (country for example) the nature
of the spread is often unknown. Hence a proper protocol to control the spread and make the citizens cautious

takes time. For this reason, the rate of transmission is
higher in the beginning. With progress of time, this rate
decreases as people learn more about the safety protocols. Sometimes, the rate may show oscillatory behaviour
because of the heterogeneity of the population. Hence,
time-dependence of the rate of transmission is an important factor.
2. From CA simulations, we find that both home quarantine and social distancing (for people coming out of
their homes) are effective measures to fight the crisis of
the spread of an infectious disease. However, even with
utmost caution while out of home (low probability of getting infected), the peak of the infection curve do not show
significant shift. On the other hand, the fraction of people quarantined strongly affects the position of the peak.
Hence, staying at ones home is the best policy during the
spread of an infectious disease.
3. Because of the conservation of the sum over subpopulations, the coupled equations become non-linear.
This implies that an analysis of response to fluctuations
in the control parameters might reveal interesting information. Such work is under progress.
4. We also find that the incubation period of the virus
plays an important role in determining the fate of the
time progression of the pandemic. Longer the incubation
period, (high probability of remaining infected) lesser are
the chances that the infected individual will be symptomatic. Hence the disease in that person cannot be detected easily. As a result, this individual poses a severe
threat of infection for the nearby susceptible population.
Other factors, like age distribution, initial population
density of susceptibles, and time of lock-down of national
borders are also major contributing issues that determine
the spread of the disease. The rate constants, which are
the parameters in the SIR model, represent average rates
involving several factors (as mentioned above) that affect
the overall temporal evolution of the population. We include these factors as parameters in terms of probabilities
in the CA simulations. This not only gives us a better
understanding of the roles of these individual factors but
also allow us a more microscopic view into the physical
map of a region affected by the spread of an infectious
disease. However, it should be noted that both the model
and the simulation produce limited results because of the
inherent inhomogeneous nature of any pandemic and the
limited availability of data. The models can be applied
to small local geographical regions. However, they may
fail to predict the outcome in a global picture.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Department of Science and Technology (DST, India) for partial support of this work. B.B.
thanks Sir J. C. Bose fellowship for partial support.
S.Mu. thanks DST, India for providing INSPIRE fellowship. S.Mo. thanks UGC, India for providing research
fellowship.

11

[1] C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. ONeill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan,
A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis, and R. Agha, International
Journal of Surgery (2020).
[2] F. Petropoulos and S. Makridakis, PloS one 15, e0231236
(2020).
[3] T. K. Yamana and J. Shaman, Epidemics , 100359 (2019).
[4] D. Wrapp, N. Wang, K. S. Corbett, J. A. Goldsmith, C.L. Hsieh, O. Abiona, B. S. Graham, and J. S. McLellan,
Science 367, 1260 (2020).
[5] W.-H. Chen, U. Strych, P. J. Hotez, and M. E. Bottazzi,
Current tropical medicine reports , 1 (2020).
[6] C. I. Siettos and L. Russo, Virulence 4, 295 (2013).
[7] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, Proceedings of
the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of
a mathematical and physical character 115, 700 (1927).
[8] D. J. Daley and J. Gani, Epidemic modelling: an introduction, Vol. 15 (Cambridge University Press, 2001).
[9] O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and J. A. Metz,
Publications of the Newton Institute 5, 95 (1995).
[10] J. I. Steinfeld, J. S. Francisco, and W. L. Hase, Chemical
kinetics and dynamics, Vol. 3 (Prentice Hall Englewood
Cliffs (New Jersey), 1989).
[11] A. J. Kucharski, T. W. Russell, C. Diamond, Y. Liu,
J. Edmunds, S. Funk, R. M. Eggo, F. Sun, M. Jit, J. D.
Munday, et al., The lancet infectious diseases (2020).
[12] W.-K. Ming, J. Huang, and C. J. Zhang, bioRxiv (2020).
[13] S. Mandal, T. Bhatnagar, N. Arinaminpathy, A. Agarwal, A. Chowdhury, M. Murhekar, R. R. Gangakhedkar,
and S. Sarkar, Indian J Med Res 151 (2020).
[14] K. Iwata and C. Miyakoshi, Journal of Clinical Medicine
9, 944 (2020).
[15] W. H. Organization et al., Considerations for quarantine
of individuals in the context of containment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19): interim guidance, 19 March
2020, Tech. Rep. (World Health Organization, 2020).
[16] K. Prem, Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M.
Eggo, N. Davies, S. Flasche, S. Clifford, C. A. Pearson,
J. D. Munday, et al., The Lancet Public Health (2020).
[17] R. Singh and R. Adhikari, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.12055 (2020).
[18] L. M. Casanova, S. Jeon, W. A. Rutala, D. J. Weber,
and M. D. Sobsey, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76, 2712
(2010).
[19] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May, Nature 280, 361 (1979).

[20] D. S. Jones, M. Plank, and B. D. Sleeman, Differential
equations and mathematical biology (CRC press, 2009).
[21] A. Skvortsov, R. Connell, P. Dawson, and R. Gailis, in
MODSIM 2007 International Congress on Modelling and
Simulation. Modelling and Simulation Society of Australia and New Zealand (Citeseer, 2007) pp. 657–662.
[22] E. Holmes, D. Tilman, and P. Kareiva, Spatial ecology
, 111 (1997).
[23] M. Hartfield and S. Alizon, PLoS pathogens 9 (2013).
[24] S. Zhang, M. Diao, W. Yu, L. Pei, Z. Lin, and
D. Chen, International Journal of Infectious Diseases 93,
201 (2020).
[25] C. A. Hollingsworth, P. G. Seybold, L. B. Kier, and C.K. Cheng, International journal of chemical kinetics 36,
230 (2004).
[26] P. G. Seybold, L. B. Kier, and C.-K. Cheng, The Journal
of Physical Chemistry A 102, 886 (1998).
[27] S. Wolfram, Reviews of modern physics 55, 601 (1983).
[28] M. Bartolozzi and A. W. Thomas, Physical review E 69,
046112 (2004).
[29] B. S. Soares-Filho, G. C. Cerqueira, and C. L. Pennachin, Ecological modelling 154, 217 (2002).
[30] A. Goltsev, F. De Abreu, S. Dorogovtsev, and J. Mendes,
Physical Review E 81, 061921 (2010).
[31] R. M. Almeida and E. E. Macau, in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, Vol. 285 (IOP Publishing, 2011) p.
012038.
[32] L. B. Kier, P. G. Seybold, and C.-K. Cheng, Modeling
chemical systems using cellular automata (Springer Science & Business Media, 2005).
[33] S. Fu and G. Milne, in Proc. of the Australian Conference
on Artificial Life (2003).
[34] S. H. White, A. M. Del Rey, and G. R. Sánchez, Applied
Mathematics and Computation 186, 193 (2007).
[35] G. C. Sirakoulis, I. Karafyllidis, and A. Thanailakis,
Ecological Modelling 133, 209 (2000).
[36] A. Remuzzi and G. Remuzzi, The Lancet (2020).
[37] S. Ruan, The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).
[38] J. T. Wu, K. Leung, M. Bushman, N. Kishore, R. Niehus,
P. M. de Salazar, B. J. Cowling, M. Lipsitch, and G. M.
Leung, Nature Medicine , 1 (2020).
[39] R. Barro, J. Ursua, and J. Weng, VoxEU. org 20 (2020).

