arXiv:2004.10929v3 [physics.flu-dyn] 29 Apr 2020

Modeling ambient temperature and relative humidity
sensitivity of respiratory droplets and their role in
Covid-19 outbreaks
Swetaprovo Chaudhuri

∗1

, Saptarshi Basu

†2

, Prasenjit Kabi2 , Vishnu R.

Unni3 , and Abhishek Saha
1
2

‡3

Institute for Aerospace Studies, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, India
3

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of
California, USA

Abstract
One of the many unresolved questions that revolves around the Covid-19 pandemic
is whether local outbreaks can depend on ambient conditions like temperature and
relative humidity. In this paper, we develop a model that tries to explain and describe
the temperature and relative humidity sensitivity of respiratory droplets and their possible connection in determining viral outbreaks. The model has two parts. First, we
model the growth rate of the infected population based on a reaction mechanism - the
final equations of which are similar to the well-known SIR model. The advantage of
modeling the pandemic using the reaction mechanism is that the rate constants have
sound physical interpretation. The infection rate constant is derived using collision rate
∗

Email: schaudhuri@utias.utoronto.ca
Email: sbasu@iisc.ac.in
‡
Email: asaha@eng.ucsd.edu
†

1

theory and shown to be a function of the respiratory droplet lifetime. In the second
part, we have emulated the respiratory droplets responsible for disease transmission
as salt solution droplets and computed their evaporation time accounting for droplet
cooling, heat and mass transfer and finally crystallization of the salt. The model output favourably compares with the experimentally obtained evaporation characteristics
of levitated droplets of pure water and salt solution, respectively, ensuring fidelity
of the model. Droplet evaporation/desiccation time is indeed dependent on ambient
temperature and relative humidity, considered at both outdoor and indoor conditions.
Since the droplet evaporation time determines the infection rate constant, ambient
temperature and relative humidity are shown to impact the outbreak growth rates.

Introduction
Seasonality of viral diseases is documented [1, 2, 3, 4], yet its explanation lacks rigorous
scientific underpinning. The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has led to the debate whether temperature and relative humidity have influenced the growth rate of the pandemic in specific
geographical locations. The debate has been bolstered by the observation that higher growth
rates in localized outbreaks are often associated with higher latitudes and times corresponding to the transition from winter to spring. Wang et al. [5] concluded that high temperature
and high relative humidity reduced the effective reproductive number of the outbreak - a result they claimed to be consistent with the past outbreaks of influenza and SARS. However,
Yao et al. [6] found that ambient conditions like temperature do not hold any significant
influence on the growth rate of the pandemic. A recent report by the United States National
Academies [7] and references of recent experiments therein show that laboratory evidence
from multiple sources suggest reduced survivability of the Covid-19 virus at high temperature and relative humidity. A review of recent literature focusing on establishing effect of
temperature and humidity has been conducted in [8]. Screening 517 articles the authors
found that the general consensus is cold and dry conditions were suitable for the spread of
the virus. To our knowledge the reason for this behavior is not well established.
It has been however well established that Covid-19 transmits via respiratory droplets that
are exhaled during breathing, talking, coughing or sneezing. Different activities correspond to
2

different droplet sizes and myriad trajectories for the droplets embedded in the corresponding
jets. These respiratory droplets are essentially salt solution droplets with salt mass fraction
of about 0.01, in addition to proteins and pathogens, when the droplets emerge from an
infected individual [9, 10]. In this paper, to model the outbreaks, we extensively use the
evaporation and settling times of NaCl-water droplets which are in turn used as a surrogate
model of the infectious droplets. The evaporation mechanism of such droplets is laced with
complexities stemming from initial droplet cooling, heat transfer, mass transfer of the solvent
and solute, respectively, and finally crystallization of the solute - a phenomenon known as
efflorescence. The model developed is first validated with new experimental results obtained
from droplets observed to evaporate in an acoustic levitator. Simultaneously, a chemical
kinetics based reaction mechanism model is developed with final rate equations similar to
that yielded by the SIR model [11]. The rate constant is shown to be a strong function
of the droplet lifetime. Next, the droplet lifetime at two typical locations relevant to the
ongoing pandemic is evaluated. At these locations, both outdoor and indoor conditions
are considered. Combining all, we find that the model yields encouraging results in at
least partially explaining the significantly different growth rate of the outbreak at the two
geographical locations exhibiting very different weather conditions. The results in no way
suggests that variables not considered in this paper play a secondary role in determining
the outbreak spread. Rather, this paper aims to establish a possible connection between
the pandemic and the ambient conditions using a well defined framework rooted in physical
sciences. The paper is arranged as follows: first we provide details of the experiments used
to obtain the evaporation characteristics of the water and salt solution droplets. This is
followed by the reaction mechanism model that yields the equations for the growth rate
and the infection rate constant of the outbreaks. This infection rate constant provides
the connection and motivation for modeling the droplet evaporation time scales. Next, to
evaluate the rate constant, detailed modeling of the droplet evaporation is presented. This
is followed by results and discussions. Finally, we summarize the approach and findings in
the conclusion section.

3

Experiments
The experiments with isolated evaporating droplets were conducted in a contact-less environment of an ultrasonic levitator (tec5) to discount boundary effects, generally present in
suspended, pendant or sessile droplet setups [12, 13]. The experimental setup with the diagnostics is shown in Fig. 1. A droplet was generated and positioned near one of the stable
nodes of the levitator by using a micropipette. The levitated droplet was allowed to evaporate
in the ambient condition of the lab at 30o C and at about 50% RH. The transient dynamics of
evaporation and precipitation of the evaporating droplet was captured with shadowgraphy
technique using combination of a CCD camera (NR3S1, IDT Vision) fitted with a Navitar
zoom lens assembly (6.5x lens and 5x extension tube) and a backlit-illumination by a cold
LED light source (SL150, Karl Storz).

Figure 1: Experimental setup showing the acoustic levitation of a droplet illuminated by a
cold LED source. A diffuser plate is used for uniform imaging of the droplet. A CCD camera
fitted with zoom lens assembly is used for illumination. The schematic is not to scale.
A set of 10 images at a burst speed of 30 frames per second is acquired every 2 seconds
for the entire duration of the droplet lifetime. The spatial resolution of the images was
≈ 1µm/pixel. The temporal evolution of diameter of the evaporating droplet was extracted
from the images using the ”Analyze Particles” plugin in ImageJ (open source platform for
image processing). The final precipitate was carefully collected on carbon tape and observed
in dark-field mode under a reflecting microscope (Olympus BX-51). A range of initial droplet
diameters varying from 300µm to 1000µm were investigated in experiments.

4

A reaction mechanism to model the pandemic
In this section, we model the infection spread rate using the collision theory of reaction rates,
well known in chemical kinetics [14]. The connection between droplets and the outbreak will
be established later. In this model we adopt the following nomenclature: P represents a
Covid-19 positive person infecting healthy person(s) susceptible to infection. The healthy
person is denoted by H (who is initially Covid-19 negative), R represents a person who has
recovered from Covid-19 infection and hence assumed to be immune from further infection
while X represents a person who dies due to Covid-19 infection. We consider only onedimensional head on collisions and the schematic of a collision volume is shown in Fig. 2.
Here, one healthy person denoted by H with effective diameter σH is approached by a Covid19 positive person P of same effective diameter. σH can be considered as the diameter of
the hemispherical volume of air that is drawn by H during each act of inhalation.

Figure 2: A schematic of the collision rate model for the infection to occur. Infected person P
(large black circle) ejects a cloud of infectious droplets D denoted by small red dots and the
cloud approaches a healthy person H with a relative velocity V~DH to infect them. The figure
also shows the collision volume swept by the droplet cloud D and H with their respective
effective diameters.
It is widely believed that Covid-19 spreads by respiratory droplets [15] resulting from
breathing, coughing, sneezing or talking. Thus, we assume that a conical volume in front
of P is surrounded by a cloud of infectious droplets exhaled by P . The droplet cloud is
denoted by D and the maximum cloud diameter is given by σD . Clearly σD should be
determined by the smaller of the evaporation or settling time of the droplets ejected by P
5

and the horizontal component of the velocity with which the droplets displace. In each such
cloud, we assume that there are numerous droplets containing active Covid-19 virus. The
velocity of this droplet cloud relative to H is given by V~DH . In such a scenario, we assume
that in a unit volume there are nP infected persons, nH healthy persons. For a collision to
be possible, the maximum separation distance between the centers of D (the droplet cloud)
and H is given by
σDH = (σD + σH )/2

(1)

The collision volume - the volume of the cylinder within which a collision between the
2
droplet cloud of P and air collection volume of H should lie is given by πσDH
VDH . Thus,

the number of collisions between H and the droplet cloud D of P , per unit time per unit
volume, that will trigger infections, is given by
2
ZDH = πσDH
VDH nP nH

(2)

Now, given that each collision between P (basically its droplet cloud D) and H results
conversion of the healthy individual to infected individual, we can write
dnH
= −ZDH
dt

(3)

Now, we can define [P ] = nP /ntotal and [H] = nH /ntotal , whereas ntotal is the total
number of people per unit volume in motion outside their residence - those who are capable
of transmitting the infection as well as accepting the infection, in that given volume. This
implies

ω=−

d[H]
2
= ntotal πσDH
VDH [P ][H] = k[P ][H]
dt

(4)

where,
2
k = ntotal πσDH
VDH

(5)

Here, ω is the reaction rate. Furthermore, if we assume that the mortality rate is about
3% for the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, then we can convert the kinetics of infection spread
to a complete reaction mechanism given by the following:
k

P + H −−1→ P + P∗
6

[R1]

k

P∗ −−2→ P

[R2]

k

P −−3→ 0.97 R + 0.03 X

[R3]

It is to be recognized that H does not become P immediately on contact with the droplet
cloud. The virus must proliferate for a finite time after contact to render a person infectious.
A person who has just come in contact with the virus and does not have the capability to
infect others yet, is denoted by P ∗ . k1 , k2 and k3 are the rate constants of reactions [R1], [R2]
and [R3], respectively. All rate constants must have dimensions of [T ]−1 . Clearly, k1 > k3
for the rapid outbreak to occur. It is to be recognized that this framework implies that
k1 , the rate constant of the second order elementary reaction [R1] resulting from collisions
between the droplet cloud from an infectious individual and healthy individual, is purely
controlled by physical effects. The rate constants k2 and k3 of the other two first order
elementary reactions [R2] and [R3] are essentially decay rates emerging from the time by
which the respective concentrations reach e−1 levels of the initial concentration, for the
respective reactions. Thus, k2 and k3 are purely determined by interaction between the virus
and human body. We know the approximate recovery time from the Covid-19 disease is
about 14 days. Thus we can assume k3 = 1/14 day−1 . We also assume the latency period
(not incubation period) to be 1 day, hence k2 = 1 day−1 . Given the importance of k1 in
determining the outbreak characteristics, we will refer to k1 as the infection rate constant.
The major contribution of the work is imparting a rigorous physical interpretation to k1 and
calculating it ab initio.
Using Eqn. 4, we can write the system of ODEs for d[P ]/dt and d[P ∗ ]/dt as
 


d[P ]
k2
[P ]
 dt   −k3



 




=
(6)



 


 d[P ∗ ] 
k1 [H] −k2
[P ∗ ]
dt
In this paper we are interested in modeling the initial phases of the outbreaks where


[H]  [P ]. Hence, we can safely assume [H] ≈ [H]0 i.e. the concentration of healthy people
remains approximately constant during the early phase of the outbreak and is equal to the
initial concentration which is very close to unity at t = 0 i.e. at the onset of the outbreak.

7

The time of the beginning of the outbreak denoted by t = 0 for a particular location can be
assumed to be the day when number of Covid-19 positive persons equalled 10. [P ]0 is [P ] at
t = 0. Then, [P ] can be solved as an eigenvalue problem and is given by

[P ] = [P ]0 (C1 eλ1 t + C2 eλ2 t )

(7)

C1 , C2 are constants to be determined from the eigenvectors and the initial conditions
[P ]0 and [P ∗ ]0 . λ1,2 are the eigenvalues and are given by
p
−(k3 + k2 ) ± (k3 + k2 )2 − 4(k2 k3 − k1 k2 )
λ1,2 =
2

(8)

2
By Eqn. 5, k1 = ntotal πσDH
VDH . As mentioned before k2 = 1 day−1 and k3 = 1/14 day−1
√
which yields λ1,2 = −0.5357 ± 0.2156 + k1 . If k2 → ∞ i.e. a healthy person becomes

infectious immediately on contact with an infectious person λ1 → k1 − k3 .
Clearly this model does not yet account for the preventive measures like ”social distancing”, ”quarantining” after contact tracking and population wide usage of masks. We will
call this ”social enforcement”. However, it can be included by accounting for the time variation of [H]. Social enforcement reduces the concentration of healthy, susceptible individuals
from [H0 ] to [HSE ] where the concentration of healthy population susceptible to infection
after implementing strict social distancing (at time t = tSE ) [HSE ] < [H0 ]. In case of social
enforcement [P ] will be given by:
[P ] = [P ]0 (C1 eλ1 t + C2 eλ2 t ) 0 < t < tSE
[P ] = [P ]SE (C1 e

λ1 (t−tSE )

λ2 (t−tSE )

+ C2 e

(9)

) t ≥ tSE

Here, [P ] = [P ]SE at t = tSE and λ1,SE , λ2,SE are the eigenvalues from Eqn. 6 with [H] =
[HSE ]. k1 - the infection rate constant, remains to be completely determined. It is to be
2
recognized that two of the key inputs of k1 are σDH and VDH , since k1 ∝ VDH σDH
by Eqn.

5. As already mentioned σH is the diameter of the hemisphere from which breathable air
is inhaled. σD is the diameter of the droplet cloud. Using mass and momentum balance, it
can be shown that the diameter of a turbulent puff initially injected with a velocity U0 , after
time t is given by σD,t = σD,0 (8aU0 t/(9σD,0 ))1/4 [16]. The velocity of the puff, on the other
hand, can be expressed as, VD,t = U0 (9σD,0 /(8aU0 t))3/4 [16]. Since the puff occurs only when
8

P coughs/sneezes, the effective, time averaged diameter and the velocity of the puff relative
to P can be calculated as

σD,P = τ

−1

τ

Z
0

VD,P = τ

−1

Z

4σD,0
σD,t dt =
5

τ




VD,t dt = 4U0

0

8aU0
9σD,0

9σD,0
8aU0

1/4

3/4

τ 1/4

(10)

τ −3/4

(11)

Here, τ is the characteristic lifetime of the respiratory droplets in the puff, σD,0 is the
initial diameter of the jet, entrainment coefficient a = 2.25 [16]. Now, the puff is present
only for a short time τ after it has been ejected. Therefore the steady state k1 can be defined
as

2
k1 = ntotal πσDH
VDH (τ /tc )

(12)

Just like in collision theory, not all molecules are energetic enough to effect reactions, in our
case the droplet cloud is not always present. The last fraction (τ /tc ) is the probability the
droplet cloud with average diameter σD,P is present. tc is the average time period between
two vigorous expiratory events. VDH = (VD,P + VP ) + VH . We can assume VP = VH . It
is thus apparent that τ appears in σDH , VDH and in the last fraction in Eqn. 12 thereby
emerging as a critical parameter of the entire pandemic dynamics. Hence τ merits a detailed
physical understanding. Given the composition of the respiratory droplets, modeling τ is
highly non-trivial and is taken up in the following section.

Modeling respiratory droplet evaporation
It is well documented in the literature that an average human exhales droplets (consisting
of water, salt, proteins and virus/bacteria) in the range of 1 − 100µm [17, 18, 10]. In this
section, we offer a detailed exposition of the evaporation dynamics of such droplets as ejected
during the course of breathing, talking, sneezing or coughing.
The small droplets (< 2 − 3µm) have a very short evaporation timescale. This implies
that these droplets evaporate quickly (< 1s) after being breathed out. However, the same

9

conclusion does not hold for slightly larger droplets ejected in form of cloud or aerosol
(> 5µm). These droplets exhibit longer evaporation time, leading to increased chances
of transmission of the droplet laden viruses. In particular, when inhaled, these droplets
enable quick and effective transport of the virus directly to the lungs airways causing higher
probability of infection. As a rule of thumb, the smaller droplets (< 30µm) have low Stokes
number, thereby allowing them to float in ambient air without the propensity to settle down.
For larger droplets (> 100µm), the settling timescale is very small (∼ 0.5s). In effect, based
on the diameter of the exhaled droplets, we propose three distinct possibilities:
• Small droplets (< 5µm) evaporate within a fraction of a second, thereby reducing the
possibility of infection.
• Large droplets (> 100µm) settle within a small time frame (< 0.5s) limiting the radius
of infection.
• Intermediate droplets (∼ 30µm) show the highest probability of infection due to slightly
longer evaporation lifetime and low Stokes number. The significance of the 30µm
diameter droplets will be apparent later.
In this work, we particularly focus our attention to the modeling of droplets over a large
range of diameters from 1µm to 100µm. Based on available literature, we assume that the
droplets exhaled during breathing, are at an initial temperature of 30o C [19]. The ambient
condition, however, vary strongly with geographical, seasonal changes etc. Hence, in the
following, we conduct a parametric study to determine the droplet lifetime across a large
variation of temperature and relative humidity conditions. The droplet evaporation physics
is complicated by the presence of non-volatile salts (predominantly NaCl) as present in our
saliva [9]. We would also look into simultaneous desiccation of solvent and crystallization
of such salts in subsequent subsections. Once the exhaled droplet encounters ambience, the
droplet will evaporate as it undergoes simultaneous heat and mass transfer.

10

Evaporation
For modeling purpose, the exhaled droplets are assumed to evaporate in a quiescent environment at a fixed ambient temperature and relative humidity. In reality, during coughing,
talking or sneezing, the droplets are exhaled in a turbulent puff [20]. However, as shown in
Eqn. 11, the puff rapidly decelerates due to entrainment and lack of sustained momentum
source, rendering the average VD,P to be less than 1% of the initial velocity. Furthermore,
since Prandtl number P r = ν/α = 0.71 for air, we can safely assume that the temperature
and relative humidity that the droplets in the puff experiences are on average very close
to that of the ambient. At the initial stages, the puff will indeed be slightly affected by
buoyancy, which will influence droplet cooling and evaporation dynamics. Quantifying these
effects accurately, merit separate studies, see for e.g. [21] for buoyant clouds. In a higher
dimensional model these could be incorporated. In any case, the evaporation rate of the
droplet is driven by the transport of water vapor from the droplet surface to the ambient far
field. Assuming quasi-steady state condition, the evaporation mass flux can be written as
ṁ1 = −4πρv Dv Rs log(1 + BM )

(13)

ṁ1 = −4πρv αg Rs log(1 + BT )
here, ṁ1 is the rate of change of droplet water mass due to evaporation, Rs the instantaneous
droplet radius, ρv is density of water vapor and Dv is the binary diffusivity of water vapor
in air, αg is the thermal diffusivity of surrounding air. BM = (Y1,s − Y1,∞ )/(1 − Y1,s )
and BT = Cp,l (Ts − T∞ )/hf g are the Spalding mass transfer and heat transfer numbers,
respectively. Here, Y1 is mass fraction of water vapor, while subscript s and ∞ denote
location at droplet surface and at far field, respectively. The numerical subscripts 1, 2 and
3 will denote water, air and salt respectively. Cp,l and hf g are the specific heat and specific
latent heat of vaporization of the droplet liquid. For pure water droplet, the vapor at the
droplet surface can be assumed to be at the saturated state. However, as indicated earlier,
the exhaled droplets during talking, coughing or sneezing are not necessarily pure water,
rather they contain plethora of dissolved substances [10]. The existence of these dissolved
non-volatile substances, henceforth denoted as solute, significantly affects the evaporation
of these droplets by suppressing the vapor pressure at the droplet surface. The modified
11

vapor pressure at the droplet surface for binary solution, can be expressed by Raoult’s
Law, Pvap (Ts , χ1,s ) = χ1,s Psat (Ts ), where χ1,s is the mole fraction of evaporating solvent
(here water) at droplet surface in the liquid phase [22] and χ1,s = 1 − χ3,s . The far field
vapor concentration, on the other hand, is related to the relative humidity of the ambient.
Considering the effects of Raoult’s law and relative humidity, the vapor concentrations at
droplet surface and at far field can be expressed as:
Pvap (Ts , χ1,s )M1
Pvap (Ts , χ1,s )M1 + (1 − Pvap (Ts , χ1,s ))M2
(RH)Psat (T∞ )M1
=
(RH)Psat (T∞ )M1 + (1 − (RH)Psat (T∞ ))M2

Y1,s =
Y1,∞

(14)

For evaporation, the droplet requires latent heat, which is provided by droplet’s internal
energy and surrounding ambient. Assuming perfect stirring within the droplet (no thermal
gradients), the energy balance is given by
mCp,l

∂Ts
∂Ts
= −kg As
|s + ṁ1 hf g − ṁ1 el
∂t
∂r

(15)

where, Ts is instantaneous droplet temperature; m = (4/3)πρl Rs3 and As = 4πRs2 are the
instantaneous mass and surface area of the droplet; ρl and el are the density and specific
internal energy of the binary mixture of salt (if present) and water and kg is the conductivity
of air surrounding the droplet.

∂T
|,
∂r s

is the thermal gradient at the droplet surface and can

be approximated as (Ts − T∞ )/Rs , which is identical to convective heat transfer for a sphere
with Nusselt number of 2.

Crystallization
Evaporative loss of water leads to increase in the salt concentration in the droplet, with time.
As shown before Pvap (Ts , χ1,s ) is a function of the salt concentration in the droplet which
thus must be modeled using the species balance equation as shown below in Eqn. 16
dmY3
+ ṁ3,out = 0
dt

(16)

ṁ3,out represents the rate at which salt mass leaves the solution due to crystallization and
is modeled below. Clearly the model shows that as water leaves the droplet, Y3 increases.
12

When Y3 is sufficiently large such that the supersaturation ratio S = Y3 /Y3,c exceeds unity,
crystallization begins. Here we use Y3,c = 0.393 based on the efflorescent concentration of 648
g/L reported for NaCl-water droplets in [23]. Growth rate of the crystal could be modelled
using a simplified rate equation from [24, 25].
dl
= (S − 1)gcr Ccr e−Ea /RTs
dt

(17)

Here l is the crystal length. By [25], for NaCl, the constant Ccr = 1.14 × 104 m/s, the
activation energy Ea = 58180J/mol and a constant gcr = 1. Using this, the rate of change
of the crystal mass which equals ṁ3,out , is given by [25]

ṁ3,out =

dm3,crystal
dl
= 6ρs (2l)2
dt
dt

(18)

The governing equations (Eqns. 13-18) manifest that several physical mechanisms are
coupled during the evaporation process. The internal energy of the droplet undergoes variation primarily due to evaporative mass loss and sensible enthalpy change, resulting in change
in its temperature. The evaporation is driven by the vapor concentration gradient from the
droplet surface to the far field. The partial pressure of water vapor at the droplet surface
is determined by the surface temperature and solvent (water) mole-fraction at the droplet
surface, while its surface temperature Ts is determined by Eqn. 15. The far field vapor
concentration, on the other hand, is ascertained by the ambient condition, (temperature and
relative humidity, RH), which in the case of Covid-19 corresponds to specific geographical
locations. It is obvious that for lower ambient temperatures, i.e. Ts,0 > T∞ , the droplet
should undergo rapid cooling from its initial value. The droplet temperature, however,
should eventually reach a steady state limit (wet bulb). This limit is such that the droplet
surface temperature will be always lower than the ambient, implying a positive temperature
gradient or heat input. The heat subsequently transferred from the ambient to the droplet
surface after attaining wet bulb limit is used completely for evaporating the drop without
any change in sensible enthalpy. For a droplet with pure water, i.e. no dissolved non-volatile
content, the mole-fraction of solvent at surface remain constant at 100% and at the limit
of steady state, the droplet evaporation can be written in terms of the well-known D2 law

13

[14, 22]
2
− Km t
Ds2 (t) = Ds,0

(19)

Km = 8(ρv /ρl )Dw ln(1 + BM ).

(20)

where,

However, for a droplet with binary solution, the evaporation becomes strongly dependent on the solvent (or solute) mole-fraction, which reduces (or increases) with evaporative
mass loss. The transient analysis, thus, becomes critically important in determining the
evolution of droplet surface temperature and instantaneous droplet size. During evaporation, the mole-fraction of solute increases and attains a critical super-saturation limit, which
triggers precipitation. The precipitation and accompanied crystallization dynamics, essentially, reduce the solute mass dissolved in liquid phase leading to a momentary decrease in
its mole-fraction. This, in turn increases the evaporation rate as mandated by Raoult’s law,
which subsequently increases the solute concentration. These competing mechanisms control
evaporation at the latter stages of the droplet lifetime. At a certain point, due to continuous
evaporation, the liquid mass completely depletes and evaporation stops. The droplet after
complete desiccation consists only of salt crystals, probably encapsulating the viruses and
rendering them inactive.

Results and discussions
Experimental validation
To validate the model, few targeted experiments were conducted to observe isolated levitated
droplets evaporating in a fixed ambient condition. Particularly, the droplets with (1% w/w)
NaCl solution vaporized to shrink to 30% of its initial diameter during the first stage of
evaporation as shown in Fig. 3. Hereafter, a plateau-like stage is approached due to increased
solute accumulation near the droplet’s surface, which inhibits the diameter from shrinking
rapidly. However, as shown in Fig. 3 shrinkage does occur (till Ds /Ds,0 ≈ 0.2), as the droplet
undergoes a sol-gel transformation. The final shape of the precipitate is better observed from
the micrographs presented in Fig. 3.
14

D0: 1mm

I

II

III

D0: 593µm

IV

I-IV: Images during evaporation of NaCl-water solution

V: Crystal structures

I
II

III
IV
V

Figure 3: Instantaneous droplet images taken by CCD camera (top left panel) and Dark field
micrograph of the final salt precipitate (top right panel). Comparison of experiments and
simulations in the bottom left and right panels. Evolution of normalized droplet diameter
as a function of time for pure water (left panel); salt-water solution droplet with 1% NaCl
(right panel).
Figure 3 shows the final precipitate morphology for the desiccated droplets. The precipitates display a cuboid shaped crystalline formation which is consistent with the structure
of NaCl crystal. The size and crystallite structure does show some variation which could be
linked with the initial size of the droplet. Only precipitates from larger droplets could be
collected since smaller sized precipitates tend to de-stabilize and fly-off the levitator postdesiccation. While the precipitate from larger sized droplets tend to yield larger and less
number of crystals, smaller droplets seem to degenerate into even smaller crystallites. However, this work does not investigate the dynamics of morphological changes of crystallization
in levitated droplets.
Figure 3 shows the comparison between results obtained from experiments and modeling.

15

Experiments were performed with both pure water droplets as well as with droplets of 1%
salt solutions. Experiments have been described in the previous section. For the pure water
cases shown in the left panel, simulation results follow the experiments rather closely. In the
pure water case, classical D2 law behavior could be observed. For the salt water droplets,
a deviation from the D2 law behavior occurs and droplet evaporation is slowed. This is
due to the reduced vapour pressure Pvap (Ts , χ1,s ) on the droplet surface resulting from the
increasing salt concentration with time. Evaporation rate approaches zero at about Ds /Ds,0
for 0.3 (experiments) and 0.25 (simulations), respectively. However, the salt concentration
attained at this stage exceeds the supersaturation S ≥ 1 required for onset of crystallization.
Thus the salt crystallizes reducing its concentration and increasing Pvap (Ts , χ1,s ) such that
evaporation and water mass loss can proceed until nearly all the water has evaporated and
only a piece of solid crystal as shown in Fig. 3 is left. It can be observed from Fig. 3
that in all cases, the final evaporation time is predicted within 15% of the experimental
values. This suggests that despite the model being devoid of complexities associated with
inhomogeneities of temperature and solute mass fraction within the droplet and simple one
step reaction to model the crystallization kinetics, the model demonstrates reasonably good
predictive capability. It is prudent to mention again, that although we have done the analysis
for single isolated droplet, in reality coughing or sneezing involves a whole gamut of droplet
sizes in the form of a cloud. However, based on the droplet size distribution during coughing
and sneezing [26], one can show that the total volume of the respiratory droplets is a negligible
fraction (O(10−5 )) of the volume that an individual exhales during breathing or coughing
[20]. This ensures that the droplets are well dispersed and the gas is sufficiently dilute. In
other words, the dilute limit dictates that each droplet in that exhaled volume may not be
influenced by the other droplets in the vicinity. This further justifies the efficacy of the
current model based on an isolated droplet.

Location specific droplet lifetime
Next, we set out to use this model to predict the droplet evaporation characteristics at
two very different geographical locations, specifically at New York City and at Singapore
to finally connect it to the respective infection rates. The ”outdoor” ambient conditions to
16

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 4: Lifetime of droplets as a function of initial droplet diameter Ds,0 . The solid line
shows total evaporation time while the dashed line depicting settling time shows the time
within which the droplets escapes the radius of collection σH /2.
be used are average ambient temperature and relative humidity at the two locations. We
also consider ”indoor” conditions, where temperature and relative humidity are controlled
and are assumed to be same for both locations. To obtain the averaged outdoor ambient
parameters, averaging time period for each location starts from five days prior to the date
on which 10th Covid-19 positive case was reported at that location. The averaging ended
five days before the time upto which model output was required. For New York City from
February 25, 2020 to March 26, 2020, the temperature and relative humidity ranges are
given by: 4.61o C ≤ T∞ ≤ 11.74o C and 35.90% ≤ RH∞ ≤ 71.35%, respectively. The mean
values that would be used for modeling New York City outdoor conditions are T∞ = 7.56o C
and RH∞ = 55.28%. For Singapore, the time period spans from January 25, 2020 to
March 18, 2020. The temperature and relative humidity in Singapore for that period ranges
within 25.67o C ≤ T∞ ≤ 31.85o C and 58% ≤ RH∞ ≤ 89.89%. The mean values that
would be used for Singapore outdoor conditions are T∞ = 28.17o C and RH∞ = 76.92%.
For indoor conditions we consider the standard values prescribed by American Society of

17

Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers for indoor air-conditioning [27], i.e.
T∞ = 21.1o C and RH∞ = 50%. Using these three sets of ambient conditions characterized
by mean temperature and mean relative humidity at New York, Singapore and indoors, we
estimate the droplet evaporation time over a range of droplet sizes 2µm ≤ Ds,0 ≤ 50µm. The
final evaporation time of droplets of the above size range is shown in Fig. 4. Also, shown
in the same figure is the settling time, which is calculated accounting for the decreasing
diameter using the equation for Stokes settling velocity.
w = (ρp − ρf )gDs2 /18µ

(21)

The settling time is estimated as that time by which the droplet gets out of the radius from
which breathable air is collected - which has already been defined as σH /2 in Section 3.
Mathematically tsettle is obtained by Eqn. 22
Z tsettle
wdt = σH /2

(22)

0

In Fig. 4, tsettle for different Ds,0 is plotted only when tsettle ≤ tevap . tevap being the overall
evaporation time at the corresponding initial diameter of the droplet. From Fig. 4 it is clear
that for all conditions while tevap monotonically increases with Ds,0 , tsettle monotonically
decreases with Ds,0 as expected. The purpose of this exercise is to estimate the maximum
time an exhaled droplet can remain within the collection volume without being evaporated.
This can be estimated by defining a characteristic droplet lifetime τ , where
n

o

τ = max min tevap , tsettle , ∀Ds,0

(23)

From Fig. 4 it can be found that τ at New York City and Singapore are τN Y C =
17.02s while τSIN G = 12.63s, respectively. The initial droplet diameter corresponding to
outdoor conditions for New York City and Singapore are Ds,0,N Y C = 29.5µm and Ds,0,SIN G =
30µm, respectively. Ds,0,indoor = 36µm for indoor conditions. Thus in Fig. 5 we look into
the evolution of the normalized mass and temperature of the droplets at the two outdoor
conditions. Fig. 5 clearly explains why τN Y C > τSIN G . We may recollect that the New York
City outdoor ambient conditions considered corresponds to low temperature and low RH
while Singapore outdoor condition corresponds to higher temperature and higher RH. Indeed
18

100

305
300
303

10-1

295
280

290
10

-2
0

0.02

0.04

285
280

10-3
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 5: Evolution of normalized mass of water in the droplet (left panel) and droplet
temperature (right panel) as a function of temperature at the conditions of New York City
and Singapore.
higher RH at Singapore implies that the temporary hiatus in evaporation due to reduced
vapor pressure is reached at a higher water mass load of the droplet, than at New York City
condition. In both cases, this occurs at about 3 seconds. However, the higher temperature in
Singapore condition results in faster crystallization kinetics due to the Arrhenius nature of
the equation given by Eqn. 17 which causes eventual faster crystallization rate, than at New
York City condition. Figure 5, clearly shows that although the knee in the solvent depletion
profiles are attained at the same time, it is the crystallization and simultaneous desiccation
dynamics that governs the eventual difference in lifetime of the droplets at two different
locations. It remains to be seen whether this result holds for a detailed crystallization
reaction mechanism. The temperature evolution plots shown in right panel of Fig. 5 also
reveals how the droplet initially exhaled at 30o C rapidly cools to the corresponding wet-bulb
temperature to subsequently allow heat transfer into the droplet leading to evaporation.
However, as the salt concentration reduces due to crystallization, the temperature rises
subsequently, above the corresponding wet-bulb limits.

19

Covid-19 positive cases

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

Data: NYC
Model: NYC
Data: SING
Model: SING
Model: SING after SE

0

10

20

30

40

50

time in days from 10th postive case

Figure 6: Actual Covid-19 data and model output from Eqn. 24. All parameters could be
found in Table 1. Covid-19 data for New York City has been obtained from [28] and data
for Singapore is obtained from [29]. SE implies Social Enforcement.

Location specific growth rate of Covid-19 positive cases
With the droplet lifetime available at the two locations, the corresponding infection rate
constants given by Eqn. 5 could be evaluated. As such, the performance of the model could
be tested using the time series data from New York City and Singapore and shown in Fig. 6.
All the parameters used to calculate k1 to finally numerically calculate Eqn. 7 at the two
different locations and four different conditions are described below in Table 1. Additionally,
the average distance XD,P = τ VD,P travelled by the droplet cloud D relative to P is shown
in the Table. XD,P ranges from 1.45m to 1.79m. To account for infection at both outdoor
and indoor, at each geographical location, Eqn. 7 can be modified as the following:

20

[P ] = [P ]0 (1 − F)(C1,o eλ1,o t + C2,o eλ2,o t ) + [P ]0 (F)(C1,i eλ1,i t + C2,i eλ2,i t )

(24)

=⇒ NP = NP,0 (1 − F)(C1,o eλ1,o t + C2,o eλ2,o t ) + NP,0 (F)(C1,i eλ1,i t + C2,i eλ2,i t )
Here, F denotes the fraction of the infectious population that infected others, at indoors,
at time t = 0. We assume F = 0.75 that is initially, most infections occurred indoors.
λ1,o , λ2,o and λ1,i , λ2,i denote the eigenvalues from the system of ODEs given by Eqn. 6 for
outdoor and indoor k1 , respectively. NP and NP,0 are the total number of infectious people
at day t and at day t = 0, respectively, in a location for a given population density ntotal
and ambient conditions. The constants C1 , C2 are determined from the eigenvectors of the
k-matrix shown in Eqn. 6 and the initial conditions. We assume NP,0 = NP ∗ ,0 . Figure
6 shows that the model qualitatively conforms to the available data from New York City
(NYC) and Singapore (SING). Though the match between NYC data and model output is
excellent, given the number of parameters involved, we believe that such exact match could be
fortuitous. However, we indeed find that the large difference in the Covid-19 positive growth
rates between two highly populated cities could be partly attributed to their difference in
outdoor ambient temperature and relative humidities. However, the actual growth rate in
Singapore while initially following the model, dropped much further with time. This could be
attributed to the large scale enforcement of temperature check, contact tracing, quarantining
and widespread usage of masks at very early stages of the outbreak. If we assume that social
enforcement measures were implemented early in Singapore [32] such that concentration of
susceptible healthy individuals reduced to [H]SE = 0.3 after the 50th case was reported, then
utilizing Eqn. 9 and same k1 as before, we find that the model follows the actual data rather
closely. Thus, according to the model the comparatively slower growth rate of the outbreak
in Singapore is attributed to both favorable weather conditions as well as appropriate social
enforcement measures.

Summary
Respiratory flow ejected by human beings consists of a polydisperse collection of droplets.
Since the virus is an obligatory parasite, it needs an intra-cellular environment to proliferate.
21

Figure 7: Flow-diagram outlining the interconnections of the model developed
However, if rapid desiccation of fluid from the droplets shrink the volume of the bio-material
and drastically prevent the virus from multiplying, a relatively sparse viral load to any
non-affected person is presented.
In this paper we have presented a model for the early phases of Covid-19 outbreak as a
function of ambient temperature and relative humidity, at both outdoor and indoor conditions. The model and its inter-dependencies on the different physical principles/sub-models
is summarized in Fig. 7. It must be recognized that the model assumes conditions where
transmission occurs solely due to inhalation of infected respiratory droplets alongside many
other simplifying assumptions. After being ejected, smaller droplets attain the wet bulb
temperature corresponding to the local ambience, and begins to evaporate. However, due to
presence of dissolved salt the evaporation stops when the size of the droplet reaches about
20-30% of the initial diameter. But now, the droplet salt concentration has increased to levels that trigger onset of crystallization. The evaporation time of the salt solution droplet is a
however a complex manifestation of the intricate interplay between several physico-chemical
phenomena: droplet cooling, evaporation, increasing salt concentration leading to crystal-

22

lization. Of course, the entire process competes with settling - the process by which larger
droplets fall away before they can evaporate. The smaller of the two: evaporation time and
settling time thus dictates droplet lifetime τ . In any case, the infection rate constant derived
using collision theory of reaction rates, is shown to be a function of the respiratory droplet
lifetime (τ ). Since the infected population size depends almost exponentially on this rate
constant, the model finds that given similar relative humidity between two places, infection
spreads more rapidly in lower temperature conditions than in their warmer counterparts.
While qualitative trends of actual Covid-19 data are predicted by the model, it is found that
difference between outdoor ambient conditions - temperature and RH cannot quantitatively
explain the difference between data obtained for two different metropolis. It is found that
inclusion of social enforcement measures could account for the remaining difference. Thus,
it can be concluded (within limitations of the model and several associated assumptions)
that while warm weather indeed can lead to slower growth rates, strict social enforcement including but not limited to social distancing, contact tracing, quarantining and population
wide usage of non-medical masks that can prevent entry of droplets of size 10-30µm into the
respiratory tract, is still much required to control the Covid-19 pandemic.

Acknowledgement
The authors thank Prof. C. K. Law, Prof. D. Lohse and Prof. K.N. Lakshmisha for reading
the paper and for providing valuable comments. The authors thank Dr. Chaitanya Rao, Dr.
Lalit Bansal and Mr. Sandeep Hatte for independently checking some of the calculations.

References
[1] E. R. Deyle, M. C. Maher, R. D. Hernandez, S. Basu, and G. Sugihara, “Global environmental drivers of influenza,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 113,
no. 46, pp. 13081–13086, 2016.
[2] K. Jaakkola, A. Saukkoriipi, J. Jokelainen, R. Juvonen, J. Kauppila, O. Vainio,
T. Ziegler, E. Rönkkö, J. J. Jaakkola, and T. M. Ikäheimo, “Decline in temperature and
23

humidity increases the occurrence of influenza in cold climate,” Environmental Health,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 22, 2014.
[3] A. C. Lowen and J. Steel, “Roles of humidity and temperature in shaping influenza
seasonality,” Journal of Virology, vol. 88, no. 14, pp. 7692–7695, 2014.
[4] J. Cohen, “Why do dozens of diseases wax and wane with the seasons and will covid19?,” Science Magazine, vol. doi:10.1126/science.abb723, 2020.
[5] J. Wang, K. Tang, K. Feng, and W. Lv, “High temperature and high humidity reduce
the transmission of covid-19,” Available at SSRN 3551767, 2020.
[6] Y. Yao, J. Pan, Z. Liu, X. Meng, W. Wang, H. Kan, and W. Wang, “No association
of covid-19 transmission with temperature or uv radiation in chinese cities,” European
Respiratory Journal, 2020.
[7] N. A. of Sciences Engineering and Medicine, Rapid Expert Consultation on SARS-CoV2 Survival in Relation to Temperature and Humidity and Potential for Seasonality for
the COVID-19 Pandemic (April 7, 2020). Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press, 2020.
[8] P. Mecenas, R. Bastos, A. Vallinoto, and D. Normando, “Effects of temperature and
humidity on the spread of covid-19: A systematic review.,” medRxiv, 2020.
[9] Y. Chartier and C. Pessoa-Silva, Natural ventilation for infection control in health-care
settings. World Health Organization, 2009.
[10] X. Xie, Y. Li, A. Chwang, P. Ho, and W. Seto, “How far droplets can move in indoor
environments–revisiting the wells evaporation-falling curve.,” Indoor air, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 211–225, 2007.
[11] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics,” Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of
a mathematical and physical character, vol. 115, no. 772, pp. 700–721, 1927.

24

[12] A. Saha, S. Basu, and R. Kumar, “Effects of acoustic-streaming-induced flow in evaporating nanofluid droplets,” Journal of fluid mechanics, vol. 692, pp. 207–219, 2012.
[13] A. Saha, S. Basu, C. Suryanarayana, and R. Kumar, “Experimental analysis of thermophysical processes in acoustically levitated heated droplets,” International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 53, no. 25, pp. 5663 – 5674, 2010.
[14] C. K. Law, Combustion Physics. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[15] C.D.C,

“How

coronavirus

spreads.”

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-

ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-sprea, 2020. Accessed:2020-03-29.
[16] B. Cushman-Roisin, Environmental Fluid Mechanics. John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2008.
[17] J. Duguid, “The numbers and the sites of origin of the droplets expelled during expiratory activities,” Edinburgh Medical Journal, vol. 52, no. 11, p. 385, 1945.
[18] X. Xie, Y. Li, H. Sun, and L. Liu, “Exhaled droplets due to talking and coughing,”
Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 6, no. suppl 6, pp. S703–S714, 2009.
[19] G. E. Carpagnano, M. P. Foschino-Barbaro, C. Crocetta, D. Lacedonia, V. Saliani,
L. D. Zoppo, and P. J. Barnes, “Validation of the exhaled breath temperature measure:
Reference values in healthy subjects,” Chest, vol. 151, no. 4, pp. 855 – 860, 2017.
[20] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and J. W. Bush, “Violent expiratory events: on
coughing and sneezing,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 745, pp. 537–563, 2014.
[21] R. Narasimha, S. S. Diwan, S. Duvvuri, K. R. Sreenivas, and G. S. Bhat, “Laboratory
simulations show diabatic heating drives cumulus-cloud evolution and entrainment,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 108, no. 39, pp. 16164–16169,
2011.
[22] W. A. Sirignano, Fluid Dynamics and Transport of Droplet and Sprays. Cambridge
University Press, 2010.

25

[23] F. Gregson, J. Robinson, R. Miles, C. Royall, and J. Reid, “Drying kinetics of salt
solution droplets: Water evaporation rates and crystallization,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, vol. 123, no. 1, pp. 266–276, 2018.
[24] A. Naillon, P. Duru, M. Marcoux, and M. Prat, “Evaporation with sodium chloride
crystallization in a capillary tube,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 422, pp. 52–61,
2015.
[25] H. Derluyn, Salt transport and crystallization in porous limestone: neutron-X-ray imaging and poromechanical modeling. PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, 2012.
[26] J. Duguid, “The size and the duration of air-carriage of respiratory droplets and dropletnuclei,” Epidemiology & Infection, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 471–479, 1946.
[27] https://www.ashrae.org/news/ashraejournal/comfort-conditioning-and-thermalcomfort, 2020.
[28] https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/imm/covid-19-daily-datasummary.pdf, 2020.
[29] https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-source-data, 2020.
[30] P. Munyard and A. Bush, “How much coughing is normal?,” Archives of disease in
childhood, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 531–534, 1996.
[31] B. Hansen and N. Mygind, “How often do normal persons sneeze and blow the nose?,”
Rhinology, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 10–12, 2002.
[32] Y. Ng, Z. Li, Y. X. Chua, W. L. Chaw, Z. Zhao, B. Er, R. Pung, C. J. Chiew, D. C.
Lye, D. Heng, et al., “Evaluation of the effectiveness of surveillance and containment
measures for the first 100 patients with covid-19 in singapore–january 2–february 29,
2020,” 2020.

26

Parameters

NYC Outdoor

NYC Indoor

SING Outdoor

SING Indoor

ndensity (people/km2 )

10194

10194

8358

8358

ntotal (people/m3 )

5.06x10−4

5.17x10−4

4.18x10−4

4.23x10−4

Ds,0 (µm)

29.5

36.0

30.0

36.0

T∞ (K)

280.76

294.44

301.17

294.44

RH∞ (%)

55.28

50

76.91

50

τ (s)

17.02

7.41

12.63

7.41

tc (s)

5400

5400

5400

5400

VD,P (m/s)

0.11

0.20

0.13

0.20

VDH (m/s)

2.905

2.996

2.931

2.996

XD,P

1.79

1.45

1.66

1.45

σH (m)

0.124

0.124

0.124

0.124

σDH (m)

0.27

0.23

0.26

0.23

k1 (day −1 )

0.985

0.339

0.548

0.278

k3 (day −1 )

1

1

1

1

k3 (day −1 )

0.071

0.071

0.071

0.071

F

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.75

C1,o

1.178

-

1.351

-

C2,o

-0.178

-

-0.351

-

C1,i

-

1.502

-

1.561

C2,i

-

-0.502

-

-0.561

NP,0

10

10

10

10

λ1 (day −1 )

0.544

0.195

0.325

0.154

λ2 (day −1 )

-1.616

-1.266

-1.396

-1.226

Table 1: Parameters to calculate Eqn. 24 at ambient conditions corresponding to New York
City (NYC) and in Singapore (SING) averaged over the specified time periods. ndensity (units
people/km2 ) is converted to ntotal (units people/m3 ) using ntotal = ndensity /[106 ×(1.8+σD /2)].
k1 is calculated using Eqn. 12. tc , the average interval between expiratory events (coughing
and sneezing) is calculated assuming an average person coughs 12 times and sneezes 4 times
within 24 hours [30, 31].
27

