arXiv:2004.09968v1 [cs.SI] 21 Apr 2020

The Ivory Tower Lost: How College Students
Respond Differently than the General Public to the
COVID-19 Pandemic
Viet Duong, Jiebo Luo

Phu Pham, Tongyu Yang

Yu Wang

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, USA
vduong@ur.rochester.edu, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Goergen Institute for Data Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, USA
{ppham2, tyang20}@u.rochester.edu

Political Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, USA
ywang176@ur.rochester.edu

Abstract—Recently, the pandemic of the novel Coronavirus
Disease-2019 (COVID-19) has presented governments with ultimate challenges. In the United States, the country with the
highest confirmed COVID-19 infection cases, a nationwide social
distancing protocol has been implemented by the President. For
the first time in a hundred years since the 1918 flu pandemic,
the US population is mandated to stay in their households
and avoid public contact. As a result, the majority of public
venues and services have ceased their operations. Following the
closure of the University of Washington on March 7th, more
than a thousand colleges and universities in the United States
have cancelled in-person classes and campus activities, impacting
millions of students. This paper aims to discover the social
implications of this unprecedented disruption in our interactive
society regarding both the general public and higher education
populations by mining people’s opinions on social media. We
discover several topics embedded in a large number of COVID19 tweets that represent the most central issues related to the
pandemic, which are of great concerns for both college students
and the general public. Moreover, we find significant differences
between these two groups of Twitter users with respect to the
sentiments they expressed towards the COVID-19 issues. To our
best knowledge, this is the first social media-based study which
focuses on the college student community’s demographics and
responses to prevalent social issues during a major crisis.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Twitter, College Students , Classification, Sentiment Analysis

I. I NTRODUCTION
First detected in Wuhan, China on December 31th, 2019,
COVID-19, or the coronavirus, outbreak grew rapidly in scale
and severity, and was officially declared as a pandemic on
March 11th, 20201 . As of April 13th, the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported 1,812,734 confirmed cases of
COVID-19 worldwide, including 113,675 deaths2 . Due to the
novelty and intractability of the virus, the global community,
particularly the elderly and those with underlying medical
problems3 , are at a high risk for serious health and safety
hazard. However, we suspect that the younger and physically
1 https://edition.cnn.com/2020/02/06/health/wuhan-coronavirus-timelinefast-facts/index.html
2 https://who.sprinklr.com/
3 https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus

healthier population is just as susceptible, though in a different way, to COVID-19. In order to control the spread of
the outbreak, non-pharmaceutical interventions and preventive
measures such as social-distancing and self-isolation have been
implemented worldwide out of utmost necessity, which has
led to the large-scale shutdown of public gathering places. As
members of an active working and learning society, people
who dedicate most of their daily hours at workplaces and
educational institutions are highly vulnerable to the impacts
of the closure of these facilities.
This is especially true for college students. The response to
the COVID-19 pandemic has brought a sudden disruption in
the operations of schools, colleges and universities, influencing
more than 1.7 billion students in 192 countries4 . Located at
the epicenter of the pandemic, with 579,005 confirmed cases,
including 22,252 deaths5 , the U.S educational system, which
is one of the largest in the world, has taken the biggest hit.
Beginning with the University of Washington, which closed
its campus on March 7th, 2020 and moved classes online for
its 50,000 students, many colleges have also immediately responded to this outbreak by cancelling all on-campus activities
such as workshops, conferences, and sports, and relocating
their in-person classrooms to online platforms. As of April
14th, 2020, more than 124,000 U.S. public and private schools
have closed due to the virus, affecting at least 55.1 million
students6 . This transition has introduced multiple challenges
for students. The foremost concern is related to how the
government and education system handle the pandemic crisis
with the study-from-home approach. Past surveys suggested
that students experience severe limitation on particular subjects
that benefit from physical interaction with the materials, and
tend to lose the ”pacing mechanism” of scheduled lectures,
thus have a higher chance of dropping out than those in
4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impact of the 201920 coronavirus pandemic on education
5 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-inus.html
6 https://www.edweek.org/ew/section/multimedia/map-coronavirus-andschool-closures.html

traditional settings [1], [2]. More recently, as the COVID-19
pandemic is unfolding, Sahu [3] hinted at other issues related
to the closure of schools, apart from online learning, such
as international students’ travel and students’ mental health.
This motivates us to provide a more comprehensive study on
the student demographics regarding their primary subjects of
concern and how they are expressed, particularly amidst the
COVID-19 crisis.
In this study, we attempt to explore the responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic by Twitter users, with the focus on
the college students. Also, we highlight our findings regarding the college student demographics by characterizing the
outstanding differences in their behaviors from the general
public. Such insights can be vital for educators and policymakers to measure the effectiveness of their on-going efforts
in the global fight against COVID-19 and the protection of
our younger population. In addition, we train classification
models to identify the demographics of users who posted
tweets associated with COVID-19, as well as extracting the
sentiments they inherently expressed in their posts. The models
can be used in social media platforms to investigate central
social problems, with respect to both their universality and
degree of impact, and to draw the community’s attention
towards high-priority targets for addressing such problems.
Our main contributions are several folds: (1) we approach
the social issues related to COVID-19 across different demographics using social media, by collecting data from Twitter;
(2) we deploy topic modeling methods on a novel dataset
to highlight the topical patterns of the ongoing social media
discussions during a major crisis, regarding two different
user demographics on Twitter; and (3) our implementation
of state-of-the-art transformer models for natural language
inference achieves new state-of-the-art performance for the
Twitter sentiment classification task, which allows meaningful
insights on social media behaviors to be discovered reliably.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Our study draws knowledge from the body of research on
characterizing the demographics of social media users, along
the dimensions such as gender [4], [5], age [6], [7], and social
class [7]. Methods on inferring the Twitter user demographics
were typically reliant on mining fine-grained linguistic patterns from the user’s Twitter biography (short self-descriptive
text) and posts, which are proven highly precise for certain
attributes when properly constructed [5], [8]. These approaches
have also been deployed with relatively strong performance
for the college student demographics [9], [10]. Due to the
recent advance in neural networks for sequence and image
classification, Wang et al. [11] were able to leverage a multimodal, multi-attibute, and multilingual approach to achieve
the state-of-the-art accuracy on gender, age, and organization
entity classification. Building upon the discoveries of previous
works, we design and evaluate our own college student user
classification method. This enables us to identify the two pools
of users (college students and general public) among college
followers on Twitter for the subsequent comparative analysis.

Research on sentiment analysis for Twitter textual data,
which tackles the problem of analyzing the messages posted
on Twitter in terms of the sentiments they express, has also
been performed. Twitter is a very challenging domain for
sentiment analysis mainly due to the length limitation of texts
[12]. The majority of past approaches employed a traditional
machine learning methods such as logistic regression, SVM,
MLP, etc., trained on lexicon features and sentiment-specific
word embeddings (vector representations of words) [13], [14].
More recent approaches typically opted for sequence learning
models trained to learn relevant embeddings for classification
from large pretrained word embeddings, particularly the GloVe
[15] embeddings for Twitter data. Best performing models
of this breed include Cliche (2017) [16] and Baziotis et al.
(2017) [17], which shared the first place for sentiment analysis
on Twitter (Task 4A [18]) at the International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation 2017 (SemEval-2017). The novelty
in our approach to Twitter sentiment analysis involves the
implementation of state-of-the-art transformer methods such as
BERT [19] and RoBERTa [20], whose outstanding sentiment
classification prowess remains untested for Twitter data in the
literature.
III. DATA C OLLECTION AND P REPROCESSING
A. Data Collection
In this study, we limit the user population to those who follow the official Twitter accounts of colleges in the U.S. News
2020 Ranking of Top 200 National Universities. Relevant
users identified as English speakers were collected using the
Tweepy API7 . Since the lists of the followers of the colleges
in consideration might overlap, simply collecting tweets from
these users could create major data redundancy and time
complexity problems. Therefore, we extract unique users from
the combined results, as well as their personal information
and profile images, to obtain a dataset of 12,407,254 unique
users. This set of users is relatively large and 1,641,582 of of
these users have Twitter protected accounts, which means we
are not allowed to collect tweets (Twitter posts) from them.
Thus, we randomly sample 100,000 users from the unprotected
pool to represent the population of college followers for the
subsequent tweet collection and text analysis.
Tweets were collected using the Tweepy API. We retrieved a
total of 1,873,022 tweets from the 100,000 user samples posted
within the timeframe between January 20th, when the first
COVID-19 case was confirmed in the U.S., and March 20th
of 2020 to cover a two-month period, when nationwide social
distancing protocol and school closure were attracting mass
concerns. We then extracted tweets related to COVID-19, with
a list of keywords consisted of ”corona”, ”#Corona, ”#coronavirus”, ”covid-19”, ”covid19”, ”coronavirus”, ”#Covid 19”,
”chinese virus”, and ”#ChineseVirus”. As a result, we obtain
73,787 unique COVID-19 related tweets, pertaining to 12,776
users, whom in this study we will address as affected users.
7 https://git.io/JvAjh

In addition, tweets that are not related to COVID-19 of the
12,776 affected users are kept for the student inference task.
B. Text Preprocessing
We develop a text preprocessing pipeline similar to that of
Baziotis et al. [17] to ensure that our text dataset is to a high
degree lexically comparable to natural language, and include
COVID-19 domain-specific word knowledge from a novel
dataset. This is done by performing sentiment-aware tokenization, spell correction, word normalization, segmentation (for
splitting hashtags) and token annotation. They implemented a
tokenizer with the SentiWordnet corpus [21], which is capable
of avoiding splitting expressions or words that should be kept
intact (as one token), and identify most emoticons, emojis, expressions such as dates, currencies, acronyms, censored words
(e.g. s**t), etc. In addition, we perform spelling correction on
the extracted tokens by composing a dictionary for the most
commonly seen abbreviations, censored words and elongated
words (for emphasis, e.g. ”reallyyy”). The Viterbi algorithm
is used for word segmentation, with word statistics (unigrams
and bigrams) computed from a recently published Twitter
dataset of 50 million English tweets related to COVID-19
[22], to obtain the most probable segmentation posteriors.
Moreover, all texts are lower-cased, while URLs, emails and
mentioned usernames are annotated with common designated
tags and removed to retain the natural language elements from
the text data. The processed tweets are then annotated by
the Standford CoreNLP English annotator [23], which uses
syntactic constituency and dependency tree parsing to extract
the appropriate part-of-speech (POS) tags and lemmas (the
base/dictionary forms of words) from the tweet tokens.
IV. INFERENCE OF C OLLEGE STUDENT DEMOGRAPHICS
A. Extracting Age, Gender and Organization Attributes from
Twitter User Profiles
We consider age, gender and organization entity to be highly
descriptive attributes to first obtain a general view of our user
samples. According to National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) 8 , as of Fall 2017, 56.2% of enrolled students aged
between 19 and 29 years old, 20.1% are under 18, and 56.6%
of them were female. These student demographic statistics
are projected by NCES to remain consistent through 2020.
Also, organizational Twitter accounts apparently should not
be targeted for student inference because college students are
individuals. These attributes are extracted using the M3 (Multilingual, Multimodal, Multi-attribute) deep learning system
for inferring the demographics of users from four sources of
information from Twitter profiles: user’s name (first and last
name in natural language), screen name (Twitter username),
biography (short self-descriptive text), and profile image [11].
We extract 1,111 organization entities from 12,776 affected
users, and disregard them from comparative analysis since they
are not individuals. Also, the gender and age attributes are used
to verify our classification results.
8 https://nces.ed.gov/

Fig. 1. The M3 Model for Inferring Gender, Age, and Organization-identity
from Image and Text Data [11].

Although the M3 Model is highly robust for gender (0.918
Macro-F1) and organization entity (0.898 Macro-F1) recognition without using tweets, the distinguishing features for
these attributes are widely available in the name, profile image,
and description of Twitter users, which is not necessarily the
case for the college student demographics. Since attributes
from the user’s name and photo image are not necessarily
indicative of college students, we attempt to retrieve the
students by matching the word ”student” with the Twitter
biographies, and found only 248 matches (2.22% of the nonorganizational users). We also matched the keywords directly
related to their degree status (such as BS, MS, MBA, PhD,
etc.) to their Twitter biography, and found 335 (3%). While
college students are likely to mention their degree status rather
than current occupation, and many users mention the names
of colleges in their biography, these should not be deciding
factors because they might just be college alumni or professors
instead of actual students. Due to the fact that the users are
already college followers, we expect much higher percentages
of college students. Thus, the use of tweets for college student
identification is critical to our study.
B. Heuristically Identifying College Students Using Tweets
1) Gold-Standard Annotations: We sample 2,400 random
users from the 11,165 non-organizational affected users and
includes their names, profile images, biographies, and tweets

from 1/20 to 3/20/2020. This information is used by human
annotators9 to answer the prompt: ”Would you think this person is a COLLEGE STUDENT?” with two response options:
”Yes” or ”No”.
2) Supervised Classification: We encode the standard Bag
of N-grams (for 1 up to 4-grams) representation of the user’s
tweets, which has been highly effective in text categorization
and information retrieval [24], to use them as features for our
classifiers. To increase the generality of our Bag of N-grams
features, we preprocess the tweets as described above and
apply TF-IDF vectorization, a term re-weighting scheme that
discounts the influence of common terms. We train a Random
Forest classifier and report the accuracy: the percentage of
correctly labeled users on 20% of the labeled samples.
3) Using Heuristic to Override the Classifier: Regarding
the self-distinguishing attributes of Twitter users from tweets,
Bergsma and Van Durme [5] discovered that users most
frequently reveal their attributes in the possessive construction,
that is my X where X is an attribute, quality or event that they
possess (in a linguistic sense). As a matter of fact, we found
306 tweets with the phrase “my class” among the 1,156,947
tweets from non-organizational users. On the contrary, phrases
like ”I have/had (a) class(es)” occur only 16 times. Therefore,
we extract this ”my X” attribute type for the college student
demographic as follows: we first part-of-speech tag our data
using the Stanford CoreNLP tagger and then look for my X
patterns where X is a sequence of tokens terminating in a
noun. To calculate the association between the attributes and
the college student demographic, we compute the pointwise
mutual information [25] between each attribute A and student
over the set of occurrences. If P M I > 0, the observed
probability of a student and attribute co-occurring is greater
than the probability of co-occurrence that we would expect if
student and attribute A were independently distributed.
P M I(A, student) = log

p(A, student)
p(A)p(student)

(1)

We employ two techniques for selecting distinctive attributes for college students: (1) we rank the attributes by
their PMI scores and use a threshold to select the top-ranked
attributes; (2) we manually filter the remaining set of attributes
to select those that are judged to be discriminative, including
phrases closely associated with college students such as ”my
zoom class”, ”my professor”, ”my dorm”, etc. Then we use
a simple heuristic to use our identified self-distinguishing
attributes in conjunction with a classifier trained on goldstandard annotations: If the user has any self-distinguishing
”my-X” attributes, we assign the user to be a college student;
otherwise, we trust the output of the classifier. We apply this
rule to bootstrap the knowledge learned by the classifier in
conjunction with our domain-specific attributes to automatically label the unannotated users. In the end, we verify the
performance of our heuristic on the same test set as the
classifier.
9 Annotators

are IRB certified for Social-Behavioral-Educational Research

4) Summary of Results: As previously discussed, the Random Forest classifier, trained on 1,920 examples, performs
quite well with Bag of N-grams features by correctly labeling
78% of the college students on the test set. We experiment
with our ”my-X” attributes and set the PMI threshold to 0.5,
and then manually filter out the irrelevant attributes. Applying
our heuristics to override the classifier improve the accuracy
further to 83%. Therefore, we have firm grounds to utilize
the combined classifier and ”my-X” heuristics to label college
students from the remaining users, which account for an
additional 2,575 out of the total of 3,460 college student users
(31% of the non-organizational users).

Fig. 2. Gender and Age Distributions of 3,460 College Student Users.

Looking at the age and gender distributions of the college
students in our samples (Figure 2), the statistics are very
consistent with real world data in the U.S. as 53.8% of the
college students we identified are female, which is very close
to the 56.7% female percentage predicted by NCES for 2020.
Although age classification is a challenging task for the M3
model (0.522 Macro-F1) and even human [11], our results are
still within a reasonable margin with NCES’s 2020 projection,
with 54.1% of the students in the 19-29 age group (vs. 56.7%)
and 28.6% under 18 (vs. 21.2%).
V. T OPICAL A NALYSIS OF C OVID -19 T WEETS
In order to understand the latent topics of the COVID19 tweets for college followers, we utilize Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) [26] to label universal topics demonstrated
by the users. To reduce the complexity of the LDA analysis
corpus, only the lemmas of tokens with POS tags of type noun,
verb, adjective, and adverb are kept from the preprocessed
tweets, because they possess the most meaningful contents
related to the topics we are looking to discover. We not only
look at individual tokens but also consider highly-correlated
groups of two and three words. Thus, bigrams and trigrams
are computed and added to the corpus. Since certain terms frequently appear in those COVID-19 tweets (e.g. virus, disease,
infection, case, test, etc.), we transform our LDA corpus using
TF-IDF vectorization. We finetune our LDA topic model and
arrive at the optimal topic number of 55 and coherence score
of 0.373. We also implement t-SNE dimensionality reduction
technique [27] to transform the computed 3126-dimensional
document-term topic posterior matrix into 2-dimensional data

Fig. 3. Topic-wise and Overall Frequency of the Top 20 Topic Keywords

points. This allows us to observe a distinctive separation of
the data points representing the topic clusters, as illustrated
in the plot of the 6 most prevalent topics of the COVID-19
tweets (Figure 4).

ongoing presidential election campaign in the US, which gives
solid evidence that the COVID-19 pandemic is influencing our
political picture. The third and fourth most frequent topics
involve social distancing and the closure of colleges.

Fig. 5. Student Tweets Contribution towards the Top 6 Topics.

Fig. 4. t-SNE Clustering of 6 Most Frequently Discussed LDA Topics.

We then label the 6 most frequently discussed topics using
the top 20 weighted topic keywords (Figure 3). Evidently,
global news is the most popular topic among the tweets,
as the numbers of confirmed positive COVID-19 cases and
deaths are constantly increasing globally. The presence of
political discussions, as well as the controversy related to
the Chinese origin of the virus, is very strong, due to the

Regarding which of the topics attracts the most attention
from the college community in comparison with the general
public, we find that college students tend to give more responses to COVID-19 issues that particularly affect them. In
other words, as most universities in the U.S announced the
shutdown of on-campus activities and encouraged students
to refrain from crowded travel and commute during March,
colleges students posted more tweets related to school closure
(32.04%) and news from areas close to their living proximity
(33.56%). In addition, they were concerned about social distancing and controversies regarding the address of the COVID19 virus as ”Chinese virus”, which are two very important
topics that we will take a closer look in later analysis.

VI. T OPIC - BASED SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
To expand the scope of our study from the topic modeling
results, we decide to dive deeper into the posts belonging to
the each of the 6 most frequently discussed topics. Specifically,
for each topic, we separate the college students and general
population into two pools and apply the RoBERTa model to
classify and examine the sentiments they expressed. Also, we
use the same topic modeling techniques as described in Section
V to provide microscopic explanations to the sentiment results.

end, both of our classifier models substantially outperform the
top two performers of SemEval-2017 (Table II) on the test
dataset. In particular, the model with RoBERTa pretraining
achieves above 0.8 Macro-F1 score, which demonstrates its
robustness for Twitter sentiment classification, and applicability for exploring the sentiments of our COVID-19 tweets.
Since we implement the RoBERTa model to classify ternary
sentiment labels, the drop in performance compared to Liu et
al. [20] is within expectation. The confusion matrix for our
RoBERTa model is given in Table III.

A. Transformer Models for Sentiment Classification
1) RoBERTa - Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining:
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) [19], was designed to pretrain deep bidirectional
representations of tokens from unlabeled text by jointly conditioning on both left and right context in all layers. This
was achieved by using a ”masked language model” (MLM),
whose pretraining objective is to predict the randomly masked
tokens of the sequence input. As a result, the pretrained
BERT model can be finetuned with just one additional output
layer to bring substantial performance gains for a wide range
of language inference tasks, including sentiment classification, without extensive task-specific architecture modifications.
Recently, Liu et al. [20] provided a replication study of
BERT pretraining, and discovered that BERT was significantly
undertrained, yet it can still match the performance of every
model published following its inception. Thus, they presented
additional insights on the design choices and training strategies of BERT and introduced alternative BERT-based models
(RoBERTa) that record state-of-the-art results on similar tasks.
They attributed their success to the use of a larger dataset
for pretraining, and better design choices for MLM. They
reported 0.948 F1 score of their RoBERTaBASE model for SST2, a Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) dataset with binary
labels (positive and negative) for sentiment analysis task.
In comparison, BERTBASE ”only” achieved 0.928 F1 score.
Therefore, we choose RoBERTa as the pretraining procedure
for our Twitter sentiment analysis model, as well as comparing
its performance with BERT.
2) Training and Evaluation: We utilize the transformers10
library by huggingface [28], which includes RoBERTaBASE
and BERTBASE in Pytorch [29], and implement the sentiment
analysis models with an additional linear layer on top of the
pretrained model’s outputs. The AdamW optimizer [30] is used
to optimize the cross-entropy loss function. We also use the
fastai11 API [31]’s deep learning wrapper for Pytorch, which
allows us to split the model’s layers into groups, in order to use
discriminative finetuning and slanted triangular learning rates
[32] for task-specific features (i.e. learning word embeddings,
learning context embeddings, and learning sentiment outputs).
We train and evaluate our models on the SemEval-2017 Task
4A dataset for Twitter message sentiment classification on a
3-point scale: Negative, Neutral, and Positive (Table I). In the
10 https://git.io/JfUEh
11 https://www.fast.ai/

TABLE I
S EM E VAL -2017 TASK 4A DATASET S TATISTICS
Dataset
Train
Test

Negative
7,838(15.6%)
3,959(32.4%)

Neutral
22,586(44.9%)
5,894(48.2%)

Positive
19,896(39.5%)
2,365(19,4%)

Total
50,320
12,218

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON BETWEEN P REVIOUS M ETHODS ON
T WITTER S ENTIMENT C LASSIFICATION AND O URS
Model
RoBERTa
BERT
LSTMs+CNNs [16]
BiLSTMs+Attention [17]

Accuracy
0.806
0.757
−
−

Macro-F1 Score
0.806
0.757
0.685
0.677

TABLE III
C ONFUSION M ATRIX OF RO BERTA M ODEL
negative
neutral
positive

negative
3315
622
22

neutral
843
4643
408

positive
23
458
1884

B. Analysis of Results
1) A depressing outlook of COVID-19: Overall, a very
small percentage of positive sentiments are expressed among
the COVID-19 tweets (lightest-colored blocks of Figure 6).
In addition, more than one in five people of our user samples discussed COVID-19 related issues in a negative light.
Considering that 2,281 out of a million of the U.S population are physically affected by COVID-19, which is already
dangerous, the amount of negativity exhibited on Twitter is
very alarming as well. Evidently, not only is the COVID-19
pandemic a health and safety hazard, it also has gloom-ridden
impacts on our society. Moreover, for the topic related to the
”Chinese virus” controversy, there is an overwhelming number
of negative responses. We can see from Figure 3 that ”racist”
is the 3rd most frequent keywords of this topic, which suggests
that many of Twitter users associated calling ”coronavirus” the
”Chinese virus” with racism.
2) College students respond more negatively to COVID-19:
An important trend that outweighs the rest of our results is that
there is a significantly higher percentage among the student
population expressing negative sentiments towards the central
issues of COVID-19, especially on news related to the spread

the learning experience among students during the crisis, the
prevention of racism-charged hate speeches is an important
task for educational institutions to protect their students.
TABLE IV
S UBTOPICS OF S OCIAL D ISTANCING
Subtopic
Label
Showing
aggression
Detailing
precautions
Expressing
concerns

Subtopic Keywords
asia, people, stay, home, worse european,
everyone, piss, fucking, work, fight
worry, safe, world, tour, stay, people, cancel, take, wash hand, precaution
sick, know, go, work, see, watch, really,
think, grocery store, family

Negative
Tweets
81.5%
65.1%
85.5%

Fig. 6. Sentiment Distributions (%) towards the 6 Most Frequent COVID-19
Topics. Percentage Blocks from Bottom to Top: Negative, Neutral, Positive.
TABLE V
S UBTOPICS OF S CHOOL C LOSING

of the pandemic and social distancing. This shows that our
analysis of the data is consistent with the our speculation on
the impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on our younger population.
College students are likely to express negative feelings towards
how social distancing and school closure are affecting their
work and study environments. Moreover, they tend to be
subject to more negative emotions upon receiving news of the
outbreak, which might be due to the subsequent implications
of these issues on those more related to their lives.
3) Negativity among College Students through the Topic
Modeling Microscope: We focus on examining the subtopics
of School Closing, which is of high concern among college
students, and on Social Distancing and China Controversy,
where highest gaps in the negative sentiments between college
students and the general population are observed (14.5% and
13.8% absolute difference in percentage of negative tweets
respectively). In addition, only negative and positive tweets
are considered because they provide the most meaningful
contexts associated with their sentiments. In general, nonneutral tweets on the Social Distancing and School Closing
topics express worrying emotions towards COVID-19, and all
the tweets revealing concerns on school closure are negative.
Moreover, many students exhibited aggression to the foreign
community, blaming them for the current disruptions in their
lives as a result of social distancing. College students also
disclosed details of their online learning experience, and
mostly showed dislikes for remote learning (81.3%). To reflect
on the responses of college students on COVID-19 in a more
positive light, it is encouraging that our college community
remains aware and vocal on the racism problem related to the
”Chinese virus” controversy, which sends a powerful message
on the public’s intolerance of racist behaviors on social media
for the betterment of our society.
These findings shed new lights on an emerging direction of
racism problems in the U.S. during the COVID-19 outbreak,
especially related to the East Asian community, in addition to
the existing discussions in the literature that focus primarily
on discrimination towards African American, Asian American,
and more recently, Muslim population [33]–[35]. Also, in addition to addressing the uneasy feelings and barriers restricting

Subtopic
Label
Detailing
current
situations
Detailing
remote
study
Expressing
concerns

Subtopic Keywords
knock, follow government instruction, feel,
survival rate whole,
country panicking,
get, people, fuck, right, week, campus
school, close, shut, student, find, get, campus, live streaming instead, email, anymore
people, due, cancel, go, concern, tell, week,
imagine, nasty, break

Negative
Tweets
98.5%

81.3%

100%

TABLE VI
S UBTOPICS OF C HINA C ONTROVERSY
Subtopic
Label
Calling out
racism
Addressing
attitudes
Detailing
public
response

Subtopic Keywords
chinese, president, call, racist, refer, flu,
reply, people, fuck, trump
people, take, perspective, sick, seriously,
asian, friend, know, ass, time
call, guy, get, keep, chinese, think, remember, wuhan, response, piss

Negative
Tweets
95.1%
97.3%
91.7%

VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We have analyzed 73,787 tweets from 12,776 Twitter
college followers who posted tweets related the COVID19 pandemic, in terms of the outstanding topics on several
social issues. We find significant differences in the sentiments
expressed towards those topics between the users who are
identified as colleges students and those of the general population. College students tend to focus their discussions on topics
closely surrounding their living environment, such as school
closure and local news. Although the percentages of positive
COVID-19 tweets are very low for both demographics, college
students are shown to be significantly more negative. In
addition, microscopic examination of the positive and negative
tweets reveals their overwhelmingly troubled feelings amidst
the spread of COVID-19, as well as unfavorable reactions to
the disruption in their lives such as racism-charged aggression.
Moreover, we discover a shift in the target of racism during
COVID-19 towards the East Asian community, which the
majority of college students and the general public are against.

Since high accuracy is achieved in both of our demographic
and sentiment classification models, future studies may collect
larger datasets to achieve better performance. In addition, this
research mainly focuses on high-level attributes of tweets
such as topic models and sentiments in understanding the
characteristics of users who discussed social issues associated
with COVID-19. Analysis on more fine-grained linguistic information, such as emotion, hate speech, and racism detection
can be performed to gain further insights on the more specific
COVID-19 related issues detailed in our study.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. V. Fedynich, “Teaching beyond the classroom walls: The pros and
cons of cyber learning.” Journal of Instructional Pedagogies, vol. 13,
2013.
[2] G. R. Morrison, S. J. Ross, J. R. Morrison, and H. K. Kalman, Designing
effective instruction. John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
[3] P. Sahu, “Closure of universities due to coronavirus disease 2019 (covid19): Impact on education and mental health of students and academic
staff,” Cureus, vol. 12, no. 4, 2020.
[4] D. Rao, D. Yarowsky, A. Shreevats, and M. Gupta, “Classifying latent
user attributes in twitter,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international
workshop on Search and mining user-generated contents, 2010, pp. 37–
44.
[5] S. Bergsma and B. Van Durme, “Using conceptual class attributes to
characterize social media users,” in Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), 2013, pp. 710–720.
[6] D. Nguyen, R. Gravel, D. Trieschnigg, and T. Meder, “” how old do
you think i am?” a study of language and age in twitter,” in Seventh
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2013.
[7] L. Sloan, J. Morgan, P. Burnap, and M. Williams, “Who tweets? deriving
the demographic characteristics of age, occupation and social class from
twitter user meta-data,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 3, 2015.
[8] C. Beller, R. Knowles, C. Harman, S. Bergsma, M. Mitchell, and
B. Van Durme, “Ima belieber: Social roles via self-identification and
conceptual attributes,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
2014, pp. 181–186.
[9] C. L. Hanson, S. H. Burton, C. Giraud-Carrier, J. H. West, M. D.
Barnes, and B. Hansen, “Tweaking and tweeting: exploring twitter for
nonmedical use of a psychostimulant drug (adderall) among college
students,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 15, no. 4, p. e62,
2013.
[10] L. He, L. Murphy, and J. Luo, “Using social media to promote
stem education: Matching college students with role models,” in Joint
European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
in Databases. Springer, 2016, pp. 79–95.
[11] Z. Wang, S. A. Hale, D. Adelani, P. A. Grabowicz, T. Hartmann,
F. Flö”ck, and D. Jurgens, “Demographic inference and representative
population estimates from multilingual social media data,” in Proceedings of the 2019 World Wide Web Conference. ACM, 2019.
[12] A. Giachanou and F. Crestani, “Like it or not: A survey of twitter
sentiment analysis methods,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 49,
no. 2, pp. 1–41, 2016.
[13] P. Korenek and M. Šimko, “Sentiment analysis on microblog utilizing
appraisal theory,” World Wide Web, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 847–867, 2014.
[14] D. Tang, F. Wei, N. Yang, M. Zhou, T. Liu, and B. Qin, “Learning
sentiment-specific word embedding for twitter sentiment classification,”
in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2014, pp. 1555–
1565.
[15] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors
for word representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp.
1532–1543.
[16] M. Cliche, “BB twtr at SemEval-2017 task 4: Twitter sentiment analysis
with CNNs and LSTMs,” in Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Vancouver,
Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2017, pp. 573–
580. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S17-2094

[17] C. Baziotis, N. Pelekis, and C. Doulkeridis, “DataStories at SemEval2017 task 4: Deep LSTM with attention for message-level and topicbased sentiment analysis,” in Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Vancouver,
Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2017, pp. 747–
754. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S17-2126
[18] S. Rosenthal, N. Farra, and P. Nakov, “Semeval-2017 task 4: Sentiment
analysis in twitter,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00741, 2019.
[19] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis,
Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2019,
pp. 4171–4186. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
N19-1423
[20] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[21] A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical
resource for opinion mining.” in LREC, vol. 6. Citeseer, 2006, pp.
417–422.
[22] E. Chen, K. Lerman, and E. Ferrara, “Covid-19: The first public
coronavirus twitter dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07372, 2020.
[23] C. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. Bethard, and
D. McClosky, “The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing
toolkit,” in Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations. Baltimore,
Maryland: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2014, pp.
55–60. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-5010
[24] F. Sebastiani, “Machine learning in automated text categorization,” ACM
computing surveys (CSUR), vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1–47, 2002.
[25] K. W. Church and P. Hanks, “Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography,” Computational linguistics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
22–29, 1990.
[26] M. Hoffman, F. R. Bach, and D. M. Blei, “Online learning for latent
dirichlet allocation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 23, J. D. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor,
R. S. Zemel, and A. Culotta, Eds. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2010, pp. 856–864. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
3902-online-learning-for-latent-dirichlet-allocation.pdf
[27] L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-sne,” Journal
of machine learning research, vol. 9, no. Nov, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[28] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi,
P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, and J. Brew, “Huggingface’s
transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1910.03771, 2019.
[29] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[30] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[31] J. Howard and S. Gugger, “Fastai: A layered api for deep learning,”
Information, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 108, 2020.
[32] J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for
text classification,” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Melbourne, Australia: Association for Computational Linguistics,
Jul. 2018, pp. 328–339. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/P18-1031
[33] J. K. Swim, L. L. Hyers, L. L. Cohen, D. C. Fitzgerald, and W. H.
Bylsma, “African american college students experiences with everyday
racism: Characteristics of and responses to these incidents,” Journal of
Black psychology, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 38–67, 2003.
[34] S. D. Museus and J. J. Park, “The continuing significance of racism in
the lives of asian american college students,” Journal of College Student
Development, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 551–569, 2015.
[35] J. Guhin, “Colorblind islam: the racial hinges of immigrant muslims in
the united states,” Social Inclusion, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 87–97, 2018.

