COVID_MTNet: COVID-19 Detection with Multi-Task Deep Learning
Approaches
Md Zahangir Alom, M M Shaifur Rahman, Mst Shamima Nasrin, Tarek M. Taha, and Vijayan K. Asari
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
Emails: {alomm1, rahmanm24, nasrinm1, ttaha1, vasari1}@udayton.edu

Abstract
COVID-19 is currently one the most life-threatening
problems around the world. The fast and accurate detection
of the COVID-19 infection is essential to identify, take
better decisions and ensure treatment for the patients which
will help save their lives. In this paper, we propose a fast
and efficient way to identify COVID-19 patients with multitask deep learning (DL) methods. Both X-ray and CT scan
images are considered to evaluate the proposed technique.
We employ our Inception Residual Recurrent
Convolutional Neural Network with Transfer Learning
(TL) approach for COVID-19 detection and our NABLA-N
network model for segmenting the regions infected by
COVID-19. The detection model shows around 84.67%
testing accuracy from X-ray images and 98.78% accuracy
in CT-images. A novel quantitative analysis strategy is also
proposed in this paper to determine the percentage of
infected regions in X-ray and CT images. The qualitative
and quantitative results demonstrate promising results for
COVID-19 detection and infected region localization.

Normal
COVID-19
Input
Output
Figure 1: Example X-ray and CT images of normal and
COVID-19 cases, and outputs of detection and infected
region localization with NABLA-3 network.

assessment or examination process and proper treatment.
According to findings from Wuhan, Hubei province in
China, isolation of infected patients through home
quarantining is the best way to protect people not already
infected with this deadly virus [2]. Thus, patients with
COVID-19 symptoms must remain isolated and wear
masks when near others. For primary examination, a sample
of nasopharyngeal exudate is taken to test reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
followed by a chest X-ray. If the chest X-ray film is normal,
then the patient can go home and take rest. If COVID-19 is
confirmed, the patient must be admitted to a hospital. At the
initial stages, COVID-19 affects both lungs, particularly the
lower lobes, and especially the posterior segments, with a
fundamentally peripheral and subpleural distribution. The
chest CT is used for detecting COVID-19 in practically
50% of patients in the first two days. A researcher from
Tongji Hospital in Wuhan, China, has concluded that the
CT should be used as the primary screening or diagnostic
method to identify COVID-19.

1. Introduction
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious
disease caused by a new virus that has not been previously
identified. The disease causes respiratory illness with
symptoms such as cough, fever, and in more severe cases,
difficulty in breathing. . The COVID-19 family is causing
thousands of deaths per day around the world. Even though
this virus first started in Wuhan, China in December 2019,
this dangerous virus is spreading around the world so
quickly and more than 1.6 million people around 188
countries have been infected as of today when we write this
article. Due to coronavirus, more than 100 thousand people
have already died worldwide, and the number of new deaths
has been increasing rapidly day by day. There is no
treatment specifically approved for this virus so far. Thus,
the World Health Organization (WHO) has declared
COVID-19 as a pandemic disease. The mutation of this
virus moving faster than anything and more deadly too.
This is one of the fastest progressive disease ever seen
before [2]. Since it is a new type of virus and it changes
formation quickly, there is no specific guideline for the

Even though the RT-PCR has been considered as the gold
standard for SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis, due to the limited
supply and strict requirements for the laboratory
environment, it delays the accurate diagnosis of patients.
Hence, it is very difficult to pause the unexpected spreading
of infection of COVID-19 diseases. By combining the
clinical symptoms and signs, the chest computed
tomography (CT) is a faster and easier approach to identify
COVID-19 in clinical practices. According to doctors and
researchers in China, CT image analysis is the key method
to examine suspected patients for COVID-19 confirmation.
1

Recent reports also support this phenomenon [2,3]. It is
crucial to detect COVID-19 infections at an early stage for
suspected patients. It is also important for patient prognosis,
control of this epidemic, and public health security. As the
rate of newly affected global regions is increasing every
day, and the number of new patients is increasing
geometrically in those areas, it has become a difficult or
sometimes impossible task to provide necessary treatment
for them [3,4,5]. Hence, the availability of an Artificial
Intelligence (AI) system can be helpful to identify the
COVID-19 patients quickly and accurately using X-ray and
CT images as shown in Figure 1.
The main motivation of this research is accurate and faster
detection of COVID-19 patients as it is very important for
the prevention and control of this pandemic. Most
importantly, it can protect human lives around the world.
We also present deep learning-based radiology image
analysis methods that could provide state-of-the-art testing
accuracy by far compared to existing methods [6].
Recently, several Deep Learning (DL) based methods have
been presented and shown to be highly accurate for
COVID-19 detection from CT images [7,12,17].
In this study, we apply advanced deep learning methods to
investigate both X-ray and CT manifestations of
coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia. These include
classification and segmentation models for analysis of
samples from two different modalities for detection and
localization. For chest X-ray image analysis, due to the
scarcity of publicly available COVID-19 X-ray samples,
we have trained our model with a pneumonia dataset, and
then utilized a Transfer Learning (TL) method for retraining
with samples of COVID-19. The contribution of this paper
can be summarized as follows:
• It presents an end-to-end COVID-19 detection and
infected region localization method using deep
learning approaches.
• The proposed methods are evaluated for both Xray and CT images and achieved promising results
for COVID-19 detection and infected region
localization tasks.
• Training and validation are performed on publicly
available samples which are collected from
different sources around the world.

2. Related works
There are several AI systems that have been proposed for
COVID-19 detection from X-ray and CT images. Some
studies demonstrate the efficiency of X-ray and CT scan
image analysis for detecting the COVID-19. Several
researchers presented artificial Intelligence (AI) and image
analysis-based methods for COVID-19 detection. In most
of the cases, the Deep Learning based approaches have been
applied and achieved very promising detection accuracy for
COVID-19.
A detailed study has been conducted in [8] to illustrate the
importance of early detection and management of COVID19 patients. A literature review was published recently in
[9] and claimed that the ground-glass and consolidative
opacities on CT are sometimes undetectable on chest
radiography. The study has also suggested that CT is a more
sensitive modality of medical imaging. The COVID-19
infection pulmonary manifestation is predominantly
characterized by ground-glass opacification with
occasional consolidation on CT. The pros and cons of
using X-ray and CT image analysis and its effectiveness for
the screening of COVID-19 patients were explained in
recent studies. In most of the cases, chest X-ray is
considered as the primary screening method. In cases of
patients without predominant disease, COVID-19 can be
defined by chest X-ray. Otherwise the CT was
recommended for determining COVID-19 infection.
Another study demonstrated that chest CT has a pivotal role
for the diagnosis and assessment of lung involvement in
COVID-19 pneumonia [10]. CT plays a central role in the
diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia and the decision has
been taken by conducting an evaluation with 366 CT scans
which were reviewed by two groups of radiologists. The
objective of this study was to define disease progression
and recovery of the illness and found that the peak period
during illness were days 6-11 [11]. The performance of the
radiologists has been analyzed and observed that the
radiologist has high specificity but moderate sensitivity in
differentiating COVID-19 from viral pneumonia on CT
scan [12]. For COVID-19 detection, a CT scan image
analysis method found that in 20 (56%) patients out of 36
patients about 2 days after symptom onset had normal [13].
Furthermore, for critical cases, images from both modalities
are recommended for decision making.

The contents of this paper are organized as the following.
Section 2 discusses related works. Section 3 presents the
proposed method and the models used in the
implementation. The experimental setup is discussed in
Section 5. Sections 6, 7, and 8 present detailed discussion
on results, limitations of the proposed method, and
conclusions respectively.

Meanwhile, there are several DL based systems that have
been proposed for X-ray and CT images in the last few
months for COVID-19 detection. A DL based method has
been proposed for COVID-19 detection from chest X-ray
which was named COVID-19 Detection Neural Network
(COVNet). The ReseNet50 was used as the backbone for
COVNet. This model was tested on 4356 chest CTs from
3322 patients and it showed 0.96 and 0.95 scores for Area
Under Curve and community acquired pneumonia (CAP)
2

score respectively [14]. The study also demonstrated CT
findings and compared for asymptomatic and symptomatic
patients for COVID-19 detection and the results showed
that there were no significant differences in age, sex
distribution, or comorbidities for symptomatic and
asymptomatic cases [14]. One of the most relevant and
recent models, COVID-Net [15]], used a deep neural
network with high architectural diversity and selective
long-range connectivity. This model experimented on two
open access data repositories, one for COVID-19 detection
dataset and another for pneumonia detection dataset. The
experimental results showed around 83.5% testing
accuracy. In this case, both databases were merged for
performing training and testing of the proposed method
[15]. However, in our proposed approach, we have trained
a model with a pneumonia dataset and used Transfer
Learning (TL) for training the same model with a COVID19 dataset.

sensitivity and specificity respectively. Overall, this model
showed around 90% accuracy [16]. In addition, another
recent study showed very promising accuracy for
pneumonia detection tasks where the model grouped three
different categories: COVID-19, Influenza-A viral
pneumonia, and healthy cases from CT images. The VNet
based VNET-IR-RPN is used for region of interest
segmentation for pulmonary tuberculosis. This deep
learning-based method showed around 86.7% testing
accuracy from CT images [17].
According to various studies presented in the literature, the
X-ray and CT scans have been used quite often to recognize
or identify the patients with COVID-19. Hence, we present
here an end-to-end deep learning-based system for COVID19 detection and infected region localization from both Xray and CT images.
3. Methodology

A deep learning-based detection for COVID-19 from chest
3D CT volumes with weak labeled samples has been
proposed recently. For each patient, a pretrained UNet
model was applied for 3D lung region segmentation and
then a 3D-CNN model was applied for predicting the
probability of COVID-19 infections. The model was
trained on 499 CT volumes and tested on 131 CT volumes
and obtained 0.959 ROC AUC with 0.907 and 0.911

In this implementation, we have used multiple models for
different tasks where the classification model is employed
for COVID-19 detection and the segmentation model is
used for Region of Interest (ROI) detection for COVID-19.
Our Inception Recurrent Residual Neural Network
(IRRCNN) model is used for the COVID-19 detection task
[18]. Our NABLA-N network is applied for infected region
segmentation from X-ray and CT images [19].

Figure 2: COVID-Det_X-ray: End-to-end system for pneumonia detection in the top row and COVID-19 detection with TL learning
from pneumonia detection at the bottom. Bottom row shows the training phase for COVID-19 which include inputs, data
augmentation, training model with TL and outputs (N: normal and C: COVID-19).

3

Figure 3: Chest segmentation model for X-ray (Chest-Seg_X-ray): the top row of the figure shows the training method and bottom
row demonstrates the different steps for testing phase.

COVID-19 Detection from X-ray-Image (COVIDDet_X-ray): Firstly, we have used the IRRCNN model to
classify the normal and pneumonia detection from chest Xray images. Then, Transfer Learning (TL) method is used
to retrain the model with samples to distinguish COVID-19
versus normal images in Chest X-ray images. The end-toend training pipeline is shown in Figure 2. The IRRCNN
model is used for this implementation where five Inception
Recurrent Residual Units (IRRUs) are used [18]. The
IRRUs are shown for unit 3 in the top of Figure 2. After
successfully training the model for COVID-19 detection,
the system has been tested with completely new samples
collected from new patients.

thresholding approach are applied for extracting the
features to identify the infected regions of COVID-19 from
the segmented chest region in Figure 4(b). Finally, the
output heatmap image with COVID-19 infected regions are
shown in Figure 4(c).

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4: The pipeline processing for COVID-19 infected
region detection: (a) chest regions, (d) mask for COVID-19
infected regions and (c) final heatmap image.

COVID-19 segmentation from X-ray-Images (COVIDSeg_X-ray): Another system is developed for detecting
infected regions due to COVID-19 in X-ray images. In this
case, the NABLA-N model is applied for only chest region
segmentation [19]. The overall framework of the end to end
training and testing phases for chest segmentation method
(Chest-Seg_X-ray) is shown in Figure 3. Mathematical
morphological approaches are applied for performing the
refinement and selecting appropriate contours for chest
region extraction, and is shown in the last column of the
second row in Figure 3. In the testing phase, precise chest
regions are extracted. After generating segmentation masks
for the chest regions, the mask is used to extract only the
chest regions from the input images as shown in Figure
4(a). A classical image processing method and an adaptive

COVID-19 detection from CT scans (COVID-Det_CT):
CT scans are found to be more effective to detect the
infection of COVID-19 within a couple of days after
infection. This is stated based on the assessment system
followed by the experts in Wuhan, China. For COVIDDet_CT, we use our IRRCNN classification model, which
is trained by datasets collected by us. The database samples
are collected from normal CT and CT scans with COVID19. From this implementation, the same strategy is
employed as described for COVID-Det_X-ray.

4

COVID-19 segmentation from CT scans (COVIDSeg_CT): For mining the specific infected region affected
by COVID-19 virus in lungs, we have developed an end to
end system for segmentation of lung region from 2D images
where the same NABLA-N model is used as mentioned in
COVID-Seg_X-ray. First, we have trained the model on
publicly available 2D lung images, Lung_Seg_CT. Then
the trained Lung_Seg_CT model is directly applied to
segment the lung region from the entire set of CT images.
Classical image processing and morphological analysis are
then applied to extract infected regions due to COVID-19.
The entire system is named “COVID-Seg_CT”. For the
testing phase, the same processing pipeline as demonstrated
for X-ray and shown in Figures 3 and 4 is used.

samples are for normal and 3,875 samples for pneumonia.
The average size of the images is around 1168×984 pixels.
Due to the limitation of our computing system, we have
resized the images to 128×128 pixels. To resolve the class
imbalance problem, we have applied class specific data
augmentation. The example images are shown in Figure 5.
The COVID-19 dataset has been collected from different
sources around the world and a publicly available dataset
[23]. Due to the scarcity of training samples, we have
applied data augmentation techniques for increasing the
number of samples.
For segmentation of the chest regions, we collected 704
chest X-ray images and corresponding masks, which are
shown in Figure 5 [24]. The original average size of the
sample is 2437×2806×3. We have resized the image to
192×192×3 pixel images. As a result, input samples
significantly lose essential information. From the total
number of samples, 80% of samples are used for training
and the remaining 20% are used for validation and testing
of the COVID-Seg_X-ray model. This is the first step of
infected regions extraction from input chest X-ray
images. The randomly selected X-ray images and
corresponding masks are shown in Figure 6.

Architecture details: The IRRCNN model consists of an
input layer, five IRRUs, a Global Average Pooling (GAP)
layer, and a Softmax output layer. For this model, we have
applied 1×1, and 3×3 kernels for IRRU. The entire model
utilizes around 34M network parameters. On the other
hand, the NABLA-N network consists of an encoding and
three decoding units. The model architecture is as follows:
3→16×(3×3) →32×(3×3) →64×(3×3) →128×(3×3)
→256×(3×3) →512×(3×3) →256×(3×3) →128×(3×3)
→64×(3×3) →32×(3×3) →16×(3×3) →1. The general
notation of FN× (M×N) where FN represents the number of
feature maps and (M×N) represents the kernel size which is
(3×3) kernels used in each layer except the last layer. The
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function is used all
through the network in this implementation. At the end, a
1×1 convolutional layer is used to reduce the dimension of
the feature maps to the single channel outputs with a
sigmoid activation function. In addition, we have utilized
the up-sampled feature maps from 3 different encoding
layers including the bottleneck layer. Therefore, we named
the model NABLA-3 network. The NABLA-3 model
utilizes totally 18.98 Million (M) network parameters. The
network is initialized with the He initialization method [21].

Figure 5: Randomly selected samples without pneumonia in first
row and second row shows the X-ray image with pneumonia.

In addition, for COVID-19 detection from CT images, there
is no labeled dataset available for this specific task. Hence,
we have collected samples from different sources for
normal CT scans. The COVID-19 CT images are
considered from different CT scans from confirmed
patients. A total of 420 samples are collected where 247
samples are for normal and 178 samples are for COVID-19.
We have observed the variation in sizes of the samples,
ranging from 450×338 pixels to 630×630 pixels.

4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental setup
The COVID-19 detection system was developed using
multiple models for classification and segmentation tasks
which is implemented with TensorFlow deep learning
framework on four NVIDIA GTX2080 Ti single GPUs. For
testing, the end-to-end system was run on the single GPU
system.
4.2. Database
We have collected several datasets for implementing this
multi-modality learning method. The pneumonia detection
samples are collected from publicly available datasets [22].
The total number of samples are 5,216, where only 1,341

Figure 6: Example images for Chest X-ray segmentation.

5

Thus, all samples are resized to 192×192 pixels. From the
total samples, we randomly selected 375 samples for
training and validation, and the remaining 45 samples were
used for testing. To increase the number of samples, a data
augmentation method was applied during the training. A set
of randomly selected samples are shown in Figure 7.

4.3. Training methods
The IRRCNN model is trained and tested on pneumonia
dataset. For COVID-19 detection method for X-ray
(COVID-Det_X-ray), the model was trained with the
following hyperparameters: Adam optimization method
with learning rate 1 × 10−3 , and Batch size 32. The system
was trained for 75 epochs in total where the learning rate
was decreased with respect to the factor of 10 after each 25
epochs. The training and validation accuracy for pneumonia
detection method is shown in Figure 9. From the figure, it
can be seen that the proposed pneumonia detection method
shows around 98.2% validation accuracy. COVID-Seg_Xray was trained with Adam optimizer with learning rate
3× 10−4 , Dice Coefficient (DC) loss.

Figure 7: Randomly selected normal and COVID-19 CT images.

For lung segmentation from CT images, we have used a set
of publicly available 2D CT scans from Kaggle competition
[25]. This dataset contains 267 samples with corresponding
masks in total with corresponding labeled images. Some
example images and masks are shown in Figure 8.

Figure 10: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)-AUC curve
for COVID-19 detection.
Figure 8: Example images for lung segmentation. First row
shows the input images and the second row shows corresponding
masks.

The classification model (COVID-Seg_CT) was trained
with same parameters as used in COVID-Seg_X-ray,
however, due to the lower number of training samples, the
model was trained for 150 epochs with batch size of 16.
COVID-Seg_CT was trained with Adam optimizer with
learning rate 3× 10−4 , DC loss, As the number of images
was less, we have used the batch size of 8. In this
implementation, we have used max-min normalized single
channel images for training and testing.

The actual size of the images is 512×512. We resized them
to 256×256-pixel single channel images. The total number
of samples was 267, where 80 percent of the images were
used for training and the remaining 20 percent used for
validation and testing.

5. Results
COVID-Det_X-ray outputs: After successfully training
the model, we have tested the pneumonia detection system
with completely new 624 images which includes 234
normal and 390 pneumonia samples. The quantitative
results show around 87.26% testing accuracy for
pneumonia detection. Then, the same IRRCNN model was
used for training and testing for the COVID-19 detection
where the pretrained weights from pneumonia were used as
initial weights for training the COVID-19 model. We have
achieved around 84.67% testing accuracy on the completely
new 67 COVID-19 testing samples. The receiver operating

Figure 9: Training and validation accuracy for pneumonia
detection task.

6

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 11: Chest segmentation (Chest-Seg_X-ray) results: (a) input chest images (b) ground truth (c) model outputs (d) refined outputs
and (e) final outputs with contours where the green and red contours represent the ground truth and detection respectively.

characteristics (ROC)-AUC for pneumonia is shown in
Figure 10. This shows an AUC of 0.93.

regions of COVID-19 accurately from the chest X-ray
images.
In addition, for quantitative justification, we have
calculated the total number of pixels of the lung regions and
the total number of pixels for infected regions with COVID19. The percentage is calculated with respect to the total
areas of the lung, which can be used for measuring the
contingency and severity of corona-virus patients. For the
first row and third column in Figure 12, the number of total
pixels for lung is 6,696 and total number of infected pixels
with COVID-19 is 2,245. Thus, the percentage of infection
is 33.52% with respect to the total number of pixels of lung
regions. In the last row of Figure 12, the total number of
pixels for the lung regions is 9,601 and the total number of
infected pixels with COVID-19 is 3,609. Thus the
percentage of infection is 37.58%.

COVID-Seg_X-ray outputs: For further evaluation and to
define the specific infected regions with COVID-19, we
have implemented an end to end segmentation system for
extracting the chest regions from the entire X-ray images.
The NABLA-N network was used for chest segmentation
from X-ray images. This model was trained on the chest-xray segmentation challenge dataset. After successfully
training the model, the performance was evaluated on the
testing samples provided by the organizer. We have tested
on completely new 57 chest X-ray images. The model
shows 0.9452 and 0.9466 in terms of global accuracy and
F1-score respectively. In addition, it shows around 0.8650
and 0.8846 for Intersection over Union (IoU) and Dice
similarity Coefficient score (DC).

This quantitative analysis can be applied to define the
severity of the COVID-19 disease. For the second, third and
fourth columns, the percentage of infection is around
51.23%, 27.66%, and 47.89% respectively.

The experimental results for the segmentation model for
COVID-19 X-ray samples are shown in Figure 12. The first
column shows the inputs images, the second column shows
the outputs from COVID-Seg_X-ray, the third column
shows the polished segmentation masks, the fourth column
represents outputs for only chest regions, and the fifth
column shows the final outputs with COVID-19 infected
regions. The qualitative results clearly demonstrate that the
proposed model is able to segment and detect contaminated

COVID-Seg_X-ray outputs for COVID-19 from
Abdominal CT: We also observed that for some cases,
patients have been confirmed with COVID-19 after
analysis of the abdominal CT images. Thus, we have
7

Figure 12: Experimental results of COVID-Seg_X-ray model: first column represents the input images, second column shows the
predicted segmentation masks, third column shows the refined outputs with chest regions, fourth column represent only chest
regions, and fifth column represent the heatmap in the infected regions.

evaluated the same model for X-ray as has been tested on
abdominal CT images. The outputs for abdominal CT
images are shown in Figure 13. The first column shows the
input images, the second column represents the refined
segmented mask, where only large regions have been
selected among a set of segmented regions, and the fourth

column shows the extracted lung region with respect to the
refined mask shown in Figure 13(b). The classical image
processing method and the adaptive thresholding method
were applied to extract the pixels to represent COVID-19.
The sixth column in Figure 13 demonstrates the heatmaps
for the infected regions due to COVID-19. For the first row,
8

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 13: Experimental results of COVID-Seg_X-ray model for abdominal CT: (a)inputs, (b) segmented masks, (c) lung regions,
(d) extracted pixels for COVID-19, and (d)final heat with heatmap.

the total number of pixels for the lung regions is 5,184 and
the total number of infected pixels with COVID-19 is
1,599. Hence, the percentage of infection is 30.84%. For
the second and third rows, the percentage of infection is
80.39% and 23.18% respectively. The quantitative and
qualitative results clearly show that the proposed
classification and segmentation for X-ray images
demonstrate promising performance in detection and
infected region extraction.

segmentation model was trained and tested on a publicly
available 2D lung segmentation dataset. This model is
named COVID-Seg_CT. After training the COVIDSeg_CT model, the testing was done on completely new
samples. The quantitative results demonstrate 0.9885 and
0.9956 for F1-score and global accuracy respectively.

COVID-Det_CT outputs: From the literature survey, we
have observed that CT scans are used to identify the
COVID-19 detection directly. In some critical cases,
Doctors fail to take a decision directly from the X-ray
analysis. Instead, the CT scans are used to take final
decisions on the patients. Different studies have claimed
that CT is more efficient to confirm the COVID-19 patients.
Thus, we have included a detection model for CT images
which is named COVID-Det_CT. The system is trained and
tested on our own dataset. The COVID-Det_CT shows
around 98.78% testing accuracy for 45 samples.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 14: COVID-Seg_CT outputs for testing samples:
(a) inputs (b) Ground Truth (GT) and (c) model outputs.

COVID-Seg_CT outputs: For extracting infected regions
with COVID-19, the NABLA-N network-based
9

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 15: The COVID-19 infected region detection results from lung CT images: (a) inputs images, (b) segmented and refined
masks with TL learning approach, and (d) infected region with heatmaps.

The qualitative results are shown in Figure 14. The first
column shows the input images, the second column shows
the ground truth, and the third column shows the outputs
from the COVID-Seg_CT model. The results clearly
demonstrate that the proposed model produces very
accurate segmentation results compared to ground truth

3.76% better testing accuracy for pneumonia detection
tasks. In addition, most of the COVID-19 infected region
detection methods proposed are based on patch-based
detection methods for infected region extraction, where
there is a big possibility to have false positive and false
negative detections as the decision is taken based on the
class [17]. On the other hand, we proposed an infected
region segmentation strategy with pixel level analysis. The
qualitative results in our experiments clearly demonstrate
efficient detection of infected regions within the lung part
and hence the proposed COVID-19 detection significantly
reduces the possibility of false positive and false negative
detections.

Since, we did not have any labeled samples for COVID-19
for segmentation tasks, the COVID-Seg_CT model was
directly applied to segment the lung regions from the
samples with COVID-19. After segmenting the lung region
from CT images, mathematical morphological operations
were performed to refine the segmentation masks. Lung
regions were then extracted with respect to the mask. The
segmentation results of COVID-Seg_CT model for
COVID-19 samples are shown in Figure 15. The first
column shows the input images, the second column shows
the lung segmentation results, the third column represents
lung regions, and the fourth column represents the results
with heatmap. In most of the cases, the proposed model
provides good accuracy of detection. However, in some
cases, we have observed false detection, as shown in the
second row in Figure 15(d).

7. Limitations
Both detection and segmentation methods for X-ray
images provide very promising accuracy. However, there
are some limitations of this study which need to be
addressed in the near future. First, the COVID-Det_X-ray
model needs to be trained and tested with more COVID-19
samples. Second, as the COVID-Det_CT model is trained
and tested on only 300 samples in the initial
implementation, the model provides very good detection
accuracy. From our point of view, the COVID-Det_CT
model needs to be trained and tested with more samples to
generalize and make the model more robust and accurate.
Third, due to the scarcity of the labeled samples for lung
segmentation in CT for COVID-19, the COVID-Seg_CT
provides outputs with some false positive detections as

6. Discussions
The proposed pneumonia detection method shows
around 87.26% testing accuracy whereas the recently
published paper in [15] shows 84.67% testing accuracy.
Thus, our IRRCNN based detection model shows around
10

[8] Yang, Wenjie, and Fuhua Yan. "Patients with RT-PCR
confirmed COVID-19 and normal chest CT." Radiology
(2020): 200702.
[9] Ng, Ming-Yen, Elaine YP Lee, Jin Yang, Fangfang Yang,
Xia Li, Hongxia Wang, Macy Mei-sze Lui et al. "Imaging
profile of the COVID-19 infection: radiologic findings and
literature review." Radiology: Cardiothoracic Imaging 2, no.
1 (2020): e200034.
[10] Poggiali, Erika, Alessandro Dacrema, Davide Bastoni,
Valentina Tinelli, Elena Demichele, Pau Mateo Ramos,
Teodoro Marcianò, Matteo Silva, Andrea Vercelli, and
Andrea Magnacavallo. "Can Lung US Help Critical Care
Clinicians in the Early Diagnosis of Novel Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Pneumonia?." Radiology (2020): 200847.
[11] Wang, Yuhui, Chengjun Dong, Yue Hu, Chungao Li,
Qianqian Ren, Xin Zhang, Heshui Shi, and Min Zhou.
"Temporal Changes of CT Findings in 90 Patients with
COVID-19 Pneumonia: A Longitudinal Study." Radiology
(2020): 200843.
[12] Bai, Harrison X., Ben Hsieh, Zeng Xiong, Kasey Halsey, Ji
Whae Choi, Thi My Linh Tran, Ian Pan et al. "Performance
of radiologists in differentiating COVID-19 from viral
pneumonia on chest CT." Radiology (2020): 200823.
[13] Bernheim, Adam, Xueyan Mei, Mingqian Huang, Yang
Yang, Zahi A. Fayad, Ning Zhang, Kaiyue Diao et al. "Chest
CT findings in coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19):
relationship to duration of infection." Radiology (2020):
200463.
[14] Li, Lin, Lixin Qin, Zeguo Xu, Youbing Yin, Xin Wang, Bin
Kong, Junjie Bai, et al. “Artificial Intelligence

shown in the second row in Figure 15 (d). This needs to be
improved.
8. Conclusion
In this study, we proposed an end-to-end system for
COVID-19 detection and infected region localization from
two different modalities of medical imaging. For
classification, and segmentation tasks, our improved
Inception Recurrent Residual Neural Network (IRRCNN)
and NABLA-3 network models were applied. The models
were tested on X-ray, abdominal CT, and full body CT
images on publicly available datasets. The observed results
show very promising detection results with 84.67% and
98.78% testing accuracy for COVID-19 from X-ray and CT
images respectively. In addition, the qualitative results
clearly demonstrate high accuracy in the segmentation and
detection of infected regions by COVID-19 in both X-ray
and CT images. In the near future, we would like to collect
more samples of COVID-19 affected subjects to develop a
robust and more accurate system.
References
[1] The Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data
(GISAID). Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases by Johns
Hopkins
CSSE.
https://www.gisaid.org/epifluapplications/global-casescovid-19
[2] Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chunquan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong Shan, Chun-liang Lei,
David SC Hui, et al. Clinical characteristics of 2019 novel
coronavirus infection in china. MedRxiv, 2020.
[3] Junqiang Lei, Junfeng Li, Xun Li, and Xiaolong Qi. Ct
imaging of the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov)
pneumonia. Radiology, page 200236, 2020.
[4] Fengxiang Song, Nannan Shi, Fei Shan, Zhiyong Zhang, Jie
Shen, Hongzhou Lu, Yun Ling, Yebin Jiang, and Yuxin Shi.
Emerging coronavirus 2019-ncov pneumonia. Radiology,
page 200274, 2020.
[5] Michael Chung, Adam Bernheim, Xueyan Mei, Ning Zhang,
Mingqian
Huang,
Xianjian
Zeng,
JiufaCui,WenjianXu,YangYang,ZahiFayad,etal. CT imaging
features of 2019 novel corona virus (2019-ncov). Radiology,
page 200230, 2020.
[6] Litjens, Geert, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi,
Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Francesco Ciompi, Mohsen
Ghafoorian, Jeroen Awm Van Der Laak, Bram Van
Ginneken, and Clara I. Sánchez. "A survey on deep learning
in medical image analysis." Medical image analysis 42
(2017): 60-88.
[7] Gozes, Ophir, Maayan Frid-Adar, Hayit Greenspan, Patrick
D. Browning, Huangqi Zhang, Wenbin Ji, Adam Bernheim,
and Eliot Siegel. "Rapid ai development cycle for the
coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic: Initial results for
automated detection & patient monitoring using deep
learning
CT
image
analysis." arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2003.05037 (2020).

Distinguishes COVID-19 from Community Acquired
Pneumonia on Chest CT.” Radiology, 2020, 200905.
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200905.
[15] Wang, Linda, and Alexander Wong. "COVID-Net: A
Tailored Deep Convolutional Neural Network Design
for Detection of COVID-19 Cases from Chest
Radiography
Images." arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2003.09871 (2020).
[16] Zheng, Chuansheng, Xianbo Deng, Qing Fu, Qiang
Zhou, Jiapei Feng, Hui Ma, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang
Wang. "Deep Learning-based Detection for COVID19
from
Chest
CT
using
Weak
Label." medRxiv (2020).
[17] Xu, Xiaowei, Xiangao Jiang, Chunlian Ma, Peng Du,
Xukun Li, Shuangzhi Lv, Liang Yu et al. "Deep
Learning System to Screen Coronavirus Disease 2019
Pneumonia." arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09334 (2020).
[18] Alom, Md Zahangir, Mahmudul Hasan, Chris
Yakopcic, Tarek M. Taha, and Vijayan K. Asari.
"Improved inception-residual convolutional neural
network for object recognition." Neural Computing
and Applications (2018): 1-15.
[19] Md Zahangir Alom, Theus Aspiras, Tarek M. Taha,
and Vijayan K. Asari. Skin Cancer Segmentation and
11

Classification with NABLA-N and Inception
Recurrent
Residual
Convolutional
Networks.
Published in SPIE Medical Imaging Conference, 15-20
February 2020, Houston, Texas, USA.
[20] Alom, Md Zahangir, Chris Yakopcic, Mahmudul
Hasan, Tarek M. Taha, and Vijayan K. Asari.
"Recurrent residual U-Net for medical image
segmentation." Journal of Medical Imaging 6, no. 1
(2019): 014006.
[21] Alom, Md Zahangir, Tarek M. Taha, Chris Yakopcic,
Stefan Westberg, Paheding Sidike, Mst Shamima
Nasrin, Mahmudul Hasan, Brian C. Van Essen, Abdul
AS Awwal, and Vijayan K. Asari. "A state-of-the-art
survey on deep learning theory and
architectures." Electronics 8, no. 3 (2019): 292.
[22] Mooney. Kaggle chest x-ray images (pneumonia)
dataset.
https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestXray-dataset, 2020. 2, 3
[23] Cohen.
Covid
chest
xray
dataset.
https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset,
2020. 2, 3
[24] https://www.kaggle.com/arturscussel/lungsegmentation-and-candidate-points-generation

12

