Title: Impacts of US State-Level Social Distancing Policies on Population Mobility and
COVID-19 Case Growth During the First Wave of the Pandemic

Authors: Gregory A. Wellenius,*,1,2 Swapnil Vispute,*,1 Valeria Espinosa,*,1 Alex
Fabrikant,*,1 Thomas C. Tsai,4,5 Jonathan Hennessy,1 Andrew Dai,1 Brian Williams,1
Krishna Gadepalli,1 Adam Boulanger,1 Adam Pearce,1 Chaitanya Kamath,1 Arran
Schlosberg,1 Catherine Bendebury,1 Chinmoy Mandayam,1 Charlotte Stanton,1 Shailesh
Bavadekar,1 Christopher Pluntke,1 Damien Desfontaines,1,3 Benjamin H. Jacobson,5
Zan Armstrong,1 Bryant Gipson,1 Royce Wilson,1 Andrew Widdowson,1 Katherine
Chou,1 Andrew Oplinger,1 Tomer Shekel,1 Ashish K. Jha,5,6 Evgeniy Gabrilovich†,1
* = co-first authorship (these authors contributed equally)
† = corresponding author, gabr@google.com

Affiliations:
1. Google, Inc. Mountain View, CA
2. Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, MA
3. ETH Zurich, Switzerland
4. Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA
5. Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA
6. Brown University School of Public Health, Providence, RI

Abstract
Social distancing remains the primary mitigation strategy to combat the COVID-19
pandemic in the United States. However, the impacts of specific state-level policies on
mobility and subsequent COVID-19 case trajectories have not been completely
quantified. Using anonymized and aggregated mobility data from opted-in Google users,
we found that state-level emergency declarations resulted in a 9.9% reduction in time
spent away from places of residence. Implementation of one or more social distancing
policies resulted in an additional 24.5% reduction in mobility the following week, and
subsequent shelter-in-place mandates yielded an additional 29.0% reduction.
Decreases in mobility were associated with substantial reductions in case growth 2 to 4
weeks later. For example, a 10% reduction in mobility was associated with a 17.5%
reduction in case growth 2 weeks later. Given the continued reliance on social
distancing policies to limit the spread of COVID-19, these results may be helpful to
public health officials trying to balance infection control with the economic and social
consequences of these policies.

Main Text
Social distancing remains a primary strategy for slowing the spread of the COVID-19
pandemic by reducing the frequency of close contact between individuals and thus
minimizing the risk of transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. Prior experience
with the 2009 H1N1 influenza and Ebola suggests that social distancing is effective in
reducing disease transmission.(1, 2)
In China, officials engaged in an unprecedented quarantine of Hubei province to contain
COVID-19 transmission out of the initial epicenter city of Wuhan.(3-5) As the pandemic
spread to new clusters of infection in the United States, efforts at containment and then
mitigation have been largely at the discretion of state and local governments, leading to
a patchwork of directives to encourage social distancing. These policies have included
state emergency declarations, work-from-home policies, school closures, closures of
non-essential businesses and services, limits placed on large social gatherings, bans on
in-restaurant dining, and shelter-in-place orders.(6) While multiple reports have
examined the links between state-level social distancing policies, changes in mobility,
and changes in case growth trajectories during the early phase of the pandemic (7-19),
it remains unclear which state-level policies are most effective in mitigating the spread
of the virus. Given the continued reliance on social distancing policies to limit the spread
of COVID-19, systematically quantifying the impact of these policies may provide useful
insights to government leaders trying to reduce the spread of the virus while minimizing
the adverse economic and social impacts of restrictions.
The recent availability of anonymized and aggregated mobility data provides an
opportunity to quantify the effectiveness of individual policy interventions on both
mobility and COVID-19 cases growth.(10) Building on results from prior studies, we
sought to: 1) quantify the effect on mobility of state emergency declarations, social
distancing policies, and shelter-in-place orders, 2) identify which policies are most
effective in reducing aggregate mobility, and 3) estimate the impact of changes in
mobility on COVID-19 case growth in subsequent weeks. We estimated aggregate
mobility based on data from Google users across the U.S. who have opted-in to
Location History (the Location History feature is off by default and requires explicit optin)(20, 21), and leveraged publicly available information on the dates of implementation
of various social distancing policies and data on reported COVID-19 cases (22). We
chose the relative change in time spent away from places of residence as our primary
mobility metric since that is on average proportional to the time at risk of infection or
contagion. We additionally considered the impacts of social distancing policies on
relative changes in the number of visits to places of work, grocery stores and
pharmacies, retail and recreational sites, parks, and transit stations.

Overall, we observed three waves of state-level responses to COVID-19: 1) a first wave
occurring during the first two weeks of March with state of emergency declarations, 2) a
second wave during the week of March 16 where a variety of specific social distancing
orders were enacted, and 3) a third wave during the last two weeks of March consisting
of orders for residents to shelter in place (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Implementation of state-level policies in response to COVID-19, ordered by date of first social
distancing policy. Although policies implemented through April 5, 2020 are shown, only effects of policies
implemented through March 23, 2020 were evaluated.

The first state of emergency related to COVID-19 was declared by Washington State on
February 29, and the more recent ones by Oklahoma and Maine on March 15. Many
states subsequently ordered that schools close (led by Louisiana and Virginia on March
13, 2020), and/or placed limits on specific activities and businesses in order to promote
social distancing. Within a week, 48 states and Washington DC had implemented at
least one social distancing policy. In 78% of states, the first social distancing order
imposed was the closure of schools. On March 16, Nevada enacted orders advising
residents to shelter in place, followed by California on March 19, 2020. By April 5, 80%
of states had ordered residents to shelter in place.
Within each county we applied a regression discontinuity analysis to estimate the
impact of enactment of social distancing policies on mobility. To assess changes in

population mobility, we used the same data that was used to prepare the Community
Mobility Reports published by Google (20, 21) (see Online Methods). Mobility trends
were aggregated to the county level (including Washington, DC and independent cities
that are not otherwise included in county boundaries), and computed daily starting on
January 3, 2020. The regression discontinuity approach provides a causal estimate of
the short-term change in mobility in the week after versus before enactment of a specific
policy. In the following sections we report on the observed impacts on mobility of
enactment of: a) state emergency declarations, b) different social distancing policies,
and c) shelter-in-place orders. We then evaluate the association between changes in
mobility and subsequent changes in COVID-19 case growth rates.
On average across the country, a declaration of a state of emergency was associated
with a 9.9% (95% confidence interval [CI]: -10.1%, -9.7%) decrease in the time spent
away from places of residence, our primary mobility metric. State emergency
declarations were also associated with 11.4% (95% CI: -11.8%, -11.0%) fewer visits to
the workplace, 11.5% (-11.7%, -11.2%) fewer visits to retail and recreational sites, and
9.3% fewer (-9.6%, -9.0%) visits to transit stations in the following week (Figure 2A).
These changes in mobility are noteworthy given that emergency declarations did not
necessarily specifically call for increased social distancing, and suggests that
government messaging, news coverage, and/or actions observed in other countries
could have influenced people’s activities. Visits to parks were also affected by
emergency declarations, with a small 3.5% (95% CI: -4.4%, -2.6%) average reduction.
The smaller impact of emergency declarations on visits to parks versus other venues is
likely at least partly explained by the seasonal transition to warmer weather during this
period. On the other hand, emergency declarations coincided with a relative increase in
visits to grocery stores and pharmacies of 8.2% (95% CI: 7.9%, 8.5%), consistent with
news reports of individuals’ stocking up on dry goods, cleaning supplies, and
medications at the end of February and early March in anticipation of further
restrictions.(23)

Figure 2: (A) Average effect on mobility of state-wide emergency declaration orders. (B) Average effect
on mobility of implementation of first state-wide social distancing (SD) policy in 49 states and Washington
DC. Idaho is not included in this figure because its first social distancing order was after March 23rd. (C)
Average effect of shelter in place (SIP) order among 7 states that had issued such an order on or before
March 23, 2020 and, for comparison, among the other states over a comparable time period (March 2329 versus March 14-20, 2020). Each bar reflects the mean and 95% confidence interval. Note that
comparisons across states are only descriptive and cannot be interpreted as reflecting a causal effect. (D)
Average change from the start of March (March 1-7, 2020) to the end of March (March 23-29, 2020).

We next examined the impact on mobility of the first social distancing policies
implemented in each state. We found that on average these orders resulted in
additional reductions in mobility above and beyond the changes observed following the
emergency declarations (Figure 2B). Specifically, implementation of one or more social
distancing policies resulted in a further 24.5% (95% CI: -24.7%, -24.3%) reduction in
time spent away from places of residence, a further 33.0% (-33.3%, -32.8%) reduction
in visits to retail and recreational outlets, and a further 27.9% (-28.3%, -27.5%)
reduction in visits to work in the following week. The same pattern was evident for visits
to parks, grocery stores, and pharmacies.

Figure 3: Effect of the first social distancing order on time spent away from places of residence by state.
Color coding reflects the number of social distancing policies that were simultaneously enacted in each
state. Boxplots indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles (box extent) and the median (center line of each
box) of county-specific changes. The whiskers extend from the hinge to the largest value no further than
1.5 * interquartile range from the hinge. Outliers beyond the whiskers are not shown.

The impact of social distancing orders varied substantially between states (Figure 3).
For example, implementation of social distancing policies was associated with a 36%
versus 12% decrease in the time spent away from places of residence in New Jersey
versus Louisiana, and we note that differences in mobility between states may be due to
a number of factors beyond social distancing policies. States that enacted multiple
social distancing measures tended to experience greater reductions in mobility. The
impact of social distancing orders also varied substantially across counties within each
state (Supplemental Table 1). This pattern of results was similar when considering
other metrics of mobility (Supplemental Figure 1). Our results are consistent with and
extend findings of previous reports based on cell phone location data suggesting
approximately a 50% reduction in individual mobility with variation across states. (12)
Given that most states enacted multiple policies to encourage social distancing over a
short time period, it is not possible to estimate the independent effects of individual
policies. However, in secondary analyses we sought to identify the combinations of

social distancing orders that were associated with greater changes in mobility (Figure
4). Among states that initially implemented a single social distancing order, the most
effective single order was imposing limits on bar and restaurant operations, which was
associated with a 25.8% reduction (95% CI: -26.3%, -25.3%) in time spent away from
places of residence. This result may suggest that restrictions on bars and restaurant
operations discourage outings to other points of interests beyond restaurants, such as
retail and recreation. The smallest reductions in time spent away from places of
residence were observed in those states that only imposed state-mandated school
closures and/or bans on large gatherings, suggesting that bar and restaurant limits and
orders calling for the closure of non-essential businesses are critical to further reduce
mobility.

Figure 4: Association between different combinations of first social distancing orders on average time
spent away from places of residence. Note that only two combinations of measures are observed in more
than 3 states. Each bar reflects the mean and 95% confidence interval. Abbreviations: LGB = Large
Gathering Ban, SMSC = State-Mandated School Closures, B&RL = Bar & Restaurant Limits, NBC =
Nonessential Business Closures.

We also considered the impact on mobility of state-wide orders to shelter in place.
Among the 7 states that had issued shelter-in-place orders on or before March 23, we
found substantial reductions in time spent away from places of residence and in visits to
all categories of locations (Figure 2C). Specifically, time spent away from places of
residence was 29.0% (95% CI: -29.4%, -28.5%) lower in the week following
implementation of shelter-in-place orders versus the prior week. Note that these
changes are multiplicative over time as all states had already declared a state of
emergency and implemented at least one social distancing policy. For comparison, we

also show in Figure 2C the change in mobility during the same time frame (March 2329 versus March 14-20, 2020) among states that had and had not yet issued shelter-inplace orders by March 23. However, note that comparisons between states reflect the
influence of a number of factors on mobility in addition to policy differences. The total
average change in mobility comparing the end versus start of March (Figure 2D)
provides a measure of the cumulative impact of multiple interventions during this time.
Finally, we quantified the association between changes in time spent away from places
of residence and subsequent change in the growth rate of cases. Following the
approach by Courtemanche et al. (7), we estimated case growth as the difference in the
log of new cases from week to the next. We then fit a linear mixed effects regression
model to estimate the impact of mobility changes on case growth at the county level,
adjusting for temporal trends in case growth. We first examined the association between
changes in mobility and subsequent changes in case growth 2 weeks later. We found
that a 5% decrease in the time spent away from residences was associated with 9.2%
fewer new cases of COVID-19 reported 2 weeks later (95% CI: -7.3%, -11.0%) (see
Supplemental Table 3). A 10% decrease in mobility was associated with 17.5% fewer
new COVID-19 cases reported 2 weeks later (95% CI: -14.1%, -20.9%). Changes in
mobility were more strongly associated with changes in case growth rates 3 and 4
weeks later (Supplemental Table 3).
These estimates of timing and/or magnitude of the impacts of changes in mobility on
case growth are consistent with previous reports (7-11,13-19). For example, Gao et al.
(8) showed that COVID-19 doubling time was associated with enactment of social
distancing policies and correlated with home dwell time derived from SafeGraph mobility
data. Similarly, Badr et al. (9) used anonymized cell phone tower data and found that
reduced mobility was correlated with COVID-19 case growth rates in 25 US counties 23 weeks later. Our results add to this emerging body of evidence by providing
quantitative estimates of the impacts of social distancing policies on multiple metrics of
population mobility and subsequent changes in case growth in a very large population
of Google users across the US.
These results should be interpreted in light of several important limitations. First, our
source data is limited to smartphone users who have opted into Google’s Location
History feature. This data may not be representative of the population as a whole, and
furthermore its representativeness may vary by location. Additionally, this data is only
viewed through the lens of differential privacy algorithms, which were used to protect
user anonymity when preparing the Community Mobility Reports(20). Second,
comparisons across rather than within locations are only descriptive since these regions
can differ in substantial ways besides the policy environment. Third, our analyses are

focused on state-level policies, whereas individual metropolitan areas and counties
within a state may have implemented specific social distancing policies prior to
implementation of state-level policies (see Supplemental Figure 3 for detailed
examples from King County, WA, Westchester County, NY, New York County, NY, and
Santa Clara County, CA).
In summary, using anonymized, aggregated, and differentially private data from Google
users who opted into Location History, we found that state-mandated social distancing
orders were effective in decreasing time spent away from places of residence, as well
as reducing visits to work, grocery stores/pharmacies, and retail/recreational locations.
While the majority of states declared states of emergency by early March, the
emergency declaration per se had only a modest effect on mobility. In contrast,
implementation of one or more specific social distancing orders was associated with an
almost 25% additional reduction in time spent away from places of residence and a 33%
additional reduction in visits to retail and recreational locations. These effects were
evident in every state and in virtually every county. Although we were unable to
comprehensively estimate the independent effects of different social distancing
measures due to their close temporal proximity in each state, we found that those states
that implemented multiple such measures experienced more pronounced declines in
mobility. Furthermore, limits on bars and restaurants appeared to be the single most
effective social distancing order. Additionally, we replicated the findings of prior studies
that changes in population-level mobility are strongly linked to changes in COVID-19
case growth in the subsequent weeks.
We conclude that state-based orders intended to promote social distancing appear to
be highly effective in accomplishing the public health goals of encouraging individuals to
minimize time away from their place of residence and thereby reduce the population risk
of COVID-19 transmission. Our findings not only illustrate the effectiveness of specific
social distancing orders, but also demonstrate the magnitude of change in mobility and
subsequent case growth that may result from such policies in the future. Moreover, our
results highlight the potential utility of aggregate mobility data as a leading indicator of
subsequent COVID-19 risk.

Online Methods
Our analytic goals were to: 1) quantify the effect on mobility of state emergency
declarations, social distancing policies, and shelter-in-place orders, 2) identify which
policies are most effective in reducing aggregate mobility, and 3) estimate the impact of
changes in mobility on COVID-19 case growth in subsequent weeks. We used a

regression discontinuity approach to estimate the impact of state declarations of
emergency and social distancing policies on mobility.
Data on state social distancing policies were obtained from official documents issued by
state governors and health and education officials. Documents were linked from the
Kaiser Family Foundation’s State Data and Policy Actions Tracker (24) and
supplemented with manual searches of state public health websites. Dates of policy
enactment were cross-checked with the AEI COVID-19 Action Tracker (25) and the
NYTimes Shelter in Place Tracker (26). Policies tracked were categorized as follows: 1)
state-declared state of emergency, 2) state-mandated school closures, 3) statemandated closing of non-essential businesses and services, 4) state-mandated limits on
large gatherings, 5) state-imposed bans on in-restaurant service, and 6) state-imposed
mandatory quarantines. State-mandated closing of non-essential businesses included
any order closing gyms, theaters, and other businesses even if it did not extend to all
non-essential businesses. Limits on large gatherings referred to any ban on gatherings
larger than a certain number of people, though that threshold varied between states. For
states that issued additional orders reducing the size of permitted gatherings, the date
of the first such order was taken. Bans on in-restaurant service excluded mandatory
reductions in restaurant capacity and included only those orders that prohibited any
restaurant activity except pick-up and delivery. These bans often also included bars and
clubs. Mandatory quarantine referred to any stay-at-home or shelter-in-place order that
prohibited non-essential travel away from the home for all residents. Shelter-in-place
orders specifically for high-risk individuals were excluded. Orders that went into effect at
any time after 12:00 pm were considered to begin on the following day.
We obtained aggregated and anonymized data from Google users on mobile devices in
all 50 states and Washington, DC who have opted into having their Location History
data stored. The anonymized dataset used for these analyses is the same as the one
used to create the publicly-available Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports
(published at http://google.com/covid19/mobility on April 2, 2020). The aggregation and
anonymization process applied to Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports has
been previously described in detail. (20) The Community Mobility Reports leverage
signals such as relative frequency, time and duration of visits to calculate metrics
related to places of residence, work places, as well as several other categories of
locations. The anonymization process based on differential privacy was designed to
ensure that no personal data, including an individual’s location, movement, or contacts,
can be derived from the resulting metrics.
Mobility data were aggregated to the county level (and Washington, DC) and available
daily from January 3 through March 29, 2020. Changes for each day are compared to a

pre-COVID baseline value for that same day of the week in the period of 2020-01-03
through 2020-02-06. We chose to use the relative change in the average number of
hours spent away from places of residence as the mobility metric of primary interest.
This metric is estimated as 24 minus the population-averaged number of hours spent at
places of residence, and compared to the same baseline as used in the Community
Mobility Reports. We considered relative changes in the number of visits to specific
categories of points of interests as secondary metrics of mobility. Details of how these
metrics are estimated have been published elsewhere. (20)
Within each county we applied a regression discontinuity analysis to estimate the
relative change in time spent away from the place of residence (primary outcome) and
the relative change in the number of visits to public locations (secondary outcomes)
associated with: 1) declaration of a state of emergency, 2) ordering of one or more
social distancing measures, and 3) orders for people to shelter-in-place. For each
county we compared the value of each metric in the week after the date of
implementation versus the 7-day period 9 to 2 days prior to the date of implementation.
We included a two-day washout period prior to the implementation date given the public
messaging that typically precedes implementation of these orders. Given data until
March 29 were used in these analyses, the effects of policies enacted on or before
March 23 could be evaluated. Standard errors were calculated at the county level by
first estimating the variance of the weekly average using February 1-28, 2020. The
standard error of the relative change was calculated using the delta method. The state
level estimates reflect population-weighted aggregates of the county-specific estimates.
The national estimates are a simple average of the state estimates.
We note that less populous counties are more likely to have days with missing data on
visits to one or more categories of places (e.g., pharmacies), owing to the use of an
anonymization procedure to protect user privacy. However, we believe that missing data
has negligible effects on the state and national estimates provided because: 1) state
level estimates are weighted by county population, and populous counties are extremely
unlikely to have any metrics which fall below the limits of detection, and 2) the
(unweighted) correlations between the relative changes in the combined metrics used in
this paper (e.g., grocery stores and pharmacies considered together), compared to an
unbiased, but lower-coverage alternative (e.g., grocery stores only) are very high
(>0.95).
Because each county and state is compared to its recent past these estimates are
causally interpretable. However, comparisons across counties or states are only
descriptive since locations can differ substantially in terms of the proportion of the
population that opted into Location History; the demographics of this group; the quality

of the mobility data and of the Google Maps data about local establishments; and a
number of other factors that may influence the observed changes in mobility beyond
differences in the policy environment.
We obtained data on reported COVID-19 cases at the county level from the John
Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center (22). We then assessed the association between
changes in mobility and subsequent changes in the number of new COVID-19 cases.
Specifically, we fit a linear mixed effects model to estimate the change in the log of new
cases from one week to the next in a county as a function of weekly mobility changes,
the number of weeks elapsed since the county first reported it’s 10th infection (to
account for the progression of the pandemic), and an indicator variable for the first week
the county reported 10 new cases (to mitigate potential noise resulting from changes in
small case counts). We used a multilevel model where counties are nested within states
since different states have differing policies that apply to all counties within a state. We
hypothesized that case growth would be related to changes in population mobility 2
weeks earlier, but also considered mobility changes 3 and 4 weeks earlier in separate
models.
All analyses were performed using python 3.6.7 and graphics were created using the
package plotnine 0.6.0.

References
1. Peak, C. M. et al. Population mobility reductions associated with travel
restrictions during the Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone: use of mobile phone data.
Int J Epidemiol 47, 1562-1570 (2018).
2. Chowell, G. et al. Characterizing the epidemiology of the 2009 influenza A/H1N1
pandemic in Mexico. PLoS Med 8, e1000436 (2011).
3. Kraemer, M. U. G. et al. The effect of human mobility and control measures on
the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science, (2020).
4. Tian, H. et al. An investigation of transmission control measures during the first
50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science, (2020).
5. Maier, B. F. & Brockmann, D. Effective containment explains sub-exponential
growth in recent confirmed COVID-19 cases in China.
6. Gostin, L. O. & Wiley, L. F. Governmental Public Health Powers During the
COVID-19 Pandemic: Stay-at-home Orders, Business Closures, and Travel
Restrictions. JAMA, (2020).
7. Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J. & Yelowitz, A. Strong Social
Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth
Rate. Health Affairs vol. 39 1237–1246 (2020).
8. Gao, S. et al. Association of Mobile Phone Location Data Indications of Travel
and Stay-at-Home Mandates With COVID-19 Infection Rates in the US. JAMA
Netw Open 3, e2020485 (2020)
9. Badr, H. S. et al. Association between mobility patterns and COVID-19
transmission in the USA: a mathematical modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis
2020;20: 1247–54.
10. Mazumder, B. & Moorthy, A. How does social distancing affect the spread of
Covid-19 in the United States? Chicago Fed Letter (2020)
11. Bonaccorsi, G. et al. Economic and social consequences of human mobility
restrictions under COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
117, 15530-15535 (2020).
12. Klein, B. et al. Reshaping a nation: Mobility, commuting, and contact patterns
during the COVID-19 outbreak. (Network Science Institute, 2020).
13. Chen, M.K. et al. "Causal Estimation of Stay-at-Home Orders on SARS-CoV-2
Transmission". Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05469 (2020). Accessed
2020-10-08.
14. Fang, H., Wang, L. & Yang, Y. Human mobility restrictions and the spread of the
Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China. Journal of Public Economics 191,
104272, (2020).

15. Fowler, J.H. et al. "The effect of stay-at-home orders on COVID-19 cases and
fatalities in the United States". Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06098
(2020). Accessed 2020-10-08.
16. Holtz, D. et al. Interdependence and the cost of uncoordinated responses to
COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 1983719843, (2020).
17. Jia, J. S. et al. Population flow drives spatio-temporal distribution of COVID-19 in
China. Nature 582, (2020).
18. Chang, S. et al. Mobility network models of COVID-19 explain inequities and
inform reopening. Nature, (2020).
19. Buckee, C. O. et al. Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19.
Science, (2020).
20. Aktay, A. et al. "Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports: Anonymization
Process Description (version 1.0)". Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.04145
(2020). Accessed 2020-04-08.
21. Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports.
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
22. Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/
23. Knoll, C. Panicked Shoppers Empty Shelves as Coronavirus Anxiety Rises. New
York Times. March 13, 2020.
24. Kaiser Family Foundation, State Data and Policy Actions to Address
Coronavirus. https://www.kff.org/health-costs/issue-brief/state-data-and-policyactions-to-address-coronavirus/ Accessed 2020-04-2.
25. American Enterprise Institute, COVID-19 Action Tracker.
https://www.aei.org/covid-2019-action-tracker/ Accessed 2020-04-02.
26. Mervosh, S., Lu, D. & Swales, V. See Which States and Cities Have Told
Residents to Stay at Home.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-homeorder.html. Accessed 2020-04-02.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Giorgia Abeltino, Matthew Abueg, Skip Addison, Elizabeth Adkison,
Maha Afifi, Gerald Agapov, Ahmet Aktay, Putri Alam, Jan Antonaros, Neha Arora, Harry
Askham, Boris Babenko, Arturo Bajuelos, Avi Bar, Davi Barbosa, Sean Barclay, Pinal
Bavishi, Sherry Ben, Ashish Bora, Aleksey Boyko, Michael Bringle, Sander Bruens,

Mark Bryars, Hema Budaraju, Peggy Bui, Mark Burslem, Senaka Buthpitiya, Shayla
Byrd, Yuannan Cai, Bilson Campana, Yannick Carer, Danilo Carvalho Martins, Daniel
Chang, Kai Chang, Cameron Chen, Will Chen, Amit Chibber, Paul Chien, Bryan Chu,
Diego Ciulli, Daniel Coelho, Joel Conkling, Iz Conroy, Brian Coopersmith, Joe Corkery,
Sofie Cornelis, Greg Corrado, Gwen Cossoul, David Coz, Cristhian Cruz, Kane,
Cunningham, Ashok Cutkosky, Matt D'Zmura, Mark Daly, Van Dang, Abhimanyu Das,
John Davis, Karen DeSalvo, Michael DeWitt, Jon Deaton, Eusebio Del Rio, Amey
Desai, Kedar Dhamdhere, Duc Huy Doan, Lizzie Dorfman, Quang Duong, Paul
Eastham, Ilya Eckstein, Arjan El Fassed, Vetri Elango, Luke Farrell, David Feinberg,
Dave Feltenberger, Enrica Filippi, Lutz Finger, Jen Fitzpatrick, Oren Fliegelman,
Gerardo Flores, Iarla Flynn, Heather Folsom, Pauline Fournié, Ben Galin, Chris
Gamble, Sanjay Ganapathy Subramaniam, Francis Gastellu, Badih Ghazi, David
Gibson, Lance Gjerstad, Shane Glass, Varun Godbole, Sasha Gontmakher, Yves
Gonzalez, Julien Goodwin, Rich Gossweiler, Eva Grzesik, Miguel Guevara, Ollie
Guinan, Karen Guo, Armin Hamidovic, Elizabeth Hamon Reid, Matt Hancher, Michal
Hanula, Tharindi Hapuarachchi, Chanelle Hardy, Tracy Harrison, Jay Hartford, Raiden
Hasegawa, Catherine Heilig, Fred Hersch, ViVien Hoang, Michael Hogue, Tobias
Horstmann, Shanti Hossain, Daniel Hottinger, Michael Howell, Rayman Huang, Ben
Hutchinson, Miles Hutson, Ayush Jain, Rahul Jain, Leigha Jarett, Tiam Jaroensri, Heidi
Jern, Xiang Ji, Renee Johnston, Jonas Jongejan, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Mansi Kansal,
Olga Kanzheleva, Caro Kaplan, Arian Karbasi, Alan Karthikesalingam, Gargi Keeling,
Kori Kelley Meehan, Philipp Kern, Asif Khan, Maxim Khenkin, Nathan Kiner, Winnie
King, Dominic King, John Kirmizi, Naho Kitade, Bhavana Koka, Jan Kottmann, Kristian
Riber Kraaer, Jonathan Krause, Shubha Kumble, Ivan Kuznetsov, Maciej Kuzniar, Dan
LaLiberte, Marcelo Lacerda, William Lam, Ali Lange, Dieter Laskowski, Roy Lee,
Sanghyun Lee, Mihai Letia, Dominic Leung, Peter Lewis, Jimmy Li, Larry Li, Yechen Li,
Arden Liao, Casey Lichtendahl, David Lieber, Ziheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Yun Liu, Yun Liu,
Weijie Liu, Xinle Sheila Liu, Aaron Loh, Pete Lu, Jieying Luo, Johnny Luu, Susanna
Makela, William Malcolm, Paula Marques, Helena Martins, Katrin Maurer, Yael Mayer,
Christine McGavran, Marlo McGriff, Alex McPhillips, Gav Mcginty, Jordon Mears, Emily
Meng, Craig Mermel, Constantinos Michael, Brian Michalski, Benjamin Miller, Anita
Misra, Akinori Mitani, Amlan Mohanty, Dave Moloney, Francisco Moneo, Leeron Morad,
Eric Morley, Paul Muret, Mahvish Nagda, Kunal Nagpal, Arun Nair, Amir Najmi, Cozi
Namer, Shannon Newberry, Sue Ngo, Shuxin Nie, Dave Otaguro, Rasmus Pagh, Daniel
Papasian, Smruti Parichha, Ed Parsons, Arti Patankar, Fernando Pereira, Sonia Phene,
Ansley Post, Jingzheng Qin, Karthik Raman, Neha Rana, Ramya Rao, Frances Rees,
Emily Reif, Vitaly Repeshko, Thomas Roessler, Gregor Rothfuss, Kathryn Rough,
Apaar Sadhwani, Bashir Sadjad, Nima Sadrieh, Sankar Balaji Sairam, Krittinee Sakarin,
Tamas Sarlos, Troy Sauro, Dario Sava, Karen Saville, Rory Sayres, Dominik Schmid,
Ian Schneider, Tori Scoville, Christopher Semturs, Shay Seng, Weijie Shen, Jeff Shih,

Crystal Sholts, Maxim Sigalov, Sandesh Singh, Preeti Singh, Daniel Smilkov, Neil
Smith, Jamila Smith-Loud, Chris Snow, Denis Sosnovtsev, Patrick Squire, Prav
Srinivasan, Mukund Srinivasan, Michael Stapelberg, Sterling Stein, Jacob Stimes, MinYian Su, Kaushik Subramanian, Mimi Sun, Mukund Sundararajan, Caitlin Taggart,
Diane Tang, Rachel Teo, Shashi Thakur, Eric Tholomé, Nikhil Thorat, Chandu Thota,
Jayden Tilbrook, Andrew Tomkins, Iveel Tsogsuren, Annisah Um'rani, Linus Upson,
Marissa Urban, Avinash Varadarajan, Hal Varian, Alexander Varshavsky, Mia Vu,
Adrienne Walcer, Alexandria Walden, Harry Wang, Tom Wang, Helen Wang, Abbi
Ward, Chris Webb, Dale Webster, Barron Webster, Janet Whiteman, Kasumi Widner,
John Williams, Jimbo Wilson, Alex Wilson, Derek Wu, Neo Wu, Ellery Wulczyn,
Fangzhou Xu, Lu Yang, Liron Yatziv, Kiran Yogesh, Samantha Yorke, Mark Young,
Ross Young, Tom Yue, Yanning Zang, Shujing(Anne) Zhang, Celia Zhang, and Ashley
Zlatinov for their help and advice.

Data and Code Availability: The anonymized and aggregated dataset analyzed herein
was the same one that was used to create the publicly-available Google COVID-19
Community Mobility Reports (published at http://google.com/covid19/mobility on April 2,
2020). The data analyzed in this paper consisted of anonymized, aggregated, and
differentially private counts of visits to places in different categories. The publicly
available data reflects percentage ratios computed using these counts. The information
on dates of policy interventions was aggregated from publicly available data as
described in the Supplemental Information.

Funding: No extramural funding.

Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of
interest.
Author Contributions: GAW, SV, AB, AP, CS, SB, KC, AO, TS and EG developed the
concept. SV, VE, AF, BW, KG, CK, AS, CB, SB, CP, DD, ZA, CM, BG, RW, and AW
computed the data. GAW, VE, AF, TCT, BW, KG, AB, AP, AS, CB, BJ, ZA, AO, TS,
AKJ, and EG designed the experiments. GAW, VE, AF, TCT, JH, AD, BW, CB and ZA
analyzed the data and performed statistical analysis. All authors contributed to writing
the manuscript. GAW, SV, VE, and AF contributed equally to this manuscript and
therefore are listed as co-first authors.

Supplemental Information
Sensitivity Analyses
We performed a sensitivity analysis to assess the distribution of each outcome metric
under the null hypothesis of the policies having no effect. We interp ret the relative
change across two periods of time (period 1: January 27-February 2, 2020; period 2:
February 5-11, 2020), prior to the enactment of any state-level social distancing
measures, as observations under the null hypothesis. During this time there were only 5
reported cases of COVID-19 in the U.S., which were isolated in Washington state.
Although there was a small drop in time spent away from the place of residence across
these pre-intervention periods, the much larger effects on mobility observed after each
of the policies suggests that our observed effect during the exposure period is in fact
related to the implementation of social distancing (Supplemental Figure 2).
Supplemental Figures 2.A and 2.B can be compared to Figures 2 and 3 in the main
text to gain a sense of how different these effects look when the first social-distancing
measures were implemented. Under the null hypothesis of no policy-affect, the median
observed change is slightly below -2%. However, during the first social-distancing
measures, the median drop is nearly 10 times as large at -19%. For further context, all
but two counties during the first social-distancing measures are below the null
distribution median, and over 96% of counties are below the null distribution 2.5%
percentile. A comparison between the changes in mobility during first social-distancing
measures and changes in mobility under the null hypothesis for each metric is
presented in Supplemental Tables 2.A and 2.B.
Our main analyses estimate the incremental mobility changes after versus before each
of three waves of policy orders (Figure 2). However, it is also of interest to quantify the
overall effect of social distancing by comparing mobility at the end versus the start of
March. We define the overall effect as the change in mobility from the week before the
term “social distancing” started increasing in Google Search (March 1-7th) to the last
week available in the data (March 23-29th). We see a significant decrease in all metrics.
The ordering of the magnitudes is comparable to those in Figure 2B. As expected the
overall magnitudes of the drops are larger than any of the incremental effects in Figure
2.

Supplemental Table 1: ANOVA sum of squares decomposition of the variation in the relative change on
average time spent away from places of residence across counties for the linear model with the relative
pre-post difference in time spent away from the residence as the outcome and state as the only
independent variable. The results show that approximately half of the variance in the outcome is
explained by differences between states and the remaining variance is largely explained by differences
across counties within states.
Sums of
Squares

Degrees of
Freedom

State

5.48

49

Residual

5.53

2733

11.01

2782

Total

F statistic
55.24

P value
< 0.0001

% of variance explained by
each source
49.76%
50.24%

Supplemental Figure 1: Effect of first social distancing order on visits to places of work (A), visits to
grocery stores and pharmacies (B), visits to retail, recreation, and eateries (C), visits to transit stops (D),
and visits to parks (E). Boxplots indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles (box extent) and the median
(center line of each box) of county-specific changes. The whiskers extend from the hinge to the largest
value no further than 1.5 * interquartile range from the hinge. Outliers beyond the whiskers are not shown.

Supplemental Table 2.A: Relative changes in national averages from January 27-February 2, 2020 to
February 5-11, 2020 for all metrics of interest. Since these periods occurred before any orders were
issued, we interpret these changes as observations under the null hypothesis of no policy effect.
Although most metrics show a statistically significant decrease, the magnitude of the effect is
considerably smaller compared with the policy intervention effects. The effect of the first social distancing
order on time spent away from places of residence is ~12x larger. Similar differences are observed for the
other metrics, ranging from ~2x to ~90x for Parks and Transit, respectively. The same reference null
distribution can be used for the effects of the other two waves (i.e., emergency declaration and shelter in
place).
Effect of 1st SD Order

Pseudo Effect

Estimate

SE

Estimate

SE

Ratio of estimates

Time Spent Away
from Residences

-24.47%

0.10%

-2.10%

0.11%

11.64

Visits to Grocery &
Pharmacy

-9.27%

0.12%

-1.43%

0.14%

6.46

Visits to Parks

-10.54%

0.41%

-5.96%

0.50%

1.77

Visits to Retail &
Recreation

-33.04%

0.12%

-0.66%

0.14%

49.75

Visits to Transit
Stops

-22.43%

0.15%

-0.25%

0.18%

89.58

Visits to Workplaces

-27.92%

0.21%

-1.16%

0.23%

24.16

Supplemental Table 2.B: Distribution of relative changes across counties for metrics from January 27February 2, 2020 to February 5-11, 2020 compared to the analogous distributions during the first social
distancing measures. This table depicts the heterogeneity of the changes before any orders were issued
and are interpreted as observations under the null hypothesis of no policy effect. In this table, we see that
all the medians for the first social distancing measure are substantially lower than the medians under the
null. Furthermore, the spread of the effects for the first social distancing measure is larger (e.g., for
workplace visits the 90% range is 26 percentual points during the treatment period vs 10 percentual
points under the null). The same reference null distribution can be used for the effects of the other two
waves of policy interventions.

First SD measures
5 %ile

Before any order

25 %ile 50 %ile 75 %ile 95 %ile

5% ile 25 %ile 50 %ile 75 %ile 95 %ile

Time Spent
Away from
Residences

-31%

-23%

-19%

-15%

-10%

-8%

-4%

-2%

-1%

1%

Visits to
Retail &
Recreation

-48%

-37%

-30%

-24%

-12%

-10%

-4%

-1%

1%

6%

Visits to
Workplaces

-35%

-26%

-21%

-16%

-9%

-8%

-3%

-1%

0%

2%

Visits to
Transit
Stops

-42%

-26%

-17%

-9%

1%

-9%

-3%

0%

2%

9%

Visits to
Parks

-37%

-22%

-10%

3%

30%

-26%

-14%

-6%

2%

19%

Visits to
Grocery &
Pharmacy

-22%

-13%

-6%

1%

13%

-7%

-3%

-1%

1%

7%

Supplemental Figure 2.A Relative changes in national averages from January 27-February 2, 2020 to
February 5-11, 2020 for all metrics of interest. The results are also shown in Supplemental Table 2.A.
This plot can serve as a reference point for Figure 2 in the sense that these periods occurred before any
orders were issued and can be interpreted as observations under the null hypothesis of no effect of policy
interventions. Each bar reflects the mean and 95% confidence interval.

Supplemental Figure 2.B: Relative changes in county averages from January 27-February 2, 2020 to
February 5-11, 2020 for time spent away from the residence. Counties are grouped by state to show the
heterogeneity across counties and states before any orders were issued. The changes can be
interpreted as observations under the null hypothesis of no policy effect because these periods occurred
before any orders were issued. Boxplots indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles (box extent) and the
median (center line of each box) of county-specific changes. The whiskers extend from the hinge to the
largest value no further than 1.5 * interquartile range from the hinge. Outliers beyond the whiskers are not
shown.

Supplemental Table 3: Percent change (and 95% confidence interval) in COVID-19 case growth
associated with a week-on-week mobility change of a specified magnitude.
Percent Change (95% confidence interval)
Mobility
change

2 Week lag

3 week lag

4 week lag

-5%

-9.2 (-7.3, -11.0)

-20.9 (-19.4, -22.3)

-13.0 (-9.3, -16.6)

-10%

-17.5 (-14.1, -20.9)

-37.4 (-35.0, -39.6)

-24.4 (-17.8, -30.4)

-15%

-25.1 (-20.3, -29.6)

-50.4 (-47.6, -53.1)

-34.2 (-25.4, -41.9)

-20%

-32.0 (-26.1, -37.4)

-60.8 (-57.8, -63.5)

-42.8 (-32.4, -51.6)

Supplemental Figure 3: Timeline of change in average time spent away from places of residence in King
County, Washington (i.e. Seattle area) (A), Westchester County, New York (B), New York County, New
York (i.e., Manhattan) (C), and Santa Clara County, California (i.e. San Jose area). Colored boxes denote
the declaration of a state of emergency, the implementation of the first county-level social distancing
order, the implementation of the first state-level social distancing order, and county and/or state-level
orders for residents to shelter in place. The height of each box corresponds to the change in average time
Location History users spent away from places of residence in the week before (plus a 2-day washout
period) versus the week after each policy date.

