CLINICAL CONCEPTS MIGHT BE INCLUDED
IN HEALTH-RELATED MATHEMATIC MODELS
Dinamarca - Montecinos, José Luis
MD, PhD, Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Valparaíso, Chile

Aguilar - Navarro, Sara
MD, PhD. Ins tuto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán,
Ciudad de México, México

Runzer - Colmenares, Fernando

arXiv:2004.13555 [physics.med-ph] 23 Apr 2020

Universidad Cien ﬁca del Sur, Lima, Perú

Morales - Eraso, Alexander
MSc, Universidad Coopera va de Colombia, campus Pasto, Colombia

The construction of mathematical models that allow comprehensive approach of decision-making in
situations of absence of robust evidence is important. While it is interesting to use models that are easy to
understand, using values of direct interpretation, we analized a published index (COVID-19 Burden
Index) and found it seems to be oversimplified. It is possible that the proposed index, with current data,
could be useful in geographically and administratively narrowed places. But it is inaccurate to be
applied throughout the process and in places as broad as American countries. It would be ideal to
correct and refine the referred model, bearing in mind clinical concepts described, to take advantage of
the proposal and generate a more accurate response, which can serve as an input both in the
implementation of measures and in the prediction of the behavior of a pandemic like the current one.
However, what we propose is to improve the accuracy of the model in terms of quantities and
applicability, agreeing with the concept of "stay at home". The approach between complementary areas
of knowledge should be the door that we must open to generate the new evidence we need.
Mathematics should not dispense clinical sciences.

Dear Editor:
We have carefully read the ar cle "Is a COVID19
Quaran ne jus ﬁed in Chile or USA right now?",
published by RI González, F Muñoz, PS Moya and M
1
Kiwi . The construc on of mathema cal models that
allow comprehensive approach of decision-making in
situa ons of absence of robust evidence is important.
As such, the approach from the exact sciences is
ma er of interest to the current pandemic.
Indeed, we have some examples of current models. In
Mexico, an a empt has been made to predict the
behavior of COVID-19 and es mate possible scenarios
through Gauss model. With the Universidad de
Guadalajara´s data, "contagion cri cal days" between
March 20th-24th, were determined.
Assuming Y=1.0257x and R2=0.9846, and considering
how the virus evolved in China and recent local data,
the results using the equa on, with 98% conﬁdence,
create some possible op mis c and cri cal scenarios.
The model was built to es mate these scenarios at 5
days and not daily (as in Spain or Italy) given the fewest
conﬁrmed infected in Mexico 2.

While it is interes ng to use models that are easy to
understand, using values of direct interpreta on, the
proposed index (“COVID-19 Burden Index”) seems to
us to be oversimpliﬁed. This, because the authors
minimize the impact of three relevant situa ons that
are substan al issue of the integral process: First, in
rela on to a contextual jus ﬁca on, they use the
assump on that diﬀerent country-reali es are
comparable. Second, rela ve to the equa on, they use
a numerator greater than the actual one. Finally, in
rela on to the denominator, they do not incorporate
fundamental clinical-epidemiological variables. All
this leads to a possible overes ma on of the total,
with a risk of bias in the interpreta on and
applicability of the results. We will brieﬂy develop
these three elements in the same order in which we
have just presented them.
Three reali es (South Korea, United States of America
and Chile) are put as comparable considering data
related only to the COVID-19 incidence. It is not taken
into account that South Korea is a small country 3 with
just over 100,000 km² (109° according to land surface
globally), with four ci es (Seoul, Busan, Incheon and

Daegu) concentra ng just over a third of the country's
4,5
total popula on; United States of America
is a
federal country with almost 10 million Km² (4°), in
which the ﬁ een most populous ci es do not account
for even 10% of the country's total; while Chile 6 is a
highly centralized country with approximately
750,000 Km² (38°) in which a single city (San ago)
concentrates one third of the country's total
popula on (Table N° 1).
Table N° 1
Comparison of popula on percentages and distribu on
between South Korea, Chile and the United States of America
Country

Area in km2

Population

N Cities*
5

U.S.A.

9.831.513

328.239.523

62

CHILE

756.945

18.751.405

1

S. KOREA

100.339

51.446.201

4

*N Ci es: Ci es that account for about a third of the total popula on

Analyzing and comparing the incidence of a disease,
without considering the geographical and popula on
reali es of three very diﬀerent territories cons tutes a
methodological limita on, too important not to be
considered in the development of a model. Since the
measures being implemented will be diﬀerent
according to geographical reali es, the ini al rate of
contagion will be diﬀerent, and the distribu on of
resources available to deal with the disease will be
diﬀerent. In the Mexican example, the total N of
conﬁrmed cases reached a value less than the daily N
conﬁrmed in Spain and Italy, in the same me elapsed
since “case one”. That is why we think it is correct to
compare similar reali es, especially in terms of
popula on concentra on according to territorial area,
and according to the distribu on of cri cal resources
that exist in a given place and me.
Next, the numerator (15% of the conﬁrmed
popula on), equates to between 3 and 6.5 mes the
es mated number of people that will require
7
mechanical ven la on . There is no jus ﬁca on for
why this high percentage was used. Had it ini ally
been decided that the total N of conﬁrmed cases were
going to develop severe pneumonia? However, in
most hospitals in La n America -including Chile- this
type of pa ent does not necessarily recharge intensive
care beds, but specialized beds. This is a major factor
to reﬁne in the proposed model. Correc ons that
would bring the model closer to reality would be:
N conﬁrmed – (N recovered + N deceased)
Or, in any case:
N conﬁrmed × 0.05

In sta s cal terms, the problem is to use all of the N
observa ons to obtain op mal es mates of the ˆθi of
the θi, considering the uncertainty introduced by the
observa on errors. This is a problem that Gauss
describes as "the most important of the applica on of
2
mathema cs to natural philosophy" .
Finally, with regard to the denominator, the following
elements should be well thought-out: The distribu on
of clinical resources that each country has to deal with
a situa on such as the current one, beyond the gross
N. Relevant in all cases, is especially relevant in
countries with strong organiza onal and
administra ve centralism, as La n Americans: The
distribu on of resources is heterogeneous and does
not have to relate to a par cular N of contagions in the
same place and me. On the other hand, there is a set
of variables that makes a comparison between
countries more complex. Beyond the eﬀect that
certain measures implemented may have generated
on the shape of the infec on, lethality and
recoverability curves, there will always be popula onspeciﬁc variables that will end up aﬀec ng the
development of these curves: gene c, nutri onal and
idiosyncra c elements. Variables of this type should
be considered and quan ﬁed to be included in the
denominator in the form of a correc ve factor.
It is possible that the proposed index, with current
data, could be useful in geographically and
administra vely narrowed places. But it is inaccurate
to be applied throughout the process and in places as
broad as American countries: Today, the reality in Chile
shows that for several days we would be with a result
"1" which, according to the model, should be
interpreted as "collapse of the health system", which
is s ll far from happening. It would be ideal to correct
and reﬁne the presented model, bearing in mind the
concepts described, to take advantage of the proposal
and generate a more accurate response, which can
serve as an input both in the implementa on of
measures and in the predic on of the behavior of a
pandemic like the current one. However, what we
propose is to improve the accuracy of the model in
terms of quan es and applicability, agreeing with the
concept of "stay at home".
In conclusion, we believe that the approach between
complementary areas of knowledge should be the
door that we must open to generate the new evidence
we need. Mathema cs should not dispense clinical
sciences, and the result of mutual synergy will always
exceed the mere sum between the two. As long as
evidence is built, we must avoid venturing conclusions
that can promote or result in hasty decisions.

arXiv:2004.13555 [physics.med-ph] 23 Apr 2020

References
1. González RI, Muñoz F, Moya PS, Kiwi M. Is a COVID19 Quarantine justified in
Chile or USA right now? arXiv:2003.10879v1 [physics.med-ph] 24 Mar
2020.

5. United States Census Bureau, County Population Totals: 2010-2019.
Estimation 2019. Disponible en: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/timeseries/demo/popest/2010s-counties-total.html#par_textimage_242301767

2. Sprot D.A. (1978) Gauss’s contributions to statistics. Historia Mathematica
5, p. 183-203.

6. Oficina de Información Diplomática, Dirección General de Comunicación,
Diplomacia Pública y Redes, Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores, Unión
Europea y Cooperación, Gobierno de España. Ficha país: República de Chile.
Chile. Disponible en: http://www.exteriores.gob.es/Portal/es/
SalaDePrensa/Paginas/FichasPais.aspx

3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Korea.
http://www.fao.org/countryprofiles/index/en/?iso3=KOR
4. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012, sección
6 Geography and Envi-ronment, table 358. Accesible en
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/statab/131e
d.html

7. Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing
He, Lei Liu, Hong Shan, Chun-liang Lei, David S.C. Hui, Bin Du, Lan-juan Li, et
al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. DOI:
10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.

arXiv:2004.13555 [physics.med-ph] 23 Apr 2020

