L IGHTS AND SHADOWS OF COVID-19, T ECHNOLOGY AND
I NDUSTRY 4.0

Nicola Melluso
Department of Energy Systems, Territory and Construction Engineering
University of Pisa
Pisa, 56126
nicola.melluso@phd.unipi.it
Silvia Fareri
Giacomo Brodolini Foundation, Marco Biagi Foundation
University of Modena e Reggio Emilia
Andrea Bonaccorsi
DESTEC
University of Pisa

Filippo Chiarello
DESTEC
University of Pisa

Elena Coli
Department of Information Engineering
University of Pisa

Gualtiero Fantoni
Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering
University of Pisa
Pietro Manfredi
Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering
University of Pisa
Vito Giordano
Department of Information Engineering
University of Pisa

Shahin Manafi
Giacomo Brodolini Foundation, Marco Biagi Foundation
University of Modena e Reggio Emilia

April 28, 2020

A BSTRACT
Scientific discoveries and technologies played a significant role in the digital revolution that occurred
over the last years. But what is their role in the turmoil brought by the current pandemic? The aim of
this paper is to show how digital technologies are operating during this first phase of the spreading of
COVID-19. The study analyses and debates the current and potential role of digital technologies,
focusing on their influence in the industrial and social fields. More specifically we used the blogging
platform “Medium”, which has seen an exponential growth in its production of articles over the
last couple of months. Even if different from esteemed scientific sources, this platform provides a
structure that suits our analysis. We searched how many times digital technologies are mentioned in
articles regarding Coronavirus and, after collecting these articles, we collected page tags (comparable
to “keywords” in scientific articles) and classified them (technology tags and non-technology tags)
to create a graph showing the relation between them. This network allowed us to acknowledge
and picture how technologies are currently debated. This was the starting point to discuss the key
implications for an imminent future, and question about the impact on industry, society and labour
market. What are the opportunities or threats of using technologies of Industry 4.0? Which are the
needs rising because of the pandemic and how can technologies help in their fulfillment? How will
the industrial scenario change after this pandemic? How will the labour market be affected? How can
technologies be advantageous in the emerging social challenges?

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

1

Introduction

We are living a world in which digital technology is playing a main role in development, growth and evolution, in
particular for companies and activities involved in the process of producing goods for sale. Before the advent of
this pandemic, we were witnesses of a gradual spreading and embracing of technologies connected to Industry 4.0
phenomenon. However, we can observe how a change is happening in the current situation and foresee how differently
technologies will be employed in the future. Both industry 4.0 and the pandemic present themselves as two revolutionary
phenomena that lead to radical changes.
The aim of this study is to discuss the role of digital and 4.0 technologies in relation to their impact on industry, labour
market and society during Covid 19 pandemic. We use as starting point for this discussion a quantitative analysis of
how these technologies are behaving in this pandemic scenario. In particular, we looked at how much 4.0 technologies
are mentioned in the articles about coronavirus in Medium’s blogging platform. By linking the technologies found with
the topics discussed in the articles, it is possible to create a data driven relational structure that allows us to carry out our
discussions.
At this stage of the pandemic, the efforts of scientific production are mainly focused on finding a cure and how to
manage the emergency situation. However, we cannot overlook what will come after the end of this extraordinary
situation. Therefore, the collection of information must take into account a broad and in-time knowledge source as
Medium, in order to be able to frame the scenario perfectly. There are numerous sources of information and numerical
data on how the virus is spreading and impacting industries and the economy in general, for instance papers. However,
given the fast pace of the diffusion and the recent nature of the virus we cannot rely on documents that have long-waiting
periods before approval since our objective is to analyse data that is already available and thus analysable.
This study is a first attempt to demonstrate how the advent of COVID-19 did not stop the advance of technologies 4.0,
in fact it gave it a push, a drive that certainly has a change in its direction. If some technologies are maybe becoming
inadequate and inefficient in this emergency scenario, some have seen an increase in their employment and a massive
development.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the background of this study. In particular Section 2.1
discusses the Industry 4.0 phenomenon focusing on the technologies that played an important role in this paradigm
shift; Section 2.2 shows how the Medium platform works and it explains in detail the reason we choose it as source
of data. Section 3 presents the methodology used to gather, analyse and visualize data to capture relations between
technologies and COVID-19. In Section 4 the results and outcomes of the methods are shown and described. Finally,
Section 5 discusses how the role and impact of technology has changed in the face of this crisis on industry, the labour
market and society.

2

Background

In this section we show past works that support our methodological approach. In particular, section 2.1 shows recent
trends in industry 4.0 and efforts in the mapping and understanding of this fuzzy field; section 2.2 explores how Medium
has previously been used in literature as a data source.
2.1

Industry 4.0 and Technologies

In the last few years the production system in advanced countries has been theater of a new paradigm shift, defined as
Industry 4.0. The term Industry 4.0 has been initially formulated in Germany in 2011 by two researchers during the
Hannover Trade Fair, to connote the current phase of computerization of the manufacturing systems [1]. It refers to a
novel approach to the industrial system, that is based on the real-time connection of people, machines and objects for
the intelligent management of logistic-production systems [2]. The opportunities and challenges resulting from this
paradigm are such that today we are talking about the fourth industrial revolution.
It is said to be the fourth because this revolution was preceded by three other revolutions: the first dates back to the
early nineteenth century with the invention of the steam engine and the exploitation of its power for the mechanization
of production; the second (end of the 19th century) saw the spread of the assembly line and the concept of dividing
the work aimed at mass production; the third focused on the introduction of automated systems based on electronic
and information technologies [3]. The growing interest in Industry 4.0 in everyday life is confirmed by the increasing
number of articles focusing on topics that are related to the “Industry 4.0”. An example of this trend is shown in Figure
1 which displays the number of times that “Industry 4.0” has been used as a tag in Medium articles, i.e. 2026 times in
the last 4 years. The growth has been approximated by the line.
2

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

Figure 1: Number of Medium articles with the tag “Industry 4.0”
The role of the technologies has been considered central in the current landscape of Industry 4.0, in fact many
authors speak about industry 4.0 as a "tech tsunami". In particular, we can see the fourth industrial revolution as an
intelligent recombination of existing technologies and some new technologies and their application in the manufacturing
environment [4]. This definition could be misleading, suggesting that the wave influences only manufacturing companies,
however, Industry 4.0 affects all sectors, also the Public Administration and the everyday life of citizens.
As said above, the technologies are the key elements of the 4.0 paradigm, therefore a question arises: “What are the
main technologies of the Industry 4.0 paradigm?”. While there is a reasonable convergence on the definition of Industry
4.0, there is still disagreement and misalignment with respect to the 4.0 technologies [5], caused by the large amount of
possible applications that the new paradigm affects [6]. This issue has been faced with two concurrent top-down and
bottom-up approaches.
The top-down approach involved a panel of experts employed to map and define the Industry 4.0 technological landscape
from different points of view (e.g. academic or industrial perspective). An example of these top-down studies is the
classification of technologies of McKinsey, Boston Consulting Group or Xu, L. (2018). They classify the technologies
in various categories. For example the Boston Consulting Group clusters the 4.0 technologies into 9 categories:
autonomous robots; simulation; horizontal and vertical system integrator; internet of things; cybersecurity; cloud;
additive manufacturing; augmented reality; big data and analytics.
On the other hand, the bottom-up approach used text mining techniques to extract the technologies from a corpus of
text. In this context, it is interesting the work of Chiarello, F. et al. (2018) that leverages publications and open source
repositories (Wikipedia) to define and cluster the technologies of the Industry 4.0 paradigm. The researchers were able
to find more than 1200 technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and they have grouped them into 11 clusters: big
data; transactions, digital certification, digital currency; programming languages; computing; embedded systems; intel
technologies; internet of things; protocols and architectures; communication networks and infrastructures;production
technologies; identification technologies. Both top-down and bottom-up approaches demonstrated that Industry 4.0
could be mapped in a technological domain.
Governments and policy departments define their guidelines referring to the Key Enabling Technologies (KETs). An
example is given by the Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development (H2020) that defines
KETS as “the driver for economic growth and employment to improve the EU’s competitiveness in a rapidly changing
global environment”.
2.2

Data Source: Medium

At the state of the art, the largest free and open repository of knowledge for COVID-19 is CORD-19 1 implemented
by Allen Institute for AI and containing over 52.000 scholarly articles, including around 41.000 full text, about the
coronavirus family of viruses and, in particular, about COVID-19. Although CORD-19 is the most widely used
repository for scientific production about COVID-19, the focus of most articles is on the medical perspective. The result
is that information about technologies linked to COVID-19 are almost impossible to be found within the repository.
1

https://pages.semanticscholar.org/coronavirus-research

3

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

Therefore, the idea is that, in this specific context and for our specific purpose, scientific literature is not the best source
to be used. So, we focused on not-scientific sources and, in particular, Medium.
Medium is one of the most trending blogging web-platforms. Statistics show almost 60 million monthly readers at the
end of 2017, 7,5 million posts and 2 billion words written on Medium in 20162 . The actual estimated numbers are even
higher. The main difference between Medium and the other blogging platforms is that Medium is more social-oriented.
In fact, it allows some following and liking features that make it really close to a social network. Therefore, Medium
could be considered as a hybrid between scientific articles and Twitter, as explained below. Every Medium article,
before being published, should be associated with one or more tags in a similar fashion to keywords for an academic
paper.
The use of Medium brings different advantages and disadvantages. Among the first, we could mention the availability
of a large number of full texts. Moreover, the availability of keywords associated with Medium’s articles is crucial for
further analysis carried out in this work. For what concerns Medium’s disadvantages, they are mainly linked to the
reliability of the articles, since their review process is very fast and not structured.
The chart in Figure 2 shows how much the topic of Covid-19 is spreading on Medium. Confronting Figure 1 and Figure
2, it is visible how Medium has answered fast to the Covid-19 pandemic, reaching a level of interest far behind Industry
4.0 already before March 2020 when also European countries started the lock-down.

Figure 2: COVID-19 topic spread on Medium

3

Methodology

As said in the introductory section, the scope of the present study is to analyse the connections between technologies and
the COVID-19 and how the latter is influencing these links. Given this purpose, the adopted methodology is structured
as follows:
• definition of the appropriate data source to extract the necessary information;
• retrieval of all documents related to COVID-19;

• extraction of digital technologies from the documents;

• analysis of how technologies are connected to the other topics discussed within the documents.
Each phase is explained in the following paragraphs.
Definition of the data source There are numerous sources of information and numerical data on how the virus is
spreading and impacting industries and the economy in general, for instance papers. However, given the fast pace of the
diffusion and the recent nature of the virus we cannot rely on documents that have long-waiting periods before approval
since our objective is to analyse data that is already available and thus analysable. That being said, we found that
Medium highly satisfies our requirements given that users have the possibility to publish articles without necessarily
2

source: DMR (https://expandedramblings.com)

4

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

waiting for approvals and reviews. Moreover, like papers published on well known databases, e.g. Scopus, every article
on Medium has specific tags which make it easier to understand the topics that are being addressed.
Document Retrieval After having identified the right data source for the study, we proceeded with the retrieval of
all documents inherent to the pandemic. More specifically, we searched for articles that had the covid-19 tag and
subsequently, used web scraping techniques to download the related content, i.e. title of the articles, body and tags.
This process was mainly facilitated by the structure of Medium’s web pages.
Extraction of technologies Document retrieval is then followed by the extraction phase in which we adopted text
mining algorithms to search for technologies belonging to a predefined list within the content of the downloaded articles.
We use the complete list of technologies extracted and mapped by Chiarello et a. 2018. In particular we used regular
expressions in order to extract also inflections (e.g. singular, plurals) of the technologies. This allowed us to have an
initial understanding of which technologies are currently being mentioned together with covid-related articles, however
it still does not provide a complete overview on their connections with the other topics.
Analysis of connections Finally, after extracting the technologies it was possible to define their link with the other
topics addressed within the same articles. In detail, this was achieved by calculating the co-occurrence degree (i.e. how
many times two elements appear together in the same document) between technologies and those tags which are not
considered technologies. The counts were then represented as an (N, N) adjacency matrix, where N is the number of
unique topics/technologies and the elements in the matrix indicate the number of co-occurrences. We then used the
adjacency matrices to generate an undirected graph Gs = (Vs, Es), where the vertices, Vs, are the topics/technologies,
and the edges, Es, are the respective co-occurrences. This first graph has been visualized using Gephi [7] and it is
shown in the Results section in Fig. 5.
Furthermore, we decided to take the analysis one step further by using web scraping to extract those technologies
that Medium considers to be related to every technology of the graph. We then re-calculated the co-occurrence of the
technologies and used it to create a new graph shown in Fig. 6. The latter, together with the one in Fig. 5, can provide
valuable insight into technologies that might appear in articles in the near future regarding the COVID-19 based on the
connections that technologies of the graph in Fig. 5 have with other technologies shown in Fig. 6. These results will be
better analysed in the following section.

4

Results

The analysis has been done by extracting COVID-19 related articles for a time window ranging from 1st of January
2020 till the 17th of April 2020. We found a total number of 26.788 articles related to COVID-19, of which 453
containing at least one digital technology contained in the list. As we expected, the number of articles is having an
exponential growth curve.

Figure 3: Number of articles of Tech-COVID
Figure 4a and 4b show a first view of the relationship between tags that are technologies (“Tech Tags”) and tags that
are not technologies (“Other Tags”). The values in the heatmap of Figure 4a represent the co-occurrence of two tags,
5

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

namely the number of times are used in the same articles. Clearly, the “Surveillance” tag is the one that is highly
cited with all the technologies. This is due to the fact that the use of geolocalization systems for surveillance has been
subjected to an intense debate. It is also interesting to underline the high correlation between the tag “Social Distancing”
and “Internet of things”. This is probably due to the fact that the use of this technology will face the emerging need of
maintaining the social distance.
Figure 4b shows the co-occurrence values normalized by the variable “Other Tag”. This picture has to be read by
looking at the values for each column. For example, the high value between “Cryptocurrency” and “Finance” means
that for the “Finance” tag, the most cited technology is “Cryptocurrency”.
Further considerations could be done looking at the Figure 4b where the co-occurrence value is normalized using the
minmax normalization by grouping the tags:
• the “Citizen” macro-cluster (“Social Distancing”, “Self-improvement”, “Mental Health”, “Public Health”) is
frequently linked to “Internet of Things” and “Predictive Analytics”; this confirms that IoT is giving the main
technological support to the citizens;
• the “State” macro-cluster (“Society”, “Politics”, “Economy”) shows both a focus on geolocalization technologies (and therefore to ensure the tracking of movements), and on technologies to support communication and
effective information sharing;
• the “Business” macro-cluster (“Remote Working”, “Start-up”, “Innovation”), could be seen from the point
of view of both worker and company; this cluster relies on the cloud as a decisive support, as well as remote
control and virtual reality; it also interesting the high correlation with cybersecurity, probably due to the
increasing amount data whose sharing is spreading.
Figure 5 shows the graph of the tags relations. The blue nodes represent the technologies, while those in green are the
tags that are not technologies. The size of nodes is proportional to the number of times the tag is used in COVID-19
related articles. The layout of the graph (relative position of the nodes) is computed considering the number of times
two tags are cited simultaneously in different articles: the more they are cited together, the closer two appear. For
example, "quarantine" and "lockdown" are close because it is common to use the two tags for the same article. In this
picture we removed the obvious tags of "pandemic", "covid" in order to have a clearer visualization of the results.
Figure 6 shows the graph of tags generated starting from the technologies found in the COVID-19 articles. Similar
to the graph in Figure 5, each node is a tag and the size of the node depends on the in and out degree of each node.
In practice, the larger is the node, the higher is related to the other tags. The main difference in this version of the
graph, with respect to the one showed in Figure 5, is that the number of COVID articles in which these technologies are
contained is negligible. In other words, the graph gives a picture of the technologies prior to COVID-19 manifestation.
The image, if compared with the previous one (Figure 5), gives us a picture of the reconversions of technologies in
COVID perspective.
An interesting example is given by the tag "Virtual Assistant". In Figure 6 it is linked to the term "Productivity" while
in Figure 5 it is very close to the concept of health. This means that due to the pandemic, the technology could find
more health related applications. Similarly, the behaviour of the tags of "Remote Control" and "Condition Monitoring"
is crucial to understand the role of Industry 4.0. These two concepts appear highly in both graphs (of Figures 5 and 6)
and their relation is given by the tag of “Smart Manufacturing” or “Internet of Things”.

5

Discussion

In the present session we discuss the results shown in section 4. We structured this section focusing on the joint impact
that Digital Technologies and COVID-19 are having on Industry, labour market and Society as a whole respectively in
sub-sections 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3.
5.1

COVID, Technologies and their impact on Industry

The post COVID-19 era will bring us into the “new normal” where temperature scanning, social distance, sanification,
mask wearing and tele-whatever will be the way of living expecting us for the next 18-24 months. If some technologies
were adopted only in airports, embassies, and few other sensitive places, now most of them can be adopted and many
barriers to entry are falling down.
The use of teleconferences in judgments, the advent of ’ePrescription’ instead of medicinal prescription on paper
sheets have been adopted in a few days in many countries around the world thus cancelling long debates and ancient
6

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

(a) Heatmap of technologies associated with COVID related tags

(b) Normalized heatmap of technologies associated with COVID related tags. The value is normalized using the minmax
normalization by grouping the tags (Other Tag variable)

Figure 4: Relations among technologies and non-technologies tags

7

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

Figure 5: Graph of tags for articles concerning COVID-19 that contains a technology
resistances. Probably the same will happen with the apps for contact tracing in everyday life where the standard aversion
towards telecontrol and tracing is reducing and the health consequences are reducing the concerns about privacy.
The industrial side is not behaving differently. Teleoperation and remote control of production sites are becoming
urgent. Owing to social distancing many companies (SMEs included) should organize their production in more shifts
to maintain the same level of production they had before the COVID-19. However a plant organized to work with a
certain number of workers and employees can not operate with half the number of personnel in two shift but a deep
transformation is necessary. Machines, equipments, technical services etc.. should be substituted with modern ones
(impossible due to the COVID-19 economical crisis) retrofitted or revamped. Industrial Internet of things seems to
be the natural candidate for this transformation. A low cost approach based on IoT devices (at edge and node) and IT
platforms (mainly small Manufacturing Execution Systems) is an affordable alternative to digital transformation.
In such a new scenario data coming from the machines will enable telecontrol of the factory, but also remote maintenance
and predictive maintenance. Machine producers or plant installers as well as system integrators are struggling with
8

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

Figure 6: Graph of related tags of technologies
teleoperating and acting on the machines and installations from remote. The goals are to detect what is happening at the
plant/shop floor level and to teleoperate on the machine or guide the operator in performing some fixing, adjustment,
assembly or spare part substitution. It opens the market to VR training for learning how to assembly and repair industrial
machines to headsets with AR and remote assistance.
Robotic solutions are the other way to reduce social interactions and keep the production level. In particular in many
SMEs cobots could play a role due to their simple programming and the reduced spaces. Moreover they are perceived
mor as a tool or an assistant than as a robot, thus increasing the acceptance by employees.
Several regulations3 , sector standards4 , company-syndicates’ agreements (e.g. FCA with all the syndicates) impose a
social distance also in working activities. It is oriented to reduce the virus transmission but really hard to achieve, control
3
4

https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg
https://www.lear.com/safeworkplaybookfiles

9

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

and use in case of infected people. Several devices appeared in the market: they are based on bluetooth technology on
mobile phones or on small boards (embedded electronics) or on RFID tags and antennas.
Singapore, with its TraceTogether5 app, is applying people tracing and coronavirus diffusion based on mobile phone,
QR code scanning, etc... The APP is for the general public and many other countries are rapidly following such a best
practice but with limitation due to cultural and regulatory aspects (e.g. GDPR).
The case is different when a worker entres the company gate. No one can force the employees to install any app on
their personal mobile phone. Moreover, smartphones are often forbidden in production to not disturb and distract the
workers during their activities (sometimes dangerous). In other cases the use of cameras and smartphones are forbidden
for IP reasons. therefore other alternatives have been proposed.
Several embedded solutions are spreading in industrial settings: from bracelet to keyrings, to pendants, to wearable
wristbands. Many of them are conceived as alerting systems: from blinking leds to vibration. However all of them could
perform more functions than the ones that now are accepted. Actually they can also record the contacts to trace the
possible contacts with an infected person. Such a tracing activity could be perceived as a violation of GDPR and many
national laws (e.g. the Italian law on workers’ statute Article 4 of Law No 300 of 20/05/1970), which implemented the
non traceability of workers’ activities.
In perspective such devices can enable not only detection of events, but, with a more distributed architecture (several
gateways for triangulation and localisation), also interesting analyses of assets movements into the shopfloor. Everything
could be encrypted and tracking made anonymous. However the anonymous data (when analysed) can provide useful
information, now for redefining facility layout for the COVID19 emergence, but later also for improving logistics and
production.
The health emergence is pushing logistics to a new level (Amazon first demonstrated the acceleration). The explosion
of online shopping exerted a huge pressure on the logistic chain that could now find further economies in asset tracing
and tracking through beacon or passive/active RFID tags. Blockchain certified transactions and smart contracts, ready
to emerge, could now find the occasion to overcome the friction in other fields than cryptocurrencies.
Last but not least, the so-called smart or remote working increased cybersecurity issues: fishing first and data breach
later are the two most evident signs of unmanaged transitions. Actually even if collaboration tools and sharing platforms
existed before and were adopted in companies, only few of them were really prepared to shift from working at the office
to working from home. The COVID-19 demonstrated the low level of awareness for what concerns cybersecurity and
the enormous quantum leap that companies have to make to address their cyber security aspects.
5.2

COVID, Technologies and their impact on Labor Market

Industry 4.0 was, and currently is, a strong and heterogeneous influence on the job market. A change in organisational
activities and competences was a consequence to this phenomenon that clearly spreads differently worldwide at an
exponential speed and with an uncertain impact [8]. Middle-sized and large enterprises saw the need for new assets and
a change in the modus operandi that could be beneficial to growth and competitiveness. But what is and will be the
impact of this industrial revolution on occupations and competences is still a sensitive topic open to discussions [9]; it is
evident that, in the future, workers will be needed to be independent and to master operating new technologies, with
additional cross-sectoral skills decisive for a market that seems to project towards digitisation.
However, the advent of this pandemic emergency brought a change to the way we deal with our daily life and work,
and we cannot mistakenly isolate the two phenomena. First, the two phenomena are similar because of their impact on
society. Second, the consequences of the pandemic are influencing the tech revolution. Within a few months, the pillars
of Industry 4.0, (such as the role played by some new occupations, the need of digital skills required from enterprises or
the fear of technology) are being redesigned.
The approach to work and the openness to changement will be shaped. First, if in the digital revolution the technology
was seen as a potential cause of job destruction, in this situation it will be seen as support for the citizen since it is
evident that it is an opportunity to mitigate the problems caused by forced distance in workplaces. Second, the borders
between work time and leisure will change: the importance of managing stress due to hyperconnection, even outside
the office will increase especially because of the physical boundaries in the work/non-work environment. Finally, this
situation will lead people to transform their mentality towards accepting radical changes in the way they work; in
particular, the fear of being replaced by the technology will give way to a greater open-mindedness.
A technology could be interpreted either as an enabler or a replacement for a working activity. In fact, a particular
technology could help the worker to increase his productivity, but could also entirely replace his job. For these reasons,
5

https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/

10

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

we have witnessed an increasing demand for adaptability with an emphasis on the concept of lifelong learning and
human development [10]. With the advent of COVID-19, it is particularly necessary to have resilience and adaptability
in order to face the new restrictions that the pandemic imposes. A new working reality leads to the consolidation of
new skills and the rise of new job profiles. First, having people with digital skills is strictly necessary in order to adapt
to smart working. Having digital skills in the company is no longer about competitive advantage, but about survival.
Second, we will see the rise of profiles relating to risk management, ensuring compliance with safety regulations and
specifically to biohazard monitoring. In particular, it will be the focus on soft skills such as time management, creativity
and resilience.
However, we can state that the long debate on how much the introduction of technologies afflicts the labour market is
definitely enriched by this renewed and exceptional dynamic: the advent of the COVID-19 sanitary emergency, can
slow down or hasten the employment and spread of technologies. Even if this pandemic phenomenon is completely
new, the effect on job market could be studied by looking on what was happening during the Industry 4.0 revolution.
However, we have to take into account the negative effects that the pandemic is having on the demand for labour. The
shock of job demand will result in significant downward adjustments to wages and working hours. The lockdown is
having a major impact on economic activities; by March 10, workers had lost about 30,000 hours of work, and for
some of them this had resulted in lower wages. The negative impact on wages will also result in lower consumption of
goods and services, which will necessarily also have an impact on activity turnover; poverty is therefore set to increase
substantially [11]. In the face of this, while in Industry 4.0 it was possible to identify some professions more at risk,
today entire social categories are vulnerable, for different reasons: young people not yet in employment, who will
suffer the effects of the crisis; women, who are the most representative in the sectors most affected (such as services);
unprotected workers, such as freelancers, who are much less protected than employees [12].
5.3

COVID, Technologies and their Social Impact

The COVID-19 crisis has forced the technological community to experience the first large scale exercise on creativity
under constraints. We know from creativity studies and the neuroscience of creativity that meeting severe constraints
may trigger novel solutions to a large degree. The crisis has forced technologists to work under negation of time
(extreme time pressure), shortage of space (social distancing, close home environments), lack of materials (disruption
of supply chains). Our data show that the ability of the technological community to react to the crisis by suggesting new
solutions has been fast and effective.
Technologists working on Industry 4.0 solutions have found it, however, that the main functional requirements were, to
a certain extent, similar at a high level of abstraction. Industry 4.0 solutions are based on the recombination between
physical transformation activities (manufacturing) and intelligent (learning) information processing. These solutions
habilitate the manipulation of physical reality at a distance, exploiting the power of telecommunication networks to
transmit data at high speed.
The technologies needed to address the COVID-19 crisis require something similar, but in daily life. The physical
contact must decrease to the minimum viable product in order to reduce or mitigate the risk of contagion. Consequently,
the physical movement of people and goods must be reduced. The physical concentration of people in the same place
must be avoided. In all these cases the remote operation of activities become crucial.
The analysis of technologies proposed under the crisis reveals a high level of conceptual flexibility in the community of
inventors, startup companies, and technology-based firms. Having explored systematically the constraints of physical
proximity in the remote operation of manufacturing activities has allowed technologists to develop rapidly adaptations
and smart solutions. The social impact of technologies is the result of genuine inventivity and empathic engagement
with large scale problems of humankind. This is good news.

References
[1] K. Henning. Recommendations for implementing the strategic initiative industrie 4.0. 2013.
[2] Hussain H. I. Ślusarczyk B. Jermsittiparsert K. Haseeb, M. Industry 4.0: A solution towards technology challenges
of sustainable business performance. Social Sciences, 2019.
[3] Xu E. L. Li L. Xu, L. D. Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. International Journal of Production
Research, 2018.
[4] Trappey C. V. Govindarajan U. H. Sun J. J. Chuang A. C. Trappey, A. J. A review of technology standards and
patent portfolios for enabling cyber-physical systems in advanced manufacturing. IEEE Access, 2016.
11

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 28, 2020

[5] Kreiner C. Macher G. Messnarz R. Riel, A. Integrated design for tackling safety and security challenges of smart
products and digital manufacturing. CIRP annals, 2017.
[6] Trivelli L. Bonaccorsi A. Fantoni G. Chiarello, F. Extracting and mapping industry 4.0 technologies using
wikipedia. Computers in Industry, 2018.
[7] Mathieu Bastian, Sebastien Heymann, and Mathieu Jacomy. Gephi: An open source software for exploring and
manipulating networks. 2009.
[8] C. Last. Global commons in the global brain. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 2017.
[9] Chiarello F. Coli E. Binda A. Fareri S., Fantoni G. Estimating industry 4.0 impact on job profiles and skills using
text mining. Computers in Industry, 2020.
[10] Paul Schulte John Howard. The impact of technology on work and the workforce. International Labour
Organization, 2019.
[11] International Labour Organization. Covid-19 and the world of work: Impact and policy responses. ILO Monitor
1st Edition, 2020.
[12] International Labour Organization. Covid-19 and the world of work. updated estimates and analysis. ILO Monitor
2st Edition, 2020.

12

