Care Robots with Sexual Assistance Functions
Oliver Bendel
School of Business FHNW, Bahnhofstrasse 6, CH-5210 Windisch
oliver.bendel@fhnw.ch

Abstract
Residents in retirement and nursing homes have sexual
needs just like other people. However, the semi-public situation makes it difficult for them to satisfy these existential
concerns. In addition, they may not be able to meet a suitable partner or find it difficult to have a relationship for mental or physical reasons. People who live or are cared for at
home can also be affected by this problem. Perhaps they can
host someone more easily and discreetly than the residents
of a health facility, but some elderly and disabled people
may be restricted in some ways. This article examines the
opportunities and risks that arise with regard to care robots
with sexual assistance functions. First of all, it deals with
sexual well-being. Then it presents robotic systems ranging
from sex robots to care robots. Finally, the focus is on care
robots, with the author exploring technical and design issues. A brief ethical discussion completes the article. The
result is that care robots with sexual assistance functions
could be an enrichment of the everyday life of people in
need of care, but that we also have to consider some technical, design and moral aspects.

Introduction
Residents in retirement and nursing homes have sexual
needs just like other people. However, the semi-public
situation makes it difficult for them to satisfy these existential concerns. They may also find it challenging to find a
suitable partner, or it may be mentally or physically difficult for them to have sexual intercourse or a relationship.
People who live or are cared for at home (Giuliani et al.
2005) may also be affected by this problem. Perhaps they
can meet someone more easily and discreetly than the
residents of a health facility, but some elderly and disabled
people may be restricted in some ways.
This article examines the opportunities and risks that
arise with regard to care robots with sexual assistance
functions. First, it deals with sexual well-being. Second, it
Accepted paper of the AAAI 2020 Spring Symposium “Applied AI in Healthcare:
Safety, Community, and the Environment” (Stanford University). Because of the
COVID-19 outbreak, the physical meeting has been postponed.

presents robotic systems ranging from sex robots to care
robots. Third, the focus is on care robots, with the author
investigating technical and design issues. A short ethical
discussion and a summary with an outlook round off the
article.

Sexual Well-being
The Geneva-based World Health Organization (WHO)
believes that sexual health is more than the absence of
sexually transmitted diseases, sexual dysfunction and sexual violence. Rather, it includes sexual well-being (WHO
2006). According to Döring 2018, sexual well-being contributes to overall mental and physical health through various mechanisms (e.g. testosterone production, stress reduction, pain reduction, partnership commitment).
We can even regard sexual well-being as a human right.
The aforementioned WHO, the United Nations (UN), the
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) and
the World Association for Sexual Health (WAS) have
developed and published declarations of sexual and reproductive human rights (Döring 2018). Of course, it is not a
basic right to have sex anytime, anywhere, or with anyone.
But it is about basic access to it.
There is no reason to exclude the elderly and disabled or
those in need of care from sexual well-being, and if you
recognize that this is a human right, it goes without saying
that all people who want to be sexually active should be
considered. This, of course, takes place within the current
social and legal framework, so that, for example, the sexual
wishes of minors must also be rejected.
There has been little research into what people in need
of care, the elderly and the disabled really want. Sexuality
in the care sector seems to be a taboo topic, for scientists as
well as affected persons, for individuals as well as for
organizations. Rosalind Mary Owens, known as Tuppy
Owens, is the founder of Outsiders, a private club providing peer support and dating opportunities for physically

and socially disabled people, and set up the Sexual Health
and Disability Alliance (SHADA) for health and social
care professionals. According to her, people with disabilities – the focus of her book “Supporting Disabled People
with their Sexual Lives: A Clear Guide for Health and
Social Care Professionals” – have four central concerns
regarding their sexual life (Owens 2015):
A.
B.
C.
D.

ination more. There are only a few sex robots on the market, and their mobility is limited. Like love dolls you have
to position them in a suitable place.
TrueCompanion’s often mentioned Roxxxy is a sex robot that, according to the company, can listen, talk and
respond to touch (Bendel 2015). You can choose between
different personalities, from “Wild Wendy” to “Frigid
Farrah”, and between different sexual orientations. The
male counterpart is Rocky. You could allegedly order both
from the website (www.truecompanion.com), which advertised with the words “world’s first sex robot”, also using
the term “sex robot doll”. There have been speculations
that the two robots do not exist, at least not as a product,
and the website is now offline.
Shenzhen All Intelligent Robot Technology (www.aiaitech.com), Doll Sweet (www.dsdolleurope.com), Abyss
Creations (www.realdoll.com) and the affiliated wellknown “factory” Realbotix (realbotix.com) launch love
dolls, also known as dolls or sex dolls (Bendel 2019a,
2019b). Early on, these figures attracted attention with
their detailed and knowledgeable, albeit idealizing, design.
They have silicone skin or skin made of thermo-plastic
elastomers. Gel can be stored underneath so that the body
parts feel real, like the elastic flesh of young women and
men. Love dolls sometimes have synthetic voices or simple
motor skills such as turning the head and moving the eyes.
Shenzhen All Intelligent Robot Technology stresses that
artificial intelligence (AI) is in its products, and there may
be a display in the back of the head.
All in all, the boundaries between love dolls and sex robots are fluid. The love dolls currently found in the brothels of Germany, Spain, Russia and Switzerland are not sex
robots. However, if you extend them with mimic and gestural abilities and with natural language abilities, the term
is suddenly more appropriate. Harmony by Realbotix has
left the existence of classic rubber dolls far behind. She has
mimic abilities, and she speaks to the user and understands
him or her within the bounds of her possibilities. The company from San Diego also stresses the fact that AI is used –
Harmony herself emphasizes this in videos (Inventions
World 2017). For sex robots as well as for love dolls it is
true that they are usually designed human-like, and some
advanced models can be seen as androids.

“Feel sexually free.”
“Become educated about sex and their own sexuality.”
“Enjoy sexual activities.”
“Support in a crisis.”

The main focus here will be on concern C, i.e. the actual
sexual activities. But the author of this article also dedicates a section to concern B. According to Owens (2015),
the following actions are decisive for solo and partner
sexual activities from the point of view of people with
disabilities:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

“Being hugged (if and when appropriate)”
“Sharing their bed”
“Using pornography”
“Using sex toys”
“Partnered sex”
“Using sexual services for reasons other than education”
“Finding financial support for sex products and services”

According to Döring (2018), the needs of elderly and old
people are described similarly. In particular, the idea that
older people live largely asexually is incorrect. Even if
some of them have fewer opportunities, their desires and
impulses remain largely or completely preserved.
If one now takes concern C seriously and considers several of the seven points listed, also and especially against
the background of the outlined situation in which persons
in need of care, the elderly and the sick find themselves,
the inclusion of sex robots and care robots with sexual
assistance functions presents itself as an option. In the
following, the author distinguishes relevant types and identifies concrete products in order to obtain an overview of
what exists in reality.

Care Robots
The majority of care robots are prototypes. You find them
in test environments as well as at trade fairs, conferences
and exhibitions (Becker 2018; Bendel 2018a). Tests and
studies also take place in hospitals and nursing homes.
Early developments include the “nurse’s assistant” HelpMate and the “nurse-bot” Pearl, which support nursing
staff (Bekey 2012). HelpMate transports things, Pearl provides useful information and visits patients. JACO² 6 DOF

Relevant Robot Types
Sex Robots and Love Dolls
Love dolls in the stricter sense are common, sex robots are
not. Still, there is much more literature about sex robots
(Levy 2008; Cheok et al. 2017; Cheok and Levy 2018;
Zhou and Fischer 2019). They seem to stimulate our imag-

2

by Kinova Robotics (kinova-robotics.com), short JACO,
can help people with limited arm and hand functions. It
consists of one arm and one hand with three fingers, which
distinguishes it from conventional cooperation and collaboration robots with their two fingers; nevertheless, it is very
close to these co-robots, for example with regard to the
basic construction and the number of degrees of freedom.
Care-O-bot from Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing
Engineering and Automation IPA in Stuttgart, Germany
(www.care-o-bot.de) is able to grab things and bring them
away and moves safely among people and through spaces.
It has a gripper with which it can pick up and hand over a
flower, for example. In an advertising video, it does just
that, and when the other person smiles, it simulates emotional reactions on its big display in the head area. Aethon’s TUG has similar goals and functions
(www.aethon.com). It is able to transport medicines and
materials and take the elevator; it also has natural language
skills. The HOBBIT, designed as a mobile information
terminal within an EU project, was intended to help senior
citizens (hobbit.acin.tuwien.ac.at). It should strengthen the
feeling of safety and be able to pick up objects from the
ground. Cody from the Georgia Institute of Technology
(College of Engineering, coe.gatech.edu) can turn bedridden patients around and wash them.

The Japanese Robear (predecessor versions RIBA and
RIBA-II) from Riken (www.riken.jp) – as bearish in appearance as the name suggests – works in tandem with the
caregiver and assists with the transfer from and to the bed
and with the straightening in the bed. The research institution discontinued further development, although there were
promising approaches and tests. TWENDY-ONE, a humanoid robot with two hands with four fingers each from
the Sugano Laboratory of WASEDA University, supports
patients with helping them sit up and household tasks
(twendyone.com).
F&P Personal Robotics (www.fp-robotics.com) based in
Switzerland has developed the service robots Lio and PRob. They are similar to JACO, but have usually only two
fingers. Basically, they are co-robots specialized in the
health sector. Their interchangeable attachments at the end
of the arm allow them to be used for both therapy and care.
A new product was developed in cooperation with a Chinese partner: P-Care. It has two arms, an actual body and a
head that resembles that of a monkey, more precisely the
Monkey King (Sūn Wùkōng in the classic Chinese novel).
Lio has been repeatedly tested in old people’s and nursing
homes in Switzerland and Germany (Früh and Gasser
2018; Wirth 2020).
More and more often, the humanoid robots of Aldebaran
(today part of SoftBank), namely the small Nao (with legs
and hands with three fingers, see Fig. 1) and the larger
Pepper (with castors and hands with five fingers, see Fig.
2), are found in retirement and nursing homes or in corresponding simulated environments. Anderson et al. (2019)
used Nao in a machine ethics project. Pepper often functions as an information and entertainment robot. Although
its arms and hands are designed down to the last detail and
are almost like those of human beings, it is hardly suitable
as a transport robot and for receiving and serving medicine
and food – the extremities are supposed to enable convincing gestures, no more and no less. The same applies to the
smaller Nao.
It is obvious that care robots are sometimes abstract,
sometimes animal- or human-like. Robear and P-Care can
certainly be described as intermediate forms. They resemble, as already said, a bear or a monkey, but Donald Duck
is also created after the model of a duck and yet appears
more like a human being (the same goes for Mickey Mouse
who is more a human than a mouse). This is due to the
design of body parts, such as arm and hand, behavior, and
natural language skills (visually depicted in the comic, via
speech bubbles, implemented via sound in the animated
film). Even if a robot does not have such abilities – the
mere fact that it takes on tasks that arise in nursing and
support brings it closer to people in the perception of those
in need of care.

Fig. 1: The fingers of Nao

3

Embraces by robots are possible if they have two arms,
such as P-Care, restricted also with one arm. However, the
hugs and touches feel different to those made by humans.
When one uses warmth and softness, like in the HuggieBot
project, the effect improves, but is still not the same (Block
and Kuchenbecker 2019). In hugs it is important that another person hugs us (hugging ourselves is totally different), and that this person is in a certain relationship to us.
He or she may be strange to us, but there must be trust or
desire. Whether this is the case with a robot must be assessed on a case-by-case basis. There is some evidence that
two arms are not enough, that instead humanoid forms of
appearance and behavior must be added.
It is also possible for robots and humans to be in the
same bed. Here, too, the effects are unclear. A human being might want to experience security and well-being, and
it is doubtful whether the robot can convey these. If the
robot simulates breathing movements or snoring, this could
help, depending on the patient’s condition. But all in all,
many people affected will notice that there is only a thing
next to them, similar to a plush toy next to a child, only
that the adolescent eventually develops a distance to his or
her artificial companion and disposes of it. Nevertheless,
this get-together is not completely absurd. The Somnox
sleep robot (meet-somnox.com) aims to eliminate insomnia, support natural recovery and reduce stress (Samadder
2019). The kidney-shaped cushion gently breathes in and
out and plays soothing sounds.

Robots with Sexual Connotations
Sex Robots and Love Dolls
Sex robots and love dolls can certainly be used in old people’s and nursing homes. However, there are several points
against this:
−
−
−
−
−

They are strongly sexualized, which can be experienced as inappropriate in this context.
They partly correspond to stereotypes that are perceived differently and sometimes rejected.
They are used in controversial environments such as
brothels.
They tend to be aimed at private buyers and casual
customers and are not age- and disability-friendly.
They are primarily aimed at men, in both female and
male forms.

Presumably, the use of sex robots and love dolls would
currently meet with little acceptance among those in need
of care, nursing staff and relatives. A similar case can be
assumed for use at home. In addition to the caregivers and
relatives, friends and neighbors could also be disturbed by
the presence of the sex robot. Nevertheless, under certain
circumstances there might be possible solutions:
−
−
−
−
−

One could place the sex robots and love dolls in separate rooms where they cannot be noticed and can be
discreetly visited.
The persons responsible would only take them out on
certain occasions in order to lend them to or bring
them to the users.
Certain types could be adapted, softened or defused by
appropriate clothing or body interventions.
Manufacturers could be asked to consider women as
users, for example with a greater variety of male and
female figures.
One could work towards a change in posture and make
it clear that those affected have the right to use sex robots with the look they want.

Another possibility would be to equip care robots with
sexual assistance functions. The author will discuss this in
the following.

Fig. 2: The hand of Pepper
A care robot could contribute to partnered sex through
direct stimulation with the help of its extremities or
through openings through which it can be penetrated. The
tools and openings can be more discreet than with sex
robots. The fact that such use cannot be ruled out even
today is shown by SoftBank’s indication that one should
not have sex with Pepper (Lott-Lavigna 2015). Its hands
might actually be suitable for masturbation (see Fig. 2);
they might just need to be a little more powerful and to use

Care Robots with Sexual Assistance Functions
Instead of a sex robot or a love doll, care robots with sexual assistance functions could also be used, both in retirement and nursing homes and within one’s own home. They
would initially refer to concern C and to three of the Owens points mentioned (2015), namely “Being hugged”,
“Sharing their bed” and “Partnered sex”.

4

some liquids or gels. Nao’s hands could also be helpful, for
both sexes (see Fig. 1). The “upgrade” of the care robot
would take place with hardware and software. A robot such
as Lio or P-Care could receive new end pieces (particularly
convincing hands or forms of sex toys) – or appropriate
movement possibilities thanks to new software or newly
learned actions.
If patients have movement restrictions, a care robot with
a robot arm such as Care-O-bot or Twendy-One according
to Döring (2018) can also be used to give the patient a sex
toy, position it and hold it. Related to Owens, this would be
a support at point 4 (you are still at concern C). With such
robotic manipulations, the person in need of care would be
more independent in living their solo sexuality and would
not have to ask relatives or caregivers for help with this
intimate matter (Döring 2018).
The care robot could also discreetly take over the cleaning of the sex toy, an important task for which hardly anyone feels responsible in everyday care (Döring 2018).
Here, too, point 4 of Owens is addressed, and in the broadest sense, still concern C. In addition, there is an aspect of
sexual health that has hardly been appreciated so far,
namely the avoidance of sexual diseases. One has to consider the possibility that the sex toy is used by several
people and therefore there is a risk of infection.
Of course, the care robot can also – point 3 of Owens –
be used to provide and dispose of pornography (concern
C). It may also be used as an extended audio book, i.e. it
can read erotic and pornographic texts and make noises
such as moaning and sighing. The marking language
SSML is only rudimentarily suitable for this and would
have to be extended. Bendel (2018b) has made proposals
for this. The robot can also play along a bit, with appropriate facial expressions and gestures as well as body movements. It is difficult to say whether all this is desired by
those affected and would have to be tested.
Basically, natural language skills are an important option. According to the website, the manufacturer attached
great importance to communication when equipping
Roxxxy. Even those who are no longer physically active
can enjoy stimulating conversations or dirty talk (Bendel
2018b). AI systems could be used to get to know the user
and his or her preferences better and better and to satisfy
him or her verbally – and to address him or her accurately
with the name (perhaps also a nickname).
Also concern B can be developed with the help of care
robots with sexual assistance functions. They could thus
offer sexual education, and perhaps this form would help to
avoid shame one would have towards humans (Bendel
2018a). Those in need of care could ask all sorts of questions that the care robot could answer with the help of an
extensive knowledge base and as a networked system,
professionally flawlessly and with robotic neutrality or
looseness. In the background, a caregiver or a doctor could

help in individual cases without the patient having to notice this.
According to Döring (2018), to think about sexual assistance functions from the outset when designing care robots
and to develop them together with the target groups requires all participants to be guided by the parameters of
sexual health and sexual human rights (see also Barrett and
Hinchcliff 2018). Otherwise, she adds, the issue of sexuality will remain stigmatized and marginalized. So there is a
demand for education, for attention to the real needs of
patients and elderly persons, and for the willingness to do
the right thing to do the good thing, even if it is difficult.

Brief Ethical Discussion
In this context – the use of sex robots and love dolls or
machine sexual assistance functions for people in need of
care is a novelty and in the eyes of many people a curiosity
– an ethical discussion must undoubtedly be conducted. It
must not be a question of moralizing or patronizing –
which in principle is not the task of philosophical ethics.
Rather, dialectical and discursive methods have to be used
to determine whether, for example, general human rights
are violated or whether certain conflicts arise (e.g. with
special personal rights).
At first glance, one could argue that care robots exhibiting sexual assistance functions offend human dignity. In
fact, many people will reject and even find repulsive the
use of such robots, they will assume these systems are
deceptive – or unnatural, even if this is a bad argument. So
it is all the more important that the use is voluntary. But
one could also question whether robots really promote
sexual well-being – or rather destroy it. Ultimately, empirical studies must show this.
Some people will be bothered by the fact that their relatives are fobbed off with machine options in their sexual
needs. Others will deny the sexual needs of their old or
dependent acquaintances and relatives at all. Reservations
are also likely to emerge among those in need of care
themselves. Sex robots and love dolls, as well as care robots with a sexual assistance function, are capable of triggering violent disputes in nursing homes, hospitals and
private households. One can try to soften or dissolve them
in discourse.
Furthermore, intimacy and privacy and the related informational autonomy are important issues. Robots usually
have cameras and sensors of all kinds, especially when
they are mobile, and can thus, in principle, photograph and
monitor patients in need of care. Personal data in this area
is very sensitive and must be protected. Self-learning systems pose further problems. The AI-enhanced robot could
create detailed profiles that would be interesting for nefarious groups, for example for coercion and extortion.

5

An alternative would be sexual assistance by human
specialists. Döring (2018) lists sexual counselling, sexual
support and sex work. Sexual counselling creates conditions and prerequisites for sexual activities without the
professional him- or herself being actively involved in
sexual activities. Sexual accompaniment in the sense of
active sexual assistance enables sensual-sexual closeness
with the specialist, who is often referred to as the sexual
accompanist. Last but not least, the erotic industry is adapting to the growing number of older people and people in
need of care – in other words, it is classic sex work with a
new target audience. Of course, others will be disturbed by
the fact that people – usually women – offer sexual activities here, even if they do so voluntarily.

What is needed are qualitative and quantitative studies
and empirical research that sheds light on the situation. A
prerequisite, however, would be that care robots be
equipped with sexual assistance functions and tested with
persons in need of care. The future must show whether
science and practice are prepared to do this.

References
Anderson, M.; Anderson, S. L.; and Berenz, V. 2019. A ValueDriven Eldercare Robot: Virtual and Physical Instantiations of a
Case-Supported Principle-Based Behavior Paradigm. Machine
Ethics: The Design and Governance of Ethical AI and Autonomous Systems, Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 107, Issue 3/
March 2019.
Barrett, C.; and Hinchcliff, S. 2018. Addressing the Sexual Rights
of Older People: Theory, Policy and Practice. London: Routledge.
Becker, H. 2018. Robotik in der Gesundheitsversorgung: Hoffnungen, Befürchtungen und Akzeptanz aus Sicht der Nutzerinnen
und Nutzer. In Bendel, O. ed. 2018. Pflegeroboter. Wiesbaden:
Springer Gabler. 229 – 248.
Bendel, O. 2019a. Sexroboter aus Sicht der Maschinenethik. In
Bendel, O. ed. 2019. Handbuch Maschinenethik. Wiesbaden:
Springer VS. 335 – 353.
Bendel, O. 2019b. Liebespuppen. In Gabler Wirtschaftslexikon.
Wiesbaden:
Springer
Gabler.
https://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/definition/liebespuppen121148.
Bendel, O. 2018a. Roboter im Gesundheitsbereich: Operations-,
Therapie- und Pflegeroboter aus ethischer Sicht. In Bendel, O. ed.
2018. Pflegeroboter. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler. 195 – 212.
Bendel. O. 2018b. SSML for Sex Robots. In Cheok, A. D.; and
Levy, D. eds. 2018. Love and Sex with Robots. Third International Conference, LSR 2017, London, UK, December 19–20, 2017,
Revised Selected Papers. Cham: Springer International Publishing. 1 – 11.
Bendel, O. 2015. Surgical, Therapeutic, Nursing and Sex Robots
in Machine and Information Ethics. In van Rysewyk, S. P.; and
Pontier, M. eds. 2015. Machine Medical Ethics. Series: Intelligent Systems, Control and Automation: Science and Engineering.
Berlin, New York: Springer. 17 – 32.
Block, A. E.; and Kuchenbecker, K. J. 2019. Softness, Warmth,
and Responsiveness Improve Robot Hugs. International Journal
of Social Robotics, January 2019, Volume 11, Issue 1, 49 – 64.
Cheok, A. D.; and Levy, D. eds. 2018. Love and Sex with Robots.
Third International Conference, LSR 2017, London, UK, December 19–20, 2017, Revised Selected Papers. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Cheok A. D.; Devlin, K.; and Levy, D. eds. 2016. Love and Sex
with Robots. Second International Conference, LSR 2016, London, UK, December 19–20, 2016, Revised Selected Papers.
Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Döring, N. 2018. Sollten Pflegeroboter auch sexuelle Assistenzfunktionen bieten? In Bendel, O. ed. 2018. Pflegeroboter. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler. 249 – 267.
Früh, M.; and Gasser, A. 2018. Erfahrungen aus dem Einsatz von
Pflegerobotern für Menschen im Alter. In Bendel, O. ed. 2018.
Pflegeroboter. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler. 37 – 62.

Summary and Outlook
The present paper examined the possibilities that arise in
the field of sexual well-being with regard to care robots. It
turned out that there is potential to this idea. Depending on
the country and culture, sex robots and love dolls may
appear inappropriate in old people’s and nursing homes (or
in assisted living). Care robots will spread more and more,
and one could upgrade them more or less inconspicuous in
hardware and software. Of course, controversies are unavoidable even then.
Whether care robots, as they currently present themselves, are really suitable for sexual assistance functions
related to partner sexuality is not clear. Some like JACO,
Lio and P-Rob seem too technical, others like HOBBIT too
experimental, others like Robear too “animaloid”. Bendel
(2019b) has pointed out that some younger men in brothels
with love dolls may be attracted to fantasy figures, but that
Daisy Duck or Minnie Mouse are probably the limit (or
Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse to cover up all the customs). This is perhaps not due to the animal part, but to the
comic-like nature and the fact that they are childhood figures.
Sex robots and love dolls seem to be more likely candidates due to the far-reaching humanoid design, which
makes them androids. There is no doubt that we are naturally attracted to attractive people, and robots that meet
certain criteria may awaken similar feelings in us. Harmony, for example, looks desirable, at least if you prefer certain stereotypes like full lips and big breasts. However, the
development of sex toys over the last ten years has been
different. Whereas in the past the primary sexual characteristics were reproduced – think of dildos and artificial vaginas –, today more and more abstract or thing-like forms are
preferred. It is about stimulation, e.g. with vibrations or
sounds. In this respect, non-humanoid care robots could
also satisfy sexual needs.

6

Giuliani, M. V.; Scopelliti, M.; and Fornara, F. 2005. Elderly
people at home: technological help in everyday activities. In
Robot and human interactive communication, 2005. IEEE International Workshop. 365 – 370.
Inventions World. 2017. Harmony, A Beautiful Lady AI Robot
Can Replace Your Bed Partner. Video on YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LcDWigVV6tA.
Levy, D. 2008. Sex and Love with Robots. The Evolution of Human-Robot Relationships. New York: Harper Perennial.
Lott-Lavigna, R. 2015. Pepper the robot’s contract bans users
from having sex with it. Wired, 23 September 2015.
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/pepper-robot-sex-banned.
Owens, T. 2015. Supporting Disabled People with their Sexual
Lives: A Clear Guide for Health and Social Care Professionals.
London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Samadder, R. 2019. Somnox sleep robot – like being in bed with
a baby Darth Vader. Guardian, 15 October 2019.
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/oct/15/somnoxsleep-robot-like-being-in-bed-with-a-baby-darth-vader?.
WHO. 2006. Defining sexual health. Consultation Report.
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/sexual_healt
h/defining_sh/en/.
Wirth, L.; Siebenmann, J.; and Gasser, A. 2020. Erfahrungen aus
dem Einsatz von Assistenzrobotern für Menschen im Alter. In
Buxbaum, H. ed. 2020. Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler. (Will be published in 2020.)
Zhou, Y.; and Fischer, M. eds. 2019. AI Love You: Developments
on human-robot intimate relationships. Cham: Springer International Publishing.

7

