arXiv:2004.04732v1 [q-bio.PE] 8 Apr 2020

Transparent Covid-19 prediction
Christoph Bandt∗
April 13, 2020

Abstract
We present a very simple and transparent method to interpret time series of confirmed
Covid-19 cases. Roughly speaking, the analysis of weekly new infections for each day is a
tool for the definition and early detection of the turning point of the epidemic. In Italy, the
growth of Covid-19 activity was overcome one week ago, Austria and Switzerland followed
suit. This note emphasizes the crucial delay of two weeks between infection and listing of
infection in a central database. Our estimates of the time course of Covid-19 activity and
reproduction rates can reduce the information gap by several days. We show that Spain
and Germany are already beyond the turning point. In general the estimated reproduction
rates become undercritical a short time after the main lockdown measures, and the Covid19 activity starts to decrease afterwards. This note gives a very optimistic outlook for all
regions which have taken strict containment measures.

The data. To describe the global Covid-19 infections, Johns Hopkins University established the now famous database of cumulated numbers of confirmed cases, deaths and recoveries,
for each day t and each country or region [10]. Here we explain how the series Ct of confirmed infections for a certain region can be interpreted and used for prediction. The letter t is commonly
used to denote either a date, or a number, like ‘day 10 from the beginning of observations’. If t is
today, then t − 1 is yesterday, and t − 7 is one week ago. The sequence C1 , C2 , ... is usually drawn
as a function of t, as shown on the left of Figure 1. It is rather smooth and ever-increasing. It
is compared with exponential growth functions - a too pessimistic viewpoint since containment
measures gradually diminish the growth. Another data series is given by the number of new
infections on day t,
Nt = Ct − Ct−1 .
This function illustrates the time course of infections much better. It is irregular since the data
were collected under pressure. For instance, in the middle of Figure 1 we see the value 4749 for
Spain on 25 March followed by 9630 the day after. In Ct this deviation is hardly noted. France
was not included in the picture because a still bigger outlier, 25615 on April 5 and 2886 on April
6, at present makes our analysis impossible.
∗

Institute of Mathematics, University of Greifswald, 17487 Greifswald, Germany, bandt@uni-greifswald.de

1

cumulated cases C

daily infections N

t

weekly infections W

t

9T

50T

100T

t

Italy
Spain
Germany

6T
30T
60T
3T
10T

20T

10 Mar

20 Mar

30 Mar 6 Apr

10 Mar

20 Mar

30 Mar 6 Apr

10 Mar

20 Mar

30 Mar 6 Apr

Figure 1: Overall number Ct of confirmed cases, number Nt of daily infections, and number Wt
of weekly infections for Italy, Spain and Germany, March 8 to April 7, 2020.
Basic idea.

Here we consider the numbers of weekly new infections
Wt = Ct − Ct−7 = Nt + Nt−1 + ... + Nt−6

for each day t. Although the Wt are composed of past values, they have a greater predictive
value than daily infections. The right of Figure 1 clearly shows the course and the apex of the
epidemic. Italy now is almost two weeks beyond the apex, Spain has followed, with a strong
decrease of new infections, and Germany is also on the decreasing side. Below we prove that
after lockdown conditions there must be a steady improvement during the first two weeks after
the turning point - no matter whether lockdown is lifted or not. In this time the danger of
infection is extremely low. And if an infection should happen, it will be included in Ct only
two weeks later. This is a very optimistic outlook, which with a time shift applies to all regions
which have taken strict containment measures.
Note that the improvement is not visible in Ct . Germany has a much smaller total number
than Italy, and the same slope, but it reached the turning point several days later. A conventional
analysis would emphasize that Spain has largest slope and has just overtaken Italy in the total
number of cases, so it should be in bad shape. However, weekly numbers show that Spain
obviously is improving fast.
Weekly numbers are appropriate for Covid-19 analysis for several reasons. A moving sum
is widely used as a smoothing filter of data [9] so Wt is much more regular than Nt . Seen as
a difference filter, the Wt will also damp weekly periods in the data which often reflect the
mechanism of health administration. The most important and specific argument is that Wt can
be considered as a proxy of the infection potential or Covid-19 activity I. We are interested in
the time course of the activity, not in its actual size. We neglect the uncovered asymptomatic
individuals by assuming that the infections caused by them are proportional to the infections
caused by positively tested persons.
Many experts accept the rule that positively tested patients remain contagious for 7 days.
See the Covid-19 activity maps in [4], for instance. So we just subtract from the overall number
Ct those cases which have become unable to spread the infection. Thus Wt models the danger
2

for the public. We want to know how this quantity changes in time. However, the most actual
numbers Wt give information only on the danger two weeks ago. Formally, Wt is an estimate
of It−14 , not of It . It is crucial to understand completely this information gap of Covid-19. A
detailed discussion is given below.
The time for which a patient can infect others varies between 7 and 14 days for moderate
cases according to [3], and this is why quarantine should last at least two weeks. The light
cases which are not tested also cause infecitons. For the statistics, we take one week as a kind
of mean value. We may also pretend that the time varies between 5 and 9 days, and replace
Ct−7 in the definition of Wt by the average 15 (Ct−5 + Ct−6 + ... + Ct−9 ). The resulting smoothed
weekly infections were used only for Figure 2 to obtain smooth curves. Other coefficients would
be possible, but we want to keep things transparent.
In contrast to simulation studies based on models, like [1, 2], our approach is strictly datadriven. We have only 20 up to 50 hastily collected daily numbers for the evaluation of a very
complex process in a whole country. We take these data as they are, and adapt our methods
to make the best of them. To fit models to these data, many additional assumptions would be
necessary. Our calculations can be checked and modified by everyone who has a computer and
a software for calculation like Excel or R, or Matlab, which was used here.
Weekly infections W in China, Korea and Japan, for days t from 21 Jan to 28 Mar
t

Guangdong
Henan
Hubei
Hunan
Zhejiang
Japan
Korea, South

10T

1T

100

30
21 Jan

1 Feb

10 Feb

20 Feb

1 Mar

15 Mar

25 Mar

Figure 2: Development of weekly infection numbers Wt for each day between 21 January and 28
March 2020 in China, South Korea, and Japan. The logarithmic scale makes it possible to show
the Wuhan province and Chinese provinces with small number of infections in one figure. All
regions except Japan go through a parabolic turning point. At the end of March, new infections
in Guangdong have risen again above the minimum of 30.

The Chinese example. China was the first country to go through the Covid-19 epidemic.
Figure 2 shows the development of weekly infection numbers Wt in Hubei with capital Wuhan,
four other Chinese provinces, South Korea, and Japan. This picture conveys an optimistic
3

message. We see that on the right side of the maximum the function decreases exponentially
fast, only slightly flatter than on the increasing side. The time in Figure 2 starts just before 23
January when strict lockdown measures in Wuhan were implemented by the Chinese government.
Note that the scale of Wt is logarithmic between 30 and 40000. The statistics in Wuhan could
be the best with so many cases but on Feb 12 the criteria for confirmed cases were changed
and 15000 cases added, after 0 cases the day before. This explains why the curves for the other
provinces look more regular, like parabolas. On linear scale, they would be bell-shaped.
In the provinces with relatively few cases, as well as in Korea, it took a bit more than
two weeks to reach the apex of Covid-19 activity. In Wuhan, with tens of thousands of active
infections, four weeks were necessary, starting from lockdown. European countries are going
through a similar scenario, and Italy was first to overcome the apex in Figure 1.
Figure 2 shows that Covid-19 activity hardly disappears completely. Even with very strong
restrictions in Wuhan, it stayed on an intermediate level of 3000 for several days, and then went
down to almost zero. In Guangdong the infection potential has again risen above 30. In South
Korea, where no emergency measures were implemented, the infection potential decreased up
to 700 and then stayed constant. It is not easy to manage Covid-19 activity of such size, but it
seems possible for a large and technologically developed country. Japan has so far succeeded in
keeping the infection potential low, though it crossed the Korean level at the end of March.
Delays. We must understand that the infections counted today did actually happen two
up to four weeks ago, as indicated in the following scheme.
•
infection

•
symptoms

•
test of patient

•
lab result

•
•
local report report to region/government

The delay between infection and appearance of symptoms, known as incubation time, is
beyond human control. It is said to be between 2 and 12 days, with 5-6 days in average [7, 3].
More details and references can be found at [11]. Depending on the strength of symptoms and
the time, for example Saturday night, the patient will decide to undertake a test. To this end,
a doctor has to be consulted who performs the test or certifies the need of testing at another
place. The test material is transported to a lab and evaluated. The lab reports to the doctor
and/or a local authority. A file is created and a report sent to regional and federal authorities.
It seems obvious that the total time between an infection and its reporting to the government
is rarely below 10 days. In Europe a realistic estimate of the average is between two and three
weeks. There are several moments of hesitation. A patient hesitates to visit the doctor. A local
officer hesitates to report a bad case because the press may meddle into his actions. Moreover, a
health administration trimmed for cost-efficiency has no reserves and slows down under pressure.
Finally, officials may underestimate the importance of fast information.
All delays are of course random variables, and beside mean values, variances are important.
Careful analysis of delays is crucial since they dramatically influence political decisions. All over
the world the danger of an epidemic was initially underestimated because of late information.
This is a main reason for the current crisis. A simulation study by Ferguson et al. [1] came
to the conclusion that 20 million people will die if governments do not act firmly and rapidly
enough.
4

The dilemma of politics. When the danger was realized, harsh measures were taken:
borders and schools closed, mobility restricted, emergency laws activated. However, even the
most drastic measures cannot avoid an infection which already took place. We have to wait
two weeks to see the very first effects of containment measures. This is an unprecedented and
extremely difficult situation for politicians, for the people, and for the media who live from news.
Nobody is used to wait two weeks when the situation gets worse.
Pressed by the media, politicians are tempted to order more and more restrictions, no matter
how expensive or inefficient. When the situation improves, they can claim success. Otherwise,
the measures were necessary anyway.
Imagine a hunter fighting against a raging tiger, while he always sees only the tiger’s position
14 seconds ago. He will take a very heavy machine gun and shoot all his ammunition, destroying
the forest and killing friendly animals, since he is never sure that the tiger was hit.
The disadvantage of delays in the period of infection growth turns into an advantage when
the apex is overcome. For two weeks the situation will constantly improve, no matter what we
do. Even if we become careless, we shall notice this only two weeks later. Nevertheless, at the
start of improvement we can immediately lift all restrictions of the previous two weeks, because
they did not contribute to the change. They simply had no chance to show an effect.
Five European countries. While the epidemic in the USA and in the United Kingdom
is still in a growing stage, some European nations have been in the public focus for almost four
weeks now. Since in Wuhan the time from lockdown to the apex was about four weeks, did they
also arrive at the turning point?
We now look on Figure 1 on logarithmic scale for the last two weeks. On the one hand,
logarithms allow to show small and big numbers in one picture, as in Figure 2. So we can
include Switzerland and Austria which both reached the apex one day after Italy. On the other
hand, logarithms provide the appropriate scale for multiplicative processes where day-to-day
differences are terribly growing but day-to-day quotients are slowly varying.
cumulated cases C

daily infections N

t

weekly infections W

t

100T

t

40T
5T

50T

Italy
Spain
Germany
Switzerland
Austria

20T
2T
10T

20T

1T

10T

5T

500

5T
25 Mar

1 Apr

8 Apr

25 Mar

1 Apr

8 Apr

25 Mar

1 Apr

8 Apr

Figure 3: Confirmed cases Ct , daily infections Nt , and weekly infections Wt for Italy, Spain,
Germany, Switzerland, and Austria, March 18 to April 5, 2020.
The function Ct becomes concave on logarithmic scale. That is, the function is still increasing,
but its slope decreases with time. Note that the graph of an exponential function on logarithmic
5

scale is a line. The decrease of slope in the graphs of Ct vaguely illustrates that containment
measures had an effect.
Mathematicians like to find change points in time series, and certainly politicians would
like to see a sudden change which can be identified as effect of a certain lockdown measure.
Unfortunately, due to the big variance of delays we can only see gradual decrease of the slope.
More detailed data are necessary to specify the effect of measures.
Both Ct and Nt give little information on differences between countries. Only Wt shows
such differences. While Italy, Switzerland and Austria reached the apex almost together, Spain
and Germany came later. The weekly infection numbers of Italy have steadily decreased for 13
consecutive days now. In Spain and Germany these numbers decreased for 6 consecutive days.
For Austria and Switzerland the decrease of Wt was interrupted. The reason is that Nt for
small countries is subject √
to greater statistical variation. (For a Poisson random variable, the
95% confidence radius is 2 N . Since Covid-19 cases come in clusters, we should take twice that
value, so that N = 500 has a statistical error ±100 or 20% while N = 5000 has an error ±300
or 8% .)
The decrease of Wt in Austria is fast, as for Chinese provinces with small infection numbers
in Figure 2. The decrease of Wt for Italy, Spain and Germany is much slower, like for Wuhan
in Figure 2. We can suspect that today, two weeks later, the values are actually on the level of
Wuhan at 1 March.
On the whole, the decrease of Wt on logarithmic scale does not look so convincing. Is it
possible that the values will rise again? We have to study the infection process from another
point of view.
The reproduction rate. A basic parameter of epidemiology is the reproduction rate R of
a disease which says how many other persons will be infected by a sick individual. If it is larger
1, the epidemics will spread exponentially. If R < 1 the epidemic will end soon. For Covid19, estimates of R vary between 1.4 and 6.5, see [6]. The scenarios of [1, 2] were determined
from mathematical models which are complex improvements of so-called SIR models, They have
convinced politicians that strong containment measures are unavoidable and save lifes.
Now we are in the phase of lockdown which is difficult to describe by such models. The
spatial aspect has to be taken into account. A first spatial infection model was the contact
process [5], today one would use random geometric graphs [8]. Much more and better data are
needed to fit parameters of such models to Covid-19 reality.
So we shall try to estimate reproduction for each country from the small and rough data
series Ct . This works surprisingly well. We postulate that the new infections Nt come from the
yesterday’s infection potential Wt−1 . That is quite realistic: on the one hand the infection took
place several days ago, but on the other hand the person who caused today’s infection would
himself remain infectious for a few more days. Thus a daily reproduction rate can be estimated
as the quotient qt = Nt /Wt−1 .
Unfortunately, calculation of quotients will not at all work with irregular data. We must
care for smoothing in both numerator and denominator. Instead of Nt we take the average
(Nt + Nt−1 )/2 = (Ct − Ct−2 )/2. The denominator now must also be stretched over two time
points. We replace Wt−1 = Ct−1 − Ct−8 by (Ct−1 + 2Ct−2 )/3 − Ct−11 . We neglected smoothing
at t − 11 since we worked on the increasing branch of Wt and wanted predict the turning point.
6

The resulting quotients were still not smooth enough, and were smoothed by a simple binomial
filter. This gives the formula
qt =

pt−1 + 2pt + pt+1
4

with

pt =

Ct − Ct−2
1
.
2 (Ct−1 + 2Ct−2 )/3 − Ct−11

Estimated daily reproduction rate rt of Covid-19
Italy
Spain
Germany
Switzerland
Austria

0.3

0.2
1/7
0.1

0
2 Mar

9 Mar

15 Mar

21 Mar

Figure 4: The estimated reproduction rate rt .
Note that the smoothing results in one and a half day loss of actuality. So because of the
delay of 14 days, the number qt is an estimate for the daily reproduction rate of the disease at
time t − 15.5. These daily reproduction rates rt are shown in Figure 4. The time is now the time
of real infection, not the time of observation.
When a positive case remains infectious for seven days in the average, then its total reproduction rate is seven times larger than the daily one. So the critical value of the daily reproduction
rate is 1/7 instead of one. In Figure 4, the critical value is indicated by a black line. It turns out
that the curves of all five countries hit this critical line, in almost the same order as the apex of
estimated Covid-19 activity was reached. At the end of the time period, on March 23, Austria
had the smallest reproduction rate, less than half of the critical value. The other four countries
have almost the same reproduction rates, all far lower than the critical value. From this point
of view the infection process will die out, according to the paradigm of epidemiology. This holds
under constant lockdown conditions which have been in force for two more weeks now. Thus
also from this point of view, the actual danger of infection today, at April 8, is very low.
Conclusion. Finally, let us compare the following dates in Table 1.
• The day of maximal Covid-19 activity, which is two weeks before our observed maximum
point of Wt in Figure 3.
• The day in Figure 4 where the estimated daily reproduction rate crosses the critical line.
• The day of stay-at-home order in the respective country.
7

The lockdown measures in different countries differ a lot and cannot be compared so easily.
However, in each country there was a definite speech of the head of government with a strict
stay-at-home order. There were less restrictive containment measures before, and there were
further restrictions after that date. We refer to [2] for a comprehensive comparison of dates.
In Italy first the northern regions with many infections were locked. On March 5 events
were forbidden and schools closed, followed by complete lockdown on March 11. In Germany
some federal states took their specific measures earlier, schools were closed from March 15,
events completely forbidden on 20, and the lockdown came on March 22. [4]. Everywhere some
measures were announced in advance and took place one or more days later.
country
estimated apex
hitting critical line
stay-at-home order

Italy
13
9
11

Spain
18
15
14

Germany
20
15
22

Switzerland
12?
14
16

Austria
15
11
20

Table 1: Day of March for turn of Covid-19 activity, compared with day where reproduction
becomes undercritical, and day of the strong lockdown
The essential observation of our study is: the lockdown measures had an immediate impact.
The reproduction rate crossed the critical line almost instantly, sometimes even before the main
lockdown speech, and the apex of Covid-19 activity was reached very few days later. The
tiger was hit with the first or second shot. Politicians could rely on the people’s cooperation
and willingness to fight the disease. Further restrictions after the main speech could not show
effects, however, since the virus is on very low level two weeks after their implementation. Due
to the information gap, the danger was overestimated, and more collateral damage done than
needed.
The necessity to minimize the information gap. Now restrictions have to be carefully
lifted. The tiger is not dead, it will come back. Again we may underestimate the danger - not
in the very moment, but a few weeks ahead.
At this point, it is absolutely crucial to minimize the information delay. New monitoring
systems must be built up. They cannot be run by the local health administrations who do
a great job, have enough work and an established workflow. There must be parallel lines of
information. One cheap improvement is the establishment of an immediate daily report on
numbers of positive and negative tests from every lab to the health ministry. In Germany, this
could probably gain three days for government decisions. An even earlier although not definite
information would be provided by a central 24/7 hotline where everybody can apply for a date
in a test center, and where basic information on symptoms and contact to infected people can
be gathered just after the incubation time. Different lines of data need to be aggregated, for
which experts have to be hired. This is essential for getting through to the time when a vaccine
will be available.

8

References
[1] Neil M Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, and Gemma Nedjati-Gilani et al. Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid-19 mortality and healthcare demand.
Imperial College London (16-03-2020).
[2] Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra, and Axel Gandy et al. Estimating the number of infections
and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in 11 european countries.
Imperial College London (30-03-2020).
[3] European
Center
for
Disease
Prevention
and
Control.
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19-pandemic, 2020.

Covid-19.

[4] Robert Koch Institute. Daily situation reports. https://www.rki.de/EN/Home/homepage_node.html,
2020.
[5] Thomas M Liggett. Stochastic Interacting Systems: Contact, Voter and Exclusion Processes. Springer.Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1999.
[6] Ying Liu, Albert A Gayle, Annelies Wilder-Smith, and Joacim Rocklöv. The reproductive
number of covid-19 is higher compared to sars coronavirus. J. Travel Medicine, 27(2), 2020.
https://academic.oup.com/jtm/article/27/2/taaa021/5735319.
[7] World
Health
Organization.
Coronavirus
incubation
https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses, 2020.

period.

[8] Matthew Penrose. Random geometric graphs. Oxford University Press, 2003.
[9] R.H. Shumway and D.S. Stoffer. Time Series Analysis and Its Applications. Springer, New
York, 2 edition, 2006.
[10] Johns
Hopkins
University.
Coronavirus
covid-19
global
cases
by
the
center
for
systems
science
and
engineering.
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html, 2020.
[11] Worldometer. Coronavirus incubation period. https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus,
2020.

9

