arXiv:2004.13553v1 [physics.soc-ph] 22 Apr 2020

Universal Masking is Urgent in the COVID-19 Pandemic:
SEIR and Agent Based Models, Empirical Validation,
Policy Recommendations
De Kai P H D MBA

Guy-Philippe Goldstein MBA

HKUST (University of Science & Technology), Hong Kong
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA
dekai@cs.ust.hk dekai@icsi.berkeley.edu
@dekai123 http://dek.ai

Ecole de Guerre Economique, Paris, France
guyphilippeg@gmail.com
@guypgoldstein

Alexey Morgunov

Vishal Nangalia P H D MBC H B FRCA

University of Cambridge, UK
Manifold Research, Cambridge, UK
asm63@cam.ac.uk alexey@manifoldresearch.com
@AlexeyMorgunov

University College London, UK
ELU AI Ltd, London, UK
Royal Free Hospital, London, UK
vishal.nangalia@gmail.com
@v alien

Anna Rotkirch P H D
Population Research Institute, The Family Federation of Finland
anna.rotkirch@vaestoliitto.fi
@AnnaRotkirch https://blogs.helsiki.fi/rotkirch

21 April 2020

Abstract

pirical data set we have collected that includes whether
regions have universal masking cultures or policies, their
daily case growth rates, and their percentage reduction
from peak daily case growth rates. Results show a near
perfect correlation between early universal masking and
successful suppression of daily case growth rates and/or
reduction from peak daily case growth rates, as predicted
by our theoretical simulations.
Taken in tandem, our theoretical models and empirical results argue for urgent implementation of universal
masking in regions that have not yet adopted it as policy or

We present two models for the COVID-19 pandemic
predicting the impact of universal face mask wearing
upon the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virusone employing a stochastic dynamic network based compartmental SEIR (susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered) approach, and the other employing individual ABM (agentbased modelling) Monte Carlo simulationindicating (1)
significant impact under (near) universal masking when at
least 80% of a population is wearing masks, versus minimal impact when only 50% or less of the population is
wearing masks, and (2) significant impact when universal
masking is adopted early, by Day 50 of a regional outbreak, versus minimal impact when universal masking is
adopted late. These effects hold even at the lower filtering
rates of homemade masks. To validate these theoretical
models, we compare their predictions against a new em-

*This collective work grew out of a Kinnernet discussion group
about COVID-19 initiated by Guy-Philippe Goldstein. All authors contributed to the overall design and writing. Additionally, Goldstein formulated overall study goals and analysed policy data, Morgunov ran the
SEIR simulation and collected policy data, De Kai created the online
interactive ABM simulation, Nangalia contributed with medical expertise and to the model design, and Rotkirch and De Kai first drafted the
report.

1

as a broad cultural norm. As governments plan how to exit
societal lockdowns, universal masking is emerging as one
of the key NPIs (non-pharmaceutical interventions) for
containing or slowing the spread of the pandemic. Combined with other NPIs including social distancing and
mass contact tracing, a “mouth-and-nose lockdown” is far
more sustainable than a “full body lockdown”, from economic, social, and mental health standpoints. To provide
both policy makers and the public with a more concrete
feel for how masks impact the dynamics of virus spread,
we are making an interactive visualization of the ABM
simulation available online at http://dek.ai/masks4all. We
recommend immediate mask wearing recommendations,
official guidelines for correct use, and awareness campaigns to shift masking mindsets away from pure selfprotection, towards aspirational goals of responsibly protecting one’s community.

1

introduce an SEIR
(susceptible-exposed-infectiousrecovered) model of the effects of mass face mask wearing over time compared to effects of social distancing and
lockdown. In the second of two new theoretical models,
we introduce a new interactive individual ABM (agentbased modelling) Monte Carlo simulation showing how
masking significantly lowers rates of transmission. Both
models predict significant reduction in the daily growth of
infections on average under universal masking (80-90%
of the population) if instituted by day 50 of an outbreak,
but not if only 50% of the population wear masks or if
institution of universal masking is delayed.
We then compare the two new simulations presented
here against a new empirical data set we have collected
that includes whether regions have universal masking cultures or policies, their daily case growth rates, and their
percentage reduction from peak daily case growth rates.
Since little precise quantitative data is available on cultures where masking is prevalent, we explain in some
depth the historical and sociological factors that support
our classification of masking cultures. Results show a
near perfect correlation between early universal masking and successful suppression of daily case growth rates
and/or reduction from peak daily case growth rates, as
predicted by our theoretical simulations.
To preview the key policy recommendations that our
two new SEIR and ABM predictive models and empirical
validation all lead to:

Introduction

With almost all of the world’s countries having imposed
measures of social distancing and restrictions on movement in March 2020 to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, governments now seek a sustainable pathway back
towards eased social restrictions and a functioning economy. Mass testing for infection and serological tests for
immunity, combined with mass contact tracing, quarantine of infected individuals, and social distancing, are recommended by the WHO and have become widely acknowledged means of controlling spread of the SARSCoV-2 virus until a vaccine is available.
Against this backdrop, a growing number of voices
suggest that universal face mask wearing, as practiced effectively in most East Asian regions, is an additional, essential component in the mitigation toolkit for a sustainable exit from harsh lockdowns. The masks-for-all argument claims that “test, trace, isolate” should be expanded
to “test, trace, isolate, mask”. This paper presents crossdisciplinary, multi-perspective arguments for the urgency
of universal masking, via both new theoretical models and
new empirical data analyses. Specifically, we aim to illustrate how different degrees of mass face wearing affects
infection rates, and why the timing of introduction of universal masking is crucial.
In the first of two new theoretical models, we

1. Masking should be mandatory or strongly recommended for the general public when in public transport and public spaces, for the duration of the pandemic.
2. Masking should be mandatory for individuals in essential functions (health care workers, social and
family workers, the police and the military, the service sector, construction workers, etc.) and medical
masks and gloves or equally safe protection should
be provided to them by employers. Cloth masks
should be used if medical masks are unavailable.
3. Countries should aim to eventually secure mass
production and availability of appropriate medical
masks (without exploratory valves) for the entire
population during the pandemic.
2

4. Until supplies are sufficient, members of the general
public should wear nonmedical fabric face masks
when going out in public and medical masks should
be reserved for essential functions.

Leading political and medical experts who early were
advocated masking included Chinese CDC directorgeneral Prof. George Fu Gao (Servick, 2020), former
FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb and Prof. Caitlin
Rivers of Johns Hopkins (Gottlieb and Rivers, 2020), and
the American Enterprise Institute’s roadmap (Gottlieb et
al., 2020).
In early April 2020 a rapidly increasing number of
governments from countries without a previous culture
of mask wearing require or recommend universal masking including the Czech Republic, Austria and Slovakia.
Additionally, public health bodies in the USA, Germany,
France (Acadmie nationale de mdecine, 2020) and New
Zealand have moved toward universal masking recommendations (Morgunov et al., 2020), as shown below in
Figure 6.
The World Health Organization (2019) previously issued guidelines discouraging the use of masks in the public. However in early April 2020 the World Health Organization (2020) modified the guidelines, allowing selfmade masks but rightly stressing the need to reserve medical masks for healthcare workers (Nebehay and Shalal,
2020), and to combine masking with the other main NPI
needed to combat the pandemic. The policy shifts of the
WHO and other CDCs reflect advances in our scientific
understanding of this pandemic, and help legitimise the
altruistic “mask resistance” of civil society in this global
effort against COVID-19.

5. The authorities should issue masking guidelines to
residents and companies regarding the correct and
optimal ways to make, wear and disinfect masks.
6. The introduction of mandatory masking will benefit
from being rolled out together with campaigns, citizen initiatives, the media, NGOs, and influencers in
order to avoid a public backlash in societies not culturally accustomed to masking. Public awareness is
needed that “masking protects your communitynot
just you”.

2

Background

Masks indisputably protect individuals against airborne
transmission of respiratory diseases. A recent Cochrane
meta-analysis found that masking, handwashing, and using gowns and/or gloves can reduce the spread of respiratory viruses, although evidence for any individual one of
these measures is still of low certainty (Burch and Bunt,
2020). Currently, the lowest recorded daily growth rates
in COVID-19 infections appear to be found in countries
with a culture of mass face mask wearing, most of whom
have also made mask wearing in public mandatory during
the epidemic, and most of whom are not currently locked
downan observation that we study systematically in section 5.
Outside of East Asia, support for universal masking is
emerging elsewhere across the globe. The Czech Republic was the first non-Asian country to embrace and impose mandatory universal masking on March 11, 2020.
The Czech policy swiftly inspired various initiatives from
citizens, journalists and scientistse.g., De Kai (2020),
Howard and Fast.ai team (2020), Manjoo (2020), Abaluck
et al. (2020), Feng et al. (2020), Fineberg (2020), Tufekci
(2020)and created global movements such as #masks4all
and #wearafuckingmask. Their arguments build on the
ability of the COVID-19 virus to spread from pre- and
asymptomatic individuals who may not know that they
are infected, and to linger in airborne droplets.

3

SEIR modelling
masking impact

of

universal

In the first of our two new theoretical models, we employed stochastic dynamic network based compartmental SEIR modeling to forecast the relative impact of
masking compared to the two main other societal nonpharmaceutical interventions, lockdown, and social distancing.
The SEIR simulations were fit to the current timeline in
many Western countries, with a lockdown imposed March
the 24th (day 1) and planned to be lifted on May 31st.
Universal masking is introduced in April. The simulation
continues for 500 days from day 0, or around 17 months.
The experimental results strongly support the need for
3

universal masking as an alternative to continued lockdown
scenarios. For this strategy to be most effective, the vast
majority of the population must adopt mask wearing immediately, as most regions outside East Asia are rapidly
approaching Day 50.

β
βI
Pr(Xi = S → E) = [p +(1−p)
N

In a SEIR model, the population is divided into compartments which represent different states with respect
to disease progression of an individual: susceptible
(S), exposed (E), infectious (I) and recovered (R).
A susceptible individual may become exposed if they
interact with an infectious individual at rate β (rate of
transmission per S- I contact per time). From E , the
individual progresses to being infectious (I) and eventually recovered (R) with rates σ (rate of progression)
and γ (rate of recovery), respectively. Additionally,
individuals in I are removed from the population (i.e.,
die of the disease) at rate µI (rate of mortality).

P

j∈CG (i) δXj =i

|CG (i)|

]δXi =S

Pr(Xi = E → I) = σδXi =E

(1)
(2)

Pr(Xi = I → R) = γδXi =I

(3)

Pr(Xi = I → F ) = µI δXi =I

(4)

where δXi =A = 1 if the state of Xi is A , or 0 if
not, and where CG (i) denotes the set of close contacts
of node i .

3.1

Experimental model

We implemented SEIR dynamics on a stochastic dynamic
network with a heterogeneous population. We assumed
an initial infected population of 1% and modelled the assumed effects of social distancing, lockdown, and univer1
We used a SEIR model implemented on a stochastic
sal masking over time on the rates of infection in the popdynamical network that more closely mimics interactions
ulation.
between individuals in society, instead of assuming
All SEIR models were built using the SEIRS+ moduniform mixing as is the case with deterministic SEIR
elling tool2 , version 0.0.14. The baseline model parammodels. Furthermore, such approach allows setting
eters are fit to the empirical characteristics of COVID-19
different model parameters for each individual, which
spread, as documented in the SEIRS+ distributed COVIDwe use to model masking. In a network model, a graph
19 notebooks. Specifically, we set β = 0.155, σ = 1/5.2
of society is built with nodes representing individuals
and γ = 1/12.39. This parameterisation describes a
and edgestheir interactions. Each node has a state
SEIR model with best estimates for COVID-19 dynamS, E, I, R, or F (the latter added to represent dead
ics.
individuals). Adjacent nodes form close contact networks
The initial infected population (initi ) was set to 1%,
of an individual, while contacts made with an individual
and all others to 0%. The size of the total population was
from anywhere in the network represent global contacts
set to 67,000 (a representative typical case, that is a factor
in the population. Varying the parameters affecting the
of 1,000 from the population of the UK).
two levels of interaction, as well as setting network
Social distancing. In the model, social distancproperties such as the mean number of adjacent nodes
ing
was defined as the degree distribution of the con(“close contacts”) allows us to model the degree of social
tact
network of an individual. Default interaction netdistancing and lockdown measures.
works were used, constructed as Barabasi-Albert graphs
Formally, each node i is associated with a state Xi with m = 9 and processes using the package function cuswhich is updated based on the following probability tom exponential graph with different scale parameters.
Normal graph (scale=100) with mean degree 13.2, distransition rates:
tancing graph (scale=10) with mean degree 4.1 and lockdown graph (scale=5) with mean degree 2.2.
Lockdown stringency. Lockdown stringency was
modelled considering no stringent lockdown (i.e. only
1 https://github.com/ryansmcgee/seirsplus

2 https://github.com/ryansmcgee/seirsplus

4

Figure 1: Simulation results for a representative scenario: universal masking at 80% adoption (red) flattens the curve
significantly more than maintaining a strict lockdown (blue). Masking at only 50% adoption (orange) is not sufficient
to prevent continued spread. Replacing the strict lockdown with social distancing on May 31 without masking results
in unchecked spread.
Date fitting. The progression in the number of deaths
was used to fit the model to an approximate calendar date
representing Day 0. For the representative typical case of
the UK, this corresponded to Mar 23.

social distancing) or stringent lockdown using the locality parameter p, which was set to 0.02 during lockdown
and 0.2 during social distancing phases. This dictates the
probability of individuals coming into contact with those
outside of their immediate network. Assuming that individuals have around 13 contacts in normal everyday life,
social distancing will reduce this to 4 and lockdown to
only 2.

3.2

Experimental results

Figure 1 shows the simulation results for a representative
Mask wearing. A gradual increase in mask wearing scenario: universal masking at 80% adoption (red) flattens
was modelled using a linear increase in the proportion the curve significantly more than maintaining a strict lockof individuals randomly allocated with a reduced rate of down (blue). Masking at only 50% adoption (orange) is
transmission. The factor by which β was reduced was not sufficient to prevent continued spread. Replacing the
conservatively set to 2. The period of time over which the strict lockdown with social distancing on May 31 without
mask wearing went from 0 to maximum % was set to 10 masking results in unchecked spread.
days. 50% and 80% maximum values were considered.
Our model suggests a substantial impact of universal
5

Figure 2: Simulation results for a representative scenario: universal masking at 80% adoption (red) results in 60,000
deaths, compared to maintaining a strict lockdown (blue) which results in 180,000 deaths. Masking at only a 50%
adoption rate (orange) is not sufficient to prevent continued spread and eventually results in 240,000 deaths. Replacing
the strict lockdown with social distancing on May 31 without masking results in unchecked spread.
masking. Without masking, but even with continued social distancing in place once the lockdown is lifted, the
infection rate will increase and almost half of the population will become affected. This scenario, rendered in
grey in Figure 1, would potentially lead to over a million deaths in a population the size of the UK. A continued lockdown, illustrated in blue colour, does eventually
result in bringing the disease under control after around
6 months. However, the economic and social costs of a
“full body lockdown” will be enormous, which strongly
supports finding an alternative solution.

in 240,000 deaths. Replacing the strict lockdown with
social distancing on May 31 without masking results in
unchecked spread.

4

Agent based modelling of universal masking impact

In the second of our two new theoretical models, we
employed stochastic individual agent based modelling
(ABM) as an alternative Monte Carlo simulation technique for understanding the impact of universal masking.
Agent based models have roots in various disciplines. A
stochastic agent program can be defined as a agent function f : p → Pr(a) which maps possible percept vectors to a probabilistic distribution over possible actions
(or to states that influence subsequent actions). In AI,
Russell and Norvig (2009) summarise five classes of intelligent agents: simple reflex agents, model-based reflex
agents, goal-based agents, utility-based agents, and learning agents; note, however, that agents may also be sus-

In the model, social distancing and masking at both
50% and 80% of the populationbut no lockdown beyond
the end of Mayresult in substantial reduction of infection, with 80% masking eventually eliminating the disease. Figure 2 shows the simulation results for a representative scenario: universal masking at 80% adoption
(red) results in 60,000 deaths, compared to maintaining
a strict lockdown (blue) which results in 180,000 deaths.
Masking at only a 50% adoption rate (orange) is not sufficient to prevent continued spread and eventually results
6

ceptible to imperceptible environmental factors such as
viruses. Holland and Miller (1991) discuss artificial adaptive agents for modeling complex systems in economics.
Bonabeau (2002) surveys agent based models for simulating human systems.
As in other disciplines, ABM approaches in epidemiology (see, e.g., Hunter et al. (2017). Tracy et al. (2018),
or Hunter et al. (2018)) have several advantages compared to compartmental models which group undifferentiated individuals into large aggregates (like in the above
SEIR simulation). First, because the behavior and characteristics of each agent is independent, they can simulate
complex dynamic systems with less oversimplification of
rich variation among individuals. Second, because agents
can be simulated in physical two- or three-dimensional
spaces, they can better simulate the geometry of contact
between individuals, which is highly relevant in epidemiology. Third, the randomization on each run makes the
statistical variance more apparent than in the SIR family of models, whose smooth curves often misleadingly
convey more certainty than warranted. Fourth, ABMs
lend themselves well to visualization, as seen in Figure 5,
which helps convey the non-linear behavior of complex
dynamic systemsan especially relevant advantage when
the exponential effect of masking can be counterintuitive
in many cultures due to pre-existing cultural biases (Leung, 2020) and unconscious cognitive biases (De Kai,
2020).

4.1

homes, only medical masks combined with other protective equipment provide protection. Comparing different
mask materials, medical masks have been found to be
up to three times more effective in blocking transmission
compared to homemade masks (Davies et al., 2013). Surgical masks most efficaciously reduce the emission of influenza virus particles into the environment in respiratory
droplets. Still, although masks vary greatly in their ability to protect, using any type of face mask (without an
exploratory valve) can help decrease viral transmission
(Sande et al., 2008).
However, the effect of universal masking does not require full protection from disease to be effective in lowering infection rates of COVID-19. Masks may be especially crucial for containing the COVID-19 pandemic,
since many infections appear to come from people with
no signs of illness. For instance, around 48% of COVID19 transmissions were pre-symptomatic in Singapore and
62% in Tianjin, China (Ganyani et al., 2020). This suggests that masking needs to be universal and not restricted
to individuals who think they may be infected.
Furthermore, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is known to
spread through airborne particles (Leung et al., 2020) and
quite possibly via aerosolised droplets as well according
to Service (2020), van Doremalen et al. (2020), Santarpia
et al. (2020), and Liu et al. (2020). It may linger in the air
for and travel several meters, which is why social distancing rules require at least 2 meters between individuals to
be effective.

Mask characteristics
4.2

The ABM approach allows us to put masks on individual
agents and to assign properties to those masks, to shed
light on the question of how face maskseven nonmedical
cloth maskscarry the promise to be so surprisingly effective. The objective is to examine how even a small barrier
to individual infection transmission can multiply into a
substantial effect on the level of communities and populations.
Face masks work in two ways: They can protect an
infected person from spreading the virus (transmission),
and they can limit how much the non-infected individual
is exposed to the virus (absorption). Traditionally, masks
are worn to protect the wearer from being infected by an
ill person when in close and prolonged contact. In such
classic situations, for instance in hospitals and elderly

Experimental model

As a contrastive baseline we employed a compartmental
SEIR model with the same parameters as given for our
SEIR experiments of section 3.
For the new agent based model, we implemented an
environment consisting of a square wraparound twodimensional space, within which a population of individual agents reside in four states: susceptible (S), exposed
(E), infectious (I) and recovered (R). The wraparound
space means that agents who move outside a border reenter the square from the opposite side. As in our SEIR
models, the initial infected population (initi ) was set to
1%, and all others to 0%. The size of the total population
was set to 200, but the wraparound feature of the twodimensional space in effect represents arbitrarily larger
7

Figure 3: Three successive randomised runs of the agent based model for 300 days, with no mask wearing. Blue is susceptible, orange is exposed, red is infected, and green is recovered. The contrastive SEIR baseline model’s predicted
curves are shown in thinner, fainter lines. The ABM runs produce curves with a fine granularity of randomisation,
centering on average around the ODE based SEIR curves.
spaces that are approximated by replicated square tiles,
thus giving more accurate dynamics without boundary effects from small spaces.
To best fit the same empirical characteristics of
COVID-19 spread as our SEIR models, we again set σ =
1/5.2 and γ = 1/12.39. Note that β is inapplicable in
the ABM since infection transmission between individuals arises from physical proximity, which is more realistic
than randomly infecting other individuals anywhere with
some probability β with no regard to their physical location. In the baseline Monte Carlo simulation, agents
decide on a random destination location within a parameterised radius of their current point, then proceed at a parameterised speed to move there, and then repeat the process iteratively. We adjusted such ABM-specific parameters, as well as physical exposure distance, to optimise fit
to the baseline SEIR model curves, assuming none of the
population to be wearing masks. Again, this was done so
as to best approximate known COVID-19 dynamics.
ABM runs were for 300 days from the onset of the out-

break since empirically, the emergent SEIR curves stabilise before the 300th day.
To model the impact of masking, the following masking parameters can be varied:
Mask wearing. Gradual increases (or decreases) in
mask wearing can be modelled using parameterised rates
of masking M (or unmasking U ) in the proportion of unmasked (or masked) individuals. The parameters mmin
and mmax also allow modelling the minimum and maximum absolute numbers of masked agents. These masking
parameters can be dynamically adjusted any time during
any ABM run, to simulate varying policy decisions and
cultural mindset shifts.
Mask characteristics. Varying degrees of mask effectiveness are modelled by the mask transmission rate T
and mask absorption rate A, which denote the proportion
of viruses that are stopped by the mask during exhaling
(transmission) versus inhaling (absorption), respectively.
We set T = 0.7 and A = 0.7 to model the use of inexpensive, widely available, and even nonmedical or homemade
8

Figure 4: Four ABM runs under varying masking scenarios. (a) 100% of the population wearing masks from the onset
of the outbreak, with excellent suppression of infection spread. (b) 0% of the population initially wearing masks, but
instituting near universal masking of 90% of the population at day 50, still with significant suppression of infection
spread. (c) 0% of the population initially wearing masks, and instituting some masking of 50% of the population at
day 50, with not much impact on infection spread. (d) 0% of the population initially wearing masks, but instituting
near universal masking of 90% of the population at day 75 with not much impact on infection spread.

9

masks with only 70% effectiveness for universal masking,
and not higher quality N95, N99, N100, FFP1, FFP2, or
FFP3 masks which in many regions need to be reserved
for medical staff.

4.3

day 50, good chances of dramatic suppression of infection rates can still be achieved. Fortunately, this option is
within reach of most regions at the time of writing.

Experimental results

ABM simulation shows that universal masking can significantly reduce virus spread if adopted sufficiently early,
even if the masks are nonmedical or homemade.
Figure 3 shows three successive runs for the baseline
m = 0 case with zero mask adoption. Each dot (which is
in motion during simulation runs) represents an individual agent, who may become exposed to the virus through
proximity to other agents who are infectious. Blue dots
are healthy susceptible agents, orange dots are exposed
agents, red dots are infected agents, and green dots are
recovered agents. A dot with a white rectangle on it represents an agent who is wearing a mask.
The three baseline ABM runs show how chance plays
a significant role in the dynamics of virus spread. Since
each simulation run is randomised, to decrease variance
requires observation over multiple runs. On average, the
baseline case with zero mask adoption adheres to the simpler SEIR model’s predicted curves.
Figure 4 compares typical runs for four scenarios
that simulate how COVID-19 spreads among individual
agents under different masking scenarios, with the contrastive baseline SEIR model curves shown in thin lines as
a reference: (a) m0 = 100% meaning that the entire population adopts mask at the onset of the outbreak on day
0; (b) m0 = 0%, m50 = 90% meaning that none of the
population is wearing masks at the onset but that nearly
universal masking is instituted on day 50; and (c) m0 =
0%,m50 = 50% meaning that none of the population is
wearing masks at the onset but that half of the population
adopts masks on day 50, and (d) m0 = 0%, m75 = 90%
meaning that none of the population is wearing masks at
the onset but that nearly universal masking is instituted on
day 75.
In scenario (a), a dramatic decrease in the number of
infections is evident as a result of universal masking at the
onset of the outbreak. Unfortunately, most regions outside
East Asia missed the time window for scenario (a).
In scenario (b), even though the population is not initially wearing masks, if universal masking is instituted by

In scenario (c), again the population is not initially
wearing masks. On day 50, half the population dons
masks, but unlike scenario (b) which succeeds with 90%
universal masking, unfortunately 50% is an insufficient
level of mask adoption to suppress infection rates to a significant degree.
In scenario (d), the population again is not initially
wearing masks, but unlike scenario (b) the 90% universal masking is not instituted until day 75, instead of day
50. Waiting too long unfortunately greatly decreases the
degree to which infection rates can be suppressed.
To help policy makers and the general public gain a
more concrete feel for how masks impact the dynamics
of virus spread, we have made available online3 an interactive visualisation tool for the ABM simulation model,
as shown in Figure 5. The default view allows direct adjustment in real time of the percentage of masked individual agents through a slider control. Optional advanced
controls allow playing with various scenarios: whether
masking is used, the adoption rate of masking, virus transmission and absorption rates through masks of varying
quality, as well as other modelling parameters such as the
initial numbers of susceptible, exposed, infected, or recovered agents, and the contrastive baseline SEIR model
parameters.

5

Evaluation of model predictions
against empirical data on universal masking impact

For validation of the foregoing SEIR and ABM predictive models it is necessary to compare against what little
historical macro scale empirical data is available, since
precise numbers are not yet known for masking rates,
mask transmission and absorption rates, and infectious
but asymptomatic cases.

10

3 http://dek.ai/masks4all

Figure 5: Interactive visualisation tool for the ABM simulation model to help policy makers and the general public gain
a more concrete feel for how masks impact the dynamics of virus spread, available online at http://dek.ai/masks4all.

5.1

Validation data set

We collected a new data set describing the degree of success in managing COVID-19 by countries or regions segmented by the prevalence or enforcement of universal
masking. The data set covers (a) a selection of 38 countries or provinces in Asia, Europe and North America that
have similar, high levels of economic development (based
on World Bank GDP purchasing power parity per capita),
(b) detected COVID-19 cases from Jan 23 to April 10,
2020, and (c) characteristics of universal masking culture
and/or universal masking orders or recommendations by
governments.

5.2

Feature extraction

From our data set’s 38 selected countries, we computed
(a) the daily growth of confirmed cases, as well as (b)
reduction from peak of new cases. Sorted in increasing

order of the daily growth, Figure 6 presents these figures
alongside features extracted from our data set denoting
each country or region’s (c) masking culture, (d) universal masking policy, and (c) lockdown policy. Additional
clarification on definitions of a couple of these features
follow.
Masking culture is defined as an established practice by a significant section of the general population to
wear face masks prior to the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. A cursory review of the scientific literature and
the general press has identified Japan, Thailand, Vietnam
(Burgess and Horii, 2012), China’s urban centers (Kuo,
2014), Hong Kong (Cowling et al., 2020), Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea (Yang (2014), Jennings (2020))
as countries with such a consistent practice, at least in the
decade predating the Covid-19 pandemic. Nevertheless,
the notion of ”culture” should not imply that the practice of face mask wearing has been extensive and consistent throughout time. For example, though this practice
11

Figure 6: Epidemic daily growth and reduction from
peak daily growth, together with masking culture, universal masking policy, and lockdown policy, from January 23 to April 10, 2020 for selected list of countries or
provinces with high GDP PPP per capita in Asia, Europe
and North America. Universal masking was employed in
every region that handled COVID-19 well. Sources: John
Hopkins, Wikipedia, VOA News, Quartz, Straits Times,
South China Morning Post, ABCNews, Time.com, Channel New Asia, Moh.gov.sg, Reuters, Financial Times,
Yna.co.kr, Nippon.com, Euronews, Spectator.sme.sk

may have fit with preexisting Taoist and health precepts
of Chinese traditional medicine, its actual emergence may
be relatively recent, starting with the industrialization of
Japan at the start of the XXth century and both the flu
pandemics of the XXth century as well as the rise of particle pollution (Yang, 2014). The rest of the above-listed
east Asian countries has followed the same course in the
second half of the XXth century, including China as it
was confronting a severe particle pollution crisis in the
first part of the 2010s (Kuo (2014), Li (2014), Hansstein
and Echegaray (2018)). Beyond price, availability and
government recommendation, the actual practice of masking in the Asian general population may be mediated by
factors such as social norms or peer-pressure, perception
of one’s competence, past behaviors or perception of the
danger (Hansstein and Echegaray, 2018). As an example of the latter, in Hong Kong, masking was practiced by
79% of the general population during the 2003 SARS outbreak, but by only a maximum of 10% of the general population during the Influenza A pandemic in 2009 (Cowling et al., 2020).
Universal masking policy. Additionally, to the extent
that government recommendations or mandatory orders
may shape perceptions and assist in masks availability, it
may amplify the masking practice in the general population. It can thus be assumed that the maximum potency
of universal masking in the context of epidemics may be
reached when a government issues a mandatory or highly
recommended order to the general population, issued at
an early date, supported by the availability of face masks
and amplified by a pre-existing ”masking culture”. In that
case, we make the reasonable assumption that such national situations may be used to validate our SEIR and
ABM predictive models at maximum values (80-90%) for
the percentage of the general population wearing masks.
We also computed two additional meta-features to classify successful management of the epidemic outbreak.
These meta-features help to highlight both (a) success in
suppressing growth from the start (e.g., Hong Kong or
Taiwan) or (b) success in managing the epidemic by reducing the number of new cases after a peak (e.g., South
Korea).
Successful suppression of daily growth is defined as
being below 12.5% daily growth (equivalent to number of
cases doubling at the slower pace of 6 days or more) once
the number of detected cases first reached 30. These daily
12

Figure 7: Daily growth curves showing the impact of universal masking on epidemic control: epidemic trajectory after
30 detected cases in universal masking selected countries and provinces (green) vs. others (grey). Masking is nearly
perfectly correlated with lower daily growth or strong reduction from peak growth of COVID-19. Sources: John
Hopkins, Wikipedia, VOA News, Quartz, Straits Times, South China Morning Post, ABCNews, Time.com, Channel
New Asia, Moh.gov.sg, Reuters, Financial Times, Yna.co.kr, Nippon.com, Euronews, Spectator.sme.sk
growth rates are highlighted in green in Figure 6.
Successful reduction from peak is defined as a recent, significant (>60%) reduction of new cases calculated as the average of the last five days before April 10,
2020 compared to the average of the three highest number of daily new cases up to April 10, 2020 starting from
the date when the number of detected cases first reached
30. Again, these reductions from peak are highlighted in
green in Figure 6.

5.3

Validation results

Results bear out the predictions made by our SEIR and
agent-based models as described in sections 3 and 4.
In Figure 6, the green (successful supression of daily
growth and/or reduction from peak) areas show that as
of April 10, 2020, an overwhelming majority of countries or regions that have best managed COVID-19 out-

breaks were countries or regions with either (1) established universal masking cultures or (2) mandatory orders or government recommendations supported by significant and early mask production destined for the general population. These countries or regions include Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, Japan, autonomous special
administrative regions such as Hong Kong or Macau, and
Chinese provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, or Guangdong. In effect, masking in public has been required in
Taiwan, metropolitan areas in China such as Shanghai
and Beijing (as well as Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Tianjin,
Hangzhou, and Chengdu), Japan, South Korea, and other
countries (Morgunov et al., 2020). On the other hand,
the red (strict lockdown without universal masking) areas show that most of the countries which have adopted
mass testing, tracking and quarantining, but lack a universal masking culture and clear recommendations and availability for universal masking, have not achieved an equiv-

13

alent level of COVID-19 epidemic control as of April 10,
2020. This nearly perfect correlation between early universal masking and successful management of COVID-19
outbreaks bears out our SEIR and ABM predictions.
In Figure 7, daily growth curves were extracted from
our data set in order to reveal the impact of universal
masking on epidemic control on a time axis. Results show
that universal masking is nearly perfectly correlated with
lower daily growth rates of COVID-19 cases over time,
again validating the predictions from our SEIR and agent
based models.
In Figure 8, daily growth was plotted against versus
percentage reduction from peak daily daily growth. Green
points, representing countries or regions with early universal masking, disproportionately fall within the two
lower quadrants which represent successful management
of COVID-19 outbreaks. Red points, representing countries with strict lockdowns but not universal masking,
nearly all fall in the two upper quadrants which represent less successful management of COVID-19 outbreaks.
Light green points, representing countries or regions with
late universal masking, tend to fall in the middle regions.
Again, the strong correlation of universal masking with
successful control of COVID-19 case growth bears out
our SEIR and agent based models’ predictions.
Validation of the need for universal masking. These
validations highlight the gradual nature of the protection
against COVID-19 achieved with a higher fraction of the
population practicing masking, as observed in the SEIR
and ABM simulations when comparing situations with
80-90% universal masking versus only 50% masking or
none. In countries or provinces with masking culture
and universal masking orders or recommendations before March 15, 2020, the average daily growth was 5.9%
and the reduction from peak was 74.6%. In the countries without masking culture and universal masking orders or recommendations after March 15, 2020, the average daily growth was 14.2% and the reduction from peak
was 45.8%. Finally, for the rest of the other countries, the
average daily growth was 17.2% and the reduction from
peak was 37.4%, the lowest results of the sample. The
latter group includes countries that have gone into ”strict
lockdown” (or mass home quarantine) for 20 out of 27
countries (74%). This is much higher than for the intermediate group of countries without masking culture and
”late” universal masking orders (2 out 4, or 50% of the

sample), or the first group of countries and provinces with
masking culture and ”early” universal masking orders. In
that first group, no countries or provinces had to endure
”strict lockdown”.
Validation of the need for early universal masking.
Yet even within this first group, the strength of early universal masking recommendations from the government
may impact the proportion of the general population actually wearing masks and thus the level of epidemic control,
as per our models’ SEIR and ABM predictions. For example, Singapore initially encouraged people to wear masks
only when feeling unwell. Then, on April, 5, the government changed policy and decided to distribute reusable
face masks to all households (Cheong, 2020). On the
other end, Hong Kong decided by January 24, 2020 to
advise the general population to wear surgical masks in
crowded places and public transports (Hong Kong Department of Health, 2020). As can be observed from Figure 6,
as of April 10, 2020, the characteristics for epidemic control in terms of daily growth and peak from reduction are
better for Hong Kong than for Singapore. These variations may be related to levels of adherence to masking
by the general population. Though there are no available
data as of April 10, 2020 as per adherence to universal
masking in Singapore, telephone surveys in Hong Kong
done in February 11-14, 2020 and then in March 10-13,
2020, both after Department of Health public advice, have
shown declared masking adherence at the very high levels
of 97.5% and 98.8% respectively when going out (Cowling et al., 2020). Assuming the adherence level to masking was lower in Singapore since the general population
order came much later, this would support our SEIR and
ABM predictions of the need for early institution of universal masking.
Although these correlations may also be sensitive to
other unobserved factors, the theoretical SEIR and ABM
predictions as empirically validated in the various ways
described here call for urgent policy and public action
even as further enquiry is pursued into the effects of masking. Our results also confirm and amplify other previous findings. A recent macro-level regression analysis by
economists at Yale University, taking into account masking cultures and times of country COVID-19 policy responses, estimated that growth of COVID-19 rates only
half that of mask wearing countriesthe growth rate of
confirmed cases is 18% in countries with no pre-existing
14

Figure 8: Visual representation of epidemic daily growth versus percentage reduction from peak daily daily growth
in quadrants showing the impact of universal masking on epidemic control: and reduction from peak, from January
23 to April 10, 2020 for selected list of countries or provinces with high GDP PPP per capita in Asia, Europe and
North America. Masking is nearly perfectly correlated with lower daily growth or strong reduction from peak growth
of COVID-19. Sources: John Hopkins, Wikipedia, VOA News, Quartz, Straits Times, South China Morning Post,
ABCNews, Time.com, Channel New Asia, Moh.gov.sg, Reuters, Financial Times, Yna.co.kr, Nippon.com, Euronews,
Spectator.sme.sk
mask norms and 10% in countries with such norms, while
the growth rate of deaths is 21% in countries with no mask
norms and 11% in countries with such norms. The authors
note that such a 10% reduction in transmission probabilities could correspond to a per capita gain of $3,000-6,000
per each additional cloth mask, and that the economic
benefits of each medical mask for healthcare personnel
could be substantially larger (Abaluck et al., 2020).

6

Conclusion: Universal masking
needs broad support and clear
guidelines

Our SEIR and ABM models suggests a substantial impact of timely universal masking. Without masking, but
even with continued social distancing in place once the
lockdown is lifted, the infection rate will increase and almost half of the population will become affected. This
scenario would potentially lead to over a million deaths
in a population the size of the UK. Social distancing and
15

masking at both 50% and 80-90% of the populationbut
no lockdown beyond the end of Mayresult in substantial
reduction of infection, with 80-90% masking eventually
eliminating the disease.
Moreover, for a significant chance of mitigating infection growth rates, universal masking must be adopted
earlyby day 50 from the onset of COVID-19 outbreaks.
Without masking, lifting lockdown after nine weeks
while keeping social distancing measures will risk a major
second wave of the epidemic in 4-5 months’ time. However, if four out of five citizens start wearing cloth masks
in public before the lockdown is lifted, the number of new
COVID-19 cases could decline enough to exit lockdown
and still avoid a second wave of the epidemic. If only every second person starts wearing a mask, infection rates
would also decline substantially, but likely not by enough
to prevent the second wave.
Combined with the correlational empirical evidence,
our results highlight the need for mass masking as an alternative to a continued lockdown scenario. For this strategy to be most effective, the vast majority of the population needs to adopt mask wearing immediately. When a
well-timed “mouth-and-nose lockdown” accompanies the
current “full body lockdown”, both the human and economic costs of the COVID-19 pandemic can be significantly lowered.
Our theoretical and empirical results are in line with
previous studies suggesting that a high rate of masking
may be needed in a population to provide efficient protection from influenza (Yan et al., 2019) and that masking
can be an effective intervention strategy in reducing the
spread of a pandemic (Tracht et al., 2010).
Furthermore, universal masking can reduce stigmatization of ethnic groups, risk groups, or the sick and contribute to public solidarity (Feng et al., 2020).
We urge governments and international bodies who
have not yet done so to consider masking as one of the key
tools in population policy after the COVID-19 lockdowns
and until the virus is under control. The analysis presented
here supports recent studies (Abaluck et al., 2020), suggesting that the effectiveness of universal masking is comparable to that of social distancing or a societal lockdown
with closed workplaces, schools, and public spaces and
limited geographical mobility. The results from our simulation help explain the dynamics behind the perplexing
advantage in the Asian experience of tackling COVID-19

compared to the situation elsewhere.
Our analyses lead to the following key policy recommendations:
1. Masking should be mandatory or strongly recommended for the general public when in public transport and public spaces, for the duration of the pandemic.
2. Masking should be mandatory for individuals in essential functions (health care workers, social and
family workers, the police and the military, the service sector, construction workers, etc) and medical
masks and gloves or equally safe protection should
be provided to them by employers. Cloth masks
should be used if medical masks are unavailable.
3. Countries should aim to eventually secure mass
production and availability of appropriate medical
masks (without exploratory valves) for the entire
population during the pandemic.
4. Until supplies are sufficient, members of the general
public should wear nonmedical fabric face masks
when going out in public and medical masks should
be reserved for essential functions.
5. The authorities should issue masking guidelines to
residents and companies regarding the correct and
optimal ways to make, wear and disinfect masks.
6. The introduction of mandatory masking will benefit
from being rolled out together with campaigns, citizen initiatives, the media, NGOs, and influencers in
order to avoid a public backlash in societies not culturally accustomed to masking. Public awareness is
needed that “masking protects your communitynot
just you”.
The effectiveness of universal masking in a given population is likely to depend on (a) the type of masks used, (b)
the acceptance of masking in the population, (c) the level
of contagion of the virus, and (d) what other interventions have been applied. From this perspective, the Central European experience will be highly informative, since
it represents the first major shift to universal masking in
a formerly non-masking culture. The effects of this pioneering intervention on infection rates and fatalities will

16

appear only in the forthcoming weeks, although Slovakia Adam Burgess and Mitsutoshi Horii. Risk, ritual and
and Slovenia are currently showing early indications of
health responsibilisation: Japans safety blanket of surprogress (see Figure 7). In any case, they illustrate that a
gical face mask-wearing. Sociology of Health and Illcountry with no prior history of mask wearing in public
ness, 34(8):11841198, 2012.
may rapidly change course, and quickly adopt masks as
Danson Cheong. Coronavirus: Most workplaces to close,
a non-stigmatisedeven street smartway to express caring
schools will move to full home-based learning from
and solidarity in the community.
next week, says pm lee. The Straits Times, Apr 2020.
The medical and social risks of increased infections
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/mostneed to be countered by proper advice in the public doworkplaces-to-close-schools-will-move-to-full-homemain. Some studies do indicate negative effects of naive
based-learning-from-next.
improper cloth mass use, for instance higher risks of infection due to moisture retention, reuse of poorly washed Benjamin J. Cowling, Sheikh Taslim Ali, Tiffany W. Y.
cloth masks, and poor filtration in comparison to mediNg, Tim K. Tsang, Julian C. M. Li, Min Whui Fong,
cal masks (MacIntyre et al., 2015). To address concerns
Qiuyan Liao, Mike YW Kwan, So Lun Lee, Susan S.
that lay individuals may use both medical and/or cloth and
Chiu, Joseph T. Wu, Peng Wu, and Gabriel M. Lepaper masks incorrectly, masking techniques and norms
ung. Impact assessment of non-pharmaceutical inneed to be taught with targeted information to different
terventions against coronavirus disease 2019 and indemographics, just as proper handwashing and social disfluenza in Hong Kong: an observational study. The
tancing techniques have been taught.
Lancet Public Health, 0(0), April 2020. Publisher: Elsevier.

References
Jason Abaluck, Judith A. Chevalier, Nicholas A. Christakis, Howard Paul Forman, Edward H. Kaplan, Albert Ko, and Sten H. Vermund. The Case for Universal
Cloth Mask Adoption and Policies to Increase Supply
of Medical Masks for Health Workers. SSRN Scholarly
Paper ID 3567438, Social Science Research Network,
Rochester, NY, April 2020.
Acadmie nationale de mdecine. Communiqu de lAcadmie : ”Pandmie de Covid-19 : mesures barrires renforces pendant le confinement et en phase de sortie de
confinement”. Technical report, Acadmie nationale de
mdecine, April 2020.

Anna Davies, Katy-Anne Thompson, Karthika Giri,
George Kafatos, Jimmy Walker, and Allan Bennett.
Testing the efficacy of homemade masks: would they
protect in an influenza pandemic? Disaster Medicine
and Public Health Preparedness, 7(4):413–418, August 2013.
De Kai. The disastrous consequences of information disorder erupting around COVID-19: AI is preying upon
our unconscious cognitive biases. In Boma COVID19 Summit, March 2020. https://youtu.be/
ZidC7oRd7Pc, transcript at http://dek.ai/
unbias.

Shuo Feng, Chen Shen, Nan Xia, Wei Song, Mengzhen
Fan, and Benjamin J. Cowling. Rational use of face
masks in the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 0(0), March 2020. Publisher: ElseEric Bonabeau. Agent-based modeling: Methods and
vier.
techniques for simulating human systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United Harvey V. Fineberg. Ten Weeks to Crush the Curve |
States of America, 99(Suppl 3):7280–7287, May 2002.
NEJM. New England Journal of Medicine, April 2020.
Jane Burch and Christopher Bunt. Can physical inter- Tapiwa Ganyani, Ccile Kremer, Dongxuan Chen, Andrea
ventions help reduce the spread of respiratory viruses?
Torneri, Christel Faes, Jacco Wallinga, and Niel Hens.
Cochrane Clinical Answers, 2020. Publisher: John WiEstimating the generation interval for COVID-19 based
ley & Sons, Ltd.
on symptom onset data. medRxiv, 2020.
17

Scott Gottlieb and Caitlin M. Rivers. Quarantining cities
isnt needed. But a fast, coordinated response to covid19 is essential. Washington Post, March 2020.

https://www.voanews.com/science-health/coronavirusoutbreak/not-just-coronavirus-asians-have-worn-facemasks-decades.

Scott Gottlieb, Caitlin Rivers, Mark B. McClellan, Lauren Silvis, and Crystal Watson. National coronavirus
response: A road map to reopening. Technical report,
American Enterprise Institute (AEI0, March 2020.

Lily Kuo.
Chinese urbanites are spending millions on anti-pollution masks-and most of
them don’t do anything.
Quartz, Feb 2014.
https://qz.com/180830/chinese-urbanites-arespending-millions-on-anti-pollution-masks-andmost-of-them-dont-do-anything/.

Francesca Valeria Hansstein and Fabin Echegaray. Exploring motivations behind pollution-mask use in a
sample of young adults in urban china. Globalization Nancy H. L. Leung, Daniel K. W. Chu, Eunice Y. C.
Shiu, Kwok-Hung Chan, James J. McDevitt, Benien
and Health, 14(1), Dec 2018.
J. P. Hau, Hui-Ling Yen, Yuguo Li, Dennis K. M. Ip,
J. S. Malik Peiris, Wing-Hong Seto, Gabriel M. Leung,
John H. Holland and John H. Miller. Artificial Adaptive
Donald K. Milton, and Benjamin J. Cowling. RespiAgents in Economic Theory. The American Economic
ratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of
Review, 81(2):365–370, 1991. Publisher: American
face masks. Nature Medicine, pages 1–5, April 2020.
Economic Association.
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Hong Kong Department of Health. Latest recommendations by scientific committee on emerging and Hillary Leung. Why Face Masks Are Encouraged in Asia,
but Shunned in the U.S. Time, March 2020.
zoonotic diseases and scientific committee on infection
control after reviewing cases of novel coronavirus Grace Li. China’s face mask industry under scrutiny
infection.
Technical report, The Government of
as pollution worsens.
Reuters, Mar 2014.
the Hong Kong Special Administration Region,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-maskJan 2020. Press Release, Scientific Committee on
pollution/chinas-face-mask-industry-under-scrutinyEmerging and Zoonotic Diseases and the Scientific
as-pollution-worsens-idUSBREA2O0GI20140325.
Committee on Infection Control under the Centre for
Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health. Yuan Liu, Zhi Ning, Yu Chen, Ming Guo, Yingle Liu,
https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/202001/24/P2020012400762.htm.
Nirmal Kumar Gali, Li Sun, Yusen Duan, Jing Cai,
Dane Westerdahl, Xinjin Liu, Kin-fai Ho, Haidong
Jeremy Howard and Fast.ai team. Make and wear a
Kan, Qingyan Fu, and Ke Lan. Aerodynamic Charhomemade mask to slow the spread of COVID-19.
acteristics and RNA Concentration of SARS-CoV-2
#Masks4All, 2020. https://masks4all.co.
Aerosol in Wuhan Hospitals during COVID-19 Outbreak | bioRxiv. bioRxiv, March 2020.
Elizabeth Hunter, Brian Mac Namee, and John D. Kelleher. A Taxonomy for Agent-Based Models in Human C. Raina MacIntyre, Holly Seale, Tham Chi Dung,
Infectious Disease Epidemiology. Journal of Artificial
Nguyen Tran Hien, Phan Thi Nga, Abrar Ahmad
Societies and Social Simulation, 20(3):2, 2017.
Chughtai, Bayzidur Rahman, Dominic E. Dwyer, and
Quanyi Wang. A cluster randomised trial of cloth
Elizabeth Hunter, Brian Mac Namee, and John Kellemasks compared with medical masks in healthcare
her. An open-data-driven agent-based model to simworkers. BMJ Open, 5(4):e006577, April 2015. Pubulate infectious disease outbreaks.
PLOS ONE,
lisher: British Medical Journal Publishing Group Sec13(12):e0208775, December 2018.
tion: Infectious diseases.
Ralph Jennings. Not just coronavirus: Asians have worn
face masks for decades. Voice of America, Mar 2020.

Farhad Manjoo. Its Time to Make Your Own Face Mask.
New York Times, March 2020.
18

Alexey Morgunov, Z. Bayno, and R. Manawis. Status Neeltje van Doremalen, Trenton Bushmaker, Dylan H.
of face mask wearing around the world, March 2020.
Morris, Myndi G. Holbrook, Amandine Gamble,
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bzrUZe7qGGuYrHcYwypBrandi N. Williamson, Azaibi Tamin, Jennifer L. HarUkh7tHW7NuZM rkdGACR9Dc.
court, Natalie J. Thornburg, Susan I. Gerber, James O.
Lloyd-Smith, Emmie de Wit, and Vincent J. MunStephanie Nebehay and Andrea Shalal. WHO opens door
ster. Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoVto broader use of masks to limit spread of coronavirus.
2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1. New England
Reuters, April 2020.
Journal of Medicine, 382(16):1564–1567, April 2020.
Publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society eprint:
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence:
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
A Modern Approach. Pearson, Upper Saddle River, 3
World Health Organization.
Coronavirus disease
edition edition, December 2009.
(COVID-19) advice for the public: When and how
to use masks. World Health Organization, 2019.
Marianne van der Sande, Peter Teunis, and Rob Sabel.
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelProfessional and Home-Made Face Masks Reduce Excoronavirus-2019/advice-for-public/when-and-how-toposure to Respiratory Infections among the General
use-masks.
Population. PLOS ONE, 3(7):e2618, July 2008.
Joshua L. Santarpia, Danielle N. Rivera, Vicki Herrera, World Health Organization. Advice on the use of
masks in the context of COVID-19: interim guidM. Jane Morwitzer, Hannah Creager, George W. Sanance, 6 April 2020. Technical Report WHO/2019tarpia, Kevin K. Crown, David Brett-Major, ElizanCov/IPC Masks/2020.3, World Health Organization,
beth Schnaubelt, M. Jana Broadhurst, James V. Lawler,
April 2020. Accepted: 2020-04-06T20:48:18Z NumSt. Patrick Reid, and John J. Lowe. Transmission Pober: WHO/2019-nCov/IPC Masks/2020.3 Publisher:
tential of SARS-CoV-2 in Viral Shedding Observed at
World Health Organization.
the University of Nebraska Medical Center | medRxiv.
medRxiv, March 2020.
Jing Yan, Suvajyoti Guha, Prasanna Hariharan, and
Matthew Myers.
Modeling the Effectiveness of
Robert F. Service. You may be able to spread coronavirus
Respiratory Protective Devices in Reducing Influenza
just by breathing, new report finds. Science, April 2020.
Outbreak. Risk Analysis, 39(3):647–661, 2019. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/risa.13181.
Kelly Servick. Would everyone wearing face masks help
us slow the pandemic? Science, March 2020.

Jeff Yang.
A quick history of why asians wear
surgical masks in public.
Quartz, Nov 2014.
https://qz.com/299003/a-quick-history-of-why-asianswear-surgical-masks-in-public/.

Samantha M. Tracht, Sara Y. Del Valle, and James M. Hyman. Mathematical Modeling of the Effectiveness of
Facemasks in Reducing the Spread of Novel Influenza
A (H1N1). PLOS ONE, 5(2):e9018, February 2010.
Melissa Tracy, Magdalena Cerd, and Katherine M. Keyes.
Agent-Based Modeling in Public Health: Current Applications and Future Directions. Annual review of public health, 39:77–94, April 2018.

Zeynep Tufekci.
Why Telling People They Dont
Need Masks Backfired. New York Times, March 2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/17/opinion/coronavirusface-masks.html.
19

