Give more data, awareness and control to
individual citizens, and they will help COVID-19
containment
Mirco ​Nanni​* (ISTI-CNR, Italy), Gennady ​Andrienko (IAIS-Fraunhofer, Germany and City University of
London, UK), Albert-László ​Barabási (Northeastern University, USA), Chiara ​Boldrini (IIT-CNR, Italy),
Francesco B
​ onchi (ISI Foundation, Italy and Eurecat, Spain), Ciro ​Cattuto (University of Torino, Italy and
ISI Foundation, Italy), Francesca ​Chiaromonte (Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies Pisa, Italy and
Penn State University, USA), Giovanni ​Comandé (Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies Pisa, Italy),
Marco C
​ onti (IIT-CNR, Italy), Mark ​Coté (King's College London, UK), Frank ​Dignum (Umeå University,
Sweden), Virginia D
​ ignum (Umeå University, Sweden), Josep ​Domingo-Ferrer (Universitat Rovira i
Virgili, Catalonia), Paolo ​Ferragina (University of Pisa, Italy), Fosca ​Giannotti (ISTI-CNR, Italy), Riccardo
Guidotti (University of Pisa, Italy), Dirk ​Helbing (ETH Zurich, Switzerland), Kimmo ​Kaski (Aalto
University School of Science, Finland), Janos ​Kertesz (Central European University, Hungary), Sune
Lehmann (Technical University of Denmark), Bruno ​Lepri (FBK, Italy), Paul ​Lukowicz (DFKI, Germany),
Stan ​Matwin (Dalhousie University, Canada and Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland), David ​Megías
Jiménez (Universitat Oberta de Catalunya), Anna ​Monreale (University of Pisa, Italy), Katharina ​Morik
(TU Dortmund University, Germany), Nuria ​Oliver (​ ELLIS Alicante, Spain and Data-Pop Alliance, USA),
Andrea P
​ assarella (IIT-CNR, Italy), Andrea ​Passerini (Università degli Studi di Trento), Dino ​Pedreschi
(University of Pisa, Italy), Alex ​Pentland (MIT, USA), Fabio ​Pianesi (EIT Digital, Italy), Francesca ​Pratesi
(University of Pisa, Italy), Salvatore ​Rinzivillo (ISTI-CNR, Italy), Salvatore ​Ruggieri (University of Pisa,
Italy), Arno S
​ iebes (Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands), Vicenc T
​ orra (Maynooth University, Ireland
and Umeå University, Sweden), Roberto ​Trasarti (ISTI-CNR, Italy), Jeroen ​van den Hoven (TU Delft,
The Netherlands), Alessandro ​Vespignani​ (Northeastern University, USA)
* contact author: mirco.nanni@isti.cnr.it

April 14, 2020
[Abstract] ​The rapid dynamics of COVID-19 calls for quick and effective tracking of virus
transmission chains and early detection of outbreaks, especially in the “phase 2” of the
pandemic, when lockdown and other restriction measures are progressively withdrawn, in order
to avoid or minimize contagion resurgence. For this purpose, contact-tracing apps are being
proposed for large scale adoption by many countries1. A centralized approach, where data
sensed by the app are all sent to a nation-wide server, raises concerns about citizens’ privacy
and needlessly strong digital surveillance, thus alerting us to the need to minimize personal data
collection and avoiding location tracking.
We advocate the conceptual advantage of a decentralized approach, where both contact and
location data are collected exclusively in individual citizens’ “personal data stores”, to be shared
separately and selectively (e.g., with a backend system, but possibly also with other citizens),
1

​https://www.top10vpn.com/news/surveillance/covid-19-digital-rights-tracker/

1

voluntarily, only when the citizen has tested positive for COVID-19, and with a privacy
preserving level of granularity. This approach better protects the personal sphere of citizens and
affords multiple benefits: it allows for detailed information gathering for infected people in a
privacy-preserving fashion; and, in turn this enables both contact tracing, and, the early
detection of outbreak hotspots on more finely-granulated geographic scale. The decentralized
approach is also scalable to large populations, in that only the data of positive patients need be
handled at a central level. Our recommendation is two-fold. First to extend existing
decentralized architectures with a light touch, in order to manage the collection of location data
locally on the device, and allow the user to share spatio-temporal aggregates - if and when they
want and for specific aims - with health authorities, for instance. Second, we favour a
longer-term pursuit of realizing a Personal Data Store vision, giving users the opportunity to
contribute to collective good in the measure they want, enhancing self-awareness, and
cultivating collective efforts for rebuilding society.
[Introduction] National authorities are currently addressing the rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2
through strong, sometimes extreme control measures aimed at containing and slowing the
diffusion of the virus to levels that can be managed by health-care and socio-political
institutions. Knowledge of where and when the diffusion is taking place is essential for
shortening the emergency period, and for focusing stronger countermeasures where they are
actually needed. The imposition of generalized and strong emergency measures limiting citizen
liberty is, in part, an effect of our poor knowledge of how and where exactly the virus is
circulating and outbreaks are growing. Very recent results2 have clearly shown that immediate
tracing of infected people - ideally from the pre-symptomatic phase - could significantly
contribute to reducing the individual’s infection rate (the well-known ​R​0​ index) below 1.
Personal big data, able to describe the movement of people in greater detail, should be seen as
a potentially powerful weapon in combatting the pandemic, for example in contact tracing, that
is, revealing the places a patient who has tested positive has visited in recent days (thus
identifying places in risk of contagion) in addition to the people the user has been in contact with
(thus identifying specific people at risk). This kind of operation potentially puts individual privacy
at risk, and is at the core of current debates about the best trade-off between privacy and data
value for public health. One example is South Korea, which made the movement of positive
patients de facto public, clearly favouring data value (with excellent results in containment of
virus spread) while sacrificing patient privacy (who risks a social stigma, potentially dissuading
people from exposing and testing for the virus3). In contrast, various European efforts lean
toward strong individual personal data protection, stipulating clear requirements that data
collection apps should satisfy4 and promoting a unified European approach5. We believe it is
2

Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Bonsall, D.G., and Fraser, C. (2020).
Quantifying dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests that epidemic control is feasible through
instantaneous digital contact tracing. ​Science​.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/03/30/science.abb6936
3
​https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00740-y
4
​https://www.ccc.de/en/updates/2020/contact-tracing-requirements
5
​https://www.politico.eu/article/coronavirus-europe-data-regulator-calls-for-pan-european-covid-19-app/

2

possible to reap the benefits of contact tracing, including location data with a privacy preserving
level of granularity, without forgoing personal data protection altogether while enhancing trust.
GDPR compliance, abiding to the principle of privacy/data protection by design and privacy/data
protection by default, enables the benefits of location data.
[Existing proposals & their limitations] Learning from current success stories as well as
controversies, various teams of researchers and developers are now proposing a different
vision where privacy protection is a ​must​, and solutions are designed to extract useful data
without sharing personal sensitive information. In particular, the spatial information associated
with the individual citizens (where they stay or move) is considered to be too sensitive, and
difficult to protect. An important research direction is the privacy-safe, spatially-oblivious
implementation ​proximity-tracing,​ that in this context basically represents the ability to
reconstruct the close contacts with other people that an individual had before being tested
positive. A central example is the DP3T (Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing6)
approach. In general terms, the solution is based on mobile phone apps that continuously
collect the list of anonymous, app-generated IDs of other phones (which, therefore, need to
have the app installed, too) that had close and prolonged contacts with the device. With DP3T,
the trusted authority simply broadcasts the anonymous app-generated IDs of the positive
patient’s phone, and each contact needs to check the list to find themselves. DP3T is part of a
broader initiative, named PEPP-PT (Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing7), that
covers various different approaches to the problem, like replacing the broadcasting phase with a
different communication way where positive users provide the list of “contacted” anonymous
app-generated IDs to the trusted central authority, who is then able to directly call and warn the
phones in the list. The strong point of this approach lies in the simplicity of the information used,
enabling an easy and rapid implementation that guarantees privacy protection. While we believe
that this approach is on the right track and is particularly useful in the short term, we also
emphasize that limiting the analysis to simple contact (close-range proximity) data limits the
efficacy. For example, the discoverability of potentially exposed contacts is by design limited to
those who have the app installed, making it impactful only after a critical mass of users is
reached. Furthermore, only direct contacts are detected, thus not considering surface-touch
contamination, which is a typical phenomenon in large shared spaces, like supermarkets and
such, considered to be a potential vector of diffusion8. Spatial information, joined with its
temporal dimension, is a key ingredient to detect outbreak hotspots. Spatial-temporal
information within a privacy preserving architecture (e.g. appropriate granularity levels, clear
access rights and aims for data processing, enhanced security, etc.) can provide vital granular
aggregate data with a modest or null impact on fundamental rights and freedoms, see for
example the MIT Private Kit Safe Path initiative9.
​https://github.com/DP-3T/documents
​https://www.pepp-pt.org/
8
van Doremalen, N., ​et al​. (2020). Aerosol and surface stability of HCoV-19 (SARS-CoV-2) compared to
SARS-CoV-1. ​The New England Journal of Medicine​. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
9
Raskar, R., ​et al.​ (2020). Apps gone rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an epidemic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.08567
6
7

3

[Our proposal] Our claim is very simple: limiting data flow at its very source is not the best
answer. Individual citizens - and only them - should be able to collect detailed information about
their own position and movement, together with other types of data, including (in the direction of
previous proposals) pseudo-IDs of devices at close distance. The means for safeguarding
privacy should instead be in ​providing the users with full control of such data​, together with
the necessary tools for sharing only the information they want at the preferred level of detail, to
customise sharing of information depending on the individuals/entities with whom they are
sharing, and for evaluating pros and cons of each sharing option.
The paradigm we envision is based on a Personal Data Store10,11,12 where users collect and
manage all their own data, equipped with data management and analytics tools for elaborating
them, as well as with functionalities for controlling what kind of information - raw or derived from
data - should be shared with other users or with authorities. The main points of the approach we
envision, based on such environment, are the following:
● Each user has a ​personal software environment (either directly on the smart phone or
in the cloud) where they can store, elaborate and control their own data in an exclusive
way. No third-party has access to this data.
● The personal software environment of the user is ​a tool they can actively decide to
use to perform actions​, for instance to help in providing correct information to health
authorities in case they are tested positive to COVID-19; or simply to contribute to public
safety by joining some collective computation of global statistics useful to improve
countermeasures.
● When the user decides to share information, they define the ​aggregates to share​,
taking into consideration the minimum spatial and temporal granularity of the information
needed to realize the service. The environment provides the functionalities to define the
minimum data requirement and to compute and share the data. A key point is that
deciding the best trade-off between privacy and data utility might require a knowledge
that is available only late in the process, because the context might change either the
utility of a given type of data or the priorities of the individual. Interestingly, note that
recent research has found that over 75% of individuals who reported being positive for
COVID-19 had been in close contact with another individual - who they knew - infected
by COVID-1913.
● The information sharing can happen in two modalities:
○ A ​simple transfer to a trusted authority of the minimum data needed to realize
the service, for instance the list of close contacts (e.g. as hashed mac-addresses
10

Giannotti, F., Pedreschi, D., Pentland, A., Lukowicz, P., Kossmann, D., Crowley J., and Helbing, D. A
planetary nervous system for social mining and collective awareness. (2012). Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top.
214, 49–75. ​https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2012-01688-9
11
de Montjoye, Y.-A., Shmueli, E., Wang, S.S., and Pentland, A. (2014). PloS one 9 (7), e98790.
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?type=printable&id=10.1371/journal.pone.0098790
12
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/study-personal-data-stores-conducted-cambridge-uni
versity-judge-business-school
13
Oliver, N, Barber, X., Roomp, K. and Roomp, K., (2020), “The Covid19Impact Survey: Assessing the
Pulse of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Spain via 24 questions”, arXiv.org, https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.01014

4

●

that only the contact herself can recognize) similar to PEPP-PT and DP3T; or the
list of locations visited, in the form of Points of Interest or municipalities, useful to
find potential outbreaks hotspots.
○ When possible, through a collaborative, ​distributed computation of global
aggregates involving the information of the user, e.g. using secure multi-party
computation techniques14 or specific privacy-preserving distributed methods15.
The information provided by authorities (possibly thanks to the individual contributions)
about risky areas and possible contacts with positive patients can be joined with the
complete information the user has about themselves, providing a data analytics-enabled
self-awareness of own behaviour and the potential points of risk. For instance, the user
might not realize that their own daily home-work routine involves passing through an
area that has an increased level of risk, and the analysis might suggest modifying the
route to work. Note that such level of detailed information would only be available locally
to the specific user, as it comes from “merging” global information provided by
centralised entities (e.g., a nation-wide authority) with local information available only to
the individual user (on her/his devices).

This proposal (like the PEPP-PT initiative) exemplifies a distinctively European approach of
aiming to co-realize important moral obligations - in this case for public health and saving lives,
together with respecting rights and fundamental freedoms - instead of choosing for a quick
solution that relativizes one of our conflicting obligations.
Maintaining the trust of citizens at a time of crisis like the current one is a priority. This includes
respecting the requirements for maintaining fundamental respect for human rights, ethical
principles and existing legislation. A user-centric approach will also ensure that data is only
used during the duration of the crisis and that the user has the control to end the tracking once
the need is over. Our proposal leverages both the respect for individual freedoms and for the
environment, by cultivating feelings of solidarity and a sense of collective responsibility for
rebuilding society.
[Recommendations] Summarizing, our view is that emergency situations like the COVID-19
pandemic represent a strong case - yet one not unique - where providing people complete
control of the data they produce and collect and how they are shared (and, maybe, an improved
awareness of what they are collecting) can provide an edge in facing complex challenges.
Initiating (centralized or decentralized) data collection with rigid predefined privacy and data
quality requirements and excluding the human from the decision loop can often be suboptimal.

14

Lindell, Y., and Pinkas, B.. (2008). Secure Multiparty Computation for Privacy-Preserving Data Mining.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive. 2008. 197. 10.29012/jpc.v1i1.566.
15
Achieving Privacy-preserving Distributed Statistical Computation. PhD thesis, 2012.
https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/en/theses/achieving-privacypreserving-distributed-statistica
l-computation(6831db5c-d605-4a38-9711-7592d2b94e01).html

5

Our main recommendation, therefore, is to work on two parallel tracks: in the short-term and in
the long-term. In the short term, the decentralized architectures currently under development for
social contact tracing (in particular, PEPP-PT/D3PT) should be extended to manage the
collection of location data locally on the device. A loose integration between the two
components (contact and location data) should be provided, that keeps them logically
independent and mutually not linkable. This allows us to maintain all the privacy-by-design
benefits of the contact tracing solutions mentioned above, but the moment users are confirmed
as a positive case, it allows them to voluntarily provide additional contextual information in a
privacy-preserving way (on top of independently triggering the PEPP-PT/ D3PT contact tracing
mechanisms), that can contribute to the computation of useful global aggregates16, such as
spatio-temporal density maps17 to identify potential infection hubs through location data.
Over a longer-term, deep-impact actions should be investigated to realize a Personal Data
Store approach, to enable more effective emergency countermeasures based on a novel
connection between collective good and the huge information treasure that each individual
brings with themselves.

​https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/recommendation-apps-contact-tracing_en​ (e.g. point 1.2, page 8)
Anna Monreale, Wendy Hui Wang, Francesca Pratesi, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Dino Pedreschi, Gennady L.
Andrienko, Natalia V. Andrienko: Privacy-Preserving Distributed Movement Data Aggregation. AGILE
Conf. 2013: 225-245
16
17

6

