CORD-19: The C OVID -19 Open Research Dataset
Lucy Lu Wang1,∗ Kyle Lo1,∗ Yoganand Chandrasekhar1 Russell Reas1
Jiangjiang Yang1 Douglas Burdick2 Darrin Eide3 Kathryn Funk4
Yannis Katsis2 Rodney Kinney1 Yunyao Li2 Ziyang Liu6
William Merrill1 Paul Mooney5 Dewey Murdick7 Devvret Rishi5
Jerry Sheehan4 Zhihong Shen3 Brandon Stilson1 Alex D. Wade6
Kuansan Wang3 Nancy Xin Ru Wang 2 Chris Wilhelm1 Boya Xie3
Douglas Raymond1 Daniel S. Weld1,8 Oren Etzioni1 Sebastian Kohlmeier1
1

Allen Institute for AI 2 IBM Research 3 Microsoft Research
4
National Library of Medicine 5 Kaggle 6 Chan Zuckerberg Initiative
7
Georgetown University 8 University of Washington

arXiv:2004.10706v4 [cs.DL] 10 Jul 2020

{lucyw, kylel}@allenai.org

Abstract
The C OVID -19 Open Research Dataset
(CORD-19) is a growing1 resource of
scientific papers on C OVID -19 and related
historical coronavirus research. CORD-19 is
designed to facilitate the development of text
mining and information retrieval systems over
its rich collection of metadata and structured
full text papers. Since its release, CORD-19
has been downloaded2 over 200K times and
has served as the basis of many C OVID -19
text mining and discovery systems. In this
article, we describe the mechanics of dataset
construction, highlighting challenges and
key design decisions, provide an overview of
how CORD-19 has been used, and describe
several shared tasks built around the dataset.
We hope this resource will continue to bring
together the computing community, biomedical experts, and policy makers in the search
for effective treatments and management
policies for C OVID -19.

1

Introduction

On March 16, 2020, the Allen Institute for AI (AI2),
in collaboration with our partners at The White
House Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), the National Library of Medicine (NLM),
the Chan Zuckerburg Initiative (CZI), Microsoft
Research, and Kaggle, coordinated by Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), released the first version
∗

denotes equal contribution
The dataset continues to be updated daily with papers
from new sources and the latest publications. Statistics reported in this article are up-to-date as of version 2020-06-14.
2
https://www.semanticscholar.org/cord19
1

Figure 1: Papers and preprints are collected from different sources through Semantic Scholar. Released as
part of CORD-19 are the harmonized and deduplicated
metadata and full text JSON.

of CORD-19. This resource is a large and growing
collection of publications and preprints on C OVID 19 and related historical coronaviruses such as
SARS and MERS. The initial release consisted
of 28K papers, and the collection has grown to
more than 140K papers over the subsequent weeks.
Papers and preprints from several archives are collected and ingested through the Semantic Scholar
literature search engine,3 metadata are harmonized
and deduplicated, and paper documents are processed through the pipeline established in Lo et al.
(2020) to extract full text (more than 50% of papers
in CORD-19 have full text). We commit to providing regular updates to the dataset until an end to
the C OVID -19 crisis is foreseeable.
CORD-19 aims to connect the machine learning community with biomedical domain experts
and policy makers in the race to identify effective
treatments and management policies for C OVID 19. The goal is to harness these diverse and com3

https://semanticscholar.org/

plementary pools of expertise to discover relevant
information more quickly from the literature. Users
of the dataset have leveraged AI-based techniques
in information retrieval and natural language processing to extract useful information.
Responses to CORD-19 have been overwhelmingly positive, with the dataset being downloaded
over 200K times in the three months since its release. The dataset has been used by clinicians and
clinical researchers to conduct systematic reviews,
has been leveraged by data scientists and machine
learning practitioners to construct search and extraction tools, and is being used as the foundation
for several successful shared tasks. We summarize
research and shared tasks in Section 4.
In this article, we briefly describe:
1. The content and creation of CORD-19,
2. Design decisions and challenges around creating the dataset,
3. Research conducted on the dataset, and how
shared tasks have facilitated this research, and
4. A roadmap for CORD-19 going forward.

2

(e.g. Creative Commons (CC),5 publisher-specific
C OVID -19 licenses,6 or identified as open access
through DOI lookup in the Unpaywall7 database).
2.1

Papers in CORD-19 are sourced from PubMed
Central (PMC), PubMed, the World Health Organization’s Covid-19 Database,4 and preprint servers
bioRxiv, medRxiv, and arXiv. The PMC Public
Health Emergency Covid-19 Initiative6 expanded
access to C OVID -19 literature by working with
publishers to make coronavirus-related papers discoverable and accessible through PMC under open
access license terms that allow for reuse and secondary analysis. BioRxiv and medRxiv preprints
were initially provided by CZI, and are now ingested through Semantic Scholar along with all
other included sources. We also work directly with
publishers such as Elsevier8 and Springer Nature,9
to provide full text coverage of relevant papers
available in their back catalog.
All papers are retrieved given the query10 :
"COVID" OR "COVID-19" OR
"Coronavirus" OR "Corona virus"
OR "2019-nCoV" OR "SARS-CoV"
OR "MERS-CoV" OR "Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome" OR "Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome"

Dataset

CORD-19 integrates papers and preprints from
several sources (Figure 1), where a paper is defined as the base unit of published knowledge, and
a preprint as an unpublished but publicly available counterpart of a paper. Throughout the rest of
Section 2, we discuss papers, though the same processing steps are adopted for preprints. First, we
ingest into Semantic Scholar paper metadata and
documents from each source. Each paper is associated with bibliographic metadata, like title, authors,
publication venue, etc, as well as unique identifiers such as a DOI, PubMed Central ID, PubMed
ID, the WHO Covidence #,4 MAG identifier (Shen
et al., 2018), and others. Some papers are associated with documents, the physical artifacts containing paper content; these are the familiar PDFs,
XMLs, or physical print-outs we read.
For the CORD-19 effort, we generate harmonized and deduplicated metadata as well as structured full text parses of paper documents as output.
We provide full text parses in cases where we have
access to the paper documents, and where the documents are available under an open access license
4

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/global-research-on-novel-coronavirus2019-ncov

Sources of papers

Papers that match on these keywords in their title,
abstract, or body text are included in the dataset.
Query expansion is performed by PMC on these
search terms, affecting the subset of papers in
CORD-19 retrieved from PMC.
2.2

Processing metadata

The initial collection of sourced papers suffers from
duplication and incomplete or conflicting metadata.
We perform the following operations to harmonize
and deduplicate all metadata:
1. Cluster papers using paper identifiers
2. Select canonical metadata for each cluster
3. Filter clusters to remove unwanted entries
5

https://creativecommons.org/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/about/covid-19/
7
https://unpaywall.org/
8
https://www.elsevier.com/connect/coronavirusinformation-center
9
https://www.springernature.com/gp/researchers/
campaigns/coronavirus
10
Adapted from the Elsevier COVID-19 site8
6

Clustering papers We cluster papers if they
overlap on any of the following identifiers: {doi,
pmc id, pubmed id, arxiv id, who covidence id,
mag id}. If two papers from different sources have
an identifier in common and no other identifier conflicts between them, we assign them to the same
cluster. Each cluster is assigned a unique identifier CORD UID, which persists between dataset
releases. No existing identifier, such as DOI or
PMC ID, is sufficient as the primary CORD-19
identifier. Some papers in PMC do not have DOIs;
some papers from the WHO, publishers, or preprint
servers like arXiv do not have PMC IDs or DOIs.
Occasionally, conflicts occur. For example, a
paper c with (doi, pmc id, pubmed id) identifiers
(x, null, z 0 ) might share identifier x with a cluster
of papers {a, b} that has identifiers (x, y, z), but
has a conflict z 0 6= z. In this case, we choose to
create a new cluster {c}, containing only paper c.11
Selecting canonical metadata Among each
cluster, the canonical entry is selected to prioritize
the availability of document files and the most permissive license. For example, between two papers
with PDFs, one available under a CC license and
one under a more restrictive C OVID -19-specific
copyright license, we select the CC-licensed paper
entry as canonical. If any metadata in the canonical
entry are missing, values from other members of
the cluster are promoted to fill in the blanks.
Cluster filtering Some entries harvested from
sources are not papers, and instead correspond to
materials like tables of contents, indices, or informational documents. These entries are identified
in an ad hoc manner and removed from the dataset.
2.3

Processing full text

Most papers are associated with one or more
PDFs.12 To extract full text and bibliographies
from each PDF, we use the PDF parsing pipeline
created for the S2ORC dataset (Lo et al., 2020).13
In (Lo et al., 2020), we introduce the S2ORC JSON
format for representing scientific paper full text,
11

This is a conservative clustering policy in which any metadata conflict prohibits clustering. An alternative policy would
be to cluster if any identifier matches, under which a, b, and c
would form one cluster with identifiers (x, y, [z, z 0 ]).
12
PMC papers can have multiple associated PDFs per paper,
separating the main text from supplementary materials.
13
One major difference in full text parsing for CORD-19
is that we do not use ScienceParse,14 as we always derive this
metadata from the sources directly.
14
https://github.com/allenai/science-parse

which is used as the target output for paper full text
in CORD-19. The pipeline involves:
1. Parse all PDFs to TEI XML files using GROBID15 (Lopez, 2009)
2. Parse all TEI XML files to S2ORC JSON
3. Postprocess to clean up links between inline
citations and bibliography entries.
We additionally parse JATS XML16 files available
for PMC papers using a custom parser, generating
the same target S2ORC JSON format.
This creates two sets of full text JSON parses
associated with the papers in the collection, one
set originating from PDFs (available from more
sources), and one set originating from JATS XML
(available only for PMC papers). Each PDF parse
has an associated SHA, the 40-digit SHA-1 of
the associated PDF file, while each XML parse is
named using its associated PMC ID. Around 48%
of CORD-19 papers have an associated PDF parse,
and around 37% have an XML parse, with the latter
nearly a subset of the former. Most PDFs (>90%)
are successfully parsed. Around 2.6% of CORD19 papers are associated with multiple PDF SHA,
due to a combination of paper clustering and the
existence of supplementary PDF files.
2.4

Table parsing

Since the May 12, 2020 release of CORD-19, we
also release selected HTML table parses. Tables
contain important numeric and descriptive information such as sample sizes and results, which
are the targets of many information extraction systems. A separate PDF table processing pipeline
is used, consisting of table extraction and table
understanding. Table extraction is based on the
Smart Document Understanding (SDU) capability
included in IBM Watson Discovery.17 SDU converts a given PDF document from its native binary
representation into a text-based representation like
HTML which includes both identified document
structures (e.g., tables, section headings, lists) and
formatting information (e.g. positions for extracted
text). Table understanding (also part of Watson
Discovery) then annotates the extracted tables with
additional semantic information, such as column
and row headers and table captions. We leverage
the Global Table Extractor (GTE) (Zheng et al.,
15

https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid
https://jats.nlm.nih.gov/
17
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-discovery
16

Subfield

Count

% of corpus

Virology
Immunology
Surgery
Internal medicine
Intensive care medicine
Molecular biology
Pathology
Genetics
Other

29567
15954
15667
12045
10624
7268
6611
5231
12997

25.5%
13.8%
13.5%
10.4%
9.2%
6.3%
5.7%
4.5%
11.2%

Table 1: MAG subfield of study for CORD-19 papers.

Figure 2: The distribution of papers per year in CORD19. A spike in publications occurs in 2020 in response
to C OVID -19.

2020), which uses a specialized object detection
and clustering technique to extract table bounding
boxes and structures.
All PDFs are processed through this table extraction and understanding pipeline. If the Jaccard
similarity of the table captions from the table parses
and CORD-19 parses is above 0.9, we insert the
HTML of the matched table into the full text JSON.
We extract 188K tables from 54K documents, of
which 33K tables are successfully matched to tables in 19K (around 25%) full text documents in
CORD-19. Based on preliminary error analysis,
we find that match failures are primarily due to caption mismatches between the two parse schemes.
Thus, we plan to explore alternate matching functions, potentially leveraging table content and document location as additional features. See Appendix
A for example table parses.
2.5

Dataset contents

CORD-19 has grown rapidly, now consisting of
over 140K papers with over 72K full texts. Over
47K papers and 7K preprints on C OVID -19 and
coronaviruses have been released since the start
of 2020, comprising nearly 40% of papers in the
dataset.
Classification of CORD-19 papers to Microsoft
Academic Graph (MAG) (Wang et al., 2019, 2020)
fields of study (Shen et al., 2018) indicate that
the dataset consists predominantly of papers in
Medicine (55%), Biology (31%), and Chemistry
(3%), which together constitute almost 90% of the
corpus.18 A breakdown of the most common MAG
18

MAG identifier mappings are provided as a supplement

subfields (L1 fields of study) represented in CORD19 is given in Table 1.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of CORD-19
papers by date of publication. Coronavirus publications increased during and following the SARS
and MERS epidemics, but the number of papers
published in the early months of 2020 exploded
in response to the C OVID -19 epidemic. Using
author affiliations in MAG, we identify the countries from which the research in CORD-19 is conducted. Large proportions of CORD-19 papers are
associated with institutions based in the Americas
(around 48K papers), Europe (over 35K papers),
and Asia (over 30K papers).

3

Design decision & challenges

A number of challenges come into play in the creation of CORD-19. We summarize the primary
design requirements of the dataset, along with challenges implicit within each requirement:
Up-to-date Hundreds of new publications on
C OVID -19 are released every day, and a dataset like
CORD-19 can quickly become irrelevant without
regular updates. CORD-19 has been updated daily
since May 26. A processing pipeline that produces
consistent results day to day is vital to maintaining
a changing dataset. That is, the metadata and full
text parsing results must be reproducible, identifiers
must be persistent between releases, and changes
or new features should ideally be compatible with
previous versions of the dataset.
Handles data from multiple sources Papers
from different sources must be integrated and harmonized. Each source has its own metadata format,
which must be converted to the CORD-19 format,
while addressing any missing or extraneous fields.
The processing pipeline must also be flexible to
adding new sources.
on the CORD-19 landing page.

Clean canonical metadata Because of the diversity of paper sources, duplication is unavoidable.
Once paper metadata from each source is cleaned
and organized into CORD-19 format, we apply
the deduplication logic described in Section 2.2 to
identify similar paper entries from different sources.
We apply a conservative clustering algorithm, combining papers only when they have shared identifiers but no conflicts between any particular class of
identifiers. We justify this because it is less harmful
to retain a few duplicate papers than to remove a
document that is potentially unique and useful.
Machine readable full text To provide accessible and canonical structured full text, we parse content from PDFs and associated paper documents.
The full text is represented in S2ORC JSON format
(Lo et al., 2020), a schema designed to preserve
most relevant paper structures such as paragraph
breaks, section headers, inline references, and citations. S2ORC JSON is simple to use for many
NLP tasks, where character-level indices are often employed for annotation of relevant entities or
spans. The text and annotation representations in
S2ORC share similarities with BioC (Comeau et al.,
2019), a JSON schema introduced by the BioCreative community for shareable annotations, with
both formats leveraging the flexibility of characterbased span annotations. However, S2ORC JSON
also provides a schema for representing other components of a paper, such as its metadata fields, bibliography entries, and reference objects for figures,
tables, and equations. We leverage this flexible
and somewhat complete representation of S2ORC
JSON for CORD-19. We recognize that converting between PDF or XML to JSON is lossy. However, the benefits of a standard structured format,
and the ability to reuse and share annotations made
on top of that format have been critical to the success of CORD-19.
Observes copyright restrictions Papers in
CORD-19 and academic papers more broadly are
made available under a variety of copyright licenses. These licenses can restrict or limit the
abilities of organizations such as AI2 from redistributing their content freely. Although much of the
C OVID -19 literature has been made open access
by publishers, the provisions on these open access
licenses differ greatly across papers. Additionally,
many open access licenses grant the ability to read,
or “consume” the paper, but may be restrictive in

Figure 3: An example information retrieval and extraction system using CORD-19: Given an input
query, the system identifies relevant papers (yellow
highlighted rows) and extracts text snippets from the
full text JSONs as supporting evidence.

other ways, for example, by not allowing republication of a paper or its redistribution for commercial
purposes. The curator of a dataset like CORD19 must pass on best-to-our-knowledge licensing
information to the end user.

4

Research directions

We provide a survey of various ways researchers
have made use of CORD-19. We organize these
into four categories: (i) direct usage by clinicians
and clinical researchers (§4.1), (ii) tools and systems to assist clinicians (§4.2), (iii) research to support further text mining and NLP research (§4.3),
and (iv) shared tasks and competitions (§4.4).
4.1

Usage by clinical researchers

CORD-19 has been used by medical experts as a
paper collection for conducting systematic reviews.
These reviews address questions about C OVID -19
include infection and mortality rates in different
demographics (Han et al., 2020), symptoms of the
disease (Parasa et al., 2020), identifying suitable
drugs for repurposing (Sadegh et al., 2020), management policies (Yaacoub et al., 2020), and interactions with other diseases (Crisan-Dabija et al.,
2020; Popa et al., 2020).
4.2

Tools for clinicians

Challenges for clinicians and clinical researchers
during the current epidemic include (i) keeping
up to to date with recent papers about C OVID -19,
(ii) identifying useful papers from historical coronavirus literature, (iii) extracting useful information
from the literature, and (iv) synthesizing knowledge from the literature. To facilitate solutions to

these challenges, dozens of tools and systems over
CORD-19 have already been developed. Most
combine elements of text-based information retrieval and extraction, as illustrated in Figure 3. We
have compiled a list of these efforts on the CORD19 public GitHub repository19 and highlight some
systems in Table 2.20
4.3

Text mining and NLP research

The following is a summary of resources released
by the NLP community on top of CORD-19 to
support other research activities.
Information extraction To support extractive
systems, NER and entity linking of biomedical
entities can be useful. NER and linking can
be performed using NLP toolkits like ScispaCy
(Neumann et al., 2019) or language models like
BioBERT-base (Lee et al., 2019) and SciBERTbase (Beltagy et al., 2019) finetuned on biomedical NER datasets. Wang et al. (2020) augments
CORD-19 full text with entity mentions predicted
from several techniques, including weak supervision using the NLM’s Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus (Bodenreider, 2004).
Text classification Some efforts focus on extracting sentences or passages of interest. For example,
Liang and Xie (2020) uses BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) to extract sentences from CORD-19 that
contain C OVID -19-related radiological findings.
Pretrained model weights BioBERT and SciBERT have been popular pretrained LMs for C OVID 19-related tasks. DeepSet has released a BERTbase model pretrained on CORD-19.21 SPECTER
(Cohan et al., 2020) paper embeddings computed
using paper titles and abstracts are being released
with each CORD-19 update. SeVeN relation embeddings (Espinosa-Anke and Schockaert, 2018)
between word pairs have also been made available
for CORD-19.22
Knowledge graphs The Covid Graph project23
releases a C OVID -19 knowledge graph built from
mining several public data sources, including
19

https://github.com/allenai/cord19
There are many Search and QA systems to survey. We
have chosen to highlight the systems that were made publiclyavailable within a few weeks of the CORD-19 initial release.
21
https://huggingface.co/deepset/covid bert base
22
https://github.com/luisespinosaanke/cord-19-seven
23
https://covidgraph.org/
20

CORD-19, and is perhaps the largest current initiative in this space. Ahamed and Samad (2020)
rely on entity co-occurrences in CORD-19 to construct a graph that enables centrality-based ranking
of drugs, pathogens, and biomolecules.
4.4

Competitions and Shared Tasks

The adoption of CORD-19 and the proliferation
of text mining and NLP systems built on top of the
dataset are supported by several C OVID -19-related
competitions and shared tasks.
4.4.1

Kaggle

Kaggle hosts the CORD-19 Research Challenge,24
a text-mining challenge that tasks participants
with extracting answers to key scientific questions
about C OVID -19 from the papers in the CORD19 dataset. Round 1 was initiated with a set of
open-ended questions, e.g., What is known about
transmission, incubation, and environmental stability? and What do we know about C OVID -19 risk
factors?
More than 500 teams participated in Round 1 of
the Kaggle competition. Feedback from medical
experts during Round 1 identified that the most useful contributions took the form of article summary
tables. Round 2 subsequently focused on this task
of table completion, and resulted in 100 additional
submissions. A unique tabular schema is defined
for each question, and answers are collected from
across different automated extractions. For example, extractions for risk factors should include disease severity and fatality metrics, while extractions
for incubation should include time ranges. Sufficient knowledge of COVID-19 is necessary to
define these schema, to understand which fields
are important to include (and exclude), and also to
perform error-checking and manual curation.
4.4.2

TREC

The TREC-COVID25 shared task (Roberts et al.,
2020; Voorhees et al., 2020) assesses systems on
their ability to rank papers in CORD-19 based on
their relevance to C OVID -19-related topics. Topics
are sourced from MedlinePlus searches, Twitter
conversations, library searches at OHSU, as well as
from direct conversations with researchers, reflecting actual queries made by the community. To emulate real-world surge in publications and rapidly24

https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD19-research-challenge
25
https://ir.nist.gov/covidSubmit/index.html

Task

Project

Link

Search and
discovery

https://covidex.ai/
N EURAL
C OVIDEX
C OVID S CHOLAR https://covidscholar.org/

Description
Uses a T5-base (Raffel et al., 2019) unsupervised
reranker on BM25 (Jones et al., 2000)
Adapts Weston et al. (2019) system for entitycentric queries
Uses BioSentVec (Chen et al., 2019) similarity to
identify relevant sentences
Enables users to define “regular expression”-like
queries to directly search over full text

KDC OVID

http://kdcovid.nl/about.html

S PIKE -C ORD

https://spike.covid19.apps.allenai.org

COVIDASK

https://covidask.korea.ac.kr/

AUEB

http://cslab241.cs.aueb.gr:5000/

Summarization

Vespa

https://cord19.vespa.ai/

Generates summaries of paper abstracts using T5
(Raffel et al., 2019)

Recommendation

Vespa

https://cord19.vespa.ai/

Recommends “similar papers” using SentenceBERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) and
SPECTER embeddings (Cohan et al., 2020)

Entailment

COVID papers
browser

https://github.com/gsarti/covidpapers-browser

Similar to KDC OVID, but uses embeddings from
BERT models trained on NLI datasets

Claim
verification

SciFact

https://scifact.apps.allenai.org

Uses RoBERTa-large (Liu et al., 2019) to find Support/Refute evidence for C OVID -19 claims

Assistive lit.
review

ASReview

https://github.com/asreview/
asreview-covid19

Active learning system with a CORD-19 plugin
for identifying papers for literature reviews

Augmented
reading

Sinequa

https://covidsearch.sinequa.com/
app/covid-search/

In-browser paper reader with entity highlighting
on PDFs

Visualization

SciSight

https://scisight.apps.allenai.org

Network visualizations for browsing research
groups working on C OVID -19

Question
answering

Adapts Seo et al. (2019) using BioASQ challenge
(Task B) dataset (Tsatsaronis et al., 2015)
Adapts McDonald et al. (2018) using Tsatsaronis
et al. (2015)

Table 2: Publicly-available tools and systems for medical experts using CORD-19.

changing information needs, the shared task is organized in multiple rounds. Each round uses a specific version of CORD-19, has newly added topics,
and gives participants one week to submit per-topic
document rankings for judgment. Round 1 topics
included more general questions such as What is
the origin of COVID-19? and What are the initial
symptoms of COVID-19? while Round 3 topics
have become more focused, e.g., What are the observed mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 genome? and
What are the longer-term complications of those
who recover from COVID-19? Around 60 medical domain experts, including indexers from NLM
and medical students from OHSU and UTHealth,
are involved in providing gold rankings for evaluation. TREC-COVID opened using the April 1st
CORD-19 version and received submissions from
over 55 participating teams.

5

Discussion

Several hundred new papers on C OVID -19 are now
being published every day. Automated methods
are needed to analyze and synthesize information

over this large quantity of content. The computing
community has risen to the occasion, but it is clear
that there is a critical need for better infrastructure
to incorporate human judgments in the loop. Extractions need expert vetting, and search engines
and systems must be designed to serve users.
Successful engagement and usage of CORD19 speaks to our ability to bridge computing and
biomedical communities over a common, global
cause. From early results of the Kaggle challenge,
we have learned which formats are conducive to
collaboration, and which questions are the most urgent to answer. However, there is significant work
that remains for determining (i) which methods
are best to assist textual discovery over the literature, (ii) how best to involve expert curators in the
pipeline, and (iii) which extracted results convert
to successful C OVID -19 treatments and management policies. Shared tasks and challenges, as well
as continued analysis and synthesis of feedback
will hopefully provide answers to these outstanding questions.
Since the initial release of CORD-19, we have
implemented several new features based on com-

munity feedback, such as the inclusion of unique
identifiers for papers, table parses, more sources,
and daily updates. Most substantial outlying features requests have been implemented or addressed
at this time. We will continue to update the dataset
with more sources of papers and newly published
literature as resources permit.
5.1

Limitations

Though we aim to be comprehensive, CORD-19
does not cover many relevant scientific documents
on C OVID -19. We have restricted ourselves to
research papers and preprints, and do not incorporate other types of documents, such as technical
reports, white papers, informational publications
by governmental bodies, and more. Including these
documents is outside the current scope of CORD19, but we encourage other groups to curate and
publish such datasets.
Within the scope of scientific papers, CORD-19
is also incomplete, though we continue to prioritize
the addition of new sources. This has motivated
the creation of other corpora supporting C OVID -19
NLP, such as LitCovid (Chen et al., 2020), which
provide complementary materials to CORD-19 derived from PubMed. Though we have since added
PubMed as a source of papers in CORD-19, there
are other domains such as the social sciences that
are not currently represented, and we hope to incorporate these works as part of future work.
We also note the shortage of foreign language
papers in CORD-19, especially Chinese language
papers produced during the early stages of the epidemic. These papers may be useful to many researchers, and we are working with collaborators
to provide them as supplementary data. However,
challenges in both sourcing and licensing these papers for re-publication are additional hurdles.
5.2

Call to action

Though the full text of many scientific papers are
available to researchers through CORD-19, a number of challenges prevent easy application of NLP
and text mining techniques to these papers. First,
the primary distribution format of scientific papers
– PDF – is not amenable to text processing. The
PDF file format is designed to share electronic documents rendered faithfully for reading and printing, and mixes visual with semantic information.
Significant effort is needed to coerce PDF into a
format more amenable to text mining, such as JATS

XML,26 BioC (Comeau et al., 2019), or S2ORC
JSON (Lo et al., 2020), which is used in CORD-19.
Though there is substantial work in this domain,
we can still benefit from better PDF parsing tools
for scientific documents. As a complement, scientific papers should also be made available in a
structured format like JSON, XML, or HTML.
Second, there is a clear need for more scientific
content to be made accessible to researchers. Some
publishers have made C OVID -19 papers openly
available during this time, but both the duration
and scope of these epidemic-specific licenses are
unclear. Papers describing research in related areas
(e.g., on other infectious diseases, or relevant biological pathways) have also not been made open
access, and are therefore unavailable in CORD-19
or otherwise. Securing release rights for papers
not yet in CORD-19 but relevant for C OVID -19
research is a significant portion of future work, led
by the PMC C OVID -19 Initiative.6
Lastly, there is no standard format for representing paper metadata. Existing schemas like the
JATS XML NISO standard26 or library science
standards like BIBFRAME27 or Dublin Core28 have
been adopted to represent paper metadata. However, these standards can be too coarse-grained to
capture all necessary paper metadata elements, or
may lack a strict schema, causing representations
to vary greatly across publishers who use them. To
improve metadata coherence across sources, the
community must define and agree upon an appropriate standard of representation.
Summary
This project offers a paradigm of how the community can use machine learning to advance scientific
research. By allowing computational access to the
papers in CORD-19, we increase our ability to
perform discovery over these texts. We hope the
dataset and projects built on the dataset will serve
as a template for future work in this area. We also
believe there are substantial improvements that can
be made in the ways we publish, share, and work
with scientific papers. We offer a few suggestions
that could dramatically increase community productivity, reduce redundant effort, and result in
better discovery and understanding of the scientific
literature.
26

https://www.niso.org/publications/z3996-2019-jats
https://www.loc.gov/bibframe/
28
https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublincore/dces/
27

Through CORD-19, we have learned the importance of bringing together different communities
around the same scientific cause. It is clearer than
ever that automated text analysis is not the solution, but rather one tool among many that can be
directed to combat the C OVID -19 epidemic. Crucially, the systems and tools we build must be designed to serve a use case, whether that’s improving information retrieval for clinicians and medical
professionals, summarizing the conclusions of the
latest observational research or clinical trials, or
converting these learnings to a format that is easily
digestible by healthcare consumers.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF Convergence Accelerator award 1936940, ONR grant
N00014-18-1-2193, and the University of Washington WRF/Cable Professorship.
We thank The White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy, the National Library of
Medicine at the National Institutes of Health,
Microsoft Research, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative,
and Georgetown University’s Center for Security
and Emerging Technology for co-organizing the
CORD-19 initiative. We thank Michael Kratsios,
the Chief Technology Officer of the United States,
and The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy for providing the initial seed set of
questions for the Kaggle CORD-19 research challenge.
We thank Kaggle for coordinating the CORD19 research challenge. In particular, we acknowledge Anthony Goldbloom for providing feedback
on CORD-19 and for involving us in discussions around the Kaggle literature review tables
project. We thank the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), National Library of
Medicine (NLM), Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU), and University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston (UTHealth) for coorganizing the TREC-COVID shared task. In
particular, we thank our co-organizers – Steven
Bedrick (OHSU), Aaron Cohen (OHSU), Dina
Demner-Fushman (NLM), William Hersh (OHSU),
Kirk Roberts (UTHealth), Ian Soboroff (NIST),
and Ellen Voorhees (NIST) – for feedback on the
design of CORD-19.
We acknowledge our partners at Elsevier and
Springer Nature for providing additional full text
coverage of papers included in the corpus.

We thank Bryan Newbold from the Internet
Archive for providing feedback on data quality and
helpful comments on early drafts of the manuscript.
We thank Rok Jun Lee, Hrishikesh Sathe, Dhaval
Sonawane and Sudarshan Thitte from IBM Watson
AI for their help in table parsing.
We also acknowledge and thank our collaborators from AI2: Paul Sayre and Sam Skjonsberg
for providing front-end support for CORD-19 and
TREC-COVID, Michael Schmitz for setting up
the CORD-19 Discourse community forums, Adriana Dunn for creating webpage content and marketing, Linda Wagner for collecting community
feedback, Jonathan Borchardt, Doug Downey, Tom
Hope, Daniel King, and Gabriel Stanovsky for contributing supplemental data to the CORD-19 effort, Alex Schokking for his work on the Semantic
Scholar C OVID -19 Research Feed, Darrell Plessas
for technical support, and Carissa Schoenick for
help with public relations.

References
Sabber Ahamed and Manar D. Samad. 2020. Information mining for covid-19 research from a large volume of scientific literature. ArXiv, abs/2004.02085.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciBERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3615–
3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical language system (umls): integrating biomedical terminology. Nucleic acids research, 32 Database
issue:D267–70.
Q. Chen, Y. Peng, and Z. Lu. 2019. Biosentvec: creating sentence embeddings for biomedical texts. In
2019 IEEE International Conference on Healthcare
Informatics (ICHI), pages 1–5.
Qingyu Chen, Alexis Allot, and Zhiyong Lu. 2020.
Keep up with the latest coronavirus research. Nature, 579:193 – 193.
Arman Cohan, Sergey Feldman, Iz Beltagy, Doug
Downey, and Daniel S. Weld. 2020.
Specter:
Document-level representation learning using
citation-informed transformers. In ACL.
Donald C. Comeau, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Rezarta Islamaj
Dogan, and Zhiyong Lu. 2019. Pmc text mining subset in bioc: about three million full-text articles and
growing. Bioinformatics.

Radu Crisan-Dabija, Cristina Grigorescu, Cristina Alice Pavel, Bogdan Artene, Iolanda Valentina Popa,
Andrei Cernomaz, and Alexandru Burlacu. 2020.
Tuberculosis and covid-19 in 2020: lessons from the
past viral outbreaks and possible future outcomes.
medRxiv.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Luis Espinosa-Anke and Steven Schockaert. 2018.
SeVeN: Augmenting word embeddings with unsupervised relation vectors. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 2653–2665, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yuxiao Liang and Pengtao Xie. 2020. Identifying radiological findings related to covid-19 from medical
literature. ArXiv, abs/2004.01862.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Kinney, and Daniel S. Weld. 2020. S2ORC: The Semantic Scholar Open Research Corpus. In Proceedings
of ACL.
Patrice Lopez. 2009. Grobid: Combining automatic
bibliographic data recognition and term extraction
for scholarship publications. In ECDL.

M. Fathi, Khatoon Vakili, Fatemeh Sayehmiri, Abdolrahman Mohamadkhani, M. Hajiesmaeili, Mostafa
Rezaei-Tavirani, and Owrang Eilami. 2020. Prognostic value of comormidity for severity of covid19: A systematic review and meta-analysis study. In
medRxiv.

Luis López-Fando, Paulina Bueno, David Sánchez Carracedo, Márcio Augusto Averbeck, David Manuel
Castro-Dı́az, emmanuel chartierkastler, Francisco
Cruz, Roger R Dmochowski, Enrico Finazzi-Agrò,
Sakineh Hajebrahimi, John Heesakkers, George R
Kasyan, Tufan Tarcan, Benoı̂t Peyronnet, Mauricio
Plata, Bárbara Padilla-Fernández, Frank Van der Aa,
Salvador Arlandis, and Hashim Hashim. 2020. Management of female and functional urology patients
during the covid pandemic. European Urology Focus.

Yang Han, Victor O.K. Li, Jacqueline C.K. Lam,
Peiyang Guo, Ruiqiao Bai, and Wilton W.T. Fok.
2020. Who is more susceptible to covid-19 infection and mortality in the states? medRxiv.

Ryan McDonald, Georgios-Ioannis Brokos, and Ion
Androutsopoulos. 2018. Deep relevance ranking
using enhanced document-query interactions. In
EMNLP.

Torsten Hothorn, Marie-Charlotte Bopp, H. F. Guenthard, Olivia Keiser, Michel Roelens, Caroline E
Weibull, and Michael J Crowther. 2020. Relative coronavirus disease 2019 mortality: A swiss
population-based study. In medRxiv.

Mark Neumann, Daniel King, Iz Beltagy, and Waleed
Ammar. 2019. ScispaCy: Fast and robust models
for biomedical natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared
Task, pages 319–327, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Karen Spärck Jones, Steve Walker, and Stephen E.
Robertson. 2000. A probabilistic model of information retrieval: development and comparative experiments - part 1. Inf. Process. Manag., 36:779–808.
Shubhi Kaushik, Scott I. Aydin, Kim R. Derespina, Prerna Bansal, Shanna Kowalsky, Rebecca Trachtman,
Jennifer K. Gillen, Michelle M. Perez, Sara H. Soshnick, Edward E. Conway, Asher Bercow, Howard S.
Seiden, Robert H Pass, Henry Michael Ushay,
George OforiAmanfo, and Shivanand S Medar.
2020. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c) associated with sars-cov-2 infection: A
multi-institutional study from new york city. The
Journal of Pediatrics.
Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim,
Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So,
and Jaewoo Kang. 2019. BioBERT: a pre-trained
biomedical language representation model for
biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics.

Sravanthi Parasa, Madhav Desai, Viveksandeep Thoguluva Chandrasekar, Harsh Patel, Kevin Kennedy,
Thomas Rösch, Marco Spadaccini, Matteo
Colombo, Roberto Gabbiadini, Everson L. A.
Artifon, Alessandro Repici, and Prateek Sharma.
2020. Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms and
fecal viral shedding in patients with coronavirus
disease 2019. JAMA Network Open, 3.
Iolanda Valentina Popa, Mircea Diculescu, Catalina
Mihai, Cristina Cijevschi-Prelipcean, and Alexandru
Burlacu. 2020. Covid-19 and inflammatory bowel
diseases: risk assessment, shared molecular pathways and therapeutic challenges. medRxiv.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. SentenceBERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERTnetworks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kirk Roberts, Tasmeer Alam, Steven Bedrick, Dina
Demner-Fushman, Kyle Lo, Ian Soboroff, Ellen
Voorhees, Lucy Lu Wang, and William R Hersh.
2020. TREC-COVID: Rationale and Structure of
an Information Retrieval Shared Task for COVID19. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association. Ocaa091.
Sepideh Sadegh, Julian Matschinske, David B. Blumenthal, Gihanna Galindez, Tim Kacprowski,
Markus List, Reza Nasirigerdeh, Mhaned Oubounyt,
Andreas Pichlmair, Tim Daniel Rose, Marisol
Salgado-Albarrn, Julian Spth, Alexey Stukalov,
Nina K. Wenke, Kevin Yuan, Josch K. Pauling, and
Jan Baumbach. 2020. Exploring the sars-cov-2
virus-host-drug interactome for drug repurposing.
Minjoon Seo, Jinhyuk Lee, Tom Kwiatkowski, Ankur
Parikh, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019.
Real-time open-domain question answering with
dense-sparse phrase index. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4430–4441, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhihong Shen, Hao Ma, and Kuansan Wang. 2018.
A web-scale system for scientific knowledge exploration. In Proceedings of ACL 2018, System Demonstrations, pages 87–92, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Silvia Stringhini, Ania Wisniak, Giovanni Piumatti,
Andrew S. Azman, Stephen A Lauer, Hélène
Baysson, David De Ridder, Dusan Petrovic,
Stephanie Schrempft, Kailing Marcus, Sabine Yerly,
Isabelle Arm Vernez, Olivia Keiser, Samia Hurst,
Klara M Posfay-Barbe, Didier Trono, Didier Pittet, Laurent Gétaz, Franois Chappuis, Isabella Eckerle, Nicolas Vuilleumier, Benjamin Meyer, Antoine
Flahault, Laurent Kaiser, and Idris Guessous. 2020.
Seroprevalence of anti-sars-cov-2 igg antibodies in
geneva, switzerland (serocov-pop): a populationbased study. Lancet (London, England).
George Tsatsaronis, Georgios Balikas, Prodromos
Malakasiotis, Ioannis Partalas, Matthias Zschunke,
Michael R. Alvers, Dirk Weissenborn, Anastasia
Krithara, Sergios Petridis, Dimitris Polychronopoulos, Yannis Almirantis, John Pavlopoulos, Nicolas Baskiotis, Patrick Gallinari, Thierry Artières,
Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Norman Heino, Éric
Gaussier, Liliana Barrio-Alvers, Michael Schroeder,
Ion Androutsopoulos, and Georgios Paliouras. 2015.
An overview of the bioasq large-scale biomedical
semantic indexing and question answering competition. In BMC Bioinformatics.

Ellen Voorhees, Tasmeer Alam, Steven Bedrick, Dina
Demner-Fushman, William R Hersh, Kyle Lo, Kirk
Roberts, Ian Soboroff, and Lucy Lu Wang. 2020.
TREC-COVID: Constructing a pandemic information retrieval test collection. SIGIR Forum, 54.
Kuansan Wang, Zhihong Shen, Chiyuan Huang, ChiehHan Wu, Yuxiao Dong, and Anshul Kanakia. 2020.
Microsoft academic graph: When experts are not
enough. Quantitative Science Studies, 1(1):396–
413.
Kuansan Wang, Zhihong Shen, Chiyuan Huang, ChiehHan Wu, Darrin Eide, Yuxiao Dong, Junjie Qian,
Anshul Kanakia, Alvin Chen, and Richard Rogahn.
2019. A review of microsoft academic services for
science of science studies. Frontiers in Big Data, 2.
Xuan Wang, Xiangchen Song, Yingjun Guan,
Bangzheng Li, and Jiawei Han. 2020. Comprehensive named entity recognition on cord-19 with
distant or weak supervision. ArXiv, abs/2003.12218.
Leigh Weston, Vahe Tshitoyan, John Dagdelen, Olga
Kononova, Kristin Persson, Gerbrand Ceder, and
Anubhav Jain. 2019. Named Entity Recognition and
Normalization Applied to Large-Scale Information
Extraction from the Materials Science Literature.
Sally Yaacoub, Holger J Schünemann, Joanne Khabsa,
Amena El-Harakeh, Assem M Khamis, Fatimah
Chamseddine, Rayane El Khoury, Zahra Saad, Layal
Hneiny, Carlos Cuello Garcia, Giovanna Elsa Ute
Muti-Schünemann, Antonio Bognanni, Chen Chen,
Guang Chen, Yuan Zhang, Hong Zhao, Pierre
Abi Hanna, Mark Loeb, Thomas Piggott, Marge
Reinap, Nesrine Rizk, Rosa Stalteri, Stephanie
Duda, Karla Solo, Derek K Chu, and Elie A Akl.
2020. Safe management of bodies of deceased persons with suspected or confirmed covid-19: a rapid
systematic review. BMJ Global Health, 5(5).
Xinyi Zheng, Doug Burdick, Lucian Popa, and Xin
Ru Nancy Wang. 2020. Global table extractor (gte):
A framework for joint table identification and cell
structure recognition using visual context. ArXiv,
abs/2005.00589.

A

Table parsing results

There is high variance in the representation of tables across different paper PDFs. The goal of table parsing is to extract all tables from PDFs and
represent them in HTML table format, along with
associated titles and headings. In Table 3, we provide several example table parses, showing the high
diversity of table representations across documents,
the structure of resulting parses, and some common
parse errors.

PDF Representation

HTML Table Parse

Source & Description

From Hothorn et al. (2020):
Exact Structure; Minimal row
rules

From López-Fando et al.
(2020): Exact Structure;
Colored rows

From Stringhini et al. (2020):
Minor span errors; Partially
colored background with
minimal row rules

From Fathi et al. (2020):
Overmerge and span errors;
Some section headers have row
rules

From Kaushik et al. (2020):
Over-splitting errors; Full row
and column rules with large
vertical spacing in cells

Table 3: A sample of table parses. Though most table structure is preserved accurately, the diversity of table
representations results in some errors.

