arXiv:2004.07717v1 [cs.CY] 16 Apr 2020

Digital Ariadne:
Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control
Lorenz Cuno Klopfenstein∗ , Saverio Delpriori∗ ,
Gian Marco Di Francesco, Riccardo Maldini,
Brendan Dominic Paolini, Alessandro Bogliolo∗
DIGIT srl, Urbino, Italy
∗ DiSPeA, University of Urbino, Italy
April 17, 2020
Abstract
The COVID-19 crisis represents the most dangerous threat to public health since the H1N1 influenza
pandemic of 1918. So far, the disease due to the SARS-CoV-2 virus has been countered with extreme
measures at national level that attempt to suppress epidemic growth. However, these approaches require
quick adoption and enforcement in order to effectively curb virus spread, and may cause unprecedented
socio-economic impact. A viable alternative to mass surveillance and rule enforcement is harnessing
collective intelligence by means of citizen empowerment. Mobile applications running on personal devices
could significantly support this kind of approach by exploiting context/location awareness and data
collection capabilities. In particular, technology-assisted location and contact tracing, if broadly adopted,
may help limit the spread of infectious diseases by raising end-user awareness and enabling the adoption
of selective quarantine measures. In this paper, we outline general requirements and design principles
of personal applications for epidemic containment running on common smartphones, and we present a
tool, called “diAry” or “digital Ariadne”, based on voluntary location and Bluetooth tracking on personal
devices, supporting a distributed query system that enables fully anonymous, privacy-preserving contact
tracing. We look forward to comments, feedback, and further discussion regarding contact tracing solutions
for pandemic containment.

Keywords: Citizen empowerment; Collective intelligence; Mobile app; Contact tracing; Epidemic
control; Privacy; Anonymity; COVID-19.

1.

Introduction

care facilities [1]. In the absence of a viable
vaccine, so far, the spreading of the disease
due to the SARS-CoV-2 virus has been countered in many countries with countermeasures
that attempt to suppress epidemic growth,
thus avoiding to overwhelm the healthcare
system with an unmanageable number of patients. The reduction of contagion is achieved
through a set of increasingly severe measures

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and its
rapid spread have established a pandemic of
global proportions over the course of the first
months of 2020. High fatality rates detected
in the first affected regions are expected to be
even higher in countries with an older population, low-income, or lack of suitable health1

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

that limit personal freedom and entail strong
socio-economic drawbacks, going well beyond
mass gathering prohibition and case isolation.
Social distancing rules, including school and
university closure, household quarantine, internal and cross-border mobility constraints, and
selective closure of non-essential productive
and commercial activities, have brought many
countries to complete lockdown [2].
All these approaches require quick adoption and strict enforcement, in order to effectively curb virus spread in the short term.
As observed in the 1918 pandemic, there is
a strong correlation between excess mortality
and earliness of containment measures. Containment interventions that are introduced too
late or lifted too early were shown to have very
limited effect [3].
In the long term, governments are required
to trade off the adoption of dramatic full lockdown measures with more lax interventions.
For instance, progressively adopting temporary
small-scale contagion suppression actions that
aim at keeping the virus’ reproduction number,
R0 , at a level that does not exceed the healthcare system’s capacity. Adaptive adoption of
these kinds of containment policies at a regional level is expected to be effective even if
enforced for shorter periods of time [2].
The triggering of circumscribed quarantine measures can be directed through the
widespread adoption of technological tools
that allow tracing contacts and interactions
with known cases of contagion [4]. Mobile
apps running on personal smartphones are especially attractive as solutions because they enable immediate deployment on existing hardware and a quick response [5]. Several approaches of this kind have been proposed
over the course of the last weeks, giving raise
to a growing debate around privacy implications and potential risks of mass surveillance
and stigmatization [6, 7], that have prompted
authorities to provide recommendations and
guidelines [8], and big players to develop ad
hoc cross-platform protocols [9].
In this paper, we suggest that these contact tracing tools should be designed to sup-

port end-user empowerment, as opposed to
mass surveillance, granting citizens more data,
awareness, and control, as envisioned by Nanni
et al. [10]. In Section 2, we outline the basic requirements and the founding principles
on which they should be based. In Section 3,
we present a location/contact tracing solution,
composed of a mobile app and a distributed
query system, designed to meet these critical
requirements. The proposed system allows individuals to keep track of movements and contacts on their own private devices and to use
local traces to select relevant notifications and
alerts from health authorities, thus completely
eschewing, by design, any risk of surveillance.

2.

Requirements and Design
Principles

Taking end-user empowerment as the founding principle, in this section we outline requirements and design principles that address both
regulatory and technical issues. Compliance
with national and international regulation is
essential to protect natural persons and their
fundamental rights and freedoms, while technical requirements are mainly meant to reconcile dependability needs with the features
of general-purpose personal devices, characterized by software fragmentation, hardware
diversity, variety of non-exclusive usage modes,
lack of calibration, limited resources, and untrained users.
a. Collective intelligence. Systems based on
the voluntary participation of individuals, performing a collective effort in their pursuit of
a common goal, leverage a form of collective
intelligence, which is the only alternative to
mass surveillance and enforcement. ICT solutions should support and encourage such
collaborative behaviors.
b. Social responsibility. Individual participation in a collective effort towards a common
goal is an act of social responsibility. The technology adopted must make the social value of
end-user’s behavior clearly perceptible.
2

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

c. Awareness and control. Technology is not
infallible and systems may not always behave
as expected. Mobile apps should not induce
end-users to simply rely on them. Rather, they
should empower end-users by granting them
control and awareness of the data gathering
process and by allowing them to browse their
data and possibly add spontaneous notes.
d. Privacy and anonymity by design. Protection of sensitive data, such as locations or
health-related information, cannot rely exclusively on trust or security promises. The system must be designed to keep user data private
at all times, ideally storing them exclusively on
the user’s device, and to make identification
impossible a posteriori.
e. Technology agnosticism. Contact tracing
is a challenging task. In spite of the many approaches that have been proposed, no single
technology has proven to offer the ultimate
solution. For instance, location services have
limited accuracy, especially indoor, while Bluetooth proximity does not reveal the exposure to
indirect contagion (through infected surfaces).
The solution of choice should exploit all available technologies and be open to any improvement or integration.
f. Effectiveness. The effectiveness of containment measures based on the voluntary adoption of a mobile app strongly depends on the
percentage of the population, making proper
use of that app. Although this is always true,
each solution has to be evaluated in different
scenarios, including those well below the nominal critical mass of the target technology. Two
types of performance indicators have to be
used, to measure the support that app can provide both to end-users tested/diagnosed positive to COVID-19, willing to cooperate with
health authorities, and to all other individuals
possibly infected by them, who should take
timely countermeasures.
g. Interoperability. Interoperability must be
pursued as much as possible, in order to reduce

the critical mass requirements of each single
system and to fully exploit their potential. To
this purpose, open standard protocols should
be preferred to closed ad hoc ones, cooperation
among institutions must be technically supported, and integration with synergistic healthcare systems must be enabled.
h. Openness of source code. Open-source
access to all system components is the key
to speed up development, ensure continuous
improvement, and guarantee coherence between specification and implementation. Transparency is essential both for end-users and for
health authorities possibly adopting the solution.
i. Openness of statistical data. Statistical
data can provide valuable information to evaluate the effectiveness of epidemic containment,
to monitor contagion, and to drive timely decisions. All statistical information that can
be provided by end-users on a voluntary basis, without jeopardizing their privacy and
anonymity, is worth being gathered and made
available as an open dataset. Open data enables study and research without providing
questionable competitive advantages to any
player.
j. Avoidance of false alarms. The ultimate
goal of contact tracing systems is to reach susceptible or asymptomatic individuals who are
considered to be the target of specific measures (e.g., quarantining or testing) according
to the containment policies adopted. The solution adopted must minimize unneeded alarms
that can overwhelm the healthcare system and
spread panic.
k. Avoidance of surveillance and stigmatization. The fear of being watched and stigmatized may hinder the acceptance of contact
tracing technologies. Ideal solutions should
prevent mass surveillance and stigmatization
by design, by keeping end-user traces in their
own devices and by making it impossible for
end-users to identify the source of contagion.
3

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

l. Scalability. The higher is the adoption rate,
the more effective the solution is. Hence, scalability is a key requirement. Since the target devices, i.e., smartphones, have their own storage,
computation, sensing, and communication resources, scalability can be inherently achieved
by exploiting local resources as much as possible without triggering any network effect.

3.

Digital Ariadne

Digital Ariadne or ‘diAry’ is a privacypreserving open-source tool, developed by
DIGIT srl and the University of Urbino, that
allows users to trace their movements and
contacts, while also allowing governments or
healthcare agencies to rapidly direct their epidemic containment efforts, in a way that aligns
with the principles outlined above.
The system is composed of: a mobile application, that is voluntarily installed by users
on their smartphones, keeping track of their
locations through the device’s GPS sensor and
interactions with other users through Bluetooth
radio beacons, a privacy-aware reward system,
which incentivizes app usage while collecting
anonymous usage information to feed an open
data set, and a distributed query system that
allows recognized public authorities to selectively and anonymously notify users about possible contagion sources. The mobile app works
in background, with careful usage of battery
and storage and without impairing the functioning of the personal devices. Nonetheless,
it provides a rich user interface to make endusers fully responsible and aware of their own
contribution to epidemic containment.
Source code of the mobile applications and
the back-end service, both currently in active
development, is available on GitHub1 .

3.1.

Mobile app

The Digital Ariadne mobile application is developed using the Flutter framework for Apple iOS and Google Android. A combination
1 Source

of movement detection with the built-in accelerometers, activity recognition, data from
GPS sensors, and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
transmission is used to adaptively track the
user’s movements and interactions without
negatively impacting battery and storage capacity of the device. Traces are collected autonomously by a background service launched
by the application, but end-users can decide
at any time to interact with the app to browse
stored data, to force sampling, to mark known
locations or the add notes.

Figure 1: Main screen of the application.

Tracking status is displayed on the main
app screen, as shown in Figure 1. Three concentric circles, representing the 24 hours of the
current day, show the detected movements, the
amount of time spent in known locations, and
the notes added by the end-user.
This information is stored for a maximum
duration of 30 days on the device. The app
approximately requires 1 MB of data to store
information about a day of full tracking (this
requirement may slightly increase in case of
frequent movement).

code: https://github.com/digit-srl/diAry-apps and https://github.com/digit-srl/diAry-backend.

4

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

3.1.1.

Location tracking

The app, once activated by the user, starts tracking the device’s location and records detected
positions and movements. Location tracking
is adaptive, based on the user’s activity and
speed, in order to provide sufficient precision
in the case of movement and low battery consumption otherwise.

3.1.2.

The diAry app makes use of the Temporary
Contact Numbers (TCN) contact tracing protocol in order to broadcast randomly-generated
and anonymous identifiers, which are updated
every few minutes [11]. All installations of
the app keep a fully-local log of every identifier that has been broadcast and every identifiers that was received from other devices
making use of the same TCN protocol. This
data, which expires together with location data
after 30 days, never leaves the phone and is not
linked to private user information.

3.2.

Figure 2: Map view of tracked locations.

The user may voluntarily mark known locations through the app interface, thus allowing to specify places such as home, workplace,
school, or any other locations. Access to and
departure from these locations are detected
through geofencing and allow the user to have
a quick overview of his or her movements
throughout the day.
Also, the user may decide to add notes to
a specific location and time of the day, in order to remember specific events or situations
that may be relevant for contact tracing purposes. User movements, known locations, and
notes are shown on an interactive map like in
Figure 2.

Interaction tracking

Statistical open data set

The Digital Ariadne system makes use of a
server-side component that is used to collect
daily usage statistics in an anonymous fashion. Users are never required to identify themselves and no user-identifying information is
transmitted at any point. Communication between mobile applications and the back-end
makes use of secure connections using widelyadopted standards (HTTPS with optional certificate pinning).
An anonymous installation ID is generated
upon the first launch of the mobile application.
This ID is a randomly generated UUID and
is used only to distinguish individual installations for statistical data collection and aggregation. Installation IDs are not linked to private
user information or device characteristics.
Daily statistics include, for each installation:
1. The total number of minutes of active
tracking by the mobile app,
2. The centroid of the tracked locations, approximated to a precision of ca. 0.02 latitude and longitude degrees, that is approximately 2–3 km, in order to avoid
identification,
3. The lenght of the diagonal of the bounding box containing all tracked locations,
4. The count of known locations visited during the day,
5. The count of notes added by the user,
5

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

6. The count of GPS samples recorded and,
possibly, discarded due to insufficient accuracy,
7. The amount of minutes tracked at home.
Collected information, made available as
open data set, gives an indication of how the
mobile app is used, allowing researchers and
policy makers to gauge the effectiveness of
measures adopted at regional or national level.

3.3. Distributed queries for call to actions
While personal data never leaves the user’s
device and collected statistical data cannot be
used to identify users, Digital Ariadne is designed to give designated territorial or national
authorities access to the system through a
dashboard allowing them to publish epidemicrelated “call to actions”.
Call to actions can be seen as geographical
and temporal distributed queries that operate
with the following process: (a) an authority creates a new call to action based on a sequence
of geolocated and timestamped points and/or
a set of temporary contact numbers, (b) the
call to action is stored by the back-end service
until it expires, (c) the mobile app automatically downloads relevant call to actions, (d) the
mobile app matches call to actions to private
location and contact data, in order to verify
whether the user has been exposed to possible
sources of contagion, (e) if there is a match, the
user is privately notified and can access information associated to the call to action. Matching users may also directly choose to interact
with the public authority, optionally disclosing
part of their traces.
Thus, a call to action is composed of a series
of geographical regions (geo-polygons), associated time intervals, and a series of temporary
contact numbers (TCNs). The match is performed by checking whether the user has been
within the indicated region in a given time
period, or if any TCN is found among local
records. Sensitivity of the match can be finetuned by the health authority, by indicating

a maximum distance from the region and a
minimum time interval of match (i.e., exposure) in order to alert the user, with the intent
of reducing panic and avoiding unnecessary
alarms.

3.3.1. Creating call to actions in the case of
contagion
When diAry users are positively diagnosed,
they may grant to healthcare or government
authorities partial access to their local traces,
inlcuding geolocations, timestamps, and the
list of temporary contact numbers generated
by the diAry app.
This information can be used to generate
anonymous calls to action made accessible to
all the instances of the app in the interested
area. Call to actions are processed locally to
each installation and displayed to end-users if
and only if their traces match filtering criteria.
This mechanism enables anonymous tracking
of past interactions of diagnosed individuals,
alerting potentially infected diAry users and
prompting them for self-isolation and further
testing.

3.4.

User incentives

To further raise awareness and promote adoption and usage of the application, diAry integrates with the ‘Worth One Minute’ platform.
The platform has adopted diAry as an instrument for the common good and rewards users
with anonymous vouchers (called WOMs) for
their collaborative behaviour [12]. These vouchers are intended to provide: (a) a simple gamified experience that allows users to earn points
and thus obtain positive feedback of their voluntary contribution to epidemic containment;
(b) a tangible currency-like reward that can be
adopted as a voucher system at a local and national scale to promote microeconomic growth
in a post-lockdown scenario; (c) a perception
of the social value of individual actions and
behaviours.
6

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

4.

Conclusions

In this paper, we have argued citizen empowerment to be the foundation on which novel
epidemic control technologies must be built
as a viable alternative to mass surveillance.
General design principles driving the development of such technologies have been outlined
and applied to the design of Digital Ariadne,
an open-source privacy-preserving instrument
that combines location and contact tracing capabilities to collect local traces that can be crossmatched with authoritative alerts and calls to
action without leaving the end-user’s device.
Just like Ariadne’s thread, the data stored
on personal smartphones offers a trusted trace
to find a way out of the maze of COVID-19.
We invite any kind of feedback on this
whitepaper, including comments on the design
principles and technical contributions to the
open-source diAry project.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the more than 1000
beta testers that signed up for testing and the
more than 250 users that have provided valuable feedback in the last three weeks.

References
[1] Hongdou Li, Shuang Wang, Fan Zhong,
Wuyin Bao, Yipeng Li, Lei Liu, Hongyan
Wang, and Yungang He. Age-dependent
risks of Incidence and Mortality of
COVID-19 in Hubei Province and
Other Parts of China. medRxiv, page
2020.02.25.20027672, March 2020. Publisher: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press.
[2] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani,
N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez,
G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, A. Dighe, I. Dorigatti, H. Fu, K. Gaythorpe, W. Green,
A. Hamlet, W. Hinsley, L. Okell, S. Van Elsland, H. Thompson, R. Verity, E. Volz,

H. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Walker, C. Walters, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, C. Donnelly,
S. Riley, and A. Ghani. Report 9: Impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs)
to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand. Report, March 2020.
[3] Martin C. J. Bootsma and Neil M. Ferguson. The effect of public health measures
on the 1918 influenza pandemic in U.S.
cities. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 104(18):7588, May 2007.
[4] Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle
Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner, Michael Parker, David
Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests
epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science, March 2020.
[5] Joel Hellewell, Sam Abbott, Amy Gimma,
Nikos I. Bosse, Christopher I. Jarvis, Timothy W. Russell, James D. Munday, Adam J.
Kucharski, W. John Edmunds, Fiona Sun,
Stefan Flasche, Billy J. Quilty, Nicholas
Davies, Yang Liu, Samuel Clifford, Petra Klepac, Mark Jit, Charlie Diamond,
Hamish Gibbs, Kevin van Zandvoort, Sebastian Funk, and Rosalind M. Eggo. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks
by isolation of cases and contacts. The
Lancet Global Health, 8(4):e488–e496, April
2020. Publisher: Elsevier.
[6] Johannes Abeler, Sam Altmann, Luke Milsom, Séverine Toussaert, and Hannah Zillessen. Support for app-based contact
tracing of COVID-19. Technical report,
Department of Economics, University of
Oxford, April 2020.
[7] Hyunghoon Cho, Daphne Ippolito, and
Yun William Yu.
Contact Tracing
Mobile Apps for COVID-19: Privacy
Considerations and Related Trade-offs.
arXiv:2003.11511 [cs], March 2020. arXiv:
2003.11511.
[8] European Commission. Commission Recommendation on a common Union tool7

Digital Ariadne: Citizen Empowerment for Epidemic Control

box for the use of technology and data to
combat and exit from the COVID-19 crisis,
in particular concerning mobile applications and the use of anonymised mobility
data. Technical Report C(2020)2296, European Commission, Brussels, 2020.
[9] Apple and Google partner on COVID-19
contact tracing technology, April 2020. Library Catalog: blog.google.
[10] Mirco Nanni, Gennady Andrienko, Chiara
Boldrini, Francesco Bonchi, Ciro Cattuto, Francesca Chiaromonte, Giovanni
Comandé, Marco Conti, Mark Coté,
Frank Dignum, Virginia Dignum, Josep
Domingo-Ferrer, Fosca Giannotti, Riccardo Guidotti, Dirk Helbing, Janos
Kertesz, Sune Lehmann, Bruno Lepri,
Paul Lukowicz, Anna Monreale, Katharina Morik, Nuria Oliver, Andrea Pas-

sarella, Andrea Passerini, Dino Pedreschi,
Alex Pentland, Francesca Pratesi, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Salvatore Ruggieri, Arno
Siebes, Roberto Trasarti, Jeroen van den
Hoven, and Alessandro Vespignani. Give
more data, awareness and control to individual citizens, and they will help COVID19 containment. arXiv:2004.05222 [cs],
April 2020. arXiv: 2004.05222.
[11] TCN Coalition. A Global Coalition for
Privacy-First Digital Contact Tracing Protocols to Fight COVID-19, 2020.
[12] Lorenz Cuno Klopfenstein, Saverio Delpriori, Alessandro Aldini, and Alessandro
Bogliolo. "Worth one minute": An anonymous rewarding platform for crowdsensing systems. Journal of Communications
and Networks, 21(5):509–520, October 2019.

8

