ACDC-Tracing: Towards Anonymous
Citizen-Driven Contact Tracing
Kristof Roomp, Microsoft kristofr@microsoft.com
Nuria Oliver, Spanish Royal Academy of Engineering & ELLIS Unit Alicante, nuria@alum.mit.edu

Executive Summary
As we enter the control phase of the COVID-19
pandemic, many efforts have been dedicated to
developing smartphone-based contact tracing apps in
order to automatically identify people that a person
with COVID-19 might have infected. These
applications while potentially useful, present
significant adoption, societal, technical and privacy
challenges.
We propose ACDC-Tracing, a simpler, anonymous,
voucher-based contact tracing solution that relies on
peoples’ knowledge of their own close contacts. People
who test positive are given an anonymous voucher
which they can share with a limited number of people
whom they think they might be infected. The recipients
can use this voucher to book a COVID-19 test and can
receive their test results without ever revealing their
identity. People receiving positive result are given
vouchers to further backtrack the path of infection.
This is a fully anonymous solution which does not
require any sharing of location data, Bluetooth, or
having an app installed on people’s mobile device.
Moreover, ACDC-Tracing can be tested for
effectiveness at a small scale without requiring
adoption by the entire population, which would enable
acquiring fast evidence about its efficacy and
scalability. Finally, it is compatible with and
complementary to alternative approaches to contact
tracing.

Introduction
As we enter the control phase of the COVID-19
pandemic, early detection of a significant portion of all
infected individuals will be of critical importance, so
that they can be placed in quarantine and thus avoid
further contagion. To achieve this, several key
infrastructures need to be in place, including (1) the
ability to perform daily massive amounts of tests, (2)
a person-centric end-to-end protocol for isolating
infected or vulnerable individuals, (3) special
measures for individuals in high-risk, high-spread
professions, such as healthcare personnel and nursing
home workers; and (4) the ability to give tests to the
right people to quickly identify new sources of
infection.

Contact Tracing via Smartphone Apps
It is regarding this last point --the detection of infected
individuals and their contacts—where the concept of
contact tracing via smartphone apps arises. To date,
several app proposals with varying levels of privacy
implications have been made to track contacts in order
to quickly find possible infections when someone tests
positive for COVID-19. Unfortunately, most of these
proposals – and even the most privacy-preserving
ones, such as the SafePaths project at MIT1 and the
PEPP-PT project in Europe2 – have several limitations,
including:
•

•

Critical mass: To be effective, it is estimated
that at least 60% of the population3 must be
running the application. To make it even more
challenging, in Europe only 76% of the
population has smartphones capable of
running these apps4. This is as high as 82% in
the UK and as low as 58% in Italy5, with
prominent socio-economic and demographic
differences. For example, younger children,
who can spread the illness without having
symptoms,
generally
do
not
have
smartphones.
Privacy and potential misuse: These apps
require citizens to record very personal data,
which may make people reluctant to run the
app once they realize the potential
consequences of misuse (even in the case
when data is only stored locally on their
phone). For example, could law enforcement
oblige someone to unlock their phone and
analyze it to determine all the people they
have been in contact with? In a domestic
violence or divorce situation, could someone
deliberately misreport, or threaten to
misreport, an infection on their partner’s
phone? Once this app is present on everyone’s
phone, will governments be tempted to use
contact tracing for other purposes? When
receiving a notification from their phone, will
people try to figure out who they got it from,
potentially starting malicious rumors?

•

•

Cybersecurity: Many of these mobile apps are
being developed very quickly by new, relatively
immature software development teams,
which could result in serious security
vulnerabilities6. Magnifying the problem, since
the same software would be used across an
entire country, this would present an
extremely high-value target for both statebased and non-state-based bad actors7.
Accuracy: Phone-based urban geolocation is
only accurate to about 10 meters8, and
research using Bluetooth LE for proximity
tracing has been mostly done in controlled
environments with known hardware9. Accuracy
is especially important in apartment buildings
where many people are close by measured
distance, but not necessarily sharing the same
physical space. The result of these
inaccuracies could generate a very large set of
people to test, creating an immense demand
for testing with many false positives.

As part of the insights10 from the analysis of the
answers to the Covid19ImpactSurvey, we found that a
high proportion (over 70%) of people that tested
positive could identify their likely source of infection
(e.g. a member of their household, a relative, a friend,
a patient, client or co-worker). This finding made us
consider whether a much simpler solution could
consist of simply asking people whom they might have
infected and scale this process to work with a large
number of people.

ACDC-Tracing
The proposed solution, called Anonymous CitizenDriven Contact Tracing (ACDC-Tracing), would work as
follows:
1. Person X receives a positive diagnosis for COVID19. As part of receiving this diagnosis, Person X is
given a “COVID-19 testing voucher”, which
consists of a short alpha-numeric code. This
voucher could be provided either via SMS, e-mail,
a randomly selected sealed envelope or whatever
other mechanism makes sense depending on the
testing protocol of the country. This voucher is not
connected to the identity of Person X.
2. Person X is told that they can share this code with
up to 6 people, which is an upper bound of the
estimated reproductive number for COVID-1911.
This number would be adjusted based on the
findings of an initial pilot. Person X would be asked
to distribute these vouchers to the people they
think they might have infected.
3. The recipients of the code can use it to book an
appointment for receiving a COVID-19 test at a
web site provided by the government or by a

1. Patient receives positive
diagnosis, receives testing
voucher

4. Recipient goes to testing
facility with confirmation
code, can retrieve
diagnosis using only the
confirmation code

2. Patient shares COVID-19
testing voucher with a
limited number of likely
infection recipients

3. Recipient uses testing
voucher to book a test,
receives confirmation code
assigned by the testing
facility

private testing facility. The web site does not
require the recipient to identify themselves; it only
validates that the code has not been used more
than 6 times and gives a confirmation code with a
testing location and a date/time.
4. The recipient goes to the testing facility, presents
the confirmation code and is given the test. The
next day, the recipient can check the results of
their test either e.g. online or by phone using only
their confirmation code (which would be fully
anonymous). Recipients that test positive would
again receive a voucher that would allow them to
follow the same process as above.

No Critical Mass Required to be Effective
Phone based contact tracing proposals require a large
uptake by the general population before being
effective, and do not prove their value until a critical
mass is reached.
A key advantage of ACDC-Tracing is that it can be
evaluated and tested at a small scale to prove its
effectiveness.

Privacy
There are several key points concerning privacy
preservation in this proposal:
1. Vouchers are not tied to identity. The only
thing that needs to be tracked is the number
of times that a voucher has been used. Once
this is done, all information related to that
voucher can be erased.

2. No trusted 3rd party involvement is required in
the communication between the infected
person and the possible recipients. Person X
can send the voucher via their preferred
means of communication, by phone, by an
encrypted WhatsApp conversation, etc.
3. No personal data is stored on any mobile
device --or anywhere for that matter-- that
could be compromised by security breaches.

Integration with phone-based contact tracing
ACDC-Tracing is complementary to other contact
tracing approaches and could be integrated into a
phone-based solution. For example, instead of just
notifying people that they have been in close contact
with an infected individual, a contact-tracing app could
provide an anonymous single-use voucher that would
allow people to immediately get tested, using the
same infrastructure already created for ACDC-Testing.

Discussion
The proposed approach is scalable, technologically
simple and fully privacy preserving, while at the same
time taking advantage of a “viral” model for tracing
back the infection chain. We believe that it could be
implemented in a short time with a simple back-end
infrastructure. It could even be implemented without
any infrastructure using paper vouchers in sealed

envelopes (with a matching checklist at the testing
center). This could be especially important in areas
where there is high risk of stigmatization due to a
positive diagnosis, since no names or identification
need to be recorded.
While technology is a key element to help tackle the
spread of COVID-19, important further considerations
need to be taken into account for any early detection
plus contact tracing approach, such as: (1) the
availability of testing infrastructure for a large number
of people; (2) the existence of a person-centric
quarantine where people are not afraid to test positive;
(3) the empowerment of and trust placed in citizens
who would be the main source of the contact tracing;
and (4) the development of incentives for
asymptomatic, low-risk individuals to get tested if they
were at risk of having contracted COVID-19.
ACDC-Tracing is compatible with other contact tracing
options. It could provide a fast, high-quality solution in
a timely fashion. In addition, it allows us to quickly
learn which types of contact tracing are most
effective, providing valuable ground truth to develop
models that identify which contacts are most likely to
produce positive test results.

References
1

Private Kit: Safe Paths; Privacy-by-Design Covid19 Solutions using GPS+Bluetooth for Citizens and Public Health
Officials https://safepaths.mit.edu/
2
Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing https://www.pepp-pt.org/
3
The UK could slow the spread of coronavirus using your phone https://www.wired.co.uk/article/uk-coronavirusspread-app-phone-data
4
GSMA: The mobile Economy Europe https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/europe/
5
Wikipedia: list of countries by smartphone penetration
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_smartphone_penetration
6
Krebs on Security: What’s Your Security Maturity Level? https://krebsonsecurity.com/2015/04/whats-your-securitymaturity-level/
7
Commodification of Cyber Capabilities: A grand Cyber Arms Bazaar
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ia/ia_geopolitical-impact-cyber-threats-nation-state-actors.pdf
8
Smartphone GPS accuracy study in an urban environment
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0219890
9
Experiment of indoor position presumption based on RSSI of Bluetooth LE beacon
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7031308
10
The Covid19Impact Survey: Assessing the Pulse of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Spain via 24 questions
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.01014/
11
High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/7/20-0282_article

