On the airborne aspect of COVID-19
arXiv:2004.10082v1 [physics.pop-ph] 20 Apr 2020

coronovirus
Navinder Singh,

∗

and Manpreet kaur†

navinder.phy@gmail.com; drmanpreetkaur30@gmail.com

April 22, 2020
Abstract
It is a widely accepted view that COVID 19 is either transmitted via surface contamination or via
close contact of an un-infected person with an infected person. Surface contamination usually happens
when infected water droplets from exhalation/sneeze/cough of COVID sick person settle on nearby surfaces.
To curb this, social distancing and good hand hygiene advise is advocated by World health Organization
(WHO). We argue that COVID 19 coronovirus can also be airborne in a puff cloud loaded with infected
droplets generated by COVID sick person. An elementary calculation shows that a 5 µm respiratory infected
droplet can remain suspended for about 9.0 minutes and a 2 µm droplet can remain suspended for about an
hour! And social distancing advise of 3 feet by WHO and 6 feet by CDC (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention) may not be sufficient in some circumstances as discussed in the text.

COVID-19 is a pandemic. It has infected

I. A Newtonian-Stokes

over 2.2 million people worldwide, and over

calculation (Neglecting

1.5 lakh people have died due to it, as of 20th

Brownian motion)

April 2020. Most of the information related to
COVID-19 can be found at WHO website[1],

Let h be the typical height of a human be-

and at CDC website[2]. In the next section we

ing (∼ 1.6 meter). Human exhalation gener-

present a calculation with the aim to calculate

ates mucosalivary droplets of varied size from

timescale over which the virus in infected wa-

0.5 µm to 12 µm[3]. Consider the trajectory

ter droplets exhaled by a COVID sick person

of a droplet. Time taken to fall from height h

stays in air.
∗ Theoretical

using Newtonian mechanics neglecting air drag
p
is given by (2h/g), where g is acceleration

Physics Division, Physical Research Lab-

oratory, Ahmedabad, India. Cell Phone: +919662680605.
† Department of Pediatric and preventive dentistry,

due to gravity. For h = 1.6 meters this time

Ahmedabad Dental College, Ranchodpura, Ahmedabad.

is roughly 0.6 sec (less than a second). In this

India. Cell Phone: +919409290203

case we say that droplets are not airborne and
1

Airborne aspect of COVID-19

settle to nearby surfaces in a time less than a

Let us take radius of a typical water droplet
to be 5 micro − meters. Its mass will roughly

second.
But this picture is radically modified when

be 5.25 × 10−13 kg. Let us say ambient temper-

air drag is taken into account. The equation of

ature is 25 degree centigrade. Air viscosity at

motion including drag force ( f d ) for the verti-

this temperature is η = 1.85 × 105 Kg/(m −

cal downward direction is given by

sec).

Plugging these numbers we get τ =

m
6πηr

≃ 3.0 × 10−4 or 0.3 milli − secs. For the

m

dv(t)
= mg − f d .
dt

(1)

shortest (drag free) time scale (0.6 seconds) the
exponentials e−t/τ in the expressions of v(t)

Here f d Stokes’ drag force given by 6πηrv(t).
η is the viscosity of air, r is the radius of water
droplet, and v(t) is its downward velocity at
time t. For the time being consider that initial
(t = 0) downward velocity is zero. The solution of the above equation immediately gives

and h(t) are extremely small. Thus v(t) =
vterminal ≃ gτ ≃ 3.0 mm/sec (from equation
(2)) which is very low terminal speed! And
that the terminal speed is reached even within
millisecond time scale (as τ is in sub-millisecond timescale).
The total time taken t0 to fall down from
height h is t0 ≃

fd

h
gτ

≃ 544.0 seconds, which is

about 9 minutes! This is very surprising. In nil

h

wind conditions, typical droplets of size 5 µm
can take 9 minutes to settle down! Smaller

mg

droplets can take even more time! This time
scale is inversely proportional to the square of
the radius of droplet:
Figure 1: Various forces acting on the water droplet.

t0 = 4.5
v(t) = gτ (1 − e−t/τ ),
where τ =

m
6πηr .

(2)

And the instantaneous height

(measured from the top end) v(t) =

dh ( t )
dt

is



ηh
gρr2



,

(4)

where ρ is the density of water droplet. 2 µm
droplet can remain suspended for about an hour!
If we consider initial downward component
of velocity (as exhalation imparts some initial

given by

speed to dropletsi ) then the solution of the
h(t) = gτ (t + τ (e

−t/τ

− 1)).

(3)

Let time taken to fall down be t0 and h(t0 ) = h
the typical height of a person.
2

equation of motion leads to
i Nasal

1.4 m/sec.

breathing typically leads initial speeds of about

Airborne aspect of COVID-19

cloud loaded with infectious droplets is gov(t) = v(0)e−t/τ + gτ (1 − e−t/τ ).

ing to stay there! (a two micrometer droplet
(5)

Whatever be the initial speed it is going to
decay in millisecond timescales as τ is very
small in sub milli-second time scales. Also
any transverse component of the water droplet

will remain suspended for about an hour, and
smaller droplets take more time to settle). So
this well person will enter this infectious cloud
and can get infection, even if social distancing
norms are obeyed!

will be dissipated away in such small time

Now, if the wind is flowing transverse to the

scales. It does not form a parabolic projectile

people’s queue, it will take away that infec-

trajectory as commonly visualized.

tious cloud, and it will disperse in the ambient air. At sufficiently large distances concen-

II. Important physical situation
related to social distancing
As an implication of the above calculation,
consider a situation like this: Consider that

tration of infectious droplet nuclei will be extremely low, and it will be no more dangerous.
But if wind is flowing along the queue, then
wind can transfer those infectious droplets to
unprotected well persons.

people are standing in a queue in front of a
milk parlor or in front of an ATM for cash

III. Life-time of the water

withdrawal waiting for their turn. Also con-

droplets

sider that all are following social distancing
norm and they stand 6 feet away from each

In the above discussion it is assumed that

other. Let us suppose that a person is infected

water droplets preserve their size. It is not

but he/she is asymptomatic.ii The person is

true. They evaporate in short time depend-

standing at his/her place say for more than

ing upon the size of the droplet. However, a

five minutes. Also consider a nil wind con-

recent research by Lydia Bourouiba and col-

dition.

This person will create an invisible

laborators show that life-times are radically

cloud loaded with respiratory droplets of var-

modified as the droplets are in a very special

ied size. These droplets are all infected! After

environment of respiratory puff cloud which

five minutes this person moves ahead to take

contains lots of water vapors[4]. A thorough

his/her turn, and a person behind him/her

investigation of droplet life times and trajec-

takes his/her position.

tories taking into account in this special en-

It will take couple
But the

vironment is much needed (in equation (1)

has been seen that a person can be infectious even

mass will then be a time depended param-

of seconds to move 6 feet ahead.
ii It

if she/he has no symptoms.

eter). But, when an infected droplet evapo3

Airborne aspect of COVID-19

rates, it ends up in an infected droplet nuclei

bigger droplets.

The criterion is based on

or an infected aerosol. These are sub-micron

the value of Reynolds number. The fluctuat-

sized and take even more time to settle. Al-

ing force ξ (t) and the drag force f d are in-

though the above mechanical-hydrodynamical

timately related to each other through fluc-

approach cannot be applied, as aerosols dy-

tuation dissipation theorem (as both origi-

namics will be stochastic and Brownian mo-

nate from the common origin via molecular

tion will be important in its transfer from one

bombardment)[5]. Thus we need to compare

place to another, but it will take much more

drag force with another important force in the

time to settle to ground! In addition, a tur-

problem that is called the inertial force. The

bulent wind can take it away. This points to-

inertial force is the force required to change

wards airborne nature of the disease. A dis-

droplets momentum over a distance of its size

cussion about the Brownian motion is given

f inertial ∼ mv(v/r ) (average rate of change of

in the next section.

droplet’s momentum over its size). The other
force is the viscous force f drag = ηrv (we ne-

IV.

Consideration of the
Brownian motion

glect prefactors, as we are interested in order
of magnitudes). Their ratio is called Reynolds
number:

In equation (1) we considered the systematic component (drag component f d ) of the

Re =

ρrv
f inertial
=
.
f drag
η

(6)

force due to bombardment of droplet by air

For 5 µm droplet drifting down with speed

molecules and we neglected a random compo-

3 mm/sec, Re ∼ 0.8. This is a borderline case.

nent of this force which is also due to bom-

However, for Coronovirus (size ∼ 125 nm)

bardment of droplet by air moleculesiii . Thus

moving at this drift speed the Reynolds num-

the total force has two components: F (t) =

ber turns out to be of the order of 10−2 . This

f d + ξ (t). ξ (t) is the random force whose av-

is completely a fluctuation dissipation domi-

erage is zero hξ (t)i = 0 but correlated in time.

nated regime, and the virus will perform a

Simplest form of correlation is delta correla-

Brownian motion.

tion

hξ (t)ξ (t′ )i

=

Γδ(t − t′ )[5].

This random force can be neglected for

Thus, the timescales obtained above by
Newton-Stokes analysis are the minimum pos-

imagine slow motion movie in which the droplet

sible timescales (these are the lower bounds).

is being bombarded from all sides by air molecules. At

That is, the 5 µm droplet will take more than

iii Just

one instant of time more molecules will bombard from
left and the droplet will jerk towards left, and at the other

9 minutes to settle. Detailed investigation us-

instant of time this imbalance topples to some other direc-

ing Langevin or more sophisticated model is

tion. This leads to a random force.

beyond the scope of this investigation.

4

Airborne aspect of COVID-19

[2] Centers for Disease Control and Preven-

V. Advise to Public

tion (CDC). https://www.cdc.gov.
In view of the airborne nature of the disease to
some extent it is advised that when someone
is out of one’s house to get essential goods at
a frequently visited place (like a grocery store)
one should not only wear a good mask for oral
and nasal protection, but a protective gear for

[3] R. S. Papineni and F. S. Rosenthal, Journal of Aerosol Medicine, 10, 105 (1997).
Shinhao Yang etal, Journal of Aerosol
Medicine, 20, 484 (2007).
[4] Lydia

Bourouiba,

eyes (eye guard or eye shield) is also highly

clouds

recommended to cover-up the airborne aspect

emissions:potential

of the disease discussed in this work.

reducing

and

Turbulent

respiratory

pathogen

implications

transmission

of

gas

for

COVID-19.

Journal of the American Medical Asso-

VI. Summary

ciation. Published online on march 26
(2020).doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4756.

We show within Newtonian-Stokes elementary mechanics that respiratory droplets does

[5] Navinder Singh, Electronic transport theo-

not form a quick parabolic projectile trajec-

ries: from weakly correlated to strongly corre-

tories as commonly visualized. Stokes drag

lated systems. CRC Press (2017).

dominates, and they fall down much slowly. A
five micron droplet takes about nine minutes
to fall down from a height of 1.6 meters, and a
droplet of two micron size takes about an hour
to settle down! This clearly shows airborne nature of the disease. Even when they evaporate
they end up forming a sub-micron sized infected aerosols which can stay airborne over
much longer timescales. In view of the above
factors, much more precautionary steps needs
to be taken to stop spread of this dangerous
virus.

References
[1] World

Health

Organization

(WHO).

https://who.sprinklr.com/
5

