Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for
COVID-19
Md Tahmid Rashid · Dong Wang

arXiv:2004.04565v3 [cs.SI] 23 May 2020

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract With the spiraling pandemic of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19), it has becoming inherently important to disseminate accurate and timely information about the disease. Due to the ubiquity of Internet connectivity and smart
devices, social sensing is emerging as a dynamic AI-driven sensing paradigm to
extract real-time observations from online users. In this paper, we propose CovidSens, a vision of social sensing based risk alert systems to spontaneously obtain and
analyze social data to infer the state of the COVID-19 propagation. CovidSens can
actively help to keep the general public informed about the COVID-19 spread and
identify risk-prone areas by inferring future propagation patterns. The CovidSens
concept is motivated by three observations: 1) people have been actively sharing
their state of health and experience of the COVID-19 via online social media, 2)
official warning channels and news agencies are relatively slower than people reporting their observations and experiences about COVID-19 on social media, and
3) online users are frequently equipped with substantially capable mobile devices
that are able to perform non-trivial on-device computation for data processing
and analytics. We envision an unprecedented opportunity to leverage the posts
generated by the ordinary people to build a real-time sensing and analytic system for gathering and circulating vital information of the COVID-19 propagation.
Specifically, the vision of CovidSens attempts to answer the questions: How to
distill reliable information about the COVID-19 with the coexistence of prevailing
rumors and misinformation in the social media? How to inform the general public about the latest state of the spread timely and effectively, and alert them to
remain prepared? How to leverage the computational power on the edge devices
(e.g., smartphones, IoT devices, UAVs) to construct fully integrated edge-based
social sensing platforms for rapid detection of the COVID-19 spread? In this vision
Md Tahmid Rashid
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
E-mail: mrashid@nd.edu
Dong Wang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
E-mail: dwang5@nd.edu

2

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

paper, we discuss the roles of CovidSens and identify the potential challenges in
developing reliable social sensing based risk alert systems. We envision that approaches originating from multiple disciplines (e.g., AI, estimation theory, machine
learning, constrained optimization) can be effective in addressing the challenges.
Finally, we outline a few research directions for future work in CovidSens.
Keywords Social sensing · COVID-19 · coronavirus · disease tracking · real-time ·
information distillation.

1 Introduction
In this era of big data and pervasive Internet connectivity, social sensing is emerging as a dynamic AI-driven sensing paradigm that utilizes observations by humans
and devices coupled with powerful AI devices (e.g., dedicated AI system-on-a-chip
(SOC)) to obtain information about the physical world [1, 2]. In this vision paper,
we present CovidSens, the notion of real-time risk analysis and alerting systems
based on social sensing to obtain the situational awareness and guide the intervention motives for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). According to the most
recent statistics, there are more than 1.5 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 and
above of 89,660 deaths spread across 50 states in US [3, 4]. Most of the above cases
happened within one weeks time (i.e., between March 29, 2020 and April 04, 2020)
and the current trend seems to be ever increasing [4]. As the outbreak of COVID19 progresses, circulating information about the spread in an accurate and timely
manner has grown ever important. However, with heightening uncertainty and
commotion among the general public, the communication of timely and accurate
information to intended recipients is a challenging task. While official warning
channels and news agencies have served an active role in informing the public
about the spread, they often fall short in terms of pace. It is apparent that the
official warning channels and news media take a while to confirm and disseminate the information regarding the outbreak of a new disease [5]. By contrast,
information propagation across the social media and crowdsensing platforms is
inherently faster than traditional news media [6]. For example, during the 2013
Boston Marathon Bombing, news about the first bomb explosion and the arrest
of the suspect were posted in Twitter several minutes before news agencies made
announcements [7, 8]. After the onset of Cholera outbreak in Haiti in 2010, the
knowledge regarding the outbreak was first obtained from social media, which occurred weeks before officials confirmed the case of the outbreak [9]. Such cases
exemplify the importance of social sensing during emergency scenarios such as
now during the COVID-19 outbreak.
The CovidSens concept is thus motivated by three observations during this
global crisis of COVID-19. First, people tend to actively convey their state of
health and experience of the virus via online social media since the onset of the
COVID-19. For instance, at one given day, 6.7M people talked about coronavirus
on social media [10]. Second, people report their observations on social media
relatively faster than the official warning channels and news agencies that make
formal announcements. As such, knowledge contribution and discovery through
social sensing may offer more effective news transmission [6]. Third, online social
media users, who report their observations of COVID-19, are frequently equipped

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

3

with powerful mobile devices with rich processing capabilities [1]. Such devices
can execute complex AI models to distill information about the COVID-19 spread
at the edge, potentially expediting the data analysis [11]. Given these premises,
we perceive an unprecedented opportunity to leverage the posts generated by the
social media users to build a complete AI-driven analytics framework for rapidly
gathering and circulating vital information of the COVID-19 propagation.
Let us consider a few tweets posted during the course of the COVID-19 spread
across the US in Figure 1. These tweets express the experiences and observations
of individuals about the COVID-19. If such tweets could be analyzed using stateof-the-art AI algorithms to identify regions affected by COVID-19 and determine
the rate of the spread, it might potentially expedite the alleviation of the adverse
effects of the virus. In addition, by parsing the location and movement data from
smartphones and social media posts to detect crowds or mass gatherings while respecting user privacy, government agencies and the mass public could be informed
about the more risk-prone areas of a city during the COVID-19 outbreak [12].
This could potentially help to divert people away from more crowded locations
and hence reduce the spread of the disease.

Fig. 1 Tweets posted during the COVID-19 outbreak

While the CovidSens vision promises opportunities for a robust social sensing
based information distillation and alert service for the COVID-19 spread, several
technical challenges exist in the way of building such a system to autonomously
gather and distribute real-time development of the disease to the general public.
In contrast to traditional disaster response systems (e.g., for floods or forest fires),
one unique goal of CovidSens is to obtain knowledge of the dynamics of the disease
spread (e.g., inferring the stages of the disease among people). The first challenge
is, therefore, to build a social sensing data collection platform that is able to spontaneously obtain the relevant social signals about symptoms, cases, and fatalities
of COVID-19 from the online social media users. The second challenge lies in

4

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

developing reliable data analysis models based on adaptive AI architectures [13]
that can extract credible information of the disease spread from the noisy, sparse,
and unstructured social data contributed by unvetted human sources such as the
tweets in Figure 1. The third challenge exists in handing the huge volumes of social
data about the COVID-19 outbreak that varies widely (e.g., across text, image,
video, and audio data). The fourth challenge is how to distill information of the
COVID-19 spread by customizing existing AI algorithms to run on the individually
owned edge devices that are originally designed to run in a centralized fashion. The
fifth challenge is to circulate the extracted information about the disease spread
to the general public in a timely and efficient manner so that they can plan their
actions accordingly. The sixth challenge lies in designing effective alert systems
that consider the human aspect of the problem (i.e., handling people’s reaction
to alerts like fear, concern, or ignorance). The seventh challenge is combating the
misinformation spread in the social media where people tend to report rumors or
falsified facts of the COVID-19 spread.

The CovidSens aims to overcome the above limitations by providing a more reliable and timely COVID-19 monitoring and alerting system for the mass population
based on social sensing. We envision a dynamic and scalable AI-driven information
retrieval and dispatching system for the general public based on data derived from
multiple sources (e.g., social media, crowdsourced platforms, Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV)) to quickly and effectively inform about the COVID-19 spread using a combination of smartphone applications, UAVs, message boards, or other
modes of information dispersal. We expect this service to be important and useful
for people who live in or travel to the affected areas, allowing them to take special
precautions and be well prepared. The successful development of such systems
can potentially help both authorities and general public respond more quickly and
efficiently to COVID-19 and eventually help save more lives.

We acknowledge the potential to employ interdisciplinary techniques from deep
learning, machine learning, estimation theory, game theory, online social media
analysis, distributed systems, and mobile phone applications to develop effective
CovidSens systems. Research along the realm of CovidSens is important because
the COVID-19 is spreading rapidly in many countries worldwide and a timely
alerting system that explores the rich real-time information streaming on social
media is yet to be developed. The results of this research can pave the way for
studying and tackling COVID-19 around the world.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss a few stateof-the-art works in the direction of CovidSens. In Section 3, we explore potential
real-world applications of CovidSens. We identify the a few likely challenges in
implementing a successful CovidSens system in Section 4. Afterwards in Section
5, we highlight a set of research directions for future work aligning with CovidSens
to contain the COVID-19 spread. Finally, we conclude our vision of CovidSens in
Section 6.

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

5

2 Related Works
2.1 Social Sensing
Social sensing is rapidly progressing as a pervasive sensing paradigm where humans
are used as sensors to attain situational awareness about the physical world [6].
Examples of social sensing applications include predicting poverty in developing
countries [14], studying human mobility in urban areas [15], identifying traffic
abnormalities [16, 17], monitoring the air quality [18], tracking social unrest [19]
and disasters [20, 21], and detecting wildfire [22]. A comprehensive survey of social
sensing schemes is provided in [23]. Zhang et al. developed a scalable approach to
obtain data veracity in social sensing [24]. Xu et al. developed a framework for semantic and spatial analysis of urban emergency events using social media data [25].
Zhang et al. presented a constraint-aware truth discovery model to detect dynamically evolving truth in social sensing [26]. More recently, there is an advent of
social-media-driven drone sensing (SDS) approaches that address the data reliability issue of social sensing by integrating social signals with physical UAVs [27].
While existing social sensing approaches aim to provide pervasive sensing, they
are not tailored specifically to monitor the COVID-19 outbreak. Compared to
traditional social sensing applications, CovidSens not only requires an inference
of the data veracity, but also how the COVID-19 outbreak can progress across
regions based on indications from social media posts (e.g., posts about crowded
subways could indicate high risk of COVID-19 risk spread). Thus, it remains a
critical task to develop a reliable social sensing model that can accurately monitor
the COVID-19 spread.

2.2 Disease Outbreak Investigation
In recent times, disease tracking based on epidemiological data has been an important avenue of research. Several studies have independently explored the feasibility
of using social media and crowdsensing for detection, tracking, and analytics of
contagious disease outbreaks [28, 29]. For example, Google launched a real-time influenza surveillance system, namely Google Flu Trends [30], to monitor influenza
spread by analyzing search terms related to illness symptoms. Kalogiros et al.
developed Allergymap, a crowdsensing-based disease identification system for allergen season onsets and allergy patient stratification [31]. Krieck et al. studied
the possibility of analyzing Twitter data for infectious disease surveillance [32].
Chester et al. [33] carried out bacterial outbreak investigation based on web forum
posts about sick participants from a bike race. Despite the advances in disease
monitoring techniques, current schemes have not been designed to handle the exponential progression of the COVID-19 pandemic and provide reliable risk alert in
the context of CovidSens. Therefore, it entails a more rapid information distillation
and processing system that can track the COVID-19 spread in real-time.

6

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

2.3 Automated Disease Warning and Alert Systems
While traditional health systems play an important role in alerting the general
public about infectious diseases, their slow information progression have necessitated the adoption of automated warning and alert systems [28]. Brownstein et
al. contributed a few early works in this domain by developing: i) a series of interactive websites, HealthMap and Flu Near You [28, 34], and ii) a smartphone
application called Outbreaks Near Me [35] to present vital information about outbreaks of various illnesses around the world. Toda et al. explored the effectiveness
of a text-messaging system for notification of disease outbreaks in Kenya [36]. Yu
et al. developed ProMED-mail, an early warning system for emerging diseases [37].
Carter studied the possibility of a tweet-based information dispersal system to facilitate the containment of Ebola in Nigeria [38]. The above approaches are known
to provide disease warning with reasonable effectiveness. However, it is an even
more challenging task to develop a real-time COVID-19 spread indicator for CovidSens that uses both social-media and crowdsourced data, and also transmit the
news of the spread to the general public in real-time.

2.4 COVID-19 Spread Monitoring
With the emergence of the COVID-19 outbreak, several streams of research have
introduced methods to monitor the COVID-19 propagation. Sun et al. [39] proposed the first study that harnesses crowdsourced data from several social media
sources to monitor the COVID-19 spread. Schiffmann [40] developed an informative web portal that aggregates news from myriads of news sources to present
latest information on COVID-19 spread. The Johns Hopkins Center for Systems
Science and Engineering (JHU CSSE) developed an interactive online dashboard
to track and present worldwide reported cases of COVID-19 in real-time [41]. An
online community of international students and professionals, called 1point3acres,
developed a web-based real-time COVID-19 news aggregator to track the state
of the spread in the US and Canada [42]. A mobile app has been developed by
the Singapore government to leverage crowdsourced information to locate community transmission of COVID-19 [43]. A key drawback of the above tools is that
they possess partial autonomy, requiring some degree of manual efforts to validate the information of the COVID-19 spread before presenting them online [40,
42]. During this evolving COVID-19 outbreak, delays are undesirable. Therefore,
a significant limitation exists in existing approaches to spontaneously track the
COVID-19 propagation and disseminate the information to the end users.

2.5 AI-driven Disease Prediction
The growing demand for intelligent application domains like autonomous driving,
robotics, computational medicine, computer vision, and natural language processing call for reliable AI-driven information distillation systems [44]. In the recent
past, several studies have used AI for diagnosis, identification, and monitoring
of infectious diseases using data collected from various sources (e.g., past disease
records, social media posts, wearable sensors) [45, 46, 47]. Babu et al. applied Grey

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

7

Wolf optimization and recurrent neural networks (RNN) on patient symptom data
for early disease detection and response [48]. Du et al. proposed a convolutional
neural networks (CNN)-based approach for measles risk identification by analyzing public perception of measles outbreak from Twitter data [49]. Torres et al. [47]
developed an artificial neural network (ANN)-based dengue tracking system based
on prior infection data. Mahalakshmi et al. built a Zika virus outbreak prediction
system from symptom data based on multilayer perception (MLP) neural networks [50]. However, despite the usefulness of existing approaches, due to the lack
of sufficiently sized datasets with high quality labels on COVID-19, a key concern
in AI-driven COVID-19 detection is ending up with underfitted and biased AI
models that could yield erroneous prediction [51]. Moreover, while the above systems utilize efficient AI architectures for prediction of specific diseases, they have
not been tailored to handle the massive scale of the rapidly progressing COVID-19
spread that has heightened to a global pandemic. It is therefore a challenging task
to develop scalable and adaptive real-time AI-based monitoring frameworks for
COVID-19.

3 Real-world Applications
In this section, we highlight a few probable applications in real-world scenarios
aligning with the CovidSens vision.

3.1 Social-media-driven Disease Spread Indicator
In a social-media-driven disease spread indicator (SDSI), social media posts related to COVID-19 are analyzed to attain the state of the spread [39]. An example
of an SDSI architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. Initially, a real-time Twitter
data crawler engine collects tweets indicating public opinions about the disease.
The tweets are subsequently filtered and labelled into discrete categories based on
the topics of discussions. A few examples of these topics can be: i) what regions
are being frequently reported to be infected; ii) the time between people first talking about COVID-19 symptoms to deciding to be tested (i.e., how long the virus
takes to show effect in people) [39], iii) which age of people are expressing about
symptoms the most; iv) how rapidly authorities are responding to the stimuli; and
v) whether people are talking about other people they know getting recovered [39,
52]. Afterwards the labeled Twitter data are passed to a tweet analytics and training engine on a backend server. Specifically, the backend server will construct a
clean and timely events summary about the COVID-19 spread by distilling relevant and reliable information from the massive amount of noisy, unstructured,
and unvetted data feeds using adaptive AI algorithms such as Long Short Term
Memory networks (LSTM) or Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [53]. Lastly, a website
or smartphone app will interact with end users to provide them warnings or alerts
about the disease spread in their vicinity based on their queries. The analytics
engine jointly analyzes the data veracity, source reliability, observation bias (e.g.,
under vs over estimation), as well as the likelihood of large-scale havoc launched by
malicious users on social media using novel estimation theoretic, machine learning,
and deep learning techniques.

8

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

Fig. 2 Overview of an SDSI system

3.2 Crowdsensing-based Disease Tracking

Crowdsensing-based disease tracking (CDT) involves sensor networks and groups
of people, with mobile devices capable of sensing, collectively sharing disease related information (e.g., early symptoms, nearby infected persons, deciding to selfquarantine) [39, 54]. CDT is fueled by the observation that individuals tend to
proactively volunteer in contributing data about the COVID-19 spread using their
smartphones, wearables, or other devices with sensors and connectivity [39]. In
contrast to SDSI, CDT is relatively less pervasive and requires active participation of people and physical sensors. However, in return the data is less noisy and is
hence more reliable. Figure 3 shows an example of a representative CDT system. A
CDT may typically incorporate three main components. The first component is a
data collection platform consisting of a network of users with a custom smartphone
application to log data and a set of internet-of-things (IoT) devices (e.g., smart
heart-rate monitors, activity trackers, thermal scanners). The smartphone application interacts with users and allows them to actively contribute their reports on
the COVID-19 if they are willing to. If the users choose to input data, the app lets
the users configure at what granularity (e.g., state, county, street, or N/A) they
feel comfortable to share their location information. The second component is an
analytics framework that applies relevant statistical analysis and AI techniques
on the obtained data to infer probable regions of infection and safe zones [35, 54].
To conserve bandwidth and expedite processing, the computational power of the
smartphones can be harnessed to execute the AI algorithms at the edge. The third
component is a smartphone application on the end users’ mobile phones to visually
represent the analyzed geospatial distribution of the inferred regions [35]. The app
can obtain the needed information from the backend server based on the users
queries (e.g., checking the risk level of a particular area of interest) [55]. In most
cases the data collection, processing, and representation is carried out in the same
smartphone application [35]. Sun et al. proposed one of the earliest crowdsourcing
based COVID-19 outbreak detection system [39]. The Singapore and South Korea
governments have launched mobile apps that utilize crowdsourced data to trace
community transmission of the COVID-19 [43].

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

9

Fig. 3 Overview of a CDT system

3.3 UAV-based Health Surveillance and Alerting

The urgency of the COVID-19 outbreak has necessitated new dimensions for UAVbased health surveillance and alerting (UHSA) systems [56]. With the help of
onboard sensors (e.g., cameras, microphones), UAVs are able to gather intelligence remotely during a disease pandemic scenario where human patrol teams
and ground units cannot operate due to risks of getting infected. For instance,
UAVs can assist in detecting unwanted crowds of people along locked down areas
of a city [56]. Figure 4 demonstrates a representative UHSA model for mitigating the COVID-19 spread. The UHSA system responds to emergency requests by
individuals through social media posts about unnecessary mass gatherings. Afterwards, the data is gathered in a backend server and processed using social sensing
approaches based on statistical analysis, deep learning, and machine learning for
analyzing the truthfulness of the data. The information is then updated across
nearby regions by raising verbal alerts through speakers installed on the UAVs.
UAVs are also dispatched out to different areas of a city to spontaneously scan
and obtain situational awareness about the region. Using the onboard sensors
and image classification algorithms like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
UHSA detects if people are breaking the rules during the lock down situation
(e.g., by roaming outside, gathering in crowds). The framework may also locate
and verify the availability of critical supplies using the UAVs (e.g., open pharmacy,
grocery stores) based on the social media posts. Using the onboard speakers of the
UAVs, the people breaking the rules are alerted to return home. One real-world
example of UHSA during the COVID-19 ordeal is in California, USA where the
law enforcement officials have resorted to utilizing drones for patrolling the state
of California during the ongoing lock-down situation [57]. During the COVID-19
crisis in China, UAVs have served multiple roles including post-epidemic aerial
evaluation, alerting, and relief distribution to affected regions [58].

10

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

Fig. 4 Overview of an UHSA system

4 Research Challenges and Opportunities
In this section, we present a set of prevalent research challenges and opportunities
in the development of an effective CovidSens framework.

4.1 Data Collection Challenge
During the onset of rampant disease outbreaks like COVID-19, the primary objective of a CovidSens system is to collect information from the general public.
However, several difficulties prevail to locate and obtain the relevant posts related
to the COVID-19 spread. For instance, while conducting simple keyword based
searches on obtained social media data, the desired keywords may indicate various
other unwanted things (e.g., while the term “sick” is generally used to indicate
people who are not doing well, it may also be used to express sarcasm by certain
people). Several recent studies focused on mitigating this issue of data discovery by
replacing simple keyword based searches with singular value decomposition (SVD)
driven K-means clustering [59], adaptive sampling [60], and recurrent neural network (RNN) based textual labeling process [61]. However, such methods still lag
behind human perception in terms of accurately scanning for relevant input data.
Thus, obtaining a collection of relevant social media data that directs to the right
set of information remains an arduous task. Moreover, a great portion of social
media data may eventually turn out to be redundant (e.g., retweets) or simply
rephrased from a single original post [62]. On top of that, a good amount of social
media data is observed to be transient and perishable [63]. For example, people
may delete their previous posts and online repositories (i.e., Twitter and Facebook
servers) hosting the posts may take them down for undisclosed reasons. In addition
to that, social media APIs such as Twitter often impose various rate limitations
which can heavily impede the data collection during disease outbreaks [64]. The
data collection process for COVID-19 therefore necessitates a tool that can locate,
obtain, and store the relevant information from users in real-time across social
media channels.

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

11

4.2 Data Reliability Challenge
The concept of CovidSens is centered around the noisy and unreliable data generated by the unknown human sources on the social media [65, 66, 67, 68]. One
important task while harnessing social media for CovidSens is to extract trustworthy information from unreliable human sources with unknown source reliability [2].
We define this as the data reliability challenge in social sensing. Several truth discovery solutions have been developed to mitigate the data reliability problem. For
instance, Wang et al. presented a framework to jointly estimate the reliability of
data sources and the correctness of the reported measurements in social media
posts using approaches from estimation theory [2, 69]. Zhang et al. built upon the
previous framework to address the scalability and physical constraint challenges
and employed the improved schemes to real-world social sensing applications [24,
26]. Yin et al. developed Truth Finder, a probabilistic algorithm using iterative
weight updates to improve the quality of the data in social sensing [70]. While
great efforts have been made on developing reliable social sensing solutions, certain limitations hinder these solutions from being applied in CovidSens to track
COVID-19. One drawback of traditional social sensing schemes is that they solely
rely on the noisy social media data and there no external means of validating
the credibility of the input data during the COVID-19 epidemic [26]. Existing
methods are also not tailored towards disease outbreak detection, which may lead
to prediction of false cases of COVID-19. For example, a person simply posting a
symptom of breathing difficulty may not necessarily suffer from COVID-19. It may
be required to analyze other traits of the patient based on earlier posts. Hence,
it remains an unresolved challenge in CovidSens to develop reliable social sensing
models that can explore the uncertainty in the input data and extract reliable
signals.

4.3 Data Modality Challenge
While data collection is an intrinsic challenge in using social sensing for tracking
the COVID-19 spread, a greater difficulty exists in processing the rapidly generated incoming signals consisting of multitudes of features or dimensions [23]. This
challenge is identified as data modality in social sensing where large amounts of unfiltered and unstructured data with multiple modalities need to be processed [71,
72, 73, 74]. Specifically, data modality refers to the different variety or types of data
prevalent in the social media such as text, image, location, audio, and video [75].
Moreover, each type can further encompass different dimensionality as well which
makes the data modality challenge even harder. Examples of dimensionality in
CovidSens can range along reports of: i) proximity to infected locations, ii) number
of suspected cases, iii) number and types of symptoms, iv) intensity of symptoms
(i.e., mild, moderate, or severe), v) recovery rate, vi) death rate, and vii) number
of self-quarantined cases. Recent social sensing tools primarily focus on analyzing
the text data in social media [76]. This trend is advocated by the fact that image
data processing involves heavy computation requirement [77].
Consequently, existing methods do not focus on fusing multiple types of data
which may potentially generate richer detection of COVID-19 propagation. For
example, a person may tweet about having COVID-19, but based on an image

12

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

posted with the tweet it may turn out that the person’s symptoms have actually
resulted from an allergic reaction instead [78]. Fusing text with other data such
as image and location data may potentially yield more accurate prediction of
the COVID-19 spread. Therefore, given the sheer volumes of multi-modal data
generated by the social media users about the COVID-19 outbreak, solutions need
to be developed to efficiently utilize the different modality of data. Moreover,
since multi-modal data processing intrinsically demands greater compute power,
care must be given to efficiently strike a trade-off between detection accuracy and
computational complexity. A set of unsolved questions springing from the data
modality challenge in CovidSens are: i) How to efficiently fuse the different types
of social media data related to COVID-19 into one unified data stream? ii) How
to design algorithms to process a wide variety of social data in real-time for an
accurate prediction of the COVID-19 spread? iii) How to speed up the analysis
of multi-modal data for faster COVID-19 spread detection by distributing the
computation across multiple devices?

4.4 AI-model Scalability Challenge
Due to the global scale of the COVID-19 outbreak, it is important to resort to
adaptive AI-based methods that can effectively monitor the state of the spread
from the social sensing data across any region of the world in real-time. This necessitates the scalable AI algorithms that can be readily deployed across the edge
devices (e.g., smartphones, IoT devices, drones) in order to reduce latency and
bandwidth consumption, and yield faster information extraction for the COVID19 spread. Unfortunately, existing AI schemes such as DNNs, MLPs, and RNNs
have been originally developed for powerful centralized hardware (e.g., GPU clusters) and are not tailored for resource constrained smart devices residing at the
edge of the network [79, 80, 81]. In particular, current AI algorithms are associated
with model update processes that operate in a centralized fashion, which imposes
a high network bandwidth requirement. In addition to that, mainstream AI models require extensive training to update the model parameters before being able to
generate reliable predictions. Thus, even if the current AI algorithms could be improvised to run on the edge devices, due to their heavy computation requirements
for the model training processes, they would drain the batteries of the portable
edge devices faster [82, 83, 84]. A few open questions in CovidSens originating from
the AI-model scalability challenge are: i) how to parallelize the AI model training process across the edge devices to speed up the model training and conserve
network bandwidth? ii) How to optimize the AI algorithms to run efficiently on
the energy constrained edge hardware? iii) How to modularize the AI algorithms
so that they can be seamlessly deployed across a large number of edge devices
without a single point of failure?

4.5 Location Data Scarcity Challenge
One recurring issue in social sensing is the user privacy whereby the personal information of the online users remains at risk of falling into the wrong hands [85].

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

13

Geo-location data shared by users can also be used to expose other private information as well (e.g., ethnicity, race, financial status) which social media users do
not typically consent to share and are also not required by CovidSens applications.
Thus, it has been observed that due to the concern of one’s location and private information being exposed, many social media users tend to not share their location
information while reporting their observations in the social media [86, 87, 88]. For
example, in an independent study involving data collection for disaster related
tweets, it was found that less than 10% of the tweets were actually geo-tagged
(i.e., contained geographical location of the users). As such, CovidSens applications that heavily rely on the location metadata from the social media posts to
provide inference of the COVID-19 spread may under-perform when the number
of geo-tagged social media are scarce. Recent literature has explored methods to
work around this issue by exploiting spatiotemporal social constraints for location
inference from social media posts [89]. However, such uni-dimensional approaches
that rely on solely on the content of the social media posts may result in high
estimation errors for the inferred locations. In order to precisely track the progress
of the COVID-19 propagation, it is imperative to obtain the exact locations of the
surges. Consequently, it is a challenge in CovidSens applications to design a solution that can mitigate the data scarcity issue which may eventually yield better
sensing results for tracking the COVID-19 spread.

4.6 Timely Presentation Challenge
With the rapidly evolving circumstances during the COVID-19 outbreak, it is
critical to present the information of the disease spread to the end users in a
timely manner. This necessitates an information presentation system that can
both process as well as present data of the disease propagation in real-time and
keep people alerted. In the recent past, several methods have been implemented
to present disease outbreak updates to the mass through means of interactive
websites [28, 34]. However, such methods of information distribution and collection
solely rely on aggregating knowledge from different news portals and information
websites which can lead to potential delays in alerting people about the most recent
situation [6]. Due to their structured nature of information crawling and collating,
existing web-based techniques cannot be directly applied to social sensing which
encompasses unstructured and noisy social data [90]. In addition to that, websites
and smartphone applications rely on the constant availability of both the Internet
and a smart device, either of which may not be available in all circumstances.
Thus, vital information may not reach all sectors of the population, especially with
the elderly and less tech savvy individuals without access to computers and smart
devices. Based on these grounds, it remains an open question in CovidSens on how
to develop a reliable yet efficient mechanism that can rapidly deliver important
messages and information regarding the COVID-19 spread to all segments of the
population.

14

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

4.7 Human Factor Challenge
One important aspect to consider while dealing with social signals in CovidSens
is the human component. Given the intensifying concerns and panic among the
general public during the COVID-19, we acknowledge that people can be overly
emotional, sensational, or biased in expressing their opinions in the social media or
the crowdsensing applications [91]. Such behavior can potentially trigger misrepresented or misinterpreted observations and thus yield erroneous disease tracking
results. Based on the above concerns, one critical challenge stemming from the
human aspect of social sensing can be on deciding how to handle the mood of the
population while containing the public concern at desirable levels. Moreover, it is
imperative to study the human component closely and model how people react
to the information presented to them through the warning and alert systems in
CovidSens. Some individuals may turn out to be excessively sensitive and thus
care must be taken so as not to develop the grounds for unnecessary panic or civil
unrest. For example, during the Ebola epidemic in Liberia in 2014, riots broke
out among the residents when officials raised alarms of the outbreak [92]. On the
other extreme of the spectrum, we also acknowledge that a certain proportion of
the population have a tendency to be oblivious of the circumstances, neglect warnings, and remain excessively calm during this outbreak situation. The challenge of
CovidSens is to strike a smooth balance between raising attention and providing
assurance: at one end we need to calm people down while informing them of the
situation but at the same time we also need to send out the message to remain
well-prepared.

4.8 Misinformation Spread Challenge
With the heightening concern of the COVID-19 spread, just as social media has
served as a platform for attaining information, it has also served as the venue for
sprouting misinformation. Due to the increased adoption of social sensing as a
news source, misinformation spread on social media has remained an inevitable
issue [70]. This has caused social media giants such as Facebook and Google to
conduct worldwide campaigns to fight the propagation of fake news [93]. Figure 5
illustrates a collection of tweets referring to misinformation during the COVID-19
outbreak. The World Health Organization (WHO) has been forced to reallocate
considerable resources to combat swathes of misinformation like these, which may
potentially hinder COVID-19 monitoring efforts [94]. This phenomenon has been
classified by WHO as an ‘infodemic [94]. Social sensing tools, otherwise known
as truth discovery algorithms, are known to under-perform in the presence of
widespread misinformation, which is common during disease outbreak scenarios.
One obvious measure to address this issue is to acquire ground truth for validating
the source reliability and event correctness. However, obtaining such ground truth
is delay prone since it requires a significant amount of manual effort, but most
importantly it is impractical during the course of virus breakouts where people
should restrict locomotion and contact with other people. Therefore, it remains a
critical challenge in CovidSens to construct an effective mechanism that can identify and isolate the misinformation spread to generate trustworthy social signals
indicating the COVID-19 spread.

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

15

Fig. 5 Tweets indicating fake news

5 Road-map for Future Work
In this section, we discuss a few potential directions for future work in the realm
of CovidSens.

5.1 Uncertainty Quantification in CovidSens
We note that CovidSens relies on noisy and uncertain social-sensing data generated
by unvetted data sources to monitor the COVID-19 spread. Thus, one domain for
future work can be to mitigate the data reliability challenge for CovidSens applications. We observe that existing social-sensing tools or truth discovery algorithms
mainly prioritize on the data veracity or source reliability from the social media
data. However, in a social-media-driven COVID-19 spread indicator application,
the estimation confidence of a reported event’s veracity is also crucial [90]. Consequently, it is important to determine the confidence level with which the COVID-19
propagation is predicted. For example, an inferred age demography with a low estimation confidence can easily lead to an erroneous conclusion on which age of
people are most likely to be affected by COVID-19. In particular, further research
can focus on rigorously quantifying the uncertainty of output results to evaluate
and enhance the performance of the truth discovery algorithms. While the uncertainty quantification is well-studied in statistics and estimation theory, it is mostly
overlooked in existing social sensing solutions since the performance of truth discovery algorithms are hard to inspect and humans are more likely to generate the
claims with different degrees of uncertainty (e.g., affirmative assertions versus pure
guesses) [95]. Based on this, one probable research direction is to develop a method
to determine the confidence levels of detection by quantifying the uncertainty of
the results in CovidSens applications.
Current literature on statistical analysis discusses principled approaches based
on estimation theory. A set examples of techniques to quantify the uncertainty of
the estimation results of the truth discovery algorithms are maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) and Cramer-Rao lower bounds (CRLB) [17, 96, 97, 98]. While
these methods have been tested to operate optimally to provide the desired uncertainty quantification, it still remains a critical challenge to formulate the truth
discovery problems in CovidSens in a mathematically tractable way that would allow the uncertainty estimation tools to be applied upon. We envision that theories

16

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

from multiple disciplines would be leveraged to cater to the uncertainty quantification problem in the CovidSens applications.

5.2 Rumor Suppression and Fake News Detection
One direction for future work for CovidSens is to combat the misinformation propagation challenge. Therefore, rumor suppression and fake news detection are indispensable for COVID-19 related misinformation spread containment. We acknowledge that rumors and misinformation in social media originates from the behaviour
of individuals sharing what others share [67, 99]. Thus, it is beyond the scope of
machine intelligence alone to contain the spread of rumors and misinformation entirely. Based on these premises, a few potential research questions can be: i) how
to develop techniques that incorporate human intelligence along with machine intelligence to more accurately identify the rumors from true information about the
COVID-19 spread? ii) How to investigate and identify the origin behind misinformation sharing from the social media posts? iii) How different demography (e.g.,
age groups, gender classes) react to misinformation about COVID-19 spread and
how to utilize this knowledge to combat the misinformation propagation?
Several existing literature has proposed different fact determining techniques
for analyzing and detecting falsified claims and rumors on social media using: i)
Bayesian-based heuristic algorithms [70], ii) analyzing textual evidence with associated images [100], and iii) considering physical constraints and temporal dependencies of the evolving truth [26]. One new domain of research focuses on unifying
the collective strengths of human intelligence (HI) and artificial intelligence (AI)
to screen out misinformation in the social media [101]. Such approaches utilize
HI-based crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) in
combination with existing deep neural networks (DNNs) and machine learning
techniques, and can be used to classify social media posts about COVID-19 as
veracious or falsified [101].

5.3 Mesh Network for News Aggregation and Circulation
A stream of potential research can focus around mitigating the data collection
and timely presentation challenges in CovidSens applications. In order to obtain
information, traditional news media (e.g., CNN, BBC) rely on dedicated news
reporters while social news aggregators (e.g., Digg, Reddit) rely on active voluntary participation of committed individuals [102]. A key drawback of such news
collection approaches is that they entrust a central authority (i.e., a news agency
or web administrator) to analyze and verify disease outbreaks like COVID-19,
which may induce delays in deriving the COVID-19 propagation [6]. In contrast, a
decentralized social-sensing based news aggregation and subscription service can
potentially accelerate the news collection as well as distribution of information
during the global pandemic of COVID-19 [103]. A survey shows that 37% of Internet users promulgated news content through social media posts on Facebook
and Twitter [103]. With the proliferation of smart devices and people’s tendency
to post about being tested positive for COVID-19 [104, 105, 106] as well being
tested positive on antibodies [107], information about probable COVID-19 cases

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

17

can propagate very fast through the social media. However, as identified earlier, a
key hurdle is to develop a system that can spontaneously locate, obtain, and store
the data from the social media platforms. Furthermore, after the COVID-19 related information is assembled, a system needs to be developed that can convey the
processed information to the mass public. A set of important research questions
are: i) how to efficiently filter and organize information contributed by diversified
and unreliable sources? ii) How to compile the gathered information to an acceptable degree that each subscriber feels complacent in reading and trusting? iii) How
to present the information to less tech savvy individuals with limited knowledge
on computers and smartphones? iv) How to sustain the news aggregation and
circulation during an Internet downtime?
A possible approach of information collection is to develop a real-time social
media data collection and storage engine, such as Apollo [108]. One other potentially effective technique for information aggregation is to develop a dedicated
crowdsensing-based smartphone application which allows users to readily report
about COVID-19 related observations [35]. Subsequently, a decentralized mesh
network based news subscription service can be constructed from the collected
data in the mobile app that is able to operate autonomously without a central
authority. The service can be used to leverage the rich set of real-time observations of COVID-19 contained in the social data to explore the collective wisdom
of common individuals without relying on dedicated news reporters. The entire
service may be implemented within the aforementioned mobile app that can both
collect the information of the COVID-19 spread from the online users and also
present the prepared news to others [35]. This process can virtually eliminate the
existence of a central authority, hence reducing delays in information gathering
and distribution in a CovidSens application.

5.4 Privacy Aware Location Discovery Based on Contextual Analysis
CovidSens applications are inherently location data driven and hence a potential
domain of research in CovidSens can be to address the location data scarcity
challenge from the social media data. Specifically, studies can focus on determining
the location of the COVID-19 related report origination points in the absence of
the geo-location metadata in the posts. We emphasize that during inferring the
event report locations from the social media data, care must be given to respect
individual privacy from the system perspective, which if done improperly may lead
to serious privacy breaches. For example, while a user’s location information may
be deduced from the text data in social media, it may also be used to infer other
sensitive information such as job, ethnicity, race, financial status [109, 110]. Leakage
of these information may place users at risk and lead to loss of confidence in the
developed system [85]. Therefore, one important area of research in CovidSens
can focus on how to develop privacy-aware location inference tools based on the
contextual analysis of social media data that protects the identity and privacy of
the users.
Once the user privacy is ensured, a good amount of opportunity exists in designing techniques to leverage the contextual information that is embedded within
the text content of a social media post (toponym resolution). Moreover, images
contained with posts can also be useful in extrapolating an accurate estimate of

18

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

the social media report’s origination sites [111]. For example, an individual tweeting about COVID-19 symptoms claiming to be from a particular location can be
given greater credibility if he or she posts with the image of the place. Another
way to obtain the geo-location information of social media data can be to use
image-based geocoding where subjects in the background of a posted image are
cross-referenced with known landmarks or popular sites to find the location of the
image [112].
People who post about disease symptoms in social media and “follow” other
social media users with similar symptoms may be co-located [113]. Intuitively,
if one user’s location can be determined, the location of the related users may
be discovered as well. However, individuals may also reside very far from one
another. For instance, two friends showing COVID-19 related symptoms may be
located in two different cities. Thus, additional features from the social media data
may be analyzed to infer other evidence for being co-located. Rich privacy-aware
location inference schemes can be developed that fuse friend-follower networks
with the contextual information embedded within texts in tweets to determine the
whereabouts of COVID-19 spread [89, 113]. An ensemble of solutions employing
natural language processing (NLP) [114], deep neural networks (DNNs), and social
network analysis can be built to accurately infer the location information from the
social media data [101, 111].

5.5 Edge Intelligence with Federated Learning
One prospective domain for future research in CovidSens can be focused on addressing the scalability challenge of the AI models to effectively monitor the
COVID-19 propagation from the social sensing data. In order to ensure that the
most up-to-date information of the COVID-19 spread is available at any instant
across any location, a large scale deployment of CovidSens is crucial. However,
since traditional AI models are inherently built with a design philosophy that endorses centralized training [115], they may not be a viable approach for such a
global scale implementation of CovidSens. Therefore, in order to reliably analyze
the obtained data related to COVID-19 across a global extent, we envision expandable AI architectures that can be spontaneously deployed across a massive
number of edge devices.
With the growth of powerful edge devices (e.g., smartphones, IoT devices)
and the demand for distributed model training over a large number of computing nodes, federated learning (FL) is gaining traction as a distributed AI training
paradigm [116]. In FL, a shared global AI model is trained from a collection of
edge devices owned by end users, while retaining the training data within the edge
devices [90]. By not transmitting the private data to a central server, FL manages
to preserve user privacy and therefore foster trust among the participating users.
The principle of FL aligns appropriately with our vision of scalable social sensing
systems by shifting AI from the cloud to edge devices. However, there are still several open challenges in FL that need to be addressed before establishing effective
CovidSens systems. One recurring issue in FL is the inconsistent availability of the
edge devices, otherwise known as churn [82]. FL heavily relies on the participation
of the edge devices for the training phase, which requires multiple iterations to
converge to a global optima. Edge devices are owned by rational individuals who

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

19

might abruptly leave in the middle of an ongoing AI model training process [90].
Moreover, edge devices might periodically evict tasks for power savings, or have
a higher priority task to supplant the model training task. This could potentially
negate the learning process, yielding poor model parameter training [82]. Another
limitation of many existing FL schemes is that they rely on synchronous model
update operations [117]. At every iteration of the model training, the server aggregates the model weights after receiving updates from all the clients. Due to
the heterogeneity of the edge devices and the instability of network connections,
all the devices cannot be guaranteed to have the same update interval [80]. Thus,
the server is prone to substantial downtime while needing to wait for all local
updates before aggregation. In a CovidSens application, where time is a crucial
factor, such delays are undesirable as they may slow the real-time prediction of the
COVID-19 spread. Therefore, it is an open challenge to simultaneously handle the
churn issue and develop asynchronous model training in FL for scalable CovidSens
applications.

5.6 Integration of Social Sensing with Physical Sensing
As identified earlier, one key goal for developing effective CovidSens applications
is to address the data reliability challenge stemming from the unreliable social
media users. Beside uncertainty quantification, a strand of research to combat the
data reliability challenge in CovidSens is to integrate social sensing with physical
sensing paradigms (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and vehicular sensor
networks (VSNs)) to verify the reports connected to COVID-19. Compared to
UAVs and VSNs, social sensing has a broader outreach, but suffers from inconsistent reliability. On the other hand, UAVs and VSNs are fitted with arrays of sensors
(e.g., temperature, humidity, and air quality sensors, cameras, microphones) [118]
that allow them to sense COVID-19 related events with substantial fidelity [119].
However, they are limited in sensing scope and possess partial autonomy [120].
Leveraging the collective strengths of UAVs and VSNs with social sensing can
potentially accelerate the discovery of COVID-19 related events. The reliable and
high quality measurements provided by physical sensors naturally complement
the uncertain estimation and broader sensing scope of social sensing. Driven by
the social signals, the mobility and agility of UAVs and VSNs can allow them to
be quickly sent to COVID-19 prone areas or hot zones to collect real-time evidence (e.g., people loitering on streets or gathering in larger groups) and ascertain
whether the reported cases actually exists before sending out medical teams or
law enforcement [118].
A few possible courses of work can focus on either integrating social sensing
with UAVs, namely social drone [27], or with VSNs, namely social car [121] to
sense the neighborhood of COVID-19 affected areas for unwanted crowds, open
pharmacies or emergency supply stores, and so on. Social drone based approaches
can be further integrated with computational modeling (e.g., disease propagation
models) to enhance the COVID-19 detection process [122]. A set of open research
questions in these applications are: i) how to leverage the noisy social signals to
quickly guide drones and cars to locations of interest? ii) How to accommodate
various constraints imposed by the physical world (e.g., deadlines of urgent cases
like dying patients, limited availability drones and their limited flight times)? iii)

20

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

How to leverage the observations collected by the drones (e.g., unwanted crowds)
to improve the social sensing process? Probable solutions that holistically solve
the above challenges in the context of CovidSens systems are yet to be developed.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce CovidSens, a new vision of reliable social sensing based
information distillation and risk alerting systems to monitor the COVID-19 spread
and study the transmission dynamics of the contagious disease. We highlight a
few key challenges in CovidSens applications including data collection, reliability, scalability, modality, presentation, and misinformation spread. By harnessing
interdisciplinary techniques, CovidSens can combine the collective strengths of social sensing with AI as well as human intelligence to perform real-time analyses
on the obtained epidemiological data. CovidSens can yield more timely and accurate prediction of the COVID-19 spread which may subsequently be presented to
end users through a collection of rich mobile apps and UAVs. We hope this paper
will uphold CovidSens as an important avenue for guiding research to tackle the
current COVID-19 pandemic around the world.

Acknowledgment
This research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. CNS-1845639, CNS-1831669, Army Research Office under Grant W911NF-171-0409. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government. The
U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation here on.

References
1. Ignatov, A., Timofte, R., Chou, W., Wang, K., Wu, M., Hartley, T., Van Gool, L.: Ai
benchmark: Running deep neural networks on android smartphones. In: Proceedings of
the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 0–0 (2018)
2. Wang, D., Kaplan, L., Le, H., Abdelzaher, T.: On truth discovery in social sensing: A
maximum likelihood estimation approach. In: Proc. ACM/IEEE 11th Int Information
Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN) Conf, pp. 233–244 (2012). DOI 10.1109/IPSN.
2012.6920960
3. Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in the u.s. URL https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/cases-in-us.html
4. Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in the u.s.
URL https://coronavirus.
1point3acres.com/en
5. Vos, S.C., Buckner, M.M.: Social media messages in an emerging health crisis: tweeting
bird flu. Journal of health communication 21(3), 301–308 (2016)
6. Wang, D., Szymanski, B.K., Abdelzaher, T., Ji, H., Kaplan, L.: The age of social sensing.
Computer 52(1), 36–45 (2019)
7. Haddow, G., Haddow, K.: Social media and the boston marathon bombings: A case study.
Physical Security & Emergency Management (2015)
8. Haddow, G.D., Haddow, K.S.: Disaster communications in a changing media world.
Butterworth-Heinemann (2013)

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

21

9. Chunara, R., Andrews, J.R., Brownstein, J.S.: Social and news media enable estimation
of epidemiological patterns early in the 2010 haitian cholera outbreak. The American
journal of tropical medicine and hygiene 86(1), 39–45 (2012)
10. 6.7 million people just mentioned the coronavirus on social media. URL https://t.co/
be68zIJfYj?amp=1
11. Zhang, D., Vance, N., Wang, D.: When social sensing meets edge computing: Vision and
challenges. In: 2019 28th International Conference on Computer Communication and
Networks (ICCCN), pp. 1–9. IEEE (2019)
12. Facebook, google discuss sharing smartphone data with government to fight
coronavirus, but there are risks.
URL https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/19/
facebook-google-could-share-smartphone-data-to-fight-coronavirus.html
13. Khan, A., Sohail, A., Zahoora, U., Qureshi, A.S.: A survey of the recent architectures of
deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06032 (2019)
14. Smith, C., Mashhadi, A., Capra, L.: Ubiquitous sensing for mapping poverty in developing
countries. Paper submitted to the Orange D4D Challenge (2013)
15. Noulas, A., Scellato, S., Lambiotte, R., Pontil, M., Mascolo, C.: A tale of many cities:
universal patterns in human urban mobility. PloS one 7(5), e37027 (2012)
16. Zhang, Y., Dong, X., Shang, L., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: A multi-modal graph neural
network approach to traffic risk forecasting in smart urban sensing. In: International
Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking (SECON), p. to appear. IEEE
(2020)
17. Wang, D., Kaplan, L., Abdelzaher, T., Aggarwal, C.C.: On credibility estimation tradeoffs
in assured social sensing. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 31(6),
1026–1037 (2013)
18. Zhang, Y., Zhang, D.Y., Vance, N., Wang, D.: An online reinforcement learning approach
to quality-cost-aware task allocation for multi-attribute social sensing. Pervasive and
Mobile Computing 60, 101086 (2019)
19. Al Amin, M.T., Abdelzaher, T., Wang, D., Szymanski, B.: Crowd-sensing with polarized
sources. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor
Systems, pp. 67–74. IEEE (2014)
20. Marshall, J., Wang, D.: Mood-sensitive truth discovery for reliable recommendation systems in social sensing. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems, pp. 167–174 (2016)
21. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L., Aggarwal, C.C.: Recursive fact-finding: A streaming approach to truth estimation in crowdsourcing applications. In: 2013 IEEE 33rd
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, pp. 530–539. IEEE (2013)
22. Boulton, C.A., Shotton, H., Williams, H.T.: Using social media to detect and locate
wildfires. In: Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (2016)
23. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L.: Social sensing: building reliable systems on unreliable data. Morgan Kaufmann (2015)
24. Zhang, D., Wang, D., Vance, N., Zhang, Y., Mike, S.: On scalable and robust truth
discovery in big data social media sensing applications. IEEE Transactions on Big Data
(2018)
25. Xu, Z., Zhang, H., Sugumaran, V., Choo, K.K.R., Mei, L., Zhu, Y.: Participatory sensingbased semantic and spatial analysis of urban emergency events using mobile social media.
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2016(1), 44 (2016)
26. Zhang, D.Y., Wang, D., Zhang, Y.: Constraint-aware dynamic truth discovery in big data
social media sensing. In: Big Data (Big Data), 2017 IEEE International Conference on,
pp. 57–66. IEEE (2017)
27. Rashid, M.T., Zhang, D., Shang, L., Wang, D.: An integrated social media and drone
sensing system for reliable disaster response. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications. IEEE (2020)
28. Schmidt, C.W.: Trending now: using social media to predict and track disease outbreaks
(2012)
29. Charles-Smith, L.E., Reynolds, T.L., Cameron, M.A., Conway, M., Lau, E.H., Olsen,
J.M., Pavlin, J.A., Shigematsu, M., Streichert, L.C., Suda, K.J., et al.: Using social media
for actionable disease surveillance and outbreak management: a systematic literature
review. PloS one 10(10) (2015)
30. Wilson, N., Mason, K., Tobias, M., Peacey, M., Huang, Q., Baker, M.: Interpreting google
flu trends data for pandemic h1n1 influenza: the new zealand experience. Eurosurveillance
14(44), 19386 (2009)

22

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

31. Kalogiros, L.A., Lagouvardos, K., Nikoletseas, S., Papadopoulos, N., Tzamalis, P.: Allergymap: a hybrid mhealth mobile crowdsensing system for allergic diseases epidemiology:
a multidisciplinary case study. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), pp. 597–602. IEEE
(2018)
32. Krieck, M., Dreesman, J., Otrusina, L., Denecke, K.: A new age of public health: Identifying disease outbreaks by analyzing tweets. In: Proceedings of health web-science
workshop, ACM Web Science Conference, pp. 10–15 (2011)
33. Chester, T.L.S., Taylor, M., Sandhu, J., Forsting, S., Ellis, A., Stirling, R., Galanis, E.:
Use of a web forum and an online questionnaire in the detection and investigation of an
outbreak. Online journal of public health informatics 3(1) (2011)
34. Brownstein, J.S., Freifeld, C.C., Reis, B.Y., Mandl, K.D.: Surveillance sans frontieres:
Internet-based emerging infectious disease intelligence and the healthmap project. PLoS
medicine 5(7) (2008)
35. Freifeld, C.C., Mandl, K.D., Reis, B.Y., Brownstein, J.S.: Healthmap: global infectious
disease monitoring through automated classification and visualization of internet media
reports. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 15(2), 150–157 (2008)
36. Toda, M., Njeru, I., Zurovac, D., Tipo, S.O., Kareko, D., Mwau, M., Morita, K.: Effectiveness of a mobile short-message-service–based disease outbreak alert system in kenya.
Emerging infectious diseases 22(4), 711 (2016)
37. Yu, V.L., Madoff, L.C.: Promed-mail: an early warning system for emerging diseases.
Clinical infectious diseases 39(2), 227–232 (2004)
38. Carter, M.: How twitter may have helped nigeria contain ebola. BMJ: British Medical
Journal (Online) 349 (2014)
39. Sun, K., Chen, J., Viboud, C.: Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease
2019 outbreak based on crowdsourced data: a population-level observational study. The
Lancet Digital Health (2020)
40. Schiffmann, A.: Coronavirus dashboard. URL https://ncov2019.live/data
41. Dong, E., Du, H., Gardner, L.: An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19 in
real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020)
42. Covid-19 in us and canada. URL https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en
43. What we can learn from south korea and singapores efforts to stop coronavirus (besides wearing face masks).
URL https://news.yahoo.com/m/
9ff084c5-5c10-39ff-98c5-18cb5749a0fa/what-we-can-learn-from-south.html
44. Abiodun, O.I., Jantan, A., Omolara, A.E., Dada, K.V., Mohamed, N.A., Arshad, H.:
State-of-the-art in artificial neural network applications: A survey. Heliyon 4(11), e00938
(2018)
45. Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., Tozzi, A.E., Vanhems, P., Voirin, N.: Measuring contact patterns
with wearable sensors: methods, data characteristics and applications to data-driven simulations of infectious diseases. Clinical Microbiology and Infection 20(1), 10–16 (2014)
46. Kawtrakul, A., Yingsaeree, C., Andres, F.: A framework of nlp based information tracking and related knowledge organizing with topic maps. In: International Conference on
Application of Natural Language to Information Systems, pp. 272–283. Springer (2007)
47. Torres, B.Y., Oliveira, J.H.M., Tate, A.T., Rath, P., Cumnock, K., Schneider, D.S.: Tracking resilience to infections by mapping disease space. PLoS biology 14(4), e1002436
(2016)
48. Babu, S.B., Suneetha, A., Babu, G.C., Kumar, Y.J.N., Karuna, G.: Medical disease
prediction using grey wolf optimization and auto encoder based recurrent neural network.
Periodicals of Engineering and Natural Sciences 6(1), 229–240 (2018)
49. Du, J., Tang, L., Xiang, Y., Zhi, D., Xu, J., Song, H.Y., Tao, C.: Public perception analysis
of tweets during the 2015 measles outbreak: comparative study using convolutional neural
network models. Journal of medical Internet research 20(7), e236 (2018)
50. Mahalakshmi, B., Suseendran, G.: Prediction of zika virus by multilayer perceptron neural
network (mlpnn) using cloud. International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE) (2019)
51. Naudé, W.: Artificial intelligence vs covid-19: limitations, constraints and pitfalls. Ai &
Society p. 1 (2020)
52. Cascella, M., Rajnik, M., Cuomo, A., Dulebohn, S.C., Di Napoli, R.: Features, evaluation
and treatment coronavirus (covid-19). In: StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls Publishing
(2020)

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

23

53. Ma, J., Gao, W., Mitra, P., Kwon, S., Jansen, B.J., Wong, K.F., Cha, M.: Detecting
rumors from microblogs with recurrent neural networks. Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2016) (2016)
54. Haddawy, P., Frommberger, L., Kauppinen, T., De Felice, G., Charkratpahu, P., Saengpao, S., Kanchanakitsakul, P.: Situation awareness in crowdsensing for disease surveillance in crisis situations. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies and Development, pp. 1–5 (2015)
55. Zhang, Y., Zhang, D., Li, Q., Wang, D.: Towards optimized online task allocation in
cost-sensitive crowdsensing applications. In: 2018 IEEE 37th International Performance
Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC), pp. 1–8. IEEE (2018)
56. Minaeian, S., Liu, J., Son, Y.J.: Vision-based target detection and localization via a
team of cooperative uav and ugvs. IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics:
systems 46(7), 1005–1016 (2015)
57. Cops will start using drones fitted with night-vision cameras. URL https://www.
the-sun.com/news/580338/cops-to-start-using-drones/
58. Ruiz Estrada, M.A.: The uses of drones in case of massive epidemics contagious diseases
relief humanitarian aid: Wuhan-covid-19 crisis. Available at SSRN 3546547 (2020)
59. Nur’Aini, K., Najahaty, I., Hidayati, L., Murfi, H., Nurrohmah, S.: Combination of singular value decomposition and k-means clustering methods for topic detection on twitter.
In: 2015 International Conference on Advanced Computer Science and Information Systems (ICACSIS), pp. 123–128. IEEE (2015)
60. Zhang, Y., Zhang, D., Vance, N., Li, Q., Wang, D.: A light-weight and quality-aware
online adaptive sampling approach for streaming social sensing in cloud computing. In:
2018 IEEE 24th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS),
pp. 1–8. IEEE (2018)
61. Jagannatha, A.N., Yu, H.: Structured prediction models for rnn based sequence labeling in
clinical text. In: Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing. conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, vol. 2016,
p. 856. NIH Public Access (2016)
62. Zanzotto, F.M., Pennacchiotti, M., Tsioutsiouliklis, K.: Linguistic redundancy in twitter.
In: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 659–669. Association for Computational Linguistics (2011)
63. Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: Deeprisk: A deep transfer learning approach
to migratable traffic risk estimation in intelligent transportation using social sensing.
In: 2019 15th International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems
(DCOSS), pp. 123–130. IEEE (2019)
64. Makice, K.: Twitter API: Up and running: Learn how to build applications with the
Twitter API. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.” (2009)
65. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L., Ganti, R., Hu, S., Liu, H.: Exploitation of physical
constraints for reliable social sensing. In: 2013 IEEE 34th Real-Time Systems Symposium,
pp. 212–223. IEEE (2013)
66. Wang, D., Kaplan, L., Abdelzaher, T.F.: Maximum likelihood analysis of conflicting
observations in social sensing. ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks (ToSN) 10(2), 30
(2014)
67. Wang, D., Al Amin, M.T., Abdelzaher, T., Roth, D., Voss, C.R., Kaplan, L.M., Tratz,
S., Laoudi, J., Briesch, D.: Provenance-assisted classification in social networks. IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 8(4), 624–637 (2014)
68. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L.: Surrogate mobile sensing. IEEE Communications
Magazine 52(8), 36–41 (2014)
69. Wang, D., Amin, M.T., Li, S., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L., Gu, S., Pan, C., Liu, H.,
Aggarwal, C.C., Ganti, R.: Using humans as sensors: an estimation-theoretic perspective. In: Information Processing in Sensor Networks, IPSN-14 Proceedings of the 13th
International Symposium on, pp. 35–46. IEEE (2014)
70. Yin, X., Han, J., Philip, S.Y.: Truth discovery with multiple conflicting information
providers on the web. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 20(6),
796–808 (2008)
71. Chu, X., Ilyas, I.F., Krishnan, S., Wang, J.: Data cleaning: Overview and emerging challenges. In: Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data,
pp. 2201–2206 (2016)
72. Zhang, Y., Zong, R., Han, J., Zheng, H., Lou, Q., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: Transland: An
adversarial transfer learning approach for migratable urban land usage classification using

24

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.
79.
80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang
remote sensing. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp.
1567–1576. IEEE (2019)
Zhang, Y., Zong, R., Han, J., Zhang, D., Rashid, T., Wang, D.: Transres: A deep transfer
learning approach to migratable image super-resolution in remote urban sensing. In:
International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking (SECON), p. to
appear. IEEE (2020)
Shang, L., Zhang, D.Y., Wang, M., Lai, S., Wang, D.: Towards reliable online clickbait
video detection: A content-agnostic approach. Knowledge-Based Systems 182, 104851
(2019)
Birke, R., Bjoerkqvist, M., Chen, L.Y., Smirni, E., Engbersen, T.: (big) data in a virtualized world: volume, velocity, and variety in cloud datacenters. In: 12th {USENIX}
Conference on File and Storage Technologies ({FAST} 14), pp. 177–189 (2014)
Zhang, Y., Vance, N., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: On opinion characterization in social sensing:
A multi-view subspace learning approach. In: 2018 14th International Conference on
Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), pp. 155–162. IEEE (2018)
Zhang, N., Chen, Y.s., Wang, J.l.: Image parallel processing based on gpu. In: 2010
2nd International Conference on Advanced Computer Control, vol. 3, pp. 367–370. IEEE
(2010)
Allergy symptoms vs covid-19 symptoms. URL https://www.familyallergy.com/
general/allergy-symptoms-vs-covid-19-symptoms/
Li, H., Ota, K., Dong, M.: Learning iot in edge: Deep learning for the internet of things
with edge computing. IEEE network 32(1), 96–101 (2018)
Zhang, D., Vance, N., Zhang, Y., Rashid, M.T., Wang, D.: Edgebatch: Towards aiempowered optimal task batching in intelligent edge systems. In: 2019 IEEE Real-Time
Systems Symposium (RTSS), pp. 366–379 (2019)
Zhang, D., Rashid, T., Li, X., Vance, N., Wang, D.: Heteroedge: taming the heterogeneity of edge computing system in social sensing. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Internet of Things Design and Implementation, pp. 37–48 (2019)
Vance, N., Rashid, M.T., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: Towards reliability in online high-churn
edge computing: A deviceless pipelining approach. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), pp. 301–308. IEEE (2019)
Zhang, D., Ma, Y., Zhang, Y., Lin, S., Hu, X.S., Wang, D.: A real-time and noncooperative task allocation framework for social sensing applications in edge computing
systems. In: 2018 IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS), pp. 316–326. IEEE (2018)
Zhang, D., Ma, Y., Zheng, C., Zhang, Y., Hu, X.S., Wang, D.: Cooperative-competitive
task allocation in edge computing for delay-sensitive social sensing. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM
Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC), pp. 243–259. IEEE (2018)
Vance, N., Zhang, D.Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, D.: Privacy-aware edge computing in social
sensing applications using ring signatures. In: 2018 IEEE 24th International Conference
on Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), pp. 755–762. IEEE (2018)
Zhang, Y., Lu, Y., Zhang, D., Shang, L., Wang, D.: Risksens: A multi-view learning
approach to identifying risky traffic locations in intelligent transportation systems using
social and remote sensing. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), pp. 1544–1553. IEEE (2018)
Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Zhang, D., Lu, Y., Wang, D.: Riskcast: social sensing based traffic
risk forecasting via inductive multi-view learning. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp. 154–
157 (2019)
Zhang, Y., Dong, X., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: A syntax-based learning approach to geolocating abnormal traffic events using social sensing. In: Proceedings of the 2019
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp. 663–670 (2019)
Huang, C., Wang, D., Zhu, S.: Where are you from: Home location profiling of crowd
sensors from noisy and sparse crowdsourcing data. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2017-IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 1–9. IEEE (2017)
Wang, D., Zhang, D., Zhang, Y., Rashid, M.T., Shang, L., Wei, N.: Social edge intelligence: Integrating human and artificial intelligence at the edge. In: 2019 IEEE First
International Conference on Cognitive Machine Intelligence (CogMI), pp. 194–201. IEEE
(2019)

CovidSens: A Vision on Reliable Social Sensing for COVID-19

25

91. Kim, Y., Huang, J., Emery, S.: Garbage in, garbage out: data collection, quality assessment and reporting standards for social media data use in health research, infodemiology
and digital disease detection. Journal of medical Internet research 18(2), e41 (2016)
92. Fisman, D., Khoo, E., Tuite, A.: Early epidemic dynamics of the west african 2014 ebola
outbreak: estimates derived with a simple two-parameter model. PLoS currents 6 (2014)
93. Wingfield, N., Isaac, M., Benner, K.: Google and facebook take aim at fake news sites.
The New York Times 11, 12 (2016)
94. Misinformation will undermine coronavirus responses. URL https://dailybrief.oxan.
com/Analysis/DB250989/Misinformation-will-undermine-coronavirus-responses
95. Wang, D., Huang, C.: Confidence-aware truth estimation in social sensing applications.
In: International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking (SECON), pp.
336–344. IEEE (2015)
96. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Kaplan, L., Aggarwal, C.C.: On quantifying the accuracy of
maximum likelihood estimation of participant reliability in social sensing. In: DMSN11:
8th International Workshop on Data Management for Sensor Networks (2011)
97. Wang, D., Abdelzaher, T., Ahmadi, H., Pasternack, J., Roth, D., Gupta, M., Han, J.,
Fatemieh, O., Le, H., Aggarwal, C.C.: On bayesian interpretation of fact-finding in information networks. In: 14th International Conference on Information Fusion, pp. 1–8.
IEEE (2011)
98. Wang, D., Kaplan, L., Abdelzaher, T., Aggarwal, C.C.: On scalability and robustness limitations of real and asymptotic confidence bounds in social sensing. In: 2012 9th Annual
IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications
and Networks (SECON), pp. 506–514. IEEE (2012)
99. Kumar, K.K., Geethakumari, G.: Detecting misinformation in online social networks
using cognitive psychology. Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences 4(1),
1–22 (2014)
100. Zhang, D.Y., Shang, L., Geng, B., Lai, S., Li, K., Zhu, H., Amin, M.T., Wang, D.:
Fauxbuster: A content-free fauxtography detector using social media comments. In: 2018
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 891–900. IEEE (2018)
101. Zhang, D., Zhang, Y., Li, Q., Plummer, T., Wang, D.: Crowdlearn: A crowd-ai hybrid
system for deep learning-based damage assessment applications. In: 2019 IEEE 39th
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 1221–1232.
IEEE (2019)
102. Shang, L., Zhang, D.Y., Wang, M., Wang, D.: Vulnercheck: A content-agnostic detector
for online hatred-vulnerable videos. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), pp. 573–582. IEEE (2019)
103. Hong, S.: Online news on twitter: Newspapers social media adoption and their online
readership. Information Economics and Policy 24(1), 69–74 (2012)
104. Youve tested positive for covid-19. who has a right to know? URL https://time.com/
5810231/covid19-sharing-positive-result/
105. What happens when you go coronavirus viral. URL https://www.vox.com/recode/2020/
4/21/21223701/coronavirus-viral-internet-twitter-facebook
106. Coronavirus update: Covid-19 survivor chronicles journey on twitter, saying
im so thankful to be alive.
URL https://newyork.cbslocal.com/2020/04/10/
coronavirus-survivor-story-david-lat/
107. Belleville mayor has coronavirus antibodies, believes he had covid-19 months
ago. URL https://www.northjersey.com/story/news/essex/belleville/2020/04/30/
belleville-nj-mayor-tests-positive-coronavirus-antibodies/3057925001/
108. Towards fact-finding for social (human-centric) sensing. URL https://apollo.cse.nd.
edu/
109. Zhang, D.Y., Wang, D., Zheng, H., Mu, X., Li, Q., Zhang, Y.: Large-scale point-ofinterest category prediction using natural language processing models. In: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1027–1032. IEEE (2017)
110. Zhang, D., Zhang, Y., Li, Q., Wang, D.: Sparse user check-in venue prediction by exploring
latent decision contexts from location-based social networks. IEEE Transactions on Big
Data (2019)
111. Gallagher, A., Joshi, D., Yu, J., Luo, J.: Geo-location inference from image content and
user tags. In: 2009 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, pp. 55–62. IEEE (2009)
112. Lin, D., Kapoor, A., Hua, G., Baker, S.: Joint people, event, and location recognition
in personal photo collections using cross-domain context. In: European Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 243–256. Springer (2010)

26

Md Tahmid Rashid, Dong Wang

113. Gu, H., Hang, H., Lv, Q., Grunwald, D.: Fusing text and frienships for location inference
in online social networks. In: 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, vol. 1, pp. 158–165. IEEE (2012)
114. Dhavase, N., Bagade, A.: Location identification for crime & disaster events by geoparsing
twitter. In: International Conference for Convergence for Technology-2014, pp. 1–3. IEEE
(2014)
115. Zhang, D.Y., Wang, D.: An integrated top-down and bottom-up task allocation approach
in social sensing based edge computing systems. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 766–774. IEEE (2019)
116. Konečnỳ, J., McMahan, H.B., Yu, F.X., Richtárik, P., Suresh, A.T., Bacon, D.: Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.05492 (2016)
117. Chen, Y., Sun, X., Jin, Y.: Communication-efficient federated deep learning with
asynchronous model update and temporally weighted aggregation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.07424 (2019)
118. Erdelj, M., Natalizio, E., Chowdhury, K.R., Akyildiz, I.F.: Help from the sky: Leveraging
uavs for disaster management. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16(1), 24–32 (2017)
119. Rashid, M.T., Zhang, D., Liu, Z., Lin, H., Wang, D.: Collabdrone: A collaborative
spatiotemporal-aware drone sensing system driven by social sensing signals. In: 2019
28th International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN),
pp. 1–9. IEEE (2019)
120. Rashid, M.T., Zhang, D.Y., Shang, L., Wang, D.: Sead: Towards a social-media-driven
energy-aware drone sensing framework. In: 2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on
Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), pp. 647–654. IEEE (2019)
121. Rashid, M.T., Zhang, D., Wang, D.: Socialcar: A task allocation framework for social
media driven vehicular network sensing systems. In: The 15th International Conference
on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks (MSN). IEEE (2019)
122. Rashid, M.T., Zhang, Y., Zhang, D.Y., Wang, D.: Compdrone: Towards integrated computational model and social drone based wildfire monitoring. In: 16th International
Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, (DCOSS20). IEEE (2020).
Accepted

