Regression Approach for Modeling COVID-19 Spread and Its
Impact On Stock Market
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
email:b.pavlyshenko@gmail.com, LinkedIn:https://www.linkedin.com/in/bpavlyshenko/

arXiv:2004.01489v1 [q-fin.ST] 2 Apr 2020

April 6, 2020

1

Abstract

The paper studies different regression approaches for modeling COVID-19 spread and its impact
on the stock market. The logistic curve model was used with Bayesian regression for predictive
analytics of the coronavirus spread. The impact of COVID-19 was studied using regression
approach and compared to other crises influence. In practical analytics, it is important to
find the maximum of coronavirus cases per day, this point means the estimated half time of
coronavirus spread in the region under investigation. The obtained results show that different
crises with different reasons have different impact on the same stocks. It is important to analyze
their impact separately. Bayesian inference makes it possible to analyze the uncertainty of crisis
impacts.
Keywords: COVID-19, coronavirus, regression, predicitive analyticvs, stock market, Bayesian
inference

2

Bayesian Model for COVID-19 Spread Prediction

At present time, there are different methods, approaches, data sets for for modeling COVID-19
spread [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. For the predictive analytics of COVID-19 spread, we used a logistic
curve model. Such model is very popular nowadays. To estimate model parameters, we used
Bayesian regression [7, 8, 9]. This approach allows us to receive a posterior distribution of model
parameters using conditional likelihood and prior distribution. In the Bayesian inference, we
can use informative prior distributions which can be set up by an expert. So, the result can be
considered as a compromise between historical data and expert opinion. It is important in the
cases when we have a small number of historical data. Probabilistic approach makes it possible
to receive the probability density function for the target variable. Logistic curve model with
Bayesian regression approach can be written as follows:
n ∼ N (µ, σ)
α
105
1 + exp(−β(t − t0 ))
t = tweeks (Date − Date0 )
µ=

(1)

where Date0 is a start day for observations in the historical data set, it is measured in weeks. The
data for the analysis were taken from [2]. α parameter denotes maximum cases of coronavirus,
β parameter is an empirical coefficient which denotes the rate of coronavirus spread.
For solving Bayesian models, numerical Monte-Carlo methods are used. Gibbs and Hamiltonian sampling are the popular methods of finding posterior distributions for the parameters of
1

probabilistic mode [7, 8, 9]. Bayesian inference makes it possible to obtain probability density
functions for model parameters and estimate the uncertainty that is important in risk assessment analytics. In Bayesian regression approach, we can take into account expert opinions via
information prior distribution. For Bayesian inference calculations, we used pystan package for
Stan platform for statistical modeling [9]. Figure 1 shows the box plots for β parameters of
coronavirus spread model for different countries.

Figure 1: Box plots for beta coefficients of coronavirus spread model for different countries
Figures 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 show the predictions for coronavirus spread cases using current
historical data. In practical analytics, it is important to find the maximum of coronavirus
cases per day, this point means the estimated half time of coronavirus spread in the region
under investigation. New historical data will correct the distributions for model parameters
and forecasting results. The ’Bayesian Model for COVID-19 spread Prediction’ package can be
loaded at [10] for free use.

2

Figure 2: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for China

Figure 3: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for USA

3

Figure 4: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for Italy

Figure 5: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for Spain

4

Figure 6: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for Iran

Figure 7: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for France

5

Figure 8: Modeling of COVID-19 spread for Germany

6

3

COVID-19 Impact on the Stock Market

Coronavirus outbreak has a huge impact on the stock market. It is very important , e.g. for
forming stable portfolios, to understand how different crises impact stock prices. We are going
to consider the impact of coronavirus crisis on stocks and compare it to the crisis of 2008 and
market downturn of 2018. For this, we can use the regression approach using OLS regression and
Bayesian regression. Bayesian inference makes it possible to obtain probability density functions
for coefficients of the factors under investigation and estimate the uncertainty that is important
in the risk assessment analytics. In Bayesian regression approach, we can analyze extreme
target variable values using non gaussian distributions with fat tails. We took the following
time periods for each of crises - crisis 2008: [2008-01-01,2009-01-31], down turn 2018: [2018-1001,2019-01-03], coronavirus: [2020-02-18,2020-03-25]. For each of above mentioned crises, we
created a regression variable which is equal to 1 in the crisis time period and 0 in other cases.
Figure 9 shows the time series for S&P500 composite index:

Figure 9: Time series for S&P500 composite index
As a target variable, we consider the daily price return. Knowing the daily price return,
changes in crises periods, one can estimate the ability of investors to understand trends and
recalculate portfolios. These results were received using Bayesian inference. For Bayesian inference calculations, we used Python pystan package for Stan platform for statistical modeling [9].
Figure 10 shows the box plots of impact weights of each crisis on S&P500 composite index. The
wider box for coronavirus weight can be caused by shorter time period of investigation comparing
with other crises and consequently larger uncertainty. For our investigations, we took a random
set of tickers from S&P list. Figure 11 shows top negative price returns in coronavirus crises.
Figure 12 shows the tickers with positive price return in coronavirus crisis. Figure 13 shows
the weights for different crises for arbitrarily chosen stocks. We calculated the distributions for
crises weights using Bayesian inference. Figure 14 shows the box plots for crisis weights for
different stocks.

7

Figure 10: Box plots of impact weights of each crisis on S&P composite index

Figure 11: Top negative price returns in COVID-19 crises

Figure 12: Tickers with positive price returns in COVID-19 crises
8

Figure 13: The weights for different crises for arbitrarily chosen stocks

Figure 14: Box plots for crisis weights for different stocks.
9

4

Conclusion

The logistic curve model can be used with Bayesian regression for predictive analytics of coronavirus spread. Such a model can be effective when the exponential growth of number of coronavirus confirmed cases takes place. In practical analytics, it is important to find the maximum
of coronavirus cases per day, this point means the estimated half time of coronavirus spread
in the region under investigation. New historical data will correct the distributions for model
parameters and forecasting results. ’Bayesian Model for COVID-19 spread Prediction’ package
can be loaded at [10] for free use.
The obtained results show that different crises with different reasons have different impact on
the same stocks. It is important to analyze their impact separately. Bayesian inference makes it
possible to analyze the uncertainty of crisis impacts. The uncertainty of crisis impact weights can
be measured as a standard deviation for weight probability density functions. The uncertainty
of coronavirus crisis is larger comparing to other crises that can be caused by shorter analysis
time. Knowing the uncertainty allows making risk assessment for portfolios and other financial
and business processes. In Bayesian regression, we can receive a quantitative measure for the
uncertainty that can be a very useful information for experts in model selection and stacking.
An expert can also set up informative prior distributions for stacking regression coefficients of
models, taking into account the domain knowledge information.

References
[1] IHME COVID, Christopher JL Murray, et al. Forecasting covid-19 impact on hospital
bed-days, icu-days, ventilator-days and deaths by us state in the next 4 months. https:
//www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.27.20043752v1.
[2] COVID19 Global Forecasting (Week 2). Kaggle.Com.
covid19-global-forecasting-week-2.

https://www.kaggle.com/c/

[3] CSSE COVID-19 Dataset. GitHub.Com.
https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/
COVID-19/tree/master/csse_covid_19_data.
[4] Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States. GitHub.Com. https://github.com/
nytimes/covid-19-data.
[5] COVID-19 reports. https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/
covid-19/.
[6] COVID-19 Kaggle community contributions. Kaggle.Com.
covid-19-contributions.

https://www.kaggle.com/

[7] John Kruschke. Doing Bayesian data analysis: A tutorial with R, JAGS, and Stan. Academic Press, 2014.
[8] Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, David B Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald B
Rubin. Bayesian data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2013.
[9] Bob Carpenter, Andrew Gelman, Matthew D Hoffman, Daniel Lee, Ben Goodrich, Michael
Betancourt, Marcus Brubaker, Jiqiang Guo, Peter Li, and Allen Riddell. Stan: A probabilistic programming language. Journal of statistical software, 76(1), 2017.
[10] Bayesian Model for COVID-19 Spread Prediction. GitHub.Com. https://github.com/
pavlyshenko/covid19.

10

