COVID-19 in air suspensions
Daniel A. Stariolo1
1 Departamento

de Fı́sica, Universidade Federal Fluminense and

arXiv:2004.05699v3 [physics.class-ph] 9 May 2020

National Institute of Science and Technology for Complex Systems,
Av. Litorânea s/n, Campus Praia Vermelha, 24210-346 Niterói, RJ, Brazil
(Dated: May 12, 2020)
We analyze the stability of virus-carrying particles in air at equilibrium after the
dissipation of the initial turbulent process produced by sneezing, coughing, breathing or speaking. Because the viruses are expelled mainly attached to small liquid
droplets, with diverse sizes and weights, and the external environmental conditions
can also be diverse, the subsequent motion spanes different spatial and temporal
scales. We analize the validity of two simple models in this context. For droplet
sizes larger than 100 µm, computing the time of decay to the ground and the distance travelled within a simple free fall model with empirical data extracted from the
literature, we obtain distances in the range between 1 to 3 meters from the emitter,
with a falling time of less than 1 s, similar to known recommendations for safe social
distancing. For droplet sizes less than 100 µm a model of motion in a viscous medium
predicts that isolated viruses could remain suspended in quiet air for more than a
month, while small droplets of 1 µm in size can remain suspended for several hours,
in qualitative agreement with experimental results on virus stability in aerosols.

2

Introduction
With the advance of the Covid-19 virus pandemic a discussion began regarding the proper
use of masks as a safeguard against contagion. The initial advise from the World Health
Organization was that only confirmed infected people should wear masks, in order to prevent
transmission of the virus by sneezing and coughing [1]. But the high rate of propagation
of the virus in different environments around the world raised a concern about this initial
prescription. In particular, the fact that most of infected people go without developing
symptoms make them potential transmitters of the desease. Together with restrictions on
human circulation and social distancing, other important protective measure can be the
generalized use of masks in public places, like hospitals, supermarkets and aircrafts [2].
Although it is believed that the main mechanism of transmission of the virus is through
transport from infected surfaces to the mouth, nose or eyes, much less is known about
transmission through the air. For how long the virus can remain suspended in the air ?
What are dangerous concentrations ? How an initial concentration is propagated in space
and time ? These are very broad questions, but relevant in order to build a robust response
against contagion of air transmitted deseases, like Covid-19.
The mechanisms of propagation of virus in the air are diverse, depending on the nature
of the process that expels the virus from inside an infected individual. When caughing
or sneezing, a person ejects a turbulent cloud composed of liquid droplets in a wide range
of sizes [3, 4]. Larger droplets fall down quickly and the cloud looses much of its initial
momentum, until a buoyant gas of small droplets of sizes less than 100 µm continuous
expanding and spreading through space. Furthermore, in realistic situations, the effects of
air currents due to openings in the builiding or air-conditioning must be taken into account.
Results of simulations of realistic air flows carrying droplets after repeated coughing by a
person in a room show that they can be transported for several meters before they settle
on a surface or fall to the ground, thus having the potential to infect other people around
in times of the order of seconds [5]. It was found that droplets of sizes less than ∼ 30 µm
can remain suspended in the air of the room after exiting the main current. Another way of
exhaling the viruses in the air is when speaking and breathing. These are softer processes
as compared with a cough or a sneeze, but they are equally potential ways of spreading the
virus in the surroundings of an infected person. From these observations, it is clear that
the answers to the above posed questions are not unique. Many factors influence the spatial

3
and temporal extensions of the virus in the air.
Our aim is to present a pedagogical discussion of the motion of the virus in suspended air,
either considering a suspension of isolated viruses or a suspension of small liquid droplets
with a viral load. When breathing, sneezing, talking or coughing, droplets with a viral
charge are expelled from the mouth of an infected person. The droplets dispersed in the
sorrounding air do not interact between them. Small droplets of sizes less than 10 µm are
abundant, forming aerosols which can be suspended in the air for a given amount of time.
The main characteristics of the particles which determine the time of suspension in the air
are their mass and size. In general, there is a distribution of particle masses and sizes in an
aerosol. As a consequence of gravity, heavier particles will fall down at a faster rate than
lighter ones. Nevertheless, recent reports show that the Covid-19 can remain suspended and
active in aerosols for hours [6], making them potentially dangerous for the transmission of
the desease to healthy people breathing around.
We will present some results based on simple physical models for the propagation of the
particles with a viral charge once they come out from the mouth of an infected person. First,
we will consider a virus that is ejected from the mouth as a free falling object under the
only influence of gravity. We will analise the validity of this approximation with the size
and weight of the particle. When valid, the results for this model predict that the virus
should settle down on the ground after travelling approximately 1 to 3 meters, as suggested
by different sources and transmitted in the general media [7]. Then, we will present some
estimates of the air interparticle distance as compared with the size of the Covid-19 virus
and of larger droplets. This will suggest us that the virus falls down in a viscous medium,
the air. We will address the problem of the identification of the correct form of the drag
force on the droplets, which has been considered many times in related contexts, see e.g.
references [8, 9] for excellent discussions (see also [10, 11] for elegant analytical solutions to
the equations of motion). Because expelled droplets, where the virus can be found, show a
distribution of sizes and masses, we will present simple estimations of the rate and time of
decay for typical sizes of the particles. We will not consider the initial turbulent flow nor
external currents produced by air conditioning, for example [3, 5]. Instead, we will focus
on the late regime of deposition of the small droplets that remain suspended in quiet air
in equilibrium. The results can be considered as bringing lower bounds, or conservative
estimations, to the spatial and temporal extensions of airborne virus. The analysis leads

4
us to conclude that typical droplets containing virus may remain suspended in quiet air for
more than an hour, in agreement with experimental results reported recently [6].

A droplet in free fall
Free fall is the simplest model for the falling of a particle under the influence of gravity.
It is assumed that there are no collisions with other particles during the trajectory. The
position and velocities of the particles are given by Newton’s equations of motion for a free
fall [12]:
x(t) = x0 + v0x t

(1)

vx (t) = v0x
1
y(t) = y0 + v0y t + g t2
2
vy (t) = v0y + gt,
where x and y refer to horizontal and vertical directions respectively, (x0 , y0 ) are the initial
horizontal and vertical position coordinates of the particle, (v0x , v0y ) are the corresponding
components of the initial velocity vector, and g = −9, 8 m/s2 is the acceleration of gravity
(the minus sign reflects that distances grow positive from bottom to top, and gravity points
downwards in this reference frame). Here, we will be interested in knowing how far a
particle can travel, once it leaves the mouth of a person with an initial velocity vector in
the horizontal direction, given by (v0x , v0y = 0). The initial position of the particle will
be set to (x0 = 0, y0 = h), where h is the height at which the mouth is located. Within
these conditions, from the third equation from (1) we can obtain the time to reach the floor
(y = 0) from an initial height y0 = h:
s
t(h) =

2h
.
g

(2)

Then, for example, a particle in free fall from a typical height of a person , h = 1.7 m, will
reach the floor in t(1.7 m) = 0.59 s. The horizontal distance it can travel is then obtained
from the first of equations (1). It depends on the initial horizontal velocity v0x . We chose two
representative cases, extracted from an experimental study reported in [13]. We considered
the maximal reported velocities, a conservative choice. The maximal initial velocity of a
particle when talking or breathing was reported to be v1 ≈ 1.5 m/s, while the maximal

5

h[m]

th [s]

xv1 (th )[m]

xv2 (th )[m]

1.5

0.55

0.83

2.77

1.6

0.57

0.86

2.86

1.7

0.59

0.88

2.95

1.8

0.61

0.91

3.03

TABLE I. Times of decay to the floor and horizontal distances of a spittle droplet when talking or
breathing (xv1 ) and after sneezing or coughing (vv2 ), for four initial heights computed with a free
fall model.

initial velocity when sneezing or caughing was found to be v2 ≈ 5.0 m/s. Although in
the cited report these corresponded to maximal speed, i.e. the scalar value of the velocity
vector, we will consider them to be maximal representative of horizontal velocities, which
we assumed in this case. Some typical values of time of decay and travel distance to the
floor are shown in Table I.
As we can see in Table I, the times for a particle in free fall to settle on the ground
from the typical height of a person is less than a second. The estimates of the horizontal
distance travelled by the virus is less than 1 m when talking or breathing, and around
3 m from sneezing or coughing. These estimates roughly agree with others suggesting that
keeping a distance of around 2 m between people could be enough to represent a secure
situation [7]. Nevertheless, as will be shown in the next section, the free fall approximation
is not accurate for the decay of small droplets, which may stay suspended in the air for more
than an hour [6, 14]. In the next section we will analyze the range of validity of the free
fall model and show that for particles of sizes less than 100 µm it is necessary to consider
friction effects due to the viscosity of air.

Particle flow in a viscous medium
The density of dry air at T = 20o C and 1 atm is ρair = 1.2041 kg/m3 [15]. Considering
the air in a cube of volume V = l3 , we can estimate the typical interparticle distance in air
to be:
l ≈ (m/ρair )1/3 ,

(3)

6
where m is the average mass of an air particle (mainly nitrogen and oxigen molecules).
The average molecular mass of dry air is Mair = 28.97 g/mol [16]. Considering that there
are NA = 6.022 × 1023 particles in a mol of substance, where NA is Avogadro’s constant,
then m = Mair /NA ≈ 4, 81 × 10−26 kg. Thus, the typical interparticle distance in air is
l ≈ 3, 42 × 10−9 m = 3.42 nm [17]. To compare with, the approximate size of the Covid-19
virus is dC ≈ 100 nm [18]. Then, the virus will hit many particles in its trajectory through
the air [19]. As a better model to compute characteristics of the trajectory of the virus
we can assume that it is an approximately spherical particle falling in a viscous medium,
the air. Furthermore, in the vast majority of cases, the virus will come attached to small
liquid droplets expelled when talking or coughing, which have a larger volume than a single
virus. Then, besides the effective downward gravitational force (the difference between the
weight and buoyancy), one has to consider the upward drag force Fd on the particle. The
nature and precise form of the drag force is a complex issue in fluid dynamics. A well known
quantity to characterize the dynamical regime is the Reynolds number [20, 21]:
Re =

ρf d v
,
η

(4)

where ρf is the fluid density, d is the typical lengthscale of the object (the diameter in the
case of a sphere), v the relative velocity, and η is the dynamic viscosity. For the microscopic
objects of relevance for the present problem, the Reynolds number is very small. This
claim will be justified a posteriori, once we compute the typical velocities involved. At small
Reynolds number Re < 1, the drag force on a sphere of radius r is given by Stokes’ law [3, 9]:
Fd = 6π η r v.

(5)

For sphere diameters less than 1 µm a correction factor has to be considered [22]. As for
the sizes of interest in our analysis this factor is of order one, we will use the approximate
expression given above. In the vertical direction, this upward viscous force grows with time
proportional to the velocity. It is opposed by the excess force between the weight and the
buoyancy:
4
Fg = (ρs − ρf ) g πr3 ,
3

(6)

where ρs is the density of the sphere. In this case, we will consider spherical droplets with
ρs = 997 kg/m3 (the density of water) and ρf = ρair given above. As ρs ≈ 1000 ρair , we
can discard the density of air in Fg , which reduceds to the weight of the spherical droplet,

7
Fg ≈ ms g. When the upward drag force Fd equals the weight of the particle, Fd = Fg , the
droplet reaches mechanical equilibrium and, from then on, continues to fall with a constant
terminal velocity given by:
vT = µ ms g,

(7)

where µ = 1/6πη r is the droplet mobility in the fluid. For air, the dynamical viscosity is
η = 18.5 µP a · s = 1.85 × 10−5 kg · m−1 · s−1 . Assuming that particles have an initial vertical
velocity equal to zero, the terminal velocity is the maximal velocity it attains while falling
down [23].
First of all, let’s make an estimation of the limits of validity of the “free fall” model of
the previous section. The free fall model assumes that gravity, i.e. the weight, is the only
relevant force governing the motion of a particle. Then, as long as the weight is much larger
than the drag force, the motion can be considered a free fall. Now, the weight of a spherical
particle Fg = ms g can be written equivalently as Fg = ρs V g = ρs (4/3 πr3 )g. It grows
proportional to the volume, i.e. as the cube of its radius. On the other hand, the drag force
produced by the viscosity of air grows linearly with the radius of the sphere, Fd = 6π η r v,
much slower than the weight. Then, one can naively expect that the weight will quickly
be much larger than the drag force as the size of the particle grows. Nevertheless, Fd also
depends on the velocity, which is growing in the initial part of the motion, before it attains
its terminal value. In any case, if the object falls down from rest, the real velocity when the
particle has fallen down a height h will always be smaller than the corresponding free fall
velocity vf f , given by the last of equations (1) with the time given by (2), i.e.
vf f (h) =

p
2gh.

(8)

We can set this value as an upper bound for the velocity of the particle after falling from
a height h from rest. For example, in the present situation considering a typical height
h = 1.7 m, the free fall velocity is vf f = 5.77 m/s. Equating the weight with the drag force
computed at vf f we can obtain an upper bound for the radius of the particle rc :
r
9 η
rc =
vf f .
2 ρs g

(9)

When the radius r ≥ rc the drag force becomes irrelevant and the free fall model is valid.
For the case under consideration rc ≈ 200 µm. Several studies reported a wide range of
droplet sizes, from the order of 1 µm up to millimeters (see. e.g. Table 1 in [24]). Droplet

8
sizes are strongly dependent on the nature of the phenomenon, while talking, breathing,
sneezing or caughing. For example, it has been found that sneezing produces larger droplets
than coughing, and also that the velocity at which the droplets are expelled is considerably
larger during sneezing. Other characteristics that may influence the final results reported
in the literature are measurement techniques, the number of sampled indiviuals and their
health conditions, among others. Last but not least, it is also known that droplets suffer
evaporation after coming out of the respiratory tract. Then, the methodology of measurment
is also important. The further from the mouth, the smaller will be the droplet size, due to
evaporation. For droplets of size ∼ 200 µm the time of evaporation is approximately ≈ 6.6 s
[25], i.e. larger than the time to reach the ground of all cases considered in Table I. Then,
the free fall estimates are relevant for the motion of sneezing droplets of this size.
Now, let’s consider some cases with droplets smaller than 10 µm, which represent the
majority of cases found in experiments. To begin with, the smallest droplet of interest is a
single Covid-19 virus. The size of the virus (its approximate diameter) is dC ≈ 100 nm =
0.1 µm, and its mass mC ≈ 10−18 kg [14]. Then, its mobility and terminal velocity in dry
air will be:
1
≈ 0.57 × 1011 s · kg −1
6πηr
vT = µ mC g ≈ 5, 59 × 10−7 m/s.
µ=

(10)

We note that the downward maximal velocity of a single virus is too small. Assuming that
it began its fall with this vertical velocity at a height h = 1.7 m, it will reach the ground in a
time t = h/vT ≈ 3 × 106 s ∼ 35 d (see Figure 1). Then, single viruses can remain suspended
in undisturbed air for more than a month before settling down on the ground.
The previous case of single viruses floating freely in the air is probably not the most
probable situation, nor the most dangerous from a contamination perspective, because the
viral charge of the virus depends on its concentration. More relevant are droplets (mainly
composed of water) with a virus charge in them. We will consider two typical cases: whole
droplets as they come out from the mouth of an infected person, and droplets nuclei, that
are the remanent of the original droplets once the water has evaporated. The typical size
of droplet nuclei when coughing is around ddn ≈ 1 µm and that of whole droplets dd ≈
10 µm [26]. Assuming that the droplets content is mainly water, the terminal velocities and

9
1e+08
1e+07

t = A(h)/d2

1e+06

t [s]

100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.01

0.1

1

10

100

d [µm]
FIG. 1. Time to reach the floor versus size of droplets emitted while sneezing, coughing, speaking or
breathing, assuming they fall in viscous air at low Reynolds number. Note the double logarithmic
scale. A(h) depends on the height from which the droplet is emitted (see text). Vertical solid lines
correspond the examples computed in the text.

times of decay from a height h = 1.7 m for both cases are:
vdn ≈ 2.9 × 10−5 m/s,
vd ≈ 2.9 × 10−3 m/s,

tdn ≈ 5.9 × 104 s ≈ 16.3 h
td ≈ 5.9 × 102 s ≈ 9.8 mins

for droplets nuclei,
for water droplets.

(11)

These order of magnitude estimates show that droplets nuclei of ∼ 1 µm can remain suspended in air for around 16 hours, while droplets of ∼ 10 µm can remain for around 10
minutes. These results are compatible with recent experimental determinations of the halflife of the Covid-19 virus in aerosols [6, 14]. In Figure 1 we can see that the sizes and
falling times of relevant droplets emerging from expiratory events span many scales. From
the considerations above, it is an exercise to show that the Stokes’ model used here predicts
that the falling time decays with the inverse square of the size:
th (d) =

18η h
.
ρ g d2

(12)

For the typical height of a person, which is of interest in the present discussion, the effects
of h on the final falling time is very small.

10
Finally, let us consider if the assumption of a drag force linear in the velocity is justified,
i.e. if Re ≤ 1 for the motions involved in the present problem. Recalling from equation (4)
that the Reynolds number is proportional to the size of the object and its velocity, for the
sizes of interest here let’s consider a droplet with d = 10 µm for which vT = 2.9 × 10−3 m/s.
In this case Re ≈ 1.9 × 10−3 . Then, the problem considered in this work is in the very small
Reynolds number regime. Even for droplets an order of magnitude larger, d ∼ 100 µm, the
terminal velocity will be of the order of 0.1 m/s, and Re ∼ 1.

Diffusion in quiet air
After realizing that a small droplet can remain suspended in quiet air for several hours,
one can ask how far it can travel before settling on the ground. Assuming that, after the
initial cloud looses most of its initial momentum, the remaining gas undergoes diffusion in
quiet air, we can estimate how far a micro droplet can travel during a given time. In a
diffusive process particles undergo random displacements without a net direction, due to
collisions with other particles. Then, although the average particle displacement is zero, a
measure of how far it goes in its random walk in sapce is given by the root mean squared
displacement:
rrms ≡

p
hr2 (t)i = (6 Dt)1/2 ,

(13)

where D = µkT is the diffusion constant [27], which depends on the mobility of the particle
in the medium and on the temperature. For droplet nuclei of 1 µm at 20o C, the diffusion
constant is D ≈ 12.13 × 1012 m2 /s. Then, the order of magnitude of rrms for a time span of
the order of a few hours is rrms ∼ 1 mm. We can conclude that, in the absence of currents,
micro droplets of these sizes stay practically around the same region where the initial cloud
lost its initial momentum. In a real situation, there will always be some degree of turbulence
in the medium, due to the initial process of sneezing or coughing, or even because people
walk around. Although one cannot expect that diffusion is the dominant mechanism of
propagation of the final cloud of micro droplets, this is useful to illustrate the slow time
scales of dissipation of the gas of droplets in the absence of currents. Small currents of air
are responsible for propagating the remaining cloud of virus-carrying micro droplets away
from the source, creating a potentially infectious atmosphere in closed spaces which can
remain for quite a long time.

11

Conclusions
We have shown estimates of the motion of droplets in the air, depending on droplet size
and initial velocities, as they leave the mouth during talking, breathing, sneezing or coughing.
Depending on the size of the droplets, which can vary in a wide range, two different models
can give useful estimates of the time of persistence of the droplets in quiet air. For droplets
larger than ≈ 200 µm, typical of sneezing events, a free fall model is appropriate. They
can attain distances of several meters, justifying recommendations for social distancing. On
the other side, for droplets of sizes less than ≈ 200 µm, the free fall model is not accurate,
and a model of motion in viscous air is necessary. Our results show that typical respiratory
droplets with sizes ≤ 10 µm can remain suspended in dry quiet air from several minutes to
hours. The time of evaporation of water droplets of sizes as small as 10 µm is much less than
a second [25], leaving droplets nuclei. Then, we conclude that droplet nuclei, which can be
suspended in dry air for hours, may be carriers of the virus in quiet air environments, like
in a closed room or in an aircraft.
Together, these results suggest that airborne transmission of the virus may be a possible
mechanism of infection. This also points that the use of masks, even for healthy people,
may be a valid way of reducing contagion of Covid-19. More experimental studies are
needed in order to confirm if airborne transmission is relevant as compared with other
known mechanisms, like surface mediated ones.
Finally, it is important to stress that the results presented here, based on simplified
models of motion, represent lower bounds for the time of stability of small droplets in the
air. Considering realistic situations, taking into account small currents and/or convection
mechanisms in closed spaces do not contradict the present conclusions [4, 5, 28]. Inclusion
of these and other effects, like the process of evaporation of droplets, are interesting routes
for future research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am greateful to Liliana Obregón, Paulo Murilo Castro de Oliveira and Daniel Barci for
useful comments and feedback. This work was supported in part by a grant from Conselho

12
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Brazil.

[1] World Health Organization, “When to use a mask,” https://www.who.int/emergencies/
diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public/when-and-how-to-use-masks
(2020), [Online; accessed 9-April-2020].
[2] J. Howard, A. Huang, Z. Li, V. Tufekci, Z.and Zdimal, H. van der Westhuizen, A. von Delft,
A. Price, L. Fridman, L. Tang, V. Tang, G. Watson, C. Bax, R. Shaikh, F. Questier, D. Hernandez, L. Chu, C. Ramirez, and A. Rimoin, “Face masks against covid-19: An evidence
review,” (2020), preprints202004.0203.
[3] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and J. Bush, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 745, 537563
(2014).
[4] L.

Bourouiba,

JAMA

(2020),

10.1001/jama.2020.4756,

https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/articlepdf/2763852/jama bourouiba 2020 it 200011.pdf.
[5] S. Zhu, S. Kato, and J.-H. Yang, Building and Environment 41, 1691 (2006).
[6] N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris, M. G. Holbrook, A. Gamble, B. N.
Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt, N. J. Thornburg, S. I. Gerber, J. O. LloydSmith, E. de Wit,

and V. J. Munster, New England Journal of Medicine 0, null (0),

https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
[7] World Health Organization, “Q&a on coronaviruses (covid-19),” https://www.who.int/
news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses (2020), [Online; accessed 9-April-2020].
[8] E. M. Purcell, American Journal of Physics 45, 3 (1977), https://doi.org/10.1119/1.10903.
[9] P. Timmerman and J. P. van der Weele, American Journal of Physics 67, 538 (1999),
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.19320.
[10] C. E. Mungan, European Journal of Physics 27, 1141 (2006).
[11] A. Vial, European Journal of Physics 33, 751 (2012).
[12] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, “Motion,” in The Feynman lectures on physics,
Vol. 1 (Basic Books, New York, NY, 2010) Chap. 8, originally published 1963-1965.
[13] J. W. Tang, A. D. Nicolle, C. A. Klettner, J. Pantelic, L. Wang, A. B. Suhaimi, A. Y. L. Tan,
G. W. X. Ong, R. Su, C. Sekhar, D. D. W. Cheong, and K. W. Tham, PLoS One 8, e59970
(2013).

13
[14] Y. M. Bar-on, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo, “SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) by the
numbers,” (2020), arXiv:2003.12886.
[15] Wikipedia contributors, “Density of air — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,” https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Density_of_air&oldid=947606372 (2020), [Online; accessed 6-April-2020].
[16] Wikipedia contributors, “Molar mass — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,” https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Molar_mass&oldid=947331724 (2020), [Online; accessed 6-April-2020].
[17] Equivalently, we can define l = 1/na , where na is the number of particles per unit volume.
Then, assuming that air at normal pressure and temperature behaves as an ideal gas, na =
P/kT , where P is the pressure, T the absolute temperature and k the Boltzmann constant.
At T = 293o K and P = 1 atm one recovers the result in (3).
[18] N. Zhu, D. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Li, B. Yang, J. Song, X. Zhao, B. Huang, W. Shi, R. Lu,
P. Niu, F. Zhan, X. Ma, D. Wang, W. Xu, G. Wu, G. F. Gao, and W. Tan, New England Journal of Medicine 382, 727 (2020), pMID: 31978945, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001017.
[19] Another possibility is to compare with the mean free path, lp = 1/(nσ),the average distance
a particle will travel between collisions. n is the particle density and σ the collisional cross
section. For air at T = 25o C and normal pressure P = 1 atm, lp ≈ 34 nm. Then, the Covid-19
is still 3 times larger than the mean free path in air.
[20] R. W. Fox and A. T. McDonald, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1992).
[21] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, “The flow of wet water,” in The Feynman
lectures on physics, Vol. 2 (Basic Books, New York, NY, 2010) Chap. 41, originally published
1963-1965.
[22] T. M. Crowder, J. A. Rosati, J. D. Schroeter, A. J. Hickey, and T. B. Martonen, Pharmaceutical Research 19, 239 (2002).
[23] In fact, the motion of a particle with a drag force linear in the velocity can be solved in full
generality, i.e. for any initial velocity, see e.g. [9–11]. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this
work, it is enough to consider the particular situation in which the object falls down from rest.
[24] Z. Y. Han, W. G. Weng, and Q. Y. Huang, J R Soc Interface 10, 20130560 (2013).
[25] W. F. Wells, American Journal of Epidemiology 20, 611 (1934).

14
[26] S. Yang, G. Lee, C.-M. Chen, C.-C. Wu, and K.-P. Yu, Journal of Aerosol Medicine 20, 484
(2007).
[27] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, “Diffusion,” in The Feynman lectures on
physics, Vol. 1 (Basic Books, New York, NY, 2010) Chap. 43, originally published 1963-1965.
[28] L. A. Anchordoqui and E. M. Chudnovsky, “A physicist view of airborne infection,” (2020),
arXiv:2003.13689.

