OUTBREAK: A user-friendly georeferencing online tool for disease
surveillance
Raúl Arias-Carrasco1,#, Jeevan Giddaluru2,#, Lucas E. Cardozo2, Felipe Martins2,
Vinicius Maracaja-Coutinho1,3,*, Helder I. Nakaya2,4,*
1Advanced

Center for Chronic Diseases – ACCDiS, Facultad de Ciencias

Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
2Department

of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical

Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
3Instituto

Vandique, João Pessoa, Brazil

4Scientific

Platform Pasteur USP, São Paulo, Brazil

*Co-corresponding
#These

authors

authors contribute equally to this work.

Corresponding author information:
Helder I Nakaya, PhD
Av. Prof. Lúcio Martins Rodrigues, 370, block C, 4th floor
São Paulo – SP - Brazil
CEP: 05508-020
Phone: + 55 11 2648-1130
e-mail: hnakaya@usp.br

Vinicius Maracaja-Coutinho, PhD
Santos Dumont, 964, Independencia
Santiago – Región Metropolitana – Chile
Código Postal: 8380494
Phone: +56 9 51097362
e-mail: vinicius.maracaja@uchile.cl

Keywords: Outbreak, Pandemic, Epidemiology, Surveillance, Georeferencing

Abstract
The current COVID-19 pandemic has already claimed more than 100,000 victims
and it will cause more deaths in the coming months. Tools that can track the
number and locations of cases are critical for surveillance and can help in making
policy decisions for controlling the outbreak. The current surveillance web-based
dashboards run on proprietary platforms, which are often expensive and require
specific computational knowledge. We present a new tool (OUTBREAK) for
studying and visualizing epidemiological data. It permits even non-specialist
users to input data most conveniently and track outbreaks in real-time. This tool
has the potential to guide and help health authorities to intervene and minimize
the effects of the outbreaks. It is freely available at http://outbreak.sysbio.tools/.

Background
Effective epidemiological surveillance is essential to ensure that the
response to infectious disease outbreaks is timely and adequate. Communicable
disease surveillance provides the essential information to monitor, evaluate, and
model the impact of preventive and control activities; to detect and track the
spread of the epidemic and emerging diseases and other threats to public health
and to geographically locate communicable diseases in countries, regions, and
across the globe. Integrated surveillance enables health authorities to (i) identify
populations at risk, (ii) implement prevention and control strategies, (iii) detect
unusual disease patterns, and (iv) contain the re-emergence or emergence of
communicable diseases [1].
Recent Coronavirus epidemics have displayed the capacity to spread
rapidly. The SARS epidemic (2003–2004) infected over 8,000 people in 17
countries with a mortality rate of 9.6% [2]. Later in 2012, MERS-CoV infected
2,519 subjects with a mortality rate of 34.3% in 27 countries [3]. The current
SARS-COV-2 pandemic has already claimed more than 100,000 victims and it
will cause more deaths in the coming months [4]. Coronaviruses spread through
human contact and also through objects contaminated by respiratory droplets
exhaled by the infected persons [5]. Because of its rapid spread and high rate of
infection [6], by infecting a large proportion of the population it can cause the
collapse of the health system of a country [7]. Tools that track and update the
number and locations of cases are critical for surveillance of an epidemic and can

help the decision-makers to fashion effective policies for controlling the spread of
the disease.
Several web-based dashboards display surveillance datasets on the
current COVID-19 outbreak, such as by Johns Hopkins University [8], the
University

of

Virginia

(http://nssac.bii.virginia.edu/covid-19/dashboard/),

HealthMap developed by Harvard University and Boston Children’s Hospital
(helthmap.org/wuhan), and The World Health Organization’s (WHO) dashboard
(https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html), among others.
Although most of these epidemic dashboards use open-source data, they run on
Esir ARCGIS web-services which are often expensive and hard to build and
require specific knowledge on GIS-based programs. These dashboards are
limited in monitoring the outbreak from a spatial epidemiological perspective, are
without a time axis to track the evolution of the epidemic, and they do not allow
the user to input data. To overcome these issues, we developed a new webbased tool for studying and visualizing epidemiological data, allowing the user to
input data in the most convenient way for non-specialists to track outbreaks in
real time and in a user-friendly manner.

OUTBREAK Overview
OUTBREAK facilitates epidemic surveillance by showing in an animated
graph the timeline and geolocations of cases of an outbreak. It is made available
in a user-friendly web site (http://outbreak.sysbio.tools/), where even nonspecialists can input data in the most convenient way. The tool tracks outbreaks
in real-time, and exercises surveillance over the spread of epidemics in regions,
countries or, even, across the globe. For example, we built maps and animations
showing

the

evolution

of

the

2003

SARS

epidemic

(https://outbreak.sysbio.tools/animation/SARS_2003) and the evolution of the
ongoing

COVID-19

cases,

from

January

22

to

March

19,

2020

(https://outbreak.sysbio.tools/animation/COVID19).

Availability and Codes
OUTBREAK online tool is freely available at http://outbreak.sysbio.tools/.
The software includes a text and video tutorial with a detailed description of how
to use it. OUTBREAK was developed using Python, through the Flask

environment [9]. The interface was implemented using JavaScript through the
React.js (reactjs.org) with the Node.js library [10]. The map for georeferencing
was implemented using the MapBox service through the React.js library “reactmap-gl”. An up-to-date version of the tool is available for downloading at Docker
Hub (https://hub.docker.com/r/integrativebioinformatics/outbreak) together with
the information on how to install and run the software locally.

Data Preparation and Input
OUTBREAK input file requires geographical (latitude and longitude pairs)
and temporal (date) information. Users are required to provide this information in
a tab-delimited text file. The file can be generated as an Excel sheet that has at
least four fixed columns for geographical (Label, Latitude, Longitude) and
temporal (Date) data (Table 1). The other three optional columns representing
the colors, size, and the number of occurrences for each point can also be
included in this file (Table 1). This file can be uploaded at the “Run” page (Figure
1A), after filling a form with the title and a brief description to be shown on the
interactive map (Figure 1B). The optional columns in the input file are useful to
differentiate datasets of interest to be visualized in the interactive map. For
instance, in Figure 1B the reported cases for the COVID-19 outbreak are
represented in orange, whereas the associated deaths are represented in red.

Outbreak Surveillance and Interactive Map Exploration
The tool accepts as input any file containing georeferenced and dated
information. Users can specify the dates from a calendar to visualize the outbreak
evolution throughout a particular period (Figure 2A). The user can generate
animations by hitting the “play” button at the bottom of the animation page
(Figures 1B and 2B). It is possible to change the speed of animation and share it
on social media. When the animation is displayed, two dynamic graphs are
automatically generated, one that shows the number of cases per day and the
other that shows the cumulative number of cases till that day. Both graphs evolve
according to the period previously selected in the calendar. The graph boxes can
be dragged and dropped to facilitate interactive map inspection. Examples of
such use of the graphics of SARS 2003 and COVID-19 2020 outbreaks are
shown in Figure 2C.

To exercise surveillance over an outbreak, decision-makers and
epidemiologists may need to explore the geographical evolution of cases over
time and classify the cases by criteria such as incoming cases, ethnicity, sex, and
age, among others. To make the datasets graphically clear for exploration,
OUTBREAK enables the users to apply different colors for each variable of
interest (Figure 3). Finally, the high-level zoom-in feature allows for deeper
surveillance of an outbreak in the city of interest at different levels, such as
neighborhood, street and even at a single building level (Figure 3). To
demonstrate these features, we also displayed the car incidents from San
Francisco Open Data Portal (https://datasf.org/opendata/) where each type of
incident has a different color (https://outbreak.sysbio.tools/animation/EXAMPLE).

Conclusion
OUTBREAK is a web-based tool that permits easy surveillance of any
epidemiological data. The high level of zoom-in enables the user to track data, at
every geographical level—on a worldwide scale, at the level of a city level, a
neighborhood, a street or a building. Moreover, the data can be presented
graphically in real-time to easily show the daily changes in the number and the
spread of cases. The tool only needs world coordinates (in decimal degrees
format) and dates to generate the graphics. Besides helping in monitoring the
spread of epidemics, OUTBREAK can be used to handle any type of world-wide
data, such as for animal migration studies and population studies among others.
Finally, we hope that the ease of use and the availability of interactive and
dynamic maps that make exploration of the data easy will guide and help health
authorities and decision-makers in making effective interventions to minimize the
undesirable impacts of the current and future outbreaks.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thanks Lucas Fleig for his technical assistance in the
development of the tool. HIN is supported by CNPq (313662/2017-7) and the São
Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP; grants 2017/50137-3, 2018/14933-2,
2018/21934-5 and 2013/08216-2). VMC and RAC are supported by FONDAPCONICYT (15130011).

References

1.

Martinez, L., Global infectious disease surveillance. Int J Infect Dis, 2000.

4(4): p. 222-8.
2.

Smith, R.D., Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: lessons

from SARS on the role of risk perception, communication and management. Soc
Sci Med, 2006. 63(12): p. 3113-23.
3.

Rivers, C.M., M.S. Majumder, and E.T. Lofgren, Risks of Death and

Severe Disease in Patients With Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus,
2012-2015. Am J Epidemiol, 2016. 184(6): p. 460-4.
4.

Organization., W.H., Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation

Report – 60. 2020.
5.

Peeri, N.C., et al., The SARS, MERS and novel coronavirus (COVID-19)

epidemics, the newest and biggest global health threats: what lessons have we
learned? Int J Epidemiol, 2020.
6.

Li, Q., et al., Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel

Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J Med, 2020. 382(13): p. 1199-1207.
7.

Grasselli, G., A. Pesenti, and M. Cecconi, Critical Care Utilization for the

COVID-19 Outbreak in Lombardy, Italy: Early Experience and Forecast During
an Emergency Response. JAMA, 2020.
8.

Dong, E., H. Du, and L. Gardner, An interactive web-based dashboard to

track COVID-19 in real time. Lancet Infect Dis, 2020.
9.

Aslam, F.A. and P. Mohammed. Efficient Way Of Web Development Using

Python And Flask. 2015.
10.

Tilkov, S. and S. Vinoski, Node.js: Using JavaScript to Build High-

Performance Network Programs. IEEE Internet Computing, 2010. 14(6): p. 3.

Tables

Table 1–General description of the input file for generating interactive maps in
OUTBREAK. A description and necessary titles of mandatory and optional
columns are displayed.

Column title

Data description

Mandatory columns:
Label

ID of respective Latitude and Longitude pairs.

Latitude

Latitude value (Decimal Degrees)

Longitude

Longitude value (Decimal Degrees)

Date

Date in day-month-year format

Optional columns:
Color

The names of user-defined colors for representing data on the
interactive map. One color to be assigned to each set of data.

Size

Size of the points displayed on the interactive map.

Figures

Figure 1 - General Overview of OUTBREAK Tool. (A) Run section of the tool,
where the user uploads the input file and inserts the title and brief description of
the surveillance analysis to be performed. (B) Result section, showing the
dynamic interactive map generated after running the tool.

Figure 2 - Different Features Available in OUTBREAK. (A) Calendar box used
to select a particular period of interest to be explored with the tool. (B) Control
menu for the dynamic video generated by the OUTBREAK. The user can rewind
or fast-forward the animation, with further options to play, pause, restart, or share
the video in social media or by copying its URL to the clipboard. (C) Dynamic
graphics generated when running the tool, showing the cases per day and
cumulative cases for SARS 2003 and COVID-19 2020 outbreaks.

Figure 3 – Zoom and Color Features. Example of surveillance of a hypothetical
epidemic in San Francisco using OUTBREAK. Some key features of the tool are
represented, such as the use of different colors to show the studied cases, and
the use of zoom to investigate particular cases and retrieve the information at a
neighborhood, street or even at a single building level.

