Advanced Fuzzy Cognitive Maps: State Space and RuleBased methodology for Coronary Artery Disease
detection
Ioannis D. Apostolopoulos 1*, Peter P. Groumpos 2, Dimitris I. Apostolopoulos
1

2

3

University of Patras, Medical School, Department of Medical Physics, Rio, Achaia, PC 26504, Greece
ece7216@upnet.gr
University of Patras, Department Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rio, Achaia, PC 26504, Greece;
groumpos@ece.upatras.gr
University of Patras, Medical School, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Rio, Achaia, PC 26504, Greece. Tel.: +30
6972122372, email: dimap@med.upatras.gr

* Correspondence: Ioannis D. Apostolopoulos - ece7216@upnet.gr

Abstract
In this study, the recently emerged advances in Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM) are investigated and employed,
for achieving automatic and non-invasive diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease (CAD). A Computer-Aided
Diagnostic model for a precise prediction of CAD using State Space Advanced FCM (AFCM) approach is
proposed. Also, a rule-based mechanism is incorporated, to further increase the knowledge of the system and
the interpretability of the decision mechanism. The proposed method is tested utilizing a CAD dataset from
the Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine of the University of Patras. More specifically, two architectures of
AFCMs are designed, and parameter testing is performed. Furthermore, the proposed AFCMs, which are based
on novel equations proposed in literature, are compared with the traditional FCM approach. The experiments
highlight the effectiveness of the AFCM approach, which obtained an accuracy of 78.21%, achieving an
increase of seven percent (+7%) on the classification task, and obtaining 85.47% accuracy.It is demonstrated
that the AFCM approach in developing Fuzzy Cognitive Maps outperforms the conventional approach, while
it constitutes a reliable method for the diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease.
Keywords: State Space Fuzzy Cognitive Maps; Coronary Artery Disease; Fuzzy Cognitive Maps; Decision
Support System; Machine Learning;

Highlights





Advanced Fuzzy Cognitive Maps approach (State Space) is proposed for automatic diagnosis of
Coronary Artery Disease
Rule-Based approach is embedded to the framework to increase the performance

1. Introduction
Medical Decision-Making problems are complex. Traditionally, physicians are requested to handle
information of different nature, e.g. patient’s history, clinical diagnostic tests, medical images, and demographic
characteristics. The interpretation of the results involves uncertainty, which plays a critical role for the decisionmaking to a wide and diverse set of fields. Approaching dynamic systems that involve uncertainty is demanding,
therefore engineers and decision-makers face difficulties (Bhattacharyya 2020).
Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) have been proposed the past years, to overcome those issues.
A CDSS is an expert system that provides decision support and serves as a diagnostic and treatment reference
for clinicians or patients. CDSSs incorporate any available patient related clinical data and the experts’
knowledge to perform a reasoning analysis.
A lot discussion is held regarding the decision mechanisms relating the inputs and the desired outputs of
the systems. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) constitute a simple computational and graphical methodology to
represent complex problems. FCMs’ decision-making mechanism is a unique method of handling the
parameters of a desired decision.
FCMs were introduced by Kosko in 1986 in order to represent the causal relationship between concepts
and analyze inference patterns (Kosko 1986, Kosko 1998). They take advantage of the knowledge and the
experience of experts, offering them an alternative way of addressing the problems, yet in the same way a
human mind does. This is achieved by using a conceptual procedure, which can include ambiguous of fuzzy
descriptions (Bourgani 2014). Recently, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps were employed to describe and solve medical
problems (Papageorgiou 2008a, Papageorgiou 2011; Giabbanelli 2012).
State Space Advanced Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (AFCM) are an evolution of the classic methodology, which
promises more precise results for a large variety of complex systems. This methodology, which is thoroughly
analyzed in (Mpelogianni 2018a), is presented in the following subsections, and it overcomes some issues of
the classic FCMs. Those issues are: (a) the presence of concepts of different nature was ignored in the traditional
approach and, (b) the utilization of the classic sigmoid normalization function was fuzzing the system,
especially in cases of the existence of several concepts, due to the fact that the output value was always
transformed to a number near one. Despite the fact that the novel strategy in (Mpelogianni 2018) is intended
for applications where time iteration steps play the most vital role in the behavior of the system, they can also
be employed to applications where time does not play any role.
As to our best knowledge, AFCM have not been applied and evaluated to medical diagnosis. In this work,
we employ the newly emerged State Space FCMs for the automatic and non-invasive prediction of Coronary
Artery Disease (CAD). The Coronary Artery Disease is caused when the atherosclerotic plaques load, namely
fill, in the lumen of the blood vessels of the heart, which are named coronary arteries, and they obstruct the
blood flow to the heart. According to the World Health Organization, 50% of deaths in European Union is
caused by Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD), while 80% of the premature heart diseases and strokes can be
prevented (WHO 2014). Diagnosing CAD in a non-invasive way is an open challenge, despite the massive
number of researches been made so far (Dilsizian 2014; Soni 2011, Apostolopoulos 2020). Several research
works are focused in proposing Rule-Based Machine Learning or Fuzzy Logic utilizing publically available
datasets (Abdar 2019, Ghiasi 2020, Setiawan 2020, Hossain 2020). The present work is not focused on
performing a thorough analysis of the best-performing approaches. Besides, comparisons are not meaningful
because different sets of data of various sizes are utilized. We focused our work in improving and confirming
the effectiveness of the AFCM approach over the classic, which was implemented in a recent work by the
authors (Apostolopoulos 2020).
Designing AFCM models requires the collaboration between subject-matter experts and modelers. The
experts suggest and aid for the design of the AFCM, for it to be user-friendly, scientifically acceptable, and
interpretable. In this work, the Nuclear Medicine staff suggested that the causal relationships between concepts

2

in (Apostolopoulos 2020) were unable to explain some unique and complex connections. Hence, the proposed
models were designed to function with the aid of some universal rules. The Rule-Embedded AFCM (REAFCM), which is proposed in this work, is evaluated on a real patient-candidate database from the Laboratory
of Nuclear Medicine of the University of Patras. Aiming to improve and evaluate AFCM’s performance, we
experiment with the new and the traditional equations, as well as with different activation functions and
architectures. The optimal parameters are defined through the The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
newly emerged State Space approach for the development of FCMs, improving the accuracy by 7%. It is also
demonstrated that RE-AFCM can be applied to medical problems, with the appropriate modifications and with
respect to the nature of the inputs.

2. Methods
2.1 Traditional FCM theory
FCMs (Kosko 1986) constitute a computational methodology able to examine situations which the human
thinking process involves fuzzy or uncertain descriptions. FCMs consist of a graphical representation through
a signed directed graph, which includes feedback consisting of nodes and weighted arcs (Kosko 1986,
Groumpos 2000, Felix 2019). Each node in the graph represents a concept used to describe the cause and effect
relationship. The nodes are connected by weighted arcs representing the actual interconnections. Each concept
Ci (i.e., the variable of the system) is characterized by a number representing its values, and is calculated through
the transformation of a fuzzy value, or the fitting of a numeric value, to the desired interval [0,1]. The initial
weight values are defined by the experts of the domain and, therefore, they are linguistic variables, or rule-type
statements. Through a defuzzification procedure the linguistic variables are transformed into numeric weights.
In this way, FCMs embody the accumulated knowledge and experience from experts (Groumpos 2018). An

example is given in Figure 1.
Fig.1 Fuzzy Cognitive Map.

The degree of inﬂuence between the two concepts is indicated by the absolute value of W ij. During the
simulation, the value of each concept (Ci) is calculated as shown in (Salmeron 2019, Papageorgiou 2008b).
2.2 State Approach
In the classic FCM representation, all concepts and parameters are treated and calculated regardless of
their different nature. However, even when a system is described in fuzzy way, the main concept is the same.
In the classic control theory, which shall be employed to address the matter, a separation of the concepts is
suggested (Ogata 1970; Mpelogianni 2018b), as follows:

3





Input Concepts: The inputs of the system, (u)
State Concepts: The concepts describing the operation of the system, (x)
Output Concepts: The concepts describing the outputs of the system, (y).
A simple representation of the system is achieved by a block diagram, which is presented in (Mpelogianni
2018b), and depicted in Figure 2.

Fig.2 Block Diagram of the separated concepts.

In this way, more accurate knowledge of the system is obtained, because the state concepts are separated
from the input concepts. Moreover, introducing state concepts aids in a more complete characterization and
modeling of human decision-making process. The proposed separation facilitates the understanding of the
system’s operation, and the simpler calculation of the concepts’ values.
2.2.1 Mathematical Expressions of the State Space Advanced Approach
Separating the concepts into categories enables the calculation of their values in a more distributed way.
The initial weight matrix, which describes all relations, shall be divided into smaller ones in order to correspond
them to each concept category. The equations (eq. 1, eq. 2)
X [k + 1] = Ax[k] + Bu[k] (1)
Y [k + 1] = Cx[k] + Du[k]

(2)

Shall now be used to calculate the variation, caused by the change in the input and state concepts, to the state
and output concepts, at each time step [k]. In equations (1), and (2), A, B, C and D are individual weight matrixes
derived from the initial; The elements of matrix A depend on the states’ weights, while the elements of matrix
B show how each input concept affects the state concepts of the system. Matrix C embodies the relation between
the states and the outputs, while matrix D incorporates the direct affection of input concepts to output concepts
(Ogata 1970).
Since equations (1) and (2) are used to compute the variation caused between the concepts, it is more
accurate to express them as follows:
ΔX [k + 1] = Ax[k] + Bu[k] (3)
ΔY [k + 1] = Cx[k] + Du[k] (4)
Using equations (3) and (4), the expression of the actual values of X[k+1] and Y[k+1] is in equations (5)
and (6):
X [k + 1] = Χ[Κ] +
Y [k + 1] = Y[Κ] +

ΔΧ[κ+1]
∑n
j=1,j≠i |Wji|
ΔY[κ+1]
∑n
j=1,j≠i |Wji|

(5)
(6)

4

One more advantage of the mentioned technique is the transparency and decomposability of the system.
2.2.2 Activation and Normalization Functions
In order to apply the AFCM methodology, the values of all the input concepts must lay between the interval
[0,1], where 0 denotes that the value of the concept is very small and 1 that the value is very big. There are
many proposed activation functions to perform the aforementioned task. In this work we utilize the newly
proposed alteration to the classic sigmoid function, as introduced in (Mpelogianni 2016). We use this function
for the inner calculations (i.e. the inputs and the states). The function is explained below:
𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑚 +

𝑀−𝑚
1+𝑒 −𝑟∗(𝑥−𝑡𝑜)

(7)

In equation (7), m is the lower limit of the curve, M is the upper limit of the curve, r is the slope of the
curve and to is the symmetry to the y axis. We refer to equation (7) as SigmoidN.
For the final classification between “Healthy” or “Diseased”, we also use a Softmax classifier (Jang 2016),
to evaluate and compare the different methodologies.
2.2.3 Fuzzification and de-fuzzification process




An overview of the fuzzification and the de-fuzzification process shall be presented.
Step 1: The experts assign the weight values (verbal). Those weight values shall be de-fuzzified into crisp
numbers in space [0,1].
Step 2: The concepts initial values may be verbal or numerical. As in step 1, the verbal inputs shall be defuzzified into crisp numbers in space [0,1].
Step 3: When reaching a stable state after a specific amount of iterations, the model’s output values are
numerical in the desired space. Those values shall then be fuzzified and substituted with verbal ones (e.g.
0.85 equals to “Definitely Abnormal Situation”) The process of fuzzification and de-fuzzification shall be
done with different methods, such as the Center of Area (COA) (Axelrod 2015), or Center of Gravity
(COG) (Jang 1997). For the normalization of the output values, both sigmoid or tanh functions may be
utilized.

2.3. The proposed models
2.3.1. The overall procedure
Two Nuclear Medicine doctors were pooled to define the concepts, the interconnections and the outputs
of the system. The system was designed to meet the needs of the Department of Nuclear Medicine of Patras.
Therefore, the input concepts of the system reflect the department’s approach in diagnosing CAD. The
relationships between the concepts of the system are described by the doctors in a linguistic way, thus allowing
freedom to explain the interconnections the way experts prefer. The rest of the procedure, i.e., the defuzzification of the inputs and weights, is performed by the engineers. We can summarize the steps of the
process as follows: (a) the experts decide the inputs of the system and their possible values, (b) each expert
assigns a specific verbal weight between the concepts he/she believes that share a connection, (c) the doctors
specify the specific rules describing the system and provide the necessary documentation that confirms the
rules, (d) the doctors in collaboration with the engineers define the state concepts of the system, (e) the input
values, the state and the weight values as well as the rules are transformed from nominal to numeric or binary
form, following specific mathematical expressions, and (f) the numeric value of the output is calculated. The
normalization function returns the score, or the probability of the subject.
Based on the aforementioned approach in designing FCMs, the concepts of the AFCM shall be divided
into inputs, states and outputs.
2.3.2 Concept Definition
The global input concepts, i.e., before the specific input and state concepts are defined, as well as their
possible values as defined by the experts are given in the Table 1.

5

Table 1. Initial concepts of the proposed AFCM

A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
A9
A10
A11
A12
A13
A14
A15
A16
A17
A18
A19
A20
A21
A22
A23
A24
A25
A26
A27
A28
A29
A30
A31

Attributes
typical angina pectoris
atypical angina pectoris
atypical thoracic pain
dyspnea on exertion
asymptomatic
gender - male
gender - female
age <40
age [40-50]
age [50-60]
age >60
known CAD
previous stroke
peripheral arterial disease
smoking
arterial hypertension
dyslipidemia
obesity
family history
diabetes
chronic kidney failure
electrocardiogram normal
electrocardiogram abnormal
echocardiogram normal - doubtful
echocardiogram abnormal
treadmill exercise test normal
treadmill exercise test abnormal
dynamic echocardiogram normal
dynamic echocardiogram abnormal
scintigraphy normal - doubtful
scintigraphy abnormal

Values
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, occasionally, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, relatively, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
yes, no
little, abnormal, definitely abnormal
yes, no
abnormal, definitely abnormal
yes, no
doubtful, abnormal, definitely abnormal
yes, no
Little abnormal , medium abnormal, abnormal, definitely abnormal

The state concepts were discussed and designed in collaboration with the experts. The state concepts may
be constituted by the following expressions:





A32: Predisposing factors
A33: Recurrent Diseases
A34: Demographic Characteristics
A35: Diagnostic Tests

The reader should note that we change the number of state concepts for the experiments, to inspect the
effectiveness of each state-concept. For example, we design a AFCM with only one state concept before we
proceed to adding more state concepts. It is also mentioned that when the system is designed with state concepts,
some of the input concepts are directly connected to the state concepts and not to the output.
The proposed system classifies the instances to “Healthy” or “Diseased”; thus, the system shall have two
possible classes as outputs. We propose two approaches for the final classification. The first approach suggests
a single output concept (Out), the value of which describes the probability of infection. For this approach the
SigmoidN is utilized through the entire process, due to the fact that it yields better results, as shown in Results
section. The second approach suggests two output concepts to be inserted, referred to as “out_healthy”, and
“out_diseased”. They present each class’s score. A softmax classifier is utilized to classify each instance, based

6

on the score of each class. For the activation of the concepts, we experiment with both the classic sigmoid
function and with the signoidN, with parameters set at M=1, m=-1, to = 0, r=1.
2.3.3 Interconnections
The interconnection weights between nodes shall be undertaken by experts, in cooperation with each other.
The possible linguistic values of the weights shall be: Very Weak (VW), Weak (W), Medium (M), Strong (S),
Very Strong (VS). The weights may also take negative values, e.g. “-VS”.
These values are then defuzzied and a corresponding numerical value will be assigned to each one
(Runkler 1996). We provide corresponding tables for equations 3 and 4:

Equation 3, Matrix A (input - input): Table 2
Equation 3, Matrix B (input - state): Table 3
Equation 4, Matrix C (output - input): Table 4
Equation 4, Matrix D (state - output): Table 5
Table 2. Matrix A of the equation 3. Due to size constrains, in this table, only the inputs that have connections
with each other are depicted. The original size of Matrix A is 31x31, with zero diagonal values.
Concept

Concepts affected

Weights (effect of concept A6 on A22-A31)

A7

A22 – A31

+W, -W, +VW, -VW, +W, -W, +W, -W, +W, -W,

The AFCM’s table A embodies the interconnection between the input concepts. In the proposed system,
there are relations between the input concept A7 (female) and the concepts describing the diagnostic tests (A22
– A31). Those relations exist for every AFCM designed in the experiments.
Table 3 presents the interconnections between the inputs and the states of the system. That is, which inputs
may have an influence on the states of the model. In our case, the concepts A12, A13, A15, and A16-A19 are
defining the state A32 (predisposing factors). The concepts A14, A20 and A21 define the state A33 (recurrent
diseases). Concepts A6-A11 are constituting the state A34 (Demographic Characteristics). Finally, concepts
A22-A31 are constituting the state A35 (Diagnostic Tests).
Table 3. Contents of Matrix B of equation 3. The original Matrix B is 4x31, where four represents the four state
concepts and thirty-one refers to every input concept. When an input concept is not related to one of the state
concepts, each value in Matrix B is zero.
State

Includes concepts

A32: Predisposing factors
A33: Recurrent Diseases
A34: Demographic Characteristics
A35: Diagnostic Tests

A12, A13, A15, A16-A19
A14, A20, A21
A6 – A11

Weights (effect of input concepts on state
concept)
M, M, W, M, VW, W, VW
M, M, W
M, -S, -VS, -W, W, S

A22 – A32

-M, M, -W, M, -S, W, -W, M, -VS, S

In Table 4, the direct relation between the inputs and the outputs is presented. Please note that in this case,
the inputs defining the state concepts do not directly affect the output(s).
Table 4. Preview of Contents of Matrix C of equation 3. Due to constraints of size, only 5 examples are given.
The original Matrix C is 13x1 for one output concept and 13x2 in case of two output concepts. The size of this
matrix is 13, due to the fact that only relations between input concepts and the output are expressed. Realtions
between input concepts and states are expressed by Table 3.

7

Input

Case: Single
Output

A1
A2
A3
A4
Aj

Case: Two classes
out_healthy

out_diseased

0
0
0
0
S

VS
M
W
W
0

VS
M
W
W
-S

In Table 5, the system’s Matrix D is presented. Matrix D, contains the connection of the state concepts
with the output concepts. In the particular case, interconnections between the states do not exist.
Table 5. Contents of Matrix D of equation 3. For one output concept the original matrix is 4x1, while for two
output concepts the size is 4x2.

State

Two classes

Single
Output

A32
A33
A34
A35

S
VS
S
VS

out_healthy

out_diseased

If negative then S, else 0
If negative then VS, else 0
If negative then S, else 0
If negative then VS, else 0

If positive then S, else 0
If positive then VS, else 0
If positive then S, else 0
If positive then VS, else 0

All Matrixes A,B,C and D are utilized to calculate the final values of the equations 3 and 4 to define the
values of ΔX [k + 1] and ΔY [k + 1]. Those values define the final values of X [k + 1] and Y [k + 1], based on
equations 5 and 6.
2.3.4 Rules
As mentioned above, modern decision-making problems involve complex relationships, and often a
relation between concepts cannot only be explained with the casual FCM strategy (i.e., assigning a specific
weight). In this study, a RE-AFCM model is designed, allowing the embedding of more complex expressions
(rules).
To achieve this, the addition of a hidden mechanism, referred to as “rule-activator” is proposed. The
experts suggested a set of rules to be applied to the model, in order to increase its knowledge. Their suggestions
were derived from either recent published guidelines (Levine 2016), or their experience. Those rules are
presented in Table 6. Some of those rules involve deactivation of specific concepts. Negating or deactivation a
concept involves removing its value and the corresponding weight from the system.
Table 6. Rules and their effect on systems concepts, inputs and outputs
Rule
If Definitely Abnormal Scintigraphy
If ECG is Normal and Scintigraphy is
Normal
If previous Stroke
If Known CAD
If absense of Diabetes, Known CAD and
Previous Stroke

Concepts affected
The weight of Scintigraphy is significantly increased (+50%)
before the iterations
The weights of both tests are relatively increased (+20%) before
the iterations
Negate the Gender Discrimination and de-activate the attribute
from the system, before the first iteration step
Negate the family history affection before first iteration step
Increase the weights of the diagnostic test, if the result is
“Normal” (+20%)

8

If the subject is asymptomatic with
abnormal Scintigraphy and at least one
more abnormal diagnostic test

Decrease the weight of concept A5 (asymptomatic) by 25%

3. Results
3.1. The dataset of the study
The database of the particular study consisted of 303 patient cases, all recorded at the Department of
Nuclear Medicine of Patras, in Greece. Most of instances were recorded during the last 8 years. All the patient
cases had been pointed to Surgical Coronary Angiography. For every instance, therefore, a final medical report
confirming or denying the presence of the disease is available. For the characterization of the instances, the
stenosis of the coronary artery is the only criterion, which is obtained by the above mentioned invasive
diagnostic test. Patients with stenosis equal or above 70% were labeled as diseased, whereas the rest were
labeled as healthy.
The dataset contains 116 healthy cases and 187 diseased cases. Male instances are 266 and Female
instances are 37. The attributes of the dataset used for the experiments are corresponding to the factors
influencing the diagnosis of CAD. The dataset contains every possible diagnostic test a patient may undergo at
the clinical section of the experts’ laboratory.
The medical reports regarding the diagnostic test were translated in numeric values with the appropriate
staging. This approach was supervised by medical staff. The attributes regarding the patient's history and
condition (i.e. smoking) were also in need of preprocessing in order to express the linguistic values (i.e.
"smoker") into binary format.
3.2. Evaluation Criteria and results
We extensively evaluate our system, therefore, more criteria besides accuracy will be employed. The
evaluation criteria of the system shall be the following: (a) Accuracy based on the whole dataset, (b) True
Positives, (c) False Positives, (d) False Negatives, (e) True Negatives, (f) Sensitivity, and (g) Specificity.
3.3. Experiment setups
For the experiments, we propose several cases. In each case, we employ modified architectures and parameters.
A summary of the experiment setups is given below:











Case 1: Traditional FCM, with single output, and sigmoid activation function.
Case 2: Traditional FCM, with two output classes, sigmoid activation function, and Softmax Classifier.
Case 3: AFCM, with single output, two states (A32, A33), sigmoid activation function, no rule activator
concept.
Case 4: AFCM, with single output, two states (A32, A33), SigmoidN activation function, no rule activator
concept.
Case 5: AFCM, with two output classes, two states (A32, A33), SigmoidN activation function, no rule
activator concept, and Softmax Classifier.
Case 6: AFCM, with single output, two states (A32, A33), tanh activation function, no rule activator
concept.
Case 7: RE-AFCM, with single output, two states (A32, A33), SigmoidN activation function, no rule
activator concept.
Case 8: RE-AFCM, with two output classes, two states (A32, A33), SigmoidN activation function, no rule
activator concept, and Softmax Classifier.
Case 9: RE-AFCM, with single output, three states (A32, A33, A34), SigmoidN activation function, with
rule activator concept.
Case 10: RE-AFCM, with single output, four states (A32, A33, A34, A35), SigmoidN activation function,
rule activator concept.

9

For cases 1 and 2, we use the FCM proposed in (Apostolopoulos 2017). Table 7 presents the results for the
different cases.
Table 7. Accuracy, Sensitivity, and Specificity for the different experiment setups

Case
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Case 10

Accuracy
77.34%
78.21%
79.20%
80.19%
79.86%
70.95%
81.84%
80.19%
85.47%
80.85%

Sensitivity
81.55%
83.96%
86.63%
87.70%
87.16%
82.8%
83.42%
87.70%
89.3%
83.42%

Specificity
68.02%
68.97%
67.24%
68.10%
68.10%
51.7%
79.31%
68.10%
79.31%
76.72%

The reader shall notice that Case 9 does not include the diagnostic tests as state-concept. In this case, each
diagnostic test is considered as input concept, which directly affects the output. The same procedure takes place
in Cases 3 to 8.
The results highlight the effectiveness of the new equations for computing the concepts’ values, as it is
demonstrated by the increase in accuracy for Case 3 to Case 10. Moreover, the results clarify that the new
proposed activation function, SigmoidN, is more preferable for this task over the sigmoid. Also, the combination
of single output with SigmoidN, results in an improvement of performance, compared to the combination of
two class outputs, and Softmax Classifier. Finally, the addition of rules further improved the knowledge of the
system.
Based on the results, we conclude that the proposed RE-AFCM outperforms the traditional FCM approach.
What is more, for the specific task, the optimal parameters shall be an architecture consisting of three states, a
single output, and the SigmoidN function. Table 9 presents the confusion matrix of Case 9 (the optimal case).
Table 9. Confusion Matrix of Case 9.

Predicted Diseased
Predicted Healthy
Total

Disease d(D+) Healthy (D-)
167
24
20
92
187
116

Total
191
112
303

The confusion matrix corresponds to sensitivity of 89.3%, specificity of 79.3%, PPV of 87.43% and NPV of
82.14%. The overall accuracy is 85.47%. An overview of the RE-AFCM (case 9) is depicted in Figure 3.

10

Fig.3 RE-AFCM (Case 9) overview
The reader can observe the final form of the proposed AFCM in Figure 4.

Fig.4 Proposed Framework (RE-AFCM).

3.4. Comparisons with state-of-the-art algorithms

11

In this section we compare the results of the proposed system with state-of-the-art classification
algorithms. The cross – validation was chosen to be 5-fold due to the small amount of training data. The Neural
Network contains three depth layers of 1024, 512, and 256 nodes. Training was performed for 120 epochs, with
a batch size of 32 and an initial learning rate of 0.01. Other Neural Networks with alterations on the prementioned parameters were tested and excluded due to inefficiency. Hence, the Neural Network we pick is the
one with the better accuracy over all. The Support Vector Machine (SMO) has the following parameters:
Complexity Parameter (c) is set at 1.0, the value of epsilon is set at 1E-12, the batch size is 32 and the calibrator
method is tuned to Logistic. AdaBoostM1 meta classifier is trained for 50 iterations, with a batch size of 32 and
the decision classifier Decision Stump is selected. Chirp is trained with a batch size of 32. Random Forest was
trained for 100 iterations with a bag size of 20%, and batch size 32. Spaarc was trained with a batch size of 32.
The rest of the classifiers were trained with the optimal parameters suggested by MATLAB Machine Learning
Toolkit.
Table 9. Machine Learning classifiers’ results.

Classifier
Coarse Tree
Linear Discriminant
Logistic Regression
Linear SVM
Cubic SVM
Medium Gaussian
Coarse Gaussian
Medium KNN
Cubic KNN
Ensemble Bagged Trees
Ensemble Subspace Discriminant
Neural Network
Support Vector Machine (SMO)
AdaBoostM1
Chirp
Spaarc
Random Forest
RE-AFCM (this work)

Accuracy (5-fold –
cross validation)
63.4
70.3
70.6
70.0
68.0
73.3
62.7
67.7
66.3
68.3
71
72.6
72.93
74.58
76.89
72.93
74.58
85.47%

The results demonstrate that the proposed model, outperforms every Machine Learning classifier which
was employed for the classification task in this work. The shortage of large-scale dataset is impeding the
traditional machine learning algorithms to learn the actual and significant relationships between the concepts.
This is reflected in the accuracy each algorithm obtains.
4. Discussion
It is demonstrated that the new approaches for the development of Advanced Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, as
well as the rules mechanism inserted to the system, improve the results, compared to classic FCMs.
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps provide a distinguishable way to express the cause – effect relationship between
phenomena, between numeric, nominal, binary, or categorical parameters. A complex system may include all
the above-mentioned factors. Relationships between them, provided that are discovered, can be represented
visually and mathematically through FCMs. In this way, not only the developers, but also the experts on the
field, may observe and understand the FCM representations.
The interconnections between concepts learned by supervised learning algorithms are not ensured to reﬂect
causal connections. That does not mean that unobserved causes may not exist; in fact, one target of supervised
learning is to make assumptions regarding the relations between mutually affected concepts during the process
of training and testing. Assumptions that can be confirmed or denied experimentally later. Compared to

12

trainable artificial intelligence algorithms, ΑFCM do not intend to discover associations that may or may not
exist.
The scientific community has enormously contributed towards the advance of FCMs, proposing a variety
of FCM-based frameworks for the same or relative tasks. Some of those works are presented in Table 10.
Table 10. FCM-based methodologies
Author / Publication
Nair 2020

FCM-based proposal
Generalised Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps
(GFCMs)

Carvalho 1999

Rule Based Cognitive
Maps (RBFCM)

Belogianni 2018

State-Space FCM

Wang 2020

Deep FCM

Wu 2020

Wavelet FCM

Papageorgiou 2019

Hybrid FCM with
Artificial Neural
Network

Christoforou 2017

Multi-layer FCM

Future study opportunities include comparison of the various FCM-based approaches to a complete and
pre-defined large-scale CAD dataset, in order to perform an in-depth analysis of the proposed systems.
Clinical researchers today are confronted with increasingly large, complex, and high-dimensional datasets
(Holzinger 2014). Consequently, the application of interactive visual data exploration in combination with
machine-learning techniques for knowledge discovery and data mining is indispensable.
Clinical researchers, or domain-experts are often not computer experts as well. They have high level
medical domain-expert knowledge to perform their research, to interpret newly gained knowledge and patterns
in their data. On the other hand, computer engineers lack the knowledge of medical data and their unique nature;
Moreover, deep, dynamic and complex medical situations require a high level of expertise and experience for
the decision making. A smooth interaction of the domain-expert with the data would greatly enhance the whole
knowledge-discovery process chain (Holzinger 2014). This can be achieved by the cooperation of engineers
and doctors.
That is the case in our work and, generally, in most of proposed models using AFCMs. The experts in a
specific domain, not only have the overall supervision of the procedure, but also design the models in
cooperation with the developers. Experts define the relationships, the concepts, the system’s desired outputs. In
our work, the doctor is in the loop, playing the most vital role in the development and the evaluation of the
model.
Finally, the proposed model is explainable, as the user/expert can be notified about the degree of
significance of each input, based upon which, the model yielded a specific result-prediction. Besides,
interpretable and explainable algorithms are mandatory for medical decision-making systems (Holzinger
2018).
The State Space AFCM methodology needs further development from theoretical point of view: a) better
separation of concepts, utilization of more experts, understand better the nonlinear behavior of the system, use
learning methods to update the AFCM model, controllability and observability of the dynamic system,
sensitivity of all concepts, b) the AFCM could be utilized to study other medical problems, especially the

13

pandemic of coronavirus, c) develop appropriate software tools for the AFCM models, e) perform extensive
simulation studies for as many as possible medical problems and validate these models, f) Develop Wise
Learning (WL) methods and compare them with Deep Learning (DL) approaches of Artificial Intelligence (AI),
g) employ the AFCM models, and feedback methodologies to develop Intelligent Control and Cognitive Control
algorithms, and h) explore synergies between Neuroscience and fuzzy cognition.
5. Conclusion
In this research, a state approach of FCMs, as well as the cooperation of FCMs and rule-based decision
mechanism, were applied and examined for the prediction of CAD. The proposed model was evaluated on a
dataset of Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) candidates and outmatched several Machine Learning Algorithms
regarding the prediction of CAD infection. The new approach combines the classical state space approach of
dynamic systems to help improve the existing method of FCMs. The results of this study show that the new
state space AFCM achieves better performance over the traditional FCM methodology. Therefore, we can
conclude that the AFCMs’ decision-making mechanism is a unique and promising method of handling the
parameters of a difficult medical problem. To the best of our knowledge, seldom has State Space AFCM been
applied to medical problems before (Anninou 2017, 2018). The rule-based implementation to the specific
AFCM is an extension provided in the present research.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Abdar M, Książek W, Acharya U R, Tan R-S, Makarenkov V and P\lawiak P 2019 A new machine learning technique
for an accurate diagnosis of coronary artery disease Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 179 104992
Anninou A P, Groumpos P P, Poulios P and Gkliatis I 2017 A New Approach of Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Knowledge
Networks in Modelling Diagnosing Process of Meniscus Injury IFAC-PapersOnLine 50 5861–5866
Anninou A, Poulios P, Groumpos P and I G 2018 A Novel Software Tool for Detection of Meniscus Injury using
Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Networks Physiother Rehabil 03 Online: https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/anovel-software-tool-for-detection-of-meniscus-injury-using-dynamic-fuzzy-cognitive-networks-2573-03121000155-100007.html
Apostolopoulos I D and Groumpos P P 2020 Non - invasive modelling methodology for the diagnosis of coronary
artery disease using fuzzy cognitive maps Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering 1–9
Apostolopoulos I D, Groumpos P P and Apostolopoulos D I 2017 A Medical Decision Support System for the
Prediction of the Coronary Artery Disease Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps Conference on Creativity in Intelligent
Technologies and Data Science (Springer) pp 269–283
Axelrod R 2015 Structure of decision: The cognitive maps of political elites (Princeton university press)
Bhattacharyya S P and Keel L H 2020 Control of uncertain dynamic systems (CRC Press)
Bourgani E, Stylios C D, Manis G and Georgopoulos V C 2014 Time dependent fuzzy cognitive maps for medical
diagnosis Hellenic conference on artificial intelligence (Springer) pp 544–554
Carvalho J and Tomè J A 1999 Rule based fuzzy cognitive maps and fuzzy cognitive maps-a comparative study 18th
International Conference of the North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society-NAFIPS (Cat. No. 99TH8397)
(IEEE) pp 115–119
Christoforou A and Andreou A S 2017 A framework for static and dynamic analysis of multi-layer fuzzy cognitive
maps Neurocomputing 232 133–145
Dilsizian S E and Siegel E L 2014 Artificial intelligence in medicine and cardiac imaging: harnessing big data and
advanced computing to provide personalized medical diagnosis and treatment Current cardiology reports 16 441
Felix G, Nápoles G, Falcon R, Froelich W, Vanhoof K and Bello R 2019 A review on methods and software for fuzzy
cognitive maps Artificial intelligence review 52 1707–1737
Ghiasi M M, Zendehboudi S and Mohsenipour A A 2020 Decision tree-based diagnosis of coronary artery disease:
CART model Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 192 105400
Giabbanelli P J, Torsney-Weir T and Mago V K 2012 A fuzzy cognitive map of the psychosocial determinants of
obesity Applied Soft Computing 12 3711–24

14

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

Groumpos P P 2018 Intelligence and Fuzzy Cognitive Maps: Scientific Issues, Challenges and Opportunities STUD
INFORM CONTROL 27 247–64
Groumpos P P and Stylios C D 2000 Modelling supervisory control systems using fuzzy cognitive maps Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 11 329–336
Holzinger A and Jurisica I 2014 Knowledge discovery and data mining in biomedical informatics: The future is in
integrative, interactive machine learning solutions Interactive knowledge discovery and data mining in biomedical
informatics (Springer) pp 1–18
Holzinger A, Kieseberg P, Weippl E and Tjoa A M 2018 Current advances, trends and challenges of machine learning
and knowledge extraction: from machine learning to explainable AI International Cross-Domain Conference for
Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction (Springer) pp 1–8
Hossain S, Sarma D, Chakma R J, Alam W, Hoque M M and Sarker I H 2020 A Rule Based Expert System to Assess
Coronary Artery Disease under Uncertainty arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09002
Jang E, Gu S and Poole B 2016 Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144
Jang J-S R, Sun C-T and Mizutani E 1997 Neuro-fuzzy and soft computing-a computational approach to learning and
machine intelligence [Book Review] IEEE Transactions on automatic control 42 1482–1484
Kosko B 1986 Fuzzy cognitive maps International journal of man-machine studies 24 65–75
Kosko B 1998 Global stability of generalized additive fuzzy systems IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 28 441–452
Levine G N, Bates E R, Bittl J A, Brindis R G, Fihn S D, Fleisher L A, Granger C B, Lange R A, Mack M J, Mauri L
and others 2016 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with
coronary artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines Journal of the American College of Cardiology 68 1082–1115
Mpelogianni V, Arvanitakis I and Groumpos P 2018 State Feedback of Complex Systems Using Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps IJBTE 6 1–6
Mpelogianni V and Groumpos P P 2018 Re-approaching fuzzy cognitive maps to increase the knowledge of a system
AI & SOCIETY 33 175–188
Nair A, Reckien D and van Maarseveen M F 2020 Generalised fuzzy cognitive maps: Considering the time dynamics
between a cause and an effect Applied Soft Computing 106309
Ogata K 1970 Yang, and Y Modern control engineering
Organization W H and others 2014 Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2014 (World Health
Organization)
Papageorgiou E I 2011 A new methodology for Decisions in Medical Informatics using fuzzy cognitive maps based
on fuzzy rule-extraction techniques Applied Soft Computing 11 500–13
Papageorgiou E I, Spyridonos P P, Glotsos D Th, Stylios C D, Ravazoula P, Nikiforidis G N and Groumpos P P 2008
Brain tumor characterization using the soft computing technique of fuzzy cognitive maps Applied Soft Computing 8
820–8
Papageorgiou E and Stylios C 2008 Fuzzy cognitive maps Handbook of Granular computing 755–774
Papageorgiou K I, Poczeta K, Papageorgiou E, Gerogiannis V C and Stamoulis G 2019 Exploring an Ensemble of
Methods that Combines Fuzzy Cognitive Maps and Neural Networks in Solving the Time Series Prediction Problem
of Gas Consumption in Greece Algorithms 12 235
Runkler T A 1996 Extended defuzzification methods and their properties Proceedings of IEEE 5th International Fuzzy
Systems vol 1 (IEEE) pp 694–700
Salmeron J L, Mansouri T, Moghadam M R S and Mardani A 2019 Learning fuzzy cognitive maps with modified
asexual reproduction optimisation algorithm Knowledge-Based Systems 163 723–735
Setiawan N A, Venkatachalam P A and Hani A F M 2020 Diagnosis of coronary artery disease using artificial
intelligence based decision support system arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02854
Soni J, Ansari U, Sharma D and Soni S 2011 Predictive data mining for medical diagnosis: An overview of heart
disease prediction International Journal of Computer Applications 17 43–48
Vassiliki M and Groumpos P P 2016 A revised approach in modeling fuzzy cognitive maps 2016 24th Mediterranean
Conference on Control and Automation (MED) 2016 24th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation
(MED) (Athens, Greece: IEEE) pp 350–4 Online: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7536070/
Wang J, Wang X, Li C, Wu J and others 2020 Deep Fuzzy Cognitive Maps for Interpretable Multivariate Time Series
Prediction IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems

15

40.

Wu K, Liu J and Chi Y 2017 Wavelet fuzzy cognitive maps Neurocomputing 232 94–103

Declarations
Funding
The research received no external funding.
Conflicts of interest/Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
Availability of data and material
The dataset is recorded at the Department of Nuclear Medicine of the University Hospital of Patras, Greece and
is not allowed to be publically available.

16

