1

A Novel Methodology for Epidemic Risk Assessment
of COVID-19 outbreak
A. Pluchino*1, A.E. Biondo2, N. Giuffrida3, G. Inturri4, V. Latora1,5,6,7,
R. Le Moli8, A. Rapisarda1,5, G. Russo9, C. Zappalà1

Keywords: Epidemic risk assessment, COVID-19 outbreak, Italy, Air Pollution, People Mobility,
Strategies for outbreak containment.
* Corresponding Author: alessandro.pluchino@ct.infn.it
1

Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia “Ettore Majorana”, Università di Catania and INFN Sezione di
Catania, Italy;
2

Dipartimento di Economia e Impresa, Università di Catania, Italy;

3

Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Architettura, Università di Catania, Italy;

4

Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica Elettronica e Informatica, Università di Catania, Italy;

5

Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Austria;

6

School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK

7

The Alan Turing Institute, The British Library, London NW1 2DB, UK

Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale - UO di Endocrinologia - Ospedale Garibaldi Nesima
- Università di Catania, Italy;
8

9

Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica, Università di Catania, Italy.

2

Abstract
We propose a novel data-driven framework for assessing the a-priori epidemic risk of a geographical
area and for identifying high-risk areas within a country. Our risk index is evaluated as a function of
three different components: the hazard of the disease, the exposure of the area and the vulnerability of
its inhabitants. As an application, we discuss the case of COVID-19 outbreak in Italy. We characterize
each of the twenty Italian regions by using available historical data on air pollution, human mobility,
winter temperature, housing concentration, health care density, population size and age. We find that the
epidemic risk is higher in some of the Northern regions with respect to Central and Southern Italy. The
corresponding risk index shows correlations with the available official data on the number of infected
individuals, patients in intensive care and deceased patients, and can help explaining why regions such
as Lombardia, Emilia-Romagna, Piemonte and Veneto have suffered much more than the rest of the
country. Although the COVID-19 outbreak started in both North (Lombardia) and Central Italy (Lazio)
almost at the same time, when the first cases were officially certified at the beginning of 2020, the disease
has spread faster and with heavier consequences in regions with higher epidemic risk. Our framework
can be extended and tested on other epidemic data, such as those on seasonal flu, and applied to other
countries. We also present a policy model connected with our methodology, which might help policymakers to take informed decisions.

3

Introduction
The prediction of the future developments of a natural phenomenon is one of the main goals of science,
but it remains always a great challenge when dealing with an epidemic. This proved to be particularly
true in the case of the COVID-19 global pandemic that the world is suffering since January 2020.
SARS-CoV-2 is a novel coronavirus, initially announced as the causative agent of pneumonia of
unknown etiology in Wuhan city, China. The genome sequence is related to a viral species named severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) related-CoV. These viral species also comprise some viruses
detected in rhinolophid bat in Europe and Asia1,2. The mechanisms of immunological response to the
virus infection are partially known, however a dysregulation of the immune system is very likely
responsible for a worse outcome especially in patients with pre-existing respiratory or systemic diseases3.
Most infections by coronavirus are mild and self-treated. Therefore, especially in the early stages of the
disease evolution, it can be misleading to estimate the real spread of the virus just on reports of hospital
and general practitioner reports. Moreover, such reports vary according to how measurements are
performed, the number of tests being related very often only to the number of symptomatic patients.
Despite all this, the large amount of official data published in the last months, and updated daily4,5, has
nourished the development of several mathematical models, which are fundamental to understand the
possible evolution of an epidemic and to plan effective control strategies6-15. However, due to the
incompleteness of the data and to the intrinsic complexity of our globalized world, predicting the
evolution, the peak or the end of the pandemic is a very difficult challenge 16-17. In this paper we propose
a different approach aiming, instead, at evaluating the a-priori risk of an epidemic, in particular the one
caused by COVID-19. It can also result helpful in setting sound strategies to prevent or decrease the
impact of future epidemic waves.

4
The COVID-19 outbreak started officially in China in January 2020, although probably the virus had
been already circulating in the country since late October 2019 according to a recent report18. In Italy the
first infected Italian patient was officially detected on the night of February 20 in Codogno (Lombardia),
even if a recent research study of Lombardia Region reveals that more than 1000 positive cases were
already present (but not tested) in that region already in the second half of January19 or even before20.
Moreover, at the end of January, a couple of Chinese tourists coming from Wuhan were hospitalized in
Rome (Lazio) after the confirmation test of the infection. This proves that, in Italy, we have had at least
two official starting points of the COVID-19 outbreak, one in the north of Italy and one in the central
part18, thus leaving some doubts about the reasons of a faster diffusion of the virus in the northern regions
of Italy with respect to the central ones. Then, on March 9, a period of strict lockdown was imposed by
law in order to contain the rise of the contagion. After the end of the lockdown, at the beginning of May,
Italian people were able to travel again with no restrictions: most of them went to south, either to go back
home or for vacation. However, this reopening of the country did not change the different and more
dramatic impact that the pandemic has continued to have on different parts of Italy. In fact, at the
beginning of autumn 2020, when the second epidemic wave arrived in Italy, the same northern regions
(Lombardia, Emilia Romagna, Piemonte, Veneto), which have suffered more due to the first wave, seem
to be still the most impacted by the pandemic with respect to the central and southern regions, in terms
of severe cases and deceased persons5.
To go more into details of this asymmetric impact of Covid-19 on the various Italian regions, let us look
at the official data released by the Italian Ministry of Health4 on April 2, just before the epidemic peak,
and on July 14, at the end of the first wave in Italy. We report in Fig. 1a and 1b the apparent case fatality
rate. It results to be quite high in northern Italian regions, about 10-14%, compared to the center and
southern ones, where it is about 1-4 %. In general, these estimates are higher than those observed in other
parts of the world, e.g., South Korea and Japan (1.7% and 2.6%, respectively)21. This can be explained

5
by considering that the official data underestimate the correct numbers of infected people, as shown in
several recent studies. For example, in March, at least 60% of infected individuals were asymptomatic,
and usually difficult to detect22. The testing strategies adopted in Italy, especially in March-April,
generally consisted in checking only people showing severe symptoms and, in particular, aged over 65.
Therefore, daily official records depend very much on the number of tests done on the population,
resulting in a biased sample towards aged patients.
On the other hand, also the number of officially reported deaths due to Covid-19 seems to be quite
underestimated, since many aged people have most probably died in their houses or nursing houses
without having been tested for Covid-19. Thus, in order to have a more reliable indicator of damages
caused by SARS-CoV-2, it is convenient to look at the excess of total mortality observed in Italy with
respect to the average value of past five years, as reported by official data provided by ISTAT, the Italian
Institute for Statistics23, and shown here in Fig.1c. The figure shows that the impact of the pandemic has
been much more dramatic than it results from official Covid-19 data. Further, it is also clear that regions
in the North of Italy have been most affected by the pandemic, even after the March-April lockdown.
The approach proposed in this paper can offer a possible explanation for the observed different diffusion
and severe impact of the disease, based on a series of cofactors that differentiate the regions of Italy in
various respects. In particular, the methodology we introduce, based on the Crichton’s triangle24,25,
evaluates the epidemic risk index of the various Italian regions in terms of several factors, such as air
pollution, people mobility, winter temperature, housing concentration, health care density, population
size and age, which can be quantified using available historical data. The rationale behind the selection
of these factors, as explained in the Methods section, relies on the literature, on the easy accessibility of
statistical spatial data and on their uneven distribution among the Italian regions. These factors have been
then combined to construct a reliable indicator of the a-priori epidemic risk index in Italy, which has

6
been compared to the impact of the current COVID-19 outbreak registered in two moments: one close to
the epidemic peak and the other at the end of the first epidemic wave. As we will show hereafter, Italian
regions mostly affected by the pandemic (in terms of total cases, patients in intensive care units (ICU)
and deceased ones) are also those with the highest risk of joining a higher propensity to spread the virus
with a greater vulnerability of the population to the damage of the disease. Furthermore, we will show
that our epidemic risk index fits quite well also the official available data of seasonal flu in Italy for 2019202026. Finally, we will propose a theoretical policy model, with actual examples, to design strategies
aimed to the reduction of both the risk and the impact of new epidemic waves before their occurrence.

Results
Identification of the risk variables and their correlations with the COVID-19 damages
We have investigated a series of factors contributing to the risk of an epidemic diffusion and its impact
on the population. Among many possible, we selected the following variables: mobility index, housing
concentration, healthcare density, air pollution, average winter temperature and age of population. In
paragraph 1 of Methods section we motivate our choice on such variables (mainly based on epidemics
literature and features of the COVID-19 outbreak), show the related data (see Table M1) and explain the
adopted normalization.
The first step is, of course, to estimate to what extent the chosen normalized variables individually
correlate with the main impact indicators of the COVID-19 epidemic, i.e., total cases and total deaths
detected in each Italian region, cumulated up to July 14, 20204, when the first epidemic wave seemed to
have finished, and the intensive care occupancy recorded on April 2, 20204, when the epidemic peak was
reached. In the first two rows of Fig. 2, from panel (a) to panel (f), the spatial distributions of the six risk

7
indicators, multiplied by the population of each region, are reported as chromatic maps and thus can be
visually compared with the analogous maps of the three impact indicators, panels (g), (h) and (i) in the
third row. As detailed in Table M2.1, in paragraph 2 of Methods section, pairwise correlations between
risk indicators are, with a few exceptions, quite weak; furthermore, in Table M2.2, results of the linear
least squares fit of each individual risk indicator to damages are reported. We found correlation
coefficients ranging from 0.71 to 0.96, always higher than those observed as a function of the population,
which can be considered the null model; however, the relative quadratic errors stay quite high (from 0.26
to 0.62). This suggests that some opportune combination of risk indicators could better capture the risk
associated to each region. In the next paragraph, we propose a risk assessment framework aimed to this
Definition of a risk assessment framework and calibration with COVID-19 data
Conventional risk assessment theory relies on “Crichton’s Risk Triangle”24,25, shown in panel (l) of
Fig. 2. In this framework, risk is evaluated as a function of three components: Hazard, Exposure and
Vulnerability. Hazard is the potential for an event to cause harm (e.g., earthquake, flooding, epidemics);
Exposure measures the amount of assets exposed to harm (e.g., buildings, infrastructures, population);
Vulnerability is the harm proneness of assets if exposed to hazard events (e.g., building characteristics,
drainage systems, age of population). The risk is present only when all of the three components co-exist
in the same place. Used for the first time in the insurance industry24, this approach has been extended to
assess spatially distributed risks in many fields of disaster management, such as those related to climate
change impact27-31 and earthquakes32.
In the present paper, we consider Hazard as the degree of diffusion of the virus over the population of an
Italian region (influenced by a set of factors, related to spatial and socio-economic characteristics of the
region itself); Exposure is the amount of people who might potentially be infected by the virus as a
consequence of the Hazard (it should coincide with the size of the population of the region); Vulnerability

8
is the propensity of an infected person to become sick or die (in general, it is strongly related to the age
and pre-existing health conditions prior to infection). The combination of Vulnerability and Exposure
provides a measure of the absolute damage (i.e., the number of ill people due to pathologies related to
the virus in the region), which we called Consequences.
In paragraph 3 of Methods section we propose two models that differ in the way the risk indicators are
aggregated into the three components of the Crichton’s risk triangle. In particular, we consider the E_HV
model, where the effect of Hazard and Vulnerability are combined in a single affine function of the six
indicators, and the E_H_V model, where Hazard and Vulnerability are considered as affine functions of,
respectively, mobility index, housing concentration and healthcare density, on one hand, and air
pollution, average winter temperature and age of population on the other hand (see Fig. 2 (m) for a
summary). In both models the Exposure is represented by the population of each region. Furthermore,
two versions of each model have been considered: an optimized one, where the weights of the risk
indicators are obtained through a least-square fitting versus real COVID-19 data, and an a-priori one,
where all the weights are assumed to be equal.
As shown in Tables M3.1 and M3.2 of Methods section, models based on data fitting perform better,
both in terms of relative mean quadratic error and correlation coefficient, as expected. In particular, the
E_H_V model fits the best. Furthermore, in agreement with the strong correlation of the variables with
the targets, most coefficients are positive. Indeed, all coefficients obtained by fitting the number of cases
and the intensive care occupancy are positive, and only one negative coefficient appears in each model,
when fitting the number of deceased. However, the numerical value of the coefficients strongly depends
on both models and targets, making these models not very robust. On the other hand, the a-priori models
are independent of the targets, depending only on the choice of the variables we decided to include in the
risk evaluation.

9
Among the two considered a-priori models, where all coefficients assume the same value, we observe
that the E_H_V model produces a smaller error with respect to real COVID-19 data and better correlation
coefficients than the E_HV model, thus justifying the multiplicative approach which define the risk
intensity in terms of the product between Hazard and Vulnerability (we used data at April 2, 2020 for
this preliminary analysis but similar results would be obtained using data at July 14, 2020). Moreover,
the aggregation of risk indicators in the three components of the E_H_V model follows better our
motivations to choose those indicators (as explained in Methods, paragraph 1).
Validation of the a-priori E_H_V Model on COVID-19 data
Once we established the robustness of the a-priori E_H_V model, let us now build the corresponding
regional risk ranking and validate the model with the regional COVID-19 data as a case study. In
particular, following the scheme of Fig. 2 (m), by multiplying Exposure and Vulnerability for the k-th
region, we first calculate the Consequences (𝐶! = 𝐸! ∙ 𝑉! , k=1,…,20). Then, by multiplying Hazard and
Consequences, we obtain the global risk index 𝑅! for each region (𝑅! = 𝐻! ∙ 𝐶! , k=1,…, 20). In this
respect, the risk index can be interpreted as the product of what is related to the occurrence of causes of
the virus diffusion in a given region (𝐻! ) and what is related to the severity of effects on people (𝐶! ).
In Fig. 3 (a) we can appreciate the predictive capability of our model by looking at the a-priori risk
ranking of the Italian regions, compared with the COVID-19 data4, in terms of total cases (cumulated),
deaths (cumulated) and intensive care occupancy (daily, not cumulated), updated both at April 2, 2020
and July 14, 2020. The values of 𝑅! have been normalized to their maximum value, so that Lombardia
results to have 𝑅! =1. The average of 𝑅! over all the regions is 𝑅"# = 0.15 and can be considered
approximately a reference level for the Italian country (even if, of course, it has only a relative value).
As already explained, due to the intrinsic limitations of the official COVID-19 data, it is convenient to

10
make the comparison at the aggregate level of groups of regions, without expecting to predict the exact
rank within each group. Let us therefore arrange the 20 regions in four risk groups, each one characterized
by a different color and ordered according to decreasing values of the risk index: very high risk
(0.4 < 𝑅! ≤ 1, in red), high risk (0.2 < 𝑅! ≤ 0.4, in brown), medium risk (0.03 < 𝑅! ≤ 0.2, in beige)
and low risk (𝑅! ≤ 0.03, in pink). With this choice, our model is clearly able to correctly identify the
four northern regions where the epidemic effects have been far more evident, in terms of cases, deaths
and intensive care occupancy: the first in the ranking, i.e. Lombardia (whose risk score is about three
times the second classified) and the group of the three regions immediately after it, Veneto, Piemonte
and Emilia Romagna (even if not in the exact order of damage). A quite good agreement can be observed
also for the other two groups: only for Sardegna the effects on both total cases and deaths seem to have
been slightly overestimated (its insularity might play a role), while for other two regions, Umbria and
Valle d’Aosta, some impact indicators have been slightly underestimated. Notice that the proposed risk
classification seems quite robust, since it holds both near to the peak of April and at the end of the first
wave, in July, when the intensive care occupancy of the majority of the regions was zero. In Table M3.3
reported in Methods, a further analysis of the robustness of this classification has been performed by
eliminating, one by one, single indicators from the risk index definition: results show that the position of
some regions slightly changes inside each group, but the composition of the four risk groups remains for
the mostly unchanged with just few exceptions worsening the agreement with the impact indicators
shown in Fig.3 (a). This confirms the advantage of including all indicators in the risk index.
The clear separation between northern regions from central and southern ones is also confirmed in the
bottom part of Fig. 3, where the a-priori risk color map, in panel (c), is compared with the map of
COVID-19 total cases in July, panel (b), and the map of the serious cases and deaths of the seasonal flu
2019/20 in Italy, panel (d) (ISS data19). The agreement is clearly visible. In Fig. 4 we show the
correlations between the a-priori risk index and the three main impact indicators related to the outbreak,

11
i.e. the total number of cases (a) and the total number of deaths (b), cumulated up to July 14, 2020, and
the intensive care occupancy (c), registered at April 2, 2020. For each plot, a linear regression has been
performed, with Pearson correlation coefficients always taking values greater or equal to 0.97, indicating
a strong positive correlation. On the right of each plot we report the corresponding percentages of damage
observed in the three Italian macro-regions – North, Center and South, see the geographic map (d). Also
in this case the correlation is evident, if compared with the percentage of cumulated a-priori risk
associated to the same macro-regions (e).
Another interesting way to visualize these correlations is to represent the a-priori risk index through its
two main aggregated components, Hazard and Consequences, and plotting each region as a point of
coordinates (𝐻$ , 𝐶$ ) in the plane {𝐻 × 𝐶 }. This Risk Diagram is reported in Fig. 5 (a), where the points
have been also characterized by the same color of the corresponding risk group of Fig. 3. It is evident
that the iso-risk line described by the equation C = Rav / H (being Rav = 0.15 the average regional risk
value) is correctly able to separate the four more damaged and highly risky, northern regions (plus Lazio)
from all the others. The value of the risk index is reported in parentheses next to each region name. As
shown in Fig. 5 (b), where the ranking of the Italian regions has been disaggregated for both Hazard and
Consequences, it is interesting to notice that some regions (such as Friuli, Trentino or Valle d’Aosta)
exhibit high values of Hazard and quite low values of Consequences, while for other regions (such as
Campania or Piemonte) the opposite is true. See also the colored geographic maps in Fig. 5 (c) and (d)
for a visual comparison. This confirms that it is necessary to aggregate such two main components in a
single global index to have a more reliable indication of the regional a-priori risk.
Let us close this paragraph by showing, in Fig. 6, three sequences of the geographic distribution of the
total cases (a), total number of deaths (b) and current intensive care occupancy (c) as a function of time,
from March 9 to July 14, 2020. These sequences are compared with the geographic map of the a-priori

12
risk level (the bordered image on the right in each sequence), the latter being independent of time. In all
the plots, damages seem to spread over the regions with a variable intensity (expressed by the color scale)
quite correctly predicted by our a-priori risk analysis. The intensive care occupancy map compared with
the risk map is dated April 2, since the occupancy on July 14 is zero almost everywhere (with the
exception of Lombardia and a few other regions).
In the next paragraph, the methodology proposed in this paper, and in particular this representation in
terms of risk diagram, will be used to build a policy model aimed at mitigating damages in case of an
epidemic outbreak similar to the COVID-19 one.
A proposal for a policy protocol to reduce the epidemic risk
We have seen how the risk can be thought as composed in two components, one related to the causes of
the infection diffusion and the other to the consequences. In this paragraph we will interpret the
consequences in terms of protection and required support to people with the goal of improving the
social result and/or reducing the economic cost. It is evident that enhancing the capability of the
healthcare system appears to be the most important action: basically, the insufficient carrying capacity
creates the emergency. Beyond specific factors explained above, the epidemic crisis in Lombardia
essentially showed a breakdown of its healthcare system, caused by high demand rate for hospital
admissions, long permanence times in intensive care, insufficient health assistance (diagnosis equipment,
staff, spaces, etc.).
Previously illustrated data provide a positive analysis of an epidemic disease (i.e., how things are, in a
given state of the world). The normative approach here described presents a viable framework to assess
possible policy protocols. Several variables affecting the diffusion of an infection can be looked at as
suitable policy instruments to manage both the spreading process and the stress level to the healthcare

13
system of a given district (such as a country, a region, an urban area, etc.). Following the evidence
suggested by data, we propose a theoretical model (whose details are presented in the Methods section,
paragraph 4) based on two independent variables influencing the level of risk, namely the infection ratio,
i.e., the proportion of infected individuals over the total population, and the number of per capita hospital
beds, as a measure of the impact of consequences caused by the spreading of the disease.
We adopt an approach based on a standard model of economic policy, in which a series of instruments
explicitly affecting the infection ratio and the per capita hospital beds endowment can be used to approach
the target, i.e., the minimization of the risk level. A similar rationale, covering other topics, can be found
in Samuelson and Solow33 (1960) and builds upon a widely consolidated literature which dates back in
time34-39 (among many others). Despite the analysis concerns a collective problem, the model here
proposed describes elements of a possible decision process followed by an individual policy-maker, thus
remaining microeconomic in nature. Panel (a) in Fig. 7 shows the risk function, while the right panel
provides an illustration of the family of its convex contours, for a finite set of risk levels (limited for
graphic convenience):
Panel (b) in Fig. 7 replicates the meaning of Fig. 5a by translating the consequences indicated by data as
the required per capita hospital beds, while explaining that the position of each iso-risk curve corresponds
to the different actual composition of the scenario at hand.
We assume a unique care strategy based on the structural carrying capacity of the healthcare system,
defined as the available number of per capita hospital beds. Such a carrying capacity derives from the
health expenditure 𝐺% , which is set to a level considered sufficient. Such a choice is based on political
decisions and is reasonably inferred from past experience, structural elements of population, such as age
and territorial density, etc. A part of the deliberated budget is dedicated to set up intensive care beds, as
an advanced assistance service provision.

14
During an emergency, possibly deriving from an epidemic spreading, the number of beds can suddenly
reveal insufficient. In other words, it is possible that the amount of hospital beds required at a certain
point is greater than the current availability. In the model, we assume the number of hospital beds, H,
and the proportion of intensive care beds, 𝛼, as exogenously determined by the policy-maker who fixes
𝐺% . The actual carrying capacity is shown as a function of the infection ratio, x, computed as the infected
population over the total, as shown in panel (c) of Fig. 7, and detailed in paragraph 4 of Methods. Changes
in the proportion of per capita intensive care hospital beds over the total, cause instead, a variation in the
slope of the line (which becomes steeper for reduction in the proportion of intensive care beds). Finally,
changes in the overall expenditure shift the line with the same slope (above for increments of the
expenditure). In particular, it is worth to notice that the political choice of the ratio 𝛼 = 𝐻𝐻/𝐻 may
imply that the overall capacity to assist the entire population is not guaranteed (i.e. the intercept on the 𝑥
axis might be less than 1). A direct comparison of elements contained in panels (a-b) and (c-d) of Fig. 7
provides a quick inspection of the policy problem, focused to control the epidemic spreading. The
constraint should be considered as a dynamic law, but since the speed of adjustment is reasonably low,
we will proceed by means of a comparative statics perspective, in which a comparison of different
strategies can be presented, by starting from different, static, scenarios.
Further, by definition, an emergency challenges the usual policy settings, since the speed of damages is
greater than that of policy tools. In panel (e) of Fig. 7 a hypothetic country has a given carrying capacity
to sustain the risk level represented by the iso-risk curve. Without an immediate availability of funds to
increase the carrying capacity, the main policy target could easily be described as the transposition of the
iso-risk curve to the bottom-left: the closer the curve to the origin, the higher the satisfaction for the
community. Secondly, the meaning of the relationship between the curve and the line is that until the
curve touches the line, the policy maker has a sort of measure of how much the problem is out of control,

15
given by the distance between the curve and the constraint. Third, policies may try to transpose the curve
to lower levels or, equivalently, the constraint upwards (with or without modification of the slope). A
minimal result is reached if both are at least tangent, as depicted in panel (f) of Fig. 7.
Whenever such a tangency condition has been reached, the highest infection rate that the given health
care system can sustain has been found. Further policy actions are possible to approach a lower iso-risk
curve or to save resources and/or re-allocate them differently. A policy can be considered satisfactory
when any of points belonging to the arc TT’ is reached, e.g. the point L. Alternative policies are neither
equivalent, nor requiring the same actions, and the policy-maker has to choose actions with reference to
the actual data collected by its own Country. Points F and G, although carrying the same risk level as E,
still represent out-of-control positions. Different regions of the plot have a different signaling power: at
point F, the infection rate is low and, thus, very difficult to be further reduced. In such a case, for
example, it would be advisable to suggest health protocols which improve people safety. On the contrary,
at point G, the infection rate is so high that a limit on social interaction easily appears to be much more
urgent than medical protocols.
The right mix between a demand-side and a supply-side policy to adopt is a decision of political nature.
A distinction can be made by saying that demand-side policies are devoted to reduce the number of newly
infected people (by means of restrictions to movements, quarantine regulations, rules of conduct, etc.)
and their effects are able to lower the iso-risk curves; supply-side policies are, instead, aimed at
incrementing the carrying capacity of the system (by means of expenditure for the healthcare system,
increments of dedicated personnel and intensive care beds, in-house medical protocols) and their effects
can shift the constraint representing the carrying capacity of the system. Politics has, then, to decide when
the risk is low enough or the constraint is sufficiently high. Specific calibration of the model will allow,
in a forthcoming research, a detailed analysis of policy implications, by considering actual conditions

16
and risk factors of specific districts, thus providing the policy-maker with a toolbox for normative
directions. For instance, the model can be read to analyze differences in proposed actions in Lombardia
and Veneto, and in other regions or countries.

Discussion
We have shown how a data-driven epidemic risk analysis, accounting for a proper combination of a set
of cofactors, can contribute to understand the highly inhomogeneous spread of COVID-19 in Italy during
the first epidemic wave (from March 2020 to June 2020), in terms of a different a-priori risk exposure of
different geographical areas. Regions such as Lombardia, Veneto, Piemonte and Emilia Romagna result
indeed in the first positions of our proposed a-priori risk ranking, which consists of three main
components, Hazard, Exposure and Vulnerability, related, directly or indirectly, to the probability of
spreading of a virus and of its harming ability. We have evaluated these three components by using
historical available data on various factors that can contribute to the territorial risk. Then, assuming the
existing data are reliable, we compared our risk map with real impact indicators both close to the
epidemic peak and at the end of the first epidemic wave. We are aware that the information about total
number of cases can heavily be underestimated and is strictly dependent on the testing strategies. For this
reason we also adopted for the comparison the total number of deaths and the intensive care occupancy.
In all the cases we were able to correctly identify four groups of regions where the observed epidemic
effects match with the a-priori risk level.
In the second part of the paper we then advanced a theoretical policy model that provides a decisionmaking toolbox to face a complex phenomenon as that of an epidemic emergency. In what follows, we
provide an example illustrating the application of the model, following the steps of its practical
implementation. A policy maker facing an emergency outbreak, should:

17
STEP 1) Detect the current Risk Profile:
1.a) compute the infection ratio over the population, x;
1.b) measure the demand for hospital beds, b;
STEP 2) Measure the current Carrying Capacity of the healthcare system (supply of hospital beds), z;
STEP 3) Check the sustainability of the epidemic burden and assess costs of possible interventions;
STEP 4) Apply the chosen policy;
STEP 5) Evaluate results and, if necessary, repeat.
In order to see the procedure in action, let us now go through a numerical example with hypothetical
data, which can be easily substituted with actual data of any country/region, if available.
Imagine a district with a population of 10000 people, invested by a pandemic without a known therapy.
Assume, further, that the healthcare system has 2500 hospital beds (that is a very conspicuous
endowment), among which 1000 are intensive care ones. Consider a first case in which 1500 persons are
infected and 1200 of them present symptoms and need hospital treatments. Thus, in terms of our
theoretical model presented in Methods, values are set as: n=10000, H=2500, HH=1000; then, a=0.4,
h=0.6 and zH=0.25.
STEP 1) The infection ratio results, currently, to be equal to x=1500/10000=0.15 and the evidence
suggests that, over the infected part of the population, 80% requires hospital treatments. Therefore, the
actual estimate of the absorbed allowance (the demand of per capita hospital beds) is
b=1200/10000=0.12. The point representing the country risk profile in the proposed plane hazardconsequences would, then, have coordinates (0.15, 0.12), as the point A in panel g) of Fig.7.
STEP 2) The line representing the carrying capacity of the healthcare system intercepts the vertical axis
to the point zH=0.25 and its slope is h=(1-a)=1-1000/2500=0.6, as the black line depicted in panel g) of
Fig.7. It is worth to notice that, in this example, the healthcare system would not be able to handle
infection ratios greater than 41.6%, as shown by the intercept on the horizontal axis.
STEP 3) The policy maker can see that point A can be managed by means of the current carrying capacity:
it lies below the line representing the constraint. Despite this apparently encouraging result, what comes

18
next might depend on the speed of the epidemic spreading. This model is, however, not dynamic; it uses
instead a comparative static approach. Let us therefore consider two hypotheses. In case the contagion is
not proceeding by involving a greater share of the population, the policy maker can reasonably decide to
do nothing. Contrariwise, in case of a situation where the contagion is still in the ascending phase, the
policy maker can (i) compare the pace of epidemic progression, (ii) measure the time remained before
the free allowance will be used and (iii) decide, correspondingly, whether it is the case to intervene or
not. In case the choice is “do nothing”, STEP 4) and STEP 5) are not necessary.
Consider now a different example, in the same district as before, in which the contagion has reached
3000 persons and 2500 of them need hospital treatments. In this case, the algorithm would lead to:
STEP 1) The infection ratio results to be equal to x=3000/10000=0.3 and the actual estimate of the
absorbed allowance (the demand of per capita hospital beds) is b=2500/10000=0.25. The point
representing the country risk profile in the proposed plane hazard-consequences has, now, coordinates
(0.3, 0.25), as the point B in panel g) of Fig.7, reported also in panel h).
STEP 2) The line representing the carrying capacity of the healthcare system is the same as before,
reported as the black line in panel g) and h) of Fig.7.
STEP 3) The policy maker can immediately understand that the situation is out of control, since the
constraint says that the healthcare system is able to allocate no more than z=0.07 per-capita beds if the
infection rate reaches x=0.3, while the situation in progress requires b=0.25 per-capita beds. This can be
easily seen by comparing point B and the point on the constraint with the same abscissa of B. Since b>z,
the policy maker has to decide what to do in order to satisfy the excess demand. Moreover, the situation
could in principle represent a further element of diffusion of the epidemic, thus making the policy
intervention more urgent. Different strategies are possible and, also in this case, the speed of contagion
spreading matters in tuning opportune actions.

19
3.a) If, for example, the progression of the disease is decreasing or even constant, a viable decision is
to allocate resources to fill the gap in terms of hospital beds. Consequently, the expenditure will be
incremented by DH, represented by a parallel shift upwards of the constraint, as the dashed line
passing through point B. It is worth to notice that, in principle, the deliberated expenditure could
also exceed the required gap and set the constraint to higher allowance.
3.b) If, instead, the progression of the disease is increasing, the policy maker could decide to modify
also the proportion of intensive care beds (a), in order to face the probable growth of infected
persons. This would make the constraint line flatter, while new expenditure will also be required
to shift it upward to reach, at least, point B, as the dotted line passing through it.
3.c) Under both 3.a and 3.b, the policy maker can comparatively consider restrictive interventions aimed
to reduce the infection ratio, while deciding the expenditure to expand the endowment of hospital
beds. Examples of such restrictive policies could be a forced closure of restaurants, gyms and
cinemas. Such interventions would have the effect to shift the point B to the bottom-left, thus
associating infection ratios with lower per capita beds requirements. Then, the cost of additive
hospital beds has to be compared to social cost of restrictions, in terms of tax revenues, required
subsidies, unemployment and social uncertainty. The political preference and the availability of
budget funds will guide the choice. Consider that the effectiveness of such restrictive initiatives is
estimated according to the presumed knowledge of the social custom in the district at hand. In the
example, a society where restaurant consumptions are very frequent is very likely to respond well
to a restriction of this type.
It is worth to notice that such choices, i.e., the amount of governmental expenditure in the healthcare
system (influencing the vertical distance between the new and the former linear constraint), the details
of the regulation imposing the restrictions, etc., are of political nature and cannot be decided by the
model. They will be tailored according to political preferences of the policy maker.

20
STEP 4) The chosen policy is applied and the consequences are measured, while the spreading continues
at its pace. Evaluation and new measurements occur and the process starts again (STEP 5).
While preserving simplicity, the model is able to depict various scenarios according to actual data and
can help designing policy strategies fitting the situation at hand. In particular, elements of the model can
be depicted by importing data of a district (i.e., a region, a country, etc.) and follow the presented
algorithm to tailor the most adequate policy. As explained above, the political preference will guide the
decision, in terms of the chosen expenditure profile (i.e., whether to change H only or also a), and in
terms of possible restrictions for society, as different lockdown strategies (e.g., more drastic but specific
vs more gradual but generalized). In all cases, the forced closure of socio-economic activities will serve
as an ancillary tool aimed to support a potentially insufficient endowment of hospital beds, but the actual
implementation relies on the ability and preference of the Government.
In conclusion, our work is a first attempt to jointly consider different factors contributing to evaluate the
a-priori epidemic risk in a geographical area. Better medical knowledge and data availability will be
important to further refine and improve the proposed methodology, which could also be easily applied
to other countries provided that they make the necessary information accessible. Further studies will deal
also with dynamic implications, thus providing more specific intuitions according to different
evolutionary paths of contagion spreading.

21

Figures
a

b

c

Figure 1: (a) color geographic maps of the apparent case fatality rate in the various regions on April 2, 2020 (b) and on July
14, 2020 (b), data released by the Italian Ministry of Health4. Maps were realized with QGIS 3.10 (https://qgis.org/en/site/).
(c) Percentage of deaths change in 2020 with respect to the average taken in the period 2015-2019 (ISTAT22).

22

l

m

Figure 2: The geographical distribution of the six risk factors (a-f) can be compared with the COVID-19 total cases (g), the
total deaths (h) and the intensive care occupancy (i). Cases and deaths have been cumulated up to July 14, 2020, i.e. at the
end of the first epidemic wave; the intensive care data have been recorded on April 2, 2020, i.e. just before the epidemic peak.
The risk indicators have been multiplied for the population of each region and normalized between 0 and 1 (the color scale
for temperature has been reversed, i.e. dark colors mean low temperatures, see Methods). A concentration of dark colors in
the northern regions is roughly visible for almost all the indicators and the correlations between the single factors and the
damages range from 0.70 to 0.95. Maps were realized with QGIS 3.10 (https://qgis.org/en/site/). (l) Crichton’s Risk Triangle.
(m) Risk Index assessment framework: risk indicators (factors) are reported in red, risk components in black.

23

a

b

c

d

Figure 3: (a) A-priori normalized risk ranking of Italian regions, emerging from our analysis of risk indicators, compared with
the corresponding total cases, deaths and intensive care occupancy updated, respectively, at April 2, 2020 (just before the
epidemic peak) and at July 14, 2020 (at the end of the first wave). Regions are organized in four risk groups, corresponding
to different colors: very high, high, medium and low risk. The agreement with the observed effects Data referring to
overestimations or underestimations of risk are also colored in green and red, respectively. (b-d) Comparison between the
spatial distribution of COVID-19 total cases at July 14, 2020 (b), the most struck regions (in terms of severe cases and deaths)
from 2019-2020 seasonal flu (d) according to the ISS data19 and our a-priori risk map (c). The geographical correlation with
the risk map is evident for both kind of epidemic flus. Maps were realized with QGIS 3.10 (https://qgis.org/en/site/).

24

a

b
d
e
c

Figure 4: The three main impact indicators for COVID-19 – the total number of cases (a) and the total number of deaths (b)
cumulated up to July 14, 20204, and the intensive care occupancy (c) at April 2, 20204 – are reported as function of the apriori risk index for all the Italian regions. The size of the points is proportional to the risk index score. A linear regression
has been performed for each plot. The Pearson correlation coefficients are very good, always greater or equal than 0.97. The
corresponding percentages of damages, aggregated for the three Italian macro-regions (North, Center and South (d)) are also
reported to the right and can be compared with the percentages of cumulated a-priori risk (e). It is clear that our a-priori risk
index is able to explain the anomalous damage discrepancies between these different parts of Italy. Maps were realized with
QGIS 3.10 (https://qgis.org/en/site/).

25

a

b

c

d

Figure 5: (a) Risk Diagram. Each region is represented as a point in the plane {𝐻 × 𝐶} while the color is proportional to the
corresponding risk group updated at July 14, 2020 (see Fig.3a). The most damaged regions lie with a good approximation
above the C = Rav /H hyperbole (i.e. the iso-risk line related to the average regional risk index), while the less damaged ones
lie below this line. The a-priori risk index score is also reported for each region. (b) The rankings of Italian regions according
to either Hazard (on the left) or Consequences (on the right). The corresponding colored geographic maps are also shown in
panels (c) and (d) for comparison. Maps were realized with QGIS 3.10 (https://qgis.org/en/site/).

26

Figure 6: The geographic distributions of damage in the various Italian regions – cumulated total cases (a), cumulated total
deaths (b) and daily intensive care occupancy (c) – are reported as function of time, from March 9, 2020 to July 14, 2020 and
compared with the geographic distribution of the a-priori risk. Obviously, the intensive care occupancy to compare with the
risk map is that of April, since in July, at the end the epidemic wave, this variable is zero everywhere except for a few regions
(among which only Lombardia has a score slightly higher than 25). Maps were realized with QGIS 3.10
(https://qgis.org/en/site/).

27

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

Figure 7: (a-b) The Risk function and its convex contours: an example for 𝑅 = 𝑥 !.# 𝑏!.# . (c-d) The carrying capacity function
and effects of policy interventions on the supply-side. (e-f) Comparative statics of equilibrium and disequilibrium. (g-h) Two
examples of model implementation, see the main text.

28

Methods
1. Synthetic description of the risk indicators, population and data sources
This paragraph presents all the indicators we used, their rationale and the set of references supporting
their selection. Table M1 reports the data used for each region, their definition, unit of measure and
relevant source. We included in the a-priori risk index only territorial or environmental factors unevenly
distributed among the regions, easily available on national databases.
Mobility index: Commuting data are often used to correlate population mobility and the spreading of an
infection40. On the other hand, many recently published papers have monitored to what extent people are
complying to issued travel restrictions41 and if they are proofing to be effective in the reduction of the
Covid-19 epidemic spreading42. According to available data, the average trip rate of mobile population
in Italy is 2.50 per day and the average distance covered is 28.5 km per day43. We characterize each
region with a “mobility index” as the regional average of the ratio between the sum of commuting flows
(incoming and outgoing) for each municipality and its employed population. The data source is the Italian
Ministry of Economic Policy Planning and Coordination44. Housing concentration: Urbanization
increasingly affects the epidemiological characteristics of infectious disease45,46. Close proximity of
people in their short range mobility and the attitude to use crowded public transport is amplified in
compact and dense cities47. We capture those circumstances by the “Housing Concentration”, measured
as the ratio between the number of houses classified as "non detached houses" and the total number of
houses. The data source is the same database cited for the mobility index. Healthcare density: Delayed
hospital admission, misdiagnosis, unsuitable air conditioning systems, lack of infected patients
segregation and inter-hospitals transfers, all might contribute in what it is commonly called superspreading event48. It is worthwhile to notice that super-spreading events can occur in many situations
where overcrowding in closed spaces favour the transmission of the infection. Nevertheless, our intention
was to include in the a-priori risk index only territorial or environmental factors unevenly distributed
among the regions, easily available on national databases. We measure the potential occurrence of this
events in the infection spreading by including the “Healthcare Density” as the number of hospital beds
per 10.000 inhabitants at regional level. Data source is the website of the Ministry of Health
(http://www.dati.salute.gov.it/dati/dettaglioDataset.jsp?menu=dati&idPag=17). Pollution: Long-term
exposure to air pollution may be one of the most important contributors to fatality caused by the COVID19 in Europe49 and in northern Italy4. Particulate matter (PM) is able to penetrate deeply into the
respiratory tract and increase the risk of respiratory diseases50. According to the European Environment
Agency (EEA Report No 10/2019), PM concentration in 2016 were responsible for about 374.000
premature deaths in the EU-28. Recently has been evidenced that PM10 determines a hyperactivation
of JAK/STAT protein family that is associated with cells proliferation and survival51. JAK/STAT is also
hyperactivated by several cytokines generated during the Covid-19 infection5. For these reasons a
strengthening mechanism between PM10 and Covid-19 infection could be assumed. Besides, very recent
studies are directly correlating the population exposed to particulate pollution and the contagion from
COVID-19 and the consequent health damage52,53,54. Based on these premises, we decided to include the
PM10 annual average of the mean daily concentration as a factor influencing the vulnerability of people
exposed to the infection. The data source is WHO (https://www.who.int/airpollution/data/cities/en/), that
provides measures at urban background, residential areas, commercial and mixed areas for the period
2013-2016. Temperature: Weather plays a role in the spread of 2019-nCoV55,56,57, although not fully
established. Chan58 et al. (2011) report that a low temperature and low humidity environment may
facilitate the virus transmission in subtropical areas during the spring and in air-conditioned

29
environments. It is also commonly accepted that cold cuts down the defense barriers of the respiratory
tracts59,60. We decided to include the average winter (from December 2016 to April 2017) daily mean
temperature in each region as a factor potentially enhancing the individual vulnerability. The source of
data is the Italian Ministry of Agriculture (https://www.politicheagricole.it/). Age of population: Most
of the official data sources report more severe impacts of 2019-nCoV on elderly people, probably both
for an intrinsic weakness of their immunity system and for the co-existence of other chronic pathologies.
Therefore we use the ratio between the population over 60 and the total population to take into account
this vulnerability factor, even if it shows only relatively small differences from one region to another.
Data source is the same as population, i.e. ISTAT database (www.istat.it/it/archivio/104317).
Population: Of course, as anyone who is infected might get ill, it is straightforward to use the total
population of each region that could be affected by the infection as a measure of the risk exposure. We
also use the population as a multiplying factor of each risk indicator when measuring its degree of
correlation to the damage of each region (see first paragraph in the Results section). About 43% of the
population is concentrated in the five regions of Northern Italy and one out of six in Lombardia. Data on
regional population are available on ISTAT database (www.istat.it/it/archivio/104317).
Indicator

Mobility inex

Data source

www.urbanindex.it www.urbanindex.it

Definition

ratio between
commuting
flows and
employed
population

Region

dimensionless

Abruzzo
Basilicata
Calabria
Campania
Emilia Romagna
Friuli Venezia Giulia
Lazio
Liguria
Lombardia
Marche
Molise
Piemonte
Puglia
Sardegna
Sicilia
Toscana
Trentino Alto Adige
Umbria
Valle d'Aosta
Veneto

Housing
concentration

0.752
0.738
0.775
0.762
0.823
0.823
0.793
0.788
0.844
0.801
0.735
0.799
0.767
0.767
0.794
0.815
0.807
0.795
0.805
0.838

Healthcare
density
www.dati.salute.
gov.it

ratio between the
number of "non
number of
detached
hospital beds
houses" and the
per 10.000
total number of
inhabitants
houses
# beds/inhab.
dimensionless
('0000)
0.871
33.8
0.869
32.2
0.917
29.6
0.863
31.2
0.851
40.1
0.952
35.7
0.834
37.8
0.903
36.4
0.961
38.9
0.795
33.9
0.871
39.2
0.862
38.1
0.950
31.0
0.962
35.3
0.942
31.6
0.857
32.7
0.888
40.8
0.805
37.0
0.919
38.6
0.884
36.1

Pollution

Temperature

Age of
population

Population

www.who.int/
www.istat.it/it/ www.istat.it/it/
airpollution
www.politicheagricole.it
archivio/104317 archivio/104317
/data/cities/en

annual
ratio between
average winter daily
average of
over 60
total residents
mean temperature
PM10 daily
population
living in the
(from December
mean
and total
region
2016 to April 2017)
concentration
population
mg/m 3

°C

dimensionless

24.3
18.7
22.9
31.1
24.8
21.9
25.3
20.7
29.5
23.9
18.9
26.3
23.2
22.4
21.7
22.7
18.1
22.2
21.4
27.6

5.4
8.4
10.5
8.5
5.7
4.0
7.7
6.8
3.6
6.6
7.1
2.5
9.6
10.7
11.9
7.2
-1.0
6.4
-2.3
4.3

0.281
0.267
0.252
0.222
0.293
0.308
0.265
0.344
0.271
0.292
0.287
0.303
0.253
0.266
0.250
0.306
0.247
0.303
0.279
0.268

Table M1: The risk indicators original data are reported for each Italian region, together with their sources.

inha
1 307 309
578 036
1 959 050
5 766 810
4 342 135
1 218 985
5 502 886
1 570 694
9 704 151
1 541 319
313 660
4 363 916
4 052 566
1 639 362
5 002 904
3 672 202
1 029 475
884 268
126 806
4 857 210

30
2. Comparison between single risk indicators and impact indicators
The seven risk indicators under consideration are named below, together with their reference interval:
Population:

𝑋! ∈ [126806, 9704151]

Mobility index:

𝑋" ∈ [0.74, 0.84]

Housing concentration:

𝑋# ∈ [0.80, 0.96]

Healthcare density:

𝑋$ ∈ [29.6, 40.80]

Air Pollution:

𝑋% ∈ [18.09, 31.07]

Average Winter Temperature:

𝑋& ∈ [-2.29, 11.92]

Age of Population (fraction of over-60 individuals): 𝑋' ∈ [0.22, 0.34]

These variables are suitably normalized between 0 and 1 as:
𝑥! =

𝑋!
max(𝑋! )

;

𝑥" =

𝑋" − min(𝑋" )
,
max(𝑋" ) − min(𝑋" )

𝑖 = 1,2,3,4,6, 𝑥# =

max(𝑋# ) − 𝑋#
max(𝑋# ) − min(𝑋# )

where min(𝑋$ ) and max(𝑋$ ) are, respectively, the minimum and the maximum value assumed by each
variable 𝑋$ in its own reference interval. The new normalized variables are also dimensionless.
Notice that the normalization is different for the population, since we want to avoid values equal to zero,
and for the temperature, since, at variance with all other quantities, we expect that the risk increases with
the decrease of the temperature.
The first test is to check possible pairwise correlations among normalized indicators, with the exception
of the population (whose correlation with many other indicators is quite obvious). The Pearson
correlation coefficient is reported for each couple in the correlation matrix, see Table M2.1 below.
Mobility
index
Mobility
index
Housing
concentration
Healthcare
density
Air
Pollution
Inverted
temperature
Over
60
concentration

Housing
concentration

Healthcare
density

Air
Pollution

Inverted
temperature

Over60
concentration

1.0000

0.0820

0.4064

0.3505

0.4640

0.2337

0.0820

1.0000

-0.1356

-0.0510

-0.0737

-0.2119

0.4064

-0.1356

1.0000

-0.0935

0.6998

0.3389

0.3505

-0.0510

-0.0935

1.0000

-0.0405

-0.2527

0.4640

-0.0737

0.6998

-0.0405

1.0000

0.2183

0.2337

-0.2119

0.3389

-0.2527

0.2183

1.0000

Table M2.1: Pearson correlation coefficients among the indicators 𝑥& , … , 𝑥'

31
As one can see, the majority of the indicators are weakly correlated. Noticeable exceptions concern the
moderate positive correlations of some indicators, such as mobility and healthcare, with the inverted
temperature. These can be explained by observing that northern Italian regions are, on average, colder
and with greater mobility and healthcare density than central and southern regions.
The second thing is to check if any of the six risk indicators, 𝑥& , … , 𝑥' , each considered separately, can
fit any of the targets 𝑇( , 𝑙 = 1, 2, 3, i.e. our three impact indicators: cumulative number of cases,
cumulative number of deceased and number of hospitalized in intensive care at April 2, 2020. For each
variable 𝑥$ , 𝑖 = 1, … ,6, we consider a risk 𝑅$,( = 𝑥* ∗ 𝛼$,( ∗ 𝑥$ , and each 𝛼$,( is determined by matching
the target 𝑇( in the least square sense.
In particular, we perform a linear least square fit, minimizing the following quadratic error :
𝑛

𝝐'%&

=

2

"#𝑇𝑙𝑘 − 𝑅𝑖,𝑙 $
𝑘=1

for the i-th risk indicator with respect to the l-th impact indicator. In this expression 𝑛 = 20 is the number
of regions and 𝑇(! denotes the impact indicator (𝑙 = 1, total cases, 𝑙 = 2, number of deceased, 𝑙 = 3,
intensive care occupancy) for region 𝑘.
The relative mean quadratic error is defined as
𝜀$(,

=

𝝐*()

*
∑,
+-. #+)

.

The result is summarized in Table M2.2. It appears that each single parameter correlates with all three
targets (respectively number of cases, deceased and hospitalized in intensive care) well above the obvious
correlation coefficient of the population, shown in the first column, however the correlation are not
strikingly high, and the mean quadratic error is not so small.

Table M2.2: Relative mean quadratic error and correlation coefficient of single parameters.

32
3. Definition of the Risk Index and comparison among some models
The goal of this paragraph is to choose the best model of aggregation of the risk indicators presented
before in the framework of the Crichton’s Risk Triangle (see Results section). We observe that, in any
model of this kind, the risk has to be necessarily proportional to the exposure, represented by the
population. Therefore, we will assume that the risk R is given by the product of Exposure E times a given
function FHV of the other parameters, related with Hazard and Vulnerability:
𝑅 = (𝐸 ∗ 𝐹%- )
We propose and compare the following models, in order to understand which one is most suited for a
robust risk evaluation.
1) E_HV Linear Model. Here the effect of Hazard and Vulnerability are combined in a single affine
function of the parameters. We assume a dependence of the risk of the form:
𝑅._%- = 𝐸 ∗ 𝐹%𝐸 = 𝑥* ; 𝐹%- = 𝑐%- + 𝛼& 𝑥& + ⋯ + 𝛼' 𝑥'
The coefficients 𝑐%- , 𝛼& , … , 𝛼' , in turn can be:
a) obtained by a least square fitting;
b) assigned a-priori with 𝑐%- = 0 and all the 𝛼$ , 𝑖 = 1, … ,6 , assumed to be equal.
2) E_H_V Multiplicative Model. Here, Hazard and Vulnerability are considered as affine functions of,
respectively, 𝑥& , 𝑥, , 𝑥0 and 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥' . We assume that 𝐹%- is the product of Hazard and Vulnerability,
i.e.:
𝑅._%_- = 𝐸 ∗ 𝐹%- = 𝐸 ∗ 𝐻 ∗ 𝑉,
𝐸 = 𝛼* 𝑥* ,

(1)
(2)

𝐻 = 𝑐% + 𝛼& 𝑥& + 𝛼, 𝑥, + 𝛼0 𝑥0 ,

(3)

𝑉 = 𝑐- + 𝛼1 𝑥1 + 𝛼2 𝑥2 + 𝛼' 𝑥' .

(4)

Again, 𝑐% , 𝑐- , 𝛼* , … , 𝛼' can be:
a) obtained by a least square fitting;
b) assigned a priori, by setting 𝑐% = 0, 𝑐- = 0, and with all the 𝛼$ , 𝑖 = 1, … ,6, assumed to be
equal.
As before, we shall compare these four models (1.a, 1.b, 2.a and 2.b) versus the three types of targets
available, 𝑇( (𝑙 = 1, 2, 3), represented by our impact indicators: cumulative number of cases, cumulative
number of deceased or number of hospitalized in intensive care, all registered at April 2, 2020. In
particular, for models 1.b and 2.b we adopt a linear least square fit, while, for determining the optimal
parameters of models 1.a and 2.a we perform a nonlinear least square best-fit, by trying to fit the total

33
number of cases in each region up to April 2, 2020. Since in the E_H_V model the dependence of the
risk on 𝐸, 𝐻 and V is multiplicative, we may add two normalization conditions in order to avoid infinite
solutions, for example:
𝛼& + 𝛼, + 𝛼0 = 1,

(5)

𝛼1 + 𝛼2 + 𝛼' = 1.

(6)

For all the models, we minimize the error:
𝑛

𝝐'&

=

( )

" %𝑇𝑙𝑘 − 𝐸𝑘 ∗ 𝐹𝐻𝑉 (𝑥1𝑘

(𝑘)

2

, … , 𝑥6 ; 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠)&

𝑘=1

with respect to the parameters. In this expression 𝑛 = 20 is the number of regions, 𝑇(! denotes the impact
indicator (𝑙 = 1, total cases, 𝑙 = 2, number of deceased, 𝑙 = 3, intensive care occupancy) for region 𝑘,
𝐸! indicates the population of region 𝑘, and the function 𝐹%- depends on the model considered. The
relative mean quadratic error 𝜀 is defined as

𝜀&'

=

𝝐2𝑙

1
∑2
/34 +/0

.

The non-linear fit is obtained by minimizing the error function by using the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm of MatlabÒ (Optimization Toolboxä). Results of the best-fit with the four models are
summarized in Table M3.1, while 𝛼 coefficients of the fitting parameters, normalized so that the sum of
their absolute value is 2, are reported in Table M3.2 for both E_HV (1.a) and E_H_V (2.a) models.
Finally, in Table M3.3, a stability analysis of the risk ranking of the Italian regions obtained with the
E_H_V a-priori model (1), performed by eliminating each one of the six risk indicators, 𝑥& , … , 𝑥' in turn.

Table M3.1: Relative average quadratic error and correlation coefficients for E_HV and E_H_V models, for both the versions
with data fitting and with a-priori coefficients.

34

Table M3.2: Normalized coefficients 𝛼$ , 𝑖 = 1, … ,6 of both E_HV and E_V_H models, in the versions computed by fitting
the data (1.a and 2.a). Most coefficients are positive, however their numerical value strongly depends on the model and on
the fitted data.

Table M3.3: Robustness of the a-priori risk ranking, shown in Fig.3a of the main text, under elimination of single indicators
from the risk index definition. The composition of the four risk groups seems to remain mostly unchanged. The few regions
that change group have been colored in red. Notice that all these small changes worsen the group composition, in terms of the
comparison with the impact indicators shown in Fig.3(a). Only the elimination of the over-60 indicator leaves the groups
composition unchanged, probably due to the fact that the fraction of over 60 individuals shows only small fluctuations going
from one region to another (see Table M1).

35
4. The theoretical model for policy assessment
We propose a theoretical framework to discuss the policy problem. The risk of a community has been
described above as depending on several components. We now adopt a simplification and consider the
whole set of possible elements reconciled on two aspects, namely the proportion of infected individuals
over the total population, which we call here infection ratio, 𝑥, and the impact of consequences caused
by the spreading of the disease, measured as the number of per capita hospital beds, 𝑏, required by the
emergency situation. Without loss of generality, we assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the aboveexplained negative role played by hospitals as contagion spreading factors, can be neglected here. Thus,
define such a simplified notion of risk as 𝑅: (0,1) × ℝ → (0,1) be a 𝐶 , function, determined by 𝑥 ∈
34
34
(0,1) and 𝑏 ∈ ℝ, i.e., 𝑅 = 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑏). Consistently with previous analysis, we assume that > 0, > 0
35
36
and since, the level of risk is subject to saturation,

3% 4
35 %

3% 4

< 0, 36% < 0.

The level of risk is the target variable that the policy-maker tries to minimize, given the constraint
constituted by the current carrying capacity, i.e., the endowment of hospital beds (𝐻) financed by the
expenditure in the healthcare system 𝐺% . In principle, it may be considered as a dynamic variable, but
we will proceed with a comparative-static analysis, by presenting policy intuitions from different initial
configurations. Thus, the constraint is the result of the political orientation of the Government. In
particular, let the part of the global allowance dedicated to intensive care beds, 𝐻𝐻, be the sole remedy
to the epidemy and define 𝐻𝐻 = 𝛼𝐻, 𝛼 ∈ (0,1). The current carrying capacity of the healthcare system,
i.e. the available number of hospital beds, is the function 𝑍 ∶ (0,1), × ℕ × ℝ → (0,1), defined as 𝑍 =
𝐻 − ℎ 𝑥 𝑛, where ℎ = (1 − 𝛼) and 𝑛 is the population of the district under consideration. In per capita
terms, it can be rewritten as 𝑧 = 𝑧% − ℎ𝑥, with 𝑧 = 𝑍/𝑛 and 𝑧% = 𝐻/𝑛. Within a comparative statics
perspective, for any given couple (𝐻, 𝛼) we can consider a reduced form of the carrying capacity
constraint, depending on the infection diffusion rate as a negatively sloped line in the plane (infection
ratio, hospital beds), where also the convex contours of the risk function can be considered. It is worth
to notice that the model refers to the variable hospital beds in both demand, 𝑏, and supply, 𝑧, terms. All
in all, the proposed framework matches required and available beds per infection ratio. Policies may try
to affect 𝑥 and can effectively tune 𝑧, by adjusting 𝛼 and 𝐺% , in such a way that the exploitation of
available resources allows the minimization of 𝑏, at least, a tangency point between the capacity
constraint and the risk level. The model assumes that the intensive care is the sole remedy to the epidemy.
The fact that other effective protocols exists may have an effect on the slope of the linear constraint that
represents the current carrying capacity of the healthcare system. In case other protocols exist, the model
operates as described, but the line is translated downwards, other things being equal. In effect, other
therapies or remedies would operate as an alternative to hospital beds, thus making the constraint less
binding, i.e., reducing the needed allowance to face a given infection ratio.

Acknowlegments
AEB, AP and AR acknowledge financial support of the national project PRIN 2017WZFTZP Stochastic
forecasting in complex systems. AP, AR, GR GI and VL acknowledge financial support of the fund
“Linea Intervento 2 - Piaceri” from Catania University. The authors would like to thank Christian Mulder
for his valuable comments and suggestions.

36

Author’s contribution statement
A.P., A.E.B, G.I., R.L., V.L., A.R., G.R. conceived and wrote the paper, collected and analyzed data.
N.G. and C.Z. analyzed data and prepared figures. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

References
1. Zhang, Y-Z. Novel 2019 coronavirus genome. Virological.org.
http://virological.org/t/novel-2019-coronavirus-genome/319 (2020).

Available

from:

2. Peiris, J.S., Yuen, K.Y., Osterhaus, A.D. & Stöhr, K. The severe acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl
J Med. 349(25), 2431-41 (2003).
3. Conticini, E., Frediani, B. & Caro, D. Can atmospheric pollution be considered a co-factor in extremely
high level of SARS-CoV-2 lethality in northern Italy? Environmental pollution 261, 114465 (2020).
4. GitHub Repository COVID-19 2020, coming from Italian Ministry of Health: https://github.com/pcmdpc/COVID-19.
5. Johns Hopkins University data https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19.
6. Giordano, G. et al. Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide
interventions in Italy. Nat Med. 26, 855-860 (2020).
7. Castorina, P., Iorio, A. & Lanteri, D. Data analysis on coronavirus spreading by macroscopic growth
laws. Int. Journal of Modern Physics C 31(07), 2050103 (2020).
8. Lanteri, D., Carcò, D. & Castorina, P. How macroscopic laws describe complex dynamics:
asymptomatic population and Covid-19 spreading.
9. Lanteri, D. et al. Containment effort reduction and regrowth patterns of the Covid-19 spreading.
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14701
10. Gatto, M. et al. Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency
containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 (19), 10484-10491 (2020).
11. Fanelli, D. & Piazza, F. Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading in China, Italy and France.
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 134, 109761 (2020).
12. Zlatic, V. et al. Bi-stability of SUDR+K model of epidemics and test kits applied to COVID-19.
Nonlinear Dynamics 101, 1635-1642 (2020).
13. Estrada, E. COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2. Modeling the present, looking at the future. Physics
Reports 869, 1-51 (2020).

37
14. Tsallis, C. & Tirnakli, U. Predicting COVID-19 peaks around the world. Frontiers in Physics, 29
(2020).
15. Tirnakli U. & Tsallis C. Epidemiological model with anomalous kinetics - The Covid-19 pandemics.
Frontiers in Physics in Press. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139287 (2020).
16. Castro, M. et al. The turning point and end of an expanding epidemic cannot be precisely forecast.
PNAS 117 (42), 26190-26196 (2020).
17. Gallo, L. et al. Lack of practical identifiability may hamper reliable predictions in COVID-19
epidemic models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.00443
18. Giovanetti, M., Angeletti, S., Benvenuto, D. & Ciccozzi, M. A doubt of multiple introduction of
SARS-CoV-2 in Italy: A preliminary overview. J. Med. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25773 (2020).
19. Reuters https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-italy-study/italys-coronavirusepidemic-began-in-january-study-shows-idUSKCN2262B1.
20. Apolone, G. et al. Unexpected detection of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the prepandemic period in
Italy. Tumori Journal https://doi.org/10.1177/0300891620974755 (2020).
21. See https://ourworldindata.org/mortality-risk-covid.
22. Pinotti, F. et al. Lessons learnt from 288 COVID-19 international cases: importations over time,
effect of interventions, underdetection of imported cases.
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.24.20027326 (2020).
23. See https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/240401.
24. Crichton, D. The Risk Triangle. Natural disaster management: a presentation to commemorate the
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) 1990-2000. Ingleton J: Tudor Rose
(1999).
25. Kron, W. Flood risk = hazard x exposure x vulnerability. In: Wu M. et al. (ed.), Flood Defence,
Science Press, New York, 82-97 (2002).
26. Epicentro 2020: https://www.epicentro.iss.it/influenza/FluNews18-19#casi.
27. Tomlinson, C.J., Chapman, L., Thornes, J.E., & Baker, C.J. Including the urban heat island in spatial
heat health risk assessment strategies: a case study for Birmingham, UK. International journal of health
geographics 10(1), 42 (2011).
28. Thomalla, F., Downing, T., Spanger-Siegfried, E., Han, G. & Rockström, J. Reducing hazard
vulnerability: towards a common approach between disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation.
Disasters 30(1), 39-48 (2006).

38
29. Kim, H., Park, J., Yoo, J. & Kim, T.W. Assessment of drought hazard, vulnerability, and risk: A case
study for administrative districts in South Korea. Journal of Hydro-environment Research 9(1), 28-35
(2015).
30. Collins, T.W., Grineski, S.E. & Aguilar, M.D.L.R. Vulnerability to environmental hazards in the
Ciudad Juárez (Mexico)-El Paso (USA) metropolis: a model for spatial risk assessment in transnational
context. Applied Geography 29(3), 448-461 (2009).
31. Estoque R.C. et al. Heat health risk assessment in Philippine cities using remotely sensed data and
social-ecological indicators. Nature Communications 11(1), 1-12 (2020).
32. Babayev, G., Ismail-Zadeh, A., Le Mouël, J.L. & Contadakis, M.E. Scenario-based earthquake
hazard and risk assessment for Baku (Azerbaijan). Natural Hazards & Earth System Sciences 10(12)
(2010).
33. Samuelson, P.A. & Solow, R.M. Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy. The American
Economic Review, 50(2), 177-194 (1960).
34. Pigou, A.C., The Economics of Welfare. Macmillan, London (1932).
35. Hotelling, H. The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation and of Railway and Utility
Rates. Econometrica 6 (3), 242-269 (1937).
36. Hicks, J.R. The Foundations of Welfare Economics. The Economic Journal 49(196), 696-712 (1939).
37. Samuelson, P.A. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge Harvard University Press (1947).
38. Samuelson, P.A. Social Indifference Curves. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 70(1), 1-22 (1956)
39. Bator, F.M. The Simple Analytics of Welfare Maximization. The American Economic Review 47(1),
22-59 (1957).
40. Charaudeau, S., Pakdaman, K. & Boëlle, P.Y. Commuter mobility and the spread of infectious
diseases: application to influenza in France. PloS ONE 9(1) (2014).
41. Klein, B. et al. Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility in major metropolitan areas
in the United States during the COVID-19 outbreak. Network Science Institute, Northeastern University
(2020).
42. Fang, H., Wang, L. & Yang, Y. Human mobility restrictions and the spread of the novel coronavirus
(2019-ncov) in china (No. w26906). National Bureau of Economic Research. DOI 10.3386/w26906
(2020).
43. ISFORT. 16° Rapporto sulla mobilità degli italiani. www.isfort.it (2019).
44. Italian Department for Economic Policy Planning and Coordination, http://www.urbanindex.it/.
45. Alirol, E., Getaz, L., Stoll, B., Chappuis, F. & Loutan, L. Urbanisation and infectious diseases in a
globalised world. The Lancet infectious diseases, 11(2), 131-141 (2011).

39
46. Stier, A., Berman, M.G. & Bettencourt, L.M.A. COVID-19 attack rate increases with city
size. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.10376 (2020).
47. Mo, B. et al. Modeling Epidemic Spreading through Public Transit using Time-Varying Encounter
Network. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.04602 (2020).
48. Stein, R.A. Super-spreaders in infectious diseases. International Journal of Infectious Diseases,
15(8), e510-e513 (2011).
49. Ogen, Y. Assessing nitrogen dioxide (NO2) levels as a contributing factor to the coronavirus
(COVID-19) fatality rate. Science of The Total Environment 138605 (2020).
50. Cui, Y. et al. Air pollution and case fatality of SARS in the People's Republic of China: an ecologic
study. Environmental Health 2(1), 15 (2003).
51. Reyes-Zárate, E. et al. Atmospheric particulate matter (PM10) exposure-induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis evasion through STAT3 activation via PKCζ and Src kinases in lung cells. Environmental
Pollution 214, 646-656 (2016).
52. Setti, L. et al. Potential role of particulate matter in the spreading of COVID-19 in Northern Italy:
first observational study based on initial epidemic diffusion. BMJ Open 10(9) (2020).
53. Pansini, R. & Fornacca, D. Initial evidence of higher morbidity and mortality due to SARS-CoV-2
in regions with lower air quality. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20053595 (2020).
54. Wu, X., Nethery, R. C., Sabath, B. M., Braun, D. & Dominici, F. Air pollution and COVID-19
mortality in the United States: Strengths and limitations of an ecological regression analysis. Science
Advances, 6(45). DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abd4049 (2020).
55. Bukhari, Q. & Jameel, Y. Will Coronavirus Pandemic Diminish by Summer? Available at SSRN
3556998.Sxansk (2020).
56. Moozhipurath, R.K., Kraft, L. & Skiera, B. Evidence of protective role of Ultraviolet-B (UVB)
radiation in reducing COVID-19 deaths. Scientific Reports 10, 17705 (2020).
57. Pirouz, B., Golmohammadi, A., Masouleh, H.S., Violini, G. & Pirouz, B. Relationship between
Average Daily Temperature and Average Cumulative Daily Rate of Confirmed Cases of COVID-19.
MedRxiv (2020).
58. Chan, K.H. et al. The effects of temperature and relative humidity on the viability of the SARS
coronavirus. Advances in virology, (2011).
59. Chowel, G., Fuentes, R., Tower, S. & Sotomajor, V. The influence of climatic conditions on the
transmission dynamics of the 2009 A/H1N1 influenza pandemic in Chile. BMC infectious diseases 12,
298 (2012).
60. Makinen, T.M. et al. Cold temperature and low humidity are associated with increased occurrence
of respiratory tract infections. Respiratory Medicine 103, 456-462 (2009).

