Holding a Conference Online and Live
due to Covid-19

arXiv:2004.07668v3 [cs.DB] 20 Apr 2020

A Report on EDBT / ICDT 2020 (version: April 16, 2020)

Angela Bonifati

Giovanna Guerrini

Carsten Lutz

Lyon 1 University
(France)

University of Genova
(Italy)

University of Bremen
(Germany)

Wim Martens

Lara Mazilu

Norman Paton

University of Bayreuth
(Germany)

University of Manchester
(UK)

University of Manchester
(UK)

Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles

Marc H. Scholl

University of Copenhagen
(Denmark)

University of Konstanz
(Germany)

Yongluan Zhou
University of Copenhagen
(Denmark)

The joint EDBT/ICDT conference (International Conference on Extending Database Technology/International Conference on Database Theory) is a well established conference series on data management, with annual meetings in the second
half of March that attract 250 to 300 delegates. Three weeks before EDBT/ICDT
2020 was planned to take place in Copenhagen, the rapidly developing Covid-19
pandemic led to the decision to cancel the face-to-face event. In the interest of the
research community, it was decided to move the conference online while trying to
preserve as much of the real-life experience as possible. As far as we know, we are
one of the ﬁrst conferences that moved to a fully synchronous online experience
due to the COVID-19 outbreak. By fully synchronous, we mean that participants
jointly listened to presentations, had live Q&A, and attended other live events associated with the conference. In this report, we share our decisions, experiences,
and lessons learned.

1

1 Introduction
Three weeks before EDBT/ICDT 2020 was planned to take place in Copenhagen, the rapidly
developing Covid-19 pandemic reached a state in which it became clear that the face-to-face
event had to be canceled. We, the organizers, then decided to move the conference online while
trying to preserve as much of the real-life experience as possible. Given the very short notice,
we had to be pragmatic and could not prepare the online event as carefully as we would have
done otherwise. In fact, we considered the whole thing an interesting experiment suggested
by the circumstances, with potentially important lessons to be learned for the community and
beyond. We were delighted to receive signiﬁcant support for our decision from the attendees
and keynote speakers and by the community spirit that developed in its course. The online
event ran smoothly and was much more enjoyable and successful than we had expected. We
received a lot of positive feedback, both informally and in the survey that we sent to our participants after the conference. The purpose of this document is to share our experience and the
lessons learned, so that other conference organizers facing a similar situation can beneﬁt from
it.

2 Decisions
We go over a list of questions that other conference organizers are likely to face when considering a move online, share our decisions, describe how we implemented them in practice, and
what we think about the outcome in retrospect. Since the conference needed to be re-organized
within a very short time and the eﬀect on internet services of millions of people working from
home because of the pandemic was not clear, we used an important guiding principle:
Aim to minimize our dependency on stable internet connections.

(GP)

Should the conference be synchronous (i.e., live) or asynchronous? We decided to run
the event in a fully live mode to simulate a face-to-face event as much as possible. Participants
jointly listened to presentations, had live Q&A, and attended other live events associated with
the conference. This was achieved by combining the Zoom video conference software with
the Slack communication platform. Sessions took place on the dates originally planned for the
face-to-face event and we used one Zoom meeting for each of the planned sessions, with a
password provided to delegates. Fully asynchronous, in contrast, could mean to put videos of
the presentations online to be watched by participants at the time that ﬁts them best and to
have asynchronous Q&A in Slack or a similar tool.
In retrospect, we are satisﬁed with choosing the synchronous approach: interaction and
discussion are key features of conferences and although these cannot all be fully preserved
online, we managed to preserve them to a reasonable extent. Indeed, interesting discussions
emerged after many presentations and, to a lesser extent, also in Slack. With more time to
prepare and better tool support, we believe that even more interaction can be fostered.
How do we deal with time diﬀerences? It seems diﬃcult to deal with time diﬀerences
when participants are evenly distributed around the globe. In EDBT/ICDT, however, the bulk

2

of participants are from Europe, followed by North and South America, and Asia. To accommodate the relevant time zones, we opted for shorter days, about 5 to 6.5 hours, rather than
the expected length (8-9 hours) in a face-to-face meeting. The days were centered around
noon CET, which allowed attendees from other continents to attend most sessions without
major hassles. For some talks, we made adjustments to the schedule in order to let the speaker
present live, e.g. from North America. For example, keynote talks took place at diﬀerent times
on diﬀerent days as keynote speakers were from diﬀerent time zones.
In the future, one could try to adapt the program even more carefully to speakers’ time zones.
In a Eurocentric conference such as EDBT/ICDT, centering around noon CET is a natural thing
to do, but speakers from remote time zones could still not attend early and late sessions. This
could be alleviated by having even shorter conference days, at the expense of stretching the
conference over a longer time period.
How long should sessions and presentations be? Research sessions generally spanned
an hour with the net talk length for each papers being 10 and 12 minutes for EDBT and ICDT,
respectively. In comparison, EDBT and ICDT allot 20 and 25 minutes for presentations in faceto-face conferences. The main reason for having shorter talks was that we expected longer
online sessions to be very tiring for attendees. Another reason is that shorter talks help in
achieving shorter conference days to deal with time zone issues as discussed above.
In retrospect, we were happy with the shorter presentations and the sessions didn’t seem
too long. This impression was conﬁrmed by the participants in our survey (Section 3).
Should talks be recorded or given live? Following our guiding principle (GP), we opted
for pre-recorded talks that we then streamed live from a central place with a high capacity
internet connection. Our aim was to minimize the probability of technical problems that might
result from participants having diﬀering internet connection quality and not being suﬃciently
familiar with the Zoom software. We suggested to use Zoom to record videos, with the speaker
visible, which also helped to get participants acquainted with Zoom. We considered using
Microsoft CMT for video upload, but ended up using a simple sFTP solution as CMT has a ﬁle
size limit of 100MB. We checked the quality of the videos beforehand. We plan to make the
videos publicly available after the conference.
Mostly this worked well, with many good quality videos being submitted. On the one hand,
pre-recording talks seemed to result in presentations that were well planned, to the point,
and with almost no slips of the tongue. On the other hand, the talks were sometimes more
monotonous and less dynamic. Some presentations, including 2 keynotes and 1 tutorial were
presented live. The keynotes and the tutorial went ﬂuently, but in one of the workshops there
were some technical issues with people presenting live. Practice sessions seem necessary for
live presentations.
How can questions be managed? Zoom has two modes, the meeting mode and the webinar
mode. In the beginning of the conference, we used the webinar mode. This mode has a textbased Q&A facility that allows participants to type their questions and to upvote questions
asked by other participants. We then had the people with the most popular questions ask

3

them face-to-face. Some participants asked questions in the Zoom chat, but this rendered the
chat (which sometimes uses pop-ups) distracting during presentations. Especially when talks
are very short, the smallest distraction can bring listeners oﬀ-track. We also generated one
Slack channel per session, where question and discussion could continue “oﬄine”. Slack was a
welcome technological addition, which speakers also used to post their slides after the talk.
The Q&A facility in Zoom is quite good in principle, but it is only available in webinar mode.
For smaller, parallel sessions we preferred a more informal approach based on Zoom’s meeting
mode, which we switched to on the second day. In that mode, participants can see a list of
the names of the other participants and they can activate their sound and video (but there is
still a meeting host who can mute everyone, e.g. when a talk starts). In meeting mode, we
simply asked participants to switch on their camera and raise their hand to indicate that they
want to ask a question, as in a real conference. We encouraged people to also switch on their
camera after each talk even if they did not want to ask a question, the aim being to create a
community feeling, which was quite successful. Many people also switched on their cameras
at the beginning and end of each sessions. We still used webinar mode for larger audiences,
such as the keynotes.
Retrospectively, we strongly prefer meeting mode and an informal approach to Q&A whenever the audience is of moderate size, say up to 50 participants. This brought much more
interaction. Interestingly, quite intense discussions emerged after some talks, probably even
more intense than in a face-to-face meeting. This might be due to the group feeling created by
Zoom meeting mode when several people have switched on their camera, whereas in a faceto-face event, the few people who are interested in an in-depth discussion of a presentation
might sit far apart from each other, with much less of a group feeling.
How can sessions be chaired? Following our guiding principle (GP), we started with only a
Zoom host and no session chair. It turned out, however, that the single host is rather busy with
running the session, playing the videos, and monitoring the chat. As the event went by, the
technology was holding up, and internet connections seemed to be suﬃciently stable, session
chairs were introduced to manage discussions while a separate Zoom host was technically
managing the Zoom session, and this was felt to be successful.
Can there be a social programme? The programme only had very short coﬀee breaks of
15 minutes, to make the conference days shorter. There was no joint activity during the coﬀee
breaks apart from using the Slack channels. We held two “Bring your own beer” receptions,
one on the opening evening of ICDT, and one on the opening evening of EDBT, where evening
refers to the CET time zone. In the receptions, people arrived in an online session and were
assigned at random to Zoom breakout groups, to allow smaller group interactions.
Retrospectively, we would go for longer coﬀee breaks to make the conference days less exhausting. The receptions seemed to work well, given the circumstances, and this was also
conﬁrmed in our survey (Section 3). There might well be scope for having more sessions with
opportunities for extended, informal, interactions. It might be interesting to use other, technically more sophisticated tools for this, such as Online Town.

4

How should short/poster papers be handled? We decided to waive short advert videos,
and use Slack for asynchronous discussions. We didn’t have a clear idea how to run more
interactive sessions that would simulate a poster session, so the short paper session turned
into a collection of short videos (26 in all) back-to-back with no intermediate Q&A.
The session was well attended, with over 50 people there throughout. However, it was hard
work to sit through so many, diverse, videos, and the Slack channel was not especially busy.
Retrospectively, we would be tempted to simulate a poster session in a more realistic way
to enable deeper interactions. One way of doing this could be to have each poster participant
create their own Zoom meeting from within Slack such that participants can use Slack to easily
switch between the rooms.
What should be the approach to demos? We adopted the conference model of videos of
the demo in 15 minute slots. Each demo was a 10 minute video, with 5 minutes for questions.
In retrospect, the videos were alright, but there wasn’t the chance for extended discussions that
are associated with demo sessions. Given that technology and internet connections were more
stable than we expected, we would be tempted to try having each demo participant create their
own Zoom meeting from within Slack such that participants can use Slack to easily switch
between the rooms. Again, this more closely reﬂects the experience at a face-to-face demo
session.
What should be the approach to keynotes and tutorials? Keynotes and tutorials were
in 1-hour slots, some of them with gaps every 15 minutes for questions. A complete hour of
presenting seemed rather long. Furthermore, in an online webinar everyone feels close to the
presenter, so some people are more inclined to ask questions. As such, one may want to plan
more discussion time.
Two keynotes used videos, two were presented live. Concerning tutorials, three of them used
pre-recorded videos, one was presented live. The division of talks into parts was felt to have
been a success for both keynotes and tutorials in order to let people chime in with questions.
What do we do if the meeting host has technical problems? Before the conference, we
tested how the software platform reacts if the meeting host drops out (e.g. by losing the internet
connection). In our case, we observed that the meeting can still continue, but the host’s video
freezes. In order to avoid major technical problems, we reached out to back-up hosts for each
session, who received a crash course on how to handle the software platform about one week
before the conference. We also wrote a general guide for session hosts on how to set up all the
parameters to make the sessions work the way we want it. This technical aspect of running a
conference certainly requires some practice and we highly recommend thorough preparation.

5

3 Attendee Feedback Survey
We ran a feedback survey after the conference, which was answered by 114 participants (over
42% of the registered participants). Here, we present a selection of its results.
What is your current occupation? (114 responses)

39.5%

28.9%
17.5%

1.8%
2.6%
4.4%
5.3%

Professor
PhD Student
Post-doc
Industrial Researcher
Undergraduate
Software
Researcher

Do you have a PhD? (114 responses)

64%
13.2%

Yes
No
Someday soon

22.8%

Which continent were you on during the conference? (114 responses)

82.5%
0.9%
3.5%
5.3%

Europe
North America
Asia
South America
Africa

7.9%

Which plenary sessions did you attend? (98 responses)

6

Keynote(s)
Award Session
Climate Change Session
0

20

40

60

80

100

How many ICDT-only sessions did you attend? (114 responses)

36%
43.9%

0
1–3
>3

20.2%

How many EDBT-only sessions did you attend? (114 responses)

0
1–3
>3

16.7%

39.5%

43.9%

Would you have attended more sessions if the conference would have been physical?
(114 responses)
Not at all (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Very much so (5)
0

5

10

7

15

20

25

30

35

How did the online video presentations compare to conventional conference talks?
(114 responses)
I liked them less (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I liked them more (5)
0

10

20

30

40

Notice that this is a rather even binomial distribution, slightly weighted to the negative.
What is the ideal length of a research talk for an online conference? (111 responses)

16–20 minutes
13–15 minutes
10–12 minutes
<10 minutes

35%
7%
1%
57%

As an attendant, which kind of model(s) do you prefer? Multiple choices possible.
(113 responses)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Other
0

20

40

60

(1) Live talks, live Q&A, and having recorded talks available after the conference
(2) Streamed talks, live Q&A, and having the videos available after the conference
(3) Talk videos available beforehand and asynchronous Q&A (e.g. over Slack)
(4) Talk videos available beforehand and live Q&A in discussion sessions

8

Which meeting mode do you prefer for keynotes? (111 responses)

62.2%
37.8%

"Webinar": Attendees do not have video or audio, but can type Q&A.
"Meeting mode": Attendees can have video and/or
audio and discuss among each other.

Which meeting mode do you prefer for research talks? (111 responses)

25.2%
74.8%

"Webinar": Attendees do not have video or audio, but can type Q&A.
"Meeting mode": Attendees can have video and/or
audio and discuss among each other.

Was the software infrastructure adequate for supporting EDBT/ICDT? (114 responses)
Strongly agree (5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Strongly disagree (1)
0

10

20

30

40

50

How many Slack channels have you joined during the whole conference?
(109 responses)

40.4%
34.9%

13.8%
11%

9

0–3
4–8
9–12
>12

Did the conference need more social interaction? (111 responses)
Strongly agree (5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Strongly disagree (1)
0

10

20

30

40

Did you attend the Bring Your Own Beer sessions? (111 responses)

27%
Yes
No
73%

Did you like the Bring Your Own Beer sessions? (30 responses)

Yes
No

80%
20%

In this question, we only selected the answers from respondents who said that they attended
the Bring Your Own Beer sessions.
Do you have suggestions for more social interactions or networking?
This was a free-text ﬁeld in the questionnaire. We received suggestions such as:
• Breakout rooms during coﬀee breaks, where you can see who is in which room.
• Dagstuhl-like breakout rooms (randomly put people together).
• Focused discussion rooms, e.g., per scientiﬁc area or per need (“looking for a phd student”)

10

• Dedicated Ask Me Anything (AMA) with speakers (at least for keynotes).
• Playing some online game together.
• Imitate a "social event" like watching a live-streamed video/concert together.
Given the short timespan, our planning of EDBT/ICDT 2020 indeed focused mostly on simply
making the scientiﬁc part of the conference work. There is much more that can be done in
terms of social interaction in an online conference. Social interaction sessions could act as a
buﬀer alongside the programme, i.e., they could be running before / after / during the scientiﬁc
programme to further accommodate time zone diﬀerences.
As a presenter of a research talk, would you prefer to present live or with a prerecorded talk? (80 responses)

42.5%
Live
Pre-recorded talk
57.5%

As a presenter of a demo, would you prefer to present live or with a pre-recorded talk?
(36 responses)

36.1%
52.8%

11.1 %

Live
Pre-recorded talk
Other

Among the suggestions for “Other”, respondents wrote suggestions like giving live commentary on a pre-recorded presentation of the system, or having a short (pre-recorded?) presentation to give the audience the context and then a live demo.

11

Assume that EDBT/ICDT would be held physically. Would you attend virtually if this
option existed? (113 responses)

15%
24.8%

Yes
No
Maybe

60.2 %

For which reasons would you consider to attend a hybrid conference virtually?
(107 responses)
Financial
Environmental
Family
Time
Other
0

20

40

60

Among the other reasons were: being able to attend more conferences per year, being able
to join virtually even when you don’t have a paper, being able to network more, being able to
buy virtual registrations for internship students, no visa restrictions, less travelling.
Assume that EDBT/ICDT would be held virtually only. Would you attend?

Yes
No
Maybe

57.1%

17%

25.9 %

12

Would you support the idea of having hybrid conferences for reducing CO2 emissions? (112 responses)

Yes
No
Maybe

72.3%
17.9 %
9.8%

Would you support the idea of alternating physical meetings with purely virtual conferences for reducing CO2 emissions? (112 responses)

Yes
No
Maybe

51.8%

22.3%

25.9%

Was EDBT / ICDT 2020 better or worse than a typical other edition? (114 responses)
Much better (5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Much worse (1)
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Was attending EDBT/ICDT 2020 better or worse than what you expected a virtual conference to be like? (110 responses)
Much better (5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Much worse (1)
0

10

13

20

30

Judging from these last two questions, attendants found that the online experience was indeed somewhat less than the physical experience, but at least the experience was better than
what was expected from a virtual conference. Furthermore, we need to keep in mind that this
edition was planned and organized in just three weeks, without any external guidelines. There
is room for improvement.

4 Conclusions and Advice for Future Events
First-time organization of an online conference is a complicated matter, especially under tight
time constraints. In our case, a great eﬀort of coordination was needed and a task force (formed
by the people co-authoring this report) made the executive decisions and carried out the required work. On the other hand, once the executive decisions have been made, the organizational amount of work is reasonable. We therefore encourage other conferences to try out the
transition to an on-line mode in the short term. In the medium to long term, on-line and/or
hybrid conferences may help the community reduce its CO2 footprint.
With a long-standing experience and within a large time window, things can be arranged
more carefully. For instance, one could think about the following issues:
• Carefully choosing the underlying technological platforms on which the conference has
to be hosted. People are aware of security issues around Zoom but there is no available equivalent open-source tool that can host the same number of participants. Since a
high number of participants is needed for plenary sessions, hopefully such open-source
tools will be available in the long run. Dedicated platforms for scientiﬁc conferences are
urgently needed in that respect.
• Several sessions that require tighter interactions, such as poster and demonstration sessions, need to be planned carefully. For instance, for demonstrations and posters, one
would rely on the breakout rooms in Zoom to let people gather around a demo booth or
a poster (with limited number of participants). If the poster or the demonstrated tool can
be shared with the participants beforehand, the sessions can be also prepared in advance
and be more ﬂuent and interactive. Other sophisticated solutions, such as virtual reality
and avatar-based video and chat tools, may be needed in the long run. These tools would
help reproducing the physical interactions needed for poster and demo sessions along
with the serendipity of meeting people with similar interests at these sessions.
• Networking would greatly beneﬁt from having dedicated online sessions that are scheduled alongside the normal scientiﬁc sessions of the conference. Networking is truly the
pitfall of an online event and this is especially deleterious for the junior members of our
community. An idea would be to prepare networking well in advance and to pin interesting topics or discussions with colleagues of other universities and research teams (a
sort of Pinterest specialized for scientiﬁc conferences).
Finally, we are pleased to share our experience at online EDBT/ICDT 2020 and eager to learn
more about virtual scientiﬁc events in the near future. During the climate change session,

14

which has been hosted by the conference this year, we had a lively and stimulating discussion about adopting CO2 plans for conferences. One of the options there is to allow alternate
virtual and in-person events or hybrid (simultaneously virtual and in-person) events and thus
contribute to reducing the environmental footprint of scientiﬁc conferences. Our on-line survey gives us two hopeful signs. First, there is a signiﬁcant support of the community for going
on-line in order to reduce CO2 footprint, and second, attendees clearly found this year’s conference better than what they expected a virtual conference to be like.
Finally, in the spirit of moving open science and open access forward in the right direction,
the videos of the conference talks are going to be made available to the general public. For
EDBT, they can be linked directly from the proceedings and ICDT is looking into a similar
solution.

15

