1

arXiv:2004.09246v1 [cs.CY] 13 Apr 2020

Enabling and Enforcing Social Distancing Measures
using Smart City and ITS Infrastructures:
A COVID-19 Use Case

‡

Maanak Gupta∗ , Mahmoud Abdelsalam† , Sudip Mittal‡
∗ Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville, TN, USA
mgupta@tntech.edu
† Manhattan College, Riverdale, NY, USA
mabdelsalam01@manhattan.edu
University of North Carolina Wilmington, Wilmington, NC, USA
mittals@uncw.edu

Abstract—Internet of Things is a revolutionary domain that
has the caliber to impact our lives and bring significant changes
to the world. Several IoT applications have been envisioned
to facilitate data driven and smart application for the user.
Smart City and Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) offer
a futuristic vision of smart, secure and safe experience to
the end user, and at the same time efficiently manage the
sparse resources and optimize the efficiency of city operations.
However, outbreaks and pandemics like COVID-19 have revealed
limitations of the existing deployments, therefore, architecture,
applications and technology systems need to be developed for
swift and timely enforcement of guidelines, rules and government
orders to contain such future outbreaks. This work outlines novel
architecture, potential use-cases and some future directions in
developing such applications using Smart City and ITS.
Index Terms—Smart City, Intelligent Transportation System,
COVID-19, Social Distancing, IoT, Artificial Intelligence, Digital
Twin, Big Data, Cybersecurity

I. I NTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic has engulfed the world with a
large portion of the population infected. These staggering
numbers highlight various opportunities in existing technologies and infrastructure to contain the spread of this highly
contagious virus. The impact of Coronavirus is both global
and unpredictable. Also, the supply chain shock it is causing
will most definitely and substantially cut into the worldwide
manufacturing revenue of US $15 trillion currently forecasts
for 2020 by global tech market advisory firms [1].
The lack of an approved medicine to cure this disease
presses the need for prevention and mitigation mechanisms
to minimize the spread. Social distancing measures, including
country wide lock-downs, travel prohibition, quarantining hotspots, and limiting customers at essential businesses, are
slowly restricting the spread of the virus. It is paramount, in
such critical situations, to implement swift mechanisms, and
various agencies work in coordination to limit the spread of
the disease. It is expected that broad range of situational intelligence and automated targeted response is needed throughout
the community to ensure the safety of people and assets,
with an aim to lower the fatalities and minimize impact on
the economy. However, even in the cities where strict social

distancing guidelines were issued to limited movement, it has
been noticed the technology can play a role in enforcing such
restrictions. In the United States [2], New York, San Francisco,
New Orleans, and Philadelphia ranked as the most vulnerable
specifically in terms of health risks. These large cities are
vulnerable due to high population density and higher use of
public transportation, according to the report. Also, about 61%
percent of New York City residents commute using public
transportation compared to less than 0.1% of residents from
Amarillo, TX, which ranked as one of the least vulnerable
cities in the United States.
It is clearly evident, with the surge in the number of cases
for COVID-19, that our cities are not prepared for fending
off such pandemics and outbreaks, assisting in tracking the
suspects, limiting movement of people to vulnerable neighborhoods, directing and monitoring traffic, or even pushing
alerts to commuters. There are some initiatives worldwide
which were deployed on ad-hoc basis to fight this pandemic.
Countries and cities deployed drones with loudspeakers to
communicate rules and government mandated precautions with
residents. Wearable devices [3] have been mandated for the
population to enforce quarantine measures, whereas telecommunication data has been used to monitor the large gathering
of people. Corporations are developing applications for contact
tracing [4], [5] which can effectively be enabled to trigger an
alert if someone gets in contact with newly diagnosed COVID19 patients.
Currently many countries around the world are approaching
the idea of deploying “smart” cities, including USA, Netherlands, China, and Japan, to say the least. For instance, Amsterdam’s latest model of SmartCity 3.0 [6] motivates active
participation of citizens and private organizations along with
the government in creating and expanding smart city solutions.
This initiative includes research, projects and data sharing in
areas such as infrastructure and technology, smart energy and
water, and Intelligent Transportation System (ITS). Another
prime example is Smart America [7], a White House Presidential Innovation Fellow project with the goal to research
smart city related topics such as ITS, Smart Manufacturing,
Healthcare, Smart Energy, and Disaster Response. Although

2

many cities are taking the initiative of turning into smart cities,
there are many challenges that need to be addressed.
To be effectively prepared for future outbreaks and enforce
protocols, it is expected that smart cities and ITS technology
will host a range of data driven services together with deployed
sensors to not only help in enforcing community wide social
distancing measure but also assist in early detection of such
outbreaks. This article focuses on proposing a novel architecture along with several use-cases which can be developed
to create a smart city and ITS inspired data driven system
which can help to enable and enforce community distancing
measures during pandemics and high impact low frequency
(HILF) events. We also highlight challenges and future opportunities to empower future smart cities and ITS to cater
such circumstances.
II. A RCHITECTURE
Fig. 1. Smart City and ITS Architecture

Figure 1 shows a holistic overview of the smart city and
ITS architecture. The proposed conceptual model specifically
caters to the requirements and support applications which
are envisioned to enforce social distancing and community
measures in pandemics and high impact low frequency (HILF)
events like COVID-19. In simple terms, this architecture
provides the common basis for planners and engineers to
conceive, design and implement system together with concerns
relevant to large number of stakeholders to offer services,
alerts and data driven applications. This service oriented
architecture is scalable to offer applications in wide geographic
location offering quality of service (QoS).
Overall, the architecture consists of physical devices, including road-side sensors, smart traffic lights and connected
cars, having the ability to record real time data and exchange
messages with nearby entities and upload relevant information
to central cloud facilities for processing. At the same time,
such smart physical devices can also replicate edge computes
to offer the capability for real time low latency communication
supported by ITS such as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicleto-infrastructure (V2I) or vehicle-to-everything (V2X). The
flexibility of the architecture to adapt to various use-case
requirements can be achieved by having a hybrid edge cloud
supported model which enable dynamic real time needs, and
at the same time offer infinite computation on data captured
using central cloud infrastructures. Basic Safety Messages
(BSMs) can also be used to enable V2X communication with
information pertaining to an event, location or even severity. It
is also viable to create digital twins for various smart devices
to offer a virtual counterpart for each physical object. These
twins, based on the data collected in the real environment, can
provide insights to improve the operations, increase efficiency
and discover issues.
The participating entities including vehicles, law enforcement, drones, parking sensors or other roadside units (RSUs)
must enroll with a central authority to receive certificates
and ensure trustworthiness of messages exchanged among
entities. The communication technologies which can enable
the messages exchange can include cellular LTE, WiFi, 5G or
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC). In addition,

Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) messaging
protocol has been widely used to support physical entity to
cloud service providers like Amazon Web Services (AWS)
or Microsoft Azure. This architecture will need multiple
technologies and communication protocols to cater different
use cases. As shown in the figure, the communication (with
dashed lines) can happen among different physical entities,
using cloud supported services, edge assisted messaging or
even peer to peer model. Such infrastructures and supported
technologies will need long term investment and partnership
among public and private entities to enable hundreds of smart
devices interaction with each other.
The architecture further focuses on offering data sharing
platform across interested parties which can help speed up
reaction times and also enforce community measures in critical
situations. By real time data sharing with law enforcement,
city authorities or other stakeholders, it is expected that more
efficient and automated response mechanisms can be implemented. For example, in order to ensure social distancing and
limiting community gatherings, drones can be used to collect
information about the number of individuals and messages can
be sent to the near by traffic signals to divert traffic to other
location. At the same time, automatic disinfectant and fogging
can be deployed in certain locations based number of existing
cases, vulnerability or large gatherings. Parking availability
can be shared in real time with the cloud services and
registered individuals can be allotted a time to ensure minimal
human interface. These applications (as more discussed in the
next section) allow cities to gain insights and identity problems
with low response time, and at the same time enable efficient
resource planning in times with high resource demand in most
affected areas. With continuous monitoring, data capturing and
real time communication, an efficient and more productive
safer environment can be created.
III. U SECASES
In this section, we will discuss some important usecases that
describe how smart city infrastructure and various Intelligent

3

Transportation systems technologies can be used to enforce
and enable social distancing measures in a swift and timely
manner, together with data driven AI applications.
A. Monitoring Large Gatherings
Monitoring large gatherings during pandemics is essential to
regular social distancing. ITS and Smart cities infrastructures
can play an important role in such a scenario. During the
COVID-19 outbreak, multiple countries have started utilizing
drones and other AI assisted technologies to enforce social distancing rules (including lock down rules). For example, state
police in Western Australia, Derbyshire police in England, the
local police in Italy, and local police in New Jersey [8] plan
to utilize drones to enforce social distancing. The drones can
be used to monitor areas like, recreational parks, beaches, and
public transits, ensuring people comply with the most recent
forged gathering rules. Based on the severity of infection in
a particular place, more or less stringent rules can be used.
This can be done by using body heat temperature sensors to
detect the number of people present at one particular place.
Upon detecting a higher than the allowed number, drones can
instruct the people to evacuate the place due to a higher chance
of getting infected. It can also be used to detect proximity
of people to enforce distancing rules. If a particular area is
known to be a hot infectious spot, a complete lock down can
be enforced.
Drones can also help in informing people about the newest
enforced rules. By taking advantage of ITS and smart cities
infrastructures, different rules can be enforced in different
locations. However, ongoing change of social distancing rules
can be hard to keep up with, especially during an outbreak
in which people are in a state of stress. Using drones with
attached loud speakers to inform the people at a particular
location can be very useful. This will help ensure that people
are aware of the recent enforcement rules to prevent unintended break of rules. These drones can also communicate
with automated disinfectant spray vehicles to remotely monitor
there effectiveness and direct to needed communities. As such
having a systematic way of incorporating drones as part of ITS
infrastructure, in particular, and smart cities infrastructure, in
general, can be very useful.
B. Smart Parking
Smart parking [9] can play an important role in enforcing
social distancing. In smart parking, sensors and other AI based
techniques are used to determine whether a particular spot
on the street or in a parking garage is occupied or vacant.
Using such information, different restrictions can be added on
the number of vehicles parked at a particular location. For
example, a parking space at a grocery store might allow more
cars to be parked at one particular time than a senior home
which is more critical due to the occupancy of elderly people
who are more prone to COVID-19. Changing the parking
rules at different locations, each with its own parking rules to
alleviate gathering, can be challenging. Specially, since such
rules can be updated everyday and informing law enforcement
agents of these updates can be a daunting task. Smart parking

can automatically enforce these rules while informing the
vehicles through relayed messages.
C. Re-Routing Traffic to Reduce Footprint
ITS and smart city infrastructures can be useful in creating on the fly designated, high speed routes to critical and
vulnerable locations like hospitals to supply resources like
ventilators, Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs), etc. With
the shortage of such supplies due to high volume of patients
infected, many states are pooling all the surgical resources
available in state hospitals and assigning them on per need
basis. In such a scenario, real time count of the supplies can
be maintained in hospitals, that can automatically initiate a
message to the central pool location. Once initiated, designated
enforcement vehicles can be loaded with emergency supplies
and fastest routes can be created on the fly with smart traffic
lights, and roadside units to provide free passage. At the same
time V2V and V2I messaging can be used among vehicles and
infrastructures to ensure fastest delivery.
It is also possible to create AI assisted systems that direct
vehicles to drive through COVID-19 testing locations based
on an area and waiting time at different locations. This can
be enforced with automated waiting count at various testing
areas and sending such data to a central cloud, which will
then forward messages to vehicles directing them to different
available locations. Such enforcement can also limit movement
of visitors in old-age homes or localities with greater density
of senior citizen population. More stringent policies can be
implemented in states and counties with high rates of health
conditions like, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, heart, and
kidney disease. Such architecture can also enable the number
of delivery drivers from restaurants and grocery stores to allow
a certain number of people at a time in any location.
E-Passes can be generated using Radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags that can be placed on a vehicle, to keep
track on who is on the road. This enforcement can also help
in limiting the number of vehicles on the road at one time.
For example, it should be enforced that no one from one
household is allowed to visit grocery store more than once in
10 days. If the vehicle registered for a household is detected
on road, it can be confiscated, and an automatic ticket/fine
can be issued. It is also possible to assign a designated time
and date for a particular vehicle belonging to a household.
If another vehicle from the same household is detected by
roadside sensors without an approved RFID, law enforcement
can take policy based actions. Such RFID can be issued at
a nearby Department of Motor Vehicles (DMVs) which can
also allow only one vehicle from each household to be used for
driving. In case of front-line workers like healthcare providers,
first responders, or delivery personnel, exemptions can be
made on a case by case basis for allowed vehicles.
As a result of various social distancing policies limiting
store/building occupancy, people are waiting outside various
businesses like grocery stores and pharmacies. Queues have
been formed outside such essential businesses to comply with
various maximum headcount policy. In such a scenario, people
are still exposed to risk of aerosol infection because of the

4

waiting time outside the stores even though social distancing
is followed. Using ITS and smart infrastructures, vehicles can
input their destination in the car Global Positioning System
(GPS), which can interact with a central command authority
to decide if it is feasible and allowed to go to the designated
location. Various AI assisted systems can be built to add this
functionality for a smart city. A vehicle can be directed to
other similar stores with a lower foot count and less wait
time. It is also possible to send a message to the car from
the store about various designated parking spots available. Law
enforcement can automatically be notified in case of violations
and automatically issue tickets/fines.
D. ITS, Big Data & AI
An ITS collects a lot of data about vehicles and traffic
patterns. Specifically, Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) messages have been used in ITS to codify
communication. DSRC are one-way or two-way short-range
to medium-range wireless communication channels specifically designed for automotive use. These include fields like,
latitude, longitude, time, heading angle, speed, acceleration,
brake status, steering angle, headlight status, wiper status,
external temperature, turn signal status, vehicle length, vehicle
width, vehicle mass. Augmented with other data sources which
include, ambient temperature, ambient air pressure, traction
control status, road conditions, etc.
This data source can serve as a medium to create multiple
big data and AI systems that can provide value by enabling
and enforcing social distancing measures. One such big data
system can be leveraged to find traffic hotspots in a smart
city. These traffic hot spots can inform the local government
about areas which are frequented by the population and must
be monitored regularly. Finding these traffic hotspots is also
necessary during the disinfection phase. Multiple cities all over
the world have deployed heavy machinery to spray antiseptic
solutions along high traffic areas such as, markets, streets,
shops, religious and public buildings. Leveraging smart city
big data and AI applications will help empirically prioritize
specific locations which are proven traffic hotspots. In a
futuristic smart city environment, a system can be built to
deploy drones to clean, disinfect and monitor these traffic
hotspots.
An ITS system can also be used to track vehicles currently
on the road. This specific information can be used by the local
law enforcement to create policies that enable enforcement of
social distancing measures. An example situation for such a
case is tracking vehicles which have come from areas that have
a large number of COVID-19 cases. Here the DSRC messages
or AI based registration plate readers, can be used to read state
registration number plates that can inform the local authorities
about the origins of a vehicle.
IV. C HALLENGES AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
Building such a social distancing enforcement system at a
smart city level is challenging. Researchers and developers
need to keep these in mind as in when they are developing
such systems. Some of them have been discussed below.

Fig. 2. Research Challenges and Future Directions.

Security and Privacy - One concern relates to the security
and privacy [10], [11] of general citizens who live in smart
cities and drive on roads equipped with intelligent transportation systems. While building these AI and big data systems,
researchers need to make sure that they de-anonymize the data
required. We should also use various access control techniques
to ensure the data maintains its confidentiality, availability, and
integrity. In the future, these smart cities will generate a large
amount of personal data as in when citizens will interact with
the smart city. Security and privacy preserving techniques need
to be built in parallel as we develop these smart cities.
AI & Big Data - Another challenge in creating various
big data and AI systems [12] is availability and the amount
of data needed. Most of the big data and AI applications
described above require a large quantity of labeled data.
Multiple partnerships must be developed between the private
and the public sector to create datasets that can then be
leveraged to build these smart city models.
When we develop various AI assisted usecases, special attention needs to be given to keep these models fair and without
bias. Techniques that ensure bias free decision computations
are being created and need to introduced in various smart city
systems.
Legislation and Policy - As stated earlier, privacy is one
technical concern for social distancing using smart cities and
ITS; however, technological means must complement legislation [13]. Smart city and ITS technologies are rapidly on the
rise but legislation and policies are lacking and may fall short
for a long period of time. Formal policies for social distancing
privacy are necessary and must address several issues including secure data collection, video surveillance, users/residents

5

consent, and trusted third-parties involved, to say the least.
Such legislation must be abided by when deploying smart
cities and ITS technologies. As such, research on legislation
and policy, including engagement on public policy development debates, is necessary to successfully integrate technical
privacy solutions in the smart city and ITS ecosystem.
Not only privacy related legislation is needed, but other
policies that encourage innovation, competition, and private
investment in social distancing enforcement using smart cities
and ITS technologies are essential. Such policies should include incentives and support for partnership between public
and private sectors and removal of government barriers. They
should also highlight societal benefits of advancements in
large-scale social distancing enforcement such as economical
growth and saving lives.
Deployment Cost - Deployment cost of smart cities and ITS
is massive ranging from infrastructure costs to operating costs.
For instance, attaching devices to electric public lighting not
only needs municipality collaboration but also isolation from
other critical systems which poses a burden on time and effort
and, in turn, increases the costs. Another example, battery
powered devices (e.g., drones) are limited in the amount of
time they operate and the information they can transmit by the
battery lifetime. Not to mention, regular maintenance of such
devices can be very costly, given they are usually deployed
in large numbers. Costs also include operating costs. For
instance, NYC operated an Automated Speed Enforcement
program in 140 school zones with 180 speed cameras for
over two years at a cost of $69,460,446 [14]. It is worth
mentioning that enforcing social distancing may add on to
those aforementioned costs due to the need of particular
devices and sensors (e.g., drones equipped with body heat
sensors for crowd detection).
Even though the deployment costs of smart cities and
ITS are massive, they can help reduce costs on other occasions [15]. For example, drones monitoring crowds for social
distancing can save the expenses of law enforcement officers
physically monitoring the streets and allow them to attend to
more crucial matters. Additionally, enforcing social distancing
in and by itself reduces costs. During the COVID-19 outbreak
cutting down the number of patients will substantially reduce
the healthcare sector costs. As such, developing a framework
for social distance enforcement in an effective, timely and costeffective manner is an important future research direction.
Another important future research direction includes
benefit-cost analysis studies for smart cities and ITS. As an
example, ITS traffic re-routing and predictive analysis can help
reduce traffic congestion. Not only will it serve in enforcing
social distancing rules but also save costs of unnecessary trips
to crowded destinations (e.g., grocery stores). These, including aforementioned scenarios, are examples where enforcing
social distancing helps in saving money. Analysis on the
degree to which enforcing social distancing rules potentially
reduces costs is crucial as it incentivizes the government and
reduces the economic burdens of applying a large-scale social
distancing enforcement.

V. C ONCLUSION
COVID-19 outbreak is unprecedented and has disrupted
lives of millions of people across the globe. This pandemic
has opened several research challenges and opportunities that
our community must address to equip itself for the future. The
proposed architecture and AI assisted applications discussed
in the article can be used to effectively and timely enforce
social distancing community measures, and optimize the use of
resources in critical situations. This article offers a conceptual
overview and serves as a steppingstone to extensive research
and deployment of automated data driven technologies in
smart city and intelligent transportation systems. For future,
we envision to develop these AI driven applications for wider
adoption in the community.
R EFERENCES
[1] ABI research.
URL: https://iotbusinessnews.com/2020/03/17/
07945-coronavirus-outbreak-reveals-the-weakest-links-in-the-supply-/
chain-the-suppliers-supplier/ (Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[2] Smart Cities Dive.
URL: https://www.smartcitiesdive.com/news/
clever-real-estate-most-vulnerable-cities-covid-19/575010/ (Accessed
on: 04/11/2020).
[3] SPHCC employs IoT tech and wearable sensors to monitor COVID-19
patients.
URL: https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/asia-pacific/
sphcc-employs-iot-tech-and-wearable-sensors-monitor-covid-19-patients
(Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[4] Apple, Google Bring Covid-19 Contact-Tracing to 3 Billion People.
URL: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-10/
apple-google-bring-covid-19-contact-tracing-to-3-billion-people (Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[5] Coronavirus: Singapore develops smartphone app for efficient
contact tracing.
URL: https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/
coronavirus-singapore-develops-smartphone-app-for-efficient-contact-tracing
(Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[6] Amsterdam Smart City 3.0.
URL: https://smartcityhub.com/
governance-economy/amsterdam-better-than-smart/ (Accessed on:
04/12/2020).
[7] Smart America.
URL: https://smartamerica.org/ (Accessed on:
04/11/2020).
[8] Drones
in
Enforcing
Social
Distancing.
URL:
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/04/
social-distancing-enforcement-drones-arrive-in-the-u-s.html (Accessed
on: 04/12/2020).
[9] Abhirup Khanna and Rishi Anand. Iot based smart parking system. In
2016 International Conference on Internet of Things and Applications
(IOTA), pages 266–270. IEEE, 2016.
[10] Liesbet Van Zoonen. Privacy concerns in smart cities. Government
Information Quarterly, 33(3):472–480, 2016.
[11] Ryan N Fries, Mostafa Reisi Gahrooei, Mashrur Chowdhury, and Alison J Conway. Meeting privacy challenges while advancing intelligent
transportation systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 25:34–45, 2012.
[12] Sumedha Chauhan, Neetima Agarwal, and Arpan Kumar Kar. Addressing big data challenges in smart cities: a systematic literature review.
info, 2016.
[13] National Conference of State Legislatures.
URL: https://www.
ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/
consumer-data-privacy.aspx (Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[14] U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Research and Technology. URL: https://www.itscosts.its.dot.gov/its/
benecost.nsf/CostHome (Accessed on: 04/11/2020).
[15] Patrick TI Lam and Wenjing Yang. A study of the costs and benefits of
smart city projects including the scenario of public-private partnerships.
International Journal of Urban and Civil Engineering, 11(5):600–605,
2017.

