Dynamic topic modeling of the COVID-19 Twitter narrative among U.S. governors
and cabinet executives
Hao Sha and Mohammad Al Hasan and George Mohler P. Jeffrey Brantingham
University of California
Los Angeles

Indiana University - Purdue University
Indianapolis

Abstract
A combination of federal and state-level decision making has shaped the response to COVID-19 in the United
States. In this paper we analyze the Twitter narratives
around this decision making by applying a dynamic
topic model to COVID-19 related tweets by U.S. Governors and Presidential cabinet members. We use a network Hawkes binomial topic model to track evolving
sub-topics around risk, testing and treatment. We also
construct influence networks amongst government officials using Granger causality inferred from the network
Hawkes process.

Our work contributes to the growing body of literature on
social media analytics and COVID-19. A summary of the
most related work is as follows. In (Cinelli et al. 2020), general COVID-19 related topic diffusion across different social
media platforms is analyzed. In (Yin et al. 2020), the authors study COVID-19 discussions on Chinese microblogs.
Gender differences in COVID-19 related tweeting is investigated in (Thelwall and Thelwall 2020a) and in (Thelwall and
Thelwall 2020b) the authors analyze consensus and dissent
in attitudes towards COVID-19. Geolocated tweets are used
to estimate mobility indices for tracking social distancing in
(Xu, Dredze, and Broniatowski 2020).

Hawkes Binomial Topic Model

Introduction
By mid-April 2020, the number of active COVID-19 cases
has reached over 2 million and the number of deaths is
over 140,000 world-wide. The United States has the largest
share of confirmed cases (over 670,000) and confirmed
deaths (over 27,000). Without a vaccine yet available, states
throughout the U.S. are attempting to control transmission
and reduce strain on the healthcare system through school
and business closings, along with shelter-in-place orders.
Careful planning and coordination is needed both to minimize risk from the disease, and to minimize the long-term
economic impact.
In the U.S., a combination of federal and state-level decision making has shaped the country’s response to COVID19. The response is quickly evolving, making it difficult to
understand how decision makers have influenced each other,
and whom among the decision makers have emerged as leaders on different topics. To overcome this difficulty, we analyze the Twitter narrative of various decision makers through
dynamic topic modeling. Specifically, we analyze a dataset
of all COVID-19 related tweets by U.S. Governors, the President, and his cabinet members between January 1st 2020
and April 7th 2020. We use a Hawkes binomial topic model
(HBTM) (Mohler et al. 2016) to track evolving sub-topics
around risk, testing and vaccination/treatment. The model
also allows for estimation of Granger causality (Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016) that we use to construct influence networks amongst government officials.
Copyright c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We analyze COVID-19 related tweets by U.S. governors
and cabinet members using a network Hawkes binomial
topic model1 (HBTM) (Mohler et al. 2016) with intensity
λs (t, m)
~ at node s in the network determined by,
λs (t, m)
~ = µs (t)J0 (m|p
~ s0 )+
P

t>ti

θssi ωssi e

−ωssi (t−ti )

(1)

ssi
i
J1 (m,
~ m
~ i |pss
of f , pon ).

A Hawkes process is a model for contagion in social media where the occurrence of a post increases the likelihood
of more posts in the near future. In the HBTM, tweets are
represented as bags of words following a Binomial distribution. When viewed as a branching process, the daughter
event bag of words is generated by randomly turning on/off
parent words through independent Bernoulli random variables.
In Equation 1 events at time ti are associated with a mark
m
~ i , a vector of size W , the number of words in the overall dictionary across events. The binary variables indicate
whether each word is present or absent in the event at time
ti . Spontaneous events occur according to a Poisson process
with rate µs (t) at node s in the network (here a node is either a governor or cabinet member). Unlike in (Mohler et al.
2016), we let the spontaneous rate vary in time to reflect the
exponential increase in overall COVID-19 related Twitter
activity (for estimation we use a non-parametric histogram).
The mark vector of spontaneous events is determined by,
PW
PW
m
W−
mj
j=1
J0 (m|p
~ s0 ) = ps0 j=1 j (1 − ps0 )
,
(2)
1

Code and data available at: https://github.com/gomohler/hbtm

cluster 1
ti

tj

singleton
…

These branching probabilities can then be clustered to generate families of dynamic topics over time (Mohler et al.
2016).

cluster 2

…

…

tn

words

Related work
We note that Hawkes branching point processes in general
are a popular model for mimicking viral processes on social media. Previous studies have utilized temporal point
processes to model Twitter (Zhao et al. 2015; Simma and
Jordan 2012), Dirichlet Hawkes processes (Du et al. 2015;
Xu and Zha 2017; Lai et al. 2014), joint models of information diffusion and evolving networks (Farajtabar et al. 2017),
Hawkes topic modeling for detecting fake retweeters (Dutta
et al. 2020), and Latent influencers are modeled in (Tan, Rao,
and Neville 2018) using an Indian buffet Hawkes process.
For a review of point process modeling of social media data
see (Kim, Paini, and Jurdak 2020).
Compared to standard LDA-type Hawkes processes, the
HBTM has the advantage that it jointly estimates a network
that can be used to measure influence; additionally, HBTM
automatically detects the number of clusters. The temporal
aspect of HBTM-like dynamic topic models tend to improve
topic coherence in relation to LDA (see Figure 2).

time

Figure 1: In the HTBM, spontaneous events occur with marks
generated by a binomial random variable over the dictionary of
keywords contained in the data set. Events then trigger offspring
events whose marks are generated by switching parent event words
off (white circle) with probability pof f and on (black circle) with
probability pon . Unique events are delineated with dashed lines.
Clusters are groups of parent daughter events connected by triggering.

which is the product of W independent Bernoulli random
variables with parameters ps0
The parameter θss0 determines the expected number of
tweets by individual s triggered by a tweet by individual
s0 and can be viewed as a measure of influence. The expected waiting time between a parent-daughter event pair is
−1
given by ωss
0 . The mark of a daughter event is determined
by two independent Bernoulli processes. Each word absent,
or “turned off,” in the parent bag of words is added to the bag
0
of words of the child event with probability pss
on . Each word
present in the parent bag of words is deleted with probability
0
pss
of f . Thus J1 is given by,
0

0

ss
J1 (m,
~ m
~ i |pss
of f , pon ) =
m,
~ m
~i
ss0 W1

(pon )

m,
~ m
~i
ss0 W2

(1 − pon )

m,
~ m
~i
ss0 W3

(p

)of f

(3)
(1 −

0
pss
of f )

m,
~ m
~i
W4

~ m
~i
is the number of words present in the child
where W1m,
~ m
~i
vector and absent in the parent vector, W2m,
is the number
~ m
~i
of words absent in both vectors, W3m,
is the number of
words in the parent vector absent in the child vector, and
~ m
~i
W4m,
is the number of words present in both vectors.
After removing stop words we restrict the dictionary to
the W most frequent words, on the order of several hundred
most frequent words across tweets. The Model given by Eq.
1 can be viewed as a branching process and is estimated using Expectation-Maximization (EM) (Mohler et al. 2016).
Using the EM algorithm for estimation has the added benefit that branching probabilities, estimates of the likelihood
that tweet i was triggered by tweet j, are jointly estimated
with the model:
s s

qij =

s s

i j
θsi sj ωsi sj e−ωsi sj (ti −tj ) J1 (m
~ i, m
~ j |pofi fj , pon
)

λ(ti , m
~ i)

.
(4)

,

Figure 2: UCI coherence of HBTM vs. LDA when applied
to COVID-19 related tweets by governors and cabinet members.

Data
We first collected the verified Twitter handles of all U.S.
state governors, presidential cabinet members, and the president (a total of 73 politicians, see Fig. 5 for their handles). Next, we used the Twitter API to query all tweets by
these users during the period of January 1, 2020 to April
7, 2020. We then performed a keyword expansion (Buntain,
McGrath, and Behlendorf 2018; Mohler et al. 2016) to extract a list of keywords related to COVID-19. This method
iteratively adds keywords to a query list whose frequencies
in the set of matching tweets are significantly higher than
in the general sample. We then scanned the corpus with the
expanded keyword list, obtaining a set of 7881 COVID-19
related tweets by these politicians. These tweets were further sorted in time-ascending order and converted to a bagof-word representation. The vocabulary was then restricted
to the top 425 words according to frequency.

Figure 3: Topic timeline. Clusters with size greater than 10 are pinned. Keywords indicate the topic of the clusters. The marker
color indicates the dominant component of the cluster.

Results
We cluster the data into space-time topics by sampling the
branching probabilities qij in Equation 4. In particular, we
assign tweets to the same group when a link between tweet
i and tweet j is sampled. In Fig. 3, we show topic clusters
over time consisting of more than 10 tweets. Each marker
height represents the size of the cluster and the most frequent
keywords per marker indicate the topics of the clusters.
The clusters show roughly four phases in time, with a
significant gap between the first phase and the rest. In the
first phase (early February), the federal government (most
frequent handle @SecAzar, Alex Azar, Sec. of Health) informed the public of the outbreak in China and claimed to
closely monitor the situation. Also in this phase several state
governors (most frequent handle @NYGovCuomo, Andrew
Cuomo, Gov. of New York) started reporting confirmed
cases, but stated that the risk was low, as the number of
cases was limited.
The second and the third phases (early March) appeared
almost a month later. From the keywords in these two
phases, we can see that the government started to take action to protect the American citizens (possibly overseas in
the regions of the outbreak). We can also see that live updates and press conferences were given to brief the public.
Keywords like spread and emergency indicate that the outbreak was getting worse in the U.S. Meanwhile, the keyword
test was mentioned frequently alongside laboratory, as limitations in U.S. testing was driving some of the narrative.
The fourth phase starts around mid-March, when clusters
became larger and denser. In this phase, live updates were
held by many governors on a regular basis (the highest peak
in Fig. 3). We also see the separation between the federal and
state governments, as the clusters divided into government,
administration, america and the various states (maryland,
ohio, louisiana, arizona, indiana). The Louisiana governor
John Bel Edwards (@LouisianaGov) and the Ohio governor
Mike DeWine (@GovMikeDeWine) were among the most
active on Twitter sending information to the people in their
respective states.

Figure 4: Granger causality (Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016)
influence network. Democrats (blue), Republicans (red).
Weights of the edges of the directed graph correspond to the
fraction of events estimated to be triggered across the edge.
Edges with weights less than 10 are removed.
The topic of risk appears in this phase, and the message
is that risk remains low. New topics also emerged on social distancing policies such as school close, stay home, and
work (from) home. During the third phase the government
began addressing problems like healthcare for workers and
families, and loan(s) for small businesses due to the impact
of the pandemic. The slogan socialdistancing was widely
adopted in this phase.
In the most recent phase, a cluster with frequent words
live update, press conference, and briefing is the largest,
alongside a narrative around the number of tested, confirmed positive and death cases in different states. The
Louisiana and Ohio governors continued to be the most active. Also small businesses remained a concern during this
phase and the keyword disaster indicates the negative impact of COVID-19. Meanwhile, quarantine and stay home
were encouraged and reiterated on Twitter. The sacrifices of
health workers were acknowledged (thank).
In Figure 4, we show inferred influence among governors

Figure 5: Spontaneous vs. triggering effects of politicians on Twitter. Vertical axis: base intensities (spontaneous) and effective
influences (triggering) are normalized over politicians; horizontal axis: Twitter handles of politicians. To save space, vertical
axis is truncated at 0.08, rendering President Trump’s spontaneous rate off the chart (∼ 0.16).
and cabinet members by plotting a network where each edge
weight from i → j is determined by the total estimated
number of tweets triggered at node j by tweets from node i.
The network shows influence across party lines, with Democrat governors GovNedLamont, GovernorTomWolf, GovMurphy and LouisianaGov highly connected with Republican governors GovRicketts, GovLarryHogan and GovParsonMO. We caution that this network captures Granger
causality (Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016), and does not control for confounding effects. In Figure 5, we plot the estimated baseline rate of spontaneous tweets per governor and
cabinet member, along with each individuals estimated influence (average number of subsequent tweets in the network directly triggered by a Tweet). Here we observe that
President Trump has the highest rate of spontaneous tweets,
followed by the Governor of Hawaii and Secretary Azar.
Governors Ducey, Wolf and Lamont are the largest estimated influencers.

Risk, treatment and testing sub-topics
In addition to applying the HBTM to all COVID-19 related
tweets, we also apply the model separately to three subcategories. We first apply HBTM to tweets containing the
word ”risk”. A sequence of clusters are illustrated in the
top row of Fig. 6. The emergence of this sub-category coincides with the start of the second phase of the general
timeline, and it appears that the CDC was among the first
to mention how serious the risk was and asked for immediate actions. However, the subsequent clusters in early March
indicate that both state and federal governments (Republicans and Democrats) were telling the public that the risk remains low. Also in this period, we observe calls for washing
hands to reduce risk, and that seniors were identified to be

the most vulnerable. After March 15, the narrative changes
and the high risk to the general population is acknowledged. Keywords like age and adult indicate the high risk
across age groups, even for young adults. The word high
frequently co-occurs with test and quarantine; due to the
high risk of transmission, state governments increased testing and enforced quarantine(s). Overall, from left to right,
the sequence of clusters show a clear trend in the narrative
from low risk in late February to high risk in April.
Next, we apply HBTM to tweets containing the words
“vaccine” and “treatment”. The resulting clusters are illustrated in the middle row of Fig. 6. In mid-March, keywords
launch, trial, clinicaltrial, phase, and candidate indicate
that vaccine candidates were identified and entered the clinical trial phase. We can also see the National Institute of
Health (NIH) partner with the pharmaceutical industry in
developing the vaccine. Later in March, we start to see clusters where state governors (mainly Democrats) commented
on the lack of resources, equipment, ventilators, and hospital beds. We also see cabinet members (specifically Sec.
of Health @SecAzar) giving updates about vaccine development (genetic sequence and clinical trial). Another narrative is around an agreement (agree) with insurance companies to ease the burden of the pandemic on their customers.
Additionally, we see the request to create global researcher
team in developing a vaccine. In general, the clusters here
suggest that the search for a vaccine has been a collective
effort that crosses political parties and national boundaries.
In the bottom row of Fig. 6, we show clusters found by
applying HBTM after filtering the dataset on the keyword
“test”. In early March, we see that new test kits were available. Tweets mention (negative) test results of some individuals by the Democrat governors and cabinet members. Con-

Figure 6: Timeline of sub-topics on risk, treatment and testing. Clusters with size at least 2 are pinned. Keywords indicate the
topic of the clusters. The marker color indicates the dominant component of the cluster.
Table 1: Officials ranked by in-degree (most influenced) and out-degree (most influential) in influence networks.
Topic
In-degree
Out-degree
all
GovMurphy, GovRicketts, LouisianaGov
GovNedLamont, GovMurphy, GovMLG
risk
GovMikeDeWine, NYGovCuomo, GovMLG
GovMikeDeWine, GovPritzker, SecAzar
treatment
SecAzar, GovNedLamont, GovofCO
GovofCO, GovChrisSununu, GovNedLamont
test
GovNedLamont, GovMikeDeWine, LouisianaGov
NYGovCuomo, GovHerbert, GovKemp
cern about the capacity of testing facilities and hospitals is
also discussed in early March. In mid-March, testing is expanded to the community, followed by requests for expanding facility capacity and increasing laboratories. During
this period, state governors (especially Democrats, the two
highest green markers in Fig. 6) start updating test results
(in particular number of positive cases) and providing stats
in their press conferences. The HBTM model identifies a
cluster in which drive thru site is suggested as a way to expand testing capacity. In early April, we observe that the
narrative has shifted away from a lack of testing resources;
keywords indicate that screen tools, test kits, and test sites
are available, and the testing capacity has increased.
In Figure 7, we plot Granger causality influence networks
for the risk, treatment and testing sub-topics. Again we see
connections crossing party lines. In the case of testing, the
network is characterized by a dense set of connections between a select set of governors. The risk and treatment networks are characterized by more active nodes with fewer
connections. In Table 1 we also list the most influential officials by sub-topic along with those officials most influenced.

Conclusion
We analyzed the COVID-19 Twitter narrative among U.S.
governors and presidential cabinet members using a Hawkes
binomial topic model. We observed several narratives between January 1st and early April 2020, including a shift
in the assessment of risk from low to high, discussion of
a lack of testing resources which later subsided, and subtopics around the impact of COVID-19 on businesses, efforts to create treatments and a vaccine, and calls for social
distancing and staying at home. We also constructed influence networks amongst government officials using Granger
causality inferred from the network Hawkes process. President Trump stands out for spontaneity, yet appears to have
little influence with respect to network cross-excitation. Polarization is not obvious in the Granger influence networks;
we observe a high level of cross party event triggering and
influence seems more geographically clustered and related
to state size.
We see several potential directions for future work. Here

Figure 7: Granger causality influence network for “risk”
(top), “treatment” (middle) and “test” (bottom) sub-topics.
we limited the analysis to only COVID-19 related tweets
among U.S. government officials. The HBTM can be used to
explore the COVID-19 narrative among the general population and may highlight issues around trust in institutions, adherence to social distancing, and economic impacts. Furthermore, analyzing non-COVID related tweets by government
officials prior to the pandemic and constructing an evolving
influence network may provide insights into how bi-partisan
cooperation changes during national emergencies.

References
Buntain, C.; McGrath, E.; and Behlendorf, B. 2018. Sampling social media: Supporting information retrieval from
microblog data resellers with text, network, and spatial analysis. In Proc. of the Hawaii Intl. Conf. on System Sciences.
Cinelli, M.; Quattrociocchi, W.; Galeazzi, A.; Valensise,
C. M.; Brugnoli, E.; Schmidt, A. L.; Zola, P.; Zollo, F.; and

Scala, A. 2020. The covid-19 social media infodemic. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.05004.
Du, N.; Farajtabar, M.; Ahmed, A.; Smola, A. J.; and Song,
L. 2015. Dirichlet-hawkes processes with applications to
clustering continuous-time document streams. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 219–228. ACM.
Dutta, H. S.; Dutta, V. R.; Adhikary, A.; and Chakraborty, T.
2020. Hawkeseye: Detecting fake retweeters using hawkes
process and topic modeling. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security.
Farajtabar, M.; Wang, Y.; Gomez-Rodriguez, M.; Li, S.;
Zha, H.; and Song, L. 2017. Coevolve: A joint point process
model for information diffusion and network evolution. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research 18(1):1305–1353.
Kim, M.; Paini, D.; and Jurdak, R. 2020. Real-world diffusion dynamics based on point process approaches: A review.
Artificial Intelligence Review 53(1):321–350.
Lai, E.; Moyer, D.; Yuan, B.; Fox, E.; Hunter, B.; Bertozzi,
A. L.; and Brantingham, J. 2014. Topic time series analysis
of microblogs. Technical report, DTIC Document.
Mohler, G.; Buntain, C.; McGrath, E.; and LaFree, G. 2016.
Hawkes binomial topic model with applications to coupled
conflict-twitter data. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.13638.83527.
Simma, A., and Jordan, M. I. 2012. Modeling events
with cascades of poisson processes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1203.3516.
Tan, X.; Rao, V.; and Neville, J. 2018. The indian buffet
hawkes process to model evolving latent influences. In UAI,
795–804.
Thelwall, M., and Thelwall, S.
2020a.
Covid-19
tweeting in english: Gender differences. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11090.
Thelwall, M., and Thelwall, S. 2020b. Retweeting for covid19: Consensus building, information sharing, dissent, and
lockdown life. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02793.
Xu, H., and Zha, H. 2017. A dirichlet mixture model of
hawkes processes for event sequence clustering. In Advances in Neural Info. Processing Systems, 1354–1363.
Xu, P.; Dredze, M.; and Broniatowski, D. A. 2020.
The twitter social mobility index: Measuring social distancing practices from geolocated tweets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.02397.
Xu, H.; Farajtabar, M.; and Zha, H. 2016. Learning granger
causality for hawkes processes. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, 1717–1726.
Yin, F.; Lv, J.; Zhang, X.; Xia, X.; and Wu, J. 2020. Covid19 information propagation dynamics in the chinese sinamicroblog. Math. Biosciences and Eng. 17(3):2676.
Zhao, Q.; Erdogdu, M. A.; He, H. Y.; Rajaraman, A.; and
Leskovec, J. 2015. Seismic: A self-exciting point process
model for predicting tweet popularity. In Proceedings of
the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 1513–1522. ACM.

