PORTABLE HEALTH SCREENING DEVICE OF RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
Zheng Jiang1 , Menghan Hu2 , Guangtao Zhai1

arXiv:2004.01479v1 [cs.CY] 3 Apr 2020

1

Institute of Image Communication and Information Processing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Shanghai Key Labora. of Multidim. Infor. Proce., East China Normal University, China
ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 epidemic was listed as a public health
emergency of international concern by the WHO on January
30, 2020. To curb the secondary spread of the epidemic,
many public places were equipped with thermal imagers to
check the body temperature. However, the COVID-19 pneumonia has concealed symptoms: the first symptom may not
be fever, and can be shortness of breath. During epidemic
prevention, many people tend to wear masks. Therefore, in
this demo paper, we proposed a portable non-contact healthy
screening system for people wearing masks, which can simultaneously obtain body temperature and respiration state. This
system consists of three modules viz. thermal image collection module, health indicator calculation module and health
assessment module. In this system, the thermal video of human faces is first captured through a portable thermal imaging camera. Then, body temperature and respiration state are
extracted from the video and are imported into the following health assessment module. Finally, the screening result
can be obtained. The results of preliminary experiments show
that this syetem can give an accurate screening result within
15 seconds. This system can be applied to many application scenarios such as community and campus. The demo
videos of the proposed system are available at: https:
//doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12028032.

present, the single health portrait such as body temperature
constructed by the existing screening technology has great
limitations such as low detection rate and high missing rate.
The breathing state assessment is not mentioned as much
as the body temperature in epidemic control. Respiration
is one of the most significant characteristics of human vital
signs. Among all the characteristics of respiration, respiratory
rate and breathing patterns are particularly important. Studies
illustrate that their changes are one of the earliest and major
signs of many serious illnesses. So far, diverse studies have
demonstrated that thermal imaging can be used to analyze the
respiratory rate and breathing patterns [1] [2]. Hu et al. used
thermal and visible imaging to achieving the noncontact and
nonobtrusive measurements of breathing rate and pattern [3].

Index Terms— Respiratory rate, Far-infrared imaging,
FLIR one, Mobile application, Breathing pattern.
1. INTRODUCTION
Under the epidemic situation of COVID-19, the portable
health screening device can effectively assist relevant departments in epidemic control. Some respiratory infectious diseases such as COVID-19 have hidden symptoms, and the
first symptom in many cases is not fever, but shortness of
breath. For these infectious diseases, leveraging these symptoms to find infected people can stop the virus from spreading
again and allow infected people to get timely treatment. At
This work is sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61901172, No. 61831015, No. U1908210), the Shanghai Sailing
Program (No.19YF1414100), and the Science and Technology Commission
of Shanghai Municipality (No. 19511120100).

Fig. 1: Overview of portable health screening system for respiratory infections: a) device appearance; b) analysis result of
the application.
Therefore, we developed a remote respiratory infectious
screening system based on portable thermal camera to help
fight the current epidemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. The structure of our screening system is shown in Fig. 1. It has the advantages of portability, low cost and easy operation. Through
the 15-second detection window, this system can accurately
determine body temperature and respiration state of people
wearing masks, thus giving the screening result.
The main contributions of this demonstration are three-

Fig. 2: Pipeline for the health screening system: a) the input facial thermal video of participants; b) and c) capture the forehead
and nostril cut of the video seperately and transfer images to different signals; d) extract different features according to the
indicators; e) use a classfiy algorithm to perform the health assessment result; f) screening result.
fold. First, we combine the face recognition technology with
portable thermal camera to accomplish the nostril recognition of facial thermal images. Subsequently, the temperature
information and respiration state is successfully obtained by
applying image analysis algorithms to facial thermal images.
Finally, based on the existing equipment conditions, we have
implemented a non-contact and efficient measurement system
for health screening on respiratory infections.

and Apnea) according to the obtained nostril signals. Body
temperature is achieved through forehead signals.
3) Health assessment module: this module includes health
screening and abnormal alert. Health screening is accomplished through a comprehensive analysis of body temperature, respiratory rate and breathing pattern. The algorithm is
based on Hu’s research [3]. Besides, an alert would be provided when abnormal health conditions are found.

2. DEMONSTRATION SETUP

3. VISITORS EXPERIENCE

In our demonstration, we use a FLIR one thermal camera
connected to an Android phone to collect thermal video,
and use the application we developed to achieve real-time
health screening of respiratory infections. The pipeline for
our screening system is shown in Fig. 2. Three modules
are inserted in our developed application, which are thermal
image collection module, health indicator calculation module
and health assessment module. The detailed descriptions of
these three modules are presented below:
1) Thermal image collection module: this module is
mainly composed of hardware devices, which consists of an
Android smartphone and a FLIR one thermal camera. The
system can be put into use simply by connecting the camera
to the phone and installing the application we developed. In
this demonstration, a thermal camera is aimed at the face of
a participant wearing a mask to obtain a corresponding facial
thermal video.
2) Health indicator calculation module: this module is
mainly responsible for extracrting features of temperature and
respiration data from the thermal videos. When human body
performs continuous periodic breathing activities, continuous
heat exchange occurs between the nostril and the air, and periodic temperature fluctuations occur in the respiratory tract.
Therefore, respiration data can be obtained by analyzing the
periodic changes in the temperature around the nostril. After
using a series of algorithms to deal with the collected temperature data, the accurate health indicator can be obtained.
In this system, we extract respiratory rate and one of the four
common breathing patterns (Eupnea, Bradypnea, Tachypnea

In our experiments, participants wearing masks only need
to stay hold in front of the thermal camera for 15 seconds
to complete the health screening. The result shows that the
system can efficiently extract the temperature and respiration
data of participants, and give an accurate assessment of health
conditions. During the whole non-contact screening process,
slight movement of participants can be accepted. This system may have great application prospects in many scenarios
such as community, campus and hospital which can be used
to perform preliminary check for respiratory infections and
give abnormal alerts.
4. REFERENCES
[1] Menghan Hu, Guangtao Zhai, Duo Li, Hanqi Li, Mengxin Liu,
Wencheng Tang, and Yuanchun Chen, “Influence of image resolution on the performance of remote breathing rate measurement
using thermal imaging technique,” Infrared Physics & Technology, vol. 93, pp. 63–69, 2018.
[2] Lushuang Chen, Ning Liu, Menghan Hu, and Guangtao Zhai,
“RGB-thermal imaging system collaborated with marker tracking for remote breathing rate measurement,” in 2019 IEEE
Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP). IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–4.
[3] Meng-Han Hu, Guang-Tao Zhai, Duo Li, Ye-Zhao Fan, XiaoHui Chen, and Xiao-Kang Yang, “Synergetic use of thermal
and visible imaging techniques for contactless and unobtrusive
breathing measurement,” Journal of biomedical optics, vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 036006, 2017.

