1

REVISED, Accepted by journal ‘Epidemiology’, 23 June 2020

REVIEW ARTICLE
The test-negative design with additional population controls: a practical
approach to rapidly obtain information on the causes of the SARS-CoV-2
epidemic

Jan P Vandenbroucke1,2,3, Elizabeth B Brickley2, Christina M.J.E. Vandenbroucke-Grauls4, Neil
Pearce2

(1) Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands;
(2) Departments of Medical Statistics, Non-communicable Disease Epidemiology and
Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London,
UK; (3) Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Denmark; (4) Department of
Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam UMC, The Netherlands

Corresponding Author: Jan P Vandenbroucke, Leiden University Medical Center, Dept.
Clinical Epidemiology, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands, E-mail:
J.P.Vandenbroucke@lumc.nl
Running head: Test-negative design combined with population controls
The authors have no conflict of interest
No specific sources of financial support, other than salaries by affiliations
Word count: approximately 4600, two figures

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge our debt to comments on a previous version of this
paper by Ivo Foppa, Mike Jackson, Daniel Westreich, Sheena Sullivan, Martie van Tongeren,
several Twitter commentators (David Simons, Mark D Simmons), and Marc Lipsitch; for
comments on Appendix B we thank Tim Lash and Avnika Amin. All opinions as well as
remaining inadequacies are our own.

2

Abstract
Testing of symptomatic persons for infection with SARS-CoV-2 is occurring worldwide. We propose
two types of case-control studies that can be carried out jointly in test-settings for symptomatic
persons. The first, the test-negative case-control design (TND) is the easiest to implement; it only
demands collecting information about potential risk factors for COVID-19 from the tested
symptomatic persons. The second, standard case-control studies with population controls, requires
the collection of data on one or more population controls for each person who is tested in the test
facilities, so that test-positives and test-negatives can each be compared with population controls.
The TND will detect differences in risk factors between symptomatic persons who have COVID-19
(test-positives) and those who have other respiratory infections (test-negatives). However, risk
factors with effect sizes of equal magnitude for both COVID-19 and other respiratory infections will
not be identified by the TND. Therefore, we discuss how to add population controls to compare with
the test-positives and the test-negatives, yielding two additional case-control studies. We describe
two options for population control groups: one composed of accompanying persons to the test
facilities, the other drawn from existing country-wide health care databases. We also describe other
possibilities for population controls. Combining the TND with population controls yields a
triangulation approach that distinguishes between exposures that are risk factors for both COVID-19
and other respiratory infections, and exposures that are risk factors for just COVID-19. This
combined design can be applied to future epidemics, but also to study causes of non-epidemic
disease.

KEYWORDS:
test-negative design, case-control studies, population controls. SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19,
epidemiologic methods,

3
Widespread testing is essential for monitoring the Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.[1, 2]
Most countries are focussing on testing persons with symptoms to identify patients with Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections. Ideally, this should be coupled
with random/representative population testing to follow the epidemic in the population.[3]
However, there is much that can be learnt about the causes of COVID-19, even if only symptomatic
people are tested. Still more may be learnt by conducting formal test-negative design studies, with
additional population controls, thus yielding three linked case-control studies. In this paper, we
describe how these combined study designs can enhance understanding of risk factors for
symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in the COVID-19 pandemic.
Essence of the Test-Negative Case-control Design (TND)
Test-negative case-control studies[4-9] are based on persons who undergo testing because they
present with signs and symptoms of a particular disease. The cases are those who test positive for
the disease, and the controls are those who test negative - the latter will have another reason for
their signs and symptoms, most likely another disease. [8] These ‘cases’ and ‘controls’ usually come
from one geographical population, although not everyone in a particular area may present for
testing (and some people may come from outside the area).
TNDs involve comparing the odds of a given intervention (e.g. vaccine receipt) or a given risk factor
(e.g., oral contraceptives) among symptomatic persons who test positive compared to those who
test negative. Given assumptions described in the literature,[8] it can produce effect estimates
(odds ratios) which are generalizable to the general population (See APPENDIX A for more detail).
The approach is most commonly known for its use in assessing vaccine effectiveness,[4] but has also
been applied to study risk factors for antibiotic resistance,[5, 10] and to estimate risk factors in
circumstances in which diagnostic bias was suspected, for example in studies on oral contraceptives
and venous thrombosis, and on aspirin use and Reye syndrome.[8]
Test-negative designs allow us to obtain quick answers to important questions. Additionally, by
design, they protect against some forms of bias which are otherwise difficult to control. People who
are tested for a disease will not be representative of all those who have the disease (unless everyone
in the population is tested) - usually, they are more likely to have severe symptoms, and more likely
to seek medical help. This help-seeking behaviour is affected by many factors such as age, gender,
socioeconomic status, access to health care, proximity to testing facilities, severity of symptoms,
personality, and insurance coverage. In a test-negative design the same selective forces that lead
individuals to be tested will operate on both those who test positive and those who test negative.
There is a substantial literature on this study design,[4-9] and it is generally agreed that it can
produce valid effect estimates under the assumption of similar selection pressures for the testpositives and the test-negatives.

4
Reasons for considering the TND in the COVID-19 pandemic
Insights into risk factors for COVID-19 can be gained by collecting the same information on
symptomatic individuals who test positive and those who test negative, i.e., by performing a testnegative case-control study. Because the test-negatives belong to the same population (i.e. people
who would come for testing if they had symptoms of COVID-19) as the test-positives, this may give
timely and locally relevant insight into the causes of SARS-CoV-2 infection in different communities
(urban, rural), in communities with many cases, or communities with few cases.
Direct comparisons of test-positives to test-negatives (comparison TND in Figures 1 and 2) can yield
insight into specific risk factors for becoming infected and symptomatic with SARS-CoV-2: these may
include age, sex, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic factors (e.g. income, education), occupational
exposures (e.g. healthcare workers performing aerosol-generating procedures, delivery drivers,
teachers), contact patterns (e.g. household exposure to confirmed case, crowding, travel histories,
childcare responsibilities), geographic residence (e.g. urban versus rural), behavioural factors (e.g.
shopping locations, smoking), medical risk factors (e.g. immunodeficiency), and genetic factors (from
the swabs or blood sample taken for viral diagnosis, which will also contain human cells).
Some of this information might already be routinely collected. If a sufficient number of test sites test
large numbers of people, different types of additional information may be asked at different testing
sites – so as not to burden the test sites and to be able to adapt questionnaires to evolving
questions. Some risk factors may be immediately important for local decisions, others more widely
or more theoretically. The data can be analysed like any other case-control study, although
consideration should be given to assessing possible interpretation issues arising because both the
cases and controls are drawn from a subgroup of the general population (see also APPENDIX A).[8]
An interesting variant might be to study risk factors for antibody seroprevalence (instead of new
infections) which is an approach that investigates cumulative risk of infection rather than incident
infection. Some of its uses are discussed below.
Critical reflections on the interpretation and feasibility of the TND in the COVID-19 pandemic
The TND involves a comparison between persons who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 and persons who
test negative but who have similar signs and symptoms. The test-negatives will have another reason
for their similar signs and symptoms - most likely they will have another viral respiratory infection.
Some exposures (e.g. overcrowding), will increase the risks both of COVID-19 and of other
respiratory infection. Thus, the TND can only identify those risk factors that are either totally distinct
or clearly different in magnitude from the risk factors of illnesses that manifest with similar
symptoms. For example, if living in crowded conditions equally increases the risks both of COVID-19
and of other respiratory infections, then the proportions living in crowded conditions would be
similar in the test-positives and the test-negatives. On the other hand, if male sex was a risk factor
for symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection, but not for other respiratory infections, then more of the
test-positives than the test-negatives would be male.
A second concern is about the sensitivity and specificity of the test. Although RT-PCR testing has a
high specificity for SARS-CoV-2, the sensitivity can vary in relation to timing of symptom onset,[11,
12] the bodily fluid tested,[13] and the assay used.[14] There will be misclassification of cases and

5
controls. This can be expected to be ‘non-differential’ (whether the test works correctly on a
particular person is unrelated to exposures such as crowding). Such non-differential misclassification
of exposure or disease is a known problem in case-control studies, and it usually results in bias of the
effect estimate towards the null (an underestimation of effects). However, there is a major
difference between the usual case-control study and the TND. In the standard population-based
case-control study, the false-negatives remain part of the source population, and only a (small)
fraction of them will be sampled and end up in the control group. In contrast, in the TND it is certain
that at a particular test site all false-negatives will be included in the control group (the test
negatives); similarly, all false-positives will be included in the case group - since all persons tested at
the test site will be in the study. This may lead to stronger misclassification which has most
consequences in situations wherein the proportion of COVID-19 relative to other respiratory disease
among the persons tested is either very high or very low. There is an extensive literature on
sensitivity analysis for standard case-control studies,[15, 16] which essentially involves making
assumptions about how large this misclassification would be, and these methods can be adapted to
the TND situation. See APPENDIX B for further details.
An additional reflection is about seasonality; it is not known at the time of writing how the incidence
of SARS-CoV-2 infections over the calendar year will evolve. There is the possibility that other
respiratory viruses such as influenza might disappear during summer,[11] whereas the SARS-CoV-2
may continue to circulate; in that situation, there may not be sufficient test-negative controls.
In the earliest phases of the COVID-19 epidemic, testing for acute infection may not have been done.
The above-mentioned variant of a TND on seroprevalence of antibodies may be a solution. For
example, in a hospital-based setting, serologic testing of healthcare workers for antibodies specific
to SARS-CoV-2 may yield insights into exposure risks that could have been missed due to the initial
lack of testing for acute infection. Of course, this will miss persons who did not survive.
As the epidemic progresses, risk factors for having had the infection might become negative risk
factors for new infections. For example, bus drivers may have been frequently infected early on; if
these infections conferred sufficiently strong immunity, bus drivers may turn up later in the
epidemic mainly as ‘test-negatives’ for acute SARS-CoV2-infection when having signs and symptoms
of respiratory disease (from another virus). In addition, measures might have been taken to shield
bus drivers (passengers only entering via rear doors; obligatory unoccupied seats). While this
muddles the estimates of risk factors, the immunity conferred by earlier infection as well as the
preventive measures taken earlier are worthwhile goals of a TND study. This paradox requires to
ideally investigate the evolution of the associations over the course of the epidemic, with
background knowledge beyond the data that were obtained; as a minimum we need to look
separately at the ‘upward’ and the ‘downward’ phase of the epidemic curve. To verify a potential
role of immunity in an epidemic, subsamples of test-positives and test-negatives for acute infection
might be tested for SARS-Cov-2 antibodies. The mentioned variant of studying antibody
seroprevalence in a TND, instead of acute infections, may partially solve the problem.

6
Adding standard case-control studies with a control group representing the underlying population
As noted, a TND can potentially identify risk factors for COVID-19 that differ from those for other
respiratory infections, either in kind or in magnitude, but will not identify risk factors that the testpositives and test-negatives have in common. On the other hand, comparing test-positives with
general population controls will tell us about risk factors for COVID-19, but does not tell us which
factor is specific for SARS-CoV-2 rather than respiratory infections in general. Thus, the ideal
situation is to also have a comparison of the test-negatives with the general population. This
strategy has already been applied as an extension of TNDs of antibiotic resistance.[5, 10]
Below, we outline two different strategies to obtain population controls: first the use of
‘accompanying persons’ (e.g., friends or household members) as ‘matched controls’, and second the
use of a random sample from general population databases with country-wide health care and other
registered information from that population. In a separate section, we will briefly discuss other
possibilities for choosing controls that might be more useful in a diversity of situations. First we
discuss the benefits of population controls.
Benefits of added population controls in separate case-control studies with test-positives and testnegatives
The importance of having population controls can be seen from Figures 1 and 2, which respectively
refer to the situation with accompanying persons as controls, and to the more general situation of
population controls. A comparison of the findings from the test-negative design (TND) with a casecontrol comparison of the test positives and their population controls (CC-POS), and a separate
comparison of test-negatives with the population (CC-NEG), will enable us to assess which risk
factors are specific to COVID-19 and which are risk factors for all respiratory infections (including
SARS-CoV-2) in general. If these studies were all perfect, one would be able to calculate the results
of any one contrast from the two others, e.g., the results of comparison CC-POS should logically
follow from combining the results of the TND comparison and CC-NEG (if the odds ratio for male sex
is 1.0 in the TND, but is 2.0 in comparison CC-NEG, then it also should be 2.0 in comparison CC-POS).
In reality there might be differences due to sampling and/or unknown selection biases. Thus,
although it would be sufficient in theory to only conduct the TND and comparison CC-POS, it remains
valuable to conduct comparison CC-NEG. This enables ‘triangulation’ [17] with information about
differences in risk factors between symptomatic test-positives and test-negatives, and two casecontrol studies of test-positives and test-negatives with their population controls.
Accompanying persons as a control group
Symptomatic persons who go for SARS-CoV-2 testing may be accompanied by other persons, e.g.,
household members, relatives or friends. Thus, it may be expedient to ask an accompanying person
to volunteer the same information (e.g. completing a questionnaire) at the time of testing the
person with symptoms – this may be done before the test result is known. These persons are
members of the source population which generated the cases and should not have COVID-19
symptoms. Note that for this design it is not necessary to carry out the test on the accompanying
person.

7
For both the test-positives (COVID-19 cases) and the test-negatives (controls with other respiratory
infections), the accompanying person can be seen as a matched population control. Such
approaches have been widely used in epidemiology, and the strengths and weaknesses have been
extensively discussed.[18, 19] Briefly, using friends, siblings or spouses as matched population
controls, has the advantage of logistic convenience, and may indirectly match for various risk factors
(e.g. socioeconomic status, availability of health care, health seeking behaviour). As with any other
pair-matched case-control study, this necessitates a pair-matched analysis. Essentially the matched
analysis focusses on the subgroup of case-control pairs where the case and control differ with
respect to the exposure under study: a pair-matched analysis is an analysis of the differences that
remain between cases and their controls despite them being made ‘more equal’ by the matching.
This strategy leads to the case-control comparisons represented in Figure1: test-positives with their
accompanying persons (comparison Case Control-POS), and test-negatives with their accompanying
persons (comparison Case Control-NEG). Comparison CC-POS enables us to study directly the
differences in risk factors between a person with COVID-19 and a control person without respiratory
symptoms. Thus, in this analysis all risk factors that increase the risk of COVID-19 (some of which will
also be risk factors for other respiratory diseases) will be seen to differ between cases and controls.
Comparison CC-NEG enables us to directly assess risk factors for the mixture of other respiratory
pathogens (e.g. influenza virus, rhinovirus) that could be causing symptoms similar to those of
COVID-19.
Critical reflections on the interpretation of case-control studies with accompanying persons as
matched controls
The use of ‘friend’ controls leaves the choice of the control to the case and not to the investigator
[see pages 119-120 in[19]]. Friend controls may be quite similar to the cases, which is an intended
benefit of matching. However, they may have some possible inherent biases [pages 119-20 in [19]],
for example popularity of certain persons, or that extroverts are more often mentioned as friends.
We should stress that the problem is not that the cases and controls are made too similar - this
problem applies to all matched case-control studies and is addressed by taking the matching into
account in the analyses.[18] Rather, the problem is that they may be made similar in ways that the
investigator cannot control, and certain types of persons might be more valued to be named as
friends.
A second issue is that the accompanying persons of the test positives in the CC-POS comparison may
be as yet asymptomatic carriers of SARS-CoV-2. A common reflex might be to want to know this and
to remove these persons from the analysis. However, apart from involving logistically difficult
additional testing of the accompanying persons, it is not necessary. This is explained in detail in
APPENDIX C. Briefly, the studies are based on the source population which would come for testing if
they develop symptoms; the cases are people who have actually developed symptoms and come for
testing. The controls should be a sample of the source population which generated the cases.[20, 21]
Since the accompanying persons came with their index person for testing, it is reasonable to assume,
that they would also have come for testing at the same facility if they had developed symptoms.

8
Random sampling from country-wide general population health care and other data-bases
In regions or countries where all health care activities are registered (prescriptions, hospitalizations,
test-results, etc.) in digital databases, it may be possible to use a different type of control group,
comprising a control population randomly sampled from the region or country as a whole. While
analyses based on existing databases may lack the immediacy and flexibility of point-of-care data
collection of persons who are tested, the advantage is that data are recorded prospectively in past
time, and the epidemic can be analysed, and re-analysed, in its several stages (e.g., in relation to the
implementation of social distancing and lock-downs).
The analysis of the COVID-19 epidemic would start with recorded data of test-positives and testnegatives for SARS-CoV-2 in the total administrative population of a country or region. While this
limits information to health care data that are registered at a particular point in time, an advantage
is that health care data that have been registered before (e.g., pre-existing diseases and
prescriptions, prior hospitalizations etc.), can be added, as well as other data such as data on
crowding, income, level of education, etc., from other data-bases.
A single control group can be used for both CC-POS and CC-NEG (see Figure 2). This allows us to
randomly sample several times as many controls as there are test-positives and test-negatives
combined. For efficiency purposes, the cases and controls, as well as the random population control,
might be limited to an age bracket, say age 15-74, as there will be few symptomatic SARS-C0V-2
cases below age 15, and persons above age 75 may not be tested nor hospitalized. Age and sex
matching are undesirable in the context of COVID-19 as these may be determinants of infection and
disease course. It is always possible to stratify for age and sex, as the numbers will be sufficiently
large. Matching on being alive at the index date of the cases (i.e. the date of testing) might be
considered; however, this might be replaced by a control group that is composed of persons being
alive in the middle of the month in which persons were tested.
It might be objected that we use ‘two different control groups’ for one case group, which is often
frowned upon, because if the findings with the different control groups are different, the
investigator has to ‘choose’ which one is ‘right’ [see pages 121-2 in [19]] However, in interpreting
the combination of the TND with population control groups, neither is ‘the right one’, as both point
to a different contrast. This can be learned from a test-negative case-control study on urinary tract
infection with antibiotic resistant bacteria in contrast to infections with sensitive bacteria, with
added population controls to both groups.[10] In this study, male gender proved a strong risk factor
for antibiotic resistance in the test-negative design, while female gender was a strong risk factor for
urinary tract infections in comparisons with the population. This seems like a ‘reversing’ of risk
factors, but is logical because men generally only acquire urinary tract infections at older ages,
subsequent to prostate or other pathology which puts them also at risk of acquiring resistant
bacteria.[10] This analysis and reasoning is explained in Appendix D. It shows how the triangulation
of the test-negative design with population controls leads to identifying the right causal pathways.
Other population control groups
Many alternatives for population control selection are possible, depending on the situation in
different regions or countries. Some of these other options will be closer to the flexibility of the

9
‘accompanying persons’ control groups, others will be closer to the advantages of using existing
databases. The appropriate approach will depend on local considerations. For example:
- records from General Practitioner databases (e.g., in the UK, in some regions in Italy or Spain), or
third-party payers and insurers (Medicare, Medicaid, health maintenance organizations in the US),
which will also allow for database-centred research.
- if patients are presenting in a special set-up organized by groups of General Practitioners (e.g.,
“Corona-test-sites” managed by several GP practices where patients are referred to for testing),
control persons may be a sample from these general practices; this sample could be matched to the
practice of the referring GPs, or weighted according to the size of the referring GP practices. This
might facilitate the collection of specific new information relevant to local situations in individual
practices (e.g., the use of local sports facilities).
- if patients present to outpatient clinics or hospital departments, a control group of non-respiratory
out- or inpatients might be constructed to represent the catchment population of the hospital; such
patient controls used to be common in pharmacoepidemiology.[22]
Critical reflections on the choice of population controls
It is imperative to consider to what extent the test-positives and test-negatives from a TND are
representative of all cases in the general population, i.e., whether the general population can really
be seen as the source population for the tested persons. There are two considerations: patient
selection and doctor’s preferences.
Patient selection
Not all diseases present equally to health care facilities. In countries with universal access to health
care and relatively standardized care, it is likely that, for example, almost all solid cancers (colon,
lung, etc.) with onset before age 70 will ultimately be diagnosed and recorded. That is not the case
for self-limiting diseases such as influenza-like illnesses or headache. Many persons will just stay
home. Only persons who worry or have more severe symptoms will present themselves to a primary
care service. Still, in a country with universal access to relatively standardized care, the types of
person who present themselves at several points of care will be roughly similar, and if testing is done
for SARS-CoV-2, test-positives and test-negatives can be seen as drawn from the same underlying
general population.
The type of person that is tested may differ between countries, however. During the initial wave of
COVID-19 in February-March in Europe, testing for persons with minor symptoms was available in
Germany; in the Netherlands only persons with symptoms that were sufficiently severe to be
hospitalized were tested. Because these were country-wide measures, in both countries the general
population may be seen as the source population. In this context, it should be noted that if (self)
selection is based only on severity of disease, this will not create a bias in itself within one country.
Problems only arise if there are other factors which affect presentation for testing, given a particular
level of symptoms. For example, consider private health care facilities that are only accessible to
individuals who can afford them (these facilities exist in many guises: from standard private health
care coming as an employee benefit, to facilities only available to the very rich). A comparison of the

10
test-positives and test-negatives from such facilities with a general population control group may
not be warranted, because of inherent differences in socio-economic status, medical care, and life
style. Among persons tested in private facilities, both test positives and test negatives are, for
example, unlikely to live in very overcrowded conditions. Thus, a better control group, representing
their own source population, might be composed of other person (or patients) who make use of the
same health care facilities. This means that one may not be able to study all of the causes of the
disease (e.g. if poverty is an underlying cause, but no one who accesses these health care facilities is
low-income). Also, if we suspect that there are differences in access to testing for persons with very
mild symptoms or without symptoms (depending on type or health insurance or wealth), but few
such differences for severe disease, then one might restrict the analysis to the subgroup of tested
individuals with more severe symptomatic disease.
Doctors’ preferences
Even in settings with relatively standardized care, there might be variation in testing strategies for a
new disease like COVID-19 between (primary care) practices. The existence of physician preference
has been studied in different countries.[23] Physician preference can be based on a different
interpretation of the literature on topics where there is not yet consensus, or on implicit biases
(regarding age, sex, ethnicity). If this is suspected to have been the case, it might be better to select
population controls from the GP practices of the individuals who underwent testing – and to
approach this in the analysis as a form of ‘matching’. Matching by GP practice would, however, limit
the ability to compare between catchment areas and lead to loss of information about regional
differences. Once again, restricting the analysis to patients with severe disease (whether testpositive or test-negative), may suffer less from self-selection and testing preference by doctors. An
analysis according to severity can also be added as a sensitivity analysis.

Discussion
An ideal approach for identifying risk factors for COVID-19 would involve random/representative
population sampling.[3] However, in the surveillance efforts that are being developed when an
epidemic is unfolding, population-based testing often is limited by laboratory capacity (i.e., due to
unprecedented demands for reagents and trained technicians), funding and political will. The first
thoughts of decision makers are to facilitate testing for people with symptoms who became ill
recently, either in order to isolate, or in order to know which treatment trajectory is necessary if
symptoms worsen.[1, 2]
The situation with COVID-19 remains urgent in many parts of the world, and it is important that the
best possible use is made of information collected in the process of widespread testing of
symptomatic persons. Therefore, there are research and public health benefits in employing a testnegative case-control design, combined with case-control studies with population controls added to
it. Still, such collection of information has to be as ‘light’ as possible, in order not to disturb the
primary medical aim: to test people for their own benefit and for controlling the epidemic. The
proposed data collection can be done with minimal extra effort, it would roll along with the
epidemic, and can potentially yield important information at much less cost, and with greater ease,
than doing genuinely random population repeated sampling and testing. In situations where

11
extensive databases exist, data will have been collected as the epidemic unfolded, and then kept
frozen in time in the databases. This allows investigators to return to the data and evaluate the
course of the epidemic with new hypotheses. At the time of this writing, several efforts are
underway to set up collections of types of questions and data of interest to study the COVID-19
pandemic.[24, 25]
Adding general population controls yields linked case-control studies (the TND, CC-POS and CC-NEG)
and creates a triangulation situation[17] for inferences about local as well as general factors that
drive the pandemic. Follow-up of test-positives or test-negatives or other ‘add-ons’ will lead to
better understanding of the course of the disease. In particular, a follow-up starting from a testnegative design of acute disease may be a good starting point to provide information on the degree
and duration of protection from (re)infection conferred by having had a SARS-CoV-2 infection
previously and/or specific antibody titres, because such studies might need exact matching on date
and place of testing.[26] Finally, having an infrastructure for a test-negative design already
established in different settings may be a valuable base to evaluate the effectiveness of
interventions such vaccines when they become available, or other measures to limit transmission.
The combined test-negative and population-based case-control design may be useful, not only for
recurrent waves of this epidemic or other epidemics, but also to study causes of non-epidemic
diseases, in circumstances where a test-negative design would have advantages but in which its
inferences could be strengthened by comparing with population controls.

12
REFERENCES

1.

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Ghebreyesus, T.A., Test, test, test WHO calls for more coronavirus testing. . The Guardian 16
March 2020 https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2020/mar/16/test-test-test-whocalls-for-more-coronavirus-testing-video.
Lipsitch, M., Far more people in the US have coronavirus than you think. . Washington Post.
23 March 2020 https://www.washingtonpost.com/gdprconsent/?next_url=https%3a%2f%2fwww.washingtonpost.com%2foutlook%2f2020%2f03%2
f23%2fcoronavirus-count-confirmed-testing%2f.
Pearce, N., et al., All Covid-19 statistics are wrong but some are more useful than others.
AJPH, 2020. accepted.
Sullivan, S.G., E.J. Tchetgen Tchetgen, and B.J. Cowling, Theoretical Basis of the TestNegative Study Design for Assessment of Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness. Am J Epidemiol,
2016. 184(5): p. 345-53.
Lipsitch, M., Measuring and interpreting associations between antibiotic use and penicillin
resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Clin Infect Dis, 2001. 32(7): p. 1044-54.
Foppa, I.M., et al., The case test-negative design for studies of the effectiveness of influenza
vaccine in inpatient settings. Int J Epidemiol, 2016. 45(6): p. 2052-2059.
Jackson, M.L., et al., The impact of selection bias on vaccine effectiveness estimates from
test-negative studies. Vaccine, 2018. 36(5): p. 751-757.
Vandenbroucke, J.P. and N. Pearce, Test-Negative Designs: Differences and Commonalities
with Other Case-Control Studies with "Other Patient" Controls. Epidemiology, 2019. 30(6): p.
838-844.
Lewnard, J.A., et al., Measurement of Vaccine Direct Effects Under the Test-Negative Design.
Am J Epidemiol, 2018. 187(12): p. 2686-2697.
Sogaard, M., et al., Risk factors for extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia
coli urinary tract infection in the community in Denmark: a case-control study. Clin Microbiol
Infect, 2017. 23(12): p. 952-960.
Zou, L., et al., SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected Patients. N
Engl J Med, 2020. 382(12): p. 1177-1179.
Wolfel, R., et al., Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature,
2020.
Wyllie, A.L., e.a., Saliva is more sensitive for SARS-CoV-2 detection in COVID-19 patients than
nasopharyngeal swabs.
Vogels, C.B.F., e.a., Analytical sensitivity and efficiency comparisons of SARS-COV-2 qRT-PCR
primer-probe sets.
Lash, T.L., M.P. Fox, and A.K. Fink, Applying Quantitative Bias Analysis to Epidemiologic Data.
2009: Springer-Verlag New York.
Corbin, M., et al., A comparison of sensitivity-specificity imputation, direct imputation and
fully Bayesian analysis to adjust for exposure misclassification when validation data are
unavailable. Int J Epidemiol, 2017. 46(3): p. 1063-1072.
Lawlor, D.A., K. Tilling, and G. Davey Smith, Triangulation in aetiological epidemiology. Int J
Epidemiol, 2016. 45(6): p. 1866-1886.
Pearce, N., Analysis of matched case-control studies. BMJ, 2016. 352: p. i969.
Rothman, K.J., S. Greenland, and T.L. Lash, Modern Epidemiology, 3rd edition. 2008,
Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Vandenbroucke, J.P. and N. Pearce, Incidence rates in dynamic populations. Int J Epidemiol,
2012. 41(5): p. 1472-1479.
Vandenbroucke, J.P. and N. Pearce, Case-control studies: basic concepts. Int J Epidemiol,
2012. 41(5): p. 1480-1489.

13
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

Jick, H. and M.P. Vessey, Case-control studies in the evaluation of drug-induced illness. Am J
Epidemiol, 1978. 107(1): p. 1-7.
Boef, A.G., et al., Physician's Prescribing Preference as an Instrumental Variable: Exploring
Assumptions Using Survey Data. Epidemiology, 2016. 27(2): p. 276-83.
Social Risk Factors for COVID-19 Exposure https://osf.io/a9xpd/.
TND: The test-negative design for COVID-19. https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/research/centresprojects-groups/test-negative-design#welcome.
Kahn, R., et al., Potential biases arising from epidemic dynamics in observational
seroprotection studies. medRxiv, 2020: p. 2020.05.02.20088765.

14

Figure 1: Test-negative design and case-control studies with accompanying persons

Figure 2: Test-negative design and case-control studies with random population controls

15

APPENDICES TO: Test-Negative Design and Case-Control studies
with population controls during widespread testing of symptomatic
persons for the presence of SARS-CoV-2

Jan P Vandenbroucke1,2,3, Elizabeth B Brickley1,
Christina M.J.E. Vandenbroucke-Grauls4, Neil Pearce1

(1) Departments of Medical Statistics, Non-communicable Disease Epidemiology and Infectious
Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
(2) Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands
(3) Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Denmark
(4) Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam UMC, The
Netherlands

Corresponding Author:
Jan P Vandenbroucke, Leiden University Medical Center, Dept. Clinical Epidemiology, PO Box 9600,
2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands, E-mail: J.P.Vandenbroucke@lumc.nl,

16
Appendix A: Assumptions that underly generalizability of estimates of a Test-Negative Designs to a
broader population
The TND design has been described in detail in numerous papers. In a recent paper two of the
authors of the present paper presented this study design as a variant of ‘case-control studies with
other disease controls’. [1] These include hospital-based case -control studies in which the cases are
identified through a particular health-care facility, and the controls are other patients at the same
health-care facility.
Case-control studies with diseased controls have a long history in epidemiology, from the first casecontrol studies of smoking and lung cancer (where lung cancer patients were compared to other
patients of the same wards), to several applications in pharmacoepidemiology,[2] and applications in
cancer registries.[3] Such studies are recognized as having produced some major and valid findings,
such as the association between smoking and lung cancer.[4] However, they rest upon the
assumption that the main risk factor under study does not cause the ‘other diseases’ which are used
as controls.
The main difference between the TND in general and other case-control studies with diseased
controls is that in the TND the cases and controls are persons with similar signs and symptoms, but
who ‘test’ differently on a crucial test for a particular disease. As such, the controls (those who test
negative) will usually have another disease with similar signs and symptoms to the disease under
study.
This means that in the particular context of the application of the TND to risk factors for COVID-19,
the standard assumption of the hospital-based case-control study, that the exposure of interest is
not a cause of the other disease, is not true for many exposures. The other diseases will mainly be
other respiratory infections, and several of their risk factors will be similar to those for COVID-19. As
mentioned in the paper, the TND will not detect risk factors that are of equal strength for COVID-19
and the diseases of the controls; however, it will detect differences in magnitude of a particular risk
factor (say, crowding), or risk factors that would be totally specific for COVID-19. This situation is
similar to the situation of another TND on urinary tract infection with antibiotic resistant bacteria
(Extended Spectrum Beta Lactamase producing bacteria) in contrast to sensitive bacteria, with
added population controls to both groups.[5] In that study, recent hospitalizations proved to be a
risk factor that was specific for acquiring infections with resistant bacteria; other findings could only
be interpreted by combining the TND with the population controls (e.g., the effect of maleness
which was a strong positive risk factor in the TND analysis, but the inverse was true in the
comparison with the population).
The basic question is whether the OR generated by a TND, for a factor that is a risk factor for the
disease of interest and not for the control diseases, can in principle be the same as the OR that
would have been generated by a population-based case-control design. This question has either
been answered with strong doubts by some[6] because the TND does not have a well-defined
underlying source population; others have answered it positively, some with a few qualifications;[79] some with more qualifications.[10] In essence, we agree with the affirmative answer to that
question because the TND permits a positive answer to one ‘sentinel question’ about the validity of
a control group: would this person, who does not have the disease, have presented him/herself for
testing in that same facility if s/he would have had the disease under study.[1] The answer for a TND

17
is obviously positive. As a minimum, the results of the TND are valid for the population of ‘the
tested’.
An additional subtlety is that in a sense, one might even state that in exceptional circumstances
where the inclination to be tested is highly linked to characteristics of the tested person, or to
suspicions or habits of doctors who serve a particular segment of the population, the standard casecontrol study with ‘test-positive cases’ and random general population controls could produce
wrong answers, since the type of persons going for testing at particular medical facilities might be
self-selected in a way that the random sample of the underlying population is not. [If they were
billionaires with doctors catering for that category of persons, there would be habits that would not
differ from other billionaires but might differ quite a lot from the general population]. The TND
remedies that situation by its design by choosing controls with the same selection pressures, and will
in such circumstances produce a valid answer for the tested.
The next question is whether the OR for the TND (= those who go for testing) is applicable to the
general population from which it is drawn, or for other populations, again for risk factors that are
not known risk factors for the control diseases. It is possible that the TND may deliver unbiased odds
ratios for the source population of the ‘tested’ (i.e. everyone who would have been tested if they
had developed symptoms), but these findings may not be completely ‘transportable’ to the wider
general population or other populations – for example, the effect might be higher among the tested
than among the general population. However, there would only be lack of generalizability if there
were strong effect modification, and the distribution of effect modifiers was markedly different in
other populations.[11]
For example, is it possible that a genetic a risk factor for Covid-19 is found in a TND study, but not in
the wider population? This seems unlikely. More importantly, these issues of generalizability to
other populations is an issue in many case-control studies, and is not unique to the TND. For
example, one might ask whether the original studies on smoking and lung cancer in (white AngloSaxon) male British doctors in the 1960s would be equally applicable to lawyers, actors, sewage
cleaners, or to woman and non-white non-Anglo-Saxon persons in general. Issues of generalization
apply to all case-control study findings, not just the TND.

18
APPENDIX B. Sensitivity analysis: quantification of misclassification bias in TND due to false testnegatives and false test-positives
If one assumes particular values of Sn, Sp in a particular study, then one can estimate the bias that is
introduced by misclassification of the disease. This can be used to do a sensitivity analysis where we
assume a range of possible values of Sn, and Sp. In theory, one can then do an adjustment. However,
given the uncertainties involved, such corrections are usually conducted as additions to the main
analysis (which would report the unadjusted associations as the main results but also mention the
sensitivity analysis findings), rather than substitutes for it.
This Appendix will explain first the situation of disease misclassification in a TND study that is
intended to contrast COVID-19 patients vs. patients with other respiratory disorders (mostly other
viral infections); second it will explain how different proportions of COVID-19 vs. other respiratory
disorders will influence the role of sensitivity and specificity; and thirdly, that it is possible to
calculate back from an observed 2x2 table to the ‘true’ table, given assumptions on sensitivity and
specificity.
One may start from the assumption that the specificity of the RT-PCR is very high, except for
mishandling of specimens, mishandling of test information (mixing up of persons), or batch
contamination. In contrast, the sensitivity may depend on several factors such as the severity and
duration of the disease, the way the sample was obtained, as well as the performance of the test
itself (See paper).
To see what might happen in the TND situation, a simple numerical example is useful. All persons
with COVID-19 with a number of characteristics (a certain degree of symptoms, and a certain degree
of worry, personality, access to health care etc.), will have presented themselves to a particular test
facility. If only 70% of them will test positive (sensitivity is 70%), the remaining 30% will be falsenegatives, but as they have all presented themselves, they will be classified as test-negatives along
with the group of true test-negatives, i.e. persons with other respiratory diseases. If we assume that
the number of false-positives is negligible, and suppose that at a particular test-site there are 70
test-positives and 150 test negatives, then the true number of COVID-19 patients will be 70/0.7 =
100. This means that 30 of the 150 test-negatives are actually false-negatives, which is 20%. There
will thus be 100 COVID-19 patients out of 220 tested. Thus, all ORs on the observed numbers will be
biased towards the null. In principle, we can recalculate the true OR without test misclassification by
a standard procedure that surmises that the false-negatives amongst the test-negatives should have
the same exposure frequencies as the test-positives (i.e. misclassification is non-differential).1
In this example, we have not yet taken into account that a (probably small) number of the testpositives are actually false-positives, which in this numerical example is negligible, but that is not

1

Suppose that 42 of test-positives were men (60%), and only 50% of test negatives were men, this yields an OR for
maleness of 1.5. The real percentage of males amongst the true test-negatives can be calculated as ‘X’ in the equation:
0.50 = (0.8 x X) + (0.2 x 0.60), which gives an X of 0.475. Then the true odds ratio becomes: (0.60 x 0.525)/(0.475 x 0.40) =
1.66 (rounded off).

19
always the case, as this depends on the proportion of true COVID-19 patients among the persons
tested.
To demonstrates what happens with mutual misclassification, in different scenarios of prevalence of
COVID-19 relative to prevalence of other respiratory disorders amongst the persons tested, we can
make Table 1, following a reasoning similar to that by Flegal et al.[12] From Table 1 it becomes
apparent that if the prevalence of current COVID-19 infection is high relative to the prevalence of
other respiratory viral diseases amongst the tested (say, in summer months at the peak of an
epidemic in a population without immunity), the main driver of the misclassification is the sensitivity
of the test: a large proportion of test-negatives might actually be false negatives. Inversely, in the
situation of an almost disappearing epidemic in winter months (say, when a vaccine would be
available and it would be winter), the number of test-positives that would actually be false-positives
will become quite large, i.e., the specificity becomes more important. In each of these extreme
situations, there is misclassification, but it is less severe in the latter instances (sporadic COVID-19).
It is possible to make approximate assumptions about the ratio of the estimated OR to the true OR,
based on tables like this, with appropriate estimates of sensitivity and specificity and relative
prevalences of non-Covid-19 respiratory diseases amongst the tested.
TABLE 1: Variation of observed OR for different True COVID-19 percentages amongst the tested
with the same sensitivity, specificity, and the same exposure frequency in true test-negatives
(assumed to be 50%), and same true underlying OR of 2.0.

Fraction
TRUE
COVID-19

SENS

SPEC

0,97
0,90
0,50
0,10
0,03

0,70
0,70
0,70
0,70
0,70

0,99
0,99
0,99
0,99
0,99

TRUE Odds OBSERVED
Ratio
Odds
(rounded) Ratio
(rounded)
2,00
1,07
2,00
1,21
2,00
1,69
2,00
1,80
2,00
1,58

Finally, there is the possibility to calculate back from an observed 2x2 table to the “true” 2x2 table,
given assumptions on sensitivity and specificity. See Chapter 6 on “Outcome misclassification in Lash
et al.[13] This “correction”, is based on a single observed 2x2 table, when there has been confounder
adjustment, the adjusted odds ratio will differ from the crude odds ratio, and therefore one cannot
use the crude 2x2 table for the “correction” – more complex methods are available if one wishes to
also correct for confounders while “correcting” for misclassification.[14]

20
APPENDIX C: Reason for not omitting controls that are asymptomatic carriers of SARS-CoV-2
This reasons for not omitting controls that are asymptomatic carriers of SARS-CoV-2 can be
illustrated by considering a hypothetical study. Suppose we could identify the population (a
subgroup of the general population) which would come for testing if they had symptoms. Ideally,
one would then test all of this population and we would estimate the risk of infection in this
population, and in various subgroups. In the population (P) there might be a certain number of
people (T) who tested positive. Note that the population denominator (P) includes both people who
currently have symptomatic infections and people who don’t – it is just the total population ‘at risk’.
The risk of having a symptomatic infection is then T/P. If we compare two subgroups who are
exposed or not-exposed to a particular factor, their risks might be T1/P1 and T0/P0 respectively, and
the risk ratio (the ratio of these two proportions) would indicate the relative risk of symptomatic
Covid-19 infection in the exposed and non-exposed (e.g. if the RR was 2.0 then the exposed would
be twice as likely as the non-exposed to have symptomatic Covid-19 infection).
A case-control study involves studying all of the ’cases’ (i.e. T) and a sample of the population which
generated them (P). Thus, provided that the controls are a representative sample of the source
population P (i.e. everyone who would have come for testing if they had symptoms – which is a
reasonable assumption to make since they came with someone who was being tested), then the
odds ratio for Covid-19 infection in the case-control study will estimate the risk ratio in the
population (P) which generated the cases (T). Of course, a small number of the controls may have
asymptomatic Covid-19 infection, and would have tested positive if they had been tested. But this is
not a problem – they would have been part of the denominator (P) if a full population survey had
been conducted, and they are therefore eligible to be selected as controls. This is analogous to the
case-cohort (case-base) design which is a commonly used design for case-control studies .[15, 16]

21
APPENDIX D. Differentiation of risk factors between TND and added case-control studies by
triangulation
This is a worked out example from a paper about urinary tract infections with resistant vs. sensitive
bacteria.[5] In this example, the TND analysis is a contrast between patients with infections with
resistant bacteria (= test-positives) vs. infections with sensitive bacteria (= test-negatives). For each
group, the test-positives and the test-negatives, there is a comparison with the general population.
The TND analysis as well as the comparison between the test-positives and the population is
demonstrated on partial data from the original paper which are given below as Appendix D Table 1.
The other comparison, between test-negatives and the general population was in the Appendix of
the original paper, and is also partially given below at the right hand side of Appendix D Table 2.
Male sex is a strong risk factor for infections with antibiotic resistant bacteria in the TND analysis,
but completely the reverse happens in the comparison with the general population. This makes
sense: in the general population women have much more urinary tract infections than men, but men
when they have urinary tract infections are generally older patients (for example, patients with
prostatic disease who go in- and out of hospitals and acquire resistant bacteria in hospitals). In the
data on the other comparison, between test-negatives and the general population, the OR for being
a woman (the reverse of the OR for begin a man) is even more extreme, which is logical because the
test-positives are removed from that comparison. If one multiplies the OR for sex of the TND with
the population comparison of the test-negatives, one arrives in the direction of the population
comparison with the test-positives.

Appendix D Table 1: Partial table of risk factors for urinary tract infection (UTI) caused by extendedspectrum beta-lactamase-producing (ESBL) E. coli compared with non-ESBL E. coli UTI controls (a
test-negative design comparison) and population controls (case-control comparison of test-positives
to general population)

Characteristic

OR for ESBL E. coli UTI versus non-ESBL E.
coli UTI (95% CI)
Adjusted for age,
Multivariate
sex, and
adjusted
comorbidity

OR for ESBL E. coli UTI vs. population
controls (95% CI)
Adjusted for age,
Multivariate
sex, and
adjusted*
comorbidity

Demographic characteristics
10 years increase in age

0.90 (0.85 - 0.96)

0.92 (0.86 - 0.99)

1.25 (1.16 - 1.35)

1.16 (1.06 - 1.27)

Male sex
1.55 (1.20 - 2.02)
1.62 (1.22 - 2.14)
Citizenship: Northern Europe vs.
0.37 (0.23 - 0.60)
0.40 (0.24 - 0.66)
other countries
Marital status
Divorced or widowed vs.
1.04 (0.79 - 1.37)
-married
Never married vs. married
0.82 (0.57 - 1.19)
-Prior urinary tract infection
Within 31-180 days before
1.27 (1.01 - 1.61)
-index date
Within 181-365 days before
1.19 (0.94 - 1.50)
-index date
* Adjusted for more factors than shown here; see original publication.[5]

0.29 (0.23 - 0.38)

0.48 (0.34 - 0.67)

0.54 (0.33 - 0.87)

0.39 (0.22 - 0.68)

1.18 (0.87 - 1.59)

--

1.36 (0.95 - 1.96)

--

19.1 (14.3 - 25.4)

--

10.6 (7.98 - 14.0)

--

22

Appendix D Table 2. Partial table of risk factors for E. coli urinary tract infection (UTI) with and
without ESBL compared with population controls (two comparisons of test-positives and testnegatives with general population; first comparison same as in left hand side of Appendix D Table 1)
OR for ESBL E. coli UTI vs. population
controls (95% CI)
Adjusted for age,
Multivariate
sex, and
adjusted*
comorbidity

OR for Non-ESBL E. coli UTI vs.
population controls (95% CI)
Adjusted for age,
Multivariate
sex, and
adjusted*
comorbidity

10 years increase in age

1.25 (1.16 - 1.35)

1.16 (1.06 - 1.27)

1.34 (1.30 - 1.38)

1.24 (1.19 - 1.28)

Male sex
Citizenship: Northern Europe vs.
other countries
Marital status

0.29 (0.23 - 0.38)

0.48 (0.34 - 0.67)

0.19 (0.17 - 0.21)

0.23 (0.20 - 0.27)

0.54 (0.33 - 0.87)

0.39 (0.22 - 0.68)

1.45 (1.10 - 1.93)

1.21 (0.90 - 1.64)

Divorced or widowed vs. married

1.18 (0.87 - 1.59)

--

1.14 (0.98 - 1.32)

--

Never married vs. married

1.36 (0.95 - 1.96)

--

1.59 (1.35 - 1.87)

--

19.1 (14.3 - 25.4)

--

15.0 (12.3 - 18.2)

--

10.6 (7.98 - 14.0)

--

8.90 (7.37 - 10.7)

--

Characteristic
Demographic characteristics

Prior urinary tract infection
Within 31-180 days before index
date
Within 181-365 days before
index date

* Adjusted for more factors than shown here; see original publication.[5]

23

REFERENCES TO APPENDICES

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

Vandenbroucke, J.P. and N. Pearce, Test-Negative Designs: Differences and Commonalities
with Other Case-Control Studies with "Other Patient" Controls. Epidemiology, 2019. 30(6): p.
838-844.
Jick, H. and M.P. Vessey, Case-control studies in the evaluation of drug-induced illness. Am J
Epidemiol, 1978. 107(1): p. 1-7.
Smith, A.H., N.E. Pearce, and P.W. Callas, Cancer case-control studies with other cancers as
controls. Int J Epidemiol, 1988. 17(2): p. 298-306.
Doll, R. and A.B. Hill, Smoking and carcinoma of the lung; preliminary report. Br Med J, 1950.
2(4682): p. 739-48.
Sogaard, M., et al., Risk factors for extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia
coli urinary tract infection in the community in Denmark: a case-control study. Clin Microbiol
Infect, 2017. 23(12): p. 952-960.
Westreich, D. and M.G. Hudgens, Invited Commentary: Beware the Test-Negative Design. Am
J Epidemiol, 2016. 184(5): p. 354-6.
Sullivan, S.G., E.J. Tchetgen Tchetgen, and B.J. Cowling, Theoretical Basis of the TestNegative Study Design for Assessment of Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness. Am J Epidemiol,
2016. 184(5): p. 345-53.
Jackson, M.L. and J.C. Nelson, The test-negative design for estimating influenza vaccine
effectiveness. Vaccine, 2013. 31(17): p. 2165-8.
Jackson, M.L., et al., The impact of selection bias on vaccine effectiveness estimates from
test-negative studies. Vaccine, 2018. 36(5): p. 751-757.
Lewnard, J.A., et al., Measurement of Vaccine Direct Effects Under the Test-Negative Design.
Am J Epidemiol, 2018. 187(12): p. 2686-2697.
Pearl, J. and E. Bareinboim, Note on ''Generalizability of Study Results''. Epidemiology, 2019.
30(2): p. 186-188.
Flegal, K.M., C. Brownie, and J.D. Haas, The effects of exposure misclassification on estimates
of relative risk. Am J Epidemiol, 1986. 123(4): p. 736-51.
Lash, T.L., M.P. Fox, and A.K. Fink, Applying Quantitative Bias Analysis to Epidemiologic Data.
2009: Springer-Verlag New York.
Corbin, M., et al., A comparison of sensitivity-specificity imputation, direct imputation and
fully Bayesian analysis to adjust for exposure misclassification when validation data are
unavailable. Int J Epidemiol, 2017. 46(3): p. 1063-1072.
Pearce, N., What does the odds ratio estimate in a case-control study? Int J Epidemiol, 1993.
22(6): p. 1189-92.
Vandenbroucke, J.P. and N. Pearce, Case-control studies: basic concepts. Int J Epidemiol,
2012. 41(5): p. 1480-1489.

