ICT Intervention in the Containment of
the Pandemic Spread of COVID-19: An
Exploratory Study

1
1;
1
Akib Zaman , Muhammad Nazrul Islam , Tarannum Zaki , and
1
Mohammad Sajjad Hossain
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Military Institute of Science
and Technology, Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Correspondence*:
Muhammad Nazrul Islam
nazrul@cse.mist.ac.bd
ABSTRACT

The objective of this article is to explore the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
interventions and its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats for the containment of the pandemic
spread of novel Coronavirus. The research adopted a qualitative research approach, while the study data
were collected through online content review and Focus Group Discussion (FGD). Starting with a preliminary
set of about 1200 electronic resources or contents, 56 were selected for review study, applying an inclusion
and exclusion criteria. The review study revealed ICT interventions that include websites and dashboards,
mobile applications, robotics and drones, artificial intelligence (AI), data analytic, wearable and sensor
technology, social media and learning tools, and interactive voice response (IVR) as well as explored their
respective usages to combat the pandemic spread of COVID-19. Later, the FGD was replicated with 22
participants and explored the possible strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of
deploying such technologies to fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. This research not only explores the
exiting status of ICT interventions to fight with the COVID-19 pandemic but also provides a number of
implications for the government, practitioners, doctors, policymakers and researchers for the effective
utilization of the existing ICT interventions and for the future potential research and technological
development to the containment of the pandemic spread of COVID-19 and future pandemics.
COVID-19, Coronavirus, pandemic, epidemiological outbreak, information and communication
technology, digital intervention, ICT intervention, SWOT analysis.
Keywords:

1 INTRODUCTION

The newly discovered Coronavirus caused the COVID-19 or the Coronavirus disease bearing the symptoms
of fever, dry cough, tiredness, aches and pains, sore throat and shortness of breath (1). The disease was
first reported in December 2019 in Wuhan, China (2). Within the end of January, over 7,800 cases were
being reported from different countries including Asia, Europe, USA, Canada and many more outside China
when immediately World Health Organization (WHO) declared Coronavirus outbreak as global public health
emergency (3). As the cases began to grow rapidly and healthcare systems became unable to handle the
condition, in the following months with 118,000 cases in more than 110 countries over the world,

1

Sample et al.

Running Title

WHO declared COVID-19 as pandemic (4). As of 10 April’20, COVID-19 has spread in 210 countries
and territories affecting over one and half million people, and claiming more than 100 thousands deaths
(5). Figure 1 shows the percentage of total infected cases of COVID-19 around the world (6).

Figure 1. Percentage of infected cases around the world (6).

As clinical medicines or vaccines are under experimental processing to defend this disease, so such
pandemic can be minimized with proper social responses. To engineer such social behavior, various
initiatives have been taken by different health organizations to provide protective measures and awareness.
WHO and CDC (Centers for Diseases Control) have notified worldwide to take necessary preparation to be
safe from the exposure of this deadly disease such as practice of hygiene and social distancing, staying
home, using face-mask, hand-sanitizer and disinfectants, spreading awareness among people etc. (7, 8).

Since the whole world is fighting against the pandemic spread of COVID-19, the role of Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) to enhance public awareness and prevention, surveillance, diagnosis,
treatment and coordinate response for COVID-19 has become more significant. Thus, the ICT interventions
can be treated as one of the most effective, widely used and popular modes around the world to fight against
the pandemic spread of COVID-19. A number of ICT-based initiatives has been taken around the world; for
example, developing dashboard or web portal to provide the updated statistical report on Coronavirus, digital
interactive maps, awareness measures and emergency calling information or hot-line numbers (9, 10, 11).
WHO has gone into partnership with different social media platforms (e.g. Facebook, WhatsApp) to provide
authentic information as well as health alert messaging service (12, 13). China has introduced a number of
robot and drone technologies to support medical staff, thermal imaging and temperature detection software
applications, smart helmets to detect potential virus carriers. India, Singapore, Canada, USA and South
Korea have taken several ICT-based development program to fight against Corona pandemic (14). Few
developing countries like Bangladesh has also initiated ICT interventions in the containment of COVID-19
like developing awareness groups in social media, online system for testing Coronavirus, national Corona
information portal, and the likes (15, 16, 17).
However, ICT intervention for such widespread case needs definite analysis in order to explore several
open issues like how much capability ICT technology holds in developing and developed countries, what
opportunities lie on the usage of ICT technology in such vulnerable situation, what could be the possible
threats while depending on ICT technology to mitigate the unprecedented situation caused due to pandemic

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

2

Sample et al.

Running Title

spread of novel Coronavirus. Therefore, further investigation and analysis are required to explore such
issues raised due to the ICT interventions for the containment of the pandemic spread of COVID-19. Thus,
the objectives of this research are to investigate the ICT interventions and their roles to fight against the
pandemic spread of COVID-19, and to explore the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats (SWOT)
of ICT interventions in containment of the pandemic spread of novel Coronavirus. To attain these research
objectives, a qualitative research approach following the online content review and focus group discussion
were conducted to provide useful insights regarding this critical global concern.

The research is organized as follows. Firstly, the related works for this research is presented in Section
2. Next, the research methodology is described in Section 3. Then, Section 4 gives an overview on the ICT
interventions in COVID-19 pandemic. After that, the study results of FGD are discussed in Section 5. Finally,
the main outcomes, implications, limitations and the possibility for future research are discussed in Section
6.

2 RELATED WORK

Though numerous number of research has been conducted focusing to the ICT interventions, but these
works mainly focused to explore how the ICT interventions support in agriculture, education, women
empowerment and the like (18, 19). This section briefly introduces the earlier works that were conducted
focusing to the ICT interventions in the earlier pandemic and outbreak situations.

Galaz (20) in his work “Pandemic 2.0: Can Information Technology Help Save The Planet?” highlighted
how the information technology can contribute in pandemic situation. In this research, Galaz (20) discussed
how the information technology can facilitate to provide early warning about the epidemic, create the
networks for global health governance, provide communication support in a low cost, establish network
among the social organization, and the likes during pandemic. Similarly, Pletzer (21) explored the ICT
services developed for reducing the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS) in context of South Africa. The study included the conventional and modern ICT
applications like television, video, multimedia, web portals, mobile phones, database systems, telemedicine
and tele-centers. The study highlighted the effectiveness of ICTs; and found that health and HIV prevention
projects should give much focus and priorities on ICT based application despite having the digital divide in
the developing countries. In another work, Amicizia et al. (22) explored the significance of ICTs (mainly the
Web 2.0 and mobile applications) for immunization promotion among adolescents in the developing
countries, while Jeu (23) explored the role of ICT in prevention, detection and surveillance in Novel Zoonotic
Disease Outbreaks; and also investigated the relationship between ICT for Development (ICT4D) and
global, national, and local prevention of zoonotic diseases with pandemic potential. However, this study
highlights few scopes for future technological development that may be used for the work of pandemic
prevention and protection of human health.
Some other works discuss the possible use of electronic health and mobile health technologies in
mitigating the impact of pandemic outbreak (24, 25). For example, Araz et al. (26) proposed a new table-top
exercise tool that works through interactive simulation and visualization technique to enhance the readiness
for pandemic influenza and to identify the communication gaps between responsible authorities to work
during the pandemic situation.

The literature review provide a few important concern. First, only a few articles were found that explicitly
focused to the ICT interventions in the earlier pandemic and outbreak situations. Second, the earlier work
showed that ICT interventions has a strong significance in the containment of the earlier pandemics. Third,
none of the studies found that focused to the ICT interventions in the containment of COVID-19 pandemic;

3

Sample et al.

Running Title

similarly, no study was found that explore the possible strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats for the better deployment and future development to control, manage and mitigate the COVID19 pandemic and future pandemics/outbreaks. Therefore, this research aimed to focus on the later
concern to explore the the ICT interventions and its SWOT in the containment of the pandemic spread
of COVID-19 and future pandemics.

3 RESEARCH METHOD

From a methodological perspective, this research follows online content review (27) and focus group
discussion (FGD) (28) method. Since,there are no academic literature available in the focused area and the
topic is quite new and emerging, online content review approach was followed here to attain the existing ICT
intervention for the containment of the pandemic spread of novel Coronavirus. The online content were
analyzed through systematic coding and interpretation. Later, the outcomes of the review study were
analyzed through FGD to attain the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of ICT intervention in
the pandemic spread of COVID-19. In other words, an analytical assessment through FGD was performed
to reveal the SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) (29) of the ICT interventions during
the pandemic spread of COVID-19.

3.1 Online content review

The objective of online content review is to explore the existing ICT interventions around the world to fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic. The Yahoo search engine and the Google search engine were used to find
the related online content. The search strings used to find the available online content were “information
technology and COVID-19”, “ICT intervention and Coronavirus”, “ICT intervention and COVID-19”,
“information and communication technology and digital services and Coronavirus”, “information and
communication technology and digital services and COVID-19”, “electronic health services and mobile
applications and Coronavirus”, “electronic health services and mobile applications and COVID-19”, “artificial
intelligence and COVID-19 and Coronavirus“, “big data and data science and Coronavirus and COVID-19”,
“robotic and wearable technology and COVID-19”, and “robotic and wearable technology and Coronavirus”.
The search results produced more than 1200 sites of content. The exclusion criteria include: (a) online
content that discussed the same topic, especially the news articles that focus on the same digital/ICT
interventions but published in multiple newspapers; (b) online contents that are not focused to our research
objectives; and (c) the contents written other than English and Bengali. After applying this inclusionexclusion process, we finally selected 56 online resources that include electronic news articles, online press
releases, websites/web contents of different organizations, and the article written as a blog.
The selected articles were reviewed systematically to extract data primarily related to the technology or
digital solution used in pandemic spread of COVID-19; and the purpose of using such digital technologies in
COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, the extracted data were synthesized and analyzed to explore the digital
interventions in the containment of pandemic spread of COVID-19.

3.2 Focus group discussion

The objective of focus group discussion study was to understand the possible strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats of ICT interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the present vulnerable
situation, two sessions of FGD were conducted online using Zoom platform. A total of 22 (8 female and 14
male) test-subjects participated in the FGD. Among them, 16 participants were Computer Science graduate,
3 participants were Business graduate and the remaining 3 participants were Medical doctors. 18
participants from Bangladesh, 2 from USA and 2 from Canada joined in the discussion sessions. The
participants average age was 27 4. All the participants are quite familiar with ICT and the current

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

4

Sample et al.

Running Title

vulnerable situation due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Each session lasted for around 90 -100 minutes. The
participants were invited by email, Facebook messenger or telephone to participate and to fix a suitable
time. Participants’ written (by email) consent to ensure anonymity and confidentiality were also taken
informally through email or Facebook messenger. The R & D wing of authors’ institute provided the ethics
approval. Also, to record the audio video of the FGD sessions, permission were taken from each participant.
For each FGD session, one of the researcher acted as the moderator and other two researchers combinedly
performed the role of facilitator and moderator. At the beginning, the moderator briefly presented the
purpose of this study and ensured participants that the study data will be handled anonymously and their
identity or photo will not be published or disclosed in any medium. Next, the moderator briefly highlighted
the existing ICT interventions and the purpose of using such technologies around the world (i.e. the
outcomes of the online content review). After that, the moderator opened up the floor for sharing and
discussion concerning the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats (SWOT) of ICT interventions in
the containment of the pandemic spread of novel Coronavirus. The open discussion mainly focused to
explore the possible strengths to deploy such technologies, identify the possible weaknesses some
countries might face, open up the future opportunities for the government, practitioners or researchers for
taking necessary initiatives to take a better preparation to fight the future pandemics, and understand the
existing threats that are required to address for achieving maximum benefits from ICT interventions in
COVID-19 pandemic. The open discussion was mainly managed by the facilitator like if any participant
wanted to talk, he/she raised hand (Zoom allow hand raise service), then all others mic would be muted
unless he/she finished talking and another participant looked for the option. A screenshot of the FGD
session conducted through Zoom is presented in figure 2.

Figure 2. Screenshot of online focus group discussion session.

4 ICT INTERVENTIONS IN COVID-19 PANDEMIC

The review study explored the existing digital or ICT-based technologies that are being used for containment
of pandemic spread of COVID-19 around the globe. Figure 3 presents the key ICT-based technologies along
with three examples (for each technology). The results showed that websites and dashboards, mobile
applications, robotics and drones, artificial intelligence (AI) or machine learning (ML), data analytic, wearable
or sensor technology, social media and learning tools and interactive voice response (IVR) are

5

Sample et al.

Running Title

Figure 3. ICT Interventions in containment of COVID-19 pandemic.

primarily used around the world as ICT intervention to combat the pandemic spread of COVID-19 and
to provide health services during this vulnerable period.

a) Websites and Dashboards - Most countries have created websites, dashboards, and national
portals to fight within a local sphere mainly to provide updated Corona statistics, preventive and
controlling information, government and medical declarations, awareness and mental health related
information, emergency contact information, hospital map, and facilitate for self-assessment and
symptom reporting for the risk of COVID-19. For example, WHO collaborated with WhatsApp (1) and
CDC collaborated with Apple Symptom Checker (30) are striving to raise awareness and provide
updated statistics of COVID-19. A dashboard developed and maintained by John Hopkins University
(31) has used data visualization technique to provide latest scenario of the pandemic.
b) Mobile Application - A number of mobile applications are being developed almost in every
Corona affected country around the world. The main purpose of using mobile applications includes
providing treatment information or services, remote monitoring and assistance to Corona infected
patients, provide updated statistics on COVID-19, making people aware about Coronavirus, providing
communication service including live video chatting and emergency calls, assisting to improve selfconfidence and mental health during the pandemic situation, and providing preventative and
controlling information. For example, ADiLife COVID-19 (32), HealthLynked COVID-19 Tracker (33),
COVID Live Tracker - Corona Virus Pocket Guide (34) are providing remote assistance, health
awareness and updated statistics about the spread of COVID-19. Again, China based apps like
“Close contact” (35) and “Ali pay Health Code” (35) are using data analytic to provide color codes to
every citizen which is actively helping to maintain the social distance and monitor public health.
c) Robots and Drones - Several kind of robots and drones like disinfecting robot, agricultural robot,
virtual human, micro-multicopter and industry robot are being used in several countries for multiple

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

6

Sample et al.

Running Title

purposes that include transporting medical supplies, disinfection process (35), detection of symptoms
(35), patient monitoring (36, 14) and in few cases providing physical medical support (35).
d) Artificial Intelligence - Artificial Intelligence (AI) is playing numerous roles to limit the human
interaction and involvement to fight against the COVID-19 pandemic (37). Services like disease
surveillance, early warnings and alerts, virtual healthcare assistance, diagnosis and prognosis, information
verification over social media, controlling social distancing and measuring the lock-down, treatment and
cures, processing and analyzing COVID-19 test samples, detecting and tracking individuals even when a
person is wearing a face-mask and the likes are received from the AI-based technologies (38, 39). For
example, AI based system Flu-sense (US) (40) is using machine learning and edge computing to predict
the timing of the disease that to be launched within a small scale in university clinics. Another similar
project was launched in Austria as Athena-Security (41) using thermal imaging and AI. On a similar note,
Huawei has created AI based swift diagnosis tool (42) for COVID-19 patients and suspected cases.
e) Data Analytics- Big data, data analytic, predictive analytic or data science is used to provide data
dashboard as well as to track, predict, control, respond to, and combat the pandemic spread of COVID-19
(39, 43). For example, the data analytic platform like Blue-dot (44) is used to predict the upcoming
epidemic using AI and data analysis. On a similar note Next-strain (45) is an open dataset where the
genome sequencing of novel corona virus was uploaded for data analysis purposes. Digital Mapping
(46) was also created in few countries using data mining. Like in Bangladesh, ICT Division and ROBI
Axiata Ltd has developed a data analytic based digital solutions that allows to perform various innovative
data visualization exercises to generate insights and as such, the Government can assess probability of
exposure in a given area to determine the next course of action (47).
f) Wearable Technology - Wearable computing or sensor technology like Smart Helmet (China)
(35) and portable Lab-on-chip detection kit (Singapore) (14) are being used to detect COVID-19 cases in
a mass crowd using thermal imaging, monitor and ensure quarantine of suspected patients, and
measure/collect patient’s health data remotely (48, 49). In Spain, a scientist team named CONVAT (the
Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology) has built photonics (50) system with ultra-sensitive
laser sensor that detects Coronavirus at the earliest point of infection from a saliva or nasal swab in
minutes.
g) Social Media and Learning Tools - Social Media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
Telegram are playing a very effective role to raise awareness and spread preventive measures. Moreover,
learning tools like simulation exercises (51) and management presentation (52) are being provided
globally to raise resistance against the pandemic. Furthermore, online courses like Open-Who (53) has
been introduced to provide quality knowledge all over the world.
h) Interactive Voice Responses - A wide use of Interactive Voice Responses (IVR) is introduced
globally and locally to assist health system. Google launched Rapid Response virtual agent (54) and
Xaqt’s Coronavirus IVR (US) (55) as a service are conversational IVR that gives government agencies and
NGOs the ability to provide relevant information to citizens in a responsive and proactive manner. Local
use of IVR like Aaroyga Seba (56) in India has been also observed effective for healthcare assistance,
reporting and data collection on COVID-19.

5 SWOT ANALYSIS

The outcomes of the focus group discussion were synthesized and analyzed to find out the strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of the ICT interventions in the containment of the pandemic spread
of novel Coronavirus. Figure 4 presents the revealed strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.

7

Sample et al.

Running Title

Figure 4. The SWOT of the ICT interventions in COVID-19 pandemic

5.1 Strengths

A total of six strengths were identified through the focus group discussion. Associations among the
identified strengths and ICT interventions are shown in Figure 5. The Treatment Support Acceleration
strength was cited by all the participants of FGD that includes services of treatment information circulation,
remote assistance, self-assessment for COVID-19 and uncovering symptoms from a mass people through
mobile applications, robotics, thermal imaging with AI, websites and social media. Another mostly cited (19
out of 22 participants) strength was Awareness & Training. Participants expressed that technologies like
health websites and dashboards, online learning portals, and social media provide awareness and training
on COVID-19 pandemic through data visualization of updated statistics, training of preventing measures,
educating mass people about Corona, and surveillance and monitoring public health. One participant stated
as “...To my understanding, it is social media that plays first role for making people aware about the
pandemic of Coronavirus...”. Subsequently, Health Hazard Prediction is cited by more than 80% participants
as one of the important strengths of ICT intervention that includes prediction of imminent epidemic with a
view to contain outbreak, and digital mapping of confirmed and suspected cases using AI and data analytic.
Besides, the virtual services like providing meticulous healthcare, significant assistance in transportation of
medical and humanitarian supplies, and running disinfection process with the help of modern robotic
technology and drones; that have been expressed by the 16 participants (out of 22) and categorized into the
strength of Physical Sustenance. Furthermore, more than one third of the participants opined that
Development of Drugs and Vaccines of the virus can be achieved using positive detection of confirmed and
suspected cases with the help of edge computing and AI, and Genome sequencing and epidemiological
analysis using collaborative open source data collected from all over the world. Lastly, around 50%
participants (10 out of 22 participants) stated about the Economic Crises Control that could

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

8

Sample et al.

Running Title

Figure 5. The strengths associated with the ICT interventions

be achieved using prediction of economic crisis, visualizing economic effect and recommend recovery
methodologies with data analytic tool and websites. In this vein, one participant opined that “...without taking
support of ICT, bringing back the economical sustainability after the pandemic period would not be possible
at all...”.

Frontiers

9

Sample et al.

Running Title

5.2 Weakness

Despite having various strengths, the analysis the FGD data revealed six weaknesses of ICT interventions
as presented in Figure 6.
Firstly, Lack of Reliability of data has been cited by all the participants of FGD as a prime weaknesses that
can be observed mostly in the ICT domains like websites & dashboards and social media. All of the
participants expressed concern that attaining data reliability is an obligation to stop infodemic during the
COVID-19 pandemic. One participant stated that “...mostly in social media there are various groups who are
propagating unreliable information leading into confusion and thus cater the issue of reliability...”. Besides,
Authenticity of Data was also cited by all the participants of FGD as a weakness in social media, IVRs and
websites. Misleading and unnecessary data are creating an authenticity vacancy which is a major loophole
in prevailing services. Afterwards, Cost Inefficiency is cited one of the vital weaknesses of ICT intervention
by more than 75% participants where they have emphasized ignorance of considering the affordability issue
of least development or developing countries due to liability of preciseness and quick manufacturing while
developing robots, data analytic tools and wearable or sensor technology. Furthermore, 15 participants (out
of 22) have stated Digital Divide as a weakness present in most of the domains of ICT. On this note, one of
the participants stated that “...total abolition of digital illiteracy is near to impossible. Thus, people who are
lacking enough digital knowledge cannot be expected to get the benefit of whatever lucrative digital systems
we create...”. Likewise, another participant added with the last statement that “...However, it is not only digital
illiteracy, rather some of the places are deprived for the internet connectivity and limited resources specially
in underdeveloped and least-developed countries...”. Thus, including him, 13 participants (out of 22)
acknowledged that along with digital illiteracy Digital Divide is another weakness of the prevailing ICT
services. Lastly, around 55% participants (12 out of 22 participants) specified that in parallel with lack of
authentication Breach of Security is another major weakness observed in mobile application and artificial
intelligence.

Figure 6. The weaknesses associated with the ICT interventions

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

10

Sample et al.

Running Title

5.3 Opportunities

Six viable opportunities to strengthen ICT intervention was found from focus group discussion.
Associations among the revealed opportunities and ICT interventions are shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Association of discovered opportunities and ICT domains

All of the participants allegedly cited that Precise Prediction System of Imminent Epidemic through
considerable enhancement of domains like artificial intelligence and data analytic can be the prime
opportunity in days to come. Participants emphasized the importance of identifying underlined reasons of
bio-hazard/epidemic with effective identification of harmful sectors which may lead into pandemic like
COVID-19. One of the participant stated an interesting urge that, “...what if there was not any wet wild
farming in [X country] as Global surveillance system ’Y’(fictional) has analyzed that it may create pandemic
basing on info like pattern of animals cultured, maintenance procedure, types of secretion from animals
etc...”. In addition, More than 90% participants (20 out of 22) cited Medical Robotic Process Automation
(RPA) as an opportunity to look forward. Participants discussed about how RPA can emulate human
execution of repetitive processes, saving time and costs and more importantly enabling healthcare
professionals to treat patients and can play a very vital role in containment of pandemic like COVID-19 and
others. Moreover, 80% of the participants of FGD were in the same platform articulating that most of the
COVID-19 diagnosis techniques existing now is very sluggish in nature which is prolonging the phase of
pandemic. Thus, Swift Diagnosis Technology has been stated as another vital opportunity to be explored in
similar situation like this in future. Subsequently, Educating Patients in Digital Health Care is crucial for the
individual those are not willing and skillful to use the ICT-based health services. Educating peoples about the
importance of digital health services, and providing the required level of knowledge and social
encouragement about use of digital health services was stated by 15 (out of 22) participants.

11

Sample et al.

Running Title

Interestingly, similar number of participants 15 (out of 22) expressed Efficient, Secured & Accessible Health
Information System (HIS) as an opportunity. One of the participants stand as “...Personally, I think that even
in the time of epidemic it is important to maintain the secured access of personal health record (PHR) so that
the social system does not collapse after the recovery from the epidemic...”. Though participants shared a
mixed feelings about the equality of overall desirability of new innovations in health sector; they agreed that
medical professionals compared to patient advocates and administrative personnel will have a lower
desirability score. This suggests a more precautious attitude of this specific interest group regarding
technological innovations. Lastly, Almost 60% of the participants (13 out of 22) stated Epidemiological
Research Framework as an opportunity claiming that biggest lesson out of this COVID-19 pandemic is
enough preparedness was not there for tackling the microbe; thus a strong collaborative research hub is the
demand of the time to fight with COVID-19 and future pandemics. On this point, one of the participants
stated that, “...Genetic analysis of Human specimen can be helpful to identify which type of virus/microbe
tends to attack and thus help to create preventive vaccines against them. However, this can be possible with
only a strong collaborative research framework...”.

5.4 Threats

Though with the scope numerous appealing opportunities of ICT interventions there are some probable
threats which has been pigeonholed into six broad variety through focus group discussion. All the
participants cited that Trepidation of Privacy as a major threat. Participants discussed that while flow of
personal health information is very important to control the outbreak, perceived threat of continuous online
surveillance and proliferation of this data can be disastrous. Similarly, all participants mentioned High
Infrastructure & Development Cost with the opinion that in some cases prevailing health facilities are quite
costly which makes it extremely difficult for the normal mass to afford the system. Thus, considering the
cost-benefit ratio of the system, user may stop using them which will lead into collapse of ICT based health
systems. One of the participants stated that “...it may be difficult for the least-developed and underdeveloped countries to afford costly technology of prevention/cure of COVID-19. Thus, it is indeed a
noteworthy threat, and thus a cost effective with lower cost-benefit ratio system is always desired...”.
Likewise, participants discussed that with inconsistent variation in the data and huge influx of data are
creating confusion; and making it very difficult for general people to crosscheck information and attain
success state from the information. Thus, more than 85%, 19 (Out of 22) participants agreed that Creation of
Infodemic is a threat for an effective interventions of the services. Furthermore, almost 75%, 16 out of 22
participants claimed that interference from political and religious organization to save their individual benefit
is an obstruction towards free and rapid growth of ICT which has been termed as a threat named Vicious
Social Obtrusion. On this vein, one of the participants stated that, “...capturing authentic data may be
hazardous due to non-cooperative behavior of such organizations. It makes the control procedure of the
pandemic slower and clumsy...”. Interestingly, almost 60% of the participants (13 out of 22) has brought out
the effect of digital divide and illiteracy, and mentioned Discrimination among Patients as a threat towards an
effective interventions of ICTs. Lastly, a little less than 50% (10 out of 22) participants have talked and
agreed on a threat called Exacerbation of Paranoia. One of the participants came up with a solid statement
that “...While giving color codes and various segregation process, it creates a psychological impact on
patients mind while being alone and imagining things before it is even happened like extreme consequences
of the virus infection i.e. a hypnotic paranoia state. This is true and it happens to everybody. Perks of having
too much calculation and prediction around...”.

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

12

Sample et al.

Running Title

6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

This research provides an in-depth views of ICT interventions by providing (a) the type of ICT solutions that
are deployed during the COVID-19 pandemic, (b) the way ICTs are being used to provide the health
services, (c) the types of services or supports that are received from digital innovations, (d) explore the
strengths, weakness, threats and opportunities of ICT interventions to combat with COVID-19 pandemic and
to mitigate future pandemics. The outcomes of this research will greatly contribute to the practitioners,
government, policy makers, doctors and individuals to aware about the ICT tools and their roles during the
pandemic situations. The government of developing or infected countries may take necessary initiative to
develop the affordable useful ICT-based system to provide health service and aware people to reduce the
pandemic spread of COVID-19.
The outcome of this research provides implications for the potential future researches. First, investigate
the critical success factors of ICT interventions during the pandemic situation in context of developing and
developed countries. Second, explore the impact of ICTs on reducing and combating the COVID-19
pandemic. Third, mitigate the weaknesses and threats of ICT interventions. Finally, further research and
development may focus to explore and achieve the opportunities (revealed through the SWOT analysis) to
ensure the optimum benefits ICT interventions during the future pandemics.
This research has a few limitations as well. First, some related contents may be omitted due to use the
specific keywords to search related content in the online review study. Second, only FGD was conducted
with inadequate (22 participants) number of participants and the FGD sessions were conducted online due
to the vulnerable situation. Further studies could be conducted through other methods like survey, interviews
and the likes; similarly, data could be collected from a wider group of participants. Finally, it might be
possible that the materials which have been used for the research may have some biases in their reporting.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no academic research or studies is conducted focusing to the ICT
interventions in the COVID-19 pandemic; thus, the outcome of this research would contribute as an eye
opener to the researcher, practitioners and government to take necessary further initiatives to deploy and
develop such ICT or digital interventions to combat with the pandemic spread of novel Coronavirus.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

MNI contributed conception and design of the study; AZ reviewed the related contents and extracted the
required data set; MSH and TZ organized the focus group discussion; and MNI and AZ performed the data
analysis. All authors contributed to write the first draft of the sections of the manuscript, while MNI rewrote
the entire draft article to prepare it for publication. All authors contributed to manuscript revision, read and
approved the submitted version.

FUNDING

Not Applicable
Frontiers

13

Sample et al.

Running Title

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the participants of Focus Group Discussion whose (online) participation
made the study possible despite the vulnerable situation due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Their efforts are
gratefully acknowledged.

SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Not Applicable

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Not Applicable

REFERENCES
1 .World Health Organization. Coronavirus (2020). https://www.who.int/healthtopics/coronavirus#tab¯tab 1 [Accessed
April 10, 2020].
2 .Wall Street Journal. How coronavirus became a global pandemic [vedio file] (2020).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQHX-SjgQvQ [Accessed April 2, 2020].
3 .Joseph A. STAT. WHO declares Coronavirus outbreak a global health emergency (2020).
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/who-declares-coronavirus-outbreak-a-global-healthemergency/ [Accessed
April 2, 2020].
4 .Ducharme J. Time. World Health Organization declares COVID-19 a ’Pandemic.’ Here’s what that means (2020).
https://time.com/5791661/who-coronavirus-pandemic-declaration/ [Accessed April 2, 2020].
5 .Worldometer. Coronavirus update (live) (2020). https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/#countries [Accessed April
10, 2020].
6 .Worldometer. Coronavirus worldwide graphs - countries cases distribution (2020).
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/worldwide-graphs/#case-distribution [Accessed April 10, 2020].
7 .World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public (2020).
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public [Accessed April 2, 2020].
8 .Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. How to protect yourself & others (2020).
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-gettingsick/prevention.htmlCDC AA
refValhttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019- ¯ ncov%2Fprepare%2Fprevention.html [Accessed April 2,
2020].
9 .Vera A. CNN. Here’s a complete list of every state health department’s Coronavirus website (2020).
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/03/16/health/coronavirus-us-state-websites-trnd/index.html [Accessed April 2, 2020].
10 .Australian Government - Department of Health. Coronavirus (COVID-19) health alert (2020).
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov-health-alertutm source
=health.gov.au&utm medium¯redirect&utm campaigndigital ¯ transformation&utm contenthealth- ¯ topics/novelcoronavirus-2019-ncov[Accessed April 2, 2020].
11 .New Zealand - Ministry of Health. COVID-19 (novel Coronavirus) (2020). https://www.health.govt.nz/ourwork/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-novel-coronavirus [Accessed April 2, 2020].
12 .WhatsApp. The world health organization launches who health alert on whatsapp (2020).
https://www.whatsapp.com/coronavirus/who [Accessed April 2, 2020].
13 .Jin KX. Facebook. keeping people safe and informed about the Coronavirus (2020).
https://about.fb.com/news/2020/04/coronavirus/ [Accessed April 2, 2020].
14 .The Medical Futurist. How digital health technology can help manage the Coronavirus outbreak (2020).
https://medicalfuturist.com/how-digital-health-technology-can-help-manage-the-coronavirusoutbreak/ [Accessed April
2, 2020].
15 .Corona Test BD. Are you infected with Coronavirus (COVID-19)? (2020). http://coronatestbd.com/ [Accessed April 2,
2020].
16 .Facebook. Corona facebook awareness group (2020). https://www.facebook.com/groups/1644576845235 -58/
[Accessed April 2, 2020].
17 .Corona in Bangladesh. Corona live update in bangladesh (2020). https://coronainbangladesh.com/ [Accessed April 2,
2020].
18 .Miller L, Naidoo M, Van Belle JP. Critical success factors for ict interventions in western cape schools. Proceedings of the
38th Southern Africa Computer Lecturers Association Conference, Somerset West, South Africa (2006), 94–107.

19 .Riaz W, Durrani H, Shahid S, Raza AA. Ict intervention for agriculture development: Designing an ivr system for farmers
in pakistan. Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and
Development (2017), 1–5.
20 .Galaz V. Pandemic 2.0: Can information technology help save the planet? Environment: Science and Policy for
Sustainable Development 51 (2009) 20–28.
21 .Peltzer K. Application of information and communication technology (ict) in combating human immuno-deficiency virus
(hiv) and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids) in south africa: health wellness. African Journal for Physical
Health Education, Recreation and Dance 14 (2008) 143–162.
22 .Amicizia D, Domnich A, Gasparini R, Bragazzi NL, Lai PL, Panatto D. An overview of current and potential use of
information and communication technologies for immunization promotion among adolescents. Human vaccines &
immunotherapeutics 9 (2013) 2634–2642.
23 .Hai-Jew S. Ict4d and its potential role in the detection, surveillance, and prevention of novel zoonotic disease outbreaks
for global, national, and local pandemic prevention. Human Rights and the Impact of ICT in the Public Sphere:
Participation, Democracy, and Political Autonomy (IGI Global) (2014), 94–143.
24 .Li J, Ray P. Applications of e-health for pandemic management. The 12th IEEE International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services (IEEE) (2010), 391–398.
25 .Rubin S. The use of mhealth technology for pandemic preparedness. Health Systems (2012) 21–24.
26 .Araz OM, Jehn M, Lant T, Fowler JW. A new method of exercising pandemic preparedness through an interactive
simulation and visualization. Journal of medical systems 36 (2012) 1475–1483.
27 .Kozinets RV. Netnography: Doing ethnographic research online. California: Sage Publications (2010).
28 .Breen RL. A practical guide to focus-group research. Geography in Higher Education (2006). 30(3):463-475.
29 .Leigh D. SWOT analysis. Improving Performance in the Workplace (2009). 1(3):115-140.
30 .APPLE. COVID-19 screening tool (2020). https://www.apple.com/covid19 [Accessed March 30, 2020].
31 .Center for Systems Science and Engineering. John Hopkins University. Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases Dashboard
(2020). https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ec
Frontiers 15 Sample et al. Running Title -f6 [Accessed March 30, 2020].
32 .ADiLife. COVID-19 (2020). https://www.adilife.net/en/covid-19/ [Accessed April 2, 2020].
33 .HealthLynked. Corona virus tracker (2020). https://www.healthlynked.com/corona-virus-tracker/ [Accessed April 2,
2020].
34 .SensorTower. COVID live tracker - Corona virus pocket guide (2020). https://sensortower.com/android/it/giamma-appstudio/app/covid-live-tracker-corona-virus-pocketguide/studio.coronavirus.covid19/overview [Accessed April 2, 2020].
35 .Jakhar P. BBC. Coronavirus: China’s tech fights back (2020). https://www.bbc.com/news/technology51717164
[Accessed April 2, 2020].
36 .Sieger J. Tech24. Coronavirus: How technology is helping contain the outbreak (2020).
https://www.france24.com/en/20200207-tech24-coronavirus-how-technology-is-helpingcontain-the-outbreak
[Accessed March 29, 2020].
37 .Mazhukhina K. How AI is helping scientists in the fight against COVID-19, from robots to predicting the future (2020).
https://www.geekwire.com/2020/ai-helping-scientists-fight-covid-19-robots-predictingfuture/ [Accessed April 10,
2020].
38 .Obeidat S. How artificial intelligence is helping fight the COVID-19 pandemic (2020).
www.entrepreneur.com/article/348368 [Accessed April 10, 2020].
39 .Naude W. Artificial intelligence against COVID-19: An early review (2020). ´ https://towardsdatascience.com/artificialintelligence-against-covid-19-an-early-review92a8360edaba [Accessed April 10, 2020].
40 .EurekAlert. University of Massachusetts Amherst.Portable AI device turns coughing sounds into health data for flu and
pandemic forecasting (2020). https://eurekalert.org/pub releases/2020-03/uomapad031920.php [Accessed March 29,
2020].
41 .Sullivan M. Fast Company.This AI camera detects people who may have COVID-19 (2020).
https://www.fastcompany.com/90479220/this-ai-camera-detects-people-who-may-have-covid19 [Accessed March 29,
2020].
42 .Canlas K. When In Manila.Huawei offers new tech for COVID-19 diagnosis to hospitals for FREE (2020).
https://www.wheninmanila.com/huawei-offers-new-tech-for-covid19-diagnosis-to-hospitals-forfree/?fbclid=IwAR2K1Y5oLdaaVyN0xvhGBAh2KOLuxlcru78FqcXQV1Z3Zbk0nIK0eTMAEw [Accessed March 30, 2020].
43 .Bennett S. Big data in a time of big viruses: How the world is using data & analytics to fight COVID-19 (2020).
https://www.dlt.com/blog/2020/03/17/big-data-time-big-viruses-how-world-usingdata-analytics-fight-covid-19
[Accessed April 10, 2020].
44 .Bowles J. Diginomica. How Canadian AI start-up BlueDot spotted Coronavirus before anyone else had a clue (2020).
https://diginomica.com/how-canadian-ai-start-bluedot-spotted-coronavirus-anyone-elsehad-clue [Accessed March 30,
2020].
45 .The Nextstrain Team. Genomic epidemiology of novel Coronavirus-Global sub sampling (2020).
https://nextstrain.org/ncov [Accessed March 30, 2020].
46 .The Medical Futurist. Digital maps help fight epidemicsl (2017). https://medicalfuturist.com/digitalmaps-help-fightepidemics/ [Accessed March 30, 2020].

47 .ROBI. Digital Corona Update Service (2020). https://www.robi.com.bd/en/personal/brand/digitalcorona-update-service
[Accessed March 30, 2020].
48 .Duke Pratt School of Engineering. ‘CovIdentify’ pits smartphones and wearable tech against the Coronavirus (2020).
https://pratt.duke.edu/about/news/covidentify-pits-smartphones-and-wearabletech-against-coronavirus [Accessed
April 10, 2020]. This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 16 Sample et al. Running Title
49 .Draper S. Germany’s public health authority launches smartwatch app to monitor COVID-19 spread (2020).
www.wearable-technologies.com/2020/04/germanys-public-health-authority-launchessmartwatch-app-to-monitorcovid-19-spread/ [Accessed April 10, 2020].
50 .Science—Business. Photonics21 to develop saliva test to detect COVID-19 with lasers (2020).
https://sciencebusiness.net/network-updates/photonics21-develop-saliva-test-detect-covid-19- lasers [Accessed March
30, 2020].
51 .World Health Organisation. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) training: Simulation exercise (2020).
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/training/simulationexercise [Accessed March 30,
2020].
52 .Jawad ASM. COVID-19 management guidelines (2020). https://drive.google.com/file/d/14-ngMj3blCCQlN
APUMJtp9LnTCmS-vl/view?fbclid=IwAR1- 1X-2Mo5CjpToarn1E6mlsSU5RszpLFh3p kDT5rsvzrnGd-RHge13Eg [Accessed
March 30, 2020].
53 .World Health Organisation(WHO). Covid-19: Operational planning guidelines and COVID-19 partners platform to
support country preparedness and response (2020). https://openwho.org/courses/UNCTCOVID19-preparedness-andresponse-EN [Accessed March 30, 2020].
54 .Maddox T. Techrepublic. Google Cloud launches new AI chatbot for COVID-19 information (2020).
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/google-cloud-launches-new-ai-chatbot-for-covid-19- information/ [Accessed April
08, 2020].
55 .Xaqt. COVID-19 Intelligent IVR (2020). https://www.xaqt.com/coronavirus-response-ivr [Accessed March 30, 2020].
56 .Chakrapani S. The Times Of India. Tamil Nadu govt, IIT-Madras launch IVRS to collect COVID-19 (2020).
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chennai/tamil-nadu-govt-iit-madras-launch-ivrs-tocollect-covid-19-data-fromnon-smartphone-users/articleshow/75067052.cms [Accessed March 30, 2020].

This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article

14

