arXiv:2004.02696v2 [cs.CV] 16 Apr 2020

COVID-CAPS: A Capsule Network-based Framework for Identification of COVID-19
cases from X-ray Images
Parnian Afshara , Shahin Heidarianb , Farnoosh Naderkhania , Anastasia Oikonomouc , Konstantinos N. Plataniotisd , Arash
Mohammadia,∗∗
a Concordia

Institute for Information Systems Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada
c Department of Medical Imaging, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Canada
d Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
b Department

ABSTRACT
Novel Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has abruptly and undoubtedly changed the world as we know
it at the end of the 2nd decade of the 21st century. COVID-19 is extremely contagious and quickly
spreading globally making its early diagnosis of paramount importance. Early diagnosis of COVID-19
enables health care professionals and government authorities to break the chain of transition and flatten the epidemic curve. The common type of COVID-19 diagnosis test, however, requires specific
equipment and has relatively low sensitivity. Computed tomography (CT) scans and X-ray images,
on the other hand, reveal specific manifestations associated with this disease. Overlap with other lung
infections makes human-centered diagnosis of COVID-19 challenging. Consequently, there has been
an urgent surge of interest to develop Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based diagnosis solutions, mainly
based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), to facilitate identification of positive COVID-19
cases. CNNs, however, are prone to lose spatial information between image instances and require
large datasets. The paper presents an alternative modeling framework based on Capsule Networks,
referred to as the COVID-CAPS, being capable of handling small datasets, which is of significant
importance due to sudden and rapid emergence of COVID-19. Our results based on a dataset of X-ray
images show that COVID-CAPS has advantage over previous CNN-based models. COVID-CAPS
achieved an Accuracy of 95.7%, Sensitivity of 90%, Specificity of 95.8%, and Area Under the Curve
(AUC) of 0.97, while having far less number of trainable parameters in comparison to its counterparts.
To potentially and further improve diagnosis capabilities of the COVID-CAPS, pre-training and transfer learning are utilized based on a new dataset constructed from an external dataset of X-ray images.
This is in contrary to existing works where pre-training is performed based on natural images. Pre–
training with a dataset of similar nature further improved accuracy to 98.3% and specificity to 98.6%.

1. Introduction
Novel Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), first emerged in
Wuhan, China [1], has abruptly and significantly changed the
world as we know it at the end of the 2nd decade of the 21st
century. COVID-19 seems to be extremely contagious and
quickly spreading globally with common symptoms such as
fever, cough, myalgia, or fatigue resulting in ever increasing
∗∗ The

paper is under consideration at Pattern Recognition Letters.
e-mail: arash.mohammadi@concordia.ca (Arash Mohammadi)

number of human fatalities. Besides having a rapid human-tohuman transition rate, COVID-19 is associated with high Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admissions resulting in an urgent quest
for development of fast and accurate diagnosis solutions [1].
Identifying positive COVID-19 cases in early stages helps with
isolating the patients as quickly as possible [2], hence breaking
the chain of transition and flattening the epidemic curve.
Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RTPCR), which is currently the gold standard in COVID-19 diagnosis [1], involves detecting the viral RNA from sputum or
nasopharyngeal swab. The RT-PCR test is, however, associated

2
with relatively low sensitivity (true positive rate) and requires
specific material and equipment, which are not easily accessible [1]. Moreover, this test is relatively time-consuming, which
is not desirable as the positive COVID-19 cases should be identified and tracked as fast as possible [2]. Images [3] in COVID19 patients, on the other hand, have shown specific findings,
such as ground-glass opacities with rounded morphology and
a peripheral lung distribution. Although imaging studies and
theirs results can be obtained in a timely fashion, the previously
described imaging finding may be seen in other viral or fungal infections or other entities such as organizing pneumonia,
which limits the specificity of images and reduces the accuracy
of a human-centered diagnosis.
Literature Review: Since revealing the potentials of computed tomography (CT) scans and X-ray images in detecting
COVID-19 and weakness of the human-centered diagnosis,
there have been several studies [5]-[7] trying to develop automatic COVID-19 classification systems, mainly using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [4]. Xu et al. [1] have first
adopted a pre-trained 3D CNN to extract potential infected regions from the CT scans. These candidates are subsequently fed
to a second CNN to classify them into three groups of COVID19, Influenza-A-viral-pneumonia, and irrelevant-to-infection,
with an overall accuracy of 86.7%. Wang et al. [2] have first
extracted candidates using a threshold-based strategy. Consequently, for each case two or three regions are randomly selected to form the dataset. A pre-trained CNN is fine-tuned using the developed dataset. Finally, features are extracted from
the CNN and fed to an ensemble of classifiers for the COVID19 prediction, reaching an accuracy of 88%. CT scans are also
utilized in Reference [8] to identify positive COVID-19 cases,
where all slices are separately fed to the model and outputs are
aggregated using a Max-pooling operation, reaching a sensitivity of 90%. In a study by Wang and Wong [9], a CNN model is
first pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset [10], followed by finetuning using a dataset of X-ray images to classify subjects as
normal, bacterial, non-COVID-19 viral, and COVID-19 viral
infection, achieving an overall accuracy of 83.5%. In a similar study by Sethy and Behera [11], different CNN models are
trained on X-ray images, followed by a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classifier to identify positive COVID-19 cases, reaching
an accuracy of 95.38%.
Contributions: All the studies on deep learning-based
COVID-19 classification have so far utilized CNNs, which although being powerful image processing techniques, are prone
to an important drawback. They are unable to capture spacial
relations between image instances. As a result of this inability, CNNs cannot recognize the same object when it is rotated
or subject to another type of transformation. Adopting a big
dataset, including all the possible transformations, is the solution to this problem. However, in medical imaging problems,
including the COVID-19 classification, huge datasets are not
easily accessible. In particular, COVID-19 has been identified
only recently, and large enough datasets are not yet developed.
Capsule Networks (CapsNets) [12] are alternative models that
are capable of capturing spatial information using routing by
agreement, through which Capsules try to reach a mutual agree-

ment on the existence of the objects. This agreement leverages
the information coming from instances and object parts, and
is therefore able to recognize their relations, without a huge
dataset. Through several studies[13]-[18], we have shown the
superiority of the CapsNets for different medical problems such
as brain tumor [13]-[17] and lung tumor classification [18]. In
this study, we propose a Capsule Network-based framework,
referred to as the COVID-CAPS, for COVID-19 identification
using X-ray images. The proposed COVID-CAPS achieved an
accuracy of 95.7%, a sensitivity of 90%, specificity of 95.8%,
and Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.97.
To potentially and further improve diagnosis capabilities of
the COVID-CAPS, we considered pre-training and transfer
learning using an external dataset of X-ray images, consisting
of 94, 323 frontal view chest X-ray images for common thorax diseases. This dataset is extracted from the NIH Chest Xray dataset [21] including 112, 120 X-ray images for 14 thorax abnormalities. From existing 15 diseases in this dataset, 5
classes were constructed with the help of a thoracic radiologist,
with 18 years of experience in thoracic imaging (A. O.). It is
worth mentioning that our pre-training strategy is in contrary to
that of Reference [9] where pre-training is performed based on
natural images (ImageNet dataset). Intuitively speaking, pretraining based on an X-ray dataset of similar nature is expected
to result in better transfer learning in comparison to the case
where natural images were used for this purpose. In summary,
pre-training with an external dataset of X-ray images further
improved accuracy of COVID-CAPS to 98.3%, specificity to
98.6%, and AUC to 0.97, however, with a lower sensitivity of
80%. Trained COVID-CAPS model is available publicly for
open access at https://github.com/ShahinSHH/COVID-CAPS.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study investigating applicability of the CapsNet for the problem at hand.
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Section 2
briefly introduces the Capsule networks. The COVID-CAPS is
presented in Section 3. Utilized dataset for evaluation of the
proposed COVID-CAPS, and our results are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work.
2. Capsule Networks
Each layer of a Capsule Network (CapsNet) consists of several Capsules, each of which represents a specific image instance at a specific location, through several neurons. The
length of a Capsule determines the existence probability of the
associated instance. Similar to a regular CNN, each Capsule i,
having the instantiation parameter ui , tries to predict the outputs
of the next layer’s Capsules, using a trainable weight matrix
Wi j , as follows
û j|i = Wi j ui ,
(1)
where û j|i denotes the prediction of Capsule i for Capsule j.
The predictions, however, are taken into account based on a
coefficient, through the “Routing by Agreement” process, to
determine the actual output of the Capsule j, denoted by s j ,
as follows
ai j = s j .û j|i ,
(2)

3

Fig. 1. The proposed COVID-CAPS architecture.

bi j = bi j + ai j ,
exp(bi j )
ci j = P
,
k exp(bik )
X
ci j û j|i ,
and s j =

(3)

(4)
(5)

i

where ai j denotes the agreement between predictions and outputs, and ci j is the score given to the predictions. In other words,
this score determines the contribution of the prediction to the
output. Routing by agreement is what makes the CapsNet different from a CNN and helps it identify the spatial relations.
The CapsNet loss function, lk , associated with Capsule k, is
calculated as follows
lk = T k max(0, m+ − ||sk ||)2 + λ(1 − T k ) max(0, ||sk || − m− )2 , (6)
where T k is one whenever the class k is present and zero otherwise. Terms m+ , m− , and λ are the hyper parameters of the
model. The final loss is the summation over all the lk s. This
completes a brief introduction to CapsuleNets, next we present
the COVID-CAPS framework.
3. The Proposed COVID-CAPS
The architecture of the proposed COVID-CAPS is shown in
Fig. 1, which consists of 4 convolutional layers and 3 Capsule
layers. The inputs to the network are 3D X-ray images. The first
layer is a convolutional one, followed by batch-normalization.
The second layer is also a convolutional one, followed by average pooling. Similarly, the third and forth layers are convolutional ones, where the forth layer is reshaped to form the first
Capsule layer. Consequently, three Capsule layers are embedded in the COVID-CAPS to perform the routing by agreement
process. The last Capsule layer contains the instantiation parameters of the two classes of positive and negative COVID-19.

The length of these two Capsules represents the probability of
each class being present.
Since we have developed a Capsule Network-based architecture, which does not need a large dataset, we did not perform
any data augmentation. However, since the number of positive
cases, N + , are less than the negative ones, N − , we modified
the loss function to handle the class imbalance problem. In
other words, more weight is given to positive samples in the
loss function, where weights are determined based on the proportion of the positive and negative cases, as follows
loss =

N−
N+
× loss− + +
× loss+ ,
−
+N
N + N−

N+

(7)

where loss+ denotes the loss associated with positive samples,
and loss− denotes the loss associated with negative samples.
As stated previously, to potentially and further improve diagnosis capabilities of the COVID-CAPS, we considered pretraining the model in an initial step. In contrary to Reference [9]
where ImageNet dataset [10] is used for pre-training, however,
we constructed and utilized an X-ray dataset. The reason for
not using ImageNet for pre-training is that the nature of images (natural images) in that dataset is totally different from
COVID-19 X-ray dataset. It is expected that using a model pretrained on X-ray images of similar nature would result in better
boosting of the COVID-CAPS. For pre-training with an external dataset, the whole COVID-CAPS model is first trained on
the external data, where the number of final Capsules is set to
the number of output classes in the external set. From existing
15 disease in the external dataset, 5 classes were constructed
with the help of a thoracic radiologist, with 18 years of experience in thoracic imaging (A. O.). To fine-tune the model
using the COVID-19 dataset, the last Capsule layer is replaced
with two Capsules to represent positive and negative COVID19 cases. All the other Capsule layers are fine-tuned, whereas
the conventional layers are fixed to the weights obtained in pretraining.
We used Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 10−3 ,
100 epochs, and a batch size of 16. We have split the training

4

Fig. 2. Labels available in the dataset.

Fig. 3. ROC curve from the proposed COVID-CAPS.

dataset, described in Section 4, into two sets of training (90%)
and validation (10%), where training set is used to train the
model and the validation set is used to select a model that has
the best performance. Selected model is then tested on the testing set, for the final evaluation. The following four metrics are
utilized to represent the performance: Accuracy; Sensitivity;
Specificity, and Area Under the Curve (AUC). Next, we present
the obtained results.

4. Experimental Results
To conduct our experiments, we used the same dataset as
Reference [9]. This dataset is generated from two publicly
available chest X-ray datasets [19, 20]. As shown in Fig. 2,
the generated dataset contains four different labels, i.e., Normal; Bacterial; Non-COVID Viral, and; COVID-19. As the
main goal of this study is to identify positive COVID-19 cases,
we binarized the labels as either positive or negative. In other
words, the three labels of normal, bacterial, and non-COVID
viral together form the negative class.

Using the aforementioned dataset, the proposed COVIDCAPS achieved an accuracy of 95.7%, a sensitivity of 90%,
specificity of 95.8%, and AUC of 0.97. The obtained receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve is shown in Fig. 3. In particular, false positive cases have been further investigated to
have an insight on what types are more subject to being misclassified by COVID-19. It is observed that 54% of the false
positives are normal cases, whereas bacterial and non-COVID
cases form only 27% and 19% of the false positives, respectively.
As shown in Table 1, we compare our results with Reference [11] that has used the binarized version of the same
dataset. COVID-CAPS outperforms its counterpart in terms
of accuracy and specificity. Sensitivity is higher in the model
proposed in Reference [11], that contains 23 million trainable
parameters. Reference[6] is another study on the binarized
version of the same X-ray images. However, as the negative
label contains only normal cases (in contrast to including all
normal, bacterial, and non-covid viral cases as negative), we
did not compare the performance of the COVID-CAPS with
this study. It is worth mentioning that the proposed COVIDCAPS has only 295, 488 trainable parameters. Compared to 23
million trainable parameters of the model proposed in Reference [11], therefore, COVID-CAPS can be trained and used in
a more timely fashion, and eliminates the need for availability
of powerful computational resources.
In another experiment, we pre-trained the proposed COVIDCAPS using an external dataset of X-ray images, consisting of
94, 323 frontal view chest X-ray images for common thorax
diseases. This dataset is extracted from the NIH Chest X-ray
dataset [21] including 112, 120 X-ray images for 14 thorax abnormalities. This dataset also contains normal cases without
specific findings in their corresponding images. In order to reduce the number of categories, we classified these 15 groups
into 5 categories based on the relations between the abnormalities in each disease. The first four groups are dedicated
to No findings, Tumors, Pleural diseases, and Lung infections
categories. The fifth group encompasses other images without
specific relations with the first four groups. We then removed
17, 797 cases with multiple labels (appeared in more than one
category) to reduce the complexity. The adopted dataset is then
used to pre-train our model. Table 2 demonstrates our classification scheme and distribution of the data. Results obtained
from fine-tuning the pre-trained COVID-CAPS is also shown
in Table 1, according to which, pre-training improves accuracy
and specificity. The ROC curve is shown in Fig. 3, according to
which, the obtained AUC of 0.99 outperforms that of COVIDCAPS without pre-training.
5. Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a Capsule Network-based
framework, referred to as the COVID-CAPS, for diagnosis
of COVID-19 from X-ray images. The proposed framework consists of several Capsule and convolutional layers,
and the lost function is modified to account for the classimbalance problem. The obtained results show that the

5
Table 1. Results obtained from the proposed COVID-CAPS, along with the results from Reference [11].

Method

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

Number of Trainable Parameters

COVID-CAPS without pre-training

95.7%

90%

95.8%

295,488

Pre-trained COVID-CAPS

98.3%

80%

98.6%

295,488

Reference [11]

95.38%

97.29%

93.47%

23,000,000

Table 2. Description of the External X-ray images dataset used for pre-training COVID-CAPS.

Final Category
No Findings
Tumors
Pleural Diseases
Lung Infection
Others

Initial Categories
No Findings
Infiltration, Mass, Nodule
Effusion, Pleural Thickening, Pneumothorax
Consolidation, Pneumonia
Atelectasis, Cardiomegaly, Edema, Emphysema, Fibrosis, Hernia

COVID-CAPS has a satisfying performance with a low number of trainable parameters. Pre-training was able to further improve the accuracy, specificity, and AUC. Trained
COVID-CAPS model is available publicly for open access
at https://github.com/ShahinSHH/COVID-CAPS. As more and
more COVID-19 cases are being identified all around the world,
larger datasets are being generated. We will continue to further
modify the architecture of the COVID-CAPS and incorporate
new available datasets. New versions of the COVID-CAPS will
be released upon development through the aforementioned link.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada
through the NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN-2016-04988.
References
[1] X. Xu, X. Jiang, et al., “Deep Learning System to Screen Coronavirus
Disease 2019 Pneumonia,” arXiv:2002.09334, 2020.
[2] Sh. Wang, B. Kang, et al., “A Deep Learning Algorithm using CT Images
to Screen for Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19),” medRxiv, 2020.
[3] P. Afshar, A. Mohammadi, K. N. Plataniotis, A. Oikonomou and H. Benali, “From Handcrafted to Deep-Learning-Based Cancer Radiomics:
Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol.
36, no. 4, pp. 132-160, July 2019.
[4] R. Yamashita, M. Nishio, et al., “Convolutional Neural Networks: An
Overview and Application in Radiology,” Insights into Imaging, vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 611-629, 2018.
[5] O. Gozes, M. Frid-Adar, et al., “Rapid AI Development Cycle for the
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic: Initial Results for Automated Detection & Patient Monitoring using Deep Learning CT Image Analysis ,”
arXiv:2003.05037, 2020
[6] A. Narin, C. Kaya, Z. Pamuk , “Automatic Detection of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Using X-ray Images and Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks ,” arXiv:2003.10849, 2020
[7] M. Farooq, A. Hafeez, “COVID-ResNet: A Deep Learning Framework
for Screening of COVID19 from Radiograph,” arXiv:2003.14395, 2020
[8] L. Li, L. Qin, et al., “Artificial Intelligence Distinguishes COVID-19 from
Community Acquired Pneumonia on Chest CT,” Radiology, 2020

Number of Images
60361
16103
8042
1668
8149

[9] L. Wang, A. Wong, “COVID-Net: A Tailored Deep Convolutional Neural
Network Design for Detection of COVID-19 Cases from Chest Radiography Images,” arXiv:2003.09871, 2020.
[10] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet Classification with
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS) 2012.
[11] P. K. Sethy, S. K. Behera, “Detection of Coronavirus Disease (COVID19) Based on Deep Features,” Preprints 2020, 2020030300, 2020.
[12] G. Hinton, S. Sabour, N. Frosst, “ Matrix Capsules With EM Routing,”
ICLR, 2018. .
[13] P. Afshar, A. Mohammadi, K. N. Plataniotis, “Brain Tumor Type Classification via Capsule Networks,” IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP), pp. 3129-3133, 2018.
[14] P. Afshar, K. N Plataniotis, A. Mohammadi, “Capsule Networks for Brain
Tumor Classification Based on Mri Images and Coarse Tumor Boundaries,” ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1368-1372, 2019.
[15] P. Afshar, K. N Plataniotis, A. Mohammadi, “Capsule Networks’ Interpretability for Brain Tumor Classification Via Radiomics Analyses,” 2019
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 138163820, 2019.
[16] P. Afshar, K. N Plataniotis, A. Mohammadi “BoostCaps: A Boosted
Capsule Network for Brain Tumor Classification,” Accepted in IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2020.
[17] P. Afshar, K. N Plataniotis, A. Mohammadi “A Bayesian Approach to
Brain Tumor Classification Using Capsule Networks,” Submitted to IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2020.
[18] P. Afshar, A. Oikonomou, P.N. Tyrrell, K. Farahani, K. N Plataniotis,
A. Mohammadi, “3D-MCN: A 3D Multi-Scale Capsule Network for
Lung Nodule Malignancy Classification,” Accepted with minor revision
in Scientific Reports.
[19] J.
P.
Cohen,
“Covid
Chest
x-ray
Dataset,”
https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset, 2020.
[20] P. Mooney,
“Kaggle Chest x-ray Images (Pneumonia) Dataset,”
https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset, 2020.
[21] X. Wang, Y. Peng, et al., “ChestX-ray8: Hospital-scale Chest X-ray
Database and Benchmarks on Weakly-Supervised Classification and Localization of Common Thorax Diseases,” 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3462-3471, 2017.

