Exploring the SARS-CoV-2 virus-host-drug interactome for drug repurposing
Sepideh Sadegh​1,a​, Julian Matschinske​1,a​, David B. Blumenthal​1,b​, Gihanna
Galindez​1,b​, Tim Kacprowski​1,b​, Markus List​1,b​, Reza Nasirigerdeh​1,b​, Mhaned
Oubounyt​1,b​, Andreas Pichlmair​2,b​, Tim Daniel Rose​3,b​, Marisol Salgado-Albarrán​1,4,b​,
Julian Späth​1,b​, Alexey Stukalov​2,b​, Nina K. Wenke​1,b​, Kevin Yuan​1,b​, Josch K.
Pauling​3​, Jan Baumbach​1,5
​ hair of Experimental Bioinformatics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical
C
University of Munich
2​
​Institute of Virology, TUM School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich
3​
​LipiTUM, Chair of Experimental Bioinformatics, TUM School of Life Sciences,
Technical University of Munich
4​
​Natural Sciences Department, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Cuajimalpa
(UAM-C), Mexico City, 05300, Mexico
5​
​Computational Biomedicine lab, Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Southern Denmark
1​

a​
b​

joint first authors
alphabetical order

Abstract
Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2
virus. It was first identified in Wuhan, China, and has since spread causing a global
pandemic. Various studies have been performed to understand the molecular mechanisms
of viral infection for predicting drug repurposing candidates. However, such information is
spread across many publications and it is very time-consuming to access, integrate, explore,
and exploit. We developed CoVex, the first interactive online platform for SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 host interactome exploration and drug (target) identification. CoVex integrates
1) experimentally validated virus-human protein interactions, 2) human protein-protein
interactions and 3) drug-target interactions. The web interface allows user-friendly visual
exploration of the virus-host interactome and implements systems medicine algorithms for
network-based prediction of drugs. Thus, CoVex is an important resource, not only to
understand the molecular mechanisms involved in SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1
pathogenicity, but also in clinical research for the identification and prioritization of candidate
therapeutics. We apply CoVex to investigate recent hypotheses on a systems biology level
and to systematically explore the molecular mechanisms driving the virus’ life cycle.
Furthermore, we extract and discuss drug repurposing candidates involved in these
mechanisms. CoVex renders COVID-19 drug research systems-medicine-ready by giving
the scientific community direct access to network medicine algorithms integrating
virus-host-drug interactions. It is available at ​https://exbio.wzw.tum.de/covex/​.

Introduction
Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2
(severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2). It was first identified in Wuhan, China
and has spread causing an ongoing pandemic 1​ with globally 2.4 million confirmed cases
and 167 thousand deaths as of April 20, 2020.
Our insights into SARS-CoV-2 infection mechanisms are limited and clinical therapy has
largely focused on treating critical symptoms. Therefore, the current pandemic requires fast
and freely accessible knowledge to accelerate the development of vaccines, treatments and
diagnostic tests. Research data has been collected in several online platforms such as, the
COVID-19 Open Research Dataset and the Dimensions COVID-19 collection 2,3​
​ . In addition,
existing databases that collect virus information have responded by integrating new
SARS-CoV-2 research 4,5​
​ .
As vaccine and drug development may take years, drug repurposing is a potent approach
that offers new therapeutic options through the identification of alternative uses of already
approved drugs 6​​ . These drugs have previously undergone clinical and safety trials and,
hence, accelerate drug development timelines from a decade to a few years or months. Due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous research groups around the world have been joining
their efforts to identify drugs that can be repurposed to effectively treat COVID-19.
Numerous drugs are already part of clinical trials, including remdesivir (a less effective ebola
drug), Chloroquine, Hydroxychloroquine (antimalarial drugs), Tocilizumab (rheumatoid
arthritis drug), Favipiravir (influenza drug), and Kaletra (a combination of Lopinavir and
Ritonavir for treating human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1) 7​​ .
Computational systems and network medicine approaches offer a methodological toolbox
required to understand molecular virus-host-drug mechanisms and to predict novel drug
targets to attack them 8,9​
​ . Few studies on these mechanisms in SARS-CoV-2 exist. Gordon
et al. applied affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to reconstruct the
SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and subsequently employed a
chemoinformatics approach to identify potential drugs for repurposing 10​
​ . The data generated
from that study is a major advancement in understanding SARS-CoV-2 infection. However,
to identify drug candidates, the study mainly considered the direct interactors of the human
proteins as putative targets and thus did not take into account the network context of the
human interactome. However, viral interactions with human proteins have cascading effects
in the human interactome, where key proteins necessary for the viral replication cycle are
only indirectly affected. Therefore, downstream host proteins may be additional promising
targets for therapeutic intervention but require thorough data integration and mining to be
identified (see Supplementary Material for details). Figure 1 illustrates the concept of
systems medicine-based drug repurposing specifically for SARS-CoV-2.
Gysi ​et al. integrated the experimentally validated SARS-CoV-2 virus-host interactions with
the human interactome and investigated co-morbidity and differences of virus-host

interactions across 56 tissues 11​
​ . Furthermore, network medicine analysis was applied to
compile a list of drug repurposing candidates that target also indirectly affected proteins in
the human interactome. However, the combined number of virus-host, host-host and
drug-target interactions goes into the millions such that purely algorithmic approaches to
discovering new drug targets and drug repurposing candidates produces a large number of
results, many of which lack mechanistic specificity and, hence, are not useful. Thus, to make
their results accessible, Gysi ​et al. worked closely together with clinical experts to narrow
down the number of predicted repurposable drugs.

Figure 1​ ​- The SARS-CoV-2 life cycle and the CoVex systems medicine approach of
drug repurposing.​ Most antiviral drugs (grey) target the virus proteins or their direct host
interactor proteins to inhibit different stages of the viral life cycle. Our rationale, however, is
that viral interactions with human host proteins have a cascading effect to hijack and control
key proteins necessary for the virus’ life cycle. We aim to identify repurposable drug
candidates (green) targeting these key host modulators to interfere with virus replication and
disease progression following infection. Besides an increased antiviral drug repertoire,
targeting host proteins would make it more difficult for the virus (population) to develop
resistance mutations.

In order to allow for the interactive integration of expert knowledge about virus replication,
immune-related biological processes or drug mechanisms, we have developed the
interactive systems and network medicine platform CoVex (CoronaVirus Explorer). It
integrates experimental virus-human interaction data for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 with
the human interactome as well as drug information to predict novel drug (target) candidates,
and it offers biomedical and clinical researchers interactive and user-friendly access to
network medicine algorithms for advanced data mining and hypothesis testing. CoVex
follows a human-in-the-loop paradigm and provides an intuitive visualization of virus-host
interactions, drug targets, and drugs to enable researchers to examine molecular
mechanisms that can be targeted using repurposed drugs. CoVex offers two main actions
for which several network medicine algorithms are available: Given a list of user-selected
human host proteins, viral proteins, or drugs (referred to as seeds), users can (1) search the
human interactome for viable drug targets and (2) identify repurposable drug candidates. In
a typical work-flow, these two actions are combined, i.e. starting from a selection of virus or
virus-interacting proteins, users mine the interactome for suitable drug targets for which, in
turn, suitable drugs are identified. Additionally, users can leverage expert knowledge by
uploading a list of proteins or drugs of interest as seeds to guide the analysis. Such seeds
could, for instance, be a list of differentially expressed genes, a list of proteins related to a
molecular mechanism of interest, or a set of drugs known to be effective.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In the methods section, we first describe
the datasets and integration strategy used in CoVex. Next, we introduce the rationales of the
systems and network medicine algorithms implemented in CoVex, and briefly describe the
overall architecture of the platform. In the results section, we show several application
examples to illustrate the flexibility and typical use cases of CoVex. Finally, we will discuss
opportunities and limitations in using CoVex for COVID-19 research.
CoVex opens up the systems medicine toolbox for the entire infectious disease research
community by providing an easy-to-use web tool enriched with novel algorithms. This allows
specialists from different fields to bring in expert knowledge to identify the most promising
drug targets and drug repurposing candidates for developing effective therapies. We like to
stress that the CoVex platform can and will be adopted and extended to allow exploring
other viral-host-drug interactomes, e.g. with MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome),
Zika, dengue and influenza viruses, thereby increasing preparedness for similar future
events.

Methods
Data Integration
We integrated virus-host interaction data from several sources. We obtained SARS-CoV-2
affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) data reported by Gordon ​et al​.10
​ containing
332 high-confidence virus-host interactions for 27 SARS-CoV-2 proteins​10​, as well as
SARS-CoV-1 interactions from VirHostNet 4​ (24 interactions), and Pfefferle ​et al. 12
​ (113
interactions existing in our interactome). Human PPIs were obtained from the integrated
interactions database (IID) 13
​ filtered based on experimental validation. The resulting

interactome consists of 17,666 proteins connected via 329,215 interactions. Drug-target
associations were obtained from ChEMBL (2020-03) 14​
​ , DrugBank (v.5.1.5) 15​
​ , DrugCentral
16​
17​
(2018-08-26) ​ , Target Therapeutic Database (2019-07-14) ​ , Guide To Pharmacology
(2020-01; only approved drugs) 18​
​ , PharmGKB (downloaded 2020-04) 19​
​ , and BindingDB
20​
(2019-08-12) ​ . Where applicable, we considered drugs that have binding affinity values
(EC50, IC50, Kd, and Ki) less than 10 ​μ​M 21,22​
​
. Only drugs that were mappable to DrugBank
IDs and targeting host proteins were included in the network. Drugs currently undergoing
clinical trials and mappable to DrugBank IDs (as of April 4​th 2020) for the treatment of
COVID-19 were collected from ClinicalTrials.gov (​www.ClinicalTrials.gov​) 23​
​ , the EU Clinical
Trials Register (​www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu​) and the International Clinical Trials Registry
Platform (​www.who.int/ictrp/​). In total, we have 6,861 drugs (69 in clinical trials) and 52,860
drug-target associations integrated in our network.
Systems medicine algorithms for drug repurposing prediction
The general idea of CoVex is to provide researchers and clinicians with a tool to visually
explore druggable molecular mechanisms that drive the interactions between virus and host.
To this end, the integrated virus-human-drug interactions form molecular networks that are
modeled as graphs with nodes as proteins or drugs, and edges referring to interactions
between them. The goal of CoVex is to explore this network while allowing for the
exploitation of expert knowledge. Starting with a selected set of (usually) hypothesis-driven
seeds (virus proteins, human proteins, or drugs), the goal is to first identify subnetworks
connecting these seeds and, subsequently, to identify drug repurposing candidates
associated with these mechanisms. A vast number of methods have been reported in the
literature for identifying subnetworks 24​
​ . In CoVex, we have integrated several algorithms
(including a dedicated, new development) with different underlying paradigms to provide
specific exploration options to various particular medical, therapeutic, and research
questions and hypotheses. CoVex, thus, allows users to choose among the following
approaches in the “advanced analysis” procedures.
Degree centrality is the simplest conceivable centrality measure and ranks proteins or
drugs interacting with the seeds by their node degree, i.e. the number of interactions. Thus,
this algorithm yields subnetworks in which seed-connected proteins and/or drugs are
preferentially selected if they interact with many other proteins in the network. The only
user-selected parameter is the result size, i.e. how many of the top-ranked proteins or drugs
are included. Notably, centrality measures in CoVex can be used for detecting drug targets
and for identifying promising drugs.
Closeness centrality is a node centrality measure that ranks the nodes in a network based
on the lengths of their shortest paths to all other nodes in the network. The rationale behind
this algorithm is to preferentially select proteins and/or drugs that are a short distance from
all other proteins in the network and are thus of central importance. In CoVex, we use a
modified version suggested by Kacprowski ​et al.,​ where only the shortest paths to a set of
selected seed nodes are considered 25​
​ . The only algorithm-specific, user-selected parameter
is the result size.

TrustRank: ​TrustRank is conceptually similar to closeness centrality but additionally
considers the importance of the seed nodes themselves. In other words, TrustRank ranks
nodes in a network based on how well they are connected to a (trusted) set of seed nodes 26​
​ .
It is a variant of Google’s PageRank algorithm, where “trust” is iteratively propagated from
seed nodes to neighboring nodes using the network structure. The node centralities are
initialized by assigning uniform probabilities to all seeds and zero probabilities to all
non-seed nodes. In CoVex, the TrustRank algorithm can be run starting from a user-defined
set of (trusted) seed proteins to obtain a ranked list of proteins in the PPI network that could
be prioritized as putative drug targets. Similarly, TrustRank can be executed on the joint
protein-drug interactome to identify drug repurposing candidates. User-selected parameters
include the result size and the damping factor (range 0 to 1), which controls how fast “trust”
is propagated through the network. A small damping factor results in a conservative behavior
of the algorithm (nodes close to the seeds receive much higher scores than distant ones),
while a large damping factor makes its behavior more explorative.
Multi-Steiner tree​: T
​ he Steiner tree problem is a classical combinatorial optimization
problem. It aims at finding a subgraph of minimum cost connecting a given set of seed
nodes. For CoVex, we have developed a novel method (weighted multi-Steiner tree) which
computes approximate weighted multiple Steiner trees and connects them to one
subnetwork. The user can select the set of proteins of interest and extract sub-network(s)
that connect the selected seed proteins as candidate mechanism(s) involved in COVID-19
progression. In this mechanistic subnetwork(s), we can then extract essential proteins and,
thus, the most promising drug targets and repurposable drugs for COVID-19. User-selected
parameters include the number of Steiner trees to be merged as well as the tolerance
towards accepting more expensive subnetworks (for speeding up the approximation
algorithm; details in the Supplementary Material).
KeyPathwayMiner ​is a network enrichment tool that identifies condition-specific
subnetworks (key pathways) 27​
​ . In CoVex, we utilize the KeyPathwayMiner web service to
extract a maximally connected subnetwork starting from a user-defined set of proteins of
interest (seeds). The only user-selected parameter is K, which represents the number of
permitted exception nodes, i.e. proteins that were not part of the seed proteins but serve to
connect them. Since these proteins act as bridges, these may represent key proteins
participating in the dysregulated subnetwork even though they are not directly targeted by
the virus and are therefore promising candidates for intervention. In its current
implementation exception nodes will only be added if they indeed possess a bridging
characteristic and will not be shown otherwise.
Hub penalty: ​Irrespective of the network analysis method used, the extracted solutions have
a higher intrinsic probability to contain high-degree nodes (hubs), i.e. proteins that have a
large number of interactions. While these proteins are key players in the human interactome,
they are not necessarily suitable drug targets as perturbing them might lead to severe
unintended side-effects. To mitigate this bias, users can either select an upper bound to filter
out high-degree nodes or, alternatively, penalize high degree nodes by incorporating the
degree of neighboring nodes as edge weights in the optimization. For the latter, values
between 0 and 1 can be selected, where higher values correspond to a higher penalty. Both

options are available in advanced analyses for all methods except for degree centrality,
because its rationale is to identify hubs, and KeyPathwayMiner, which conceptually does not
allow for weighted subnetwork extraction.
Implementation
CoVex consists of five components: (i) Data is stored in a PostgreSQL database (v. 12.2). (ii)
The backend is implemented using the Django web framework (v. 3.0.5) with Python (v. 3.6)
and the Django REST framework (v. 3.11.0) to build the web API. (iii) The network
algorithms (except KeyPathwayMiner) are implemented with graph-tool (v. 2.3.1) 28​
​ . (iv)
Background task processing is implemented using Redis Queue (RQ, v. 1.3.0) and the
in-memory database Redis (v. 3.4.1). Django enqueues the jobs and RQ processes them in
the background while Redis functions as a broker between Django and RQ. (v) The frontend
is implemented in Angular (v. 9.0.2) and utilizes the JavaScript libraries vis-data (v. 6.5.1)
and vis-network (v.7.4.2) for network visualization.

Figure 2 - The CoVex online platform.​ The network view (middle) shows drug candidates
(green nodes) that were found using closeness centrality on a set of proteins (blue nodes)
which resulted from a multi-Steiner tree computation with all viral proteins as seeds (not
shown here). Therefore, drugs targeting these seeds might be able to interrupt the viral life
cycle progression.

Results
The main result is the CoVex platform itself, which renders drug repurposing research
systems-medicine-ready. In the following, we first describe how the platform’s user interface

provides the full feature spectrum of CoVex to clinicians and scientists. Afterwards, we
demonstrate the use of CoVex in four different application scenarios starting with four
hypotheses and ending with different drug repurposing candidates as well as a short
discussion on how to prioritize them.
The CoVex platform
Figure 2 shows the CoVex web interface. To find potential drugs, the “Quick Start” analysis
will produce a multi-Steiner tree, which considers all viral proteins as seeds and adds a small
number of host proteins to connect them. Subsequently, drugs directly targeting these
proteins are selected via closeness centrality. After the computation has finished, a click on
the corresponding task opens the analysis results, consisting of a table view of drugs and
proteins, a visualization of the protein-protein and drug-protein interactions, and a list of
parameters used for the analysis. In the “Simple Analysis” panel, users can select seed
proteins manually and search for drugs targeting them. In the “Advanced Analysis” panel,
users can choose from a list of network medicine algorithms (see Methods and
Supplementary Material for details) to discover drug targets or drug repurposing candidates.
An enrichment analysis of the identified drug target proteins may be performed with
g:Profiler 29​
​ .

Figure 3 - CoVex application scenarios.​ Depending on the starting hypothesis, dedicated
systems medicine algorithms will propagate from selected seeds to connect drugs with viral
proteins using host proteins as proxies. Essentially, four different strategies apply: (a)
Starting with viral proteins, one can identify drugs targeting host proteins that connect the
viral seeds. (b) Starting with a set of proteins of interest as proxies, we identify pathways
connecting them to (selected or all) viral proteins. Subsequently, we identify drugs targeting
this mechanism. (c) Starting with a set of drugs of interest, one may find pathways to
(selected or all) viral proteins extracting a potentially druggable host mechanism. (d)
Hypothesis-driven, hybrid approach with seeds in different levels to be connected for
druggable mechanism extraction. Boxes with light blue background indicate the typical
starting points in the respective application scenario.

Application scenarios
The utility of CoVex and its integrated systems medicine approaches is outlined in the
following four scenarios. More details on each can be found in the Supplementary Material.

Figure 4 - Drug-protein-protein interaction network obtained using the viral proteins E,
M and Spike with multi-Steiner tree followed by closeness centrality.​ Blue nodes are
protein targets. Green nodes are approved drugs and orange nodes are non-approved
drugs. Lines represent the interactions between proteins and drugs. Note that some ACE
inhibitor drugs have been identified, such as Ramipril, Captopril, Perindopril and Enalaprilat
targeting the BDKRB1 protein, which are currently being evaluated in clinical trials.
Scenario a. Starting from a selection of viral proteins, we use the PPI network to identify the
biological mechanism or pathway utilized by the virus. As an example, we consider the viral
proteins E, M and Spike, which constitute the external structure of the virus and thus
mediate entry into the host cells during the infection process 30,31​
​
. We select the interactors of
these viral proteins reported for SARS-CoV-2 and use the multi-Steiner tree algorithm to
uncover the biological pathway involved. The resulting network (Figure 4) yields 26 new
potential drug targets, including the Bradykinin receptor B1 (BDKRB1). Subsequently, we
use closeness centrality to find drugs affecting this pathway. Notably, we identify 6 relevant
drugs that target BDKRB1: Ramipril, Captopril, Perindopril and Enalaprilat (approved), which
belong to the Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor class 32​
​ ; Icatibant, an
33​
antagonist of the Bradykinin receptor B2 ​ ; and bradykinin, a non-approved drug which is
degraded by the ACE 34​
​ . Furthermore, to understand the relationship between BDKRB1 and
two proteins known to participate in the entry of the virus (Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2,
ACE2 and Transmembrane protease serine 2​, ​TMPRSS2) 35​
​ , we use the “custom proteins”
option available in CoVex. We find that Kininogen 1 (KNG1) and Angiotensin (AGT) proteins
connect BDKRB1 with ACE2. These 4 proteins are functionally related through the

Renin-Angiotensin
System,
which
is
targeted
by
ACE
inhibitors
(​www.wikipathways.org/instance/WP554​). In summary, CoVex identifies the protein
BDKRB1, which appears to play a role in SARS-CoV-2 host cell entry and can be targeted
by several ACE inhibitors widely used in clinical trials to treat COVID-19. It should be noted
that the ACE2 protein is not present in the set of seeds used to start the analysis.
Nevertheless, CoVex is capable of identifying the pathway and new protein targets
functionally related to ACE2 (Figure 4).
Scenario b. Starting from both viral proteins and a list of proteins of interest, we can use
CoVex to identify a connecting pathway or biological mechanisms that can be targeted by
drugs. In this scenario, we are specifically interested in viral proteins that suppress host
immunity and the corresponding host immune response pathways. First, we select the viral
proteins ORF7a and ORF3a, which are potentially involved in innate immune response and
apoptosis as discussed in Gordon ​et al. (2020) 10​
​ . Next, we compile a list of proteins of
interest based on the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from the study by Blanco-Melo
et al. (2020) 36
​ lung epithelial cells were infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, leading to
altered expression of immunity-related genes to combat the viral infection. We consider
DEGs known to be associated with the host pathway involving infection with the Herpes
simplex virus (HSV), another viral pathogen. These genes include ​IFIH1​, ​OAS1​, ​STAT1,​
DDX58​, ​OAS2​, ​OAS3,​ ​IRF7,​ ​EIF2AK2,​ ​IFIT1,​ and ​IRF9​. The selected viral proteins and
DEGs (converted to Uniprot ids) were used as seeds for the multi-Steinert tree algorithm to
extract a potential immune-related mechanism. As expected, the resulting subnetwork
reveals that the viral proteins are close to the DEGs in the host PPI network. Closeness
centrality analysis assigned a high rank to Tofacitinib and Ruxolitinib, which are currently
being assessed in clinical trials. Tofacitinib and Ruxolitinib exert immunomodulatory effects
as Janus kinase (Jak) inhibitors 37,38​
​
. Thus, administration with these drugs may mitigate
immune-mediated ​lung ​injury and reduce functional deterioration caused by an
over-amplified host inflammatory response. This could be especially important in later stages
of the disease to prevent an overreaction of the body’s immune system and, hence, may
further prevent the need for mechanical ventilation in patients suffering from severe
COVID-19. Other drugs that target this subnetwork include Masitinib, Erlotinib, and
Sorafenib, which could be further examined in downstream analyses. In a similar manner,
users may provide a custom list of proteins as seeds to hunt for drugs that can target a
putative mechanism of interest.
Scenario c. Starting with a set of drugs of interest, we can follow a top-down approach to
extract potential host mechanisms and additional drugs targeting the proteins participating in
these mechanisms. As an example, we identify 69 drugs currently in clinical trials for
COVID-19 and group them based on their Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC)
classification (Suppl. Table S5)​39​. We focus on drugs from the immunostimulants class (L03)
and their target proteins as starting seeds. We further select the interactors of the
immune-related viral proteins ORF9B, ORF6, ORF3B, and ORF3A​10 as end-point seeds. By
applying the multi-Steiner tree algorithm, we discover pathways of interacting proteins that
connect the selected drugs (and their target proteins) with the selected viral proteins.
Among these connector proteins, we find five genes associated with cytokine signaling in the
immune system according to Reactome Pathways CSF2, NRG1, NUP188, PTPN18,

SOCS1)​40​. Notably, CSF2 is enriched in lung, pancreas and immune cells
(​www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000164400-CSF2​)41
​
and can be inhibited by ​KB002

(​DB05194), which is an investigational drug and an engineered human monoclonal antibody

treatment for inflammatory and autoimmune processes​15​. In summary, with CoVex, we found
a new drug target which may play a key role in the host immune response during viral
infection. We also identified a new drug candidate for COVID-19, as it targets the proteins
involved in the pathogenic mechanisms triggered by ORF3A, ORF3B, ORF6, and ORF9B
viral proteins.
Scenario d. Starting from a hypothesis-driven mixed selection of viral and host proteins as
well as drugs, we seek to utilize PPIs to identify a full mechanism or pathway and to suggest
additional drug candidates. As an application case, we follow up on a recently published
hypothesis by Liu and Abrahams concerning the putative interference of SARS-CoV-2 with
the formation of hemoglobin in erythrocytes 42,43​
​
. Essentially, the virus is believed to interfere
with heme formation causing symptoms of hypoxia. Liu and Abrahams hypothesize that this
would also explain why Chloroquine and Favipiravir are effective drugs, as they may prevent
the viral proteins from competing with iron for the porphyrin in hemoglobin (NSP1-16,
ORF3a, ORF10, and ORF8 targeted by Chloroquine as well as ORF7a targeted by
Favipiravir). Based on this hypothesis (discussed in more detail in the Supplementary
Material), we investigate the pathways connecting these viral proteins with the two effective
drugs Chloroquine and Favipiravir. To this end, we select two known heme binding host
proteins as seeds: Cytochrome b5 reductase, which interacts with the viral protein NSP7,
and the viral ORF3a, which binds to Heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1). Using KeyPathwayMiner
for drug target discovery followed by Closeness Centrality for drug discovery, we identify
methylene blue in addition to Chloroquine and Deferoxamine, which are both in COVID-19
clinical trials 44,45​
​
. Notably, Methylene blue is approved by the FDA for the treatment of
methemoglobinemia, which fits the investigated hypothesis (reduced oxygen-carrying
capacity). Also, Deferoxamine is widely used therapeutically as a chelator of ferric ions in
disorders of iron overload 46​
​ . However, note that the available scientific evidence for a
methemoglobinemia or ferric ion imbalance caused by SARS-CoV-2 is very limited (see
Supplementary Material) and that we use this hypothesis solely to illustrate the potential of
CoVex’ network medicine investigation and hypothesis testing capabilities.

Discussion
COVID-19 is a threat to our health, our social life, as well as our healthcare and economic
systems around the globe. Since the development of safe and effective vaccines is a
time-consuming process, the only alternative to mitigate the damage by the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic is to quickly identify agents for the treatment and control of COVID-19 symptoms.
Much attention in biomedical and clinical research is, thus, given to the task of identifying
therapeutically exploitable drugs. A particular interest lies in drug repurposing, since already
approved drugs can go through shortened clinical trials within months rather than years.
While a number of promising drug repurposing candidates are currently being tested, the
discovery of such candidates is still unstandardized and mostly unstructured. Systems and
network medicine offer alternative approaches, where the process of drug target discovery is
driven by computational data mining methods utilizing molecular interaction networks. As

recently demonstrated by Gysi ​et al. for SARS-CoV-2, this data-driven process can produce
a list of promising drug candidates targeting host proteins in close proximity and
mechanistically related to virus-interacting proteins 11​
​ . Here, we seek to make this network
medicine approach widely available to the community.
With CoVex, we present an interactive and user-friendly web platform that integrates
published data of SARS-CoV-1 as well as recent data about virus-host interactions in
SARS-CoV-2 10
​ with the human interactome and several drug-target interaction databases.
CoVex allows users to mine the integrated virus-host-drug interactome for promising drug
targets and drug repurposing candidates with only a few mouse clicks. Through features
such as interactive seed protein selection, filtering and upload of own lists of proteins or
drugs of interest, CoVex covers diverse application scenarios ranging from data-driven,
hypothesis-free drug target discovery to expert-guided analyses with a clear underlying
hypothesis about virus biology. To address the diversity of research questions adequately,
CoVex implements several state-of-the-art graph analysis methods. These were specifically
tailored to be employed in a network medicine context and include a weighted version of
TrustRank as well as a novel multi-Steiner tree method (Supplementary Material).
While CoVex is a powerful tool for SARS-CoV-1 and -2 research, results uncovered with our
platform have to be considered with caution. We stress that the suggested drug candidates
need to be properly vetted by clinical experts and tested following established procedures
and clinical trials. Current data about virus-host interactions in SARS-CoV-2 is still
preliminary and incomplete. For instance, important proteins such as the ACE2 receptor, a
known entrypoint for the virus 35​
​ , is missing in the SARS-CoV-2 dataset by Gordon ​et al. 10​
​ .
Moreover, we included only drugs that are reported in databases about clinical trials or in the
literature if they have a valid entry in DrugBank, possibly excluding some of the drugs
currently being investigated. Further, we do not differentiate between different sources of
drug target interactions. The strength of experimental evidence may vary depending on the
experimental assay that was used or the type of annotation from the source database, e.g.
clinical annotations and variant annotations from PharmGKB which can be interpreted as
indirect drug-protein associations. It should also be noted that we do not list drugs that target
viral proteins directly, as the goal of CoVex is to unravel novel drug targets further
downstream in the human interactome.
We acknowledge that the choice of algorithm and its associated parameters is non-trivial,
forcing users to engage in time-consuming explorative analysis. To make this easier, we
allow users to queue multiple tasks, which are executed in parallel. As our experience with
this platform grows, we also plan to develop guidelines that allow users to choose an
appropriate method for a particular research question. We further plan to integrate new data
about virus-host interactions and ongoing clinical trials in corona viruses as it becomes
available.
For the future, we also plan to extend the CoVex network medicine platform to other viruses
in which new drug targets and drug repurposing candidates are urgently sought, including
MERS, Zika, influenza and dengue.

Conclusions
We present CoVex, the first web-based platform for the interactive exploration and
network-based analysis of virus-host interactions, aimed towards drug repurposing for the
treatment of COVID-19. CoVex can be easily updated to accommodate the fast-paced data
generation in the battle against the global pandemic. CoVex is expected to speed up the
discovery of potential therapeutics for COVID-19.

Acknowledgements
TK and SS are grateful for financial support from H2020 project RepoTrial (nr. 777111). JM,
JS, NKW, and RN received funding from H2020 project FeatureCloud (nr. 826078). JB, TK,
and ML are grateful for financial support from BMBF grant Sys_CARE (nr. ​01ZX1908A​) of
the Federal German Ministry of Research and Education. JB’s BMBF grant SyMBoD (nr.
01ZX1910A) also financed parts of this project. MO is funded by the Collaborative Research
Center SFB924 of the German Research Foundation. JB was partially funded by his VILLUM
Young Investigator Grant nr. 13154. Contributions by JKP and TDR are funded by the
Bavarian State Ministry of Science and the Arts in the framework of the Centre
Digitisation.Bavaria (ZD.B, grant LipiTUM). MSA is grateful for a PhD fellowship funding from
CONACYT (CVU659273) and the German Academic Exchange Service, DAAD (ref.
91693321).
References
Coronavirus. ​https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019​.
Dimensions COVID-19 publications, data sets, clinical trials - updated daily. ​Google
Docs
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-kTZJZ1GAhJ2m4GAIhw1ZdlgO46JpvX0ZQa
232VWRmw/edit​.
3. Scholar, S. COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19).
https://pages.semanticscholar.org/coronavirus-research​.
4. Guirimand, T., Delmotte, S. & Navratil, V. VirHostNet 2.0: surfing on the web of
virus/host molecular interactions data. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​43​, D583–7 (2015).
5. PRABI. VirHostNet 2.0 · Accueil. ​http://virhostnet.prabi.fr/​.
6. Sun, P., Guo, J., Winnenburg, R. & Baumbach, J. Drug repurposing by integrated
literature mining and drug–gene–disease triangulation. ​Drug Discov. Today​ ​22​, 615–619
(2017).
7. ‘Solidarity’ clinical trial for COVID-19 treatments.
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/global-research-on-n
ovel-coronavirus-2019-ncov/solidarity-clinical-trial-for-covid-19-treatments​.
8. Baumbach, J. & Schmidt, H. From single drug targets to synergistic network
pharmacology in ischemic stroke. ​Proceedings of the​ (2019).
9. Baumbach, J. & Schmidt, H. The End of Medicine as We Know It: Introduction to the
New Journal, Systems Medicine. (2018).
10. Gordon, D. E., Jang, G. M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J. & Obernier, K. A
SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map Reveals Drug Targets and
Potential Drug-Repurposing. ​BioRxiv​ (2020).
11. Gysi, D. M. ​et al.​ Network Medicine Framework for Identifying Drug Repurposing
1.
2.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.
32.

Opportunities for COVID-19. ​arXiv [q-bio.MN]​ (2020).
Pfefferle, S. ​et al.​ The SARS-coronavirus-host interactome: identification of cyclophilins
as target for pan-coronavirus inhibitors. ​PLoS Pathog.​ ​7​, e1002331 (2011).
Kotlyar, M., Pastrello, C., Malik, Z. & Jurisica, I. IID 2018 update: context-specific
physical protein-protein interactions in human, model organisms and domesticated
species. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​47​, D581–D589 (2019).
Mendez, D. ​et al.​ ChEMBL: towards direct deposition of bioassay data. ​Nucleic Acids
Res.​ ​47​, D930–D940 (2019).
Wishart, D. S. ​et al.​ DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for 2018.
Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​46​, D1074–D1082 (2018).
Ursu, O. ​et al.​ DrugCentral 2018: an update. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​47​, D963–D970 (2019).
Wang, Y. ​et al.​ Therapeutic target database 2020: enriched resource for facilitating
research and early development of targeted therapeutics. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​48​,
D1031–D1041 (2020).
Armstrong, J. F. ​et al.​ The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2020:
extending immunopharmacology content and introducing the IUPHAR/MMV Guide to
MALARIA PHARMACOLOGY. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​48​, D1006–D1021 (2020).
Barbarino, J. M., Whirl-Carrillo, M., Altman, R. B. & Klein, T. E. PharmGKB: A worldwide
resource for pharmacogenomic information. ​Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med.​ ​10​,
e1417 (2018).
Gilson, M. K. ​et al.​ BindingDB in 2015: A public database for medicinal chemistry,
computational chemistry and systems pharmacology. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​44​, D1045–53
(2016).
Talevi, A. Multi-target pharmacology: possibilities and limitations of the ‘skeleton key
approach’ from a medicinal chemist perspective. ​Front. Pharmacol.​ ​6​, 673 (2015).
Zhang, S., Zhao, H. & John, R. Development of a quantitative relationship between
inhibition percentage and both incubation time and inhibitor concentration for inhibition
biosensors—theoretical and practical considerations. ​Biosensors and Bioelectronics​ vol.
16 1119–1126 (2001).
Charatan, F. US launches new clinical trials database. ​BMJ​ ​320​, 668 (2000).
Batra, R. ​et al.​ On the performance of de novo pathway enrichment. ​NPJ Syst Biol Appl
3​, 6 (2017).
Kacprowski, T., Doncheva, N. T. & Albrecht, M. NetworkPrioritizer: a versatile tool for
network-based prioritization of candidate disease genes or other molecules.
Bioinformatics​ ​29​, 1471–1473 (2013).
Gyöngyi, Z., Garcia-Molina, H. & Pedersen, J. - Combating Web Spam with TrustRank.
in ​Proceedings 2004 VLDB Conference​ (eds. Nascimento, M. A. et al.) 576–587
(Morgan Kaufmann, 2004). doi:​10.1016/B978-012088469-8.50052-8​.
Alcaraz, N. ​et al.​ Robust de novo pathway enrichment with KeyPathwayMiner 5.
F1000Res.​ ​5​, 1531 (2016).
Peixoto, T. P. The graph-tool python library. ​figshare​ (2014)
doi:​10.6084/m9.figshare.1164194​.
Raudvere, U. ​et al.​ g:Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and
conversions of gene lists (2019 update). ​Nucleic Acids Research​ vol. 47 W191–W198
(2019).
de Haan, C. A. M. & Rottier, P. J. M. Molecular Interactions in the Assembly of
Coronaviruses. in ​Advances in Virus Research​ vol. 64 165–230 (Academic Press,
2005).
Walls, A. C. ​et al.​ Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. ​Cell​ ​181​, 281–292.e6 (2020).
Piepho, R. W. Overview of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors. ​Am. J. Health.

33.
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

Syst. Pharm.​ ​57 Suppl 1​, S3–7 (2000).
Icatibant. ​Drugs in R & D​ ​5​, 343–348 (2004).
Kuoppala, A., Lindstedt, K. A., Saarinen, J., Kovanen, P. T. & Kokkonen, J. O.
Inactivation of bradykinin by angiotensin-converting enzyme and by carboxypeptidase N
in human plasma. ​Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.​ ​278​, H1069–74 (2000).
Hoffmann, M. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is
Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. ​Cell​ (2020)
doi:​10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052​.
Blanco-Melo, D. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from in
vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems. ​bioRxiv​ 2020.03.24.004655 (2020)
doi:​10.1101/2020.03.24.004655​.
Elli, E. M., Baratè, C., Mendicino, F., Palandri, F. & Palumbo, G. A. Mechanisms
Underlying the Anti-inflammatory and Immunosuppressive Activity of Ruxolitinib. ​Front.
Oncol.​ ​9​, 1186 (2019).
van Vollenhoven, R. ​et al.​ Evaluation of the Short-, Mid-, and Long-Term Effects of
Tofacitinib on Lymphocytes in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis. ​Arthritis Rheumatol
71​, 685–695 (2019).
WHOCC. WHOCC - ATC/DDD Index. ​WHOCC​ ​https://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/​.
Cytokine Signaling in Immune system. ​Reactome
https://reactome.org/content/detail/R-HSA-1280215​.
Uhlen, M. ​et al.​ A pathology atlas of the human cancer transcriptome. ​Science​ ​357​,
(2017).
Abrahams, L. Covid-19: acquired acute porphyria hypothesis. (2020)
doi:​10.31219/osf.io/4wkfy​.
Wenzhong, L. & Hualan, L. COVID-19: Attacks the 1-Beta Chain of Hemoglobin and
Captures the Porphyrin to Inhibit Human Heme Metabolism. (2020)
doi:​10.26434/chemrxiv.11938173.v7​.
Vincent, M. J. ​et al.​ Chloroquine is a potent inhibitor of SARS coronavirus infection and
spread. ​Virol. J.​ ​2​, 69 (2005).
Wang, M. ​et al.​ Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro. ​Cell Res.​ ​30​, 269–271 (2020).
Lederman, H. M., Cohen, A., Lee, J. W., Freedman, M. H. & Gelfand, E. W.
Deferoxamine: a reversible S-phase inhibitor of human lymphocyte proliferation. ​Blood
64​, 748–753 (1984).

Supplementary Material - Exploring the SARS-CoV-2 virus-host-drug interactome for drug
repurposing

Here, we present the new algorithmic techniques we developed to analyze the virus-host-drug
interactome by starting from a set of seed nodes, avoiding hubs. Moreover, we give additional,
detailed information about the application cases described in our CoVex paper.
New models and algorithms for seeded, weighted network analysis with hub-penalties
Multi-Steiner trees: The Steiner tree problem is a classical combinatorial optimization problem.
Given an undirected graph G = (V , E ) with non-negative edge costs c and a set of seed nodes
S ⊆ V , it asks to compute a minimum-cost Steiner tree for S , where a Steiner tree for S is a
tree in G that contains all nodes v ∈ S . Exactly solving this problem is NP-hard, but several
efficient approximation algorithms exist.
In CoVex, we compute (several) Steiner trees to connect selected host or viral proteins and
extract a potentially druggable mechanism. For this, we developed a customized version of the
2-approximation algorithm by Kou et al. 1,2​
​ . There are two main differences: First, we do not only
compute one but return the union of K Steiner trees, where K is a parameter that can be set
by the user. Computing several Steiner trees increases the stability of the extracted mechanism.
This is important, because the networks used in CoVex are very dense, which implies that
solutions to the Steiner tree problem are usually non-unique. Which solution is returned is,
hence, a matter of chance, if only one Steiner tree is computed. Returning the union of K
Steiner trees mitigates this problem. Second, we employ special parameterized edge costs c λ
with a hub-penalty λ ∈ [0, 1] that can be specified by the user (detailed below). If λ is set to a
value close to 1, the returned Steiner trees avoid hub-nodes. This is important, because
targeting proteins which are hub-nodes in the human protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
potentially results in many undesired side effects.
The multi-Steiner tree algorithm employed in CoVex is implemented as follows: In a first step,
we use the algorithm by Kou et al. to compute the first Steiner tree T . Moreover, we run a
depth-first search to find all bridges in the graph, where a bridge is an edge whose deletion
results in the graph being disconnected. Let L be the list of edges in T , C be the cost of T ,
and τ be a user defined tolerance that specifies by how much the costs of the subsequent trees
may exceed C . Furthermore, let k be the number of already discovered trees (initialized to 1)
and U be the set of returned nodes (initialized to the nodes contained in T ). We iterate the
following steps until k = K or L is empty. Subsequently, we return the subgraph induced by U .
1.

Pop edge e from L .

2.

If e is a bridge, go to step 1.

3.

Temporarily delete e from G .

4.

Run the algorithm by Kou et al. to compute the next candidate tree T ′ .

5.

If the cost of T ′ does not exceed C ·

6.

Remove all edges from L which are not contained in T ′ .

7.

Reinsert e into G .

100 + τ
100

, add the nodes of T ′ to U and increment k .

Weighted TrustRank​: TrustRank is a variant of Google’s pagerank algorithm, where “trust” is
iteratively propagated through the network starting from an initial set of (trusted) seed nodes 3​
​.
At termination, each node in the network receives a score which is high if the node is easily
reachable from a subset of seed nodes, which themselves assume central positions in the
overall topology of the network.
In CoVex, TrustRank can be used for two purposes. First, TrustRank can be used to rank drugs
targeting a previously selected or computed set of host proteins. Second, it can be employed to
discover potentially druggable host proteins which are relevant for a given set of viral or host
seed proteins. Note that, unlike the result returned by the multi-Steiner algorithm, the top ranked
nodes returned by TrustRank are not guaranteed to be connected. In practice, however, many
of the returned nodes often form one large connected component. Thus, TrustRank allows to
extract pathways in situations where it is not clear ​a priori ​that all seed nodes are involved in
one mechanism.
In CoVex, we use a customized version of the TrustRank algorithm which allows the user to
avoid hubs, if required. This is achieved by defining parameterized edge diameters
d λ (e) = 1/c λ (e) (the definition of c λ is given below in section “Parameterized edge costs with
hub-penalty”). If the user sets the hub-penalty λ to a value close to 1, the diameters of the
edges which are incident with hub-nodes are small. Therefore, “trust” flows less easily to the
hubs, which implies that they obtain a lower score. Further parameters are the result size, which
specifies how many top ranked nodes should be displayed in the result, and the damping factor
d ∈ [0, 1] . The damping factor d controls how easily “trust” can flow to nodes which are far
away from the seeds. The larger d , the higher scores distant nodes receive.
Weighted, seeded closeness centrality: ​Closeness centrality is a simple centrality measure
which ranks the nodes in a network based on the average distance of the shortest paths to all
other nodes. Kacprowski et al. suggested a version of this centrality measure where only the
distances to a selected set of seed nodes are taken into consideration 4​
​.
In CoVex, we use a modified version of this approach which uses the parameterized edge costs
c λ instead of uniform costs. This customized version of seeded closeness centrality hence
assigns lower scores to hubs, if requested by the user. Like TrustRank, closeness centrality can
be used both for extracting drug targets and for ranking drugs.
Parameterized edge costs with hub-penalty: For each edge (u, v ) ∈ E in the network G , the
parameterized costs employed by the three algorithms presented above are defined as

c λ (u, v ) = (1 − λ) · avdeg(G) + λ ·

deg(u) + deg(v)
2

, where deg(u) and deg(v) are the degrees (i.e.,

number of links) of the nodes u and v , avdeg(G) is the mean degree of all nodes contained in
G , and λ ∈ [0, 1] is a hub-penalty, which can be specified by the user. Note that for λ = 0 , all
edge costs equal avdeg(G) (no hub-penalty), while for λ = 1 , the cost of each edge is a direct
function of the degrees of its incident nodes (maximal hub-penalty). By setting λ to a value
between 0 and 1, the user can balance between these two extremes.

Figure S1 - The multi-Steiner tree connecting all host proteins​ interacting with the virus
(blue nodes are seeds) visualized in Cytoscape 5​
​ using the GraphML export feature of CoVex.
The purple nodes are the connectors building a tree structured subnetwork of the human
interactome.
Why the host protein interactions matter for drug repurposing

247 out of 332 ​host proteins interacting with the virus (interactors) reported in Gordon ​et al. 6​ for
SARS-CoV-2 form a large connected component, indicating that most of the direct targets of the
virus are in a close proximity in the human interactome. 12 drugs currently in clinical trials
(Dexamethasone, Colchicine, Pravastatin, Ribavirin, Ruxolitinib, Bromhexine, Oseltamivir,
Noscapine, Ascorbic acid, Tofacitinib, Artenimol, Suramin) target the virus interactors directly.
Figure S1 shows a Steiner tree of minimum cost connecting all the interactors. It consists of 44
connector proteins in addition to 332 interactors. The Steiner tree enables us to find new drug
target candidates. Importantly, six of the 69 drugs currently in clinical trials (Table S5) target
exclusively the connector proteins revealed by our analysis, namely Glycyrrhizic acid, Synthetic
Conjugated Estrogens B, Leflunomide, Chloroquine, Deferoxamine, and Thalidomide.
The four application scenarios
Application scenario a - Starting from a selection of viral proteins, we seek to use the human
interactome to identify biological mechanisms or pathways utilized by the virus during infection.
As an example, we are interested in the viral proteins E, M and Spike, which constitute the
external structure of the virus and thus participate in the entry into host cells 7,8​
​ .
First, we select all host proteins interacting with the viral proteins E, M and Spike from the
SARS-CoV-2 dataset. We then use the multi-Steiner Tree algorithm with the parameters shown
in Table S1 to uncover the biological pathway involved. The resulting network allows the
identification of 26 new potential drug targets, including the Bradykinin receptor B1 (BDKRB1).
Next, we use closeness centrality with the parameters shown in Table S1 to find drugs affecting
this pathway. We identify a total of 30 approved and 10 non-approved drugs (Figure S2).
Notably, we find 6 relevant drugs that target BDKRB1: Ramipril, Captopril, Perindopril and
Enalaprilat (approved), which belong to the Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
class 9​
​ . Icatibant is an antagonist of the Bradykinin receptor B2 10
​ and bradykinin is a
11​
non-approved drug which is degraded by the ACE ​ .
Finally, to understand the relationship between BDKRB1 and Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2
(ACE2) as well as Transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2), two proteins known to be
involved during virus entry 12​
​ , we use the “custom proteins” option available in CoVex and utilize
the multi-Steiner tree algorithm with the same parameters as in Table S1. We find that the
Kininogen 1 (KNG1) and Angiotensin (AGT) proteins connect BDKRB1 with ACE2 (Figure S3).
These 4 proteins are functionally related through the Renin-Angiotensin System, which is
targeted by ACE inhibitors (​https://www.wikipathways.org/instance/WP554​).
In summary, CoVex identifies the protein BDKRB1, which participates in the pathway affected
by SARS-CoV-2 and can be targeted by several ACE inhibitors, which are widely used in clinical
trials to treat COVID-19. It should be noted that the ACE2 protein is not present in the set of
seeds used to start the analysis; however, CoVex is capable of identifying the pathway and new
protein targets functionally related to ACE2, which can be targeted by ACE inhibitors as well. In

this case, CoVex allows the identification of the mechanism behind the drugs currently
considered for treating currently considered for treating COVID-19.

Figure S2 - Network obtained from interactors of baits E, M and Spike with multi-Steiner
tree followed by closeness centrality.​ Blue nodes are protein targets, green nodes are
approved drugs and orange nodes are non-approved drugs. Lines represent the interactions
between the proteins and drugs. ACE inhibitor drugs are identified, such as Ramipril, Captopril,
Perindopril and Enalaprilat targeting the BDKRB1 protein, which are currently being evaluated in
clinical trials in COVID-19 patients. Note that we also included this Figure in the main document
(Figure 4) to showcase how CoVex results look like but kept it here as well for increased
readability.

Figure S3 - The subnetwork obtained with the multi-Steiner tree algorithm shows the
connections between ACE2, TMPRSS2 and BDKRB1.​ Dark blue nodes represent the seed
proteins and light blue nodes represent the connector proteins identified.
Table S1 - Algorithms and parameters used in application scenario a
Algorithm

multi-Steiner tree

Closeness centrality

10

N.A.

Tolerance

0

N.A.

Result size

N.A.

40

DISABLED

DISABLED

0

1

FALSE

N.A.

Include indirect drugs

N.A.

FALSE

Include non-approved drugs

N.A.

TRUE

Number of trees

Maximum degree
Hub penalty
Include non-seed viral proteins

Application scenario b - Candidate drugs for the treatment of COVID-19 can be identified
starting from a user-defined set of seeds comprising differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and
viral proteins. Such a custom list can be obtained from other datasets, such as experiments
and/or literature. One possible strategy is to use proteins known to be associated with a specific
biological process, such as SARS-CoV-2 proteins involved in viral pathogenesis and host
proteins that participate in the corresponding host immune response to infection. This way, we
use the host PPI network to connect the viral proteins to the DEGs and obtain a potential
mechanism that can be targeted using repurposable drugs. To obtain a custom list of DEGs,
raw counts from the gene expression data of SARS-CoV-2-infected lung epithelial A549 cells
relative to mock-treated cells were obtained from Blanco-Melo ​et al. 13
​ (GEO accession
GSE147507). Differential expression analysis using the edgeR (v.3.26.8) package (fold change
≥​2, adjusted p-value <0.05) was performed to obtain a list of DEGs. To identify host cell
pathways enriched in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, KEGG enrichment was performed
using the gseapy (​v.0.9.15​) ​package. Enriched KEGG terms included pathways that are known
to be involved in immune response to pathogens, such as “Influenza A”, “Herpes simplex
infection”, “Measles”, and “Hepatitis C”.
In this example, we use the CoVex platform to select viral proteins involved in innate immune
response and apoptosis, namely, ORF7a and ORF3a, as indicated in Gordon ​et al. 6​
​ . Next,
using the “Custom proteins” option, we upload the Uniprot IDs of the DEGs that participate in
the enriched pathway Herpes simplex infection, which is involved in response to infection with
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), another viral pathogen. The enriched DEGs include ​IFIH1​, ​OAS1,​
STAT1​, ​DDX58​, ​OAS2,​ ​OAS3,​ ​IRF7,​ ​EIF2AK2,​ ​IFIT1​, and ​IRF9.​ We then use both the viral
proteins and DEGs as seeds for the multi-Steiner tree algorithm to extract a subnetwork that is
relevant to our pathway of interest, shown in Figure S4. Next, we use closeness centrality on
the resulting subnetwork to obtain drugs. The parameters used to run the multi-Steiner tree and
closeness centrality algorithms can be found in Table S2. Top-ranking drugs included Tofacitinib
and Ruxolitinib, which are currently being assessed in clinical trials for the treatment of
COVID-19 (Figure S5). Tofacitinib and Ruxolitinib are both known to inhibit Janus kinase (Jak),
which promote cytokine signaling 14,15​
​
. Thus, administration with these drugs can mitigate
immune-mediated ​lung ​injury and prevent functional functional deterioration in COVID-19

patients caused by an over-amplified host immune response. As shown in Figure S5, other
drugs that target this subnetwork include Masitinib, Erlotinib, and Sorafenib, which could be
further examined in downstream analyses. In a similar manner, users can provide a custom list
of proteins to retrieve drugs that can target their mechanism of interest, followed by careful
examination of the results.
Table S2 - Algorithms and parameters used in application scenario b
Algorithm
multi-Steiner tree

Closeness centrality

10

N.A.

Tolerance

0

N.A.

Result size

N.A.

20

DISABLED

DISABLED

0

0

TRUE

N.A.

Include indirect drugs

N.A.

FALSE

Include non-approved drugs

N.A.

FALSE

Number of trees

Maximum degree
Hub penalty
Include non-seed viral proteins

Figure S4 - The subnetwork showing the connections between the viral proteins (ORF7A,
ORF3A) and proteins involved in Herpes simplex infection.​ Dark blue nodes indicate
proteins involved in Herpes simplex infection, while bright blue nodes indicate the connector
nodes found by the multi-Steiner tree algorithm. The resulting subnetwork comprises potential
drug targets to suppress the host immune response.

Figure S5 - Closeness centrality recovered drugs​, such as Tofacitinib and Ruxolitinib, which
are currently being evaluated in clinical trials in COVID-19 patients.
Application scenario c - Another approach to find candidate drugs to combat COVID-19 is to
connect the targets of promising drugs which are already in clinical trials to the viral proteins.
We can identify the candidate mechanisms by extracting the sub-network(s) connecting these
two ends with a minimum number of intermediate connector proteins. This step can be done by
using the multi-Steiner tree algorithm integrated in our CoVex platform. We can then seek for
the drugs targeting the identified connector proteins utilizing the closeness centrality algorithm
from the “Find Drugs” function.
As an example, we start with the drugs classified as immunostimulants (Sargramostim,
Peginterferon beta-1a, and Peginterferon alfa-2a)​16​, and then use the multi-Steiner tree
algorithm from the “Find Drug Targets” function to connect their targets (IL3RA, CSF2RB,
SDC2, PRG2, IFNAR2, IFNAR1, and CSF2RA) to the host interactor genes of viral proteins
ORF9B, ORF6, ORF3B, and ORF3A (ALG5, ARL6IP6, BAG5, CHMP2A, CLCC1, CSDE1,
DCTPP1, DPH5, HEATR3, HMOX1, MARK1, MARK2, MARK3, MDN1, MTCH1, NUP98,
PTBP2, RAE1, SLC9A3R1, STOML2, SUN2, TOMM70, TRIM59, VPS11, VPS39), see Figure
S6. Among the identified connector proteins, we find five genes (CSF2, NRG1, NUP188,
PTPN18, SOCS1) associated with cytokine signaling in the immune system according to
Reactome Pathways 17​
​ . From this list, notably, CSF2 is enriched in lung and immune cells
(​www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000164400-CSF2​) 18​
​ . This gene can be inhibited by the
investigational drug K
​ B002 (​DB05194) (Figure S7), which is an engineered human monoclonal
antibody-based treatment for inflammatory and autoimmune processes 19​
​ .

Table S3 - Algorithms and parameters used in application scenario c
Algorithm
multi-Steiner tree

Closeness centrality

10

N.A.

Tolerance

0

N.A.

Result size

N.A.

50

DISABLED

DISABLED

1

0

FALSE

N.A.

Include indirect drugs

N.A.

FALSE

Include non-approved drugs

N.A.

TRUE

Number of trees

Maximum degree
Hub penalty
Include non-seed viral proteins

Figure S6 - Cytoscape illustration of the multi-Steiner tree​ analysis performed with CoVex
after using the export to GraphML feature, with targets of Sargramostim, Peginterferon beta-1a,
and Peginterferon alfa-2a (purple) and the host interactor genes of viral proteins ORF9B, ORF6,
ORF3B, and ORF3A (green) as seeds. Connector proteins (blue). Viral proteins (red).
Connector genes associated with cytokine signaling in the immune system (circled in blue).

Figure S7 - The closeness centrality algorithms ranks the drugs​ targeting the connector
nodes from Figure S6. The protein encoded by CSF2 is inhibited by drug ​KB002 (​DB05194).
Application scenario d - Some hypotheses might require a hybrid seeding approach, where
we are required to start from a hypothesis-driven mixed selection of viral and host proteins as
well as drugs to explore protein-protein interactions to identify a mechanism and suggest
additional drugs.
Here, we follow a recently published hypothesis concerning the interference of the SARS-CoV-2
with the formation of hemoglobin in erythrocytes 22,23​
​
. Essentially, we follow the idea that the
virus could interfere with porphyrin, which is a substrate, together with iron (Fe​2+​) ions, during
the synthesis of the heme prosthetic group in hemoglobin. The viral proteins thus hinder the
interaction of iron with porphyrin, as the viral proteins are hypothesized to compete with iron for
the porphyrin and thus to inhibit heme group synthesis, leading to hypoxia symptoms 24​
​ . Liu and
Abrahams suggest that this might explain why Chloroquine and Favipiravir are effective drugs,
as they may prevent the virus from competing with iron for the porphyrin: Chloroquine by
interfering with the viral proteins NSP1-16, ORF3a, and ORF10 which may bind the porphyrin to
prevent heme synthesis, and also by inhibiting the binding of viral protein ORF8 to porphyrins
“to a certain extent” 24​
​ . Favipiravir could prohibit ORF7a from binding to (free) porphyrin in
addition to preventing the virus from entering the host cells 24​
​ .

Starting from this theory, we investigate the host interactome for potential drug repurposing
candidates. In CoVex, we selected the viral proteins NSP1-16, ORF3a, ORF7a, ORF8 and
ORF10 as seeds and expanded the network to all of their host partner proteins. Notably, we see
that NSP7 may bind to Cytochrome b5 reductase (CYB5R), which converts methemoglobin to
hemoglobin (oxygen-transporting Fe​2+ hemoglobin to non-oxygen-transporting Fe​3+
hemoglobin). Cytochrome b5 reductase is involved in the transfer of reducing equivalents from
the physiological electron donor, NADH, via an FAD domain to the small molecules of
cytochrome b5. It is also heavily involved in many oxidation and reduction reactions, such as the
reduction of methemoglobin to hemoglobin 25–27​
​
. In addition, we see that ORF3a binds to
HMOX1 (Heme oxygenase 1), which might lead to interference with heme degradation. We
continued with all 238 host interactors as new seeds and executed KeyPathwayMiner (Table
S4) to investigate the host interactome for proteins that connect the selected virus-host
interactions proteins. We discovered five new drug targets (the proteins APP, XPO1, TRIM25,
HSCB, FBXO6) for which we extracted 20 drug candidates using the closeness centrality
measure and only screening for currently approved drugs. In the resulting ranked list, we
rediscovered Chloroquine as well as Deferoxamine, both of which are currently in clinical trial or
discussed in the literature as candidate drugs for COVID-19 treatment. Note that Deferoxamine
is widely used for the treatment of Thalassemia and as a chelator of ferric ion in disorders of
iron overload 28​
​ . In addition to these two drugs, we find Methylene blue, a drug that is approved
by the FDA for the treatment of methemoglobinemia. Note that the evidence for a
methemoglobinemia caused by SARS-CoV-2 is anecdotal (no reports on abnormal
methemoglobin levels, iron metabolism markers, etc. exist) and we used this hypothesis to
illustrate a potential hybrid level starting point for the network medicine investigation of a
hypothesis using CoVex.
Table S4 - Algorithms and parameters used in application scenario d
Algorithm
KeyPathwayMiner

Closeness centrality

5

N.A.

Result Size

N.A.

20

Maximum Degree

N.A.

DISABLED

Hub Penalty

N.A.

0.5

Include indirect drugs

N.A.

FALSE

Include non-approved drugs

N.A.

FALSE

K

Table S5 - All drugs in clinical trials targeting host proteins sorted by classification.​ We
compiled a list of all drugs targeting human proteins currently registered in clinical governmental
trial databases (see full paper).

Drug Classification

Class ID

Drug names

Immunostimulants

L03

Sargramostim,Peginterferon alfa-2a,Peginterferon beta-1a

Immunosuppressants

L04

Eculizumab,Thalidomide,Pirfenidone,Anakinra,Fingolimod,Tocil
izumab,Sarilumab,
Ixekizumab,Siltuximab,Leflunomide,Emapalumab,Tofacitinib,A
dalimumab,Baricitinib

Antineoplastic agents

L01

Ruxolitinib,Bevacizumab

Gynecological Anti Infectives And
Antiseptics

G01

Darunavir,Ascorbic acid,Sildenafil

Vitamins

A11

Calcitriol,Ascorbic acid

Ophthalmologicals

S01

Heparin,Dexamethasone,Acetylcysteine,Ascorbic
acid,Methylprednisolone,Azithromycin

Antipsoriatics

D05

Calcitriol

Lipid Modifying Agents

C10

Pravastatin

Antiobesity Preparations;excl.Diet
Products

A08

Phentermine

Antivirals For Systemic Use

J05

Atazanavir,Ribavirin,Oseltamivir,Cobicistat,Sofosbuvir,Ritonavir
,Darunavir,Lopinavir

Urologicals

G04

Sildenafil

Antibacterials For Systemic Use

J01

Azithromycin

Other Respiratory System Products

R07

Nitric Oxide

Antiprotozoals

P01

Suramin,Hydroxychloroquine,Artenimol,Chloroquine

Psycholeptics

N05

Dexmedetomidine

Agents Acting On The Renin-angiotensin C09
system

Losartan

Allothertherapeuticproducts

V03

Oxygen,Deferoxamine,Acetylcysteine,Cobicistat

Other Gynecologicals

G02

Naproxen

Topical Products For Joint And Muscular M02
Pain

Naproxen

Anti Inflammatory And Antirheumatic
Products

M01

Naproxen

Anesthetics

N01

Sevoflurane,Propofol

Anthelmintics

P02

Levamisole

Anti-acne preparations

D10

Dexamethasone,Methylprednisolone

Corticosteroids For Systemic Use

H02

Dexamethasone,Methylprednisolone

Corticosteroids;dermatological
preparations

D07

Dexamethasone,Methylprednisolone

Antithromboticagents

B01

Heparin,Enoxaparin,Dipyridamole

Vasoprotectives

C05

Heparin,Dexamethasone

Nasal Preparations

R01

Ciclesonide,Dexamethasone

Ophthalmological And Cytological
Preparations

S03

Dexamethasone

Otologicals

S02

Dexamethasone

Stomatological Preparations

A01

Dexamethasone

Antigout Preparations

M04

Colchicine

Drugs for obstructive airway diseases

R03

Ciclesonide,Mepolizumab

Coughandcoldpreparations

R05

Acetylcysteine,Bromhexine,Noscapine

Cardiac therapy

C01

Angiotensin II

Anti Hemorrhagic

B02

Camostat

Bile And Liver Therapy

A05

Glycyrrhizic acid

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

Agrawal, A., Klein, P. & Ravi, R. When Trees Collide: An Approximation Algorithm for the
Generalized Steiner Problem on Networks. ​SIAM Journal on Computing​ vol. 24 440–456
(1995).
Kou, L., Markowsky, G. & Berman, L. A fast algorithm for Steiner trees. ​Acta Informatica
vol. 15 141–145 (1981).
Gyongyi, Z., Garciamolina, H. & Pedersen, J. Combating Web Spam with TrustRank.
Proceedings 2004 VLDB Conference​ 576–587 (2004)
doi:​10.1016/b978-012088469-8/50052-8​.
Kacprowski, T., Doncheva, N. T. & Albrecht, M. NetworkPrioritizer: a versatile tool for
network-based prioritization of candidate disease genes or other molecules. ​Bioinformatics
29​, 1471–1473 (2013).
Shannon, P. ​et al.​ Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of
biomolecular interaction networks. ​Genome Res.​ ​13​, 2498–2504 (2003).
Gordon, D. E. ​et al.​ A SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map Reveals Drug
Targets and Potential Drug-Repurposing. ​bioRxiv​ 2020.03.22.002386 (2020)
doi:​10.1101/2020.03.22.002386​.
de Haan, C. A. M. & Rottier, P. J. M. Molecular Interactions in the Assembly of
Coronaviruses. in ​Advances in Virus Research​ vol. 64 165–230 (Academic Press, 2005).
Walls, A. C. ​et al.​ Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. ​Cell​ ​181​, 281–292.e6 (2020).

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Piepho, R. W. Overview of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors. ​Am. J. Health.
Syst. Pharm.​ ​57 Suppl 1​, S3–7 (2000).
Icatibant. ​Drugs in R & D​ ​5​, 343–348 (2004).
Kuoppala, A., Lindstedt, K. A., Saarinen, J., Kovanen, P. T. & Kokkonen, J. O. Inactivation
of bradykinin by angiotensin-converting enzyme and by carboxypeptidase N in human
plasma. ​Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.​ ​278​, H1069–74 (2000).
Hoffmann, M. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is
Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. ​Cell​ (2020)
doi:​10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052​.
Blanco-Melo, D. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from in
vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems. ​bioRxiv​ 2020.03.24.004655 (2020)
doi:​10.1101/2020.03.24.004655​.
van Vollenhoven, R. ​et al.​ Evaluation of the Short-, Mid-, and Long-Term Effects of
Tofacitinib on Lymphocytes in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis. ​Arthritis Rheumatol​ ​71​,
685–695 (2019).
Elli, E. M., Baratè, C., Mendicino, F., Palandri, F. & Palumbo, G. A. Mechanisms Underlying
the Anti-inflammatory and Immunosuppressive Activity of Ruxolitinib. ​Front. Oncol.​ ​9​, 1186
(2019).
WHOCC. WHOCC - ATC/DDD Index. ​WHOCC​ ​https://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/​.
Cytokine Signaling in Immune system. ​Reactome
https://reactome.org/content/detail/R-HSA-1280215​.
Uhlen, M. ​et al.​ A pathology atlas of the human cancer transcriptome. ​Science​ ​357​, (2017).
Wishart, D. S. ​et al.​ DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for 2018.
Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​46​, D1074–D1082 (2018).
Hall, D. C., Jr & Ji, H.-F. A search for medications to treat COVID-19 via in silico molecular
docking models of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein and 3CL protease. ​Travel Med.
Infect. Dis.​ 101646 (2020) doi:​10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101646​.
Khan, S. A., Zia, K., Ashraf, S., Uddin, R. & Ul-Haq, Z. Identification of chymotrypsin-like
protease inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 via integrated computational approach. ​J. Biomol.
Struct. Dyn.​ 1–10 (2020) doi:​10.1080/07391102.2020.1751298​.
Abrahams, L. Covid-19: acquired acute porphyria hypothesis. (2020)
doi:​10.31219/osf.io/4wkfy​.
Wenzhong, L. & Hualan, L. COVID-19: Attacks the 1-Beta Chain of Hemoglobin and
Captures the Porphyrin to Inhibit Human Heme Metabolism. (2020)
doi:​10.26434/chemrxiv.11938173.v7​.
Liu, W. & Li, H. COVID-19: Attacks the 1-Beta Chain of Hemoglobin and Captures the
Porphyrin to Inhibit Human Heme Metabolism.
Schomburg, D., Salzmann, M. & Stephan, D. Cytochrome-b5 reductase. ​Enzyme
Handbook 7​ 225–231 (1994) doi:​10.1007/978-3-642-78521-4_46​.
Percy, M. J., McFerran, N. V. & Lappin, T. R. J. Disorders of oxidised haemoglobin. ​Blood
Rev.​ ​19​, 61–68 (2005).
Hay, D. & Weatherall, D. J. Disorders of the synthesis or function of haemoglobin. ​Oxford
Textbook of Medicine​ 5426–5450 (2020) doi:​10.1093/med/9780198746690.003.0537​.
Lederman, H. M., Cohen, A., Lee, J. W., Freedman, M. H. & Gelfand, E. W. Deferoxamine:
a reversible S-phase inhibitor of human lymphocyte proliferation. ​Blood​ ​64​, 748–753
(1984).

