Title: Transitioning out of the Coronavirus Lockdown:
A Framework for Zone-Based Social Distancing
Authors: Eric Friedman1,2,3, John Friedman2,3, Simon Johnson3,4, Adam Landsberg3,5
Affiliations:
1

International Computer Science Institute

2

UC Berkeley

3

COVID-19 Policy Alliance

4

MIT

5

Claremont McKenna College, Pitzer College, Scripps College

*Correspondence to: ejf@icsi.berkeley.edu or sjohnson@mit.edu
Abstract: In the face of elevated pandemic risk, is it necessary to completely lock down the
population, imposing extreme social distancing? Canonical epidemiological models suggest this
may be unavoidable for months at a time, despite the heavy social and human cost of physically
isolating people. Alternatively, people could retreat into socially or economically defined
defensive zones, with more interactions inside their zone than across zones. Starting from a
complete lockdown, zones could facilitate responsible reopening of education, government, and
firms, as a well-implemented structure can dramatically slow the diffusion of the disease. This
paper provides a framework for understanding and evaluating the effectiveness of zones for
social distancing.
One Sentence Summary: We present a simple epidemiological framework for understanding
and evaluating the use of zones for social distancing in the face of a pandemic.
Main Text: As a result of its implications for health and mortality, the Coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has triggered massive disruptions to both economies and social
structures.1 In addition to more than 2 million infections and over 120,000 deaths worldwide by
mid-April 2020, the resulting widespread lockdowns have depressed economic activity and
sharply reduced the income of many people. In the United States, GDP will decline by at least 7
percent in the second quarter of 2020, and unemployment is expected by the Congressional
Budget Office to exceed 10 percent.2 The speed of this decline in measured economic activity is
also dramatic: in one week, the number of new unemployment claims was ten times larger than
in any single week of the 2007-08 recession.3 By the second week of April 2020, unemployment
in the United States was already around 13%, the highest rate since the Great Depression.4
1

We use the official pandemic name from the World Health Organization,
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019
2
Latest data on infections and deaths:
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/?utm_campaign=homeAdvegas1?%20
3
This is the CBO view on April 2, which may be considered low-ball estimate given where we are in mid-April:
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56314.
4
This estimate is from the New York Times: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/03/upshot/coronavirus-jobless-rategreat-depression.html
1

The effect on human relationships is also unprecedented, with people effectively dissuaded from
seeing friends in person, and actually forbidden (by force of law) from visiting loved ones in
elder care facilities. The impact of lockdowns on individual health is also likely to prove
significant.5
While the precise future course of infection is debated, many countries have begun to think about
how best to transition out of the complete lockdown phase.6 However, with good reason, the
World Health Organization warns that abruptly ending any lockdown could result in new
outbreaks, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is concerned there may be
at least one more wave of infection “in the late fall, early winter where there will still be a
substantial portion of Americans that are susceptible”.7 As a consequence, a number of
prominent analysts have emphasized that social distancing should be relaxed in various gradual
ways and on April 16, 2020, guidance issued by the White House seemed to support that general
notion – while placing the onus on governors to decide the details.8 In this paper, we provide a
simple framework for designing and assessing different degrees of restriction on how individuals
associate with others in person during a pandemic.
Our simple epidemiological model of “zone-based social distancing” offers a framework for
more precisely estimating the efficacy of alternative social distancing measures. We develop a
simple SIR epidemic model on a structured network, for which we can compute the inter-zonal
reproduction number that can be used to guide further empirical analysis and decision making.
While specific circumstances will always matter a great deal, the model suggests general
advantages of organizing people into zones (i.e., a particular structure of groups), specifically so
there can be strong interactions within each zone but weak interactions across zones.
Using this model, we evaluate the effect of various zone-based lockdown strategies combined
with testing and mitigation measures. We then analyze several potential scenarios.
Zones: Zone-based social distancing works by dividing the population into groups (“zones”), so
that interactions within a group are significantly greater than interactions between groups. Once
a zone (group of people) becomes infected, it is completely isolated from other zones.
For example, one simple and potentially effective zone-based approach would be to allow people
to go to work and interact in person as necessary in a research lab, office, or factory, but to limit

5

https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/04/200408102137.htm
“acceleration phase” is the CDC terminology as of April 7: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/casesupdates/summary.html.
7
Head of the WHO: "Lifting restrictions too quickly could lead to a deadly resurgence,"
https://inews.co.uk/news/coronavirus-who-lifting-restrictions-too-early-dangerous-resurgence-2536303. Head of the
U.S. CDC, “CDC Director says there may be another coronavirus wave in late fall an a `substantial portion of
Americans’ will be susceptible,” https://www.newsweek.com/cdc-director-coronavirus-wave-late-fall-substantialportion-americans-will-susceptible-1495401
8
The White House guidance: https://www.washingtonpost.com/context/president-trump-s-proposed-guidelines-forrelaxing-social-distancing-guidance/b7768600-7906-408c-89a3-06fd5a47aa26/?itid=lk_inline_manual_3. Both
ends of the American policy spectrum have detailed plans: https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/nationalcoronavirus-response-a-road-map-to-reopening/;
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/healthcare/news/2020/04/03/482613/national-state-plan-end-coronaviruscrisis/
6

2

non-work interactions to their own household. A version of this has been enacted in parts of
Germany.9
Further compartmentalizing within companies can increase resilience. For example, one leading
U.S. hospital has divided vital employees into one-week-on/two-weeks-off shifts. While
working, an employee should self-isolate as much as possible, and, when returning to work, the
employee is re-tested again. A prominent financial institution has two color teams, which are
forbidden from meeting in person in any context.10
Another specific form of zone-based social distancing involves isolating towns or cities from
each other, while allowing interactions within them, as in recent Italian travel restrictions.11
Historically, the development of quarantine measures followed a similar heuristic: the entry of
potentially infected people into an uninfected place was deliberately slowed down. During the
Great Plague of 1665-1666, for example, “All trade with London and other plague towns was
stopped.”12
An issue of vital importance pertains to senior living facilities, where people are physically
separated by living in different buildings or on separate floors within a building. In this case,
transmission of disease across residents may occur as workers move about, with devastating
consequences. A zone-based defense would specify that all residents and associated workers
should stay within their specified zone – a policy that has significant implications, for example,
for staffing levels during a pandemic. If some people, such as specialized medical professionals,
must move between zones, then scarce testing and personal protective equipment (PPE) should
be deployed so as to prioritize preventing inadvertent transmission.
Note that while zones structured around employment are important for economic activity, other
zones could be designed to improve social and mental well-being. For example, older citizens
who are self-isolating could be allowed to interact in small groups at a senior activity center, and
families with young children who are isolating could interact with each other or with dedicated
(intra-zone) childcare providers, who could be relatives or even paid employees working with a
small number of families (and not interacting in person with anyone else in a different zone).
Also, one might consider the use of zones in carefully reopening schools and universities. For
younger age groups, including elementary schools, zones could be based on shared homerooms,
although there are obvious complications when a family has children who are in different grades.
Taking these cross-connections into account can be quite complicated and must be done with
great care – while also recognizing that prolonged loss of schooling has a likely serious negative
and persistent effect on cognitive development, particularly in under-resourced environments
where distance learning is not an effective option.

9

Germany: public gatherings of more than two people (excluding people who live together and families) are not
allowed. But going to work is allowed, although public transportation should be avoided if possible.
https://www.studying-in-germany.org/social-distancing-guide-for-students-in-germany/. Bavaria and Saarland are
under complete lockdown in mid-April 2020: https://www.dw.com/en/coronavirus-what-are-the-lockdownmeasures-across-europe/a-52905137
10
Hospital and financial institution cases are proprietary commercial information, which the authors have confirmed
with at least two sources.
11
Northern Italy under a travel ban that was later extended across the country,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/09/world/europe/italy-lockdown-coronavirus.html
12
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/education/resources/great-plague/
3

At universities, the natural zones could be based on living groups (e.g., dorms), which may be
organized by academic area (e.g., undergraduate major) to better align with classes. This might
allow in-person attendance for academic area specific lab and discussion courses while moving
larger general education classes, which mix students from different fields, online.
This list is not meant to be exhaustive as many other zone-based strategies can and should be
considered, based on the objective. The key point is that any movement of nonimmune people
across zonal arrangements (e.g., university students going home for the summer), should be
accompanied by comprehensive testing and appropriate transitory quarantine periods – based
crucially on the probability of false negatives from these tests. Such decisions are likely to
depend on specific relevant conditions and local or national social priorities, so the goal of this
paper is to provide tools to allow such decisions to be analyzed, weighing economic and social
benefits of such policies.
Our network analysis suggests that reducing lockdowns in a non-zonal fashion does not have the
same effectiveness. Lockdown policies not based on zones may satisfy the important goals of
reducing R0 (the infectiousness of the disease) and protecting vulnerable populations, but such
policies do not provide the significant additional protections offered by zone-based structures.
Note that our framework is not meant to replace standard approaches to reducing R0, such as
personal protective equipment, including facemasks, and social distancing in public spaces.
Well-designed and properly implemented zone-based groups should be used to complement such
approaches by providing public health officials, university administrators, company executives,
and others with additional tools.
Model: We now present an informal overview of our model and the main results. The formal
analysis is in the technical appendix.
We consider a standard stochastic Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) network model.13 That
model considers a random network with n nodes and an average of d neighbors for each node. It
starts with most nodes in the S (susceptible) state with the remaining nodes in the I (infected)
state. Then in each period each infected node infects each of its neighbors with probability b and
is removed (R) with probability g. This implies that a node remains infected for an average of
T=1/g time periods before it transitions into the R (removed) state, which can correspond to
recovery with immunity or mortality. The total probability that such a node infects its neighbor
over that time period is q=b/(b+g).
A central established idea in the theory and practice of epidemiology is that the behavior of any
epidemic depends crucially on the basic reproduction number, which in this model is given by
R0=q(d-1), i.e., the expected number of people that an I node infects.14 Essentially, if R0 <1 then
the epidemic will typically die out after infecting only a small number of nodes while if R0>1
then the epidemic is likely to spread widely, infecting a significant fraction of the population.
We now extend the standard model to an SIR model on a random ‘zone-based network.’ This
network is divided up into m zones, where each zone contains n/m nodes. We write the average
13

Newman, M. E. (2002), Spread of epidemic disease on networks, Physical review E, 66(1), 016128
Note that the formula for R0 is for the case where all nodes have the same number of neighbors. This does not
capture the existence of highly connected people and super-spreaders.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/12/us/coronavirus-biogen-boston-superspreader.html. In that case, the formula
for R0 is slightly altered, but the general threshold result is unchanged.
14

4

neighbors of a given node as d = di + do, where di is the number of internal connections the node
has to other nodes in its own zone and do denotes refers to its outside connections to nodes in
other zones. As we show in the technical appendix, one key parameter is the “inter-zonal
connectivity ratio” (CR) which is the fraction of a node’s neighbors that are outside that node’s
own zone, i.e., CR = do/d. Thus CR=0 corresponds to a fully zoned (non-overlapping) social
structure while CR=1 correspond to a complete lack of effective zoning.
Given a zone-based social structure, we consider zone-based lockdown procedures. The key
idea is that if we determine that there are infected nodes in a zone, then that zone is locked down
– in the sense of having no further interactions with other zones. The goal of such a lockdown
procedure is to minimize the number of zones which will become infected and need to be locked
down. One key parameter in our analysis, which we call the “external infectivity time,” is based
on the number of infected people and the amount of time they were infected before lockdown
was initiated. Suppose there were k infected people and the i’th person was infectious for time ti
before lockdown, then we can define the “external infectivity time” IT = (t1+t2+…tk)/T, where we
remind the reader that T is the expected duration of an infection for a particular individual.15
Analogous to the basic reproduction number R0, one can construct an “inter-zonal reproduction
number” Rz, which is the expected number of other zones that will become infected from all the I
nodes in a given zone. Similar to the basic reproduction number, RZ indicates the number of
zones that will need to be locked down. If RZ <1, then it is likely that only a small number of the
zones will be infected and need to be locked down, while if RZ>1 then it is likely that a large
fraction of the zones will need to be locked down.
Thus, analogous to using R0 to predict the spread of a disease, we can use RZ to evaluate zonebased policies. In particular, for a good zonal policy, RZ will be significantly smaller than R0,
and ideally less than one.
Using our model, we see that
RZ = q(do-1)
Note that zone-based social distancing has 2 effects. First, as a form of lockdown, it reduces the
number of interactions people have with others. Let R0 be the reproduction number with no
lockdown, and then let RN<R0 be the reproduction number where the reduction in d but not the
effect of zoning is taken into account. Second is the effect due to the imposed zone-based
network structure which reduces it further from RN to
RZ = RN*CR*IT
The Value of Non-Overlapping Zones: To understand the value of zone-based social
distancing, and the pitfalls that may arise if it is done incorrectly, we consider the following
location-based policies.
First, recall that if there is no lockdown then a reasonable estimate is R0=3. Next, consider a
partial lockdown in which people are allowed to socialize within a specified distance of their
homes. In this case we do not get significant benefits from these overlapping zones as there is a
large amount of cross contagion between zones. To quantify this, assume that this partial
lockdown halves the number of interactions. Then one would expect RN=R0/2=1.5, since locking
down is difficult to do effectively. However, if we had the same number of interactions with

5

completely non-overlapping zones, such as made possible by locking down specific geographic
regions, then this policy would be much more effective and RZ = RN*CR*IT. Under reasonable
assumptions, IT=1.2 is a plausible value, this zone-based policy could reduce the reproduction
number by CR, the fraction of interzonal interactions, which could easily be CR=1/5, yielding
RZ=.36, a significant reduction.16
To see this more clearly, consider the distance-based lockdown in which people are allowed to
socialize within 1 mile of their home (in the taxicab metric), and compare that with a zone-based
lockdown with square zones of the same size. If CR=0 then the zone-based lockdown will
function perfectly, and no infection will ever cross the borders. It is easy to see that this is not
true with the distance-based lockdown. For example, the most obvious strategy is to lockdown
all homes within 1 mile of the detected infection, but it is easy to see that a small chain of
infections can easily escape that region. In fact, for any region chosen there is some chance of
the infection spreading beyond it and defeating the lockdown.
When CR>0, the analysis is more complicated, but it seems intuitive that the zone-based
lockdown will be better than the distance-based lockdown. To test this, we simulated this
scenario directly on the 2-dimensional integer lattice with di=950, do=50, q=0.5/(di+do), and a
distance of 100. Thus CR=0.02. We assumed that the time from infection to infectious was 2
days and the time from infection to symptomatic was 7 days. For these parameters the distancebased social distancing fails to contain the virus about 27% of the time while the zone-based
social distancing only fails about 6% of the time. We need to enlarge the lockdown region by a
factor of about 2.5 in order for the distance-based lockdown to achieve the same performance as
the zone-based lockdown according to this metric.
Workplace Zones: One natural goal for zone-based defense is to re-open businesses without
adversely affecting mortality rates. More broadly, interacting socially with exactly the same zone
of people as seen (in person) at work could also be allowed. In this case, the internal connections
would be between employees in the same company or division, while the most important
external connections would arise through workers’ housemates, who work in different companies
(i.e., for other employers). One important insight here is that if a company discovers a single
infected employee, then the company could immediately lock down, perhaps by requiring all
their employees to quarantine at home.
However, since people who live together are highly likely to transmit the virus to each other, in
the event of a zone becoming infected, all housemates of workers from that company should be
immediately quarantined (and tested if possible) to prevent spreading to other companies.
Nursing Homes as Zones: Consider a group of nursing homes. Since much of the transmission
is via staff members and specialists. In this case we can consider the network nodes to be the
residents and consider the edges as determined by the staff interacting with residents, i.e. if we
draw an edge between two residents if a staff member interacts with both. (We focus on the
residents due to their extreme risk if infected.) This highlights the importance of regular testing
of staff, which is a current issue of extreme importance but also – perhaps surprisingly – some
controversy. It also allows us to quantify the risks associated with cross contamination between
facilities, as these determine the Inter-Zonal Connectivity Ratio, CR.

16

See the technical appendix for details.
6

Pooled Testing: Pooled testing is when a single test is applied to a group of individuals and has
begun to be applied to testing for COVID-19.17 This test can then tell whether or not there are
any cases in a group, but not who they are or how many have the virus. Pooled testing has the
potential to dramatically improve the efficiency of zone-based social distancing, since we can
pool an entire zone, dramatically reducing the number of tests required. For example, for the
long-term care facilities in a particular state, there are not enough available coronavirus PCR
tests. With pooled testing, it would be possible to pool all the residents and staff in a facility, and
then only do further tests if there are any infections at that facility.
Dynamic Implications: One could add a dynamic element to these models by assuming random
infections springing up in zones, arising from interactions outside our main model. One could
use these to “flatten the curve” in a controlled dynamic fashion. For example, when hospitals are
reaching capacity, a planner could pre-emptively lockdown some of the zones, thereby reducing
the number of potential new infections. This would also lower RZ, hence reducing the probability
of a large epidemic. Alternatively, as the number of cases ebbs, one could merge zones –
allowing more interactions – or allow more interactions between zones, increasing CR.
Conclusions: Zone-based policies could be used effectively in the transition out of wide-scale
lockdowns, and further calculating the zonal reproduction number (RZ) will help develop and
evaluate such policies.

17

https://www.technion.ac.il/en/2020/03/pooling-method-for-accelerated-testing-of-covid19/,https://www.ketv.com/article/nebraska-public-health-lab-begins-pool-testing-covid-19-samples/31934880#
7

Technical Appendix:
Model and Results: In this section we present the formal analysis of our model. We first
consider the SIR model on a random d-regular network with n nodes, i.e. all nodes have degree
d. The restriction to fixed d is meant to simplify the presentation. Alternative models with
different degree distributions behave similarly. We assume that we start with most nodes in the
S (susceptible) state and a small number in the I (infected) state. In each period an infected node
will infect its susceptible neighbor with probability b and become R (removed) with probability
g, which implies that the average time in an infectious state is T=1/g. This implies that the
transmissibility q=b/(b+g) which is the probability that an infected node infects its neighbor
overall. For large n and d the following result is known:
Result:18 Let R0= q(d-1) then if R0<1, the number of infected nodes is less than 1/(1-R0) while if
R0>1 the expected number of infected nodes is given by nf(R0) where f(R0) is an increasing
function of R0 which approaches 1 as R0 approaches infinity.
Next consider an SIR model on a random zonal network. We assume there are m zones, which
are groups of nodes, each of size s=n/m. Now we assume that each node has di edges to nodes in
its zones and do to nodes in other zones, where d=di+do. Define DR= do/(d-1). We now consider
the zone meta-network where each node is an entire zone of the original network. Thus, the zone
meta-network has m nodes and we will apply the above result to it.
Assume a zonal lockdown procedure Given a lockdown with k infected people where the i’th
person was infectious for time ti before lockdown, define the effected external infectivity time to
be IT = (t1+t2+…tk)/T. Now, consider any monotonic limit where both m and n/m both approach
infinity. The dynamics on the zonal meta-network behaves like an SIR network with degree
dZ=sdo and transmission probability ITq/s.
Combining all of these we see that the basic reproduction number of the zone meta-network,
RZ = R0*DR*IT.
Thus, the zonal reproduction satisfies the above proposition for the zone meta-network.
Note that in the main text of this paper we approximate DR by CR= do/d since it is easier to use
and very close numerically in most situations.
Also, note that one can easily generalize this result to include different random graph models
including arbitrary degree distributions in which case the formulas for R0 changes slightly but is
usually well approximated by qd, where d is the average degree of a node.
Estimating IT: Consider a policy where we test for people that show symptoms of COVID-19
and lock down a zone if any person in that zone tests positive for the virus. Assume that the
person becomes infectious after 2 days and symptomatic in 7 days when the zone will be locked
down. Suppose in day 3 that person infects 1 person and in day 4 that person infects another.
Then in day 5 the first person he infected becomes contagious and infects one more person, on
day 6 they infect 3 people between them. Then t1=5, t2=4, t3=3, t4=2, t5=t6=t7=1. Now,
18

This result is found in Newman, M. E. (2002), Spread of epidemic disease on networks, Physical review E, 66(1),
016128 and Kenah, E., & Robins, J. M. (2007), Second look at the spread of epidemics on networks, Physical
Review E, 76(3), 036113.
8

IT=17/14=1.2, where we used T=14 as a reasonable value based on WHO estimates for mild
cases.19

19

https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf p.14
9

