Isothermal evaporation rate of deposited liquid aerosols and the SARS-CoV-2
coronavirus survival
P.S. Grinchuk, E.I. Fisenko, S.P. Fisenko, S.M. Danilova-Tretiak∗

arXiv:2004.10812v1 [physics.med-ph] 22 Apr 2020

A.V.Luikov Heat and Mass Transfer Institute,
National Academy of Sciences of Belarus,
15 P. Brovka Str., Minsk 220072, Belarus.
(Dated: April 24, 2020)
It is shown that the evaporation rate of a liquid sample containing the culture of coronavirus affects
its survival on a substrate. Possible mechanisms of such influence can be due to the appearance
of large, about 140 bar, non comprehensive capillary pressures and the associated dynamic forces
during the movement of the evaporation front in a sample with the virus. A simulation of isothermal
evaporation of a thin liquid sample based on the Stefan problem was performed. The comparison
of simulation data and recent experiments on the coronavirus survival on various surfaces showed
that the rate of isothermal evaporation of aqueous samples, which is higher for heat-conducting
materials, correlates well with the lifetime of the coronavirus on these surfaces.
PACS numbers: 42.62.Be, 68.03.Fg, 44.10.+i

In a recent work [1], experimental medical data on the
survival of coronavirus on various surfaces have been presented. Deposition of liquid samples consisting of water
with the coronavirus culture on a surface of various materials is common in everyday life and medicine (plastic,
cardboard, stainless steel). Surprisingly the lifetime of
the virus depends significantly on the substrate material
and can differ by almost an order of magnitude. For
brevity, below we will call these samples aqueous ones,
although the composition of the liquid fraction is more
complex. The mechanisms of influence of a substrate material are not known now. Therefore, in our opinion, it
is impossible to explain such behavior only by the specific biological interaction of viruses and materials. All
experiments [1] were carried out in laboratory conditions
at a constant temperature and, apparently, constant illumination. We suppose that the evaporation of aqueous
samples plays an important role in the survival of the
coronavirus under given conditions.
The influence of such factors as temperature and humidity on the distribution of coronavirus is undeniable.
The highest number of incidents of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus is observed in countries located from 30 to 50
degrees north latitude [2]. Obviously, these countries are
primarily linked by the climatic factor in the sense of
moderate temperatures and high humidity in winter and
spring. Therefore the evaporation rate of water samples
with virus is quite low at such conditions.
The resistance of viruses to adverse environmental factors is determined by their structure. In biology, it is
customary to distinguish between simple and complex
viruses. Simple, or non-enveloped, viruses consist of nucleic acid and protein coat (capsid). Complex or enveloped viruses outside the capsid are also surrounded
by a lipoprotein envelope (supercapsid) outside the cap-

∗

P.S. Grinchuk gps@hmti.ac.by; www.itmo.by

sid, which makes them more vulnerable to adverse environmental factors [3]. The coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is
complexly organized, has a lipoprotein membrane, and
its size reaches 80 - 160 nm [3, 4]. The characteristic size
of the coronavirus protein whiskers is only 10-20 nm [5].
Note that it has already been established that the coronavirus protective membrane is well wetted by water [5].
It is known that both absolute (AH) and relative humidity (RH) affect various types of viruses [6, 7]. Currently a number of biological and chemical mechanisms
of the influence of composition of aqueous samples on
viruses are considered: water activity, surface inactivation, salt toxicity etc. [6]. We would like to discuss a
purely physical mechanism of influence here. We propose a new hypothesis about the influence of evaporation of aqueous samples with coronaviruses on the survival of coronaviruses. We suppose that the movement
of the evaporation front through the liquid layer with
the virus leads to the cessation of its activity. The resulting local nanoscale curvatures of the liquid surface
lead to the appearance of huge local gradients in hydrostatic pressure, which cause damage to the virus. The
high resistance of viruses to external comprehensive mechanical loads is well known [8, 9]. We assumed that the
lifetime of the virus during the movement of the evaporation front is significantly reduced due to additional
mechanical stresses on some whiskers in a nanolayer of
liquid above the virus. Indeed, when the evaporation
front moves under the action of capillary forces (Laplace
pressure), a pressure drop of about 10 bar at a diameter of
80 nm acts on the coronavirus. At the same time, a pressure of out 140 bar is already acting on his ”whiskers”,
which have characteristic dimensions of 10-20 nm. Inhomogeneous dynamic capillary pressure forces can cause
mechanical damage to the virus. Observed effect of the
decrease in the concentration of viable viruses in aqueous sample during evaporation from a solid substrate in
experiments confirms our assumption about existence of
the physical mechanism [1].

2
There is at least a qualitative analogy, confirmed by
different experimental data. Significant deformations of
a graphene oxide sheet were experimentally discovered in
an evaporating micron droplet of water [10]. Graphene
is a very strong material, the elastic modulus of which
reaches 1 TPa [11].
In any case, the presence of a virus near the evaporation front violates the symmetry of the evaporation
front, which should lead to nanoscale deformations. At
a higher evaporation rate, for example, for a copper substrate, deformations near the evaporation front should
increase in amplitude and, as experimental data show
[1], individual mechanical properties of each virus type
begin to reveal. At relatively slow evaporation rates, the
difference between kinds of viruses disappears (experiments with aerosols on plastic and stainless-steel substrates with SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1).
The purpose of this work is to show, at least semiqualitatively, the impact of the thermal conductivity of a
substrate material on the evaporation of a liquid sample
with virus culture.
Thus, we connect the problem of the virus survival
with the problem of evaporation of a liquid sample as we
consider the conditions of experiments [1]. The experiments were carried out at room temperature 21-23 ◦ C.
The relative humidity during the preparation of the liquid substance with the virus culture was 40%. The survival rate of the coronavirus culture was evaluated for
polypropylene, stainless steel from AISI 304 alloy, copper and cardboard. Thus various domestic and hospital
situations were experimentally modeled. Note that the
pieces of materials were of arbitrary sizes and thicknesses.
The initial concentration of the virus in the biomaterial
was 103.4 − 103.7 or 2500-5000 ml−1 . This corresponded
to the typical concentrations observed in the upper and
lower respiratory tract of a human. Next, a liquid biomaterial with a viral culture in a volume of Vd = 50 µl was
applied to the surfaces described above. At certain time
intervals, smears were taken from the surfaces and the
virus concentration was analyzed. The virus was considered deactivated at that moment in time when its concentration decreased to a value of units per milliliter. Thus,
it was experimentally measured that the lifetime of the
virus was approximately 50 hours on a plastic substrate,
was 24 hours on a cardboard substrate, was 30 hours on
a) stainless steel substrate, and was 5 hours on a copper
substrate [1]. These results are of great practical importance for epidemiologists in order to reach the effective
prevention of the spread of coronavirus [12].
Our experience in solving evaporation problems indicates that the evaporation rate of thin films and ensembles of aerosol particles depends on the thermal conductivity of the substrate [13]. The evaporation proceeds
faster from more heat-conducting materials and from
thinner substrates. However, before quantifying and analyzing the experimental data, two points must be made.
For the objectivity of the results we want to exclude copper and cardboard. It is known that copper and its com-

pounds possess both antibacterial and antiviral activity
[14, 15]. At the same time, such activity is absent in
stainless steel [15]. The highest death rate of the virus
was observed on a copper substrate, which leads to an
assumption, that it can be the result of the occurrence of
a cumulative effect, in which the antiviral properties of
the material work in conjunction with the effect of liquid
evaporation discussed in this paper. It is important to
note that the evaporation of a liquid sample occurs most
quickly on copper.
Regarding a cardboard, it should be noted that this
is a porous material on which, in addition to evaporation, moisture is absorbed and diffused into the material.
Therefore, the lifetime of a liquid sample with viruses on
cardboard is reduced, as well as on any other porous material that absorbs moisture. This qualitative explanation correlates with the well-known fact that respiratory
viruses live less on porous surfaces [16]. Therefore, only
simulation results for stainless steel substrate and plastic
one can be correctly compared.
We calculate the time of evaporation of the deposited
liquid layer of thickness h on a substrate of thickness H,
taking into account the thermophysical properties of all
the materials involved in the process (Fig.1). This problem is governed by the one-dimensional non-stationary
moving boundary problem known as the Stefan problem.
Brownian diffusion of coronaviruses maintains their approximately uniform distribution in the sample volume,
so the use of a one-dimensional approach seems reasonable. The temperature T is governed by the heat conduction equation for substrate

ρs c s

∂Ts
∂ 2 TS
,
= λs
∂t
∂z 2

(1)

∂Tw
∂ 2 Tw
,
= λs
∂t
∂z 2

(2)

and for liquid layer

ρw c w

subject to the isothermal initial conditions Ts (z)|t=0 =
T0 , Tw (z)|t=0 = T0 , and the second kind boundary condition at the boundary of the substrate and the liquid

λs

∂Ts
∂z

= λw
z=H

∂Tw
∂z

.

(3)

z=H

The location of the moving evaporating surface of the
liquid is governed by the heat balance equation known as
Stefan condition

ρw [cw Tw (h(t)) + Uw ]

dh
∂Tw
= −λw
+ Aw + Aa . (4)
dt
∂z

Here λs , λw are the thermal conductivity coefficients of
the substrate material and the evaporated liquid; Uw is
the specific heat of vaporization of the liquid; ρs , ρw are

3

FIG. 1. The sketch for evaporation of a liquid sample with a
viral culture from the solid surface.

the mass density of the substrate and liquid; Aw and Aa
are the energy flows carried by molecules of an evaporating liquid and a ballast gas, respectively. We suppose
that evaporation is isothermal, which is typical for the
experiments described in [1].
Using the approach described in [13], from the solution
of the Stefan problem the following expression can be
obtained for the time τev of the complete evaporation of
the liquid sample

τev =

ρw U w h
2(T − Tlim )



h
H
+
λw
λs



.

(5)

Here Tlim is the temperature of the wet thermometer,
which depends only on the temperature and humidity
near the substrate. For experimental conditions in [1]
the relative humidity is about of 40% and the difference
T − Tlim is equal to 14◦ C. It is this temperature difference that provides thermodynamic force for the liquid
evaporation. It is worthy to emphasize that the temperature of the evaporation surface for quasi steady regime
is approximately equal to Tlim .
For further calculations, we need to determine the
thickness of the substrate and the evaporating film one.
In [1], unfortunately, the thicknesses of the materials on
which the viral substance was applied were not indicated.
Therefore, from general considerations about the thicknesses of materials used in everyday life, we will take the
thickness of the substrate equal to H = 1 mm. The characteristic thickness of the liquid layer can be estimated
only on the basis of the
For further calculations, we need to determine the
thickness of the substrate and the evaporating film one.
In [1], unfortunately, the thicknesses of the materials on
which the viral substance was applied were not indicated.
Therefore, from general considerations about the thicknesses of materials used in everyday life, we will take the
thickness of the substrate equal to H = 1mm. This is,
for example, the thickness of a credit card. The characteristic thickness of the liquid layer can be estimated
only on the basis of the volume indicated in the article
1/3
as h ≈ Vd = 3.7 mm. We assume that the evaporating liquid is close to some properties of water, for which
lw = 0.60 W/(m K), Uw = 2.26 MJ/kg. Then for stainless steel substrate (λs = 16.2 W/(m K)) and polypropylene one (λs = 0.22 W/(m K)), the evaporation time

of a liquid layer with a thickness of 3.7 mm on plastic
is equal to 3190 seconds, and on stainless steel is about
1850 seconds. In experiments, the lifetime of the virus
on a plastic surface exceeds the lifetime on stainless steel
substrate by approximately 1.7 times. Calculated the ratio of evaporation times on different substrates is also
1.7 times. This proportion depends only on the physical properties of materials and their thicknesses. The
absolute value of the evaporation time in this case also
depends on RH. Evaporation time increases significantly
with increasing RH of the surrounding space, see Exp.
(5). No doubts that experiments with dangerous viral
substances were carried out in closed volumes during several hours. Thus, liquid evaporation increases humidity
in the experimental box. In our case an increase in evaporation time by an order of magnitude can occur if the
relative humidity rises from 40 to 85%.
The primary experimental data from [1] gives the dynamics of the change in the concentration of the virus
over time. If our assumption is correct, then the death
rate of viruses should strongly correlate with the evaporation rate of the liquid sample. Below we present the
results of quantitative estimates that follow from this assumption. Then we compare them with experimental
data [1].
From the solution of the Stefan problem, we can obtain
the functional dependence of the height of the evaporating layer versus time for a substrate with poor thermal
conductivity

h = h0 −

λs (T − Tlim )
t = h0 − β t,
ρw U w
H

(6)

and for a substrate with high thermal conductivity

h=

s

h20 −

λw
(T − Tlim )t =
ρw U w

q
h20 − α t.

(7)

Here h0 is the initial layer height on the substrate.
For estimation of the dynamics in the concentration of
viruses that are outside a living organism, we use the simplest Malthus model [17]. According to this model, the
evolution of the concentration C of viruses is described
by the equation
dC
= k C.
dt

(8)

Here k is a parameter characterizing the dynamics of a
population change. In the framework of the proposed
approach, we believe that the parameter k for the virus
population will be proportional to the rate of evaporation
k = k ′ Vev = k ′ dh
dt . Then, for the two limiting cases of
evaporation of a viral liquid sample, we have the following
equations for the dynamics of the virus population. The
equation for low heat conductive substrate (λs < λw )

4

dC
λs (T − Tlim )
= −k ′
C,
dt
ρw U w
H

(9)




t
,
C = C0 exp −
τlc

(10)

ρw U w
H,
k ′ λs (T − Tlim )

(11)

with solution

τlc =

and
equation
for
substrate (λs ≫ λw )

with solution

high

heat

conductive

dC
k′ α
= −p 2
C,
dt
h0 − α t




r
α
C = C0 exp −k ′ h0 1 − 1 − 2 t ,
h0

(12)
FIG. 2. Processing of experimental data [1] to determine the
decay law in the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 virus. △:
stainless steel substrate; ◦: plastic substrate.

(13)

In the limit of short times, it follows from (13) that


t
C ≈ C0 exp −
,
τhc
τhc =

2h0 ρw Uw
2h0
= ′
.
′
kα
k λw (T − Tlim )

(14)

(15)

Here τlc and τhc are the characteristic lifetimes
of viruses on a low heat-conducting and high heatconducting substrate respectively.
Additional treatment of experimental data [1] shows
an exponential decay of virus concentration over time
(Fig. 2). Moreover, for a stainless steel substrate, this
characteristic time is τhc ≈ 7.4 h, for a plastic substrate
τlc ≈ 11.0 h.
For a low heat-conducting substrate, the proposed
model also predicts a simple exponential decay of the
virus concentration over time. On a high conductive substrate, the concentration behavior is a more complex one.
Asymptotically at initial times, virus concentration also
has an exponential decay. But from (11) it follows that
in this problem there is one more characteristic time

τlim =

h20
ρw Uw h20
=
.
α
λw (T − Tlim )

The obtained expressions allow us to draw several interesting conclusions. The large viral lifetimes observed
in the discussed experiments are consistent with formulas (11) and (15) under the condition of high humidity
in the local environment of the substrate. An increase
in humidity will lead to an increase in the lifetime of
the viral population in both cases. It follows from the
expression (15) that the discussed lifetime for case of a
high conductive substrate does not depend on the thickness of the substrate, but depends on the initial thickness
of the liquid film. For a low heat-conducting substrate,
it follows from the Exp. (11) that the lifetime of viruses
in liquid sample increase with a decrease in the thermal
conductivity of the substrate and an increase in the total
thickness of the substrate.
These conclusions require additional verification. Nevertheless they can play a important role for medical practitioners and researches.
Finally let us estimate the rate of evaporation of
aerosol, which can be formed on various surfaces by
sneezing or coughing.
Consider a practical example when, in isothermal conditions, an aqueous aerosol with a coronovirus is deposited on a solid surface. Using again the approach
related to the Stefan problem again [13], we obtain the
estimation for the aerosol evaporation time τa

(16)

This time is equal to twice the time of liquid film evaporation in the considered approximation.
According to our model after time τlim the concentration of the virus become constant. To note that similar
picture is observed in the experimental data.

τa =

ρw Uw HR
.
2λs (T − Tlim )

(17)

As it can be seen, the thermal conductivity of the substrate, the initial radius of the aerosol droplets R, and
the thickness of the substrate determine the time of the

5

FIG. 3. Aerosol evaporation time on a 2 mm thick plastic
substrate, depending on air humidity. Blue color is for 5 µm
aerosol droplets, red color is for 100 µm droplets. Solid lines
are for substrate and air temperature 22 ◦ C; dotted lines are
for substrate temperature 37 ◦ C, air temperature 22 ◦ C.

aerosol evaporation. During aerosol evaporation deformations near the evaporation front destroy viruses. It is
known that when coughing, the average droplet size of
the aerosol is 5 µm [18], while sneezing the aerosol has a
generally bimodal distribution of drops with maxima in
the size range of 100 and 600 µm [19]. In Figure 3 for two
temperatures 22 ◦ C and 37 ◦ C the evaporation time of

[1] N. van Doremalen, D.H. Morris, M.G. Holbrook, A.
Gamble, B.N. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt,
N. J. Thornburg, S.I. Gerber, J.O. Lloyd-Smith, E. de
Wit, and V. J. Munster, Aerosol and Surface Stability of
SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1, New Eng.
J. Med., 2020.
[2] M.N.K. Boulos, E.M. Geraghty, Geographical tracking
and mapping of coronavirus disease COVID-19/severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) epidemic and associated events around the world: how
21st century GIS technologies are supporting the global
fight against outbreaks and epidemics, Int. J. Health Geogr. 19 8 (2020).
[3] J. Cui, F. Li, Z.L. Shi, Origin and evolution of pathogenic
coronaviruses, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17 (3) 181 (2019).
[4] X. Li, M. Geng, Y. Peng, L. Meng, and S. Lu, Molecular immune pathogenesis and diagnosis of COVID-19, J.
Pharm. Anal. In Press (2020)
[5] C. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Zhang, W. Zhong, Y. Wang,
Q. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Li, X. Li, M. Zheng, L. Chen, and H.
Li, Analysis of therapeutic targets for SARS-CoV-2 and
discovery of potential drugs by computational methods,
Acta Pharmaceut. Sinica B, In Press (2020).

water aerosol particles with a diameter of 5 and 100 µm
are shown. The plastic substrate in this estimations has
2 mm thickness. Interestingly that the human skin has
a thermal properties very similar to the plastic material
[20]. Therefore, these calculations will be relevant for estimation the aerosol evaporation time on the surface of
human skin.
The evaporation time range varies widely and is sensitive to air humidity near the substrate. At 100% relative
humidity, the aerosol does not evaporate at all.
The presented theory cannot cover all physical aspects
of the complex problem of the vital functions of viruses.
But we believe that it revealed an important correlation
between the rate of evaporation of liquid biological sample and the vitality of coronavirus. It was shown that
the main experimental results on the dynamics of coronavirus survival on various surfaces, presented in [1], correlate well with the rate of isothermal evaporation of liquid
samples with viruses on substrates which do not absorb
moisture. The evaporation rate depends on the thermal
conductivity and thickness of the substrate, as well as the
relative humidity of the surrounding air. Ceteris paribus,
the viral culture should die faster on more thermally conductive and thinner substrates, as well as in lower relative
humidity environment, which provide a higher evaporation rate.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to Professor Oleg Penyazkov
for support of this work.

[6] W. Yang, L.C. Marr, Mechanisms by which ambient humidity may affect viruses in aerosols, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 6781 (2012).
[7] J. Shaman, M. Kohn, Absolute humidity modulates influenza survival, transmission, and seasonality, PNAS
106 3243 (2009).
[8] R. Zandi, D. Reguera, Mechanical properties of viral capsids, Phys. Rev. E 72 021917 (2005).
[9] A. Aggarwal, Determination of prestress and elastic properties of virus capsids, Phys. Rev. E 97 032414 (2018).
[10] W.-N. Wang, Y. Jiang, and P. Biswas, EvaporationInduced Crumpling of Graphene Oxide Nanosheets in
Aerosolized Droplets: Confinement Force Relationship,
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3 3228 (2012).
[11] I.W. Frank, D.M. Tanenbaum, A.M. van der Zande,
and P.L. McEuen, Mechanical properties of suspended
graphene sheets, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 25 2558 (2007); C.
Lee, X. Wei, J.W. Kysar, and J. Hone, Measurement of
the elastic properties and intrinsic strength of monolayer
graphene, Science 321 385 (2008).
[12] L.G. Alvarez-Zuzek, M.A. Di Muro, S. Havlin, L.A.
Braunstein, Dynamic vaccination in partially overlapped
multiplex network, Phys. Rev. E 99 012302 (2019).

6
[13] Y.A. Khodyko, V.I. Saverchenko, S.P. Fisenko, Features
of evaporation of an ensemble of femto-picoliter droplets
on a substrate. Experiment and simulation, Interfac.
Phen. Heat Transf. 6 231 (2018).
[14] K. Sunada, M. Minoshima, K. Hashimoto, Highly efficient antiviral and antibacterial activities of solid-state
cuprous compounds, J. Hazard. Mater. 235 265 (2012).
[15] J.O. Noyce, H. Michels, C.W. Keevil, Inactivation of influenza A virus on copper versus stainless steel surfaces,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73 2748 (2007).
[16] A. Tiwari, D.P. Patnayak, Y. Chander, M. Parsad, and
S.M. Goyal, Survival of two avian respiratory viruses
on porous and nonporous surfaces, Avian Dis. 50 284
(2006).

[17] T.R. Malthus, D. Winch, P. James, Malthus: ’An Essay
on the Principle of Population’ (Cambridge University
Press, 1992).
[18] S. Yang, G.W. Lee, C.M. Chen, C.C. Wu, and K.P.
Yu, The size and concentration of droplets generated
by coughing in human subjects, J. Aerosol Med. 20 484
(2007).
[19] Z.Y. Han, W.G. Weng, Q.Y. Huang, Characterizations
of particle size distribution of the droplets exhaled by
sneeze, J. R. Soc. Interface 10 20130560 (2013).
[20] M. Hoque, O.P. Gandhi, Temperature distributions in
the human leg for VLF-VHF exposures at the ANSIrecommended safety levels, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
35 442 (1988).

