Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Public Health Policy: COVID-19 Epidemic and SEIR
Model with Asymptomatic Viral Carriers

arXiv:2004.06311v1 [q-bio.PE] 14 Apr 2020

Weijie Pang

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

Abstract We measure the effect of different public health regulations to the
spread of COVID-19, based on a SEIRA model – a SEIR model including
asymptomatic transmissions. The cumulative confirmed cases and death show
nonlinear positive relationship with the value of asymptomatic rate. Based on
this model, we analyze the inhibit effects to COVID-19 of three types of public health policies, i.e. isolation of laboratory confirmed cases, general personal
protection and quarantine (lock-down). The simulations conclude that the isolation display limited effects to the asymptomatic viral carriers. The general
personal protection and quarantine perform similar effects when the their percentages of participants are same. When the total proportion of asymptomatic,
mild symptomatic and neglected patients is 40%, only depends on isolation
policy may lead to an additional 75% infections, compared with general personal protection or quarantine with an efficiency 80%. At end, we provide
seven recommendations of public health intervention before and during an
aerial transmitted epidemic (COVID-19).
Keywords Epidemic Model · COVID-19 · Public Health Policy · Asymptomatic Rate · Simulation

1 Introduction
Since the COVID-19 appeared in the late December, 2019 at Wuhan, China,
it already infected more than 1,900,000 people in more than 185 countries. In
Italy, there was two confirmed cases at January 31st. At same day, the government suspended all flights from China and announced a national emergency.
However, these actions did not stop the spread of the virus.
W. Pang
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McMaster University
E-mail: pangw6@mcmaster.ca

2

Weijie Pang

Contrast with other Coronavirus, i.e. SARS and MERS, one essential different feature of COVID-19 is the asymptomatic infection. At the beginning of
the spread of this virus, there were already several experts point out this. Many
researchers [1, 5, 9, 18, 25, 36, 38] prove the existence of asymptomatic COVID19 carriers by comparing the nucleic acid testing of patients’ pharyngeal swab
samples and chest CT scans with their typical symptoms and . Li et al. [28]
mention that more young carriers show mild symptoms than older patients.
Compared with retired people, young adult have more social activities in general. Include the asymptomatic carriers into an epidemic model is crucial.
About the proportion of asymptomatic patients among all viral carrier, many
experts [40, 33] provide their own estimation based on distinct data source.
For classical contagious disease, many models can predict the number of
infections, recoveries and deaths. One important type is the compartmental
model. Kermack and McKendrick [24] construct a deterministic model, called
as SIR model, to quantify the susceptible population, infections and recoveries
of one epidemic. Then they also updated this model in [22, 23]. Bjørnstad
et al. [7] apply this model to analyze the spread of Measles. McCluskey [32]
introduce the distributed delay and discrete delay into the SIR model. Some
people update the model to a stochastic area [20, 21, 42]. To include exposed
people with latency period, Dietz [13] construct SEIR model. Based on SEIR
model, many experts update this model [4, 31] Many researchers use clinical
and simulation data to calibrate the parameters in the epidemic model [4].
Various experts apply this type of model to analyze different diseases and
develop it [14, 27, 35]. Ndii and Supriatna[34] claim that a deterministic model
is more appropriate than stochastic models for an large initial susceptible
population. More details of compartmental models in [6, 17].
Several containment are proposed by experts. Fraser et al. [16] recommend
to isolate symptomatic patients and their contacts to control an outbreak. [15]
apply a large scale simulation to analyze the effect of publich health policy
to the spread of one virus at the beginning period. Wu et al. [39] provide
recommendation of household-based public health interventions. Allred et al.
[2] include the effect of asymptomatic patients to the demand of the health
care. Bousema et al. [8] discuss the detect tools of the asymptomatic Malaria
infections with related public health. However, few paper focus on public health
policy to inhibit an epidemic of aerial contagious virus with asymptomatic
patients based on epidemic models.
The structure of this paper is as follow. Section 2 lists the symbols we need
to construct our SEIRA model and the assumptions of to include the special
characteristics of COVID-19. In Section 3, we construct the SEIRA model
and several related models to include the effects of different public health
policy. In Section 4, we analyze the effects of asymptomatic rate, three types of
public health containment (Confirmed Cases Isolation, Personal Protections,
Quarantine), and delayed policy to the spread of COVID-19. Section 5, we
provide the suggestions of public health agency for a new aerial transmitted
virus.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

2 Assumptions & Symbols
In this paper, we have the following assumptions about COVID-19.
– No vaccine exist for COVID-19
– People who recovered after catch COVID-19 will be insusceptible of it, all
other people are susceptible.
– The number of infectious people only include the cases with typical symptoms and get confirmation from laboratory tests
– The natural birth rate and natural death rate are same (the population is
a constant)
– The infectious ability of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients are same.
Before we introduce our time series SEIRA model, we list necessary symbols
at first.
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

S: Susceptible population
E: Population who are exposed to the virus and do get confirmed test
I: Population who get laboratory positive confirmation
R: Recovery (insusceptible to COVID-19)
D: Death number
αI : rate of people exposed to the infectious patients.
αE : rate of people exposed to the asymptomatic patients.
β: rate of exposed people catch COVID-19
β I : rate of exposed people get COVID-19 with diagnosed confirmation
β E : rate of exposed people without symptoms but can transmit it to others
γ: recover rate of infected people
µI : death rate of symptomatic patients
µE : death rate of asymptomatic patients
eQ : Efficiency of quarantine (lock-down) policy
eF : Efficiency of personal protection
eL : Efficiency of Isolation for confirmed cases

3 Models
3.1 SEIR Model with asymptomatic Patients (SEIRA Model)
Based on the classical SEIR model, we construct our SEIRA model. In this
paper, we include all mild symptomatic and pre-symptomatic patients with capacity to transmit the virus in the number of asymptomatic viral carriers. The
proportion of asymptomatic patients with respect to contagious population is
r=

β − βI
β

(1)

In common sense, testing broadly may help figure out those mild COVID19 patient. But a special characteristic of COVID-19 is that there exists some

4

Weijie Pang

asymptomatic patients. Therefore, to distinguish with other contagious model,
we construct a model to include these sources of contagion.

dSt
dt
dEt
dt
dIt
dt
dRt
dt
dDt
dt

= −αI St It − αE β E St Et
= αI St It + αE β E St Et − β I Et − µE β E Et
= β I Et − γIt − µI It

(2)

= γIt
= µI It + µE β E Et

3.2 SEIRA Model with Public Health Policy
One important public health policy is self-isolating of all confirmed cases,
which is also the first recommendation to their citizens for most government.
However, considering the asymptomatic COVID-19 infectious persons, the selfisolating rule only control the movement of population I. As a result, this rule
only decrease the St It term in our SEIRA model. With a notation of eL as the
rate of people following one policy, i.e. Isolation, our model is rewritten as
dSt
dt
dEt
dt
dIt
dt
dRt
dt
dDt
dt

= −αI (1 − eL )St It − αE β E St Et
= αI (1 − eL )St It + αE β E St Et − β I Et − µE β E Et
= β I Et − γIt − µI It

(3)

= γIt
= µI It + µE β E Et

Another public health policy is general personal protection, including washing hands, general wearing mask, social distancing, which is an effective method
to prevent both asymptomatic and symptomatic patients to transmit this
virus. In other words, this policy may inhibit the rate of susceptible people’s exposure to this virus, αI and αE . The last and most strict public health
regulation is the province-wide or nationwide quarantine (lock down). When

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

we execute all three types, our model is
dSt
= −αI (1 − eF − eL − eQ + eF eL + eF eQ + eL eQ − eF eL eQ )St It
dt
− αE (1 − eF − eQ + eF eQ )β E St Et
dEt
= αI (1 − eF − eL − eQ + eF eL + eF eQ + eL eQ − eF eL eQ )St It
dt
+ αE (1 − eF − eQ + eF eQ )β E St Et − β I Et − µE β E Et
dIt
= β I Et − γIt − µI It
dt
dRt
= γIt
dt
dDt
= µI It + µE β E Et
dt

(4)

4 Simulations
Because we want to check the inhibitory effects to the spread of COVID-19 for
different efficiencies of public health policy, all rate eL , eF , and eQ would run
between 0% to 95% In our simulation, we cite the data from John Hopkins
Coronavirus Resource Center (JHU CSSE) [19] as source. Based on the data
at 4:00 pm on April 5th , 2020, the case fatality rate (CFR) for countries with
Top 6 most confirmed cases are 12.32% (Italy), 9.5% (Spain), 8.34% (France),
4.04% (China) 2.85% (U.S.), 1.54% (Germany). In our model, we assign the
constant death rate µI equal the average 6.43% and µE equal 0, which means
all people died of COVID-19 should be laboratory-confirmed positive.
Del Valle et al. [11] conclude that the contact numbers for population are
distinct from different age group, arriving peak (about 21 average number of
contacts per person daily) between 20 and 50 years old. In this paper, we take
a rough mean as 15. So we assume the exposure rate αI = αE = 15/S0 , where
S0 is the initial susceptible population.
The reproduction number (R0 ) is the average number of people catch this
disease, caused by one infectious people. Liu et al. [30] state the mean reproduction number (R0 ) of COVID-19 is around 3.28, with a median of 2.79
and a interquartile range (IQR) of 1.16. Zhang et al. [41] claim the R0 is 2.28
with a 95% confident interval as (2.06, 2.52). In this paper, we use the average
R0 = 2.54. Follow the findings from Li et al. [28], Lauer et al. [26] and Anderson et al [3]. In this model, we denote the incubation period as d days, with
assuming that the average incubation period of COVID-19 is 5.5 days. With
the value of R0 and relationship among R0 , βI and the average incubation
period by [10, 12], the estimation of β I is
βI =

R0
= 3.08%
αI × d

(5)

6

Weijie Pang

4.1 Effect of asymptomatic Rate
In this section, we want to simulate the spread of COVID-19 with respect to the
asymptomatic rate r. To avoid the effect of any public health policy and any
other viral source, we assume there is no input confirmed case and no inhibit
policy. We are interested in the effect of r to the epidemic is that, COVID-19
show much higher percentage of asymptomatic and mild symptomatic patients.
In our model, the infectious number I is only include the laboratory confirmed
cases. Because the asymptomatic patients and people in incubation period can
also infect susceptible people, we want to check the effect of the asymptomatic
rate r to the spread of COVID-19. The research in this topic may explain the
distinct performance of COVID-19 with other virus, i.e. SARS, MERS, and
N1H1.
Many experts provide their estimation of the asymptomatic rate r. Mizumoto et al. [33] studied the 3,063 tests on board the Diamond Princess cruise
ship at Yokohama, Japan and got that the estimation of the asymptomatic
proportion was 17.9%. Wu and McGoogan [40] the rate is only 1%. In face,
finding a viral carrier without symptoms is really hard. Although, the clinical tools, such as testing the nucleic acid of the pharyngeal swab sample and
chest CT scans, can help doctors, but the finding really depends on a local test
capability, a personal opinion of infectious people and the incubation period
of a virus. In general, when some patients ignore their mild symptoms at the
beginning or a potential carrier cannot get tested immediately, the value from
existing data is much underestimated. So in our paper, we analysis the effect
of the spread of COVID-19 for the asymptomatic rate r between 0% and 60%.
As early as January 31, Italy declared a national emergency after two
confirmed cases in Rome. However, except a ban of flights to China, Italy
didn’t take any other classical public health policy. Until March 9th, Italy
locked down the whole country, which is 38 days after the first two confirmed
case. Assuming there was only one viral carrier on January 31, we want to
check the spread of COVID-19 without any inhibit regulation after additional
14 days. Figure 1 show the increasing number of cumulative confirmed case and
death for asymptomatic rate r ≤ 60% within 52 days. From this figure, we can
conclude that the asymptomatic viral carriers can aggravate the transmission
dramatically.
In Figure 2, we focus one the two case, r = 0% and r = 40%. When
r = 0, the cumulative confirmed case number would be 3592 at March 9th
(38 days after the time of first confirmed case). This number is much lower
than the Italy published case number 9172. But for r = 40%, the cumulative
confirmed case number is 17441, which is nearly double the published number.
Therefore, it’s important to include the transmission from asymptomatic viral
carriers into the epidemic model. Then, the death rate is 294 when r = 0%,
1348 when r = 40%, and the public number 463. In our model, we assume all
patients would have typical symptoms before they die, which is contradict to
the real life. Since the testing rate in Italy is not ideally at the beginning, some
patient didn’t have opportunity to receive laboratory result before everything

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

(a) Cumulative Confirmed Case

7

(b) Total Death

Fig. 1: Spread of COVID-19 Within 52 Days

are too late. As a result, it is reasonable that the simulated total death is three
times the published number.

(a) Cumulative Confirmed Case

(b) Total Death

Fig. 2: Comparison for Asymptomatic Rate r = 0% and r = 40%

When Italy government realize the severe condition of COVID-19, they
closed schools and universities on March 4th, locked down some provinces at
northern part and then extended the lock-down policy to the whole country on

8

Weijie Pang

March 9th. However, if the government didn’t take any action, the cumulative
confirmed case number would reach 669, 115 on March 23th when r = 40%, just
two additional weeks. This is 38 times the number with same parameters on
March 9th. When r = 0%, the simulated result is 78,306, which is not far away
from the published number 63,927. Unfortunately, medical case study already
proved that the asymptomatic rate is not zero for COVID-19. Considering viral
carriers can transmit it during the incubation period, the published number
is much lower than the real existing cases in the country. The lack of testing
at the beginning of this epidemic, the regulator extremely underestimate the
severe level.

4.2 Effect of Single Public Health Policy
In this section, we discuss the inhibition effects of different public health policies. Here we focus on three rules, the self-isolated rule of all laboratory confirmed patients, wearing face masks (covering noses and mouths) for all people,
and nationwide lock-down (quarantine rule).
Some experts believe that ignoring asymptomatic feature have minor change
to the prediction of a epidemic [10]. Statistically, we can have similar result, if
we use a larger estimation of the mean reproduction number R0 . Unfortunately,
this neglect lead to different regulation. Without asymptomatic carriers, the
transmission of virus can be stopped by isolating all active confirmed patients.
But this rule cannot forbid the asymptomatic or mild symptomatic patients
to transmit the virus. As a result, we analyze the effect of these regulations
with different setting of the asymptomatic rate r.
4.2.1 Effect of Self-Isolation
In this part, we discuss the inhibition of the epidemic by the self-isolation rule
of laboratory confirmed cases. Here we have two start days of the self-isolation
policy, starting at the initial day (January 31st) or starting on March 9th.
Figure 3 shows the increase of the cumulative confirmed cases between March
5th (34th day) and March 23rd (52rd day).
By these two figures, the self-isolation policy can inhibit the spread of
COVID-19, and the effect show positive nonlinear relationship with the proportion of the population. Figure 3 a) and b) show the effect of different
self-isolate levels, which are applied immediately on January 31st. Contrarily,
the self-isolation rule is delayed by 10, 17, 24, 31, 38, or 45 days in Figure
4 a) and b). For any estimated asymptomatic rate r and execute date, the
Self-isolation rule inhibit the spread of COVID-19.
But when we zoom in the picture, we find the efficiency of the rule is
better for a low asymptomatic rate and an early enforce date. Figure 4 show
the difference between a self-isolation rule start on January 31 (Day 0) and
delayed time to the daily new cases. For the fast action, only 50% laboratoryconfirmed case avoid all social contacts and self-isolate themselves, which help

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

(a) Immediate Isolation when r = 0%

9

(b) Immediate Isolation when r = 40%

Fig. 3: Effect of Self-Isolation to Cumulative Confirmed Cases

(a) Delayed Isolation when r = 0%

(b) Delayed Isolation when r = 40%

Fig. 4: Effect of Delayed Isolation to Daily New Cases (eL = 50%)

the whole country avoid the epidemic from the beginning. However, if the
isolation rules was execute fully at Day 38 (Light Pink Curve), the daily new
case would be 1,210 on March 23rd (Day 52) with eL = 100% and 6,162 on
Day 52 for eL = 50% with r = 0%. The situation is even worse for COVID-19
with asymptomatic patients, there would be 14,972 people catch it on March
23rd with the delayed reaction at Day 38 from public health regulators. In

10

Weijie Pang

general, every week delay of taking actions, involving half objects, may lead
to double cumulative confirmed cases in a period of 52 days.
4.2.2 Effect of General Personal Protection
Now, we measure the inhibition of the epidemic by requiring all people take
action to protect themselves. Similarly with the discussion of self-isolation policy, we also have different start days of this rule. Figure 5 shows the increase of
the cumulative confirmed cases between March 5th (34th day) and March 23rd
(52nd day), which prove the inhibition effect of general personal protections.

(a) Immediate Policy when r = 0%

(b) Immediate Policy when r = 40%

Fig. 5: Effect of General Personal Protections to Cumulative Confirmed Cases
Comparing the effect of immediate execute policy in Figure 5 a), b) with
delayed starting time in Figure 6 a), b), taking action earlier also provide
better effect to the control of the transmission for any asymptomatic rate r.
Consistence with the self-isolation rule of diagnosed cases, a stricter public
health policy brings a sooner controlled situation.
4.2.3 Effect of Quarantine (Lock Down) Policy
In this part, we move to a discussion of the most tight public health intervention to stop the transmission of the virus. Figure 7 shows the effect with
respect to different asymptomatic rates r of a virus and executed levels. Figure 8 explains later implement date of the quarantine to the daily increase of
cases between. Similarly with the other two policies, this effects also has positive nonlinear relationships with earlier implement, stricter rules and lower
asymptomatic rate.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

(a) Delayed Policy when r = 0%

11

(b) Delayed Policy when r = 40%

Fig. 6: Effect of Delayed General Personal Protections to Daily New Cases

(a) Immediate Quarantine when r = 0%

(b) Immediate Quarantine when r = 40%

Fig. 7: Effect of Quarantine to Cumulative Confirmed Cases

4.3 Comparisons of Different Policies
The simulation already show the positive effect of these three public health
policy. In this section, we want to compare the effect of these three policies.
Figure 9 draw the effects to the cumulative confirmed cases by three regulations. When a virus do not have asymptomatic carrier, there is not different among the polices. However, the personal protections and quarantine are

12

Weijie Pang

(a) Delayed Quarantine when r = 0%

(b) Delayed Quarantine when r = 40%

Fig. 8: Effect of Delayed Quarantine to Daily News Cases

better than self-isolation of confirmed patients when we consider the asymptomatic infections for COVID-19 epidemic. Reviewing the intense condition
of all countries involved in the COVID-19 epidemic, it is not reasonable to
suppose patients can receive tests and treatments on time during a general
broadly viral transmission. So, the asymptomatic viral population contains all
mild symptomatic patients and infectious patients who cannot received laboratory test on time. Therefore, we conclude only self-isolating the laboratory
confirmed case is worse than the other two, when regulators try to control the
spread of one aerial viral epidemic.
Then the general personal protection at beginning is better than a quarantine, although they show similar effects. For quarantine, even though all citizens support this policy, many people have to work and contact with others
to maintain the function of our society, i.e. staff who are working at hospitals,
groceries, post office, waste collection, public transportation, airports and so
on. So in Figure 10, we only compare the relative difference effects to the daily
new cases from no action to 90% proportional execution. Worse, prohibition of
all people for any social and daily activities would cause incredible interruption
to the society.

5 Discussion
In previous sections, we already construct an epidemic SEIRA model and use
the simulation analyze the effects of confirmed case isolation, personal protection and quarantine. In this section, we want to give a guideline about the
non-pharmaceutical public health interventions before and during a pandemic.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

(a) Comparison when r = 0%

13

(b) Comparison when r = 40%

Fig. 9: Comparison of the Effects to Cumulative Confirmed Cases

(a) When r = 0%

(b) When r = 40%

Fig. 10: Relative Different Effect to Daily New Cases

In this paper, we assume that no imported viral source to the system.
In general, a ban for other countries only delay the peak, instead of prevent
it. Ferguson et al. [15] find a 99.9% ban can postpone 6 weeks for United
States. Therefore, we do not include the travel restrictions into our public
health policy. We want to discuss the preparation for a government during
this period.

14

Weijie Pang

First of all, at the start of one pandemic, the government must pay attention to the asymptomatic rate. Compared the cumulative confirmed cases and
deaths with low and high asymptomatic rate in Section 4.1, the proportion
of asymptomatic viral carriers (with mild symptomatic patients) among all
infections is an influential parameter of any viral transmission, also supported
by Fraser Fraser et al. [16]. When there is limited local casts, the researchers
must pay attention to foreign researchers result about asymptomatic rate. If
the pandemic start at our country, health workers need to estimate the rate
as soon as possible.
Next, more tests are better. In general, at the beginning of one transmission, only symptomatic patients get tests. However, doctors cannot find
asymptomatic patients in this situation, until one asymptomatic patient show
typical symptoms. This test rule lead to overlook of asymptomatic infections.
In fact, we should tests all contacts of every confirmed cases. Based on the
results of these test, we can estimate the reproduction number R0 and the
asymptomatic rate r. Moreover, doctors should have the right to test potential infections with typical symptoms even though they do not have direct
contacts with confirmed cases or travel history. As we all known, a dangerous
sign of pandemic is community transmission without clear source, contradict
to the previous rule. National Public Health Agency should permit doctors to
do test for more patients without direct contacts or travel history.
For laboratory confirmed cases, the compulsory self-isolation must apply to
all direct contacts compulsory immediately. In Section 4.1, we also analyzed
the spread of one virus if we miss one diagnosed case initially. In Section
4.2.1, we discussed the sensitivity of the effects for the policy to the epidemic.
Besides test all direct contacts, the isolation of the household immediately is
also necessary.
Facing a new virus, the government should recommend general public take
personal protection as soon as possible. When no information about an asymptomatic rate r, experts should assume there is asymptomatic patients. Compared the death and cumulative confirmed cases in Section 4.1, it is really
dangerous to ignore this viral transmission. Because isolation of confirmed
cases is hard to control it, a general personal protection is one of the best
method. In addition, this method is also better than lock down policy. Although these two methods share similar inhibit effects, personal protection
lead to fewer disruptions to the society and economic. Public health agency
need to involve general public into the fight with epidemic as soon as possible,
in order to avoid having to implement quarantine province-wide or nationwide.
For general personal protections, there are several types, such as social
distancing, washing hands, wearing mask and others. In these three methods,
the first two are much easier than the third one. Washing hand is the most
useful and economical method to protect people. However, when the virus is
transmitted by droplets or aerosols, only depends on washing hands could lead
to dreadful result. In this case, social distancing is essential. Unfortunately,
the social distance require critical condition about the location. In many place,
such as the vehicle of most public transportation, school, and many workplace,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

15

no enough space exists to keep social distance. In this situation, general maskwearing is a good substitution. Tellier [37] recommend use N95 respirators as
part of personal protective equipment for aerosol transmission. Considering
the storage amount and price of N95, it should be saved to people work in
high risk area. Li et al. [29] the efficiency of surgical masks is 95%, compared
with 97% for N95. As a result, an optimal choice for general public is surgical
mask during an outbreak. Because of the paucity of research about homemade
face masks, we cannot give any conclusion about homemade face mask in this
paper. Before cumulative cases and death increase sharply, the government
need take action to produce or purchase enough surgical and N95 face masks
for both health workers and general population, and educate people about
the correct method to wear a face mask and protect themselves on the same
time. During a aerial transmitted disease, a combination of all three types of
personal protections is indispensable.
Last but not least, government need lock down an outbreak zone determinedly. Although any lock-down policy brings horrible outcomes in economic
and society, it is the final policy to save life. In section 4.3, we already compare
isolation, personal pretection and quarantine. An effective personal protection
should show similar consequence with a quarantine. But when a disease is
out of control, it means the rule of isolation and general personal action are
too late or too liberal. In this situation, the government has to execute more
rigorous policy to inhibit the transmission, i.e. closing school, cancellation of
public gatherings, working from home, limited mass transportation, and national quarantine.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we construct two epidemic models. Firstly, the SEIRA model can
be used to predict epidemic with asymptomatic viral carriers. Then to analyze
the effect of different public health intervention, we use a SEIRA with policy
model. By simulation, we find that asymptomatic rate r is crucial parameters
for the health policy. When r ≥ 10%, government need to include general
personal protection into their public health policy, especially wearing-mask
for aerial transmitted virus. When there is a new virus with transmission by
droplets or aerosols, the government must
– Test all typical symptomatic suspects and direct contacts of confirmed
cases
– Estimate the proportion of asymptomatic viral carriers
– Prepare sufficient N95 and relative equipment for health worker
– Prepare enough surgical face masks for general public
– Execute compulsory isolation of confirmed case and all contacts
– Educate people with correct personal protection methods at the beginning
– Enforce quarantine when an epidemic is unavoidable

16

Weijie Pang

References
1. Al-Tawfiq, J.A.: Asymptomatic coronavirus infection: Mers-cov and sars-cov-2 (covid19). Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease (2020)
2. Allred, S.R., McQuade, S.T., Merrill, N.J., Piccoli, B., Spielman, D., Villacis, C., Whiting, R., Yadav, A., Zacher, D., Ziminski, D.: Regional health system shortfalls with a
novel covid-19 model (2020)
3. Anderson, R.M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D., Hollingsworth, T.D.: How will
country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The
Lancet 395(10228), 931–934 (2020)
4. Anderson, R.M., May, R.M.: Population biology of infectious diseases: Part i. Nature
280(5721), 361–367 (1979)
5. Bai, Y., Yao, L., Wei, T., Tian, F., Jin, D.Y., Chen, L., Wang, M.: Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19. Jama (2020)
6. Bailey, N.T., et al.: The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its applications.
Charles Griffin & Company Ltd, 5a Crendon Street, High Wycombe, Bucks HP13 6LE.
(1975)
7. Bjørnstad, O.N., Finkenstädt, B.F., Grenfell, B.T.: Dynamics of measles epidemics: estimating scaling of transmission rates using a time series sir model. Ecological monographs
72(2), 169–184 (2002)
8. Bousema, T., Okell, L., Felger, I., Drakeley, C.: Asymptomatic malaria infections: detectability, transmissibility and public health relevance. Nature Reviews Microbiology
12(12), 833–840 (2014)
9. Chan, J.F.W., Yuan, S., Kok, K.H., To, K.K.W., Chu, H., Yang, J., Xing, F., Liu, J.,
Yip, C.C.Y., Poon, R.W.S., et al.: A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the
2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family
cluster. The Lancet 395(10223), 514–523 (2020)
10. Colizza, V., Barrat, A., Barthelemy, M., Valleron, A.J., Vespignani, A.: Modeling the
worldwide spread of pandemic influenza: baseline case and containment interventions.
PLoS medicine 4(1) (2007)
11. Del Valle, S.Y., Hyman, J.M., Hethcote, H.W., Eubank, S.G.: Mixing patterns between
age groups in social networks. Social Networks 29(4), 539–554 (2007)
12. Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J.A.P.: Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases:
model building, analysis and interpretation, vol. 5. John Wiley & Sons (2000)
13. Dietz, K.: Transmission and control of arbovirus diseases. Epidemiology 104, 104–121
(1975)
14. Dukic, V., Lopes, H.F., Polson, N.G.: Tracking epidemics with google flu trends data
and a state-space seir model. Journal of the American Statistical Association 107(500),
1410–1426 (2012)
15. Ferguson, N.M., Cummings, D.A., Fraser, C., Cajka, J.C., Cooley, P.C., Burke, D.S.:
Strategies for mitigating an influenza pandemic. Nature 442(7101), 448–452 (2006)
16. Fraser, C., Riley, S., Anderson, R.M., Ferguson, N.M.: Factors that make an infectious
disease outbreak controllable. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101(16),
6146–6151 (2004)
17. Hethcote, H.W.: The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review 42(4), 599–653
(2000)
18. Hu, Z., Song, C., Xu, C., Jin, G., Chen, Y., Xu, X., Ma, H., Chen, W., Lin, Y., Zheng,
Y., et al.: Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with covid-19 screened
among close contacts in nanjing, china. Science China Life Sciences pp. 1–6 (2020)
19. JHU(CSSE): Coronavirus covid-19 global cases by the center for systems science and
engineering. Johns Hopkins University (2020)
20. Ji, C., Jiang, D.: Threshold behaviour of a stochastic sir model. Applied Mathematical
Modelling 38(21-22), 5067–5079 (2014)
21. Jiang, D., Yu, J., Ji, C., Shi, N.: Asymptotic behavior of global positive solution to a
stochastic sir model. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 54(1-2), 221–232 (2011)
22. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics. ii.the problem of endemicity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
A, containing papers of a mathematical and physical character 138(834), 55–83 (1932)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

17

23. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics. iii.further studies of the problem of endemicity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character
141(843), 94–122 (1933)
24. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: Contributions to the mathematical theory of
epidemics–i. 1927. (1991)
25. Lai, C.C., Liu, Y.H., Wang, C.Y., Wang, Y.H., Hsueh, S.C., Yen, M.Y., Ko, W.C.,
Hsueh, P.R.: Asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease, and pneumonia
due to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sarscov-2): Facts and myths.
Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection (2020)
26. Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S.,
Reich, N.G., Lessler, J.: The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)
from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal
medicine (2020)
27. Lekone, P.E., Finkenstädt, B.F.: Statistical inference in a stochastic epidemic seir model
with control intervention: Ebola as a case study. Biometrics 62(4), 1170–1177 (2006)
28. Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., Ren, R., Leung, K.S., Lau, E.H.,
Wong, J.Y., et al.: Early transmission dynamics in wuhan, china, of novel coronavirus–
infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine (2020)
29. Li, Y., Wong, T., Chung, J., Guo, Y., Hu, J., Guan, Y., Yao, L., Song, Q., Newton,
E.: In vivo protective performance of n95 respirator and surgical facemask. American
journal of industrial medicine 49(12), 1056–1065 (2006)
30. Liu, Y., Gayle, A.A., Wilder-Smith, A., Rocklöv, J.: The reproductive number of covid19 is higher compared to sars coronavirus. Journal of travel medicine (2020)
31. May, R.M., Anderson, R.M.: Population biology of infectious diseases: Part ii. Nature
280(5722), 455–461 (1979)
32. McCluskey, C.C.: Complete global stability for an sir epidemic model with delaydistributed or discrete. Nonlinear Analysis: Real World Applications 11(1), 55–59 (2010)
33. Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., Zarebski, A., Chowell, G.: Estimating the asymptomatic
proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) cases on board the diamond princess
cruise ship, yokohama, japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance 25(10) (2020)
34. Ndii, M.Z., Supriatna, A.K.: Stochastic mathematical models in epidemiology. International Information Institute (Tokyo). Information 20(9A), 6185–6196 (2017)
35. ÖZalp, N., Demirci, E.: A fractional order seir model with vertical transmission. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 54(1-2), 1–6 (2011)
36. Tang, A., Tong, Z., Wang, H., Dai, Y., Li, K., Liu, J., Wu, W., Yuan, C., Yu, M., Li,
P., et al.: Detection of novel coronavirus by rt-pcr in stool specimen from asymptomatic
child, china. Emerging infectious diseases 26(6) (2020)
37. Tellier, R.: Review of aerosol transmission of influenza a virus. Emerging infectious
diseases 12(11), 1657 (2006)
38. Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Liu, L., Wang, X., Luo, N., Ling, L.: Clinical outcome of 55 asymptomatic cases at the time of hospital admission infected with sars-coronavirus-2 in shenzhen, china. The Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020)
39. Wu, J.T., Riley, S., Fraser, C., Leung, G.M.: Reducing the impact of the next influenza
pandemic using household-based public health interventions. PLoS medicine 3(9) (2006)
40. Wu, Z., McGoogan, J.M.: Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus
disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreak in china: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the
chinese center for disease control and prevention. Jama (2020)
41. Zhang, S., Diao, M., Yu, W., Pei, L., Lin, Z., Chen, D.: Estimation of the reproductive
number of novel coronavirus (covid-19) and the probable outbreak size on the diamond
princess cruise ship: A data-driven analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases
93, 201–204 (2020)
42. Zhang, X., Wang, K.: Stochastic sir model with jumps. Applied Mathematics Letters
26(8), 867–874 (2013)

