SurviveCovid-19 - A Game for Improving Awareness of Social
Distancing and Health Measures for Covid-19 Pandemic

arXiv:2004.09759v1 [cs.HC] 21 Apr 2020

Akhila Sri Manasa Venigallaa , Dheeraj Vagavolub and Sridhar Chimalakondac
Research in Intelligent Software & Human Analytics (RISHA) Lab
Indian Institute of Technology, Tirupati, India
a
cs19d504@iittp.ac.in b cs17b028@iittp.ac.in c ch@iittp.ac.in
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled April 22, 2020
ABSTRACT
Pandemics have threatened human race many a times. One of the most important
tasks during a pandemic is to bring awareness among people. Bringing awareness
contributes a lot in controlling any pandemic. Covid-19 has been causing severe loss
to the human race. Considering the mode of spread and the level of severity of this
disease, it is extremely important to make people aware of various safety precautions
such as using sanitizers and masks and maintaining social distancing, that are to be
followed to prevent the disease and break the chain of spread. This mode of educating
individuals about the disease is being widely carried out as announcements through
online or physical awareness campaigns, advertisements in the media and so on.
The younger generations in the present day spend considerably more time on mobile
phones and games. However, there are very few mobile applications or games, aimed
to bring awareness about a pandemic, which is much lesser in case of Covid-19. Also,
considering the lockdown scenario across the world, games also act as a good pass
time indoors. Hence, we propose a 2D survival based game, SurviveCovid-19, aimed
to educate people about safety precautions to be taken for Covid-19 outside their
homes, by incorporating social distancing and usage of masks and sanitizers in the
game. SurviveCovid-19 has been designed as an Android based mobile game and has
been evaluated through a remote qualitative user survey, with 20 volunteers. The
results of the survey are promising with all the questions of survey having mean
value greater than 3.6.
KEYWORDS
Covid-19; Awareness; Survival Game

1. Introduction
Several diseases have proved to be a risk to people across the globe during many instances. Some of these diseases have qualified to be termed as epidemics and some to
be termed as pandemics based on the speed and area of their spread. According to the
guidelines specified by WHO1 ((World Health Organization)), the pandemic phase of a
disease, most commonly, influenza, begins when the same virus causes community level
outbreaks in more than two countries, across different WHO regions. The world has
witnessed several pandemics such as Cholera [Colwell (1996); Mutreja et al. (2011)],
H1N1 [Xu et al. (2010)], Smallpox [Cunha (2004); Li et al. (2007)], Ebola [Richard1 https://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/89/7/BLT-11-086173-table-T1.html

son et al. (2016)] and so on [Hays (2005)]. One of the important lessons learned from
these pandemics is the role of awareness campaigns. It has been observed that public
awareness campaigns help in reducing the severity of the outcomes of disease, which
include hospitalization and death [Mytton, Rutter, and Donaldson (2012)]. Several
governments across the world and researchers have highlighted the need for improvement of public health awareness and education campaigns, aimed towards improving
health literacy among the people [Eastwood, Durrheim, Butler, and Jones (2010)].
Health professionals across various nations have been advised to practice several control activities including basic sanitation facilities, identify and isolate suspected cases
and educate general public through awareness campaigns [Sepulveda, Valdespino, and
Garcia-Garcia (2006)]. Along with the medical care required, it is important that all
individuals across the world are aware of the safety precautions to be followed during
the pandemic.
A severe outbreak of pneumonia of a cause, initially unknown has occurred in
Wuhan,China, in December,2019. This was later identified to be caused due to a novel
coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2 (SARS-Cov-2). This disease caused by SARS-Cov-2 has been named as Covid-19 by WHO in February,2020.
Covid-19 has spread rapidly, affecting more than 1.9 million people, spread across
several countries of the world, as reported by WHO, as of 16 April,2020 [Organization
et al. (2020b)]. It has spread on a large scale in a very short span of time, ranging from
0.16 million cases [Organization et al. (2020a)] as of 16 March,2020 to 1.9 million cases
[Organization et al. (2020b)] as of 16 April,2020, resulting in a rise of 1087% cases in
a span of one month (from 16 March,2020 to 16 April,2020). Symptoms of Covid-19
include fever, cough, dyspnoea, lymphocytopenia and fatigue [Zhou et al. (2020)]. It
is observed to weaken the immune system of victims and consequently increase the
complications in patients suffering with diabetes, cardiovascular problems and chronic
kidney diseases, leading to heart failures, kidney failures, respiratory failures and even
death in some cases [Zhou et al. (2020)][Zheng, Ma, Zhang, and Xie (2020)]. The number of deaths caused due to Covid-19 have increased from 6.6K to 130.8K during 16
March 2020 to 16 April 2020 2 . Several measures to control the Covid-19 pandemic
are being taken by WHO and various nations across the world Sohrabi et al. (2020).
These measures include expediting diagnosis and contact tracing process, increasing
health care facilities and scaling up health care equipment, encouraging the process of
discovering drugs to treat Covid-19 and bringing awareness among the public3 . Several governments in the world have issued lockdown instructions, to prevent spread of
disease through public gatherings.
Public Awareness programs about Covid-19 are being carried out in various ways
across the globe. The public are being educated and repeatedly being reminded of
safety measures to be followed, through telephonic and television advertisements, physical and online campaigns, flyer displays at public places and on many online websites
and so on. Several websites dedicated to Covid-19 are being developed, to provide information about precautions to be taken and the status of Covid-19. In many countries
across the world, lockdown instructions are eased for a specific time slot, to enable
buying of daily essentials, when people are allowed to come outdoors. It is extremely
necessary to follow safety precautions when people are in public places. The younger
generation of the present day spend a lot of time with their mobile phones, on various mobile apps and mobile games [Chan, Kow, and Cheng (2017)]. Also, it has been
2 https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports
3 https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public

2

observed that games have the ability to affect players behaviour and attitude [Orji,
Vassileva, and Mandryk (2013)]. In spite of the large scale public health awareness
programs being carried out, we are not aware of any mobile games that are aimed
to educate people about the safety measures to be taken against Covid-19. Thus, we
propose SurviveCovid-19, a survival theme based 2D mobile game, with an aim to
educate players about various safety measures to be followed against Covid-19 when
in outdoors.

2. Related Work
Bringing out awareness among public with respect to various diseases plays a primary
role in keeping people healthy. With the increase in use of mobile and web applications,
several health care mobile apps and websites are being developed.
Mobile apps to support prevention of various diseases such as obesity, cardiovascular
diseases, chronic diseases such as skin cancer and so on have been developed [Brinker
et al. (2018)][Sindi et al. (2015)][Kong and Tan (2012)][Matsumura and Yamakoshi
(2013)]. Brinker et al., have presented a facial-aging mobile app, SunFace, aimed to
prevent skin cancer [Brinker et al. (2018)]. SunFace encourages users to click a selfie
and view changes induced due to 5 and 25 years of skin aging with and without sun
protection. It also provides information about most commonly caused skin cancers
due to UV rays and displays odds ratio of skin cancer based on various behaviors
[Brinker et al. (2018)]. A study conducted to evaluate SunFace app with around 350
Brazilian secondary school students has shown increased considerations for UV protective behaviours [Brinker et al. (2018)][Brinker et al. (2017)]. CAIDE Dementia Risk
Score App has been developed by Sindi et al. to predict risk of dementia based on the
profile of individuals [Sindi et al. (2015)]. It also provides guidance to individuals to
reduce the risk of dementia. The “medical history, health status and current health
behaviour” of individuals is taken as input, through a questionnaire and risk score is
calculated based on this information. It also provides a platform for medical practitioners to monitor risk of dementia of an individual and provide necessary guidance
[Sindi et al. (2015)].
Kong et al. have developed DietCam, a mobile phone based application that aims
to reduce obesity [Kong and Tan (2012)]. It assesses the food intake of users based
on three images, clicked from three different perspectives, or a short video of the food
being consumed. The type of food in the image or video is classified by comparing
result of feature matching with different types of food stored in food and nutrition
database. The volume of the food is identified through geometry calibration and 3D
reconstruction. An estimation of number of calories being consumed based on the type
of food and volume generated, is presented to the users, which helps them in assessing
the calorie intake, and consequently manage their diet [Kong and Tan (2012)]. Studies
also reveal that more than 70% of users, using weight loss reduction mobile applications
show successful weight reduction [Chin et al. (2016)]. These studies thus imply the
positive outcomes of using mobile applications in health care. iPhysioMeter has been
proposed as a smartphone program (on iPhone 4 , 4S and 5) to measure heart rate(HR)
and normalized pulse volume(NPV) [Matsumura and Yamakoshi (2013)]. The HR and
NPV values are calculated by the program when users tap on the iPhone home screen
and cover the flash LED and CMOS camera with their left index finger. The results
of measurements are sent to the users’ email [Matsumura and Yamakoshi (2013)].
Several mobile games have also been developed to promote self health monitoring
3

for various diseases [Birn, Holzmann, and Stech (2014)][Park, Koo, Cho, and Bae
(2015)][Baghaei, Nandigam, Casey, Direito, and Maddison (2016)][Bin Hussein et al.
(2019)]. MobileQuiz has been developed as a mobile game, to promote both physical
and cognitive skill among older adults and is to be played outdoors [Birn et al. (2014)].
It assigns tasks to users in view of the physical distance and direction to be covered by
the user, which when accomplished, users are rewarded with points and are provided
with a questionnaire related to the location or surrounding regions [Birn et al. (2014)].
Park et al. have proposed SnackBeaker, a mobile game, aimed to promote healthy
food choices among the players [Park et al. (2015)]. It presents a quiz that can be
answered based on elimination of one among two choices, in terms of nutritional values
provided by the two alternatives, thus educating users about the nutritional value of
different snacks and consequently helping them choose snacks with high nutritional
values [Park et al. (2015)]. A mario style based mobile game, Diabetic mario, was
introduced to help in understanding ways to manage diabetes [Baghaei et al. (2016)].
The player is assigned with the task of managing blood sugar level of Diabetic Mario
by selectively choosing the food items provided in the game console and eventually
save the princess [Baghaei et al. (2016)]. Considering the importance of Automated
External Defibrillators(AED) in cases of out-of-hospital cardiac arrests, a crowdsource
based mobile game has been designed to make users vary of AED locations and also
to motivate them to report condition of AEDs [Bin Hussein et al. (2019)].
Considering the importance of public awareness towards a pandemic and the importance of research in view of planning and response to curb the pandemic, few online
websites and telephonic lines have also been developed. ISIS has been developed as
a web framework to help in planning and response against pandemics by analyzing
multiple simulations of possible interventions, including “administering a vaccine to
a part of population, using antivirals as treatment, closing schools and work places
and instituting social distancing” [Beckman et al. (2014)]. WHO also lists out various
safety measures on the WHO website to enable public awareness during pandemics.
Few web based applications and websites are also being developed to help in tracking
Covid-19 reported cases and in bringing public awareness towards Covid-19. Dong
et al have developed web-based dashboard that displays visualizations of Covid-19
reported cases from time to time [Dong, Du, and Gardner (2020)]. It “reports cases
of the Covid-19 pandemic at level of cities in USA, Australia and Canada, province
level in China and country level in other cases” [Dong et al. (2020)]. Few governments
across the world have also promoted use of various mobile based applications4567 that
are aimed to bring awareness among people about risks, best practices and relevant
advisories regarding Covid-19.
Considering the positive impact of mobile games and apps [Orji et al. (2013)] in
the area of health care and the proven usefulness in bringing awareness about various
diseases through mobile games and apps, designing mobile games to help in public
awareness in the context of Covid-19 pandemic could be useful. However, inspite of
the availability of mobile applications towards containment of Covid-19, we are not
aware of any mobile games that promote public awareness with respect to Covid-19.
Hence, we present SurviveCovid-19, a survival based 2D game, aimed to educate users
about various safety measures to be followed against Covid-19 pandemic.
4 http://tiny.cc/dxqfnz
5 http://tiny.cc/bzqfnz
6 http://tiny.cc/70qfnz
7 http://tiny.cc/t1qfnz

4

Figure 1. Snapshot of SurviveCovid-19

3. Design
Covid-19 is severely affecting various nations across the world, at a rapid rate in the
present day. It has been observed to spread through physical contact and respiratory
droplets. Hence, several countries have issued lockdown instructions so as to prevent
public gatherings and consequently, flatten the curve. Maintaining physical distance,
using masks to cover nose and mouth and frequently using sanitizers to keep palms
clean and visiting a doctor when symptoms of cough and fever are observed, help in
reducing the risk of contracting the virus. It is important to educate the public to
follow the measures mentioned above.
SurviveCovid-19 is an educational game that helps people in understanding the
importance of masks and sanitizers to keep themselves and people in their surroundings
safe from Covid-19. This game is inspired by a simple pixel-based top-down style design
where people navigate the city with safety and health measures.
The game begins by showing a landing screen. As the game starts, the player sees
a short video depicting a simple story-line of a person who needs to get essential
items from the city during lock down for his family while following proper health
measures and avoid spreading the virus. It is then followed by a screen showing the
specific instructions to complete the game. The goal of the player is to collect the
allotted number of groceries and medicines while navigating the city. While doing so,
the player also has to make use of face masks and sanitizers to avoid getting infected or
infecting other people. To make the game challenging and fun for the players, both of
these utilities have been given a timer. The player has to make use of them strategically
to win. The game finishes when the player collects all the required items and reaches
home, as shown on the map.
The game also keeps in check the number of people getting affected because of the
user’s action in terms of people being infected directly and indirectly. This prompts the
player to tread the path with caution and by taking proper health measures throughout
the game.

4. Development
We have developed SurviveCovid, as an educational game to learn the importance of
following proper health measures against Covid-19 using the Unity 3D game engine.

5

Figure 2. Development of SurviveCovid-19

We followed a step by step approach to develop the game as shown in Figure 2. We
then used the Android SDK module provided by Unity to export the game for android
based mobile devices.
We have used 2d tiles from the standard assets pack provided by Unity to define
most of the game objects. The rest have been created using Photoshop software. The
tiles are first imported into Unity and then using the tile-map feature of Unity, we
design the game. In this way, the map of the city in which the player has to navigate is
created. A mask and a Sanitizer object are created and have been placed at strategic
positions on the map. These utilities are meant to help the player to complete the
level.
All the events in the game are controlled using scripts written in CSharp programming language. A mechanism to simulate the spread of disease through touch has been
implemented using CSharp scripts. This spread can be prevented by taking appropriate measures like using the mask and the sanitizer.
Many obstacles, such as infected people and monsters which spread the virus on
touch, are placed on the map. The people are positioned such that they mimic real
crowds and queues of people.
A single script keeps track of the groceries and medicine that have been collected
by the player. A Quota is assigned to the player automatically to collect groceries and
medicine. Only on completing the assigned quota, the player may cross the finish line.
All the media, such as videos and photos in the game, are made using Windows
Video Maker and photoshop softwares.

5. User Scenario
Consider Moksha, an individual staying indoors due to lockdown instructions in her
locality, interested to play games and to gain awareness against Covid-19. She considers
playing SurviveCovid-19, to pass her time and also to be vary of safety measures to

6

Figure 3. Start screen of SurviveCovid-19 depicting [A] Start option, [B] About option and [C] Exit option

Figure 4. Snapshots of Short Video describing different game elements including [A], conversation in video,
[B] option to skip video, [C] Grocery, medicine pack and sanitizer, [D] virus in the game and [E] doctor

Figure 5. Instruction page of SurviveCovid-19 depicting [A] Map of the city in the game, [B] Instructions in
the game, [C] Option to continue and [D] Option to Exit the game

7

Figure 6. Snapshot of SurviveCovid-19 depicting [A] Decreasing lifeline of player effected with virus, [B]
Player effected with Virus, [C] Player infecting other individual, [D] Count of infected individuals, [E] Controls
to navigate up and down [F] Controls to navigate left and right, [G] Information about Groceries and Medicine
collected vs to be collected and [H] Score of the player

Figure 7. Snapshots of SurviveCovid-19 depicting [A] Lifeline of Sanitizer, [B] Player not being effected by
virus in presence of sanitizer, [C] Lifeline of mask, [D] Player not being effected by virus in presence of mask
and [E] Game elements that contribute to increase in Player’s score

Figure 8. Snapshots of SurviveCovid-19 depicting [A] Infected player visiting a doctor and [B] Player reaching
home on accomplishing tasks of Groceries and Medicine

8

be taken when in outdoors. She downloads SurviveCovid-19 on her Android mobile
and starts the game. She is displayed with a start screen, with options - Start, About
and Exit as shown in Figure. She selects to start the game by clicking on [A] of Figure
3. She is then displayed with a short video that describes the lockdown situation of a
person, who is required to go outdoors to get daily essentials and medicine. Moksha
can also choose to skip the video and directly navigate to the game by clicking on
Press here to Continue ([B] of Figure 4), A snapshot of the video is shown in [A] of
Figure 4. Information about various game elements is also displayed as a part of the
video, as shown in [C] of Figure 4. Moksha is then presented with Instructions screen
containing instructions to be followed as shown in [A] of Figure 5, a map depicting
layout of the city, shown in [B] Figure 5, options to continue and exit, as shown in [C]
and [D] of Figure 5 respectively. She clicks on Continue ([C] of Figure 5) and starts
the game.
Moksha is then displayed with the number of Groceries and Medicines to be collected
as shown in [G] of Figure 6 The number of groceries and medicines collected versus
the goal to be collected are displayed in [G] of Figure 6. [A] of Figure 6 depicts lifeline
of the player, while the score is displayed to the top right, as shown in [H] of Figure
6. She starts moving around the city to collect required essentials. Considering the
safety precautions, not to be affected by the virus, she collects the mask and sanitizer
wherever available. The lifeline of existence of sanitizer is displayed below the player’s
lifeline, as depicted in [A] of Figure 7. [B] of Figure 7 indicates virus not being able
to harm player in the presence of sanitizer. The lifeline of mask is depicted in [C] of
Figure 7 and [D] indicates the mask protecting player from the virus. Score of the player
increases on collecting elements displayed in [E] of Figure 8. Player contracts the virus
in absence of mask or sanitizer, thus resulting in declining lifeline of the player. Moksha
then visits a doctor as shown in [A] of Figure 8, to get cured and revive player’s lifeline.
Once all the groceries and medicine are collected, player reaches home, as shown in
[B] of Figure 8.

6. Evaluation
SurviveCovid-19 has been developed to educate public about safety measures to be
taken to control Covid-19 pandemic, as an Android based mobile game. Though we
could not find games developed to support public health awareness towards pandemics,
several health care related games have been evaluated based on similar factors such
as learning outcomes, usability, user experience and so on. Also, several educational
games have been evaluated based on usability and player experience. Hence, we have
evaluated SurviveCovid-19 to understand its usability, usefulness and player experience. We considered 20 volunteers in the age group of 17-25 years and conducted a
remote qualitative user survey based on usability, usefulness and player experience
factors. The volunteers were requested to download the SurviveCovid-19 application
and install the same on their Android mobile phones. A 5-point Likert Scale based
questionnaire as shown in Table 1, has been sent to all the participants as a user
survey. The participants were asked to play the game and provide their feedback by
answering the questionnaire presented in the user survey.

9

Table 1. Qualitative User Survey.
Quality Factors

Question

Mean

SD

Usability

SurviveCovid-19 was easy to play
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

3.75

1.164

Usability

SurviveCovid-19 design is attractive.
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

3.75

0.786

Usability

The game rules are clear and easy to understand
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

3.65

1.136

3.8

1.105

Player

SurviveCovid-19 has been interesting to play

Experience

(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

Usefulness

I preferred to use mask frequently in the game
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

4

1.025

Usefulness

I preferred to use sanitizer frequently in the game
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

4.3

0.864

Usefulness

I preferred to maintain social distance in the game.
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

4.35

0.745

Usefulness

I preferred to visit a doctor when affected with virus in the game
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

3.95

1.234

Player
Experience

I feel SurviveCovid-19 can contribute in bringing awareness about Covid-19
(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

4.35

0.933

Player

I would recommend SurviveCovid-19 to my peers

3.8

1.239

Experience

(1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree)

7. Results
Table 1 indicates the results of user survey in terms of mean and standard deviation of
each question in the questionnaire. It can be observed that the mean for all the questions is greater than 3.5, indicating the positive experience of users. Figure 9, depicts
the mean and standard deviation values for each of the three quality factors. Mean
value of 3.7 for Usability indicates that most of the volunteers found SurviveCovid-19
easy and attractive. The mean value for Usefulness is greater than 4, indicating that
most of the volunteers intended to follow the safety measures against Covid-19 while
playing the game. Player Experience factor having mean value greater than 3.9 reveals
that majority of the volunteers found SurviveCovid-19 to be interesting to play and
were willing to recommend SurviveCovid-19 to their peers. Participants also suggested
that :
• Control sensitivity for navigation buttons could be improved.
• Way to home and to hospitals could be indicated in the game.

8. Discussion and Limitations
SurviveCovid-19 is based on survival theme, where the storyline deals with a person
who needs to go outdoors to purchase daily essentials and medicine during Covid-19
situation. The game has been designed in a way to enforce the players follow safety
measures to stay safe from Covid-19 when outdoors. Thus, the developed prototype
version of SurviveCovid-19 aims to educate players about precautions to be taken
towards Covid-19 and also serves as a pass time during the lockdown situations that
are prevailed due to Covid-19. Though this game has been developed to address the
younger generations of society, it can be played by a wide range audience, irrespective
10

Figure 9. Result of Questionnaire in terms of Mean and Standard Deviation of Quality Factors

of any social or educational backgrounds. The only requirement of the game is that
the players are expected to be equipped with using a mobile phone.
The current version of SurviveCovid-19 being a basic prototype, has only one level.
However, further levels can easily be added to the game and difficulty level could
also be increased with every level being added. Also, the existing SurviveCovid-19
application can be played only on Android based mobile devices. The future versions
of the game could be made compatible to mobile devices operating on other operating
systems such as Apple and Windows.

9. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we presented the prototype version of SurviveCovid-19, a survival based
2D mobile game8 , aimed to bring awareness about safety measures to be followed
against Covid-19. Public Awareness Campaingns are considered as one of the most
important measures to be taken across the world in cases of a pandemic or a disease outbreak [Mytton et al. (2012), Eastwood et al. (2010)]. The current outbreak
of Covid-19 pandemic requires all individuals across the world to be aware of precautions to be followed to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Large scale public health
awareness campaigns are being carried out by almost all the governments and various
organizations across the world, including WHO to control Covid-19. Considering the
large amount of time spent by younger generations on mobile apps and games in the
present day, and the effect of games on players’ attitude [Chan et al. (2017), Orji et al.
(2013)], it could be useful to introduce mobile games that contribute towards public
health awareness. SurviveCovid-19 aims to educate people about the safety measures
to be followed during Covid-19 and motivates them to follow the precautions in real
time. We have evaluated SurviceCovid-19 based on usability, usefulness and player
experience quality factors. The evaluation was done through a remote qualitative user
survey with 20 volunteers, and obtained positive feedback with 80% of volunteers
8A

web based version of the game is also available at https://survivecovid-19.itch.io/game2020

11

willing to recommend SurviveCovid-19 to their peers.
The game currently supports Android mobile devices. It can further be extended to
support mobile devices running on other operating systems. We plan to improve the
game by increasing number of levels in the game and difficulty of the levels. Also, future
versions of the game can include online and multiplayer features unlike the current
offline and single player version of the game. We also plan to modify the game controls
by improving the sensitivity of the control keys, as suggested by the participants in
the survey.

Acknowledgement(s)
We would like to thank all the volunteers for their valuable time and honest feedback.

References
Baghaei, N., Nandigam, D., Casey, J., Direito, A., & Maddison, R. (2016). Diabetic
mario: Designing and evaluating mobile games for diabetes education. Games for
health journal , 5 (4), 270–278.
Beckman, R., Bisset, K. R., Chen, J., Lewis, B., Marathe, M., & Stretz, P. (2014).
Isis: A networked-epidemiology based pervasive web app for infectious disease pandemic planning and response. In Proceedings of the 20th acm sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 1847–1856).
Bin Hussein, M. I. H., Fong, J. H., Lim, C. X., Lee, J. S., Tan, C. T., & Ng, Y. Y.
(2019). Mobile application for crowdsourced gamification of automated external
defibrillator (aed) locations. In Proceedings of the 4th international workshop on
multimedia for personal health & health care (pp. 24–31).
Birn, T., Holzmann, C., & Stech, W. (2014). Mobilequiz: A serious game for enhancing
the physical and cognitive abilities of older adults. In International conference on
universal access in human-computer interaction (pp. 3–14).
Brinker, T. J., Heckl, M., Gatzka, M., Heppt, M. V., Rodrigues, H. R., Schneider,
S., . . . others (2018). A skin cancer prevention facial-aging mobile app for secondary schools in brazil: appearance-focused interventional study. JMIR mHealth
and uHealth, 6 (3), e60.
Brinker, T. J., Schadendorf, D., Klode, J., Cosgarea, I., Rösch, A., Jansen, P., . . . Izar,
B. (2017). Photoaging mobile apps as a novel opportunity for melanoma prevention:
pilot study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 5 (7), e101.
Chan, A., Kow, R., & Cheng, J. K. (2017). Adolescents’ perceptions on smartphone applications (apps) for health management. Journal of Mobile Technology in
Medicine, 6 (2), 47–55.
Chin, S. O., Keum, C., Woo, J., Park, J., Choi, H. J., Woo, J.-t., & Rhee, S. Y. (2016).
Successful weight reduction and maintenance by using a smartphone application in
those with overweight and obesity. Scientific reports, 6 (1), 1–8.
Colwell, R. R. (1996). Global climate and infectious disease: the cholera paradigm.
Science, 274 (5295), 2025–2031.
Cunha, B. A. (2004). Influenza: historical aspects of epidemics and pandemics. Infectious Disease Clinics, 18 (1), 141–155.
Dong, E., Du, H., & Gardner, L. (2020). An interactive web-based dashboard to track
covid-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases.
12

Eastwood, K., Durrheim, D. N., Butler, M., & Jones, A. (2010). Responses to pandemic
(h1n1) 2009, australia. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 16 (8), 1211.
Hays, J. N. (2005). Epidemics and pandemics: their impacts on human history. Abcclio.
Kong, F., & Tan, J. (2012). Dietcam: Automatic dietary assessment with mobile
camera phones. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 8 (1), 147–163.
Li, Y., Carroll, D. S., Gardner, S. N., Walsh, M. C., Vitalis, E. A., & Damon, I. K.
(2007). On the origin of smallpox: correlating variola phylogenics with historical
smallpox records. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (40), 15787–
15792.
Matsumura, K., & Yamakoshi, T. (2013). iphysiometer: a new approach for measuring
heart rate and normalized pulse volume using only a smartphone. Behavior research
methods, 45 (4), 1272–1278.
Mutreja, A., Kim, D. W., Thomson, N. R., Connor, T. R., Lee, J. H., Kariuki, S.,
. . . others (2011). Evidence for several waves of global transmission in the seventh
cholera pandemic. Nature, 477 (7365), 462–465.
Mytton, O., Rutter, P., & Donaldson, L. (2012). Influenza a (h1n1) pdm09 in england,
2009 to 2011: a greater burden of severe illness in the year after the pandemic than
in the pandemic year. Euro surveillance, 17 (14), 11–19.
Organization, W. H., et al. (2020a). Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): situation
report, 56.
Organization, W. H., et al. (2020b). Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): situation
report, 87.
Orji, R., Vassileva, J., & Mandryk, R. L. (2013). Lunchtime: a slow-casual game
for long-term dietary behavior change. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 17 (6),
1211–1221.
Park, J., Koo, B.-c., Cho, J., & Bae, B.-C. (2015). Snackbreaker: A game promoting
healthy choice of snack foods. In Proceedings of the 2015 annual symposium on
computer-human interaction in play (pp. 673–678).
Richardson, E. T., Barrie, M. B., Kelly, J. D., Dibba, Y., Koedoyoma, S., & Farmer,
P. E. (2016). Biosocial approaches to the 2013-2016 ebola pandemic. Health and
human rights, 18 (1), 115.
Sepulveda, J., Valdespino, J. L., & Garcia-Garcia, L. (2006). Cholera in mexico:
the paradoxical benefits of the last pandemic. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 10 (1), 4–13.
Sindi, S., Calov, E., Fokkens, J., Ngandu, T., Soininen, H., Tuomilehto, J., & Kivipelto,
M. (2015). The caide dementia risk score app: The development of an evidencebased mobile application to predict the risk of dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia:
Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring, 1 (3), 328–333.
Sohrabi, C., Alsafi, Z., ONeill, N., Khan, M., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., . . . Agha, R.
(2020). World health organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019
novel coronavirus (covid-19). International Journal of Surgery.
Xu, R., Ekiert, D. C., Krause, J. C., Hai, R., Crowe, J. E., & Wilson, I. A. (2010).
Structural basis of preexisting immunity to the 2009 h1n1 pandemic influenza virus.
Science, 328 (5976), 357–360.
Zheng, Y.-Y., Ma, Y.-T., Zhang, J.-Y., & Xie, X. (2020). Covid-19 and the cardiovascular system. Nature Reviews Cardiology, 1–2.
Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., . . . others (2020). Clinical course
and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with covid-19 in wuhan, china: a
retrospective cohort study. The Lancet.
13

