ATTEMPTING TO UNDERSTAND THE SPREAD OF SARS-C OV-2:
A SSOCIATIONS BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF CASES IN REGIONS

arXiv:2004.00110v3 [physics.soc-ph] 19 Apr 2020

AND SELECTED ECONOMIC AND GEOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS

Asit Kumar Mishra
Berkeley Education Alliance for Research in Singapore
Singapore 138602
writeto.asit@gmail.com

Pawel Wargocki
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, Denmark
paw@byg.dtu.dk

April 21, 2020

A BSTRACT
We present in this work some results from analysing the spread of Covid-19 in different countries and
regions around the world and the potential relations with climate, geographical location, and GDP.
While the situation remains dynamic, we believe this analysis has the potential to uncover certain
underlying trends. We primarily intend the results to drive further, more detailed analysis of the
relevant data by other researchers that would help us gather a better understanding of the situation,
aiding our preparedness. Our observations show that countries in high latitudes, with temperate
and/or continental climate, and with reasonably ”open” economies are the most vulnerable to this
outbreak.

1

Introduction

In the last two months, from a relative unknown, Covid-19 has now become an undeniable reality for people across
the entire globe, with nearly a third of the whole world population under lockdowns right now. The situation remains
dynamic and fluid, with the number of cases and number of deaths doubling almost every seven days now. In lieu of
such conditions, we present here some quick analysis performed on the number of cases in different countries and
regions, as related to economic and geographic indicators. We understand that the situation is very dynamic and is
changing daily, and the analyses presented will need an update nearly every hour; present analyses are based on the
number of cases from March 23, 2020. But we still believe that some trends found in our analysis will remain and may
lead to some general conclusions.

2

Methods

We based our analysis on publicly available databases to enhance transparency and so that others can further check the
conclusions we reached. The following data sources were used:
•
•
•
•

Country/region wise case numbers [1]
GDP per capita, current prices, Purchasing power parity; international dollars per capita [2]
Köppen-Geiger climate classification for regions of the world [3]
Latitude of centroid of countries/regions [4]

We used the Köppen-Geiger (KG) climate classification and we made an approximation to the effect that a country is
assigned the KG climate type, which covers the major portion of its land area. In the case where countries have close to
equal coverage by two different climate types, we have used binary letter combinations (e.g., AB, CD, etc.).

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 21, 2020

We assumed a region within 5°S and 5°N to make up an equatorial belt. The rest of the world was divided into northern
and southern hemispheres.
Data analysis and plotting was done in R 3.5.3 [5].

3

Results from the analysis

The number of cases increases with an increase in GDP per capita, but not monotonically (the line in Figure 1 uses
locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS) to illustrate the trend). The seeming relation with GDP may be related
to the country’s interaction with the international community through trade and other forms of economic exchange.
Higher avenues of exchange — including that of citizens — is likely to increase the chances of secondary outbreaks.
The same idea is also illustrated by dividing the countries into OBOR (golden) and non-OBOR members (blue). As
part of China’s OBOR initiative, a country is likely to have much higher economic interaction with China. The gradual
increase with per capita GDP seems to peak around 40,000-60,000 International dollars, and has been highlighted by an
encasing circle.

Figure 1: The number of cases on March 23, 2020, and GDP per capita; the markers indicate various climates according
to the KG climate classification.
At the two extreme ends, there are two different phenomena. With very high per capita GDP, it is hypothesized that
countries are able to better care for their citizens, reducing the number of infections. At the other extreme, countries
with low GDP are likely to have minimal interaction with the world economy, providing them a degree of insulation
from large outbreaks.
The number of cases increases with distance from the equator (the line uses LOESS to illustrate trend), as shown in
Figure 2. At the current time, the outbreak is mostly limited to the Northern Hemisphere, with a sharp rise in numbers
seen for latitudes over 30°N, highlighted by encasing in a rectangle. However, the trend exhibited by data indicates that
both over 30°N latitude and below 30°S latitude, the chances for more significant outbreaks increase.
Following the data over a period of 4 weeks, we present in Figure 3 the case numbers from March 23, March 30, April
6, and April 13. The LOESS fits for the number of COVID-19 cases in different countries, plotted across the latitude of
the centroid of the country, over the same time points, have been presented in Figure 4. From Figures 3 and 4, while the
inflation in numbers across the weeks is clear, it is also clear that the trend remains unchanged. In Figure 3, a small
tightening of the confidence interval may also be noted with progression of time. Comparatively lower numbers have
persisted in latitudes closer to equator (between 25° S and 25° N). This could be due to the tropical climate (warm and
humid conditions), higher UV-C levels, or higher ground level ozone concentrations in tropical regions. However, for
now, these are only hypothesises and not enough is known about this novel coronavirus to propose something more
concrete.
From Figure 5, it is quite apparent that countries with temperate (C) and continental climates (D) have been the worst
hit so far, followed by countries with dry climate (B). Also affected are regions with a mix of temperate and dry (CB) or
temperate and continental (CD) climates. This could be related to the cool and dry nature of these climates.
2

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 21, 2020

Figure 2: The number of cases on March 23, 2020, and latitude; the markers indicate various climates according to the
KG climate classification.

Figure 3: The number of cases, over four weeks, plotted across the latitude of the centroid of the countries, data taken at
end of a) March 23, 2020 b) March 30, 2020 c) April 6, 2020 and d) April 13, 2020. Each plot also contains the LOESS
fit and the 95% confidence interval of the fit.

The outbreak, so far, has been predominantly in the northern hemisphere (Figure 6). But cases in the southern
hemisphere are on a gradual rise. Irrespective of GDP variation, cases in regions in the equatorial belt have remained
relatively low, so far.
3

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 21, 2020

Figure 4: LOESS fits for the number of cases in different countries versus the latitude of the centroid of the country,
across four time points, spread over four weeks: March 23, March 30, April 6, and April 13.

Figure 5: The number of cases on March 23, 2020, represented as boxplots for each climate type, as per KG climate
classification.

4

Conclusion

From our analyses, we drew the following hypotheses:
1. Countries with more interaction with world economies have greater vulnerability to outbreaks.
2. Countries/regions in high latitudes (over 30°) in both hemispheres are also particularly vulnerable.
3. Climate wise, temperate and continental climates are particularly vulnerable — this may even be true for
regional situations in different countries as well.
As the situation remains fluid, we present them only as preliminary hypotheses. We invite other researchers to discuss
present analyses, and we hope they will inspire some of them to delve further along these lines.
4

A PREPRINT - A PRIL 21, 2020

Figure 6: The number of cases on March 23, 2020, and the location of the country/region in equatorial belt, northern
hemisphere, or southern hemisphere

References
[1] Worldometer. COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic, 2020. https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/,
Last accessed on 2020-03-24.
[2] International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook (October 2019), 2019. https://www.imf.org/
external/datamapper/PPPPC@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD?year=2020, Last accessed on 2020-03-24.
[3] VU Wien. World Maps of Köppen-Geiger climate classification, 2017. http://koeppen-geiger.vu-wien.ac.
at/present.htm, Last accessed on 2020-03-24.
[4] Kelly O’Neill. Country centroids — WorldMap, 2019. https://worldmap.harvard.edu/data/geonode:
country_centroids_az8, Last accessed on 2020-03-24.
[5] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria, 2019.

5

