On the problem of comparing Covid-19 fatality rates
Fabio Miletto Granozio, CNR-SPIN, Napoli, IT, email: fabio.miletto@spin.cnr.it

Abstract
Understanding Covid-19 lethality and its variation from country to country is essential for supporting governments in the choice of
appropriate strategies. Adopting correct indicators to monitor the lethality of the infection in the course of the outbreak is a crucial
issue. This works highlights how far the case fatality ratio, as calculated day by day in the course of the outbreak, is a misleading
indicator for estimating the fatality rate, even if our attention is only restricted to the subset of confirmed cases. We prove that the
final case fatality ratio for several major European countries is bound to largely exceed 10%. The difference in the case fatality ratio
values between Italy and other major European countries considered in this work (except for the case of Germany), often interpreted
in terms of peculiarities of the Italian population or health system, is to be mostly attributed to the more advanced stage of the Italian
epidemic.

Introduction
Different countries are adopting different strategies to face the Covid-10 pandemic1. Monitoring Covid-19 lethality and
its variation from country to country is essential for supporting governments in selecting the appropriate decisions. The
adoption of correct indicators to monitor the lethality of the infection in the course of the outbreak is therefore a crucial
issue. 2, 3
The following terms are used in this work: the infection fatality ratio, IFR, indicates the ratio between the total deaths
and total infected patients within a given population; the final case fatality ratio, CFR fin , indicates the ratio of
confirmed deaths attributed to the infection and confirmed cases, as calculated after all patients deceased or recovered;
d (t )
time dependent case fatality ratio CFR  t  to indicate the day by day c
ratio calculated. Here, t is a discrete variable
ccc (t )
expressed in days, dc(t) the cumulative number of deaths at date t, ccc(t) the cumulative number of confirmed cases in
date t. Calculating IFR is a formidable task, because of two errors that can hardly be avoided: (a) estimating IFR exactly
from CFR fin would require registering, or correcting estimating, all Covid-19 infections and deaths in a country; (b)
estimating CFR fin itself in the course of an outbreak, as better clarified in the following, is a tricky and non-trivial
operation. Large and efficient testing programs allow accounting for non-symptomatic patients, thus increasing ccc(t).
This lowers the error (a), i.e. lowers CFR fin to values closer to IFR. This work is instead dedicated to the evaluation of
error (b).

Data analysis
Tab. 1 reports on the CFR  t  values updated on April 5, for eight countries, chosen among those currently hit harder
by the pandemic: United States of America (US), Italy (IT), Spain (ES), Germany (DE), France (FR), United Kingdom (UK),
The Netherlands (NL), Korea (KR).
Country
CFR

IT

ES

NL

UK

FR

US

KR

DE

12,30%

9,60%

9,90%

10,30%

8,70%

2,90%

1,80%

1,60%

Tab. 1: CFR  t  values updated on April 5 for KR, IT, ES, US, DE, UK, NL, and FR.

In order to show how deceptive, though common, is the approach of ignoring the error (b), thus directly estimating
CFR fin from CFR  t  in a course of an outbreak, we initially resort to a simulation. The set of curves in Fig. 1a, cumulative

confirmed cases (ccc), cumulative deaths (dc), total active cases (act), and cumulative recovered cases (rcc) was derived
by implementing an epidemic model based on very simple and general assumptions and explained in 4, where
simulations can be run as a function of the input parameters. We focus on two of such parameters: CFR fin , set to 10%,

and the average diagnosis-to-death delay time TD = 8 days. Based on the ccc(t) and dc(t) curves from Fig. 1b, we calculate
the CFR  t  curve of the simulated epidemic and plot it in Fig. 2 (dark blue line).
Fig. 1a
1,2E+4
1,0E+4

10%

6,0E+3

6%

60

0%
50

0,0E+0
40

2%

30

2,0E+3

20

4%

10

4,0E+3

0

TD =0
TD =1
TD =2
TD =4
TD =6
TD =8

8%
CFR(t)

8,0E+3

Cases

Fig. 1b
12%

Conf. Cases
Act. Cases
Deaths
Recovered

0

Days from the start of the ourbreak

20

40

60

Days from the start of the outbreak

Fig. 1: (a) Cumulative confirmed cases (ccc), cumulative deaths (dc), total active cases (act), and cumulative recovered cases
(rcc) plotted versus time for a standard simulation of an epidemic. The CFR  t  value is set to 10%, and the average diagnosis-

to-death delay time TD to 8 days; (b) Case fatality ratio CFR  t  plotted vs. time for the simulated epidemic in (a) (full blue line)
and compared with curves obtained for different delay times TD (dotted lines).

Dotted curves obtained setting shorter TD delay times are shown for comparison, confirming that the TD value
determines the mismatch between CFR  t  and CFR fin . We deduce by the comparison that before the peak of active
cases CFR  t  is a underestimates CFR fin by a
large factor. In particular, for TD = 8 days, the
CFR (t )
ratio remains below 20% for a substantial
CFR

portion of the outbreak.
The plot of the CFR  t  curves for all the nations
addressed in Tab. 1 is shown in Fig. 3. The curves
have been shifted on the time axis for better
alignment, based on the evolution of the death
curve in the country. The earliest days are omitted
because largely affected, for most nations, by
insufficient testing. The plot confirms the claims
based on the simulation: all the curves show a
clear growing trend and a behaviour which is
reminiscent of the dark blue curve in Fig. 2. Both
Fig. 2: Case fatality ratio
IT and DE presently show a CFR  t  value

CFR  t  plotted vs. time for KR, IT, ES, US, DE, UK,

NL, and FR. A relative shift of the time axes was applied for alignment,

exceeding by over five times the ones of the
based on the evolution of deaths in each country.
early stage of the epidemic, while a slightly
lower but comparable factor applies to UK, ES, NL and FR. The curves for IT, ES, UK and NL seem to be all bound to
converge towards comparable final RCF values, in spite of the large present differences. The behaviour of the US curve
is so far very difficult to interpret and certainly affected by large State-to-State inhomogeneities, also in terms of starting
date of the outbreak.

Conclusions
Both the simulation and the examples above clarify that scientists and policymakers should beware of CFR  t  as a
misleading indicator for calculating the infection fatality rate in the course of the outbreak, even if our attention is only
restricted to the subset of confirmed cases. More comprehensive data analysis methods based on the estimate of the
average diagnosis-to-death delay time TD are needed. The largely discussed5 difference in the CFR  t  values between
Italy and other major European countries addressed in this work, except for the case of Germany, are rather to be
attributed to the more advanced stage of the Italian epidemic. The CFR fin for IT, ES, FR, UK, NL are expected to be
grossly comparable at the end of the epidemic, all well above 10%. Germany is converging to lower CFR fin . Probably
larger and more efficient testing programs contribute to this result.

References
1.

McFall-Johnsen JK Lauren Frias, Morgan. A third of the global population is on coronavirus lockdown — here’s our
constantly updated list of countries and restrictions. Business Insider.
https://www.businessinsider.com/countries-on-lockdown-coronavirus-italy-2020-3. Accessed April 6, 2020.

2.

Baud D, Qi X, Nielsen-Saines K, Musso D, Pomar L, Favre G. Real estimates of mortality following COVID-19
infection. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;0(0). doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30195-X

3.

Spychalski P, Błażyńska-Spychalska A, Kobiela J. Estimating case fatality rates of COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis.
2020;0(0). doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30246-2

4.

Page Title. https://simulazionecovi.htmlsave.net/. Accessed April 6, 2020.

5.

ispiseo. Covid-19 and Italy’s Case Fatality Rate: What’s the Catch? ISPI.
https://www.ispionline.it/en/publication/covid-19-and-italys-case-fatality-rate-whats-catch-25586. Published
March 27, 2020. Accessed April 2, 2020.

