EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

arXiv:2004.00534v2 [physics.med-ph] 2 Apr 2020

HEV

CERN-EP-TECH-NOTE-2020-01
April 3, 2020

The HEV Ventilator Proposal

HEV Collaboration†
Abstract

We propose the design of a ventilator which can be easily manufactured and integrated into
the hospital environment to support COVID-19 patients. The unit is designed to support
standard ventilator modes of operation, most importantly PRVC (Pressure Regulated Volume
Control) and SIMV-PC (Synchronised Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation) modes. The unit
is not yet an approved medical device and is in the concept and prototyping stage. It is
presented here to invite fast feedback for development and deployment in the face of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

c 2020 CERN . CC-BY-4.0 licence.
†

Authors are listed at the end of this paper.

Contents
1 Motivation

1

2 Modes of Operation; overview

1

3 Conceptual Design

2

4 Specifications

3

5 Control and User Interface
5.1 Technology choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4
6

6 Typical parts required

7

7 Prototyping

8

8 Route to deployment

9

References

10

ii

1

Motivation

The worldwide medical community currently faces a critical shortage of medical equipment to
address the COVID-19 pandemic [1]–[3]. In particular this is the case for ventilators, which
are needed during COVID-19 related treatment at onset, during the intensive care phase and
during the very extended recovery times. Companies are scaling up production [4], but this
will not be sufficient to meet the demand according to the current forecasts. There is a wide
spectrum of devices, ranging from highly sophisticated through to simpler units [5], [6] useful
in the milder phases of illness. There is already a large number of proposals circulating for
devices which can be quickly manufactured cheaply and on large scale [7]–[12].
We propose here a ventilator design to be integrated into a hospital environment. The
HEV (High Energy physics community Ventilator) concept is based on components which are
simple and cheap to source, complies with hospital standards for external connections and
operating modes, and supports the most requested operation modes. The starting point of the
design is the set of MHRA (Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency) guidelines
provided by the UK government regarding Rapidly Manufactured Ventilator Systems [13].
The proposal here is, at this stage, not a medically approved system and will need a process
of verification with medical experts. However, in the interests of rapid development the
concept is presented to generate feedback, corrections, and support as the project progresses.
A demonstrator has been built and the design is now in the prototyping stage.

2

Modes of Operation; overview

Patient management during COVID-19 faces serious issues of lung damage, and the ventilators
must be able to handle situations of rapidly changing lung compliance, and potential collapse
and consolidation. The driving pressure of the ventilator is a crucial factor for patient
outcomes [14]. In particular, when a low tidal volume is used, the driving pressure is an
important variable to monitor to assess the risk of hospital mortality.
In light of the extreme importance of the pressure monitoring, the HEV ventilator will
target pressure controlled modes. This will include: PRVC (Pressure Regulated Volume
Control) mode, SIMV-PC (Synchronised Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation); and in addition
a basic mode of operation: CPAP (Continuous Positive Airway Pressure). The HEV design
also provides PEEP (Positive End-Expiratory Pressure), which is not a ventilatory mode
in itself but is designed to support steady low positive pressure to the lungs. The PRVC
mode, which is standard for commercial ventilators, aims to set the tidal volume at the lowest
possible airway pressure. In the case where the tidal volume is not achieved at a particular
pressure setting, due to changes in the patient’s airway resistance or lung compliance; this
can then be gradually adjusted. SIMV-PC mode will allow the patient to take spontaneous
breaths, and will assist the breathing when the spontaneous breath is taken. This mode
uses an additional sensor for the detection of the negative pressure initiated by the patient
breath. If the patient respiratory rate does not achieve the target value, additional mechanical
ventilation is provided by the unit.
The HEV ventilator will also be capable of a basic non-invasive operation mode where
1

a fixed pressure is made available to the patient. Although international definitions vary,
this corresponds to the CPAP definition from the MHRA documentation [13]. In all modes
of operation, PEEP will be available, which is important for patient management to avoid
alveolar collapse.
Note that the ventilator design outlined here is not intended to replace the high-end
devices needed for the most intense phase of treatment, but should be appropriate and useful
in the hospital environment for milder symptoms or long term care and recovery.

3

Conceptual Design

We describe here the conceptual layout of the system. The targeted modes of operation,
as explained above, are principally PRVC, SIMV-PC and CPAP, as defined in the MHRA
documentation [13]. The design has the patient safety built-in as a priority, so that all failure
modes revert to a situation which prioritises patient safety. In particular, if the patient stops
breathing in pressure support mode, the ventilator fail-safes automatically onto mandatory
ventilation.
The conceptual schematic is shown in figure 1. The unit takes as input the standard
compressed or mixed air supply available in hospitals, in such a way that one supply could
be connected to several units. We expect that typically the pressure supplied will be between
2 and 5 bar. The connections presented by the unit to external input/outputs will follow
hospital standards. The supply pressure is reduced by a pressure regulator to approximately
200 mbar. The system concept is based around a buffer volume of approximately 2 litres. The
filling of this buffer is controlled by the input valve (valve in). By controlling of the opening
time, one can achieve the desired target pressure in the buffer after which the valve (valve in)
is shut. This buffer filling occurs during the expiratory part of the breath cycle. If the buffer
pressure is within tolerance of the required pressure, the output valve (valve out) is then
opened, initiating the respiratory cycle. The respiratory rate, inspiratory time (corresponding
to the open time of valve out) and pause time are all controllable. If a PEEP pressure is
set, then the pressure in the lungs will have the minimum of the PEEP pressure.
We define P1 as the obtained pressure in the buffer before the inhalation cycle starts, and
P2 as the pressure in the buffer at the end of the inhalation cycle, when the valve is closed.
The volume of air taken by the patient (tidal volume) can then be calculated knowing P1 , P2
and the fixed volume of the buffer and tubes.
During operation all parameters are monitored. If the minute volume drops below the
programmed value, the pressure P1 can be increased in units of 1-2 mbar, until the target
minute volume is achieved or the maximum pressure allowed is reached.
For the CPAP operation mode all valves are left open and a manual regulator setting is
set to a fixed low pressure.
The patient is directly protected from over-pressure via the safety valve, which will open
at 80 cm H2 O. In addition, the pressure sensor in the buffer (P buffer) will continuously
check for over-pressure. In case of over-pressure in the buffer, an electro-valve (valve purge)
will be open to purge its contents and refill it to the correct level. In case of failure of output
valve of the buffer (valve out) or a powercut, the ON/OFF two say valve will connect the
2

Figure 1: Conceptual design of the HEV ventilator.

patient to the atmosphere allowing non-assisted breathing. During the expiratory cycle, the
valve scavenger opens allowing the air from the lungs to flow to the scavenging system.
The mechanical design will be based on this concept and will result in a unit with
approximate size 500 × 500 × 350 mm. The unit dimensions and the positioning of the main
components are indicated in figure 2.

4

Specifications

The HEV ventilator will be designed to the following specifications:
• Working Pressure: Up to 50 cm H2 O.
• PRVC peak pressure limit set to 35 cm H2 O by default with an option to increase this
in exceptional circumstances and by positive decision and action by the user.
• Operation modes: PRVC, SIMV-PC, CPAP, as defined above.
• Exhaust mode: PEEP available with a set range between 0 and 5 cm H2 O.
• Minute volume flow capability: Up to 20 litres/min.
• Inspiratory flow capability: Up to 120 litres/min.
• Respiratory rate: 10–30 breaths/min.
3

Figure 2: Preliminary CAD model of the HEV proposed design. The overall dimensions can be
seen, together with the placement of the major components in the HEV cabinet.

• Inspiratory:Expiratory ratio; 1:2 will be provided as standard, and the unit will be
adjustable in the range 1:1–1:3.
• Tidal volume setting to be provided in the range 250–800 ml in steps of 50 ml.
• Gas and Power Supply Inlet: Set according to the MHRA standards [13].

5

Control and User Interface

The control concept, based around the embedded controller receiving the signals from the
sensors and valves, and the touchscreen interface to the clinician, is illustrated in figure 3.
The user interface will consist of an intuitive panel which displays the needed information
and controls in a dynamic and continuous fashion. The controls and alarms described here
are extremely preliminary and simply give an idea of the system functionality. The finalised
list will emerge during the prototyping stages.
The following items will be included in the display:
• Ventilation mode.
• Working pressure, corresponding to the manually set and monitored input pressure to
the unit.
4

Figure 3: Conceptual layout of the controls and interface

• Inspiratory Minute Volume setting.
• Breaths per minute setting.
• Tidal volume display, based on previous two parameters.
• Inspiration time setting.
• Pause time setting.
• Expiration time display based on previous two parameters.
• Expired minute volume.
• Airway pressure display based on the reading of P2 .
• PEEP setting.
• Trigger sensitivity to patient-initiated breath.
The following items will be plotted as a continuous graphical display:
• Volume vs time.
• Pressure vs time.
5

• Flow vs time.
The HEV will pay particular attention to the MV leak alarm which is a standard hospital
setting alarm, but of crucial importance in the case of a highly infectious disease such as
COVID-19 to protect staff and patients. It will trigger with high sensitivity on any leak in a
circuit, which could come from the balloon in the patient airway leaking, a disconnection
or a poorly tightened tube and so on. In the current version the O2 concentration is not
measured, but this is being investigated actively. The display format will be similar to the
typical display seen in a hospital setting.
In pressure support modes the ventilator will go into an alarm state and fail-safe to
mandatory ventilation in case the patient-initiated breaths cease. For all modes alarms are
given if breath rate or minute volumes fall below acceptable levels.
The following items will be displayed as audible and visible alarms:
• Push Button manual alarm.
• Gas supply alarm.
• Apnea alarm.
• Expired minute volume.
• Upper pressure limit.
• Power failure.

5.1

Technology choice

Several solutions are currently being considered for the embedded controller including Arduino,
Raspberry Pi, and ESP32. Each have their strengths and weaknesses. Raspberry Pi performs
better for a human interface and greater graphical power, and support for HDMI which allows
for larger displays.
Raspberry Pi lacks ADCs which precludes the use of some devices. On the other hand,
the requirement of an operating system adds a complexity that may reduce overall stability.
Arduino and ESP32 have ADC capability and Wifi in several variants, but mostly the
graphical add-ons tend to be of a smaller form-factor (5 inches or less) which may not be
ideal for hospital use. The ESP32 is an Arduino compatible device with additional CPU
power and memory. The parts supply is being investigated and the availability may be a
significant deciding factor in the technology choice. Additionally, given the potential use in
several geographical locations, different variants may be developed to adapt to locale.
The current baseline design considers Arduino for controls and Raspberry Pi for monitoring.
The combination of the two offers the most power, and many developers already have one or
both of these devices in hand whilst working from home. Code will be written in a portable
manner should a change of platform be required.

6

Raspberry Pi

Arduino

Electronics

Pressure
Sensors

Display
webserver
breathing loop

Valves
Arduino
Comms
Server

UI loop

Speaker
Native Display

Safety loop

LEDs

Figure 4: Core software components and their interconnections. Raspberry Pi is used for user
interface, Arduino for primary control and connections to the electronics.

6

Typical parts required

For the mechanical structure the aim is to use as many standardised parts as possible. A list
of the typical parts required includes:
• Solenoid valve with ID bigger then 22 mm. This is the assumed diameter of the hose to
the patient.
• Fast acting solenoid valve for inlet of air into buffer volume.
• Solenoid valve for purging. It could be low volume, that in case of over-pressure only
some air is released.
• 2 litre buffer container.
• Pressure regulator from 2-5 bar to up to 200 mbar.
• 5 pressure sensors1 .
For the embedded controller similar concepts apply. A typical part list could include:
1

The pressure sensor Panasonic PS-A (ADP5) is currently being tested.

7

• 1 Arduino and 1 Raspberry Pi per unit.
• 1 touchscreen, preferably 15”, also 10” could be acceptable. If the touchscreens are not
available an option could be a standard PC monitor with an interface appropriate for
the hospital setting i.e. with buttons. Medical touchscreens could be an option but are
likely to be more expensive.
• Typical small supplies such as 5V power supplies, power supplies for the valves, USB
cables (1 standard, 2 micromax).
• Optional ethernet cable.

7

Prototyping

The first stage of prototyping is to demonstrate that the working principle of an alternatively
filled and emptied buffer is sound, and allows the ventilator to operate within the required
ranges of pressure and time. This was achieved on 27th March 2020 with a first demonstrator.
A photograph of the bench test stand is shown in figure 5. Note that the demonstrator was
built with readily available parts, and therefore the mechanical look of the device seen in
these photographs is completely different to the final design. Based on the experience with
operating the demonstrator, the desired physical characteristics of the pressure regulators,
valves and pressure sensors could be refined, and the system is now in prototyping stage.

Figure 5: Prototyping the HEV “buffer concept”. The demonstrator system is developed with the
buffer concept to demonstrate the “breathing” and flow capabilities. This demonstrator is built
with in-house parts and looks mechanically very different to the final system. Control is provided
via LabView, whereas in the final system it will be via an embedded controller.

8

8

Route to deployment

The deployment of the device will pass through the following stages:
1. In the first phase the concept will be demonstrated with a working unit prepared using
the available hardware and with a control system implemented with standard software.
2. Consultations on testing and validation are taking place with hospital clinicians, both
in the CERN region and beyond.
3. Based on the experience of the demonstrator unit and the consultation with the
clinicians, a prototype will be built and tested possibly with standard test facilities for
ventilators, available in hospitals.
4. Control software will be developed, able to run in embedded microprocessors and with a
dedicated graphical user interface allowing clinicians access to the settings and providing
alarms in a mode familiar to the operators. This will shadow the standard software
development in such a way that the hospital deployment gives identical functionality.
5. As far as production is concerned, it is foreseen, on the one hand, to enable this through
providing partner academic institutions with the detailed design (as soon as available
following completion of testing and validation), for these institutions to follow up in
accordance with local possibilities and standards; on the other hand, directly through
industry, for which purpose contacts have been established with the WHO, on the basis
of the Cooperation Agreement in place between CERN and WHO.

9

Acknowledgements
We express our gratitude to Paolo Chiggiato, Beniamino Di Girolamo, Walid Fadel, Doris
Forkel-Wirth, Andre Henriques, Christian Joram, Rolf Lindner, David Reiner, Burkhard
Schmidt, Francois Vasey from CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, Simon Cohen from Monash Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, Gordon Flynn and David Reiner from The Canberra
Hospital, Canberra, Australia, Hamish Woonton from Dandenong Hospital and Monash
Health, Melbourne, Australia, Bruce Dowd from Prince of Wales Hospital, NWS, Australia,
Lise Piquilloud Imboden and Patrick Schoettker from Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, Georg Männel and Philipp Rostalski from Universität zu Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany, Dr Roosens, University Hospital, Ghent, for many illuminating discussions
and much practical support.

References
[1] . [Online]. Available: https://www.axios.com/coronavirus- masks- hospitalsventilators-testing-ca448f4a-55bc-428d-acd3-e021b9f4fbd7.html.
[2] . [Online]. Available: https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2020 / 03 / 18 / business /
coronavirus-ventilator-shortage.html.
[3] . [Online]. Available: https : / / www . vox . com / recode / 2020 / 3 / 20 / 21186749 /
ventilators-coronavirus-covid-19-elon-musk.
[4] . [Online]. Available: https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/ventilatorsmarket- 2019- competitors- analysis- by- breas- medical- olympus- medtronichamilton- medical- vyaire- medical- incsmiths- group- ge- healthcare- ventsschiller-philips-bio-med-devices-o-two-medical-technologies-inc-aironcorporation-and-others-2019-03-21.
[5] . [Online]. Available: https://www.urgences-sante.qc.ca/wp-content/uploads/
2014/03/Oxylator-EMX.pdf.
[6] . [Online]. Available: https://e-vent.mit.edu.
[7] C. Galbiati et al., “Mechanical Ventilator Milano (MVM): A Novel Mechanical Ventilator
Designed for Mass Scale Production in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemics,” 2020.
arXiv: 2003.10405 [physics.med-ph]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2003.10405.
[8] . [Online]. Available: www.mvm.care.
[9] . [Online]. Available: http : / / oedk . rice . edu / Sys / PublicProfile / 47585242 /
1063096.
[10] . [Online]. Available: https://www.ventilaid.org.
[11] . [Online]. Available: https://oxvent.org.

10

[12] . [Online]. Available: https://www.rtbf.be/info/belgique/detail_coronavirusdes - ingenieurs - belges - developpent - un - prototype - de - respirateur ? id =
10463991.
[13] . [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/876167/RMVS001_v3.1.pdf.
[14] . [Online]. Available: https : / / www . hamilton - medical . com / de / E - Learning and-Education/Knowledge-Base/Knowledge-Base-Detail~2017-05-08~Drivingpressure-in-ARDS-patients~09161a01-6223-4668-8fa8-d906319d64f9~.html.

11

HEV collaboration
J. Buytaert1,∗ , A. Abed Abud1,2 , K. Akiba3 , A. Bay10 , C. Bertella1 , T. Bowcock2 , W. Byczynski1,8 ,
V. Coco1 , P. Collins1,∗ , O. Augusto De Aguiar Francisco1 , N. Dikic1 , R. Dumps1 , P. Durante1 ,
A. Fernández Prieto11 , V. Franco Lima2 , R. Guida1 , K. Hennessy2 , D. Hutchcroft2 , S. Ilic7 ,
A. Jevtic7 , K. Kapusniak1 , E. Lemos Cid11 , J. Lindner9 , M. Milovanovic6 , D. Murray4 , I. Nasteva5 ,
N. Neufeld1 , X. Pons1 , F. Sanders3 , R. Schwemmer1 , P. Svihra4 .
1

European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva, Switzerland
Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
3
Nikhef National Institute for Subatomic Physics, Amsterdam, Netherlands
4
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
5
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
6
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Platanenallee 6, 15738 Zeuthen, Germany
7
University of Nis, Univerzitetski trg 2, Ni 18000, Serbia
8
Tadeusz Kosciuszko Cracow University of Technology, Cracow, Poland
9
University of Applied Sciences Offenburg, Offenburg, Baden-Wuerttemberg, Germany
10
Institute of Physics, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
11
Instituto Galego de Fsica de Altas Enerxas (IGFAE), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain
2

∗ Corresponding

authors: Jan.Buytaert@cern.ch and Paula.Collins@cern.ch

12

