Accelerating drug repurposing for COVID-19 via modeling drug
mechanism of action with large scale gene-expression profiles

Lu Han1+, G.C. Shan 2+,* , H.Y. Wang2 , S.Q. Gao1, W. Zhou1*
1

Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, State Key Laboratory of

Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures, Beijing 100850, China;
E-mail: zhouwx@bmi.ac.cn;

Prof. Dr. G. C. Shan
2

School of Instrumentation Science and Opto-electronics Engineering & Beijing

Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-based Precision Medicine, Beihang
University, Beijing 100083, China;

*Corresponding authors.
Prof. Dr. G.C. Shan. E-mail: gcshan@buaa.edu.cn; Address: Beihang University, No.37
Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, China.
Prof. WX Zhou, E-mail: zhouwx@bmi.ac.cn; Tel: 86-10-66931422. Address: State Key
Laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures, No.27 Taiping Road, Haidian
District, Beijing, 100850, China.

+

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
The novel coronavirus disease, named COVID-19, emerged in China in
December 2019, and has rapidly spread around the world. It is clearly urgent to fight
COVID-19 at global scale. The development of methods for identifying drug uses based
on phenotypic data can improve the efficiency of drug development. However, there
are still many difficulties in identifying drug applications based on cell picture data.
This work reported one state-of-the-art machine learning method to identify drug uses
based on the cell image features of 1024 drugs generated in the LINCS program.
Because the multi-dimensional features of the image are affected by non-experimental
factors, the characteristics of similar drugs vary greatly, and the current sample number
is not enough to use deep learning and other methods are used for learning optimization.
As a consequence, this study is based on the supervised ITML algorithm to convert the
characteristics of drugs. The results show that the characteristics of ITML conversion
are more conducive to the recognition of drug functions. The analysis of feature
conversion shows that different features play important roles in identifying different
drug functions. For the current COVID-19, Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine
achieve antiviral effects by inhibiting endocytosis, etc., and were classified to the same
community. And Clomiphene in the same community inibited the entry of Ebola Virus,
indicated a similar MoAs that could be reflected by cell image.

Keywords: coronavirus, drug repurposing, machine learning, cell image feature,
LINCS

Introduction
Emerging coronavirus disease 2019, known as COVID-19, is caused by the SARSCoV-2 virus identified. Since the outbreak of COVID-19 in December 2019 in Wuhan,
more than 80 thousand patients were affected in China and meanwhile nearly one
million patients were affected all over the world. The disease resulted in more than 100
thousand deaths by April 15 2020, according to the National Health Commission of
People′s Republic of China and WHO. Unfortunately, the number of patients diagnosed
and death is still on the rise, and no proven effective medicine and/or treatment is
available thus far for patients contracted this emerging infection. Experience in the
management of coronavirus epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and
the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) has limited applicability for treating
COVID-19. The medicine teams from China and all over the world have been fully
engaged at the frontline to deal with this COVID-19 epidemic.[1] They are also very
active in conducting many scientific studies on the pathogenesis of the diseases caused
by this virus, mode of transmission, clinical profiles, management, and disease
prevention.
Drug repurposing can quickly find potential therapeutic drugs from drugs with
known safety, which can be quickly applied to the clinic and solve the treatment
problems of COVID-19. [1-8] At present, a large number of potential drugs have already
begun clinical treatment trials of COVID-19. In addition to drugs that can directly
interact with viruses, a large number of drugs may exert antiviral effects through host
targets. For example, chloroquine can inhibit the endocytosis of COVID-19 by

changing the intracellular environment, increasing the intracellular PH value, etc., so
as to achieve the antiviral effect; and some drugs targeting the cell pathway may
produce

anti-Coronavirus

effects

(Antiviral

potential

of

ERK/MAPK

and

PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling modulation for Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus infection as identified by temporal kinome analysis).
Due to the virus invasion, replication and release are highly host-dependent,
therefore, analyzing the effect of drugs on cells is very important to find effective
antiviral drugs. Transcriptome, proteome data and other information are the direct
influence of drugs on intracellular molecules, which is very helpful for the discovery of
new uses of drugs. However, due to the complexity of the image data itself and the fact
that it does not directly reflect the molecular characteristics, it is still difficult to use the
image data for drug function discovery despite its relatively low cost. In this study, by
analyzing the image data of 1024 drugs acting on cells, the mode of action of the drugs
was found. In terms of mechanism of action, 1024 drugs represent more than 300
different mechanisms of action. Fewer samples and more classifications make it
difficult for machine learning methods to effectively use these data for action pattern
identification. Because the multi-dimensional features of the image are affected by nonexperimental factors, the characteristics of similar drugs vary greatly, and the current
sample number is not enough to use deep learning and other methods are used for
learning optimization. [2-9] As a consequence, this study is based on the supervised
ITML algorithm to convert the characteristics of drugs. The results show that the
characteristics of ITML conversion are more conducive to the recognition of drug

functions. In this paper, 1105 drugs are analyzed by clustering algorithm in machine
learning. At the same time, this paper also uses a variety of data preprocessing methods
to improve the clustering effect. In data preprocessing, this paper compares Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm and metric learning algorithm and in data
clustering we use Affinity Propagation (AP) algorithm.[10-14] Therefore, we adopted the
ITML algorithm to achieve the identification of drugs with similar mechanisms by
optimizing the measurement of drug image features. Compared with the original data
and PCA without the ITML algorithm, this method can help to identify drugs with
similar mechanisms. For the enrichment analysis of drug types with a sample size
exceeding 5, it is found that 39 clusters were enriched with 604 types of drugs,
suggesting that a variety of cell features may be used to discover the mechanism of
action (MOA) of the drug.

Material and Methods
Data Collection
The cell imaging data set containing 372 drugs was sorted and screened (see
Methods), 1105 image data (including 812-dimensional image information)
encompassing cell responses to 372 drugs were collected cumulatively (Supplementary
Table S1). These 372 drugs represent a broad range of clinical use. These image data
represent the most intuitive phenotypic effects of these drugs on cells. The image data
includes

812-dimensional

data,

including

Cells_Area

Shape_Area,

Cells_AreaShape_Compactness, Cells_AreaShape_Eccentricity, etc. The distribution

of data in each dimension ranges from +677 to -384, etc. We have adopted the mean
variance normalization method and after normalization, the data is distributed within
the range of mean 0 and variance 1. We collected the MoA information of the drugs
from the LINCS database, which contains a total of 372 kinds of MoA, 49 kinds of
MoA have 5 or more drugs, and the most MoA has as many as 43 kinds of drugs shared.
PCA algorithm
PCA algorithm is an algorithm to analyze the most important components of input
data, which is often used for data dimensionality reduction in machine learning.
Through PCA algorithm, we can reduce an n-dimensional vector to an m-dimensional
vector as follows:
X (m) = PCA( X (n)), m < n

X (n) is the original data, and X (m) is the output data after mapping the original
data from the n-dimensional space to the m-dimensional space. Note that PCA
algorithm can not only reduce the dimension of input data, but also extract the more
effective features in origin data.

Metric learning
In addition to PCA algorithm, this paper also uses metric learning method to
preprocess input data before clustering. We use Information-theoretic metric
learning(ITML) algorithm in metric learning to learn the similarity between input data.
Metric learning is a machine learning algorithm for learning the similarity between
data, which is widely used in face recognition and other fields. Metric learning classifies

the similarity of input data by learning the distance function in a specific task.
Compared with the deep learning method, metric learning is more practical. For
example, the deep learning model trained in a specific task can only adapt to the data
similar to the training samples, [10-14] and for the input data with large differences from
the sample data, the results tend to have large errors. At the same time, when the
categories of data increase, the former training model needs to be retrained under the
new categories, which will cause a lot of resource and time consumption. Therefore,
deep learning method is often limited in practical application. As a kind of machine
learning, metric learning can solve this problem well. It makes the similarity between
the same type of data increase, and the similarity between different types of data
decrease. Obviously, the result of data clustering after metric learning will be more
accurate. In this paper, we use ITML algorithm to preprocess the input data as follows:

Sn×n = ITML( Inputm×n )
Output m×n = Inputm×n × S n×n
Inputm×n is the input data, m is the number of input data, n is the dimension of input
data. Sn×n is the similarity matrix learned by metric learning, and Outputm×n is the output
data after metric learning. In Outputm×n, the distance between similar classes of drugs
will be closer than the original data, and the distance between different classes of drugs
will be farther than the original data.
AP clustering
After data preprocessing, we cluster the data. There are many clustering algorithms,
including unsupervised clustering algorithm and supervised clustering algorithm.

Among them, supervised clustering algorithms often need some prior conditions, such
as the categories that need clustering. Unsupervised clustering algorithm often does not
need a priori condition, but through the analysis of input data, such as the density or
mean of input data. The unsupervised clustering algorithm has a good effect on some
data which is difficult to label or assign a category. In this paper, we use unsupervised
clustering algorithm Affinity Propagation(AP) to cluster.
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

1

2
同类间

3

4

不同类间

Figure 0. The distance plots for data distribution.

Results and Discussions
It is found that the currently effective drugs for COVID-19, chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine, although not the same on the MoAs label, have similar drug
characteristics. On the one hand, they can inhibit T cell proliferation and reduce the
release of proinflammatory cytokines, which can increase the pH of endosome and
block endocytosis. They can all appear in category 21. This result indicates that their
common mechanism is related to the DIP after they act on the cells. The other drugs in

the cluster are not the same as the known mechanisms of action of these drugs,
suggesting that they may also have similar effects. The other drugs contained in cluster
21 have different mechanisms of action. These DIP-like drugs may have similar effects
in antiviral. The MoA of Clomifene in cluster 21 is annotated as Estrogen receptor
antagonist, which has been found to be resistant to Ebola, suggesting that it may have
a similar mechanism of action. This research work laid the foundation for the discovery
of a new drug mechanism based on image data, and at the same time provided a new
method for COVID19 drug relocation. In the next step, we will conduct antiviral
screening experiments on some new predicted drugs.

Cell imaging dataset containing 1105 drugs
The cell imaging data set containing 372 drugs was sorted and screened (see
Methods), 1105 image data (including 812-dimensional image information)
encompassing cell responses to 372 drugs were collected cumulatively (Supplementary
Table S1). These 372 drugs represent a broad range of clinical use. These image data
represent the most intuitive phenotypic effects of these drugs on cells. The image data
includes

812-dimensional

data,

including

Cells_Area

Shape_Area,

Cells_AreaShape_Compactness, Cells_AreaShape_Eccentricity, etc. The distribution
of data in each dimension ranges from +677 to -384, etc, ，and more than 98.8% of
the data is between -20 and 20. We have adopted the mean variance normalization
method and after normalization, the data is distributed within the range of mean 0 and
variance 1. The data in each dimension follows a positive distribution with a mean of 0

and a variance of 1, in which the maximum value is 13.934 and the minimum value is
-7.930. The original data distribution diagram is shown in Figure 1a, and the normalized
data distribution diagram is shown in Figure 1b.

Figure1a Origin_data

Figure1b Norm_data

Figure 1c
Figure 1. Data distribution plots (a) data distribution for original data, (b) the normalized data
distribution. (c) The relevant data distribution, in which the pie chart with MoA; the following
five types are not represented in the pie chart. The top 10 MoA types are presented as a bar
chart.

We collected the MoA information of the drugs from the LINCS database, which

contains a total of 372 kinds of MoA, 49 kinds of MoA have 5 or more drugs, and the
most MoA has as many as 43 kinds of drugs shared. The types that contain the most
drugs include Adrenergic receptor antagonist ， Dopamine receptor antagonist ，
Cyclooxygenase inhibitor 和 Serotonin receptor antagonist. The relevant data
distribution is shown in Figure 1c (the pie chart represents MoA, and the following 5
types are not represented in the pie chart. The Top 10 is made into a bar chart)
The overall flowchart in this work is illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Overall flowchart of the present study.

ITML to Realize the 812-dimensional image data conversion
In computer vision research, different features are not the same for the
classification value applied to different purposes. The same group of pictures can be
classified according to different attributes such as shape, color, size and so on.
Supervised learning methods, such as deep learning, can automatically discover more
efficient classification methods based on the training set. However, when faced with

smaller data, the performance of these models is greatly reduced. In general image
recognition tasks, such as human photo recognition, we can manually select a suitable
feature and construct a distance function. If our goal is to recognize a human face, then
we need to build a distance function to strengthen the appropriate feature Such as hair
color, face shape, etc., if our goal is to recognize posture, then we need to build a
distance function that captures the similarity of posture. This artificially constructed
feature often consumes a lot of human effort and may not be robust to data changes.
ITML as a supervised global metric learning method is an alternative method,[10-14]
which can learn the metric distance function for a specific task according to different
learning tasks.

Figure3a

Figure3b

Figure 3. TSNEplot of original data, and TSNE plot of ITML-processed data.

As a supervised global metric learning method, ITML is an alternative method. It
can learn the metric distance function for a specific task according to different learning
tasks. We use the ITML method to learn the distance measurement of the drug MoA
classification task, where num_constraints (number of constraints to generate) = 20,

max_iter = 1000, convergence_threshold = 0.001. The TSNE graphs of the Top ten
drugs before and after learning is given in Figure 3 A and Figure 3 B. Through training
for all drugs’ MoA, we get the T matrix, and the 812-dimensional vector is transformed
to be a new vector via supervised learning after passing through the T matrix.

Drugs divided into 39 categories based on ITML-transformed features
We use the T-matrix transformed features to establish drug image phenotype (DIP)
connections. The DIP connections were represented as an “association score” and
computed with Euler distance. A total of 609960 pairs of DIP connections (Distance
Matrix) among 1105 drugs were shown in a heat map representation of Figure
3b(heatmap of the Distance Matrix).

Figure 4. Heatmap figure of data.
Application of an automated, parameter-free clustering algorithm yielded 39 drug
groups with prominent consensus internal DIP similarities.[13,14] We distinguished each
of these 39 groups as an DIP community (Figure 3a，clustering figure). We use MoA
composed of more than 5 drugs as a test set for whether the DIP community can be used
for drug MoA discovery. Our enrichment analysis identified significant (P<0.01)

enriched community-specific drug MoAs for each DIP community (Figure 3b and
Supplementary Table S*，to give what the MoA is enriched by each cluster). Notably,
Communities 18,36,29 and 34 were enriched with Protein synthesis inhibitor,
Cytochrome P450 inhibitor, Calmodulin antagonist and Phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
respectively.
To examine whether ITML can help MOA recognition, we compared the effect of
MOA recognition using raw data and data processed by PCA algorithm. Using the
original data and the data processed by the PCA algorithm for clustering, 57 and 48
clusters were obtained, and the frequency of enriched MOA was 26 and 24, respectively.
The enrichment ratio is 0.4561 and 0.5000, which is also lower than the results of ITML.
Therefore, clustering the ITML-processed data makes it easier to find drugs with
consistent MoA.

a

b

c
Figure 5. The data clustering figures for a) origin data, b) ITML data, and c) PCA data,
respectively.

1105 kinds of drugs are enriched in the ITML feature classification results
1105 drug MoAs were enriched in the 39 classification communities. Serveral
similar drug MoAs were enriched in same communities. Such as the Protein synthesis
inhibitors and HDAC inhibitors were both enriched in community 18. The Cytochrome
P450 inhibitors, and EGFR inhibitors were all enriched in community 36.

The

Acetylcholine receptor agonists, Bacterial cell wall synthesis inhibitors, and
Angiogenesis inhibitors were all enriched in community 2.

The Acetylcholine

receptor antagonists, Retinoid receptor agonists and Tyrosine kinase inhibitors were all
enriched in community 4. Such overlap may be a random phenomenon, which may
imply that two different MoA drugs cause similar cell phenotypes. We found that
Adrenergic receptor agonist, Norepinehrine reuptake inhibitor, Aromatic hydrocarbon
derivative and other MoA did not significantly enrich in all clusters. The effects of these

drugs on the phenotype of tumor cells are not significant, and therefore it may cause
image data to be non-specific feature.
DIP facilitate to identify the drug use
In order to identify which image features may be more conducive to the
identification of drug use, we calculated the intra-class distance ratio between the
features of each dimension in each cluster (Table S2 (in the annex)), see the method
section for details). And determine the Community specific image features (CSIF)
according to the intra-class ratio <0.01. We found that the CSIF in each cluster rarely
overlaps, only 26 different features play a role in 2 clusters, and no features are
simultaneously Become a CSIF of 3 or more Communities. For example,
Nuclei_Intensity_MeanIntensity_Ph_golgi is the CSIF of cluster 16 of Dopamine
uptake inhibitor and cluster 22 without enrichment of any kind of drugs. CSIF suggests
that drugs within clusters may have specific pattern responses on these characteristics.
We see that although there are only 4 Tubulin inhibitors in the data set, they are all
concentrated in Community 20. Community 20 is also enriched with CDK inhibitors,
and the only 2 Microtubule inhibitors are all in this cluster. The CSIF corresponding to
this

Community

is

Cells_Texture_InfoMeas2_Ph_golgi_5,

Cells_Texture_InfoMeas1_Hoechst_5,
Cells_Texture_Variance_Hoechst_3,

Cytoplasm_AreaShape_Zernike_8_8. This may be related to the effect of the above
drugs on the cell cycle, inhibiting the division of cells and causing changes in cell
texture. These results suggest that it is feasible to discover the function of drugs or new
compounds based on DIP (See Table S1 in the attachment for more details). It is found

that the COVID-19 prevention and treatment drugs are in cluster 21. The above research
results show that the effect of drugs on cells will be through multi-dimensional image
features, and the use of ITML for feature conversion will help us find similar drugs.
This feature can help us to find more drugs with similar mechanisms through the
similarity of drug phenotypes. At present, COVID-19 still lacks effective drugs.
Chloroquine, redisevir and other drugs may be candidate drugs with certain effects.
Drugs such as ridxivir target viral proteins, and DIP derived from uninfected cell lines
may not be able to reflect drug functions. Chloroquine exerts an anti-infective effect on
the host. However, serious side effects of drugs such as chloroquine may limit its use.
Therefore, the discovery of new alternative drugs through DIP is also of great
significance. We found that the currently effective drugs for COVID19, chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine, although not the same on the MoAs label, have similar drug
characteristics. On the one hand, they can inhibit T cell proliferation and reduce the
release of proinflammatory cytokines. , It can increase the pH of endosome and block
endocytosis. They can all appear in category 21. The CSIFs of the drugs in the cluster
include

Nuclei_Intensity_IntegratedIntensity_Mito,

Nuclei_Texture_InfoMeas1_Mito_3, and so on. The result indicates that their common
mechanism is related to the DIP after they act on the cells. The other drugs in the cluster
are not the same as the known mechanisms of action of these drugs, suggesting that
they may also have similar effects. The other drugs contained in cluster 21 have
different mechanisms of action. These DIP-like drugs may have similar effects in
antiviral. The MoA of Clomifene in cluster 21 is annotated as Estrogen receptor

antagonist, which has been found to be resistant to Ebola, suggesting that it may have
a similar mechanism of action. The image data after the drug acts on the cell is one of
the most easily obtained screening data. Judging the potential effects of drugs from
images has great application value. Here we use the cell characteristic data processed
by professional cell image processing software (cellprofiler) to predict MoA. Due to
the complex MoA of drugs, we use third-party MoA annotation data and optimize the
metrics based on ITML. The optimized cluster is more closely related to the known
MoA. Next, we found that the clustering results based on image features are closely
related to the MoA of the drug itself. Such as Tubulin inhibitors, CDK inhibitors and
Microtubule inhibitors can inhibit the formation of spindles, and they are
simultaneously classified into cluster 20. The COVID-19 drug candidates chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine, and the anti-Ebola drug clomiphene appeared in cluster 21 at
the same time. Although their MoA annotations are different, they can inhibit the entry
of the virus, and on multiple image features Have similarities. These results confirm the
possibility and accuracy of drug discovery based on cell image data. It should be noted
that the cell image data we used came from a cell line without SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Therefore, drugs that target viral proteins may not have a consistent effect on the image
of this cell infection, so these data may not be applicable to virus-targeted drug
discovery. The image data of the effect of drugs on SARS-CoV-2 infected cells may be
used to screen virus-targeted drugs.

Conclusions

In summary, the functional and association analysis of DIPs provided a hypothesis
for drug repurposing of MOA. The present study here indicates that their common
mechanism is related to the DIP after they act on the cells. The other drugs in the cluster
are not the same as the known mechanisms of action of these drugs, suggesting that
they may also have similar effects. The other drugs contained in cluster 21 have
different mechanisms of action. The results show that the characteristics of ITML
conversion are more conducive to the recognition of drug functions. The analysis of
feature conversion shows that different features play important roles in identifying
different

drug

functions.

For

the

current

COVID-19,

Chloroquine

and

Hydroxychloroquine achieve antiviral effects by inhibiting endocytosis, etc., and were
classfied to the same community. And Clomiphene in the same community inibited the
entry

of

Ebola

Virus,

indicated

similar

MoAs

with

Chloroquine

and

Hydroxychloroquine that could be reflected by cell image. The MoA of Clomifene in
cluster 21 is annotated as Estrogen receptor antagonist, which has been found to be
resistant to Ebola, suggesting that it may have a similar mechanism of action. In future,
antiviral screening experiments on some new predicted drugs will be conducted.The
present work laid the foundation for the discovery of a new MOA of drug based on
machine learning of image data, and at the same time provided a new way for the
COVID-19 drug relocation.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81273488, No. 81230089) and also supported by Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big
Data-based Precision Medicine. We thank Prof. Bijie Hu from the Zhongshan Hospital,
affiliated to Fudan University, an infectious disease professor and a senior expert at the National
Scientific Panel on Infectious diseases of COVID-19 in China, for helpful discussion.

Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Received: (April 29 2020)
Published online: ((May 2020))

References
[1] B. Cao, Y. Wang, D. Wen, W. Liu, J. Wang, G. Fan, L. Ruan, B. Song, Y. Cai, M.
Wei, X. Li, J. Xia, N. Chen, J. Xiang, T. Yu, T. Bai, X. Xie, L. Zhang, C. Li, Y.
Yuan, H. Chen, H. Li, H. Huang, S. Tu, F. Gong, Y. Liu, Y. Wei, C. Dong, F.
Zhou, X. Gu, J. Xu, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Shang, K. Wang, K. Li, X. Zhou,
X. Dong, Z. Qu, S. Lu, X. Hu, S. Ruan, S. Luo, J. Wu, L. Peng, F. Cheng, L. Pan,
J. Zou, C. Jia, J. Wang, X. Liu, S. Wang, X. Wu, Q. Ge, J. He, H. Zhan, F. Qiu, L.
Guo, C. Huang, T. Jaki, F. G. Hayden, P. W. Horby, D. Zhang, C. Wang, N. Engl.
J. Med. 2020, in press. DOI 10.1056/NEJMoa2001282.
[2] G.C. Shan, W. Zhou, L. Han, et al., A Deep Learning-based Method and Equipment
for Predicting Pharmacological Properties of Drugs Using Transcriptomic Data,
CN-Patent No.202010130277.1, 2020.
[3] J. Lamb, The Connectivity Map: Using Gene-Expression Signatures to Connect
Small Molecules, Genes, and Disease. Science 2006, 313, 1929.
[4] Y. Donner, S. Kazmierczak, K. Fortney, Drug Repurposing Using Deep
Embeddings of Gene Expression Profiles. Molecular Pharmaceutics 2018, 15,
4314.
[5] A. Subramanian, et al. A Next Generation Connectivity Map: L1000 Platform and
the First 1,000,000 Profiles. Cell 2017, 171, 1437.
[6] S. M. Corsello, et al. The Drug Repurposing Hub: a next-generation drug library
and information resource. Nature Medicine 2017, 23, 405.
[7] M. Abadi, et al. TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning.
arXiv:1605.08695 2016.
[8] Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Narayan, A. Subramanian, X. Xie, Gene expression inference
with deep learning. Bioinformatics 2016, 32, 1832.
[9] L. van der Maaten, G. Hinton, Visualizing Data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 2008, 9, 2579.
[10] F. Pedregosa, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine

Learning Research, 2011,12, 2025.
[11] Frey B J, Dueck D. Clustering by passing messages between data points[J]. Science,
2007, 315(5814): 972-976
[12] Davis, Jason & Kulis, Brian & Jain, Prateek & Sra, Suvrit & Dhillon, Inderjit.
Information-theoretic metric learning. ACM International Conference Proceeding
Series. 2007, 227. 209-216. 10.1145/1273496.1273523.
[13] Amir, E.-a.D. Visualizing high-dimensional data. nature methods, 2013, (7):608.
[14] Y. Shen, T. Liu, J. Chen, X. Li, L. Liu, J. Shen, J. Wang, R. Zhang, M. Sun, Z.
Wang, W. Song, T. Qi, Y. Tang, X. Meng, L. Zhang, D. Ho, C. M. Ho, X. Ding,
H. Z. Lu, Adv. Therap. 2019, DOI 10.1002/adtp.201900114.

