Two Burning Questions on COVID-19:
Did shutting down the economy help? Can we (partially) reopen the

arXiv:2005.00072v2 [econ.EM] 10 May 2020

economy without risking the second wave?
Anish Agarwal, Abdullah Alomar, Arnab Sarker, Devavrat Shah, Dennis Shen, Cindy Yang∗
MIT

Abstract
As we reach the apex of the COVID-19 pandemic across the globe, the most pressing question facing
us all is: can we, even partially, reopen the economy without risking the second wave? Towards answering
this question, we first need to understand if shutting down the economy helped. And second if it did, is it
possible to achieve similar gains in the war against the pandemic while partially opening up the economy?
To do so, it is critical to understand the effects of the various interventions that can be put into place and
their corresponding health and economic implications. Since many possible interventions exist, the key
challenge facing policy makers is understanding the potential trade-offs between them, and choosing the
particular set of interventions that works best for their circumstance – for example, what would be the
effect on COVID-19 related deaths if the U.S. had decreased mobility by 20% instead of 60% versus if
Italy had done the same?
In this memo, we provide an overview of Synthetic Interventions [3] (a natural generalization of the
widely applied Synthetic Control method [2]), which is a data-driven and statistically principled method
to perform what-if scenario planning, i.e., for policy makers to understand the trade-offs between different
interventions before having to actually enact them. In essence, the Synthetic Interventions method
leverages information from different interventions that have already been enacted across the world and
fits it to a policy maker’s setting of interest – for instance, to estimate the effect of mobility-restricting
interventions on the U.S., we use daily death data from countries that enforced severe mobility restrictions
to create a “synthetic low mobility U.S.” and predict the counterfactual trajectory of the U.S. if it had
indeed applied a similar intervention.
We use the Synthetic Interventions method towards answering the two questions laid out above via a
case study of the effectiveness of different interventions in mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic at the
international level. Encouragingly, we find that lifting severe mobility restrictions and only retaining
moderate mobility restrictions (at retail and transit locations), seems to effectively flatten the curve. We
hope that this will provide useful guidance for policy makers as they weigh the trade-offs between the
safety of the population, strain on the healthcare system, and impact on the economy.

1

Importance of What-If Scenario Planning

Challenge of Choosing Between Interventions. It is clear that the COVID-19 pandemic has led to an
unprecedented disruption of modern society at a global scale. What is much less clear, however, is the effect
that various interventions that have been put into place have had on health and economic outcomes. For
example, perhaps a 30% and 60% clampdown in mobility have similar societal health outcomes, yet vastly
different implications for the number of people who cannot go to work or file for unemployment. Having a
clear understanding of the trade-offs between these interventions is crucial in charting a path forward on
how to open up various sectors of society. A key challenge is that policy makers do not have the luxury of
actually enacting a variety of interventions and seeing which has the optimal outcome. In fact, at a societal
level, this is simply infeasible. Arguably, an even bigger challenge is that the COVID-19 pandemic, and the
∗ Contact

Information:
cxy99@mit.edu

anish90@mit.edu, aalomar@mit.edu, arnabs@mit.edu, devavrat@mit.edu, deshen@mit.edu,

1

resulting policy choices ahead of us, are unprecedented in scale. Thus, it is difficult to reliably apply lessons
from previous pandemics (e.g., SARS, H1N1). This is only further exacerbated when taking into the account
the vastly different economic, cultural, and societal factors that make each town/city/state/country unique.
Synthetic Interventions. In this memo, we introduce Synthetic Interventions [3], a method towards
solving the problem laid out above. Specifically, Synthetic Interventions provides a data-driven and statistically
principled way to perform what-if scenario planning, i.e., for policy makers to understand the trade-offs
between different interventions before having to actually enact them. In essence, the Synthetic Interventions
method leverages information from different interventions that have already been enacted across the world
and fits it to a policy maker’s setting of interest – for example, to estimate the effect of mobility-restricting
interventions on the U.S., we use daily death data from countries that enforced severe mobility restrictions to
create a “synthetic low-mobility U.S.” and predict the counterfactual trajectory of the U.S. if it had indeed
applied a similar intervention. We highlight a few desirable attributes of this methodology.
• Personalized Predictions – the method takes into account the heterogeneity of the particular (geographical)
purview of a policy-maker. For example, the method would provides different predictions for the effects of
a 40% drop in mobility for the U.S. vs. India vs. Italy etc. based on the particulars of that country.
• Simplicity & Interpretability – the method relies on building “synthetic” versions of each geographical
location under different interventions by simply using a weighted combination of geographical locations
that did indeed enact such an intervention. Thus, Synthetic Interventions requires relatively little hyperparameter tuning. We hope that the simplicity, interpretability, and robustness (yet surprising accuracy)
of the method will encourage policy makers to apply Synthetic Interventions without fear of over-fitting to
the idiosyncracies of their data.
• Low Data Requirement – the method produces accurate forecasts using only (i) a few “donor” regions,
i.e., the method only requires a small number of regions, approximately 5-10, to have gone through the
intervention of interest; (ii) measurements over a small number of time periods, approximately 10-30 days
(this can be viewed as the amount of training data); (iii) data corresponding to the metric of interest
from each geographical location (e.g., daily national death rates), i.e., it does not require additional
covariate information about each location; however, if auxiliary information is available, then the Synthetic
Interventions method can naturally incorporate these data points in the model learning procedure as well.
COVID-19 Case-Study using Synthetic Interventions. In the next section, we detail the use of
Synthetic Interventions to evaluate the effect of various mobility restriction interventions on health outcomes.
We give attention to the data requirements of the method, some important algorithmic details, and how to
evaluate whether the method is producing accurate forecasts. We hope this memo serves as a template for
policy makers to make statistically informed decisions on the variety of weighty policy choices ahead of them.

2

Synthetic Interventions: A Practitioner’s Guide

Recall that the aim of Synthetic Interventions is to predict the counterfactual trajectories of a region under a
variety of interventions of interest. Below, we explain how policy-makers can use the Synthetic Interventions
method to help guide them in choosing between interventions. For concreteness, we use the case study of
applying Synthetic Interventions to understand the effect of mobility restriction policies on the number of
COVID-19 related deaths at a country level, as a running example.

2.1

Modeling Decisions & Data Requirements

We begin by listing some of the key modeling decisions and data requirements for the Synthetic Interventions
method to produce reliable counterfactual predictions.

2

Choosing Metric of Interest. First, a practitioner must decide upon his or her relevant metric of interest.
Some examples include the number of (i) COVID-19 related deaths, (ii) COVID-19 related cases, (iii) ICU
beds utilized, and (iv) unemployment claim filings. The counterfactual predictions produced by the Synthetic
Interventions method will be with respect to the particular metric chosen.
Choosing Interventions of Interest. Secondly, a practitioner must define a set of interventions that are
of interest to the policy maker. For example, in the case of studying the effect of mobility, the interventions
could be a (i) less than 10% drop in mobility, (ii) 10 − 40% drop in mobility, and (iii) greater than 40% drop
in mobility compared to the national baseline. The counterfactual predictions produced by the Synthetic
Interventions method will be for the particular interventions chosen.
Choosing Pre- and Post-Intervention Time Periods. The third decision that needs to be made is
defining the pre- and post-intervention periods, i.e., the data that is fed into the algorithm must be divided
into two segments:
• Pre-Intervention – this is the time period when all geographic locations have not yet enacted an intervention
(or, more generally, enacted a common intervention); in our context, the pre-intervention period is defined
by the time horizon in which all countries are operating as normal, prior to any COVID-19 related outbreaks
(i.e., none of the countries have implemented any mobility-restricting policies). Properly defining this time
period is crucial as the algorithm strictly requires that the countries of interest are all operating under a
common setting.
• Post-Intervention – the post-intervention period should be defined as the time period when we see the
effect of the interventions that each geographic location enacted. Importantly, we note that the pre- and
post-intervention periods do not have to be contiguous, chronological time instances.
Categorizing Geographical Locations by Intervention Received. The fourth decision that needs to
be made is categorizing the various geographic locations by the interventions they enact, which are observed
in the post-intervention period. In our context, this would be categorizing the countries by the average drop
in mobility compared to the national baseline in the pre-intervention period.

2.2

Input, Output of Synthetic Interventions Method

Algorithm Overview. The method has two major steps:
• Synthetic Target Unit Construction – construct a “synthetic” model of the target region (i.e., the region
we are interested in producing counterfactuals for) as a weighted combination of other donor regions (i.e.,
regions that did indeed enact the intervention of interest).
• Counterfactual Prediction – use the model of the “synthetic” target unit, along with the observations of
our donor units under our intervention of interest, to create the target unit’s counterfactual trajectory in
this parallel setting.
Data Input.

The data input into the Synthetic Interventions algorithm is divided into two parts:

• Pre-Intervention Target and Donor Group Data – for the pre-intervention period, we require time series
data for the metric of interest (e.g., daily death rates) associated with (i) the target region; (ii) and, for
every intervention of interest, the corresponding donor regions (i.e., a donor group) that receive that
intervention during the post-intervention period. As mentioned earlier, it is important that all regions
(target and donors) do not receive any intervention during the pre-intervention period.
• Post-Intervention Donor Data – for the post-intervention period, we require time series data for each donor
region under the interventions of interest.

3

Data Output. The result of applying the Synthetic Interventions method on the data input described
above would be a counterfactual trajectory of the target unit in the post-intervention time period under every
intervention of interest. In other words, for each donor subgroup (which receives a unique intervention), one
counterfactual trajectory for the target unit will be produced.
Mathematical Formulation.
tions method.

3
3.1

Please refer to Section 4 for a formal description of the Synthetic Interven-

COVID-19 Case Study
Modeling Decisions Made to Reliably Use Synthetic Interventions

Choosing Metric of Interest - Daily Death Counts. Although there are a myriad of ways to measure
a region’s health and economic outcomes, some metrics such as the number of cases are considered “noisier”
due to the inconsistencies of testing across regions, and others such as the number of daily unemployment
filings are sparse. As a result, given its greater reliability and availability, daily death count reports are used
as our outcome variable of interest. Thus, we will apply the Synthetic Interventions method to predict how
different interventions affect the number of COVID-19 related deaths within a region.
Choosing Interventions of Interest - Daily Mobility Rate. Each country has implemented a variety
of interventions simultaneously to combat the spread of COVID-19. This makes it difficult to analyze any
particular intervention (e.g., stay-at-home orders vs. schools shutting down) in isolation. However, if we
consider the causal chain of events, we observe that all of these interventions are directed towards restricting
how individuals move and interact, which then affects the spread and, ultimately, deaths associated with
COVID-19. In light of this, we adopt mobility as our notion of intervention, and investigate how a country’s
drop in mobility level translates to the number of potential COVID-19 related deaths1 . To that end, we use
Google’s excellent mobility reports [1] to define three distinct, mutually exclusive interventions as follows:
(a) Low Mobility Restricting Intervention – reduction in mobility is below 10% compared to national
baseline from January 2020.
(b) Moderate Mobility Restricting Intervention – reduction in mobility is between 10% to 40% compared to
national baseline from January 2020.
(c) Severe Mobility Restricting Intervention – reduction in mobility is greater than 40% compared to
national baseline from January 2020.
Choosing Pre- and Post-Intervention Time Periods - Number of Deaths in the Country. As
previously mentioned, it is crucial to have a well-defined pre- and post-intervention period, where all regions
during the pre-intervention period operate under a no intervention setting, and the effects of their enacted
interventions are only observed during the post-intervention period. Towards this, an assumption we rely
on is that the enactment of mobility lockdown in a country is a function of the number of deaths in the
country instead of a particular calendar date. This is indeed verified in a data-driven manner using the
Google mobility reports – we see that 20 days prior to 80 deaths in a country (and any time before that),
essentially no country enacted a mobility lockdown. Thus, we align the daily death rate trajectories, and
correspondingly the pre- and post-intervention periods, as before and after the country has 80 deaths. In
other words, we refer to the day a country hits 80 deaths as “Day 0”, and the pre- and post-intervention
periods then refer to the days before and after Day 0, respectively.
1 To resolve any potential ambiguities, we will henceforth refer to change in the level of mobility within a country as an
intervention, and refer to orders such as the closing of schools or the enforcing of individuals to stay at home as a policy (which
eventually translates to an intervention).

4

Categorizing Countries by Intervention Received – Average (Lagged) Mobility Score. Studies
have shown that there is a median lag of 20 days from the onset of infection to the day of death (e.g., see
[5]). Hence, a country’s daily death count is a function of the region’s infection levels, which are in turn
affected by mobility levels, from roughly 20 days prior. Thus, to compute the effect of a mobility intervention
from Day 0 onwards, we compute a country’s mobility score (i.e., intervention level) from Day -20 to Day -1.
Given that the mobility score in [1] is changing every day, we take the average mobility score of a country
from Day -20 to Day -1 and then bucket it into the three intervention groups defined above2 .

3.2

Empirical Results – Looking Back: What Could Have Happened?

Here, we apply the Synthetic Interventions method to produce the counterfactual predictions of the daily
death counts for all countries in the Google mobility data set under the three possible interventions detailed
in Section 3.1.
Validating Synthetic Interventions. Our aim is to validate that the method is able to produce accurate
counterfactual predictions across all three interventions. To that end, for every intervention (mobility
restriction level), we display the counterfactual predictions associated with two representative countries that
enacted that intervention3 . In the low mobility restricting regime, we show results for the United States
and the United Kingdom in Figures 1a and 1c, respectively, in Appendix A. Pleasingly, we observe that the
output produced by Synthetic Interventions is able to accurately recreate the observed death rates in the
post-intervention period. We note that the model is learned during the pre-intervention period (Day -20 to
Day -1), and the dashed lines in Days 0 - 15 are the predicted values under all possible mobility restriction
levels (while solid lines are the true values).
Similarly, in the moderate and severe mobility restricting regimes, we display the results for Turkey, Sweden,
India, and Romania in Figures 2a, 2c, 3a, and 3c, respectively, in Appendix A. Again, we observe that the
counterfactual predictions produced from the Synthetic Interventions method is able to closely match the
observed death rates under all different interventions, i.e., mobility restrictions. Importantly, we note that in
all of these models, the Synthetic interventions built for the target country is learned in the pre-intervention
period, when no intervention has yet occurred. Still, we are able to transfer the learnt model into an
interventional setting, i.e., when the interventions take effect within the donor countries.
For each of the countries listed above, we display their top four donor countries (under each intervention)
that most closely resemble them. These are shown in Figures 1b, 1d, 2b, 2d, 3b, and 3d in Appendix A.
Key Takeaway from Counterfactual Predictions. A stark conclusion that is immediately apparent
from the figures above is that uniformly across all countries, there is a significant drop in the number of deaths
with a even a “small” drop in mobility (i.e, a 10-40% drop in mobility compared to the national baseline).
After this point, gains by further restricting mobility seem to be diminishing. An ongoing line of research is
to study how these various restrictions in mobility affect economic outcomes of a country. This will ideally
allow policy-makers to precisely quantify the trade-off between various mobility restricting interventions.

3.3

Empirical Results – Looking Ahead: What Can Happen?

What Can Happen if Mobility Restrictions are Lifted? Using the output of Synthetic Interventions,
a natural next question that arises is estimating the peak number of daily deaths if mobility restrictions
are lifted as of today (April 23rd, 2020). To do so, we input the counterfactual estimates of the Synthetic
Interventions method into an exponential curve-fitting algorithm. Specifically, for each country, we fit an
exponential function to its current trajectory and each intervention level that is less restrictive than its
current intervention level. We display the corresponding figures in Appendix B.
2 Moving
3 Similar

forward, we aim to apply more sophisticated clustering methods such as K-means clustering.
results hold generally across all countries. Please contact authors for any specific country of interest.

5

Key Takeaways. In a similar vein to the previous section, we see from the figures in Appendix B, even
small drops in mobility can significantly decrease the peak number of daily deaths in a country. Given that
the peak number of daily deaths is the key metric in understanding how strained each nation’s medical system
will be, we see that moderate mobility restriction measures can lead to a significant “flatenning” of the curve.

4

Synthetic Interventions - Formal Description

Setup. We consider the setting where there are N units and D interventions, and we observe the outcome
variable of interest (e.g., death count) associated with each unit across T time periods. Throughout, we
let n, t, and d be the indices associated with unit n, time t, and intervention d, respectively. Further, we
denote T0 < T as the intervention point (e.g., Day 0), which partitions our time horizon into two distinct
segments: the pre-intervention period (t ≤ T0 ), where all units are assumed to be in a common setting (e.g.,
in the case study above, all countries operate as usual prior to any COVID-19 related outbreaks), and a
post-intervention period (t > T0 ), where each unit may receive one of D interventions (e.g., a country goes
into a low/moderate/severe mobility lockdown).
(d)

Potential Outcome Notation. We let ynt denote the potential outcome for unit n at time t under
intervention d. Without loss of generality, we will let d = 1 represent the absence of any intervention or
null-intervention (our assumed common pre-intervention setting). Finally, we let I (d) represent the set of units
that actually receive intervention d (e.g., mobility level d) in the post-intervention period, and N (d) = I (d)
as the number of units within partition I (d) .
Input. For each unit, we have access to a time series of T observations4 according to some outcome variable
of interest. We can represent the available data (i.e., the dataset that is fed into the synthetic interventions
method) as an N × T matrix Y = [ynt ] ∈ RN ×T , with (n, t)-th entry expressed as follows:

(1)

 ynt , for all t ≤ T0
(d)
ynt =
ynt · 1(n ∈ I (d) ) + ? · 1(n ∈
/ I (d) ), for all t > T0 , d ∈ [D]


?, otherwise,
where ? indicates a missing value and 1 denotes the indicator function. That is, during the pre-intervention
period, the observed outcomes associated with all units are associated with the null-intervention. During
the post-intervention, however, we observe the outcome variable associated with each unit based on the
intervention it received.
Output. The output of the Synthetic Interventions algorithm is simply an augmentation of the observed data
Y under all possible interventions. That is, the Synthetic Interventions algorithm predicts the counterfactual
trajectory of the outcome variable under all D interventions for every unit. Hence, for each unit n, synthetic
(d)
interventions produces ybnt for all (t, d), where t > T0 and d ∈ [D]. If the counterfactual predictions are
accurate and reliable, then a practitioner now has insights as to how each intervention affects every unit
across time, and can reason about the trade-offs between interventions. Importantly, we note that these
trajectories are unit specific, i.e., the counterfactual trajectories produced will be unique to each unit.

4.1

Algorithm

For notational simplicity (and without loss of generality), we temporarily consider unit n = 1 as our target
unit of interest, which operates under intervention d∗ in the post-intervention period; we will refer to the
remaining units as our donor units. In what follows, we describe how to predict the counterfactual outcome
variables for our target unit if it was operating under a different intervention d 6= d∗ instead. The same
procedure can then be applied towards all remaining units.
4 It is not necessary that the observations are indexed by time, though it is the most common way datasets are structured.
Rather, we require T (pre- and post-intervention) measurements for each of the N units.

6

(1)

(d)

For convenience, we will denote Y (d,pre) = [ynt ]n∈I (d) ,t≤T0 and Y (d,post) = [ynt ]n∈I (d) ,t>T0 as the pre- and
post-intervention matrices, respectively, associated with the donor units who received intervention d. Let
their singular value decompositions (SVDs) be denoted as:
Y (d,pre) =

N (d)
∧T0
X

N (d) ∧(T −T0 )

σi ui viT

X

Y (d,post) =

and

i=1

si µi νiT .

i=1

1. Data de-noising, regularizing: perform Singular Value Thresholding (SVT) on Y (d,pre) and Y (d,post) to
(1)
(d)
produce Ỹ (d,pre) = [ỹnt ]n∈I (d) ,t≤T0 and Ỹ (d,post) = [ỹnt ]n∈I (d) ,t>T0 , denoted as:
Ỹ

(d,pre)

=

pre)
r (d,
X

σi ui viT

and

Ỹ

(d,post)

=

post)
r (d,
X

i=1

si µi νiT ,

(1)

i=1

where r(d,pre) and r(d,post) are hyper-parameters.
2. Pre-Intervention - Synthetic Target Unit Construction : for every intervention d 6= d∗ , define
b(d) = argmin
λ
w∈RN

(d)

T0 
X

(1)

y1t −

t=1

X

(1)

wn · ỹnt

2

.

(2)

n∈I (d)

3. Post-intervention Counterfactual Predictions : for every t > T0 ,
X
(d)
b(d) · ỹ (d) .
λ
yb1t =
nt
n

(3)

n∈I (d)

4.1.1

Algorithm – Mathematical Intuition

Below we give intuition for the two major steps of the Synthetic Interventions algorithm (described above).
Pre-Intervention - Synthetic Target Unit Construction. In order to predict the counterfactual
outcome variables for our target unit under intervention d, we first build a synthetic version of our target
b(d) in (2),
unit using the donor units within partition I (d) . That is, we find the set of weights, defined by λ
that best approximates the outcome variables of our target unit in the absence of any intervention. Crucially,
to ensure that we are not over-fitting the data beyond the inherent model complexity in the target unit
and donor trajectories, the Synthetic Interventions method performs Singular Value Thresholding (SVT)
b(d) ,
(equivalently Principal Component Analysis) on Y (d,pre) and Y (d,post) before learning the linear weights λ
as seen in (1). In other words, instead of simply performing Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression, we
perform Principal Component Regression (PCR), which learns a model in the reduced subspace spanned by
the columns of Ỹ (d,pre) , to ensure our model is appropriately de-noised and regularized. For more motivation
on why we use PCR, please refer to [4].
Post-Intervention - Counterfactual Prediction. Once the model for intervention d is learned, we
re-scale the observed outcome variables associated with our donor units in I (d) during the post-intervention
b(d) according to (3). Effectively, (3) performs a synthetic intervention d for
period by the set of weights λ
our target unit and provides the corresponding counterfactual outcome variables under such a setting. The
key assumption that allows one to make valid counterfactual estimates using the Synthetic Interventions
algorithm is that the relationship between units is invariant across interventions. Although this assumption
may seem “unnatural”, it is pleasingly implied (and justified) by a tensor factor model imposed on the data,
which can be thought of as a natural extension to the matrix factor model generally assumed in panel data in
econometrics (and, in particular, synthetic control methods). Mathematical details on this are beyond the
scope of this memo, and an interested reader should feel free to contact the authors. Lastly, just as in the
pre-intervention phase, we perform SVT (i.e., PCA) on the donor post-intervention data in (1) for de-noising
and regularization purposes.
7

5

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge fruitful discussions with Rahul Panicker of Wadhwani AI in helping us focus on mobility as
the lens to take with respect to interventions. We also thank Alberto Abadie of MIT Economics for helpful
discussions.

A

Looking Back: What Could Have Happened?

Here, we display the figures described in Section 3.2.

(a) U.S. under all interventions.

(b) Top donor nations for the U.S.

(c) U.K. under all interventions.

(d) Top donor nations for the U.K.

Figure 1: Validating Synthetic Interventions: countries with low mobility restricting interventions.

8

(a) Turkey under all interventions.

(b) Top donor nations for Turkey.

(c) Sweden under all interventions.

(d) Top donor nations for Sweden.

Figure 2: Validating Synthetic Interventions: countries with moderate mobility restricting interventions.

(a) India under all interventions.

(b) Top donor nations for India.

(c) Romania under all interventions.

(d) Top donor nations for Romania.

Figure 3: Validating Synthetic Interventions: countries with severe mobility restricting interventions.

9

B

Looking Ahead: What Can Happen?

Here, we display the figures described in Section 3.3

(a) Projection for Turkey.

(b) Projection for Sweden.
Figure 4: Looking ahead: projections for countries with moderate mobility restricting interventions.

10

(a) Projection for India.

(b) Projection for Romania.
Figure 5: Looking ahead: projections for countries with severe mobility restricting interventions.

11

References
[1] Google LLC google covid-19 community mobility reports. https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/. Accessed: 2020-04-20.
[2] A. Abadie. Using synthetic controls: Feasibility, data requirements, and methodological aspects (working paper).
2019.
[3] A. Agarwal, R. Cosson, D. Shah, and D. Shen. Synthetic interventions. CausalML Workshop of Advances of
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
[4] A. Agarwal, D. Shah, D. Shen, and D. Song. On robustness of principal component regression. Advances of Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
[5] T. B. L. B. M. Wilson N, Kvalsvig A. Case-fatality estimates for covid-19 calculated by using a lag time for
fatality. Emerg Infect Dis., 2020.

12

