The Fallibility of Contact-Tracing Apps
Piotr Sapiezynski1,* , Johanna Pruessing2 , and Vedran Sekara3,4
1 Khoury

College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
Society Foundations, Berlin, Germany
3 IT University, Copenhagen, Denmark
4 UNICEF, New York, USA
* corresponding author: p.sapiezynski@northeastern.edu

arXiv:2005.11297v3 [cs.CY] 27 May 2020

2 Open

ABSTRACT
Since the onset of the COVID-19’s global spread we have been following the debate around contact tracing apps–the techenabled response to the pandemic. As corporations, academics, governments, and civil society discuss the right way to
implement these apps, we noticed recurring implicit assumptions. The proposed solutions are designed for a world where
Internet access and smartphone ownership are a given, people are willing and able to install these apps, and those who receive
notifications about potential exposure to the virus have access to testing and can isolate safely. In this work we challenge these
assumptions. We not only show that there are not enough smartphones worldwide to reach required adoption thresholds
but also highlight a broad lack of internet access, which affects certain groups more: the elderly, those with lower incomes,
and those with limited ability to socially distance. Unfortunately, these are also the groups that are at the highest risks from
COVID-19. We also report that the contact tracing apps that are already deployed on an opt-in basis show disappointing
adoption levels. We warn about the potential consequences of over-extending the existing state and corporate surveillance
powers. Finally, we describe a multitude of scenarios where contact tracing apps will not help regardless of access or policy. In
this work we call for a comprehensive and equitable policy response that prioritizes the needs of the most vulnerable, protects
human rights, and considers long term impact instead of focusing on technology-first fixes.

Introduction
Communicable diseases, such as COVID-19, spread between people in close proximity. This is why, in addition to social
distancing, business closures, and wearing masks, public health interventions include contact tracing. It is a method of
identifying people that were in physical proximity with a positive patient, so that they can be isolated, tested and, if necessary,
treated. Traditionally, contact tracing has been done by human tracers, who interview infected patients about all their recent
contacts and then follow up with them. Human tracers engage directly with their interviewees and are trained to address any
potential health and confidentiality concerns.1 However, this approach has two drawbacks. First, low recall: we humans tend
not to remember all the people we were in close contact with during the period where we were potentially infectious (up to two
weeks before onset of symptoms2 ). It is also impossible to identify strangers we have been close to on the bus or in the store,
etc. And second, slow process: human tracers have to reach out to all the reported contacts and talk to them. This can be a
painstakingly slow process and it might well take days to get a hold of all the people we listed. Smartphone based contact
tracing promises to solve both of these limitations. If it works as intended we would not have to rely on our faulty memory. The
app could “remember” the people we do not even know, as long as both we all have compatible smartphones and installed
the app. Once we are diagnosed, the app would instantly notify all our contacts who meet certain criteria, such as duration of
contact, closeness, etc. and recommend testing and/or isolation, But of course only if everyone has a smartphone, the app, and
reliable internet access.
Yet, actually solving these two drawbacks brings about a variety of technical challenges. Currently, we are seeing a growing
consensus around a decentralized and privacy-preserving design using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to measure proximity.
One such approach was proposed by a consortium of European academics and later adopted by Google and Apple.3 The few
countries that chose more privacy-invasive approaches, including the UK, Norway, Australia, and Singapore quickly learned
that their apps do not work on iPhones. As a result some of them have signaled willingness to reconsider their approach.
Bluetooth Low Energy was chosen instead of popularly discussed location data (from GPS, cell towers, or WiFi), because
of its accuracy and battery efficiency. Location data is not accurate inside of buildings and therefore cannot be used to
determine whether two people were actually close enough to exchange the virus, or just happened to be in the same building. A
location-based approach would lead to plenty of false exposure notifications, by for example reporting everyone living in the
same building as an infected person. For more information about how exactly the Bluetooth-based, decentralized tracing would
work, we recommend a great infographic4 by the Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing group (DP3T), one of

Worldwide mobile Internet subscribers

74%

58%

North
America

76%
40%

55%

Europe

62%

Middle East
North Africa

41%
Latin
America

Commonwealth of
Independent States

26%

Greater
China

Asia
Pacific

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Source (data and assignment to markets): The Mobile Economy, GSMA, 2020, p. 14 https://bit.ly/3bmYrol

Figure 1. Access to mobile Internet is not evenly distributed across the world and is especially scarce in Sub-Saharan Africa.
the groups working on implementing tracing apps.
Contribution
Regardless of the architecture and particularities of implementation, the proponents of contact tracing apps appear to make a
number of assumptions, which we challenge in this work:
• Do people have modern smartphones and unhindered access to the Internet?
• Can we use Bluetooth signals to measure physical proximity between people? Can this be actually epidemiologically
useful?
• Can and will individuals choose to install contact tracing apps?
• Can individuals access tests and adapt their behavior accordingly once the app signals exposure?
When we answer these questions using the available data, we find that smartphone-based solutions to the pandemic may
have vastly differential impacts, if deployed without considering local contexts and varying needs of different communities.
The virus, initially dubbed by some a “great equalizer”5 has progressively proven to be a “great magnifier”6 as it already
disproportionately affected the most disadvantaged communities. It is paramount we ensure that any attempted technological
interventions to the pandemic do not exacerbate existing inequalities and are, instead, a part of an equitable public health
response. While it might appear that smartphone based contact tracing is a promising approach in selected geographies, we
must not forget that the pandemic is, by the very nature of how much we are connected, a global problem and not one of
separate societies. In the sections below we take a closer look at each of these implicit assumptions.
To be clear, this document is not a statement against ethically responsible, privacy-preserving, and time-limited contact
tracing as a concept. Community based contact tracing, traditional interview and follow-up in person or via phone-call with
those potentially exposed, and, in places where we can ensure viability, app-assisted tracing can be necessary elements of
reopening countries once testing is widely available and equally accessible to everyone.

Assumption 1: People have modern smartphones and Internet access
While in many countries smartphones are taken for granted, worldwide, only approximately 42%-45% of the population has
a smartphone7 and only about three quarters of these devices support the required Bluetooth Low Energy technology.8 This
2/15

Smartphone ownership by country

1.0

North America
Latin America
Europe
MENA
Sub-Saharan Africa
CIS
Greater China
Asia Pacific

Smartphones per person

0.8
0.6
0.4

Argentina

Kazakhstan
Iran

Japan

Philippines

Uzbekistan
Algeria Peru

0.2
0.0

South Korea
Israel
Spain
UK US

Sudan
Pakistan
Ethiopia
500

1000

2000

Sources:
Newzoo https://bit.ly/2WCnUF3
Pew Research Center https://pewrsr.ch/3chkI8r

5000
10000
nominal GDP per capita [USD]

20000

50000

Figure 2. Smartphone penetration is strongly correlated with the wealth of countries–the richest countries have eight times
more smartphones per capita than the poorest.

means that more than half the world’s population live in countries where smartphone ownership might not be high enough
for smartphone-based contact tracing to work as we show below. The latest GSMA report (see Figure 1) further illustrates
large differences between regions: in Sub-Saharan Africa only 26 out of 100 people have a mobile Internet subscription; for
comparison, in Europe the number is 76 out of 100. Internet connectivity (necessary for contact tracing apps to work) is
similarly unevenly distributed, leaving nearly half of the world’s population, 3.5 billion people, without access.9
These staggering differences are related to the wealth of countries measured here in GDP per capita, see Figure 2. In the
poorest countries only one out of 10 people have a smartphone. This number is eight to nine times higher in the wealthiest
countries meaning only one or two out of 10 people do not have one.
Yet, for digital contact tracing to be effective, epidemiologists estimate that we need at least a success rate of 60% for both
identifying and isolating the contacts within a few days.11 This fraction will differ depending on the severity of the situation
(how many people are currently affected, what distancing measures are in place, etc.). It is, however, quite clear that this success
rate cannot be achieved in countries where less than 60% of the population owns a smartphone regardless of adoption levels
and efficiency of the app itself. As visualised in the map, these countries are not evenly distributed around the world - instead,
they include most of Latin America, the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, as well as many countries in the Asia/Pacific region.
That a digital divide including uneven access to smartphones and mobile internet remains a global problem is clear. What
tends to be overlooked is how these discrepancies also exist within countries. For instance, the elderly are one of the highest
risk groups from a medical perspective. At the same time, they are also considerably less likely to have a smartphone compared
to their young compatriots. Surveys show that in Europe general smartphone adoption is above 75%.10 Yet, as we show in
Figure 3, people aged 18-35 are 1.5 times more likely to own a smartphone than those 50 years or older. This difference is
especially high in countries with low general smartphone ownership. In India and Indonesia, where penetration levels are
generally low, young people are as much as five times more likely to own a smartphone than those over 50.
Even in the US where overall smartphone ownership levels are high, we observe crucial differences between demographics.
According to a Pew survey from 2019, only 53% of Americans 65 years and older own a smartphone,12 see Figure 4. The
number is as high as 96% for adults between 18-29 years. That leaves 24 million people at the highest risk of dying from
COVID-19 outside any smartphone based tracing system. The same Pew survey also shows that income is a decisive factor for
owning a smartphone: less than three quarters of adults with a household income below $50,000 own smartphones compared to
95% of the those earning above $75,000, see Figure 4. It further reports lower penetration rates among rural residents (71%
vs 83% for (sub)urban). Finally, the Pew Research survey reports only small differences in smartphone ownership in the US
among races and genders.
Obtaining detailed statistics for smartphone ownership is generally challenging and even more difficult for low and middle
income countries. Because of the scarcity of such data we cannot draw as comprehensive a picture as for the US. What we can
do is provide a few results for other countries to compare. For instance, in the country of Georgia (South Caucasus) the gap in
smartphone ownership is strongly correlated with wealth. A recent survey observed that 95% of the most wealthy households
3/15

Age gap in smartphone ownership by country
How much more likely people below 35
are to have smartphones
compared to those above 50

Indonesia
5x

North America
Latin America
Europe
MENA
Sub-Saharan Africa
CIS
Greater China
Asia Pacific

India

4x

Russia
Kenya
Nigeria

3x

Brazil
Mexico

Canada

2x
1x

Netherlands
South Korea

equal usage

Source: Pew Research Center https://pewrsr.ch/3chkI8r

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
0.7
Smartphones per person

0.8

0.9

1.0

% of adults who own a smartphone

Figure 3. Countries with the lowest overall smartphone adoption also have the largest age gaps in ownership.10 In India and
Indonesia, below below 35 are five times more likely to have a smartphone compared to those above 50.

Smartphone ownership
per age in the US

100
96.0%
80

Smartphone ownership
per income bracket in the US
90.0%

95.0%

$30k $50k $50k
$75k
income bracket

$75k+

92.0%
79.0%

71.0%

60

78.0%

53.0%

40
20
0

18-29

30-49

50-64
age

65+

<$30k

Figure 4. Smartphone adoption in the US is among the highest in the world, but those over 65+ are still much less likely to
own a smartphone than those below 35.
have at least one smartphone, while less than 40% of the poorest households have access to one.13 With an average household
size of 3.4, smartphone adoption numbers are likely to be worse.
Data from other countries illustrate the gender gap in access to technology. For example, in Iraq the vast majority of
households own a mobile phone (this number includes both smart and feature phones), regardless of wealth and whether they
live in an urban or a rural area.14 However, when we ask the same question of women, an entirely different image emerges.
Less than half of women in the poorest households and those living in rural areas own a mobile phone, let alone a smartphone.
A Pew Research survey from 2018 showed that while the gender gap in access to smartphones was in single digits in most
of the 27 investigated countries, in India men were more than twice as likely to own one than women (34% vs 15%).10 Rolling
out contact tracing apps without taking gender, age, wealth, ability, race, and class aspects of the digital divide into account can
thus be disastrous and exacerbate problems for the most vulnerable.
A smartphone per person?
When we think of using smartphones for contact tracing, we necessarily assume that the way people treat and use their
smartphones is consistent across contexts and cultures - that smartphones belong to individuals, who constantly carry them on
their bodies. As anthropologist Susan L. Erikson describes in “Cell Phones 6= Self and Other Problems with Big Data Detection
and Containment during Epidemics” this is not necessarily the case everywhere:
Many Sierra Leoneans possess cell phones, but this possession is often temporary, even fleeting. Cell phones are
4/15

Smartphone ownership in Georgia
95.0%
percentage of households
with a smartphone

80

81.6%
73.0%

69.1%

60
40
38.5%
20
0

Q1

Q2

Q3
Wealth (quintiles)

Q4

Q5

Figure 5. In the country of Georgia less than 40% of the poorest households have even one smartphone compared to 95% of
the richest households.

Mobile phone ownership in Iraq by income and residence location
households

Mobile phone ownership

100

99%

99%

98%

98%

94%

women

80

98%

97%
84%

75%

60
40

59%

72%

66%
47%

42%

20
0

poorest

second

middle
fourth
Income quintile

richest

rural
urban
Residence location

Figure 6. In Iraq the vast majority of households have a mobile phone, regardless of wealth or location. However, women,
especially those in the poorest and rural households are much less likely to have a phone on their own.

loaned, traded, and passed around among family and friends, like clothes, books, and bicycles. A single phone can
be shared by an extended family or, in rural areas, a neighborhood or a village. (...) Outside of larger cities, fewer
Sierra Leoneans have cell phones. But in Freetown and Kenema, the capital city of the Eastern Province, I met
many people who had more than one.15
The consequences of this are two-fold. First, the data on penetration rates of smartphones and mobile internet users are
potentially overly optimistic: 20% penetration does not mean two out of ten people have one smartphone each, but it might
mean that 1 out of 10 has two devices. Second, even the smartphones might not be relevant for contact tracing efforts as they do
not correspond to one person but are instead shared among multiple individuals: 20% penetration does not mean that two out of
then people have one smartphone each and the others have none. Instead, it might mean that a group of ten people share two
devices and use them each at different times.
Internet infrastructure
In general, smartphone users tend to have access to the Internet.16 But the nation-wide statistics of Internet penetration might
not accurately reflect the reality of ease and dependability of access. One of the limiting factors are large-scale power outages
that disproportionately affect low income countries. According to a World Bank study, countries in South Asia experience 25.5
power outages per month on average, compared to 0.3 per month in Europe.17
5/15

However, power outages are not the only reason for temporary lapses in connectivity. A human rights advocacy group
Access Now reports on growing numbers of deliberate Internet shutdowns across the world which predominantly affect
vulnerable communities. Their #KeepItOn campaign documented 213 shutdowns in 33 countries in 2019.18 Some of the
recorded shutdowns only last from a few hours for example when the UK law enforcement blocked the Internet access during a
climate protest. Others last up to a few months like the case of Indian government’s complete blackout of Jammu and Kashmir
for 175 days, or Myanmar’s shutdown of the Rakhine and Rohingya communities that started in June 2019 and continues to this
day.19 In his recent Human Rights Council submission “Disease pandemics and the freedom of opinion and expression” the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, David Kaye, stressed:
Governments increasingly resort to shutting down the Internet, often for illegitimate purposes but in all cases
having a disproportionate impact on the population. Network shutdowns invariably fail to meet the standard of
necessity.20
None of the reasons given to justify the ongoing shutdowns are related to the spread of COVID: the authorities do so to
strategically curb protests, limit the free flow of information, and silence political speech.18, 21, 22 However, they are already
hindering the pandemic response among the impacted communities for example in Kashmir,23 and Bangladesh.24, 25 The
negative impact of internet shutdowns on public health response also shows us that the internet has taken up a role similar
to public infrastructure. Hence, cutting Internet access does not only harm free speech and commercial ventures but harms
fundamental rights such as the right to health.26

Assumption 2: Bluetooth works well enough for measuring proximity of epidemiological
importance
Despite the disparities in access, some countries are already employing apps for contact tracing using Bluetooth Low Energy.
While we agree that this is the best technology we have, it is not clear whether it is good enough. Let’s take a closer look.
When contact tracing is enabled on a phone, it will send out a Bluetooth signal every few seconds. Other phones around
will be able to detect this signal, and measure its strength. In theory a strong signal means that the devices are near each other;
the further they are, the weaker the signal.
Assuming ideal conditions with available smartphones, Bluetooth signals transmitted at full power can be picked up by
other smartphones over up to 100 meters (330 ft). This is much further than the distancing advisory of 2 meters (6ft). Current
app proposals rely on a combination of (1) lowering the transmission power to prevent such long distance reception and further
(2) relying on Bluetooth signal strength measurement to identify short-distance proximity events - they assume a strong signal
means a short distance while a weak signal means two people were further away from each other. Unfortunately for contact
tracing, this is not really the case. For example, the human body weakens the Bluetooth signal quite well, which means that the
app’s distance estimate between two people talking to each other will be vastly different depending on whether their phones are
in their front or back pockets. At the same time, Bluetooth signals can go through walls so your neighbors (both next door and
up/down-stairs) are likely to be logged as a close contact. In fact, a few years ago we tested treating Bluetooth received signal
strength’ as a proxy for physical distance in ideal conditions, i.e. we used the exact same model phones, we placed them in an
empty room (no human body attenuation) and various distances and found that it was very difficult to tell whether two phones
were 1 meter (3 ft) apart (crucial for epidemic measurements) or 3 meters (9 ft) apart (much less relevant for transmission, as
most virus-carrying droplets will fall within 2 meters, or 6ft).27
These problems will be even more difficult to solve with different phone models and different places where people carry
them. Solving them will require smartphone producers to closely collaborate with Google and Apple - in each phone model the
relationship between signal strength and distance will be a bit different. The code that translates signal strength to distance will
need to be further calibrated for different scenarios. This translation will be different outside vs inside, for phones carried in
front pockets vs back pockets, backpacks vs purses, and so on.
Finally, there are viral transmission pathways that would not be captured by Bluetooth. For example a widely discussed
paper describes viral transmission among people in a restaurant.28 Some of the infected guests were not sitting in close
proximity to the infected person but instead droplets were transported through the air duct. Bluetooth apps would also not
cover possible transmission through touching a common surface, with the caveat that we still do not know how likely this
transmission channel is.
Like every technology whose purpose is to detect certain events, Bluetooth-based contact tracing will suffer from two kinds
of errors: false negatives and false positives. False negatives represent the failure of the app to report a potentially dangerous
contact, for example because the distance was misjudged, or even because of external factors: the battery died, or the infected
person did not have a smartphone. False positives happen when the app reports a potential exposure to the virus even though
such exposure was very unlikely, for example the phones detected each other through a wall. These two kinds of errors have the
6/15

potential to further drive societal inequities as they affect certain groups of people unequally. False negatives will mean that
those who do not have smartphones or choose not to install the app might find it more difficult to obtain testing and adequate
healthcare. False positives will predominantly affect those living with more people, take public transport, and work essential
jobs that require them to be around others. If they are expected to isolate after receiving an exposure warning, it might lead to
inequitable quarantining29 and undermine trust.
If Bluetooth is so inaccurate, why do academics (including authors of this work) keep using it as a proxy for human
interactions also in their work on modeling the spread of diseases? In short, it is the best we have at the moment. Bluetooth is
still much more accurate than GPS data and while not perfect, the signal still tells us something about physical proximity. Most
of the academic work with this data revolves around simulations of spread dynamics. Rather than tracking who exactly was
exposed, academics are interested in probabilistic estimates of how quickly the disease will spread, how many people will be
infected, and so on. When we do focus on the risk to particular individuals, we get to run dozens of thousands of simulations to
estimate the probability of each person being infected. Only when the system is deployed in the real world, will we have a
chance to learn whether this probability corresponds to real infections well enough to support manual contact tracing efforts
without overwhelming the system with false positives. When making such comparisons, we need to remember that currently in
many places only people who have symptoms and were identified through contact tracing are tested,30 and still the majority of
them turn out not to have the virus.

Assumption 3: People can and will choose to install and use contact tracing apps
Digital rights organizations around the world stress that contact tracing technology needs to respect and protect civil liberties.
In this ideal scenario, adoption of any contact tracing technology would be voluntary, based on informed consent and trust in
the apps’ efficacy and the institutions governing them. This trust should be built through guarantees regarding transparency
(of code, of operation, but also of decision making processes and public procurement), legality, well enforced data protection
standards, and accountability.31
However, we have seen both democratic and non-democratic governments rushing to implement tracing apps and centralised
data collection systems (see https://privacyinternational.org/examples/apps-and-covid-19). Many
initially proposed tools suffer from mission creep and are designed and/or operated by private companies, lacking public
oversight, a defined legal framework and adequate privacy protections.32 The result of this situation is a lack of public trust
expressed in a low willingness to opt in and install the existing apps. A poll from April 2020 shows that Americans have low
levels of trust in tech companies, universities, insurance companies, and public health agencies. As a result, half of those who
have smartphones in the US will not install a contact tracing app.33
Experiences from around the world seem to reflect these findings. The first country to roll out an official and voluntary
contact tracing app was Singapore with TraceTogether. Popular app uptake proved to be disappointing, despite promises
of data minimisation and privacy safeguards, and the opening of the app source code. Six weeks after deployment only 1.1
million (or less than one in five) residents installed it. That is far below the minimum goal of 75%, set by their national
response team.34 Norway’s experience was similar. Two weeks after the release of their contact tracing app it had 860,000
users, corresponding to only 16% of the population.35 Such low adoption in small populations known for high levels of trust
in their governments does not inspire confidence in adoption elsewhere. Unfortunately, we do not have accurate data about
active users of other tracing apps. Apple does not publish download statistics and Google only provides a rough estimate. And
even with that data we still would not know how many downloads actually translate into active users. Our approximations
presented in Figure 7 show that adoption is, in fact, very low across the board (see Section Materials and Methods at the end of
this article to find out how we arrived at these estimates). At the time of this analysis (mid-May 2020), we clearly see that only
two countries, Israel and Czech Republic, might have reached the 60% threshold of installs that is commonly referred to as the
minimum for tracing to work, and that is only if we make the most optimistic assumption.
Moreover, a variety of groups across the US and Europe outright reject governmental containment efforts. Some actively
resist lockdowns and the wearing of masks.36, 37 Ultra-Orthodox Jews38 and the Amish tend to refrain from technologies on
religious grounds. It seems unlikely that these groups will install a contact tracing tool voluntarily, thus creating pockets of
population with significantly lower adoption than the general public.
Enforcing the use of apps
As adoption levels fail to materialise, some governments started to mandate apps by law or make them a precondition to full
participation in public life. In the latter case an app might not be legally mandatory and still based on consent, but that consent is
not meaningful if the reward is too high for citizens to actually be able to say no. While international law allows for limitations
to civil liberties during a public health crisis, including on the right to privacy, it also clearly defines how the government should
implement such limitations to balance rights and prevent abuses.39 It is yet unclear whether directly or indirectly enforcing
7/15

optimistic estimate

Recommended minimum adoption

Israel
Czech Republic
Iceland
Bahrain
Singapore
Norway
South Korea
Slovak Republic
Australia
Austria
India
Spain (Basque Country)
North Macedonia
Canada (Alberta)
Indonesia
Poland
Bulgaria
Kyrgyzstan
Philippines (Cebu)
Thailand
Mexico (Jalisco)
Ukraine
Cyprus
Italy
U.S.
United Kingdom

possible range

0%

20%
40%
60%
Fraction of population that installed the tracing app

Sources:
population counts: Worldometer https://bit.ly/2yPyS2b
app installs: Top10VPN https://bit.ly/2TqeYSv
android mkt share: statcounter https://bit.ly/3bpBaVeN

pessimistic estimate

80%

Figure 7. Despite contact tracing apps being deployed in 30 countries, the adoption levels are disappointing. Only Israel and
Czech Republic might have reached the required level of 60%, assuming the most optimistic estimate.
proposed tools would actually withstand legal tests.40 A coercive approach is also problematic if it ignores the fact that many
people might not have internet access or smartphones as shown in Assumption 1.
Notwithstanding these concerns, the Indian government made their contact tracing app mandatory for workers across the
country and for everybody in select cities (resulting in 90 million downloads corresponding to less than 7% of the population).41
Poland’s quarantine app is obligatory despite its privacy flaws.42 Calls for mandatory app use are gaining traction in Singapore43
and Italy. South Korea requires foreigners to install a tracking app when entering the country.44 Kazakhstan,45 Russia,46 and the
Gulf States47 require installing tracking tools as a prerequisite for people to leave the house during quarantine. To understand
what mandating really means for people’s lives, it is worth looking at enforcement actors and practices. India48 and Poland49
task the police with enforcing tools through fines or even jail time. In Russia, the enforcement is built into the quarantine app:
failure to comply with the instructions given by the app automatically results in a fine, even if it’s caused by a bug in the app
itself.50 We also have major concerns about how enforcement will look like for people who do not have phones or the Internet
to comply, or for people whose economic situation forces them to keep leaving the house. Looking at patterns of quarantine
enforcement to date, we can expect that extended police powers will also aggravate already dire patterns of over-policing,
racism,51 and police brutality.52
The future of the surveillance infrastructure
Finally, we are also seeing how the crisis is used as a cover to further extend surveillance powers and introduce unrelated
infrastructure often targeting the already over-surveilled. Reportedly, China intensified hacking campaigns against the Uighur
community53 and started installing cameras outside and sometimes inside people’s homes.54 Israel requires Palestinians who
want to ensure the validity of their permit to stay in Israel to install an app giving the military access to their phone data.55
Moscow introduced drones to police quarantine orders56 and Paris has adopted AI tools to assess mask adoption on public
transport.57 The US Senate has passed a law allowing the FBI to access the browsing history of all Americans without a
warrant58 in times where we all have to rely on the internet to get on with our lives. And finally, the police in South Korean and
Hong Kong track people’s movements with wristbands, a tool often considered as a potential alternative to apps including in
8/15

5/20/2020

tests-of-covid-19-per-thousand-people-vs-gdp-per-capita-1.svg

Total COVID-19 tests per 1,000 vs. GDP per capita
The testing rate is the total number of tests per 1,000 people.
GDP per capita is adjusted for price diﬀerences between countries (it is expressed in international dollars).
Iceland

100
Belarus

Latvia

Turkey
Croatia
El Salvador

10
Ghana

South Africa

Peru
Morocco

Uganda

Nepal

1

Denmark
Belgium

Ireland

Qatar

Switzerland

United Kingdom

Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America

Sweden
South Korea

Uruguay

Ukraine

Rwanda

Senegal

Israel

Kazakhstan

Serbia

Total tests per thousand

Luxembourg

Lithuania

Costa Rica
Japan

Pakistan
Mexico

Bangladesh
Bolivia

Ethiopia

Indonesia
Myanmar
Nigeria

$10,000

$100,000

GDP per capita in 2017
Source: Oﬃcial data collated by Our World in Data, World Bank
OurWorldInData.org/coronavirus • CC BY
Note: For testing ﬁgures, there are substantial diﬀerences across countries in terms of the units, whether or not all labs are included, the extent
to which negative and pending tests are included and other aspects. Details for each country can be found at the linked page.

Figure 8. Most countries struggle with performing adequate number of tests, but lower income countries are especially
affected by the shortages.
India and Bulgaria.59 The list is growing by the day.
These examples of deploying over-reaching surveillance tech under the guise of COVID-19 response are already alarming.
More subtle tech interventions like privacy-preserving Bluetooth based contact tracing might seem benign by comparison but
we will only understand their full impact in the years to come. We need to stay vigilant regarding re-purposing of tools and
data. Sean McDonald points out that:
The most political dimension of contact-tracing apps isn’t what they’re being used for right now, it’s the role they
are likely to play in attempts to reopen societies.60
Recent history has shown that it is extremely difficult to roll back overextended government powers once they have been
institutionalized and normalised. In the wake of the 9/11 attacks, the U.S. introduced the Patriot Act to drastically extend their
surveillance apparatus with the goal of curbing terrorism. We do not know how effective it was in its stated objective, but,
through the Snowden leaks, we do know that it has been widely abused to encroach on the rights of people worldwide.61 19
years after the attacks, the Patriot Act has still not been repealed, setting a dangerous precedence. We thus need to carefully
analyse what role
contact tracing tools can play in a given power equilibrium and what is their potential for retooling once the
ﬁle:///Users/piotr/Downloads/tests-of-covid-19-per-thousand-people-vs-gdp-per-capita-1.svg
pandemic is contained.

Assumption 4: Exposed individuals can adapt their behavior accordingly
Experts claim between as many as 20 million tests per day will be necessary to safely reopen the US,62 (corresponding to 60
tests per thousand residents per day) but the current (as of May, 20 2020) total for the entire epidemic is only at 12,647,79163
(39 per thousand total). Why do we need so many? Without the tests we will not know whose contacts to trace. Moreover, if
we cannot test these contacts, we will need to isolate them. At this stage of the epidemic, with a sizable infected population,
isolating all contacts would not be much different than a complete lockdown. As the current restrictions are lifted each carrier
might cross paths (and spend some time) with dozens of susceptible people daily but only a fraction of them will actually
become infected - we need to be able to test all of them, but isolate only those that do contract the virus.
Unfortunately, the shortage of testing, lack of smartphones and internet access, as well as share of informal employment all
come together to disproportionately impact the lower income countries, see Figure 8. The lack of tests and limited access to
those available drives the health divide rooted in social status and economic differences even further. There are three factors at
play: first, the economic feasibility of ceasing to work or working from home while isolating; second, the efficacy of staying at
home in order to slow down the spread; and third the ability to isolate at all.
9/15

COVID-19 cases and deaths in the U.S. prison populations
prison population
state average

cases per 100,000

8000
6000
4000
2000
0

OH

MI

AR

MA

CT

IN

NC

NJ

LA

NY

TX

GA

IL

FL

AZ

source of prisoner data: The Marshall Project, https://bit.ly/2ToWEsZ
source of state data: The COVID-19 Tracking Project, https://covidtracking.com/

200
deaths per 100,000

175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

NJ

MI

OH

MA

CT

IN

NY

IL

AR

GA

TX

LA

AZ

NC

FL

Figure 9. Imprisoned populations cannot practice social distancing and might suffer from worse access to health care. As a
result, the rates of infection and deaths are much higher than average for the states where the prisons are located.
Wealthier people will isolate at their homes (or summer houses64 ), but not everybody can afford to not work, or work from
home. WHO guidelines state that individuals expected to stay at home
...need to be provided with health care; financial, social and psychosocial support; and basic needs, including
food, water, and other essentials. The needs of vulnerable populations should be prioritized.65
Unfortunately, this is not the reality for a large fraction of the world’s population. The latest brief of the International
Labour Organisation reminds us that the 2 billion informal workers worldwide are faced
..with an almost unsolvable dilemma: to die from hunger or from the virus.66
This holds also true in richer countries. In the US, only two months into non-essential business closures, food insecurity has
reached an unprecedented level. According to the COVID Impact Survey and the Survey of Mothers with Young Children,67
two in five households run by mothers with children up to 12 years old could not afford enough food, more than a two-fold
increase compared to the same time of year in 2018.
For many across the world staying at home does not only endanger their food supply, but might also not contribute much
to slowing the virus’ spread. Transmission between people housed together is now a major driver of the pandemic.68 Those
with lower incomes are more likely to share smaller living spaces with more people, often with insufficient sanitary conditions.
One in seven people on Earth live in a slum,69 where the population density can be as much as ten times higher than in the
surrounding city.70 Additionally, More than half of the world’s population does not have access to sanitation.71 Without being
able to socially distance and practice hygiene, just staying at home will not stop the virus - sadly many of these areas are already
suffering COVID outbreaks.
Finally, some communities are not free to change their behavior and seek help in response to the virus. Roma settlements in
Bulgaria and Slovakia were cordoned off without providing adequate health and social aid.72 The virus also ravages migrant
10/15

workers’ dorms73 and refugee camps.74 While we lack sufficient data in these contexts (in part because of the lack of testing),
we do know what happens once the virus reaches another kind of population that cannot alter its behavior accordingly: those
held in prisons in the US. Once the virus makes it through the gates, it spreads much more rapidly than in the rest of the
population, leading to enormous differences in infections and deaths. For example, as we show in Figure 9 based on the data
collected by The Marshall Project,75 in Ohio prisons we have seen 48 times more cases and 8 times more deaths per 100,000
than the state average. These numbers are similar for Arkansas: we see 44 times more cases and 10 times more deaths compared
to the state average.
All of the factors we describe above are inherently connected. Economic hardship tends to overlap with other vulnerabilities
and aggravates them. Living in conflict areas or fragile states; living with displacement or an undetermined migration status;
even living in richer countries but lower on the socio-economic ladder or struggling with homelessness; all of these situations
often also mean sharing narrow spaces with insufficient sanitary conditions, and limited agency to adapt individual behavior to
protect oneself, the family, and the community.
Without public health responses pro-actively addressing these needs of vulnerable communities, many of those affected by
the virus will neither be able to access testing nor isolate. As a result, the virus is likely to continue spreading even if contact
tracing apps will reach high levels of adoption in the general population. No app will help when those affected cannot respond
accordingly to exposure notifications. All that tracing tools can do in these contexts is collect data, increase surveillance, and
add an additional mental burden to an already incredibly challenging situation.

Conclusions
In this commentary we took a step back from the discussion about the intricacies of the contact tracing technology and focused
on challenging the assumptions that are too often taken for granted. By looking at recent data and latest reporting, analysis and
commentary from around the world we can confidently say:
• Estimates show that over half of the global population do not have modern smartphones, unhindered access to the Internet,
and incompatible user patterns.
• Inevitable errors in Bluetooth sensing will affect populations differently: those without smartphones might have a
harder time accessing appropriate health care if lines for testing are filled with app users falsely alarmed about potential
exposure.
• Growing evidence shows that individuals rarely choose to install tracing apps unless coerced in some way, raising serious
concerns in regards to civil liberties and the long term impact of these surveillance systems.
• The majority of the world’s population cannot access tests and many cannot adapt their behavior accordingly if they were
notified about exposure due to socioeconomic factors and other vulnerabilities.
It is abundantly clear that no technology exists in a political, social, and economic vacuum and that the current epidemic
disproportionately harms the already vulnerable communities. Basing solutions to the problem on the technology that is
available mostly to the younger, better educated, richer and/or living in the rich countries might help them, might also
bring unintended and potentially harmful consequences, discriminatory enforcement practices and further exacerbate existing
inequalities.
Reliance on apps is, however, not just a problem of access to technology. So far, we have seen these apps designed and
deployed without conducting human right impact assessments or allowing public discussion and scrutiny. We must also consider
how the national deployments, mandating, and enforcement will affect those that do install the apps, or wear wristbands. Seda
Gürses emphasises the existence of two distinct classes in the society. The delivery class delivers the goods and health care to
the receiver class.76 Individuals in the latter can afford to stay at home and will neither be at a heightened risk of the virus, nor
exposed to the inherent privacy risks of running surveillance apps on their phones. The delivery class, on the other hand, will
be expected, or even forced, to install the apps and carry the biggest burden both of the pandemic but also of privacy loss, as
well as intensified scrutiny and surveillance from law enforcement. The voices of the delivery class are strikingly absent in the
debates on how to design public health responses in general and technology in particular.
Smartphone contact tracing promises to support manual tracers, not replace them. In fact, the very people who are
developing these apps are urging policymakers to strengthen their offline response and hire more tracers.77 But is this really the
situation we are working towards? Some countries do: Georgia,78 Ghana, and Senegal,79 as well as India’s state of Kerala80 are
successfully managing to slow down the virus with considerate and rapid public health responses and without enforcing new,
untested technology. In the US currently only one state, North Dakota, has an adequate number of tracing personnel,81 and
only a few more are planning to meet the demand. With millions of people around the world losing their jobs in the wake of
the pandemic, supporting the manual tracing efforts could provide economic relief to individuals and help contain the spread
beyond the digital divide, before experimenting with unproven and potentially harmful tech fixes.
11/15

Materials and Methods
The data for Figure 1 as well as allocation of countries to market regions, come from the GSMA The Mobile Economy report
accessible at https://bit.ly/3bmYrol. The particular numbers are transcribed from Figure 6 on page 14. They refer to
“mobile broadband” subscribers rather than “smartphone ownership”, so they involve all those that have a SIM card with mobile
data capability even if they do not have a smartphone.
There are two sources of smartphone penetration data in this Figure 2: a Pew Research Center survey from 2019 (https:
//pewrsr.ch/3chkI8r) and a Newzoo study from 2019 (https://bit.ly/2WCnUF3). Whenever a country appeared
in both surveys, we took the more optimistic (higher) estimate of penetration. The GDP estimates were taken from 2018
(the year when both penetration studies were performed) from The World Bank https://bit.ly/2LjyRX0. The
population estimates from 2018 were from the same Newzoo study for countries it covered and from the United Nations
https://bit.ly/3dGgK9S for the other countries.
All the data in Figure 3 comes from the Pew Research Center study (https://pewrsr.ch/2LotKVC) from page 13.
Y-axis is the result of dividing penetration among the 18-34 year olds by the penetration among the 50+ year old. X-axis is the
country’s total penetration.
To arrive at the results presented in Figure 7 we took the following steps. First, we used the install estimates from Google Play
store as collected and reported by Top10VPN at https://bit.ly/2TqeYSv. These estimates come in ranges 5-10, 11-50,
51-100, 101-500, and so on. The Top10VPN data also reports if each app has an iOS version. If it does, we use Statcounter
to obtain the estimate of Android market share in that country. We assume, that the same fraction of iOS users installs the
app as Android users. We then report the pessimistic estimate as the lower bound reported by Google Play Store plus the
corresponding number of installs from iOS users, and the optimistic estimate as upper bound plus the corresponding number of
iOS installs, both divided by the country’s population.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all those who volunteered their time to help us make this article better: NaLette Brodnax, Dan
Calacci, Manuel Garcia-Herranz, Enys Mones, Seda Gürses, Alan Mislove, Alissa Sadler, Rachel Ross, Jonathan Andrew, and
others.

Authors
Piotr Sapiezynski is a Research Scientist at Northeastern University, working on societal impacts of algorithmic systems.
His PhD work focused on analysing human mobility and physical proximity patterns through the lens of data collected using
smartphones. He has published on the topic in top conferences and journals.
Johanna Pruessing has a Master’s in anthropology and political science. She has lived and worked in Russia, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Turkey, the UK, and Poland focusing on human rights issues before joining the Open Society Foundations in Berlin
as a program specialist concentrating on former Soviet countries. Thematically she works at the intersection of human rights,
activism, and technology with a sweet spot for fighting digital authoritarianism.
Vedran Sekara is joining the IT University in Copenhagen as an Assistant Professor and is a research consultant at UNICEF.
His work focuses on data representativeness, building equitable algorithms, and identifying and fixing bias in common Data
Science, Machine Learning, and Artificial Intelligence like systems. He has a PhD in applied mathematics and computer
science which focuses on using digital traces collected from mobile phones to understand social relations.

References
1. Vogelstein, F. Health Officials Say ’No Thanks’ to Contact-Tracing Tech. WIRED (2020).
2. World Health Organization. Situation report - 73. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (2020).
3. Goodin, D. Apple and Google detail bold and ambitious plan to track COVID-19 at scale. Ars Technica (2020).
4. Case, N. Protecting lives & liberty, https://ncase.me/contact-tracing/ (2020).
5. Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo). [Tweet], https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/1245021319646904320 (2020).
12/15

6. 90s Kinda Girl (@divafeminist). [Tweet], https://twitter.com/divafeminist/status/1256927274936553473 (2020).
7. O’Dea, S. Smartphone users worldwide 2016-2021. Statista (2020).
8. Bradshaw, T. 2 billion phones cannot use Google and Apple contact-tracing tech. Ars Technica (2020).
9. ITU. Facts and figures 2019 - Measuring digital development. https://itu.foleon.com/itu/measuring-digital-development/
home/ (2020).
10. Silver, L. Smartphone Ownership Is Growing Rapidly Around the World, but Not Always Equally. Pew Res. Cent. (2019).
11. Ferretti, L. et al. Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science 368
(2020).
12. Anderson, M. Mobile Technology and Home Broadband 2019. Pew Res. Cent. (2019).
13. UNICEF, National Statistics Office of Georgia. Georgia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018 - Survey Findings Report.
Tech. Rep., UNICEF (2019).
14. UNICEF, Central Statistical Office, and Kurdish Region Statistical Office. Iraq Georgia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
2018 - Survey Findings Report. Tech. Rep., UNICEF (2019).
15. Erikson, S. L. Cell phones6= self and other problems with big data detection and containment during epidemics. Med.
anthropology quarterly 32, 315–339 (2018).
16. ITU. Percentage of Individuals using the Internet. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2019/
Individuals_Internet_2000-2018_Dec2019.xls (2019).
17. The World Bank. Power outages in firms in a typical month (number). https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IC.ELC.OUTG
(2019).
18. #KeepItOn Campaign. Targeted, cut off, and left in the dark. AccessNow (2020).
19. Lee, Y., Jimenez-Damary, C., Kaye, D. & de Varennes, F. UN experts concerned at surge in civilian casualties in northwest
myanmar after internet shutdown. United Nations Human Rights, Office of the High Commisioner (2020).
20. Kaye, D. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, A/HRC/35/22. (para 14) (2020).
21. Abrougui, A. et al. Netizen Report: Widespread throttling puts social media out of reach in Kazakhstan. GlobalVoices
(2019).
22. Carolina, J. Indonesia’s post-election riots led to free speech violations . GlobalVoices - advox (2019).
23. Misgar, U. L. In Kashmir, slow internet throttles doctors’ coronavirus response. The New Humanit. (2020).
24. Human Rights Watch. Bangladesh: Internet Blackout on Rohingya Refugees. Tech. Rep., Human Rights Watch (2019).
25. Kine, Phelim. Internet Curbs on Rohingya Risk Wider Virus Outbreak. Physicians for Human Rights (2020).
26. The United Nations General Assembly. International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (Article 12).
Treaty Series 999 (1966).
27. Sekara, V. & Lehmann, S. The strength of friendship ties in proximity sensor data. PloS one 9 (2014).
28. Lu, J. et al. COVID-19 Outbreak Associated with Air Conditioning in Restaurant, Guangzhou, China, 2020. Emerg Infect
Dis. (2020).
29. Landau, S., Lopez, C. E. & Moy, L. The Importance of Equity in Contact Tracing. Lawfare Blog (2020).
30. Lecher, C., Varner, M. & Martinez, E. Can You Get a Coronavirus Test? It May Depend on Where You Live. The Markup
(2020).
31. Multiple signatories [open letter]. Coronavirus: States use of digital surveillance technologies to fight pandemic must
respect human rights. Article19 (2020).
32. Osborne, C. & Day, Z. Proposed government coronavirus tracking app falls at the first hurdle due to data breach. ZDNet
(2020).
33. Washington Post-University of Maryland. National Poll, April 21-26, 2020. The Washington Post (2020).
34. Chong, C. About 1 million people have downloaded TraceTogether app, but more need to do so for it to be effective:
Lawrence Wong. The Straits Times (2020).
35. Olsen, S. J. Smittestopp på iPhone fungerer bare skikkelig når appen er åpen. Tek.no (2020).
13/15

36. BBC News. Coronavirus lockdown protest: What’s behind the US demonstrations? BBC (2020).
37. Frakfurter Allgemeine. Proteste in mehreren Städten. FAZ.NET (2020).
38. Ettinger, Yair. Ultra-Orthodox Jews Must Choose Between Obedience to Their Rabbis – or to Their Smartphone. Haaretz
(2016).
39. Kaye, D. Disease pandemics and the freedom of opinion and expression. A/HRC/44/49, para 54–57) (2020).
40. Reventlow, N. J. Why COVID-19 is a Crisis for Digital Rights. Digital Freedom Fund) (2020).
41. Phartiyal, S. Ahead of the curve: South Korea’s evolving strategy to prevent a coronavirus resurgence. Reuters) (2020).
42. Nowosielska, P. Luka w aplikacji Kwarantanna domowa. Kto poniesie za nia˛ konsekwencje? Dziennik Gazeta Prawna)
(2020).
43. Tham, I. No other way but to make use of TraceTogether mandatory. The Straits Times) (2020).
44. Smith, J., Hyonhee, S. & Cha, S. Ahead of the curve: South Korea’s evolving strategy to prevent a coronavirus resurgence.
Reuters) (2020).
45. Žajyk, D. Virusnyj monitoring: Kak koronavirus rasprostranil mirovuju sležku. The Steppe (2020).
46. Nesterova, E. Moskvičej s koronavirusom objazali prisylat‘ selfi - čtoby podtverdit‘, čto oni doma. Current Time (2020).
47. Frank, S. Golfstaaten setzen in Corona-Krise auf totale elektronische Überwachung. mena-watch (2020).
48. Dixit, P. An Entire City Has Been Told To Download A Controversial Contact Tracing App — Or Face Jail. BuzzFeed
News (2020).
49. Ministerstwo Cyfryzacji. Aplikacja Kwarantanna domowa – od dziś obowiazkowa.
˛
Serwis Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej
(2020).
50. Marohovskaja, A. & Velikovskij, D. Antisocial’nyj monitoring. .coda (2020).
51. Ashley, S. Scrutiny of Social-Distance Policing as 35 of 40 Arrested Are Black. The New York Times (2020).
52. Olewe, D. Coronavirus in Africa: Whipping, shooting and snooping. BBC (2020).
53. Greenberg, A. Amid Its Covid-19 Crisis, China Was Still Hacking Uighurs’ iPhones. WIRED (2020).
54. Gan, N. China is installing surveillance cameras outside people’s front doors ... and sometimes inside their homes. CNN
Business (2020).
55. Hasson, N. Amid Coronavirus Crisis, Israel Tells Palestinians to Download App That Tracks Phones . Haaretz (2020).
56. Vedomosti. Rosgvardija načala ispol’zovat’ bespilotniki dlja vyjavlenija narušitelej samoizoljacii . Vedomosti.ru (2020).
57. Vincent, J. France is using AI to check whether people are wearing masks on public transport. The Verge (2020).
58. Rose, J. Senate Votes to Allow FBI to Look at Your Web Browsing History Without a Warrant. Motherboard (2020).
59. BBC News. Coronavirus: People-tracking wristbands tested to enforce lockdown. BBC (2020).
60. McDonald, S. Contact-tracing apps are political. Brookings - TechStream (2020).
61. BBC News. Edward Snowden: Leaks that exposed US spy programme. BBC (2014).
62. Allen, D., Block, S., Cohen, J. et al. Roadmap to pandemic resilience: Massive scale testing, tracing, and supported
isolation (ttsi) as the path to pandemic resilience for a free society. Safra Cent. for Ethics at Harv. Univ. 20 (2020).
63. Center for Systems and Engineering (CSSE). COVID-19 Dashboard. John Hopkins Univ. (2020).
64. Hoffower, H. Rich urbanites are fleeing big cities and draining resources in smaller, more remote vacation spots. Here’s
where they’re going — and how the locals feel about it. Bus. Insid. (2020).
65. World Health Organization and others. Considerations for quarantine of individuals in the context of containment for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19): interim guidance, 29 February 2020. Tech. Rep., World Health Organization (2020).
66. International Labour Organization. Contagion or starvation, the dilemma facing informal workers during the COVID-19
pandemic. Tech. Rep., International Labour Organization (2020).
67. Bauer, L. The COVID-19 crisis has already left too many children hungry in America. Brookings (2020).
68. Dr Muge Cevik (@mugecevik). [Tweet], https://twitter.com/mugecevik/status/1257392347010215947 (2020).
69. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient
and sustainable. Tech. Rep., United Nations (2020).
14/15

70. Bird, J., Montebruno, P. & Regan, T. Life in a slum: understanding living conditions in nairobi’s slums across time and
space. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 33, 496–520 (2017).
71. Osseiran, N. & Lufadeju, Y. 1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO. Tech. Rep.,
World Health Organization (2019).
72. Walker, S. Europe’s marginalised Roma people hit hard by coronavirus . The Guard. (2020).
73. Hadavas, C. Singapore Contained the Coronavirus for Months. Now It Has One of the Worst Outbreaks in Asia. Slate
(2020).
74. Subbaraman, N. ’Distancing is impossible’: refugee camps race to avert coronavirus catastrophe. Nature (2020).
75. The Marshall Project. A State-by-State Look at Coronavirus in Prisons. Tech. Rep., The Marshall Project (2020).
76. The Radical AI Podcast. Apple & Google Partner to Promote Coronavirus Contact Tracing. Should You be Worried? with
Seda Gurses. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/apple-google-partner-to-promote-coronavirus-contact/id1505229145?
i=1000471553068 (2020).
77. Salathé, M. & Case, N. What Happens Next? COVID-19 Futures, Explained With Playable Simulations. https:
//ncase.me/covid-19/ (2020).
78. Lomsadze, G. Georgia gets rare plaudits for coronavirus response. eurasianet (2020).
79. Hirsch, A. Why are Africa’s coronavirus successes being overlooked? The Guardian (2020).
80. Nowrojee, B. How a South Indian State Flattened Its Coronavirus Curve. The Diplomat (2020).
81. Simmons-Duffin, S. States Nearly Doubled Plans For Contact Tracers Since NPR Surveyed Them 10 Days Ago. NPR
(2020).

15/15

