1

Design of a Low-cost Miniature Robot to Assist
the COVID-19 Nasopharyngeal Swab Sampling
Shuangyi Wang, Kehao Wang, Hongbin Liu and Zengguang Hou

Abstract—Nasopharyngeal (NP) swab sampling is an effective
approach for the diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19). Medical staffs carrying out the task of collecting NP specimens
are in close contact with the suspected patient, thereby posing a
high risk of cross-infection. We propose a low-cost miniature robot
that can be easily assembled and remotely controlled. The system
includes an active end-effector, a passive positioning arm, and a
detachable swab gripper with integrated force sensing capability.
The cost of the materials for building this robot is 55 USD and the
total weight of the functional part is 0.23kg. The design of the force
sensing swab gripper was justified using Finite Element (FE)
modeling and the performances of the robot were validated with a
simulation phantom and three pig noses. FE analysis indicated a
0.5mm magnitude displacement of the gripper’s sensing beam,
which meets the ideal detecting range of the optoelectronic sensor.
Studies on both the phantom and the pig nose demonstrated the
successful operation of the robot during the collection task. The
average forces were found to be 0.35N and 0.85N, respectively. It
is concluded that the proposed robot is promising and could be
further developed to be used in vivo.

workers' operating skills and psychological states may also
affect the accuracy and quality of swab collection results.
As the global fight against COVID-19 may last for a long
period of time with tens of thousands nasal swab samplings
performed worldwide each day, robotic-assisted NP and OP
swabbing with remote operation capability may reduce the risk
of infection and free up staffs for other tasks. Comparing with
human, the robot can be more thoroughly disinfected and those
parts that are in close contact with patients can be disassembled
and replaced. The value of using robots in fighting against
COVID-19 has been highlighted in [6] and a well-designed
robot for OP collection was recently developed by the
Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health and the Shenyang
Institute of Automation under the Chinese Academy of
Sciences [7]. The robot consists of a snaking-shape robot arm
for motion control, a binocular endoscope for visualization, a
wireless transmission device and a human-computer interaction
terminal for remote control. The system has been successfully
tested in vivo and proved effective in clinical trials.

Index Terms—COVID-19 diagnostic robot, nasopharyngeal
swab robot, robot to combat COVID-19

I. INTRODUCTION

T

he outbreak of novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP) caused
by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has spread
rapidly globally. Collection of specimens from the surface of
the respiratory mucosa with nasopharyngeal (NP) or
Oropharyngeal (OP) swabs are treated as effective ways for the
diagnosis and screening [1]. Several recent studies have
indicated that OP swabs are less effective than NP swabs in
detecting the COVID-19 virus [2, 3] and concluded that the use
of NP may be more suitable, although a study also highlighted
the data should be viewed with cautions [4]. According to the
US CDC, both NP and OP should be performed by a healthcare
professional, while other possible approaches, e.g., nasal midturbinate (NMT) swab (also known as deep nasal swab) and
anterior nares (nasal swab) specimen, could be supervised
onsite self-collection and home self-collection [5]. During the
conventional manually controlled swab sampling, medical
staffs are unavoidably in close contact with the suspected
patient, which poses a high risk of cross-infection. Medical
This work was funded and supported by the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Automation (CASIA) under the project No. Y9S8FZ0101.
S. Wang and Z. Hou are with the State Key Laboratory of Management and
Control of Complex Systems, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of
Automation (shuangyi.wang@ia.ac.cn, zengguang.hou@ia.ac.cn).

Fig. 1. Diagram showing the nasopharyngeal (NP) swab sampling procedure.

In the present study, we aim to explore a different strategy
and develop a low-cost, easy-to-assemble robot with small
footprint to assist NP swab collections (Figure 1). The NP swab
collections involve inserting a specifically manufactured swab
into a patient’s nasal cavity [8]. The head of the patient is
expected to be tilted back (at approximate 70°) so the nasal
passage becomes straight and accessible. The swab is then
inserted through the nostril parallel to the palate, all the way to
the nasopharynx. After left in place for several seconds for
secretion absorptions, the swab is then rotationally retracted
from the nasal cavity slowly. In this paper, we aim to present
K. Wang is with the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical
Engineering, Beihang University, China (wangkehao1003@gmail.com)
H. Liu is with the School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences,
King’s College London, UK.
Corresponding author: shuangyi.wang@ia.ac.cn

2
the design concept, the implementation method, the simulation
study, and the preliminary phantom and animal tests of this new
robot.
II. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ROBOT
A. Design Concepts
The proposed robot includes an active 2-degree of freedom
(DOF) end-effector for actuating the swab and a generic 6-DOF
passive arm for the global positioning. The schematic drawing
of the end-effector is shown in Figure 2. Within the supporting
case, a leadscrew driven linear stage actuated by a stepper
motor was mounted. A small geared stepper motor is attached
to the front end of the linear stage, controlling the following
rotation link. As illustrated in Figure 2, a specially designed
swab gripper is attached to the rotation link with its extruded
structure tightly fitted into the grove of the rotation link. The
swab can be assembled to the swab gripper with its shaft
constrained by the constraint hole and held by the gripping
cylinder of the swab gripper. The proposed individual structures
allow easy attaching and detaching operations between the
swab and the swab gripper that can be performed by either the
patient or the on-site health professional, making the collection
conveniently and both components recyclable. The overall size
of the 2-DOF end-effector is 150(L) ×60(W) ×40(D) mm. The
linear stage, the geared stepper motor, and the rotation link are
all enclosed by the supporting case and a cover when the linear
stage is at its initial position.

between the sensor and the deflection beam. Two parts of the
characteristic curve (as illustrated in Figure 2) show linear
relationships between the measured distance (d) and the output
current. To guarantee a high linearity and sensitivity, the yellow
area (measured distance in between 0 to 0.50 mm) in Figure 2
was used in this study. The selected sensor has been proved in
our previous studies to be able to achieve large output voltage
variations without using an amplifier and demonstrates low
level of noises [9, 10]. The overall size of the swab gripper is
38(L) ×33(W) ×5(D) mm. An additional feature of this design
involves an add-on headset that can be attached to a regular
chair, used to set the angle of the patient’s head, at approximate
70°. The headset has a tilting joint that can be manually adjusted
(shown in Figure 3).
B. Hardware and Software Implementation
As an example used in this research, we employed a 6-DOF
passive arm for global positioning and insertion angle
adjustments (Figure 3). The passive arm has a global revolute
joint (R1), two parallel mechanisms to adjust backwardsforwards and up-down movements (R2 and R3), and a tilting
joint (R4) working together with a ball joint (R5 & R6) to finetune the angulation of the end-effector, i.e., the insertion angle
of the swab. One clamp at the bottom was included to have the
arm attached to a table and another clamp at the end was utilized
to hold the active end-effector. The components of the arm are
widely used for lamp holders and mobile-phone stands, which
can be easily bought from the market and assembled to the
customized specification. The lengths of the arms are set at 35
mm for this application. The proposed active end-effector was
mainly made from 3D printing using Polylactic (PLA) acid and
the swab gripper was 3D printed using Polypropylene (PP)
material. PLA is a widely used rigid printing material while PP
is a semi-rigid flexible material with excellent fatigue resistance.

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the proposed 2-DOF active end-effector with
each component and the mechanism of the force sensing swab gripper shown.

Fig. 3. Implementation of the proposed robot with its passive arm, active endeffector, add-on headrest, and the embedded electronics shown. It should be
noted that this photo was taken only for illustration purpose. The in-vivo
experiment was not performed in this study.

The structure of the swab gripper was designed based on the
concept of compliance mechanism. The contact force
experienced by the swab when it is in contact with the nasal
cavity would result in the largest vertical displacement segment
of the structure at the center of the deflection beam. As shown
in Figure 2, the displacement is detected by an optoelectronic
sensor (QRE1113, Fairchild Semiconductor, California, the
United States) which consists of a LED to generate infrared (IR)
light and a photo-transistor to receive the reflected light. The
measurement circuit is embedded into a breakout board
(SparkFun Electronics, Colorado, the United States) to detect
the output voltage, which varies depending on the amount of IR
light reflected to the sensor with changes of the distance

For electronics, a microcontroller (MCU) WeMos D1 mini
with its power shield (core chip based on ESP8266, Espressif
Systems, Shanghai, China) and two stepper motor drivers
(TCM2209, TRINAMIC Motion Control, Hamburg, Germany)
were utilized in the design. The electronics setup is also shown
in Figure 3. The whole system is powered by a regular 9V-2A
power supply which can be directly plug into the power shield.
With the WiFi function of the MCU, we developed a mobile
phone-based simple user interface (UI) using the Blynk
software (Blynk ver. 2.27.17, Android APP) to remotely control
the stepper motors and display the sensor’s reading. Joysticks,
buttons, and level displays were included into the UI with their
functions illustrated in Figure 3. Specifically, with the 2-axis

3
joystick actuated diagonally, the swab can be translated and
rotated simultaneously, in both directions of each axis.

Fig. 4. Screenshot of the robot control software developed in Blynk.

The maximum payload of the robot (measured with a swab
mounted and constrained in a tube) is 3.50N and this was
measured with a commercial force sensor (JHBM-H3,
JNSensor, Anhui, China). The weight of the 2-DOF endeffector with all the electronics included is 0.23kg and the
weight of the 6-DOF passive arm is 0.31kg. The manufacturing
cost of the system is listed in the table 1 and the total cost price
of 400 RMB (~55 USD).

elements and 10027 nodes (Figure 5(a)). Contacts between the
swab and the constraint hole was modelled as frictionless using
Augmented Lagrange algorithm and the contact between the
swab and the deflection beam was considered as fully bonded.
The boundary conditions were added to constrain the
movement of the gripper in Y and Z-axes. 2.50N were applied
to the distal end of the swab in seven sub steps as this was the
maximum expected force when the swab is in the nasal cavity.
The swab has a thin long shaft and is subjected to buckling
under gradually increasing load. However, as this only happens
in a limited range and the swab is constrained by the nasal
cavity, the deformations do not cause the collapse and will
continue to transfer the load. In this study, we focused on the
load analysis. The results of the FEA are shown in Figure 5(b).
An example color coded displacement profile in the vertical
direction and the comparison between undeformed and
deformed shapes under 2.50N are shown in Figure 5(b). It can
be observed that the maximum displacement occurs at the
center point of the deflection beam, resulting in an approximate
0.50mm deformation. The force-displacement curve is shown
in Figure 5(c).

TABLE I
COST PRICE SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSED ROBOT
Components

COST (RMB)

Lead-screw driven linear stage
Geared stepper motor for the rotation link
3D printed supporting case, covers, and rotation link
3D printed swab gripper
TMC2209 stepper motor drivers and breakout board
WeMos D1 mini and its power shield
QRE1113 optoelectronic sensor
6-DOF passive arm and two clamps
Add-on headrest with clamp
Regular 9V-2A power supply

32
45
120
18
44
26
10
40
45
20

Total costs

400

III. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS OF THE SWAB GRIPPER
Finite Element (FE) models of the swab gripper and the swab
were developed in ANSYS mechanical APDL (ver. 18.2) using
geometric input of IGES file that was created by
SOLIDWORKS (ver. 2018). The model is to analyze the
displacement performances of the deflection beam of the swab
gripper when the swab is subjected to external forces. To justify
the design, the expected ranges and magnitudes of the
displacements should meet the selected linear range of the
optoelectronic sensor. In this study, Young’s modulus of 1.70
GPa and Poisson’s ratio of 0.43 were used for the swab gripper
based on the information provided by the 3D printing
manufacturer. Half model was considered as the whole
configuration is symmetric about its central plane. Both parts
were meshed using quadratic tetrahedral elements (ANSYS
element type: SOLID186). Mix u-p element formulation
method was chosen to avoid volumetric locking phenomenon
given that the selected material has a Poisson’s ratio of 0.43
which is close to that of an incompressible material (ν = 0.50).
The swab gripper was meshed using a total number of 32859
elements yielding a total of 55894 nodes and the swab has 4615

Fig. 5. FE modeling of the swab gripper when subjected to external forces: (a)
the mesh results with the force, contacts, and the boundary conditions shown,
(b) the displacement results under 2.50N, and (c) the force-displacement
relationship with the forces applied from 0 to 2.50N.

IV. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Force Calibration
Force calibration was performed using the commercial force
sensor (JHBM-H3, JNSensor, Anhui, China). The setup is
shown in Figure 6. To avoid the influence of the buckling
effects, a regular daily-used shorter swab with wooden shaft
was employed. The linear stage was actuated slowly to generate
the target contact forces (from 0 to 3.00N, 0.50N interval) and
the according measured output voltages from the optoelectronic
sensor were recorded. The loading (blue line) and unloading
(black line) curves are shown in Figure 6, where the elastic
hysteresis can be observed. As the current application does not
require high accuracy when measuring the force, the average
values of the measured output voltage during the loading and
unloading phases were used for the 2nd order polynomial curve
fitting for simplicity purpose and the relationship curve (red line)
was programmed into the microcontroller of the robot. Using
the red line as the calibration result, the error of the measured

4
samples (N = 12) is 0.24 ±0.16V (mean ± standard deviation).
The expected working range of the sensing gripper is 0 to 2.5N.

Fig. 6. Setup for the force calibration (left) and the measurement results (right).

B. Phantom and animal Experiments
To validate the performance of the robot and understand the
required force for the NP swab sampling procedure, a
commercial nasopharynx phantom (Simon Co., Shanghai,
China) and three pig noses (from a food supplier, no ethics
required) were utilized, as shown in Figure 7. The phantom has
realistic shapes and anatomical structures of the human nose
although the silicone material’s properties are different to
human tissues. The pig noses were obtained from freshly
slaughtered pigs (preserved in an ice bag and delivered two days
later). Although the anatomical structures of pig nose are
different to human nose and the pig noses were also cut to
shorter lengths, the tissue’s mechanical properties are likely to
be close to human. For both experiments, the insertion angles
of the swab were set with the swab parallel to the palate as much
as possible based on visual observation in the side view. The
phantom is stably positioned on the bench while the pig noses
required manual supports to remain stable. The robot was
actuated from the mobile app with the insertion first and then
the retraction combining with the rotation. Specifically for
experimental purpose, the measured forces were streamed to a
PC with USB cable in real time. For each test, the insertionretraction procedure was repeated for three times continuously.

Fig. 7. Experimental setups for (a) the phantom and (b) the pig nose tests.

Upon successful completions of both the phantom and the pig
nose experiments, the measured forces for the phantom are
shown in Figure 8(a) and an example measurement for the big
nose is shown in Figure 8(b). Unfortunately, both the structures
of the simulation phantom and the cut pig noses do not allow
swab to truly touch the nasopharynx, which would have
resulted in another peak force that is currently not presented on
each measurement curve. The current peaks arose from the
contacts between the swab and the turbinates. By extracting the
data of the insertion-retraction procedures, the average force
was found to be 0.35 ± 0.10N (mean ± standard deviation) and
0.85 ± 0.64N (mean ± standard deviation) while the maximum
force was found to be 0.87 and 2.45 N for the phantom and pig
noses, respectively. The maximum identified forces were
within the payload and the detectable range of the robot.

Fig. 8. Force measurement results of (a) the phantom and (b) the pig nose tests.

V. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
This paper introduces a low-cost miniature robot to assist NP
sampling. The robot can be made easily using 3D printing
technique together with other easy-to-find commonly used
components on the market. The robot is intended to be used in
a simple way by assembling different pieces together and
controlling from a mobile app. The cost price for developing
the robot is only 55 USD and can be further reduced if
manufactured in great numbers (estimated to be less than 30
USD). The payload of the robot, when controlling a swab with
a long thin shaft, is strictly limited by using small motors.
Above the threshold, the motor would slip. In addition to the
motion system, the robot has a detachable swab gripper which
incorporates the force sensing capability based on a simple
compliant mechanism and a low-cost optoelectronic sensor.
This piece can be easily assembled to and removed from the
robot, making it possible for the suspected patient to do selfassembly and disassembly pre and post being tested. The detect
range of 0-2.50N of the sensing gripper was justified using the
FE analysis. The calibration result indicated that the
displacement range (0-0.50mm) of the deflection beam meets
the prediction by the FE model and falls into the expected
linear range of the optoelectronic sensor. The sensor’s design
concept was specifically for this low-cost application.
Using the current available resources, we have tested this
robot with a commercial nasopharynx phantom and three pig
noses. The successful working of the robot was verified and the
amounts of forces during the procedure have been
preliminarily quantified. Based on the current evidences, it is
concluded that the maximum forces were below the payload of
the robot and within the detectable range of the sensing gripper.
It is also observed that the initial insertion angle of the robot is
crucial to be parallel to the palate for the success of the
collection, as this would ensure the swab can go into the lower
nasal passages. This may require another tilting DOF of the
robot to assist the initial angulation alignment or a separate side
view monitoring camera system. The current preliminary study
was limited by only using the simulation phantom and pig
noses, as both cannot fully represent the real nasal cavity of
human. Our next step will focus on finalizing the design and
pursue ethical approval for in-vivo tests.

5
REFERENCES
[1]

Laboratory testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in suspected
human cases: interim guidance, World Health Organization (No.
WHO/COVID-19/laboratory/2020.4), Mar. 2020.
[2] X. Wang et al., "Comparison of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs
for SARS-CoV-2 detection in 353 patients received tests with both
specimens simultaneously," Int. J. Infect. Dis., vol. 94, pp. 107-109, Apr.
2020. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.04.023.
[3] Y. Yang et al., “Evaluating the accuracy of different respiratory
specimens in the laboratory diagnosis and monitoring the viral shedding
of
2019-nCoV
infections,”
MedRxiv,
Feb.
2020.
DOI:
10.1101/2020.02.11.20021493.
[4] K. Carver and N. Jones, "Comparative accuracy of oropharyngeal and
nasopharyngeal swabs for diagnosis of COVID-19, " Centre for EvidenceBased Medicine (CEBM), Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health
Sciences, University of Oxford, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/comparative-accuracy-oforopharyngeal-and-nasopharyngeal-swabs-for-diagnosis-of-covid-19/.
[Accessed: 24-May-2020].
[5] Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical
Specimens for COVID-19, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Department of Health and Human Services, United States, May. 2020.
[6] G. Yang et al., "Combating COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing
public health and infectious diseases," Sci. Robot., vol. 5, no. 40,
eabb5589, Mar. 2020. DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.abb5589.
[7] Q. Wang, "China develops intelligent robots for throat swab sampling of
coronavirus tests," Global Times, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1182175.shtml. [Accessed: 24-May2020].
[8] F. Marty, K. Chen and K. Verrill, "How to Obtain a Nasopharyngeal Swab
Specimen," N. Engl. J. Med., Apr. 2020. DOI : 10.1056/nejmvcm2010260.
[9] Noh, Yohan, et al. "A2-piece six-axis force/torque sensor capable of
measuring loads applied to tools of complex shapes," in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
IROS, Macau, China. 2019, pp. 7976-7981.
[10] Y. Noh, et al., "A Contact Force Sensor Based on S-Shaped Beams and
Optoelectronic Sensors for Flexible Manipulators for Minimally Invasive
Surgery (MIS)," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 3487-3495, Apr.
2020. Doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2945163

