Domain Adaptation in Highly Imbalanced and
Overlapping Datasets
arXiv:2005.03585v2 [cs.LG] 2 Jun 2020

Ran Ilan Ber and Tom Haramaty
K Health, New York, NY
June 3, 2020
Abstract
In many machine learning domains, datasets are characterized by
highly imbalanced and overlapping classes. Particularly in the medical
domain, a specific list of symptoms can be labeled as one of various
different conditions. Some of these conditions may be more prevalent than others by several orders of magnitude. Here we present
a novel unsupervised domain adaptation scheme for such datasets.
The scheme, based on a specific type of Quantification, is designed to
work under both label and conditional shifts. It is demonstrated on
datasets generated from electronic health records and provides high
quality results for both Quantification and Domain Adaptation in very
challenging scenarios.
Potential benefits of using this scheme in the current COVID-19 outbreak, for estimation of prevalence and probability of infection are
discussed.

1

Background

Our work relates to several research topics including Quantification and Domain Adaptation (DA).
Quantification. Quantification [1] is the task of estimating label distribution in a target dataset using a classifier that was trained on a source dataset.
It is usually assumed that the conditional probabilities of input given a label
remain fixed. Quantification can be used to answer very interesting questions. For example, estimating the number of people infected with a disease
1

in a given population. The most straightforward Quantification method is
based on a confusion matrix which relates the label distribution estimated
by the classifier and the actual label distribution [2, 3, 4]. In this paper we
follow this approach.
Domain Adaptation. DA [5] is the task of adjusting a model from a
source dataset to a different, yet related, target dataset. Unlike Quantification, DA focuses on optimizing classification.
DA methods differ in supervision resources. Some methods are supervised,
some are semi-supervised and others are unsupervised [6]. This work will
focus on the unsupervised case.
We wish to characterize 3 types of DA (see Figure (1)).
1) label distribution, p(y), differs between source and target, but conditional
probabilities of input given a label, p(X|y), remain fixed. This scenario is
known in the literature as a label shift (Figure (1a)).
2) label distribution remains fixed, but conditional probabilities of input
given a label, differ. This scenario is known in the literature as a conditional
shift (Figure (1b)).
3) both label distribution and conditional probabilities of input given a label, differ (Figure (1c)). This is the most challenging type of DA. A notable
example of a method tackling this task using adversarial techniques in the
computer vision domain is presented in [7]. Here we address this task from
a different approach, which we believe is more suitable for tabular medical
datasets.

2

Introduction

In datasets characterized by overlapping classes (the same input may be
labeled in different probabilities to different classes), there are significant
“confusion effects” in which an increase in a certain label’s probability results
in the model estimating an increase in other labels’ probabilities, even when
the best possible models are used. These effects become even more dominant
when classes are imbalanced since, given an overlap between a rare class and
a prevalent class, models will learn to assign most of the probability from
data points associated with the rare class to the prevalent class. As most DA
methods were developed under the assumption that classes are separable,
they don’t take these effects into account, which may lead to poor results in
such datasets.
However, DA is in fact very much needed in these datasets, even when only
2

Figure 1: three types of DA: datasets with two classes denoted as ’1’ and
’2’ are illustrated. The data points are embedded in a space, separated into
four subspaces, roughly corresponding to the classifier’s “resolution” in the
input space. On top there is a source data set and below are possible target
datasets: a) label shift: p(y) differs but p(X|y) remains fixed. b) conditional
shift: p(y) remains fixed but p(X|y) differs. c) label and conditional shifts:
p(y) and p(X|y) differ.

3

minor shifts are involved. Due to the overlapping, the classifier will generally
not learn definite p(y|X), and so it will heavily rely on p(y) that it has learned
from the source dataset. However, due to the imbalance, even a small label
shift will cause significant differences in p(y), especially for small classes, thus
leading to poor results.
A good example for such datasets can be found in the medical field. Consider the task of classifying a list of symptoms to a condition [8, 9]. In this
scenario, as symptoms alone cannot usually be used to pinpoint a single
condition, the best a symptom-based classifier can do is assign reasonable
probabilities to a number of conditions related to the reported symptoms.
Some of these conditions may be more prevalent than others by several orders of magnitude. In fact, some conditions may be so rare and overshadowed
by other conditions, that none of the cases will be classified to them (it is
useful to include such conditions in datasets in order to generate a differential diagnosis from the classifier’s outcome, for example). A label shift is
expected in this scenario as condition prevalence often varies significantly
between populations and time periods. Less intuitively, a conditional shift
is also expected. Symptom distribution given conditions, tend to change between populations and time periods due to differences in reporting methods
(e.g., two different machine-patient dialogue algorithms that are used to extract symptoms).
Here we present a novel scheme for unsupervised DA which is tailored to
imbalanced and overlapping datasets and works under label and conditional
shifts. Before we do so, we introduce a Quantification method which is
known in the literature but is under-explored. We re-derive it and analyze it
in light of a more common approach, in order to set the building blocks for
the remainder of the work. Then, we shortly describe a standard technique
which employs Quantification to perform DA under a label shift. Finally, we
utilize the Quantification and DA methods mentioned above to derive our
novel DA scheme. The scheme is discussed theoretically and demonstrated
on datasets, generated from electronic health records (EHRs), involving the
classification of a list of symptoms to a condition.
Outline The remainder of this article is organized as follows: in Section 3
we present our DA scheme and explain it theoretically, Section 4 elaborates on
experiments performed with this scheme and Section 5 discusses our findings.

4

3
3.1

The Domain Adaptation Scheme
Quantification under a label shift

Consider a dataset in which classes are highly imbalanced and overlapping,
and a classifier trained on this dataset. We would like to use this classifier
in order to estimate the label distribution in an unlabeled target set (at this
point it is assumed there is no conditional shift). When using the classifier as
is, for reasons explained above, the estimation is expected to be very poor.
Denoting the label distribution as Py , and the probability that the classifier assigned to class y given input X as ŷ, the classifier estimation of the
label distribution is given by P̂y = E[ŷ].
In order to quantify the classifier’s confusion we define the soft confusion
matrix
Cyy0 = E[ŷ|y 0 ],
(1)
Next, plugging the definitions above we obtain CP = P̂ , and so
P = C −1 P̂ .

(2)

Note that C can be estimated from the source dataset, while P̂ can be
estimated from the target dataset using a classifier trained on the source
dataset. Hence, Eq. (2) provides a recipe for performing Quantification, i.e.
for evaluating label distribution in a target dataset, without using labels from
the target dataset. The classifier does not have to be calibrated. In fact, this
procedure may be used to calibrate classifiers on the source dataset as well.
Note that this procedure works only if C is nonsingular. C will be singular
if P̂y = 0 for one or more classes, or if the expected class distribution given
a certain label is a linear combination of the expected class distributions
given other labels. C is very unlikely to be singular, but the closer it gets to
singularity the more sensitive to noise it becomes.
The procedure described above is known in the literature but is usually
performed with a hard confusion matrix rather than a soft one (in the notation we use it means replacing ŷ with its binary equivalent: 1 for the ŷ with
the highest probability and 0 elsewhere).
The soft confusion matrix is mostly mentioned in the literature as a replacement for the hard confusion matrix in case it is singular [4, 10]. Here, we
claim that in highly overlapping and imbalanced datasets this should be the
confusion matrix used for several reasons:
1) singularity: if non of the data points in the source dataset are classified as
a certain class, the hard confusion matrix becomes singular. As mentioned
above, this often happens in such datasets since rare classes tend to be underestimated [11].
5

2) noise: comparing the expected noise of Quantification in the limit of extremely imbalanced and overlapping classes, we find that the noise in the
soft approach is smaller. Consider, for simplicity, datasets with two classes,
one rare and one prevalent. For the rare class, whose probability is p, only
  1 of its instances are classified correctly ( is determined by p and the
nature of the overlap). It is easy to show that under reasonable assumptions,
the relative noise of the hard approach for the rare class probability estima√
tion will scale like O(1/ p), while that of the soft estimation will scale like
√
O(1/ p).
3) sensitivity to conditional shift: using the hard approach, when classes
are not extremely imbalanced and overlapping, minor conditional shifts will
have a small effect on Quantification results (Figure (2a)). However, the more
imbalance and overlap exists, the more Quantification is sensitive to minor
conditional shifts (Figure (2b)). This is due to the fact that rare classes are
underestimated. Once   1 of the data points associated with a rare class
are classified correctly, even a very small conditional shift (compared to the
scale of the class contour) can lead, on one hand to an 0  , and on the
other hand to 0 = 0 (which results in a singular confusion matrix). The
changes in the soft approach will be much smoother.
4) generalization to DA with conditional shifts. An explanation will follow in
Section 3.3.

3.2

From Quantification to DA

So far, we have shown how to estimate the label distribution in a target
dataset. In order to calibrate the classifier to the target set, and thus improve
its classification quality, a known procedure is followed [12]. Recall that every
(calibrated) classifier can be described by Bayes Law,
ŷ s ∝ p(Xs |y s )Pys ,

(3)

where the superscript ’s’ emphasizes that these quantities are calibrated to
the source dataset. Once we have an estimation of class distribution in the
target dataset, it may be used to calibrate the classifier as follows:
ŷ t ≈ ŷ s ·

Pyt
,
Pys

(4)

(the subscript ’t’ stands for ’target’) where, again, we have assumed no conditional shift.
This implies that every classifier trained on the source dataset can be calibrated to a target dataset, in which class distribution is potentially very
6

Figure 2: sensitivity of Quantification to conditional shifts. Consider a rare
class ’1’ and a prevalent class ’2’. a) overlap between classes is mild. The
amount of data points from class ’1’ classified correctly in the source dataset
is in the same order of magnitude as in the two conditional-shifted targets
(marked with dashed and dotted lines). b) overlap between classes is extreme. In the target dataset marked with the dashed line, the number of
data points from class ’1’ classified correctly is much larger than that of the
source (leading to poor results), while in the target dataset marked with the
dotted line, non of the data points are classified as ’1’ (leading to an inability
to perform the process).

7

different than that of the source, with only a small number of numerical
operations.

3.3

Adding a conditional shift

No conditional shift has been assumed above. However, in many cases this
assumption is not realistic, hence we wish to relax it. In order to do so,
we divide the input space into subspaces and apply the Quantification and
calibration schemes for each subspace separately. This will work if for every
subspace σ and every class y the following condition is satisfied:
p(Xtσ |y t )
= λyσ ,
p(Xsσ |y s )

∀Xσ ∈ σ

(5)

where λyσ are constants. This is because when this condition is satisfied, the
conditional shift translates in every single subspace into a label shift,
t
ŷσt ∝ p(Xtσ |y t )Pyt = p(Xsσ |y s )Pyσ
,

(6)

t
where Pyσ
= λyσ Pyt is the probability of class y in σ in the target dataset.
In order to satisfy this condition, the shifts in p(X|y) need to be on a larger
scale than the size of the subspaces. We are aware of two plausible scenarios
where this happens:
1) sub-classes: consider a scenario in which classes are composed of separated sub-classes, and where the conditional shift results only from different
weighting of the sub-classes. In this scenario, if the space division corresponds to the sub-classes, condition 5 will be satisfied by definition.
In the medical domain, such a scenario is plausible as conditions are often
composed of “sub-conditions”. For example, viral upper respiratory infections and bacterial upper respiratory infections are both composed of several
“sub-conditions”, such as conditions localized to the nasal passages, conditions of pharyngeal origin and others. For different populations or different
points in time, the ratio between various “sub-conditions” may change (in
a different manner for each condition), leading to a conditional shift of the
kind this approach can handle.
2) conditional independence of features with respect to the classes: denoting
the input vector as X = (X1 , X2 , ..., XF ) (where F is the number of features),
assuming it can be split into V > 1 vectors Xv which satisfy
Q conditional
independence with respect to the classes, we get p(X|y) = v∈V p(Xv |y).
Without loss of generality, suppose the conditional shift results from changes
in p(X1 |y), then, assuming categorical features, by dividing the input space

8

in a way which corresponds to the different possible combinations of X1 ,
conditional independence assures that condition 5 is satisfied, as
Y
Y
t
t
t
t
s s
t
ŷσt ∝
[p(Xv,t
|y
)]
·
P
=
[p(Xv,t
(7)
σ
y
σ |y )] · Py = p(Xσ |y )Pyσ .
v

v6=1

In the medical domain, conditional independence of features (or groups of
features) is often satisfied or at least approximated. If needed, the groups v
may be evaluated from the source dataset.
Suppose a classifier is trained with data obtained using a certain dialogue
algorithm that asks users questions regarding (categorical, usually even binary) symptoms. If at some point in future this algorithm is changed, this
will most definitely lead to shifts in p(Xi |y) for some features Xi . It is impossible to know in advance which features were changed due to the unknown
label shift, however, the dialogue algorithm and global feature distribution
may provide leads.
We note that in order to work separately on different subspaces, soft
confusion matrices must be used, as all problems mentioned in Section 3.1
regarding hard confusion matrices worsen when we apply the Quantification and calibration schemes on small subspaces. This is because in certain
subspaces, some rare classes will be even rarer. In this context, it is worth
mentioning that even though we assume an extremely overlapping dataset,
some classes may have no support in some subspaces (meaning that in the
source dataset, none of the data points in the subspace are labeled to these
classes). In order to avoid singularity (or poor results) one should include in
each subspace only classes that are supported in it.
Importantly, while bias decreases with the number of subspaces, variance
will increase. This occurs due to the following:
1) the fewer data points that exist in a subspace, the more the scheme is
vulnerable to noise. Denoting the number of subspaces as Nσ , and assuming
they all contain
√ approximately the same number of data points, the noise
scales like O( Nσ ).
2) the smaller the subspace, the more uniform the predictions in the subspace
become, hence, the closer the confusion matrix gets to singularity. In the
limit where the subspace area goes to zero, all predictions in the subspace
will be identical and the confusion matrix will become singular.
Therefore, the space cannot be divided into arbitrarily small subspaces.

9

4

Experiments

We conducted two experiments with our scheme. Both involved the same
data source and classifier:
Data source The data used is based on EHR data from Maccabi HMO
(Israel) encompassing visits of adults aged 18 years and older to their family
physician. Raw EHR cases were transformed into a vector of 1221 binary
symptoms (reported vs not reported) which were then fed to the classifier
along with sex and age (age was the only non-binary feature). The classifier
classified each of them as one of 82 possible conditions. Data was divided
randomly to source and target datasets. Following source-target splitting,
the source dataset was altered by excluding cases. It was decided to alter
the source (rather than the target) as it simulates a more realistic scenario.
Details pertaining to the alterations are discussed below, separately for each
experiment.
Classifier architecture The classifier was implemented by a 4-layer neural
net. ReLU activation was used twice for non-linearity. Batch Normalization
was used twice as well. The last layer was followed by a Softmax activation
to ensure that output values are all positive and sum to one. In training,
Dropout was applied to avoid overfitting and cross-entropy loss was used
(along with the Softmax activation) to assign the classifier a probabilistic
nature.
Described below are the experiments we performed.

4.1

Quantification under a label shift

To this end, each condition was separately chosen to keep a certain ratio of
its original data points. The ratio was selected from a uniform distribution
within the range [0.2 − 1.0]. Excluded data points were chosen randomly.
The process culminated in approximately 11.3M data points in the source
dataset and 1.9M in the target.
We compared the classifier’s results without calibration to results obtained with calibrations using the hard and soft approaches. Results are
presented in Figure (3). It is shown that the soft approach performed considerably better than the hard approach.

10

Figure 3: using different approaches to estimate the ratio between condition
distribution in the source and target datasets, under a label shift. The actual
ratio is represented by the bars. For each approach we show the estimated
ratio and the Quantification score, defined to be the euclidean distance (divided by the number of conditions) with respect to the actual ratio (lower is
better). Orange crosses: the classifier calibrated to the source dataset (score:
0.047), blue triangles: the hard approach (score: 0.034), black triangles: the
soft approach (score: 0.012).

11

4.2

Quantification and DA under both label and conditional shifts

To this end we have only considered 8 respiratory conditions: Strep (Streptococcal) Pharyngitis, Upper Respiratory Infection, Viral Pharyngitis, Allergic
Rhinitis, Acute Sinusitis, Asthma, Influenza & Pneumonia. As previously
ascertained, samples were excluded from the source dataset. Each condition kept a certain ratio of its original data points, such that the source
dataset became relatively balanced (a ratio of approximately 1 : 2 between
the prevalence of the largest and the smallest classes). The exclusion of data
points was conducted by assigning each data point with a weight determined
by the values of 3 prominent symptoms: runny nose, sore throat & cough
(assigned weights were different for each condition). We then randomly selected data points using the weights as exclusion probabilities. This changed
the conditional probability of other symptoms in the source dataset as well.
Eventually, there were approximately 798K data points in the source dataset
and 287K in the target.
Results of the classifier without calibration were compared to results obtained with calibrations. First, a calibration using the hard approach, without input space division (the hard approach with input space division failed
due to singular confusion matrices). Then calibrations using the soft approach, with and without input space division. The input space division
involved PCA to reduce the number of dimensions in the input space to 6,
followed by K-Means to divide the space into 5 subspaces.
Quantification results are presented in Figure (4) and DA results are
presented in Table (1). Due to the conditional shift, both soft and hard
approaches fail to achieve good results without dividing the input space into
subspaces: in the Quantification task, the results without dividing the input
space were at least considerably better than the results obtained by a classifier
calibrated to the source dataset (note that the hard approach reached better
results than the soft approach, we believe this is due to the fact that the
imbalance in the source dataset was not extreme). In the DA task, the
results without dividing the input space weren’t significantly better than
those of the classifier calibrated to the source dataset. The soft approach
with input space division was superior to the other methods and obtained
very good results for both Quantification and DA.

12

Figure 4: using different approaches to estimate the ratio between condition
distribution in the source and target datasets, under both label and conditional shifts. The actual ratio is represented by the bars. For each approach
we show the estimated ratio and the Quantification score, defined to be the
euclidean distance (divided by the number of conditions) with respect to the
actual ratio (lower is better). Orange crosses: the classifier calibrated to the
source dataset (score: 0.31), blue triangles: the hard approach without input
space division (score: 0.18), black triangles: the soft approach without input space division (score: 0.22), black squares: the soft approach with input
space division (score: 0.12).

Method

Top1

Top3

No DA
0.51
DA without input space division - hard 0.51
DA without input space division - soft 0.51
DA with input space division - soft
0.57

0.79
0.80
0.80
0.83

Source dataset

0.87

0.60

Table 1: classification results in a scenario involving both label and conditional shifts. Since conditional symptom distributions given a condition were
altered in the source dataset, the DA methods not including the input space
division failed to significantly improve results in the target dataset. On the
other hand, the method including the division managed to bridge approximately half of the gap between the source and target performances in the
Top3 metrics and two thirds in the Top1.

13

5

Discussion

In this work we introduced a novel DA approach tailored to a challenging
scenario involving both label and conditional shifts in highly imbalanced and
overlapping datasets.
This approach is based on embedding the input into a low dimensional space,
dividing it into subspaces and calibrating the classifier separately for each
subspace. We have experimented with this scheme and found that it reaches
very good results for both Quantification and DA.
A simple method of dividing the input space to subspaces was examined.
It involved PCA for dimensionality reduction followed by K-Means for the
division. It would be interesting to investigate, both theoretically and experimentally, how different methods of space division may improve our results.
Additional improvements to our results may be achieved by using ensembles
of classifiers, as suggested by [4].
Finally, it would be interesting to further study this approach in light
of an Active Learning scheme. The relation between Active Learning and
DA has been studied extensively [13]. In the context of this work, it would
be exciting to envision new strategies for sampling in a way which optimizes
learning new information by “sacrificing” source-target similarity, but in such
a way that we would know in advance that high quality DA is guaranteed.
Potential applications in COVID-19 Researchers are diligently working to estimate both COVID-19 prevalence in given populations and the
probability that individuals will be diagnosed with COVID-19 based on reported symptoms [14, 15]. Since the symptom distribution of this disease
overlaps with a variety of other respiratory tract conditions, the above mentioned estimations are highly sensitive to the ratio of COVID-19 prevalence
in the source and target datasets. However, prevalence in the source is arbitrary and prevalence in the target may change by several orders of magnitude
in short amounts of time.
An additional complication may arise from the fact that the conditional (reported) symptom distribution, given each condition, may change between
source and target. Two plausible reasons are: 1) the source is based on
physician reports while the target is based on user self-reports, and 2) as
additional symptoms are associated with COVID-19, the populations’ awareness of them increases over time (e.g., loss of the sense of smell and taste).
The scheme we have proposed in this paper can be used to generate reliable
estimations, both on the population level and the individual level, under the
given circumstances.

14

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Omer Sidis, Yael Steuerman, Amit Wolecki,
Uri Shalit and Gabi Stanovsky for helpful discussions.

References
[1] P. González, A. Castaño, N. V. Chawla, and J. J. D. Coz, “A review
on quantification learning,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50,
no. 5, pp. 1–40, 2017.
[2] G. J. McLachlan and K. E. Basford, Mixture models: Inference and
applications to clustering, vol. 38. M. Dekker New York, 1988.
[3] G. McLachlan, “Discriminant analysis and statistical pattern recognition, wiley,” New York, 1992.
[4] Z. C. Lipton, Y.-X. Wang, and A. Smola, “Detecting and correcting for
label shift with black box predictors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03916,
2018.
[5] I. Redko, E. Morvant, A. Habrard, M. Sebban, and Y. Bennani, Advances in Domain Adaptation Theory. Elsevier, 2019.
[6] W. M. Kouw and M. Loog, “A review of domain adaptation without
target labels,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, pp. 1–1, 2019.
[7] B. Chidlovskii, “Using latent codes for class imbalance problem in unsupervised domain adaptation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08962, 2019.
[8] J. Wu, J. Roy, and W. F. Stewart, “Prediction modeling using ehr
data: challenges, strategies, and a comparison of machine learning approaches,” Medical care, pp. S106–S113, 2010.
[9] B. Shickel, P. J. Tighe, A. Bihorac, and P. Rashidi, “Deep ehr: a survey of recent advances in deep learning techniques for electronic health
record (ehr) analysis,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1589–1604, 2017.
[10] S. Garg, Y. Wu, S. Balakrishnan, and Z. C. Lipton, “A unified view of
label shift estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07554, 2020.

15

[11] G. Forman, “Quantifying counts and costs via classification,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 164–206, 2008.
[12] M. Saerens, P. Latinne, and C. Decaestecker, “Adjusting the outputs
of a classifier to new a priori probabilities: a simple procedure,” Neural
computation, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 21–41, 2002.
[13] G. Csurka, “A comprehensive survey on domain adaptation for visual
applications,” in Domain adaptation in computer vision applications,
pp. 1–35, Springer, 2017.
[14] A. S. S. Rao and J. A. Vazquez, “Identification of covid-19 can be quicker
through artificial intelligence framework using a mobile phone-based survey in the populations when cities/towns are under quarantine,” Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, pp. 1–18, 2020.
[15] A. Imran, I. Posokhova, H. N. Qureshi, U. Masood, S. Riaz, K. Ali,
C. N. John, and M. Nabeel, “Ai4covid-19: Ai enabled preliminary diagnosis for covid-19 from cough samples via an app,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.01275, 2020.

16

