CovidChain: An Anonymity Preserving Blockchain Based
Framework for Protection Against Covid-19
Hiten Choudhurya , Bidisha Goswamia , Sameer Kumar Gurungb,∗
a Department

arXiv:2005.10607v1 [cs.CR] 15 May 2020

b Department

of Computer Science & IT,Cotton University, Guwahati, Assam, India.
of Computer Science, Saint Mary’s College, Shillong, Meghalaya, India.

Abstract
Today, the entire world is facing incredible health and economic challenges due to
the rapid spread of the life threatening novel Coronavirus Disease - 2019 (COVID19). In the prevailing situation when a vaccine is many months away, the way
forward seems to be a controlled exit from the lockdown - where, infected/exposed
people are strictly quarantined and recovered/unexposed people are allowed
to carry on with their day to day business activities. However, appropriate
physical distancing norms will have to be strictly followed for such relaxations.
Therefore, mechanisms are required that will assist people in following the social
and physical distancing norms in public places. In this paper, we propose an
anonymity preserving blockchain based framework that allows people, through
use of their smart phones and other communication devices, to protect themselves
from infections as they conduct their daily business activities.
Keywords: Covid-19, Coronavirus, Contact Tracing, Blockchain, Security,
Privacy, Anonymity.

1. Introduction
The novel life threatening virus ‘Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2)’, responsible for Coronavirus Disease - 2019 (COVID-19), is
one of the greatest challenges that the world is facing today. This is a respiratory
virus and can spread through human to human contact. Therefore, to prevent
infection and to slow transmission of COVID-19, the following physical distancing
guidelines are specified by WHO [1]:
• Maintain at least 1 metre distance between you and people coughing or
sneezing.
• Stay home if you feel unwell.
• Practice physical distancing by avoiding unnecessary travel and staying
away from large groups of people.
∗ Corresponding

Author
Email addresses: hiten.choudhury@cottonuniversity.ac.in (Hiten Choudhury),
bidishagoswami112@gmail.com (Bidisha Goswami ), skg@smcs.ac.in (Sameer Kumar
Gurung)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

With millions of people infected worldwide and thousands dead, the Covid-19
pandemic is showing no sign of abating. A vaccine is yet to be found, and
physical distancing through lockdowns seems to be the only way to slow the
spread. However, the lockdowns are also pushing the world economy to the brink
[2]. Millions, in countries across the world are facing the bleak reality of job
losses, business closure and economic hardship. Hence, it has become imperative
to find ways to allow a section of the society - those who have either recovered or
are unexposed to the disease, carry on with their day to day business operations
to kickstart the economy. What is desired is a system, that will enable easing
of the lockdowns, allowing countries to continue with their economic activities,
perhaps, in a reduced capacity, while still strictly maintaining appropriate
physical distancing norms for such relaxations. Consequently, strategies have to
be put in place that will assist people in practising the distancing norms in public
places. Modern communication technologies and the ubiquity of smartphones
use can be leveraged to devise such mechanisms.
Many countries have developed mobile applications to combat the spread of
the virus by adopting technologies such as bluetooth and GPS data for contact
tracing, which is a mechanism for tracing people who had come in close contact
with some one who is infected with the virus [3]. Such mobile applications
collect information about persons who have been in close proximity with an
individual from their smart phones. If the individual is ever diagnosed with
the virus, every person who had possibly been near that infected individual,
during the period in which he was contagious, can be traced and directed to take
measures such as self-quarantine and or testing [4]. However, such applications
facilitate identification of only those people who have already been exposed to an
infected individual. While there is no doubt that contact tracing can contribute
immensely in containing the virus, we have certainly reached a stage where
economic activities also have to be allowed in a disciplined manner. Therefore,
it is highly desirable that systems be put in place that can aid in prevention of
exposing an individual from infection while s/he is engaged in her/his day to
day business activities. Applications should be devised in such a way that it’s
users can be given prior intimation about the Covid status of people in their
vicinity or of people that they plan to meet. There should be provisions in the
application that alerts users before they are entering a zone or an area that is
certified to be a covid hotspot zone. In such a scenario, the person receiving such
alerts can then take preventive measures. Since the success of such applications
depend largely on people participation, user privacy concerns should be taken
into account and there should be inbuilt mechanisms to provide incentives to
people for their participation. The data accumulated through such a public
initiative should be available to general public for scrutiny and use, so that they
can reap it’s benefit in their individual businesses.
1.1. Our Contribution
In this paper, we propose a framework that can be used by people to protect
themselves from infections while they are involved in their activities. Individuals
can use their smart phones as a digital-pass to convince authorities, institutes
and business establishments that s/he is safe from the virus and has not come
in close contact with anyone who is infected by the virus. This will allow him
or her to move freely without restrictions to accomplish their tasks and allow
for some semblance of a normal life. For individuals who fail to do so, it will be
2

implied that he is infected or is under quarantine and is not supposed to roam
around in public places. Therefore, access to public/private facilities will be
denied to such individuals till his/her quarantine period is over.
We propose the use of blockchain technology for secure record keeping of
persons using the application. The covid-19 status of individuals along with
other relevant information such as age, pre-existing medical conditions etc., can
be entered into the blockchain, while ensuring privacy and anonymity to the
individuals. This public ledger will be made available to all the stakeholders.
Given the immutable nature of the blockchain, the ledger will be available on
a read only basis to these stakeholders. The stakeholders will include entities
such as the offices and health centers of the state, central or federal government,
medical research and development centers, private hospitals, business houses,
and other organizations.
1.2. Paper Organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, similar work
carried out recently are discussed. In section 3, we present a brief overview of the
blockchain technology. In section 4, the proposed blockchain based framework is
presented. In section 5, we discuss the proposed work with reference to existing
applications and platforms that were developed recently. Finally, in section 6,
we conclude the paper.
2. Similar Work
Countries around the world have adopted mobile technologies to mitigate the
spread of corona virus and are also relying on such technologies to provide data
to augment their decisions making on the exit strategy for lockdowns [5]. China
[6], Singapore [7], South Korea, Israel [8] and Australia [9] have taken the lead in
asking their citizens to install surveillance apps to facilitate contact tracing. India
has developed Aarogya Setu app for the same purpose [10]. These government
initiatives have little or no privacy protections built into their systems which
have raised concerns of the applications being used for surveillance beyond their
stated purpose. For example, the South Korean app uses GPS location data
and citizens are required to provide their real names and their government
issued identity numbers [11]. This means that privacy is non-existent in the
contact tracing mechanism and citizens using the app can be tracked anytime
and anywhere. Singapore’s TraceTogether app stores anonymised IDs of nearby
phones exchanged through bluetooth, in encrypted form . The IDs are generated
by encrypting with a private key held by the Ministry of Health and hence can
be decrypted by only this government agency. This does not reveal the users
identity to other parties but is known to the government. Hence, users have
no privacy from government surveillance. India’s Aarogya Setu seeks the users
bluetooth connectivity and location data at the time of installation, which is
sent to government servers effectively allowing government agencies to know the
users whereabouts. Hamagen ( Hebrew for the shield ) app, endorsed by Israel’s
Ministry of Health, periodically (typically one hour) downloads anonymous GPS
location data of patients diagnosed as covid positive from the MoH cloud service.
It then compares this list with location data Hamagen has stored of the user
in the phone. This cross-referencing can then determine if the user has been in

3

presence of anyone who has been tested as positive. User location is not sent to
the government servers and the comparing of location data is done on-device of
the user. Location history and WIFI networks that the user came within range,
is stored on device for two-weeks. Future versions would keep track of bluetooth
connections and data over sound. The Israeli government has plans of making
the app open source in the near future.
Private organisations have also jumped in the fray and are offering mobile app
based solutions. PHBC [12] is a consortium of various health stakeholders such as
universities, health care providers, government agencies, etc which has developed
virus record keeping blockchain that allows the monitoring and verification of
workplaces and geographical zones that are free from corona virus [13]. Such
zones are designated as safe zones. The system tracks the whereabouts of
uninfected persons and aims to constrain their entry into uninfected areas if
they have visited infected areas by requiring them to be in the quarantine zone
before they are allowed into the safe zone. The system integrates AI and GIS
technologies and draws information in real time from agencies that provide up
to date virus infection information.
IT Researchers have also proposed a variety of approaches to control and
track the spread of the virus. The authors in [14] propose a blockchain and
AI based 4 layer framework where corona virus data is collected from various
sources such as laboratories, hospitals, social media, patient generated data and
wireless network operators. They propose to ensure privacy of such data by use
of the blockchain. AI models can then harness the data to provide solutions for
outbreak estimation, virus detection, analytics, assisting in vaccine development
and predicting of similar virus outbreak in future. However, the framework is
conceptual and does not provide implementation details.
Covid-watch is group of volunteers spread over multiple continents and
countries comprising security, policy and public health experts. The group
has developed a bluetooth based privacy-preserving mobile app that aims to
reduce the spread of corona virus [15]. Their scheme works by generating and
broadcasting random numbers whenever a user of the app is in close proximity to
another user. Bluetooth signal strength is used to estimate proximity. In every
phone a record is kept of each random number the device has transmitted or
received. If any phone app user is diagnosed as positive the local health authority
gives them a permission number which after verification is sent to a public server
along with the persons history of sent and received random numbers and is also
transmitted to all other phones. If any of the phones find a match with its
stored list of random numbers, it means that they were in close contact with the
infected person. While simple and elegant, the scheme can be compromised if
there is a man-in-the-middle attack on the bluetooth connections. Also, this app
is designed only for contact tracing. However, a lot more data could be collected
that might be of great use for epidemiological purposes which the app is not
designed for.
De Carli et al. presents a privacy-preserving mobile tracing application WeTrace in [16]. Mobile phones that have the application installed, periodically
broadcast the app generated public key. Like Covid-watch, other phones in
close proximity ( estimated using Bluetooth Low Energy) record these public
keys locally. When users change their status from “not infected” to “infected”,
messages encrypted with all the public keys available in its local storage is sent to
the backend, which broadcasts it to all users. Those who were in close proximity
4

to this user can now decrypt the message with their private key and know they
were near an infected person. The backend does not store any data, it only serves
to broadcast messages to the mobiles in the system. However as the authors
acknowledge, such a system can suffer from DDOS attacks on the backend, the
backend can be susceptible to impersonation and rouge users may issue false
notifications.
Torky and Hassanein propose a blockchain based framework for mitigating
the spread of coronavirus [17]. Their framework consists of four subsystems Infection Verifier Subsystem (IVS), P2P Mobile App, Blockchain Platform and
Mass Surveillance System. The IVS is the part of the system that records covid
positive persons in the blockchain by using“infection patterns” which are regular
expressions. The patterns derived from this regular expression, the “infection
instances” are used to digitally represent people or places who have been infected
by this patient. These are also recorded in the blockchain. A finite automaton
can verify if a regular expression instance conforms to the infected pattern
which will indicate a high probability of contagion. By representing people
as regular expressions, the system does anonymise the users. These instances
are also used in their proposed P2P mobile application. In their scheme, the
authors use the blockchain for storing the infected pattern and all confirmed
cases (infected instances) based on the pattern. The P2P application serves to
notify the populace that they might have been in contact with an infected person
or been to a place visited by an infected person. The Mass Surveillance System
component is responsible for contact tracing and for identifying the public places
the infected person may have visited in the last few days, which is sent to the
blockchain to be stored as infected patterns and infected instances. However, it
is unclear what underlying communication technology is employed to implement
this mass surveillance scheme. It is also unclear who the block miners are in
this system and what incentives they have. In Table 2, a summary of important
features of the various schemes discussed in this section is presented.
3. Overview of Blockchain

Anonymous

Autonomous

Features of Blockchain
Consensus
Based

Distributed

Immutable

Figure 1: Features of blockchain.

5

Blockchain as a concept was first coined in the white paper of Bitcoin by
Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009 [18]. It is a mechanism for the storage of decentralized,
time stamped and immutable data. As it is decentralized and distributed in
nature, it is not owned by a single authority and is kept as a distributed ledger.
As shown in Figure 1, some intriguing features of blockchain that motivated us
in adapting this technology in our proposal, are described as follows:[19]
Autonomous. Transactions in a blockchain can be carried out without the
involvement or control of a central authority or a single authority governing the
network. This architecture provides the benefits of a decentralized system with
reduced operational costs and avoiding performance bottlenecks at the central
location. Any node can add transactions and review them at any time.
Distributed. Transactions in a blockchain are virtually impossible to tamper
as they are recorded in blocks spread over the entire network with each block
validated by other nodes. In such a scenario any false transaction or changes
can be detected very easily.
Immutable. All transactions and blocks added chronologically to a blockchain
ledger are verifiable and all changes are traceable. Additionally, a consensus
mechanism synchronizes the blocks in all the nodes. These measure ensures that
data in the blockchain cannot be altered and changed.
Consensus based. New transactions and blocks are added in the blockchain
based on a previously agreed upon mechanism called consensus method. All
the stakeholders update their copy of the ledger by adding the same block to
their individual blockchains (ledger) with the help of this consensus mechanism.
Therefore, each individual at a particular instance of time has the same copy of
the blockchain, synchronized with every other individual.
Anonymous. In blockchain, information about individuals can be recorded with
a generated address, which does not reveal the real identity of the individual.
Thereby, facilitating anonymous storage of individual records.
A schematic view of how a Blockchain works is shown in figure 2 .
Transactions are broadcast
to the nodes

Using digital signature, a
user initiates a transaction

Validation of each transaction
is done by the nodes

Validated transactions are
aggregated into blocks

Using consensus protocol,
the newly added block is
validated

Validated block is added
to the blockchain

Figure 2: Stages of a blockchain.

When a new transaction is initiated, it is broadcast among the nodes, and
based on a consensus algorithm, a miner adds the transaction into the block. The
nodes in Blockchain can be any device (computer, mobile phone) that contains a
copy of the Blockchain. The miners are nodes that create blocks after validating
6

new transactions and adhering to a accepted consensus mechanism. Without
involvement and authentication from any central authority, these blocks are
validated using the consensus algorithm which establishes mutual trust and
enables a decentralized network to take a decision. Consensus algorithm plays
a significant role in maintaining the safety and regulation of the Blockchain.
Common consensus algorithms are ‘proof of work’, ‘proof of stake’ and ‘proof of
existence’ [20].
Proof of Work (PoW) is a popular consensus method used by various cryptocurrencies. It’s popularity is due to the fact that it provides safety from various
attacks. PoW is used to validate transactions and add new blocks to the chain
by solving a complex computational problem. Miners race against each other to
solve the problem and create the blocks. The first miner to solve the problem gets
to add the new block into the blockchain and claim a reward. The reward is an
incentive mechanism that ensures the participation of miners in the blockchain.
PoW has some limitations like it is computationally intensive and vulnerable
to attack from 51% of the nodes in the network. To overcome the limitations
of PoW method, Proof of Stake (PoS) method was introduced that determines
the block creator based on a combination of node’s wealth, the staking age and
random selection. Selection purely on the basis of the node’s wealth would result
in the node with the most wealth having a constant advantage in block creation.
Hence a combination of various strategies have been adopted. The staking age
ensures that nodes that hold the stake longer have a better chance to forge
blocks which decreases the chances of malicious attacks. As a reward transaction
fees are given to the block validators.
The Blockchain consists of chain of blocks as shown in the figure 3.
Block 1

Block 2

Hash of the previous block

Hash of the previous block

Data

Data

Timestamp

Timestamp

Hash

Hash

Figure 3: Structure of a blockchain.

Each block is arranged in chronological order, consisting of block header
and block body. Every block also contains the hash of the previous block, its
data, merkle root and timestamp. As each block contains the hash value of
the previous block, it is ensured that blocks are linked and changes cannot be
made in any one of the blocks without being reflected in all subsequent blocks.
This makes data in the Blockchain virtually impossible to alter and change. A
block contains a number of transactions, and all these transactions have a hash
associated with it. Each pair of these hashes are then concatenated to compute
another hash and so on. Such hashing is used to build a tree of hash values.

7

The merkle root is then the hash of all the transactions a block contains. Merkle
Root is used to provide integrity of all the transactions in a block, as changing
any one transaction will change the merkle root.
Depending on various conditions, Blockchain can be categorized into public,
private and consortium.
Public Blockchain. Public Blockchains are fully decentralized, the ledgers are
open and transparent. Anyone can be part of this Blockchain as a miner or as
a node without any restriction. Example of public Blockchain are Ethereum,
Monero, Bitcoin, etc. Bitcoin is a decentralized cryptocurrency in the absence
of a central administrator in which everyone can invest.
Private Blockchain. Private Blockchains are similar like that of public Blockchain
following a set of conditions.It is governed by an organization and only those
who have permission or invitation to access can participate. Private Blockchains
are also called permissioned Blockchain. It is also a decentralized peer-to –peer
network but the participants are decided by an organization. Hyperledger is an
example of Private Blockchain.
Consortium Blockchain. In a Consortium Blockchain, a group of companies
or stakeholders comes together to develop a Blockchain. It is partly private
and partly public Blockchain and is also referred to as a semi-decentralised
Blockchain. Consortium Blockchain consists of pre-determined group of nodes
and validation of blocks are also determined by specific group. Also in this type
of Blockchain, certain operations may be open to other participants. Example
of of consortium Blockchain are R3, EWF, Libra, etc.
Blockchain is widely used in the field of cryptocurrency - Bitcoin being
its most popular implementation. However, other than Bitcoin, Ethereum,
Monero, Litecoin are some examples of cryptocurrencies where blockchain is
used to maintain the distributed ledger of transactions. Furthermore, Blockchain
technology has found use in areas other than cryptocurrency and is transforming
these fields. A few areas where blockchain is proving particularly effective are:
• Electronic Health Records (EHRs) based on Blockchain provides patients
access to immutable and complete records of their own medical history
without any service providers, as opposed to the traditional method where
electronic records of patient’s health are held by the respective hospitals.
[21]
• Product Ownership Management System (POMS): Blockchain is used for
anti-counterfeits in the RFID enabled supply chain in which a customer
can reject purchase of counterfeits products even with a genuine RFID tag
if the seller does not have the ownership of the product. The “proof of
possession balance” of public ledger of the blockchain is used to verify th
said ownership. [22]
• In cloud computing, metadata that keeps a record of the history of creation
and operations that have been performed on a cloud data object is of
utmost importance. It is used to provide accountability, forensics and
privacy. Blockchain-based data provenance architecture can be used to
ensure transparency of such data, and can provide tamper-proof records

8

which is essential for transparency of data accountability and can enhance
availability and privacy of provenance data. [23]
• A Blockchain-based access control model in IoT is introduced to manage
access control, where smart contract is used for contextual access control
policies to make authorization decisions. This blockchain based solution
ensures user privacy by avoiding the use of a third party to handle and
implement access control policies. [24]
• A Blockchain-enabled platform can be used for processing insurance transactions to speed up the processes in the insurance industry, to make
client data confidential, to reduce operational costs, transaction processing
times and payment settlement duration and provide security in the whole
insurance mechanism.[25]
Given the inherent benefits of blockchain technology, it was felt that it can
contribute immensely in designing a platform that can be used in fight against
the spread of the COVID-19 virus.
4. The Proposed Blockchain Framework

Central
Authority
Distributed
Ledger

Police

Testing
Centre
Medical Staff

Govt. Node

eA
pp

Block Verifier

Medical Staff

W

or

kS

af

Govt. Node

WorkSafeApp

Govt. Server
Hospital/Clinic

Police

CovidChain
Block
Verifier

Block
Verifier

pp

Local
Authority

W

or

kS

af

eA

Local
Authority
Govt. Server

Govt. Node

Business House/
R & D Centre/
Block Verifier

Block Miner

Office/Inst.

Testing
Centre

Shops/Markets

Figure 4: Blockchain framework for protection against COVID-19.

In this section, we present our blockchain based framework called ‘CovidChain’
for protection against COVID-19. Compared to majority of the applications

9

that have been developed in the recent past with an intention to contain the
spread of COVID-19, our proposal differs with regards to the following aspects.
• Most of the apps are specifically designed for tracing and alerting those
people who might have come in contact of an infected person. Such a
mechanism helps the intimated people to take precautions with regards to
their own health and social behaviour. However in addition to this aspect,
in our framework, we focus on another issue: which is that of allowing those
individuals of the society who have not tested positive or have not come
in close contact with a corona positive person, to continue with his/her
economic activities while protecting himself/herself against the virus.
• The data generated in most of the apps are stored in a single location that
is under the control of a single authority. In our proposal, the generated
data is recorded in a consortium blockchain in the form of a distributed
ledger that is accessible to every section of the society. Such an approach
will increase transparency and will allow the entire population to garner
it’s benefit. It also helps in avoiding confusion about the current status of
the infection as reliable data is available to everyone at the same time.
• The framework is designed keeping privacy, anonymity and incentive for
the stakeholders in mind.
The various stakeholders and entities associated with the framework are as
follows Figure 4.
• Medical professionals: They are people who perform random testing. In
addition to their testing kits, they are equipped with a bluetooth enabled
smartphone and Internet connectivity. They have read-only access to the
ledger and generates transactions comprising of covid status of individuals
based on their test report (for example: +ive, -ive, number of days of
quarantine required, etc.).
• Hospitals/Clinics/Laboratory: They have read-only access to the ledger
and can generate transactions comprising of covid status of individuals
based on their test report (for example: +ive, -ive, number of days of
quarantine required, etc.), for onward transmission to the block miner.
• Testing Centres: These are centres established by the Govt. with facility
for COVID-19 testing. They are equipped with a bluetooth enabled smart
phone, computer and Internet connectivity. They have read-only access
to the ledger and generates transactions comprising of covid status of
individuals based on their test report (for example: +ive, -ive, number of
days of quarantine required, etc.).
• Govt. nodes: These are computers established by the authority having readonly access to the ledger. They facilitate testing centres, law enforcement
personals, medical professionals and individuals to access the ledger and
communicate transactions generated by them.
• Business houses, Research and Development Centers, etc.: They are nodes
with read-only access to the blockchain. They are interested in the data
getting appended in the blockchain for research and business purpose. Such
organizations can even participate in the system as a Block Evaluator.
10

• Institutes, shops, offices, etc.: These establishments have read-only access
to the ledger through a Govt. node or a Business house. They are interested
in the data that is getting generated, so that they can use it for smooth
running of their business activities.
• Individuals: Through their smart phones, they have read-only access to
the ledger through a Govt. node or a node belonging to a business house.
They can use the data to protect themselves from infection as they go
about their day to day business activities.
• Law enforcement personals: These are people like policeman etc., who
suggests quarantine to individuals with recent travel history or having been
contact traced to covid positive individuals, by generating such transactions
for onward transmission to the block miner. They also demarcate a locality,
district, etc. into red, orange, green zone based on number of people
infected in a locality, so that people outside such zones can be alerted
about their proximity to such a zones. Such personals have to be equipped
with Internet and bluetooth enabled smartphones or computers.
• Block Miner : It is a centrally located node in the blockchain that receives all
the transactions generated by the various stakeholders. These transactions
are then put together into blocks.
• Block Verifier/Validator : These are nodes that validates all the transactions
by examining their digital signatures. A Block Validator is either owned
by the state/central government of a country or are owned/monitored by
establishments that are nominated by the civil society.
• Local Authority: A local government of a state or a province.
• Central Authority: The central government of a country.
• WorkSafeApp: It is a smart phone application that is used as an interface
to interact with CovidChain. WorkSafeApp requires the smart phone of an
individual to be bluetooth enabled. Like many recently developed applications for contact tracing through bluetooth [10][15][7], WorkSafeApp also
collects anonymized tokens from the smart phones of all such individuals
with whom a person has come in close proximity in the past few days. If
the person is ever tested positive for COVID-19, all the collected tokens are
mapped to their corresponding contact numbers and all such individuals
are either tested for COVID-19 or are suggested to be in quarantine by
medical professionals or law enforcement agencies. WorkSafeApp also has
a self assessment module, using which a user can assess his health status
by answering certain queries. Depending on the answers and severity of
the symptoms, the module suggests people to either self quarantine or to
get in touch with a Testing Centre. As the blockchain data is publicly
available, applications similar to WorkSafeApp with CovidChain as the
backend data may be developed by individual businesses.
We split the functionality of the entire framework, including the process of adding
a block in the blockchain, into the following activities.

11

4.1. App Initialization
When WorkSafeApp is installed in a smart phone, a pair of public-private
key is generated by taking an OTP verified phone number as input from the
user. Hence forth, the phone number is neither recorded nor used for any other
purpose. For all subsequent purposes, the public key is used as it’s identity by
the user.
4.2. Transaction Generation
A transaction may be of two types, viz., transactions indicating individual
status ‘TInd ’ and transactions indicating location status ‘TLoc ’. ‘TInd ’ is a
statement that represents the covid status of an individual as determined by
a medical professional, a testing centre, a hospital or a law enforcing personal.
It has three components, viz., the hash of the public key of the individual
‘H(KpubInd )’, the COVID status ‘CS’ of the user, the Date, the T ime and
a minimal set ‘SEpid ’ of epidemiological information like age, gender, blood
group, state/province, pre-existing disease, etc., that is required by the Govt.
to make a general study on the overall data, so that new knowledge about
the proliferation pattern of the virus may be derived. ‘SEpid ’ should contain
minimum number of attributes required for data analysis. It should not contain
information like House-no, Street-no, etc. that may compromise anonymity and
privacy of an individual. Before including the set ‘SEpid ’ in the transaction, it is
encrypted using the public key ‘KpubCA ’ of the Central Authority. A transaction
is uniquely identified by a transaction identity ‘T ID’, which is the hash value of
the transaction. This is further encrypted with the Testing Centre’s private key
‘EKpriT C ’, for generating a digital signature ‘DST C ’ so that the genuineness of
the transaction may be verified by the Block Validators.
Therefore,
SEpid = {age, gender, state, ..}

(1)

SEnc = EKpubCA (SEpid )

(2)

T ID = H(H(KpubInd ), CS, Date, T ime, SEncEpid )

(3)

DST C = EKpriT C (T ID)

(4)

TInd = {T ID, H(KpubInd ), CS, Date, T ime, SEnc , DST C }

(5)

Where, ‘E’ is an encryption function and ‘H’ is a one way hash function like
SHA-256. The various symbols and acronyms used in this section are presented
in Table 1 for quick reference. TLoc is a transaction made by a local authority
or a law enforcement agency that identifies a locality, district, etc., as a red
zone , orange zone or a green zone, based on the number of infected people in
12

Table 1: Acronyms and symbols

Acronym/Symbol
TInd
TLoc
KpubInd
CS
SEpid
SEnc
KpubCA
T ID
EKpriT C
DST C
H
E
D
lt, ln
radius
zoneT ype
zoneId
DSLEA
KpriLEA

Description
Transaction related to CS of an individual.
Transaction related to CS of a zone.
Public key of an individual.
COVID-19 (C19) status.
Epidemiological information about an individual.
Encrypted Epidemiological information.
Public key of Central Authority.
Transaction identity.
Private key of a testing centre.
Digital signature of testing centre.
One way hash function.
Encryption function.
Decryption function.
Latitude, longitude.
Radius of a zone.
Zone type: red/orange/green.
Zone identity.
Digital signature of Law Enforcing Agency.
Private key of Law Enforcing Agency.

a particular area, so that people outside such zones can be alerted about their
proximity to such zones. Such transactions help the authority to disseminate (and
people to acquire), timely and reliable information about crucial decisions. To
demarcate a locality, the GPS coordinates (‘lt’, ‘ln’), radius of the zone ‘r’, date,
time, zone type ‘zoneT ype’ (red/orange/green) are recorded in a transaction.
Zone identity ‘zoneId’ which is the hash of the location coordinate, ‘TID’ which
is the hash of the entire transaction, and the digital signature of the authority
‘DSLEA ’ that is obtained by encrypting the ‘TID’ with the private key of the
Law Enforcing Authority ‘KpriLEA ’, are also recorded in a location transaction.
Therefore,
zoneId = H(lt, ln)

(6)

T ID = H(zoneId, lt, ln, r, Date, T ime, zoneT ype)

(7)

DSLEA = EKpriLEA (T ID)

(8)

TLoc = {T ID, zoneId, lt, ln, r, Date, T ime, zoneT ype, DSLEA }

(9)

After a transaction is generated (TInd or TLoc ), it is transmitted to the Block
Miner.
13

Block #n

Block #(n+1)

Block #(n+2)

HPB

HPB

HPB

MR

MR

MR

Signatures

Signatures

Signatures

Transactions

Transactions

Transactions

HASH OF PREVIOUS BLOCK
MERKLE ROOT HASH
SIGNATURE OF BLOCK MINER

SIGNATURE OF BLOCK VERIFIER1

SIGNATURE OF BLOCK VERIFIER2

TRANSACTIONS
TIDw, H(K Pub w), CS, Date, Time, S Enc , DS TC
TIDp, zoneId, lt, ln, r, Date, Time, zoneType, DS LEA
TIDy, H(K Pub y ), CS, Date, Time, S Enc , DS TC
TIDz , H(K Pub z ), CS, Date, Time, S Enc , DS TC
TIDq, zoneId, lt, ln, r, Date, Time, zoneType, DS LEA
TIDx, H(K Pub x ), CS, Date, Time, S Enc , DS TC

Figure 5: Structure of a block in CovidChain.

4.3. Block Mining
The Block Miner contains a single or multiple servers that receive the transactions from all the testing centres, hospitals, etc. When the total size of the
received transactions reaches a predetermined block size (say 1 MB), they are
bundled together into a block (Figure 5). Each transaction in the block is then
verified by validating the digital signature of the Testing Centres that signed it.
The Merkle Root Hash (MRH) of the block is calculated from the hash of all
the transactions by pairing the hash values and rehashing the sum of the pairs
as depicted in (Figure 6).

14

Merkle Root Hash
Hwpyz=H(Hwp+Hyz)

Hwp=H(Hw+Hp)

Hyz=H(Hy+Hz)

Hw=H(Tw)

Hp=H(Tp)

Tw

Tp

Hy=H(Ty)

Ty

Hz=H(Tz)

Tz

Transactions
Figure 6: Calculation of Merkle Root Hash from the Transactions.

After this, the Block Miner adds the MRH to the block and digitally signs
the MRH with its Private Key KpriBM . Therefore, if ‘Tw ’, ‘Tw ’, ‘Tw ’ and ‘Tw ’
are the transactions in a block, then the MRH ‘Hwpyz ’ of this block is calculated
and digitally signed as fols.
Hw = H(Tw )

(10)

Hp = H(Tp )

(11)

Hy = H(Ty )

(12)

Hz = H(Tz )

(13)

Hwp = H(Hw + Hp )

(14)

Hyz = H(Hy + Hz )

(15)

Hwpyz = H(Hwp + Hyz )

(16)

DSBM = EKpriBM (Hwpyz )

(17)
15

After this, the Block Miner forwards the block to a couple of Block Verifiers/Validators ‘BV1’ and ‘BV2’, selected randomly from among all the available
Block Verifiers. Each transaction in the block is then verified by validating the
digital signature of the Testing Centres that signed it; after which, the Block
Verifiers digitally sign the MRH of the block with their respective private keys
KpriBV 1 and KpriBV 2 .
DSBV 1 = EKpriBV 1 (Hwpyz )

(18)

DSBV 2 = EKpriBV 2 (Hwpyz )

(19)

The signed block is then sent back to the Block Miner. After receiving the
block, the Miner verifies the signatures of the Block Verifiers. The block is then
broadcast to all the nodes/stakeholders in the network. Upon validation of the
digital signatures, each node in the network adds the block to their individual
ledger (or their individual copy of the blockchain). While adding the block to
the blockchain, the Hash of the Previous Block (HPB) is added to the current
block.
4.4. COVID status verification

Blockchain
(Distributed Ledger)

Internet
7. If Y’= H(RAND), Alice finds CS stored against
H( Kpub
) in the CovidChain
Bob

Server
2. RAND

(X)
6. Y’=DKpub
Bob

(Y)
4. X=EKpri
Bob
3. Y=H(RAND)

1. RAND

Bluetooth
Alice

Bob
5. X, KpubBob

Figure 7: COVID status verification.

‘CovidChain’, the proposed blockchain framework will aid people by providing
an additional layer of protection from the virus while engaged in their activities.
It will enable entities in the society like offices, businesses, shops, markets,
educational institutes, traffic police, law enforcement agencies, etc., to verify
employees and clients at entry points based on data available in the blockchain.
An individual will also be able to verify another individual through the bluetooth
interface of his/her smart phone as they engage in day to day business activity.
For example, Alice will be able to verify the covid status of Bob, a plumber,
before letting him into her premise. Similarly, Bob will be able to verify the
covid status of Alice before entering her premise. A delivery boy will be able
to verify his client’s covid status through a web interface, before setting off for
delivery. Therefore, CovidChain on one hand will allow Alice to verify the covid
status of Bob and on the other hand will allow Bob to present his smart phone
16

as an E-pass to Alice. The sequence of steps involved, when Bob presents his
credentials to Alice for verification, is follows (Figure 7).
1. Alice: Generates a fresh random number RAN D.
2. Alice: Transmits RAN D and request for C19 status to Bob.
3. Bob: Calculates the following
Y = H(RAN D)

(20)

X = EKpriBob (Y )

(21)

Where, EKpriBob is the private key of Bob, ‘E’ is an encryption function
and ‘H’ is a one way hash function.
4. Bob: Transmits ‘X’, and his Public Key ‘KpubBob ’ to Alice.
5. Alice: Calculates the following.
Y 0 = DKpubBob (X)

(22)

Where, ‘D’ is the decryption function.
6. Alice: Compares Y 0 and H(RAN D). If Alice finds that Y 0 = H(RAN D),
it is convinced that KpubBob is the public key of Bob. After this, Alice
finds the covid status of Bob from the CovidChain using KpubBob (i.e.,
H(KpubBob )).
7. Alice: If the COVID Status against H(KpubBob ) is neither ‘+ive’ nor ‘IQ’
(ie., in quarantine), or if there is no transaction against ‘H(KpubBob )’,
Alice may allow Bob to have access to her premise with additional social
distancing precautions.
Bob can also verify the covid status of Alice in a similar manner.
4.5. Accessibility of Data
With the rapid spread of the virus, the numbers of infection, case fatality,
etc., and administrative decisions like declaring a zone to be a containment
zone changes rapidly. In such a fluid scenario, disseminating reliable timely
information that policy makers, epidemiologists, news agencies and people in
general depend heavily on, becomes a challenging affair. Especially so, when
the data is in control of a single authority. Since the proposed framework is
based on blockchain technology, the data is stored in distributed ledgers that
are open for public access. The data is immutable, updated in real time, and
is available for public scrutiny and audit. The possibility of the data being
manipulated by any stakeholder with malicious intention is negligible because
of its immutable nature. The availability of the data to various sections of the
society like shops, businesses, offices, households, etc., will empower them to
take crucial decisions with regards to their economic activities. For instance,
allowing uninfected people or people who are not in quarantine to join work, etc.

17

4.6. Anonymity and Privacy of Data
Anonymity and privacy of data related to individuals is an important aspect
for the success of such a platform. If an individual gets the perception that his/her
anonymity or privacy of data is not being respected, s/he will be apprehensive
about using such an application. Such applications will be successful in its
objective, only if there is widespread adoption among the populace. Taking this
into cognizance, we have designed the framework on blockchain. In our framework,
any stakeholder including the Central Authority, having access to the distributed
ledger or the blockchain, will not be able to link a particular transaction in the
ledger with any individual, because the anonymity of transactions are guaranteed
as follows.
• While creating a block, the Block Miner bundles the transactions in the
same order as it receives from the different stakeholders. Therefore, a
single block will have multiple transactions, originating at different sources,
shuffled together. This will make it extremely difficult for anyone having
access to the blockchain to link the data available in a transaction to its
origin.
• Since the Testing Centres, Hospitals, etc., records the Hash of the Public
Key in a transaction, any node/stakeholder having access to the blockschain
will not be able to traceback any data to any individual because it will
not be able to map a given Hashed Public Key to its corresponding Public
Key.
• When an individual (say Alice) has to present his identity to another
individual (say Bob) located a few feet away, s/he transmits his/her Public
Key KpubAlice through the bluetooth interface. Bob searches through the
ledger for any transaction that is recorded against H(KpubAlice ). If Bob
finds any such transaction, the only thing he gets to know about Alice is
her COVID status and nothing else, because the rest of the epidemiological
data is encrypted with the private key of the Central Authority.
• The Central Authority, having access to the epidemiological data through
it’s private key, can only link the data in a transaction to a hash value that
cannot be mapped to its corresponding Public Key. Therefore, it cannot
link any data with any particular individual. Such data, will only help
the authority to carry out epidemiological analysis without compromising
anyone’s privacy.
• While analyzing the epidemiological data, the Central Authority cannot
traceback a particular transaction of interest to its origin. But, if the
Central Authority wishes, it can collect the public key of an individual
through the bluetooth interface (say at a entry point to a public facility)
and locate his epidemiological information in the blockchain through the
hash of this public key. However, such an effort will be herculean for the
Central Authority, specially if it wishes to carry out a mass surveillance
of it’s citizens. Moreover, once the pandemic gets over, people will either
uninstall the WorkSafeApp from their smart phone or will keep their
bluetooth interface switched off, which will put an end to any such effort
by the authority.

18

4.7. Alert Mechanism
The proposed framework enables the authority to demarcate an area as a
red/orange/green zone. The data regarding the same (GPS coordinates, radius,
date and time of declaration, etc.), are added as a transaction in the blockchain.
Since the blockchain is publicly available, people will get timely information
about the same through the distributed ledger. Also, an individual who happens
to be in the vicinity of containment zone or is about the enter said zone, may be
alerted through the App.
4.8. Incentive for Stakeholders
Success of a framework like this, requires participation from almost every
individual of a Country. However, it is difficult to realize such a participation
if there is no clear thought on how various sections of the people are going to
benefit from their participation. Apart from the broader social goal of containing
the virus, there has to be perceivable incentive for the individual. In order to
have an idea of how different sections of the society are going to benefit from this
framework, the stakeholders of this framework are categorized into the following
groups, based on their similarity of interest.
• Category-I:Individuals.
• category-II: Business houses, Office, shops, Institutes, etc.
• Category-III: Testing Centre, Hospitals, Laboratories, police personals.
• Category-IV: Authority.
Category-I contains two kind of individuals: a) an individual whose covid
status is ‘+ive’ or is ‘In Quarantine (IQ)’ b) an individual whose covid status is
‘Out of Quarantine (OQ)’, or an individual who never had any symptoms and
never meet an infected person. While people of the first kind would like to see
the change of their status (say from ‘+ive’ to ‘-ive’, ‘-ive’ to ‘IQ’ and ‘IQ’ to‘OQ’,
etc.) in the public ledger, people of the second kind would like to carry on with
their day to day work with minimal restrictions while remaining protected from
infection. If the authority, shops, markets, offices, businesses, etc., allows access
of their facilities only to those individuals that are found safe, then installation
of the WorkSafeApp will enable people to use their smart phone as a digital-pass
to access these facilities.
Entities in category-II would like to carry on with their day to day business
while taking care of their own and other’s safety. By verifying the covid satus
of every individual at entry points, these individuals will be able to offer a safe
environment to their employees and clients.
Entities in Category-III are the ones that generate transactions for the
blockchain by performing clinical test on the individuals. Based on the previous
status of an individual (say ‘+ive’), in his next visit, new transaction with status
(say ‘IQ’ or ‘OQ’) may be created. This category will have their obligations to
the government and to the society in general to carry out their responsibilities.
Category-IV will have social obligations to protect the society by containing
the spread of the virus. They are the ones that will be responsible for setting
up such a system and keeping it running. They will be able to enforce strict

19

20

Application
Developer
TraceTogether [7]
Govt. of Singapore
Aaroyga Setu [10]
Govt. of India
Hamagen [8]
Govt. of Israel
CovidSafe [9]
Govt. of Australia
South Korea
Govt. of South Korea
Covid-Watch [15]
Arx et al.
Virusblockchain [13]
Hazra et al.
WeTrace [16]
Carli et al.
Covid-19 BlockChain Framework [17] Torky et al.
CovidChain
Choudhury et al.
Y: Yes; N: No; I: Insufficient Information; P: Partially Yes

Anonymity format Authority
N
N
N
N
N
Y
I
Y
Y
Y

Anonymity from Other Users
Y
Y
Y
Y
P
Y
I
Y
Y
Y

Records Epidemiological Data
N
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y

Uses Bluetooth Technology
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
I
Y

Uses GPS Location Information
N
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
I
Y

Records Contact Tracing Data
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
I
Y
Y
Y

I
Y
N
I
I
N
P
I
N
Y

Can be Used as a Digital Pass

Table 2: Comparison of CovidChain with other applications and schemes.

Has an Alert Mechanism
I
I
Y
I
I
N
I
Y
P
Y

Data Recorded in Distributed Ledger
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y

Allows Covid Status Verification
I
Y
N
Y
I
N
Y
I
I
Y

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

Prediction of Infection Risk

quarantine for people who are recorded as ‘+ive’ or ‘IQ’ in the blockchain. People
without a WorkSafeApp installed smart phone, may not be allowed to work or
move freely. To enforce such restrictions, several countries have adopted the
technique of stamping the hand of quarantined people. However, stamping has
its own limitations like the following.
• Stamp impression may fade away before the end of the quarantine period.
• Stamp impression may persist even after the quarantine period is over.
• People with stamp impression may have to face social stigma.
Another incentive for the Authority to set up such a system is generation of
epidemiological data that may help in finding novel facts and statistics for
containing the virus.
5. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the different features of the proposed framework
with reference to the applications and proposals discussed in Section 2. A summary of the comparison of our proposal ‘CovidChain’ with the other applications
and proposals developed in recent times is presented in Table 2.
In all the related works we have analysed in this area, there is anonymity
from other individuals, but very few have anonymity from the authority or
government. However, in order to gain confidence of the population so that
adoption rate of application increases, ensuring anonymity of individual from the
authority is of paramount important. CovidChain framework takes care of both
the aspects. In CovidChain, an individual gets to know only the covid status of
another individual and though the authority has access to epidemiological data,
it cannot trace it back to any particular individual.
In many of the works, epidemiological data is not collected. However, an
application like this is possible only if the authority mobilizes and invests a significant amount of public resources. In return, it is desirable that new knowledge is
derived about the spread pattern of the virus so that novel strategies for containing the virus may be planned. Therefore, it is important that epidemiological
data is collected taking care of the anonymity of individuals. In CovidChain,
there is provision for recording of epidemiological data that can only be accessed
by the authority; the general public cannot see the content as it is encrypted.
Apart form Internet connectivity, two technologies that are commonly used
in these applications are bluetooth and GPS information. While both these
technologies are crucial in exchanging information about the spread of the virus,
it is important that the information that are transmitted does not lead to
compromise in security and anonymity of an individual. Moreover, one should
not be able to transmit misleading information by impersonating as someone else.
In CovidChain, there is proper mechanism to authenticate an individual. Here,
GPS data related with an individual is never recorded in the blockchain. Only
GPS data related with a containment zone is stored, using which an individual
is alerted by measuring his her distance from a containment zone.
As evident from the table, the focus of most of the work in this area is on
contact tracing of people who might have come in close contact of an infected
individual. Such works are of great importance as it may contribute significantly
21

in identifying at-risk individuals who needs to be urgently quarantined and tested
for the virus. However, in addition to contact tracing, it is equally important
to ensure that quarantined individuals do not put other individuals at risk by
coming out in public. Since, the CovidChain framework allows individuals to
verify each other’s covid status, like a digital-pass it may help in restricting
quarantined individuals from accessing public facilities.
In most of the works, accumulated data about the spread of the virus is stored
in a centralized location under the control of a single authority. For such an
arrangement, it is difficult to gain public support and confidence due to peoples’
reservation regarding the privacy and safety of their data. It becomes difficult
to assure people that their data will not be used for any other purpose after this
crisis is over. Therefore, it becomes imperative that the structure and relevant
portion of the data is publicly made available, so that it is open for scrutiny
and audit. Such an approach not only helps in garnering public support but
also helps various sections of the society to remain well informed with reliable
data that they can use in their individual businesses. In CovidChain, blockchain
technology is used for record keeping. As a result, same copy of the ledger is
maintained at several locations with immutable data that can be accessed by all
sections of the society.
6. Conclusion
To contain the rapid spread of COVID-19, several smart phone based applications have been developed and proposed in recent times. Most of the solutions
are focused on contact tracing of people who might have come in close proximity
of an infected individual. However, in the current scenario when continued lock
downs have brought the economy of several countries to the edge, there is a
need to explore technical ways to facilitate both social distancing and economic
activities to go hand in hand. Off late, quite a few countries are contemplating
on allowing a section of their uninfected citizens to use smart phone applications as digital pass to join their respective work. However, success of such an
approach depend highly on people participation, which is possible only when
data are maintained transparently taking security and privacy concerns into
consideration. In this paper, we propose a framework that can be used by people
to protect themselves from infections while they are involved in their day to day
business activities. The framework uses blockchain technology for secure and
anonymous record keeping. The distributed nature of blockchain makes relevant
data accessible to all stakeholders for their use and public scrutiny.
References
[1] WHO, Coronavirus Prevention, Tr, World Health Organization (2020).
URL https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus/
[2] G. Gopinath, The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since the
Great Depression, Tr, International Monetary Fund (2020).
URL
https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-great-lockdownworst-economic-downturn-since-the-great-depression/

22

[3] K. T. Eames, M. J. Keeling, Contact tracing and disease control, in: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, Royal
Society of London, 2003, p. 2565–2571.
[4] D. Normile, Coronavirus cases have dropped sharply in South Korea. Whats
the secret to its success?, Tr, ScienceMag.org (2020).
URL
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/coronaviruscases-have-dropped-sharply-south-korea-whats-secret-itssuccess
[5] Whose coronavirus strategy worked best? Scientists hunt most effective
policies, accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01248-1
[6] China rolls out fresh data collection campaign to combat coronavirus,
accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-health-datacollection/china-rolls-out-fresh-data-collection-campaign-tocombat-coronavirus-idUSKCN20K0LW
[7] Tracetogether, accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/
[8] Hamagen: The Ministry of Health App for Fighting the Spread of
Coronavirus, accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL
https://govextra.gov.il/ministry-of-health/hamagenapp/download-en/
[9] Australian Government, Department of Health - COVIDSafe App, accessed:
2020-04-30.
URL
https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/
covidsafe-app
[10] Government of India - Aarogya Setu Mobile App, accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL https://www.mygov.in/aarogya-setu-app/
[11] Australia has COVIDSafe. Here is how other countries are using contact
tracing apps in the fight against coronavirus, accessed: 2020-04-30.
URL
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-04-28/coronaviruscovid19-contact-tracing-apps-around-the-world/12189438
[12] www.phbconsortium.org, accessed: 2020-04-23.
URL https://www.phbconsortium.org/
[13] www.virusblockchain.com, accessed: 2020-04-26.
URL
https://www.virusblockchain.com/coronavirus-blockchain.
html
[14] D. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, Blockchain and
AI-Based Solutions to Combat Coronavirus (COVID-19)-like Epidemics: A
Survey.
URL
https://www.techrxiv.org/articles/Blockchain_and_AIbased_Solutions_to_Combat_Coronavirus_COVID-19_-like_
Epidemics_A_Survey/12121962/1
23

[15] Slowing the spread of infectious diseases using crowdsourced data, accessed:
2020-04-28.
URL https://www.covid-watch.org/article
[16] A. De Carli, M. Franco, A. Gassmann, C. Killer, B. Rodrigues, E. Scheid,
D. Schoenbaechler, B. Stiller, WeTrace – A Privacy-preserving Mobile
COVID-19 Tracing Approach and Application (2020) 1–15arXiv:2004.
08812.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08812
[17] M. Torky, A. E. Hassanien, COVID-19 Blockchain Framework: Innovative
ApproacharXiv:2004.06081.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06081
[18] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, Tech. rep.,
Manubot (2019).
[19] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, N. Kumar, A survey on privacy protection in blockchain system, Journal of Network and Computer
Applications 126 (2019) 45–58.
[20] Sankar, Lakshmi Siva and Sindhu, M and Sethumadhavan, M, Survey
of consensus protocols on blockchain applications, in: 2017 4th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems
(ICACCS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[21] R. Guo, H. Shi, Q. Zhao, D. Zheng, Secure attribute-based signature scheme
with multiple authorities for blockchain in electronic health records systems,
IEEE access 6 (2018) 11676–11686.
[22] K. Toyoda, P. T. Mathiopoulos, I. Sasase, T. Ohtsuki, A novel blockchainbased product ownership management system (poms) for anti-counterfeits
in the post supply chain, IEEE Access 5 (2017) 17465–17477.
[23] X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, C. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat, L. Njilla, Provchain:
A blockchain-based data provenance architecture in cloud environment with
enhanced privacy and availability, in: 2017 17th IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID), IEEE, 2017,
pp. 468–477.
[24] A. Ouaddah, A. A. Elkalam, A. A. Ouahman, Towards a novel privacypreserving access control model based on blockchain technology in iot, in:
Europe and MENA Cooperation Advances in Information and Communication Technologies, Springer, 2017, pp. 523–533.
[25] M. Raikwar, S. Mazumdar, S. Ruj, S. S. Gupta, A. Chattopadhyay, K.Y. Lam, A blockchain framework for insurance processes, in: 2018 9th
IFIP International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security
(NTMS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–4.

24

