Simulating the spread of COVID-19 via a spatially-resolved
susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered-deceased (SEIRD) model with
heterogeneous diffusion
Alex Vigueriea , Guillermo Lorenzoe , Ferdinando Auricchioa , Davide Barolif , Thomas J.R. Hughese ,
Alessia Pattona , Alessandro Realia , Thomas E. Yankeelovd,e , Alessandro Venezianib,c,∗
a Dipartimento

di Ingegneria Civile ed Architettura, Università di Pavia, Via Ferrata 3, Pavia, PV 27100, Italy
of Mathematics, Emory University, 400 Dowman Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322 , USA
c Department of Computer Science, Emory University, 400 Dowman Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322 , USA
d Departments of Biomedical Engineering, Diagnostic Medicine, and Oncology, Livestrong Cancer Institutes, The
University of Texas at Austin, 107 W. Dean Keeton St., Austin, TX 78712, USA
e Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, 201 E. 24th Street,
Austin, TX 78712-1229, USA
f Aachen Institute for Advanced Study in Computational Engineering Science (AICES), RWTH Aachen University,
Schinkelstraße 2, 52062 Aachen, Germany

arXiv:2005.05320v1 [q-bio.PE] 11 May 2020

b Department

Abstract
We present an early version of a Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered-Deceased (SEIRD) mathematical model based on partial differential equations coupled with a heterogeneous diffusion model. The
model describes the spatio-temporal spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, and aims to capture dynamics
also based on human habits and geographical features. To test the model, we compare the outputs generated by a finite-element solver with measured data over the Italian region of Lombardy, which has been
heavily impacted by this crisis between February and April 2020. Our results show a strong qualitative
agreement between the simulated forecast of the spatio-temporal COVID-19 spread in Lombardy and
epidemiological data collected at the municipality level. Additional simulations exploring alternative
scenarios for the relaxation of lockdown restrictions suggest that reopening strategies should account for
local population densities and the specific dynamics of the contagion. Thus, we argue that data-driven
simulations of our model could ultimately inform health authorities to design effective pandemic-arresting
measures and anticipate the geographical allocation of crucial medical resources.
Keywords: Partial differential equations, mathematical epidemiology, compartmental models,
COVID-19, mathematical modeling, mathematical biology

1. Introduction
The outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 has caused widespread disruption throughout the world, leading
to substantial damage in terms of both human lives and economic cost. To arrest the spread of the
disease, governments have enacted unprecedented measures, including quarantines, curfews, lockdowns,
and suspension of travel. The wide-reaching ramifications of such measures, deemed by many experts
as necessary, are driven in part by a lack of clear information about the spatio-temporal spread of
COVID-19. Indeed, the absence of reliable data regarding disease transmission has necessarily led to
cautious responses. These recent events, which have required important decisions based on forecasts,
have demonstrated more than ever the need for reliable tools intended to model the spread of COVID-19
and other infectious diseases [15]. A particularly urgent need is the geo-localization of outbreaks, as this
may allow a more effective allocation of medical resources.
Several notable models of this outbreak have been presented; indeed, at the time of this writing
there are over 1,000 COVID-19 articles on MedRXiv, many of which address the modeling of disease
spread. Some models aim at offering specific evaluations of policy responses based on the implementation
∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: avenez2@emory.edu (Alessandro Veneziani)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

May 13, 2020

of different social distancing measures with combined compartmental and empirical approaches [5–7].
Rather than adopting a deterministic, mechanism-based model, Zhang et al. employed a statistical
approach to analyze the spatio-temporal dynamics of COVID-19 [17]. In Gatto et al. a combined
statistical and compartmental approach was employed, in which spatial dependence is addressed by
dividing the region of interest (Italy) into local communities connected by a network structure [6].
Here, we propose an alternative approach, using a partial-differential-equation (PDE) model designed
to capture the continuous spatio-temporal dynamics of COVID-19. We leverage a compartmental SEIRD
(susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered, deceased ) model that incorporates the spatial spread of the
disease with inhomogeneous diffusion terms [8, 9, 11, 12]. The rationale is that the diffusion operator,
properly tuned to account for local natural or social inhomogeneities (e.g., mountains, rivers, highways)
may describe the local movement of the different populations in a deterministic way, as the limit of a
Brownian motion [16]. This is critical to accurately account for information relevant to the outbreak
dynamics, such as local population densities, which vary in space and time. While a mathematical
description of non-local dynamics is still possible in terms of fractional differential operators [10], we
postpone this approach to a follow-up of the present work.
Hence, our modeling approach is more appropriate for the local dynamics on mesoscales, such as
regions within Italy. Thus, to evaluate the model efficacy, we run a simulation study of the COVID-19
outbreak in the Italian region of Lombardy, which has been severely impacted by the COVID-19 crisis
between February and April of 2020 and for which the necessary data was available. Also, the high
density of Lombardy’s population and transportation network is specifically suitable to our modeling
approach. Our simulations show a remarkable qualitative agreement with the reported epidemiological
data. We further explore various reopening scenarios, obtaining contrasting results that highlight the
importance of considering local population densities and contagion dynamics.
The paper outline is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the SEIRD model. Then, Section 3 addresses
the numerical implementation of our model and Section 4 presents the results of the simulation study in
Lombardy. We conclude in Section 5 by examining the shortcomings observed from our simulations and
discussing the additional work required to improve model accuracy and practical relevance.
2. Model
Let Ω ⊂ R2 be a simply connected domain of interest and [0, T ] a generic time interval. We denote
the densities of the susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered and deceased populations as s(x, t), e(x, t),
i(x, t), r(x, t), and d(x, t) respectively. Also, let n(x, t) denote the sum of the living population; i.e.,
n(x, t) = s(x, t) + e(x, t) + i(x, t) + r(x, t). Then, our model is comprised of the following system of
coupled PDEs over Ω × [0, T ]:
∂t s = αn − (1 − A/n) βi si − (1 − A/n) βe se − µsn + ∇ · (n νs ∇s)

(1)

∂t e = (1 − A/n) βi si + (1 − A/n) βe se − σe − φe e − µen + ∇ · (n νe ∇e)

(2)

∂t i = σe − φd i − φr i − µin + ∇ · (n νi ∇i)

(3)

∂t r = φr i + φe e − µrn + ∇ · (n νr ∇r)

(4)

∂t d = φd i,

(5)

where α is the birth rate, σ is the inverse of the incubation period, φe is the asymptomatic recovery rate,
φr is the infected recovery rate, φd is the infected mortality rate, βe is the asymptomatic contact rate,
βi is the symptomatic contact rate, µ is the general (non-COVID-19) mortality rate, and νs , νe , νi , and
νr are diffusion parameters respectively corresponding to the different population groups. Each of these
parameters may depend on time, space, or the model compartments. We also consider the Allee effect
(depensation), characterized by the parameter A. In this particular setting, the Allee effect serves to
model the tendency of outbreaks to cluster towards large population centers. Specific parameter selection
as well as initial and boundary conditions are discussed in Section 3.
Fig. 1 shows the dynamics of contagion between the compartments in our model. We remark that our
model accounts for asymptomatic transmission, which is considered a pivotal driver of the COVID-19
pandemic [3, 7, 14]. Eqs. (1)–(2) show that exposed asymptomatic patients may transmit COVID-19
to susceptible individuals at contact rate βe . This aligns with recent studies suggesting that patients
may transmit COVID-19 almost immediately after exposure [3, 7, 14]. Additionally, Eqns. (2) and (4)
involve a fraction φe of exposed patients that do not develop symptoms and move directly into the
2

Figure 1: Flow chart describing the dynamics of contagion between the population subgroups considered in our model

recovered population. We also assume that recovered patients are immune, as we do not include any
backflow from Eq. (4) to Eq. (1). (We note that this is a current source of debate, but consistent with
the existing literature for the time scale of months considered here [13]). The spatial movement over a
large population is described by an inhomogeneous random walk, which in the limit tends to a second
order differential operator [16]. The diffusivity coefficient is proportional to the population and can be
locally adjusted to incorporate geographical or human-related inhomogeneities [9].
3. Numerical implementation
We use a finite-element spatial discretization of the Italian region of Lombardy, consisting of an
unstructured mesh containing 30,407 triangles (a mesh convergence analysis was first performed; data
not shown). We use the backward-Euler method for time integration and solve each time step fully
implicitly with a Picard iteration for stability. The resulting linear systems are solved by the GMRES
algorithm using a Jacobi preconditioner.
Initial conditions for the subpopulations s, e, i, r, and d in the model are defined by means of Gaussian
circular functions centered at the latitude and longitudinal coordinates of each municipality with 10,000 or
more inhabitants, and weighted by the municipality’s population size and geographic area. These initial
conditions correspond to the data provided by Lab24 [1] from the date 27 February 2020, featuring a
severe outbreak in the province of Lodi, and moderate numbers of exposed and infected individuals in
the provinces of Bergamo, Brescia, and Cremona (see Fig. 2). We used homogeneous Neumann boundary
conditions for simplicity, mimicking a complete isolation of the region. We acknowledge that this is likely
unrealistic (e.g. if lockdown orders are relaxed) and will be considered in future efforts.
We assume σ=1/7 day−1 , φr =1/24 day−1 , φm =1/160 day−1 , and φe =1/6 day−1 . These values were
based on available data from the literature regarding the mortality, incubation period, and recovery
time for infected and asymptomatic patients [2, 3, 5, 7, 14]. Additionally, we do not consider births or
non-COVID-19 mortality (i.e., we set α = 0 and µ = 0, respectively), given the time scale of months in
our simulations.
The remainder of the model parameters are estimated in a two-step approach. First, we fit a 0D
SEIRD version of our model (i.e., consisting of a system of exclusively time-dependent ordinary differential equations and no diffusion terms) to match the temporal dynamics of the outbreak. Then, we
3

iteratively refined these values by means of recursive simulations using Eqs. (1)–(5) to match the spatiotemporal epidemiological data. We use the R2 coefficient and the root mean squared error (RMSE) to
assess the goodness-of-fit.
Given the uncertainty in the currently available COVID-19 data, we think that parameter estimation
aiming at matching the dynamics of all model compartments is not viable. As not every member of the
population is tested for infection and asymptomatic cases are known to exist in possibly large numbers, we
think that the available data of infected cases might lead to unrealistic parameter fitting. Conversely, the
data reported for COVID-19 deaths offer more reliability to calibrate the model parameters. Therefore,
we pursue quantitative agreement in the deceased compartment (i.e., d), and qualitative agreement for
the rest of the model subgroups (i.e., s,e,i,r). In Section 4, our results will focus on the model forecasts of
exposed and infected cases because these are key data for public health officials, e.g., in deciding resource
allocation and measures to prevent contagion.
We assume βi and βe to be equal, as precise estimates on the relative infectivity levels between
the symptomatic and asymptomatic pools are unclear [3]. We define βi,e with decreasing piecewise
constant values in time to model the escalation of the lockdown restrictions. Following the results
of parameter calibration, we initially set βi,e = 3.3 · 10−4 contacts−1 ·day−1 on 27 February 2020, reducing this to βi,e = 8.5 · 10−5 contacts·day−1 after the first lockdown measures on 9 March 2020,
to βi,e = 6.275 · 10−5 contacts−1 ·day−1 after the additional restrictions on 22 March 2020, and to
βi,e = 4.125 · 10−5 contacts−1 ·day−1 following the final restrictions on 28 March 2020. Similarly, we
assume νs,e,r =0.0435, 0.0198, 0.0090, and 0.0075 km2 · day−1 over the respective phases. The Allee term
A is set to 1,000 individuals·km−2 , and we fix νi = 1.0 · 10−4 km2 · day−1 throughout, assuming that
symptomatic individuals are largely immobile.
4. Results
4.1. Forecasting the spatio-temporal dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic in Lombardy
Fig. 2 shows the evolving spatial pattern of the COVID-19 outbreak in Lombardy, beginning with
exposure in Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona and Lodi. The contagion moves north from Lodi into Milan via
the southern suburbs and eventually reaches the city center. We note that although Lodi and Cremona
are the most affected areas at the onset of the outbreak, they quickly improve and avoid the explosive
growth found in Milan, Bergamo and Brescia. This is consistent with the reported data [1]. However,
we found Cremona to be somewhat underpredicted by our model. This might be attributable to the
presence of the neighboring city of Piacenza, which shares its metropolitan area with Cremona but is
not included in our simulations because it belongs to the adjacent region of Emilia-Romagna.
In Fig. 2, we demonstrate the remarkable qualitative agreement in the outbreak dynamics between
our model forecasts and data in the three main affected areas: Milan, Bergamo, and Brescia. The R2
between the model forecast and the data of infected cases are 0.997, 0.977, 0.976, and 0.998 for all
Lombardy, Bergamo, Brescia, and Milan, respectively. We observe that the outbreak emerges in Milan
later, where it grows more steadily, eventually becoming the most affected area in Lombardy. We also
note that the lockdowns appear to have effectively halted the spread in Bergamo and Brescia. These
restrictions notably reduce the spread in Milan, limiting the virus to a linear growth pattern, but fail
stop it.
We observe that our simulations predict a larger number of infections than the reported data. This
results from using the data for deceased cases for calibration, which is comparatively more accurate
than infections (see Section 3). We obtained R2 = 0.972 and range-normalized RMSE=7.6% for this
subgroup. Thus, the difference in predicted and measured infections suggests a lack in the reporting of
real cases, probably due to the deficiencies and difficulties of testing a significant sample of the whole
living population. However, we also remark that COVID-19 mortality data depend on the currently
unknown transmission rates, which emphasizes the importance of qualitative agreement to test novel
modeling approaches. To this end, we show that it is possible to rescale our simulation results to
accurately match the order of magnitude of the reported infected case data Fig. 2, though we emphasize
that this is purely for the purposes of visualization.
4.2. Exploring alternative reopening scenarios
We further use our model to assess four illustrative reopening scenarios over four months following
27 February 2020: maintenance of restrictions, relaxation of the lockdown everywhere on 3 May 2020
4

A

B

0.0

Milan

Lodi

Brescia

Cremona
Bergamo

E

D

C

3.8

7.5

11.2

15.0

0.0

3.8

11.2

15.0

Exposed/km2

22 March 2020 (Day 25)

0.0

3.8

7.5

11.2

15.0

Exposed/km2

27 February 2020 (Day 1)

5 March 2020 (Day 8)

9 March 2020 (Day 12)

G

Bergamo (simulation)
Bergamo (scaled)
Bergamo (data)

0.0

3.8

7.5

11.2

Cumulative infections

7.5

15.0

Exposed/km2

15.0

Exposed/km2

Milan (simulation)
Milan (scaled)
Milan (data)

3

2

1

0

16 April 2020 (Day 50)

Brescia (simulation)
Brescia (scaled)
Brescia (data)

104

4

3.8

11.2

Exposed/km2

F

0.0

7.5

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time (days)

Figure 2: Model forecast of COVID-19 spread in Lombardy. (A) Main areas affected by the pandemic in Lombardy. (B)
Initially, the main affected areas are Lodi and Cremona and, to lesser extent, Bergamo and Brescia.(C-E) Our model
predicts increasing exposures in Bergamo and Brescia. The outbreak in Lodi soon moves north into the Milan metro area,
where it further spreads despite the lockdown restrictions. (F) The model also predicts that governmental restrictions
eventually succeed in reducing the exposure to the disease, which is faster in Brescia and Bergamo than in Milan. (G)
Cumulative curves of infections according to reported data (dots) and simulations (dashed lines) for the three main areas
of contagion: Bergamo, Brescia, and Milan. The model has been calibrated to match the data reported for the deceased
subgroup, resulting in a forecast of a larger number of infections. To highlight the qualitative agreement of our simulations,
we also show the numerical results scaled to match the order of magnitude of the reported infectious data (solid lines).

under two different sets of assumptions, and a combination of maintenance of restrictions in Milan
and relaxation elsewhere in Lombardy. We still consider the changes in parameter values induced by
the sequential restrictions (see Section 3) and the lockdown relaxation is modeled by setting νs,e,r =
2.175 · 10−2 km2 · day−1 and βi,e = 9.0 · 10−5 contacts−1 ·day−1 (scenario A), and βi,e = 6.6 · 10−5
contacts−1 ·day−1 (scenario B). Scenario A is a pessimistic scenario, which assumes that the population
contact rate is similar to early-outbreak levels. Scenario B is more optimistic and assumes that the
generally greater public awareness of preventative measures (such as mask-wearing and social distancing)
translates to greater success in limiting contact, despite increased mobility.
Fig. 3 shows the resulting outbreak dynamics for these four reopening scenarios. Our simulations
suggest that relaxing the lockdown restrictions in the entire region may cause severe and rapid growth in
the Milan area. However, major urban zones far from Milan (e.g., Brescia and Bergamo) just experience
a marginal increase in growth and still show a favorable trend in time. Conversely, if we maintain the
lockdown restrictions in Milan and relax them elsewhere, the outbreak shows more favorable dynamics,
similar to those obtained for Brescia and Bergamo. Thus, our results suggest that maintenance of
lockdown measures in high-population, high-density areas like Milan may be necessary for longer times
to effectively arrest the spread of contagious diseases like COVID-19.
5. Discussion
We have introduced a compartmental PDE model describing spatio-temporal propagation of disease
contagion and applied it to the 2020 outbreak of COVID-19 in Lombardy specifically. Our simulations are
5

A

Global reopening A
Partial reopening

B

105

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0

10

Bergamo (GR A)
Bergamo (GR B)
Bergamo (L)

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Time (days)

Milan (GR A)
Milan (GR B)
Milan (L)

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

100 110 120

Brescia (GR A)
Brescia (GR B)
Brescia (L)

105

3.5

Cumulative infections

Cumulative infections

Global reopening B
Lockdown

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 110 120

Time (days)

Figure 3: Results of simulations over alternative reopening cases. (A) Cumulative infected cases in Lombardy over the
different reopening scenarios. Our simulations suggest that maintaining a strict lockdown outside of Milan offers little
benefit; however, keeping lockdown restriction in Milan may prevent explosive growth. (B) Comparison of the cumulative
infections in the three largest metropolitan areas (i.e., Bergamo, Brescia and Milan) for the global reopening A (GR A,
dashed lines), global reopening B (GR B, dotted lines), and maintenance of lockdown (L, solid lines).

intended to provide a proof-of-concept of the potential of PDEs for regional modeling of the outbreak.
Nonetheless, they show good qualitative agreement with reality, accurately predicting the outbreak
dynamics in different areas and recreating the transmission path in time and space. We then used
the model to examine some possible reopening scenarios, which suggested that reopening may be best
determined based on local population and contagion dynamics, and not by a one-size-fits-all approach.
Our model is in a very early stage, with ample room for improvement. We plan to consider
non-constant model parameters and adaptively update them according to measured data using dataassimilation procedures [4]. Indeed, as more reliable data becomes available, we can further extend
parameter calibration to fit data for additional model compartments other than the deceased subgroup.
Boundary conditions can also be defined in a more realistic manner, e.g., by including 0D SEIR models
describing the fluxes with respect to neighboring regions. Additionally, we used population-dependent
diffusion terms, but ideally these could also be affected by geographical features (e.g., rivers, mountains,
roadways, and railways) [9]. Non-local effects like the ones modeled by fractional operators can also
be included [10]. These considerations may be crucial whenever using the model in larger geographical
domains.
We would also like to extend our framework into more sophisticated compartmental models including,
e.g., hospitalizations, patients in intensive care units, or age and biological sex structures [6, 7]. This
would further increase the utility of the model, potentially helping decision-makers to determine the
allocation of resources among different areas. The present results clearly pinpoint the current standpoints
of virologists, emphasizing the need of restrictions. Finally, the socio-economical costs of lockdowns are
not included here, but could ultimately be incorporated in future quantitative analyses, e.g., aiming at
the comprehensive optimization of pandemic-arresting measures.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the work of Marco Demarziani, Luigi Greco, Isabella Atcha,
Kasey Cervantes, Sanne Glastra, Shreya Rana, Stefano Minelli, Chiara Macchello, Simona Petralia,
Anita de Franco, and Martina Moschella for their crucial help with data acquisition.
References
[1] Coronavirus in Italy: updated map and case count. https://lab24.ilsole24ore.com/coronavirus/en/. Accessed: 202004-26.
[2] J. Backer, D. Klinkeberg, and J. Wallinga. Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-CoV) infections among
travelers from Wuhan, China, 20-28 January 2020. Euro. Surveill., 25(5):2000062, 2020.
[3] Z. Du, X. Xu, Y. Wu, L. Wang, and Lauren A. Cowling, B. J .and Meyers. Serial interval of COVID-19 among publicly
reported confirmed cases. Emerg. Infect. Dis., 26(6), 2020.
[4] G. Evensen. The Ensemble Kalman Filter. Springer, 2007.

6

[5] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. G. Nedjati, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, P.Z. Cucunuba,
G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and
healthcare demand. Technical report, Imperial College London, 2020.
[6] M. Gatto, E. Bertuzzo, L. Mari, S. Miccoli, L. Carraro, R. Casagrandi, and A. Rinaldo. Spread and dynamics of the
COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2020.
[7] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, and M. Colaneri. Modelling the
COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nat. Med., pages 1–6, 2020.
[8] E.E. Holmes, M.A. Lewis, J.E. Banks, and R.R. Veit. Partial differential equations in ecology: spatial interactions
and population dynamics. Ecology, 75(1):17–29, 1994.
[9] J. Keller, L. Gerardo-Giorda, and A. Veneziani. Numerical simulation of a suceptible-exposed-infectious spacecontinuous model for the spread of rabies in raccoons across a realistic landscape . J. Biol. Dyn., 7(1):31–46, 2013.
[10] M.A. Khan and A. Atangana. Modeling the dynamics of novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) with fractional derivative.
Alex. Eng. J., 2020.
[11] M.Y. Kim. Galerkin methods for a model of population dynamics with nonlinear diffusion. Numer. Methods Partial
Differ. Equ., 12:59–73, 1996.
[12] M.Y. Kim. A numerical method for spatial diffusion in age-structured populations. Numer. Methods Partial Differ.
Equ., 12(2):253–273, 2010.
[13] L. Lan, D. Xu, and G. Ye. Postitive RT-PCR test results in patients recovered from COVID-19. JAMA, 323(15):1502–
1503, 2020.
[14] H. Nishiura, N.M. Linton, and A.R. Akhmetzhanov. Serial interval of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infections. Int.
J. Infect. Dis., 93:284–286, 2020.
[15] A. Remuzzi and G. Remuzzi. COVID-19 and Italy: what next? The Lancet, 2020.
[16] S. Salsa. Partial differential equations in action, from modeling to theory. Springer, 2009.
[17] X. Zhang, H. Rao, Y. Wu, Y. Huang, and H. Dai. Comparison of the spatiotemporal characteristics of the COVID-19
and SARS outbreaks in mainland China. medRxiv, 2020.

7

