arXiv:2005.12993v1 [q-bio.PE] 24 May 2020

Estimating the Number of Infected
Cases in COVID-19 Pandemic
Donghui Yan† , Ying Xu‡ , Pei Wang¶
†

Department of Mathematics and Program in Data Science
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, MA 02747
‡
Indigo Agriculture Inc, Boston, MA
¶
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NYC, NY
May 28, 2020
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused major disturbance to human life.
An important reason behind the widespread social anxiety is the huge
uncertainty about the pandemic. One major uncertainty is how many or
what percentage of people have been infected? There are published and
frequently updated data on various statistics of the pandemic, at local,
country or global level. However, due to various reasons, many cases
were not included in those reported numbers. We propose a structured
approach for the estimation of the number of unreported cases, where we
distinguish cases that arrive late in the reported numbers and those who
had mild or no symptoms and thus were not captured by any medical
system at all. We use post-report data for the estimation of the former
and population matching to the latter. We estimate that the reported
number of infected cases in the US should be corrected by multiplying a
factor of 220.54% as of Apr 20, 2020. The infection ratio out of the US
population is estimated to be 0.53%, implying a case mortality rate at
2.85% which is close to the 3.4% suggested by the WHO.

1

Introduction

With the quick spread at the global scale, the COVID-19 pandemic has become
one of the most tragic disasters in human history, with a worldwide confirmed
cases of 2.74 million and death toll at 192k as of April 24, 2020. Rising trend
of these numbers still remains in multiple countries right now. The most risky
aspects about the coronavirus are the long incubation period and the existence
of a large number of asymptomatic cases. These cause a substantial proportion of infected cases not tracked by medical systems. For better policy making
and disease control, as well as to reduce the widespread speculations among the
public about the extent of the disease spread, it is of significant interest to give
an estimate on the missing counts. Specifically, when the pandemic gradually
becomes under control, the world is considering the resume of normal business.
1

This requires a prudent assessment of the potential risk. Inevitably, such an
assessment would involve the estimation of the number of asymptomatic cases
when such cases are still active. However, the task of estimating the number
of those undocumented cases is very challenging, exactly because of the long
incubation period and those asymptomatic cases. In this work, we will present
a structured approach for such an estimation task and give an approximate estimate at the US national and state level.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we will
describe our approach. This is followed by a presentation of results in Section 3.
Finally we conclude in Section 4.

2

A structured approach

Statistically, the estimation of the number of unreported cases is related to the
problem of inference with missing data [5] or censored data [2]. However, certain characteristics of the coronavirus epidemiology allow us to take a different
approach. We adopt a structured approach, inspired by the diagnostic analysis
of remote sensing studies [8] where the errors in the land use classification were
decomposed according to their sources. Our approach is illustrated by Figure 1.
The missing counts in the reported numbers come from two sources. One is
those cases for which, at the report date, the symptoms were not severe enough
and the affected individuals would not test for infection; however, they would
eventually visit some medical facility and test for potential coronavirus infection. We call such cases the type I cases, and the waiting period before the onset
is termed as the incubation (or dormant) period. This is illustrated as the filled
blue bars in Figure 1. At the time of report, all such cases are still in dormant
status thus are missing in the reported number.

Figure 1: Time train of the progression of infection with COVID-19. Blue or
non-filled bars indicate type I or II cases, D1 , ..., D7 are the number of reported
cases during the 1th , 2nd , ..., and 7th day past the original report date.
The second source of unreported cases are those who were infected but are either
not aware of it or with symptoms too light to visit the medical facility, and later
on recovered without any particular medical treatments. We call such cases the
type II cases. The type II cases never show up in any reported numbers, thus
leaving too little clue for estimation. But we cannot overlook such cases, be2

cause the number of such cases could be potentially large and such individuals
form an important infecting source. For the rest of this section, we will describe
our method for the estimation of each of the two cases.

2.1

Estimating the number of type I cases

The estimation of the number of type I cases is facilitated by a crucial observation. Though not included in the reported number while in the dormant period,
such cases would eventually be reported when the symptoms become so severe
that the individuals have to seek medical treatments. By that time, those previously missed cases at the original report date (which was a few days ago) would
be counted towards infected cases at some later report dates (though one would
not know at which particular report date). Such numbers should be included
at the original report date but surface only several days later; for this reason
we call them delayed counts. If there is a way to estimate such delayed counts
or their total, then one can estimate the number of type I cases for the original
report date.
It will be instructive to consider a simple ideal case where all infected cases
have a dormant period of 7 days. In this ideal case, the numbers D1 , D2 , ..., D6
in Figure 1 are exactly the number of cases who were at their 6th , 5th , ..., 1st
day of infection, respectively, when counted at the original report date. If we
assume that the incubation period is 7 days, then these are all the number of
type I cases missed at the original report date but reflected perfectly later in the
number of newly reported cases during the 6 days time window following the
original report date. So the total number of type
P6 I cases at the original report
date can be calculated by their sum, D̂type1 = i=1 Di .
The reality is, however, complicated. First, the length of the dormant period
varies for individual cases. Also, during the post-report time window, newly
infected cases may arise and be reported. Thus the number of newly reported
cases at any particular day within this time window might be mixed, in the
sense that it would include both cases that are infected both before (but were
in dormant period) and after the report date. The former case will not pose a
problem as anyway such cases would be counted towards D̂type1 though cases
infected at the same day may now contribute to different Di ’s. The latter case
is undesirable but could be corrected, to a certain extent, by the truncating
effect when we only sum up the counts in the post-report time window up to a
length of T days. That is, those cases with a dormant period extending more
than T days post-report will be truncated and not included in D̂type1 , with the
total count of such truncated cases being ‘cancelled out’ by the newly infected
cases within the post-report time window of a properly chosen length T . This
leads to an estimate for the number of type I cases as
D̂type1 =

T
X

Di ,

1

where Di are now the number of cases reported at the ith day after the original
report date. We can let T take a value around or slightly larger than the mean
of the incubation periods. In the appendix, we give a justification on why our
3

estimate, D̂type1 , would be a reasonable one.

40
30
20

Estimated type I ratio

6
4

US6
US7

0

0

2

Estimated type I ratio

8

CT6
CT7
MA6
MA7

10

10

If we can keep track of the delayed estimate D̂type1 through time, then we
can get a time series which, upon smoothing, could be used to estimate the
current missing type I counts. For such an estimation to be feasible, we have
two requirements. One is that the daily reported counts through time would
not change too abruptly. Thus, our approach would not work well when the
infection trend still rises very rapidly. During such a period, the safest strategy
might be to strictly enforce social distancing. But as the overall situation is
gradually under control, our estimation would apply. The other is knowledge
of the duration of the incubation period. According to many studies [3, 1, 4],
the incubation periods has a median of around 4-7 days. While further studies
or data analysis is required to confirm this, we take T = 7 in our estimation.
Additionally, it should be cautious that our estimation is valid assuming that
the test of coronavirus is sufficiently carried out for the population of interest;
insufficient test would render an underestimate of the number of type I cases.

0

10

20

30

40

0

Days since Mar 8, 2020

10

20

30

40

Days since 2020−03−08

Figure 2: Ratio of unreported cases w.r.t. reported cases for CT, MA and the
US, where ‘6’ and ‘7’ in the legend are the values of T used, respectively.
In Figure 2, we plot the ratio of estimated type I cases w.r.t. the reported number of cases for Connecticut (CT) and Massachusetts (MA) since Mar 8, 2020.
These two states were chosen as they are similar in many aspects, so we expect
their ratio of type I cases out of reported cases would be similar. In Figure 2,
there is an initial difference in ratios of type I cases in these two states, which
we attribute to the late response and the small number of cases tested in CT.
Later, these two states exhibit strikingly similar trend, which is quite xpected.
We also explore the effect of using different values of T where 6 and 7 are used.
Again, initially the resulting estimation are fairly different, which indicates the
rapid spread of coronavirus and the rapid rise of infected cases. Gradually, the
difference in the resulting estimations diminish, which implies that the choice of
T = 7 leads to a fairly stable estimation at late stages of disease spread. Similar
4

observation can be made for the estimation of type I cases in US. This is shown
in the right panel of Figure 2.

2.2

Estimating the number of type II cases

The estimation of the number of type II cases is extremely challenging, as there
is barely anything observable. Our main strategy in the estimation is based on
the matching of population statistics—using what we see well to infer what is
missing. When we group reported infection cases, we notice a significant discrepancy in the count statistics by age groups between reported cases and the
US population. We expect that, while people in most age groups in the popuAge groups

0-19

20-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

85+

US population
Reported cases
Corrected cases

25.06
5.00
46.47

33.27
29.00
61.70

12.73
18.00
23.61

12.92
18.00
23.96

9.32
17.00
17.00

4.70
9.00
9.00

2.00
6.00
6.00

Table 1: Percentages by age groups in the US population (2020) and in the
reported infection cases. Note numbers in the bottom row are not normalized to
sum up to 1.
lation have a similar chance of being infected, those type II cases occur much
more often in age groups 20-64 but rarely for people of age 65+. This is because
people at age over 65 typically have a relatively weaker immune system along
with some pre-existing medical conditions. Once they are infected with coronavirus, a slight symptom would prompt them to seek medical treatments. As a
result, such cases are very likely to be discovered. Thus reported counts about
such age groups would be more accurate and can serve as a reference to correct
counts for other age groups. On the contrary, cases for the 20-64 age group are
easy to be overlooked or not noticed, unless their status is deteriorated. The
reported counts for these age groups thus require a correction (termed as age
correction). The age group of 85+ is more vulnerable to infections, as they
typically live in the senior centers or extended-care nursing facilities which, as a
matter of fact, have a very high risk of infection. The case statistics for this age
group would be very thorough, but many in this age group get infected simply
because they share a very confined living space with many other equally vulnerable seniors, and the infection of any one (including staff) in a senior center will
quickly spread to the rest (To certain extent, one may think of this as a party
of many people during COVID-19). So statistics in this age group would not be
a reliable reference for population match, since people in other age groups have
a very different mobility pattern (the infants interact with the world through
their parents thus have a chance of infection not so different from the general
population).
The main assumption we use for population match is that all the people, with
an age in the range 0-84, have similar chance of being infected. As a result,
the counts at different age groups would be proportional to their respective
percentage in the population; we call such an approach population matching.
Let rpop and rcase be the proportions of the reference group in the population
5

and in the reported cases, and xpop and xcorrected be the the respective proportions for the target group, respectively. Then rcase : rpop = xcorrected : xpop ,
and the corrected percentage in the infected cases for the target group can be
calculated accordingly. As we argue before, the case statistics for age groups
65-74 and 75-84 are reliable, but those for ages 0-64 are incomplete and consist of substantial missing data, and we will use the reliable portion of the
data to infer or correct statistics about the incomplete part of the data. A
simple calculation reveals that age groups, 65-74 and 75-84, according to Table 1, have a similar ratio of cases percentage: population percentage, i.e.,
9.00 : 4.70 ≈ 17.00 : 9.32. Thus, we can pool counts from these two groups
and obtain rcase : rpop = (9.00 + 17.00)/(4.70 + 9.32) = 1.8544. This yields the
corrected ratio as the bottom row of Table 1. Adding up numbers in the bottom row gives a total of 187.94%, implying that we should expand the reported
counts by 87.94% in order for the reported case counts to match the population statistics across age groups. This gives the ratio of type II cases over the
reported cases.
An interesting question is, will estimated counts of type II overlap with that
for type I cases? We claim that this will not, at least not significantly, so the
addition of estimated counts for type I and II cases is valid. The reason is that,
type I cases still contribute to the reported numbers, at a delayed time though.
These delayed cases can be thought of as a sample from the reported cases (assuming that the reported cases have a stable proportion when breakdown by
age groups). The inclusion of type I cases will not change the age-breakdown
proportions. Thus, after the inclusion of type I cases, we still have the same
age-breakdown proportions and thus require an age correction.

NE
ND

0.6

OH

SD

DE
RI

0.4

CA

MA
AZ

TX

CT

0.2

Estimated type I ratio

0.8

IA

NJ

AL GA

UT
CO

PA

KS

ME

MS

MO OK
MI

AK
VT MT LA

ID
HI

NM

KY
NC

IN

FL
WA

MN

NV

SC TN WI
OR
WY

0.0

NY

AR

MD VA
WV
IL
NH

Figure 3: Ratio of type I cases w.r.t. reported cases for each of the 50 states in
US on Apr 20, 2020.

6

3

Results

We apply our approach to each of the 50 states and the US. The data are available from Wikipedia [7]. Due to the large variation of the population at different
states, we calculate the ratio of missing cases out of the number of reported cases
for individual states. The ratio for type I cases is shown in Figure 3. Due to
the lack of reported case data for individual states by age groups, we use the
overall estimate, which is 87.94% according to discussions in Section 2.2, for the
ratio of type II cases for all the states. The overall ratio for type I cases for
the US is estimated to be 32.60%. Combining with the 87.94% ratio for type II
cases, this gives an estimated ratio of missing cases versus the reported number
at 120.54%. In other words, the reported number should multiply by a factor
of 220.54% to reflect the true number of infected cases.
With the unreported numbers estimated, we can estimate the infection ratio,
defined as the ratio of the number of infected cases out of the population. The
overall infection ratio of the US is estimated to be 0.53%, or 1.75 million, as
of Apr 20, 2020. If we use the associated death toll at about 50k, then the
case mortality rate is calculated as 2.85%, which is close to the WHO suggested
estimation of 3.4% [6]. The infection ratio for individual states are visualized
as heatmap in Figure 4. Heavily hit states are NY, NJ, CT, RI, MA, and LA
with infection ratio estimated at 2.61%, 2.11%, 1.22%, 1.15%, 1.31% and 1.04%,
respectively, as of Apr 20, 2020. The trend of infection ratio and cases by time
for these states is shown in Figure 5. It can be seen that, except LA, the infection ratio for all other five states are still rapidly increasing. NJ shows a similar
growing pattern as NY, while the three New England states, CT, RI and MA,
are similar.

0.0
WA

ND

MT

MN

OR

ME

WI

SD

ID

MI

WY
IA

NE
NV

UT

IL
CO

KS

IN

MO

OK
NM

PA

OH

WV
VA

KY

CA
AZ

NY

TN

SC
MS AL

0.5

1.0

NJ
MDDE
DC
1.5

NC

AR

TX

VTNH
MA
CTRI

GA

2.0

LA
FL

2.5

3.0

Percent of population infected by state

Figure 4: Heatmap of infection ratio for individual states as of Apr 20, 2020.

7

500
400
300
200

Estimated number of cases (k)

NY
NJ
CT
MA
RI
LA

0

100

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Estimated infection ratio (%)

NY
NJ
CT
MA
RI
LA

0

10

20

30

40

0

Days since Mar 9, 2020

10

20

30

40

Days since Mar 9, 2020

Figure 5: Trend of estimated infection ratio and infected cases for NY, NJ, CT,
MA, RI, and LA since Mar 9, 2020.

4

Conclusions

We have proposed a structured approach for the estimation the number of infected cases not included in the reported number at a given date. We distinguish
two types of ‘missing’ cases, those cases which were infected but are still during the dormant period and those asymptomatic cases which later self-recover
without medical treatments. The number of these two types of cases are estimated by accumulating reported counts within a properly chosen post-report
time window and by population matching. The reported number, as of Apr
20, 2020, of infected cases in US should be corrected by multiplying a factor of
220.54%. The overall infection ratio of the US is estimated to be 0.53%, with
a case mortality rate of 2.85% which is close to the recommended 3.4% by WHO.
Our estimation can potentially be used for risk assessment. The infant age
group may worth further consideration as people in this group are much less
risky than other age groups as they interact with the rest of the world through
their parents, so the number of cases for this group may need to adjust accordingly to reflect the true risk.

Appendix
In this appendix, we will give a justification on our estimation algorithm. We
show that the error between our estimate, D̂type1 , of the number of type I cases
and its actual value Dtype1 is small in expectation under reasonable assumptions
about the distribution of the incubation periods.
Denote by random variable X the length of the incubation period, and for
simplicity we further assume that X ≥ 0 takes integer values. Let N−1 , N−2 , ...
8

denote the number of cases that were infected one day, two days and so on before
the report date (for which we use N0 ). Here we limit to type I cases as we can
conveniently assume that type II cases have an infinite incubation period. Then
the expected number of cases that are discovered during the time window of T
days following the original report date is calculated as
Da =

∞
X

EN−i · P (i + 1 ≤ X < i + T ).

(1)

i=0

For simplicity, we would assume that all the EN−i ’s take a constant value N . We
feel that this should not be too unrealistic as we would expect that the number
of newly infected cases per day do not vary too much when the pandemic reaches
a stable stage (those at the very far distant past would be small, but they carry a
very small fraction of the total number so could be ignored). Also, we abuse the
notation a bit by using D. ’s to also indicate the expected value of the associated
random variable; the exact meaning will be determined by the context. Then
Equation (1) can be rewritten as
Da

= (T − 1) · N − N

T
−1
X

(T − i) · P (i − 1 ≤ X < i).

i=1

Under the same assumption, the number of new cases generated during the
post-report time window of length T days is
Dnew

=

T
X

ENi · P (X < T + 1 − i)

i=1

=

N

T
X

(T + 1 − i) · P (i − 1 ≤ X < i)

i=1

=

N

T
−1
X

(T − i) · P (i − 1 ≤ X < i) + N · P (X < T )

i=1

Thus the total number of reported cases during the T days post-report time
window is calculated as
Da + Dnew = (T − 1) · N + N · P (X ≤ T ) = T N − N · P (X > T ).
Assuming that random variable X has a finite mean, then we have
P (X > T ) ≤ EX/T , µ/T,
implying that the estimated number of type I cases satisfies
T N ≥ D̂type1 = Da + Dnew ≥ T N − N · µ/T.
The actual number of cases that have accumulated but not being discovered
before the report date consists of missing cases during the previous T days and
those even earlier cases, which has an expected value
Dtype1 =

∞
X

EN−i · P (X ≥ i + 1) = N

∞
X
i=0

i=0

9

P (X ≥ i) = N · EX , µN.

(2)

(2) indicates that the mean number of type I cases equals the product of the
mean daily infected cases of type I and the mean length of the incubation period,
which is consistent with the ideal case discussed in Section 2.1. Let T = (1+ǫ)µ,
then we have the following error bound for the estimated number of cases of
type I
|D̂type1 − Dtype1 | ≤ µN · max(ǫ, |ǫ − 1/T |).
It follows that the relative error of the estimate satisfies
|D̂type1 − Dtype1 |
≤ max(ǫ, |ǫ − 1/T |) = max(ǫ, |ǫ − 1/((1 + ǫ)µ)|).
Dtype1
For a given µ, one can pick ǫ to optimize the above bound. For example, when
µ = 7, one can take ǫ = 0.07 to achieve a relative error bound of about 7%.

References
[1] J. A. Backer, D. Klinkenberg, and J. Wallinga.
Incubation period
of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) infections among travellers from
wuhan, china, 2028 january 2020. Eurosurveillance (doi: 10.2807/15607917.ES.2020.25.5.2000062), 25(5), 2020.
[2] E. L. Kaplan and P. Meier. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete
observations. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 53(282):457–
481, 1958.
[3] S. A. Lauer, K. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. Meredith, A. S.
Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler. The incubation period of coronavirus
disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: Estimation
and application. Annals of Internal Medicine (doi:10.7326/M20-0504), 2020.
[4] N. M. Linton, T. Kobayashi, Y. Yang, K. Hayashi, A. R. Akhmetzhanov,
S. Jung, B. Yuan, R. Kinoshita, and H. Nishiura. Incubation period and
other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections
with right truncation: A statistical analysis of publicly available case data.
Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(2):538, 2020.
[5] R. J. Little and D. Rubin. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. Wiley,
2002.
[6] World Health Organization. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Mortality Rate, 2020.
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-death-rate/.
[7] Wikipedia.
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, 2020.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19 pandemic in the United States.
[8] D. Yan, C. Li, N. Cong, L. Yu, and P. Gong. A structured approach to the
analysis of remote sensing images. International Journal of Remote Sensing,
40(20):7874–7897, 2019.

10

