Reaction-diffusion spatial modeling of COVID-19: Greece and Andalusia as case examples
P. G. Kevrekidis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003-4515, USA and
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

J. Cuevas-Maraver
Grupo de Fı́sica No Lineal, Departamento de Fı́sica Aplicada I,
Universidad de Sevilla. Escuela Politécnica Superior, C/ Virgen de Africa, 7, 41011-Sevilla, Spain and
Instituto de Matemáticas de la Universidad de Sevilla (IMUS). Edificio Celestino Mutis. Avda. Reina Mercedes s/n,
41012-Sevilla, Spain, Avda Reina Mercedes s/n, E-41012 Sevilla, Spain

arXiv:2005.04527v3 [q-bio.PE] 14 Apr 2021

Y. Drossinos
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, I-21027 Ispra (VA), Italy

Z. Rapti
Department of Mathematics and Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

G.A. Kevrekidis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003-4515, USA
(Dated: April 16, 2021)
We examine the spatial modeling of the outbreak of COVID-19 in two regions:the autonomous community of
Andalusia in Spain and the mainland of Greece. We start with a zero-dimensional (ODE-level) compartmental
epidemiological model consisting of Susceptible, Exposed, Asymptomatic, (symptomatically) Infected, Hospitalized, Recovered, and deceased populations (SEAIHR model). We emphasize the importance of the viral
latent period (reflected in the exposed population) and the key role of an asymptomatic population. We optimize
model parameters for both regions by comparing predictions to the cumulative number of infected and total
number of deaths, the reported data we found to be most reliable, via minimizing the `2 norm of the difference
between predictions and observed data. We consider the sensitivity of model predictions on reasonable variations of model parameters and initial conditions, and we address issues of parameter identifiability. We model
both the pre-quarantine and post-quarantine evolution of the epidemic by a time-dependent change of the viral
transmission rates that arises in response to containment measures. Subsequently, a spatially distributed version
of the 0D model in the form of reaction-diffusion equations is developed. We consider that, after an initial
localized seeding of the infection, its spread is governed by the diffusion (and 0D model “reactions”) of the
asymptomatic and symptomatically infected populations,which decrease with the imposed restrictive measures.
We inserted the maps of the two regions, and we imported population-density data into the finite-element software package COMSOL Multiphysicsr , which was subsequently used to solve numerically the model PDEs.
Upon discussing how to adapt the 0D model to this spatial setting, we show that these models bear significant
potential towards capturing both the well-mixed, zero-dimensional description and the spatial expansion of the
pandemic in the two regions. Veins of potential refinement of the model assumptions towards future work are
also explored.

I.

THE LAY OF THE LAND

Since December 2019, most countries around the globe have been grappling with how to best contain the COVID-19 pandemic. This emerging infectious disease is caused by the virus SARS-CoV-2, which belongs to the same family (Coronaviridae)
as the viruses responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) identified in 2002 in China [1] and the Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) that originated in Saudi Arabia a decade later [2]. As of this writing (March 15, 2021), the
number of confirmed infections throughout the world has already eclipsed 120 million individuals with well over 2.5 million
deaths [3], a number whose rate of increase has subsided and subsequently increased as the first wave of infections (pre summer
2020) gave way to the second wave (fall 2020). A third wave in late winter/spring is feared. The race to identify a suitable
vaccine started almost contemporaneously with the appearance of the virus, and progressed very rapidly, despite subsequent
delays in manufacturing and distributing it [4]. Numerous vaccines have been developed, some approved for administration to
patients (possibly segregated in age groups) by national authorities, others are under testing or under development. Naturally, the
vaccination of whole populations will take time and may not be relevant in the short term. Given the time needed to develop and
deploy the distribution of vaccines, the so-called “non-therapeutic interventions” [5, 6] have been brought to bear (often strictly
so) during the earlier and even during the ongoing wave of the pandemic. Most notable among them are social distancing, selfquarantining (when infected), lockdown and severely restricted human mobility, limits on the number of persons in gatherings,
and the use of personal protective equipment (various forms of face masks) to mitigate the growth of the number of infections.

2
In an unprecedented for at least a two-generation setting, more than half of the planet’s population has been under the effect of
different levels of such measures.
The urgency of this ongoing and rapidly developing global pandemic has redirected a significant volume of the research community’s efforts in this particular direction. For biologists/clinicians, as well as for computational physicists/chemists, a race
against time is underway to understand the binding properties of the virus and its hacking of the RNA, the action of its spike
protein and how to inactivate it via suitable antibody mechanisms [7]. Aerosol scientists and virologists are trying to understand the role of expelled, virus-loaded respiratory droplets in the transmission of the virus, and the importance of the aerosol
transmission mode, as opposed to direct or indirect contact transmission [8], as well as the importance of forced ventilation and
air purification in indoor environments. At the same time, a clear sense of urgent need has emerged for mathematicians and
epidemiologists to consider the spreading of the virus over the population. The focal points of such studies have been extremely
diverse: from isolated (or nearly isolated) entities such as restaurants [9] small villages and cruise ships [10], and cities [11],
to states/provinces [12–14], and a large number of countries [15–21], including recently Greece [22], aside of course from the
prototypical examples of Wuhan, China [23, 24], as well as some of the hard-hit Italian regions such as Lombardy [25]. Indeed, as of the present writing there are around 3,700 articles in arXiv, and 14,000 in medRxiv and bioRxiv centered around the
theme of COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2 alone, a rather staggering number given the eleven months since the disease being declared
a pandemic. To mention just a few of these recent works, an inspiring collection of viewpoints regarding recent developments
and lingering challenges in the mathematical modeling of COVID-19 is given in [26]. Data quality and availability, rare but
significant superspreading events, the role of human behavior and host heterogeneity are just a few of the hindrances faced by
modelers. An evaluation of various different modeling approaches, including the SIR and SEIR epidemic models, as well as
high-dimensional ones, like the one presented in the present work, is performed in [27]. In [28], care has been taken to address
the issue of model limitations due to the amount and quality of data and uncertainty regarding the fraction of asymptomatic
infections and their role in spreading the disease. Most modeling reported in these works highlights the fact that all models are
imperfect, but some are still useful [29].
Within this extremely diverse and rapidly evolving landscape, including several variants of the virus [30], our team has
identified a niche of significant deficiency in the current level of modeling. The vast majority of the models developed essentially
ignores the spatial element, considering the country in the form of a well-mixed population that can be addressed at the level
of ordinary differential equations of the extremely widely used form of SIR models and multi-component, as well as multiage group generalizations thereof. Readable and informative reviews of the mathematics of infectious diseases and epidemics
include the works in [31]. While spatial generalizations of such SIR models do exist [32, 33], they are often used, but not
exclusively, at the level of interesting models of pattern formation, rather than that of realistic population level settings. In
fact, spatial extensions of SIR models have been extensively discussed, see for example [34]. They are typically used to model
vector-borne diseases whose vectors diffuse, as for example mosquitoes that transmit malaria [35]. In the case of SARS-CoV-2
the agents that transport the virus are the respiratory droplets [36] that are closely connected, both in time and space, to the
infectious individuals. The behavior of these droplets on the large spatial scales considered here (scales associated with regions)
is subsumed to the motion of individuals that we will consider to be diffusive. This modeling of individual mobility leads to a
set of reaction-diffusion PDEs that may be used to model the spatio-temporal evolution of the pandemic, an approach that we
follow in this work. A similar approach , which considers two interacting and isotropically diffusing populations (susceptible and
infected), was adopted by [37] to model the spreading of the mid fourteen century Black Death Plague in Europe, with particular
interest in the propagation velocity of one-dimensional traveling waves. Admittedly, the approximation of human mobility as
diffusive (and isotropic) neglects that human mobility is partially predictable and directed, as suggested by numerous recent
studies, for example Ref. [38]. Directed motion can be incorporated in our model via a convection term, a term that in this
initial work we neglect. The work presented herein provides the necessary framework to include it, as well as other possible
extensions like random but long-range effects (emulating travel), or anisotropic diffusion. We are not aware of any similar
PDE simulations of the spreading of an epidemic at the large scales (country-wide) considered here (but see [39, 40] for two
PDE-based studies, the former applied to France and the latter to Lombardy). Hence, the limitations and potentialities of
this approach have not been properly assessed. As we argue, such simulations entail severe computational challenges, e.g., a
numerical simulation on the spatial grid of an entire country with the population density appropriately gridded, and they avail
of novel developments in Geographic Information Systems to import the region’s geometry and to properly populate it by the
population density. Moreover, current data in Greece and in Andalusia, the regions we explore, do not appear in any source that
we are aware of in a spatially distributed form at the level and scales presented herein. The model we present argues, for the first
time, that it is relevant, interesting and computationally accessible to simulate models at the level of a country, and thus to obtain
data to compare at an adequately spatially resolved level. It is thus a prompt for researchers on the epidemiological side (or
cross-disciplinary collaborations of these with mathematical/physical scientists) to seek to produce such data. More importantly,
however, it sets the stage for a more refined, and more realistic, description of the spatio-temporal evolution of a disease in terms
of convection-reaction-diffusion PDE models.
Our aim is to enable a broad scale of spatial modeling, at the same time leveraging the unprecedented availability of data about
this pandemic and the spatial connectivities/mobility data of the human population. The approach that one can select along this
niche of spatial resolution of the pandemic is, indeed, multifold. On the one hand, one can aim to formulate a PDE model

3
incorporating the ingredients of a generalized SIR formulation. At the same time, a complementary viewpoint that is far less
computationally expensive but possibly quite informative in its own right is a metapopulation network approach in the spirit of
the work of [41]. While networks and metapopulation studies, see for example [21, 42, 43], are useful in attempting to examine
small numbers of groups of individuals, it is clear that these cannot properly capture the scale of an entire country. The number of
nodes would simply be too huge and it would not be possible to capture the tremendous variations of population-density scales.
Such models could be well suited to study propagation of waves of an epidemic between metropolitan centers, but they surely
are not well suited to capture different and much smaller scales (at least not without significant adaptations). For instance, they
cannot capture dynamics that happens within a node (unless they have further structure) and they surely cannot capture dynamics
that (spatially) happens in-between nodes. The interest in such models is to consider transport along links if one is interested
in long-range transport of a virus by, e.g., airline travel or along highways. Here, we seed viral hotspots and explore how the
virus will spread locally thereafter. Our infection initialization by hotspots aims to emulate the initial long-range transport of
infectious individuals, and hence it becomes an indirect way to incorporate mobility on a network in the absence of convection.
In that sense, our technique too requires significant adaptations but for a different reason: this is in order to properly capture
mobility of the population that induces the spreading of a pandemic.
Moreover, one can envision techniques (such as the equation-free modeling framework [44]) that may enable the cross-linking
of the above two approaches, e.g., the use of metapopulation network systems to perform PDE-level tasks. Lastly, there exist
isolated examples of models that take into account the structure of different types of networks. A particularly nice example in
this direction is the work of [45], which leverages the availability of Enron, Facebook and social graphs in the form of adjacency
matrix patterns that can be used to represent the connectivity within a country’s network.
With these considerations in mind, we develop an expanded variant of the classical SIR model (ODE model) and then focus on
its PDE spatio-temporal generalization. We incorporate particularities of this virus, such as its latent period, i.e., that individuals
exposed to the virus may be infected but not infectious during the latent period, and the significant fraction of infected and
infectious individuals that do not develop symptoms. In Section II we present the spatial model, analyze first its ODE variant
that will be used to perform appropriate optimization of its parameters in the cases of the country of Greece (but without the
islands, i.e., the mainland of Greece), and the Spanish autonomous community of Andalusia. While our study has focused on
both regions, for practical purposes, we opted to relegate the presentation and discussion of our results for Greece to an Appendix.
This renders the presentation of our model, our approach, and methodology easier to follow, and more focused. The selection
of two seemingly unrelated regions may appear a bit disparate, yet we argue these to be particularly interesting examples.
Aside from their intrinsic interest to the authors, these roughly equally-sized regions, with similar population densities, exhibit
significantly different, i.e., by an order of magnitude, number of deaths, illustrating the potential impact of different policies.
Upon optimizing the ODE results, we use their output to formulate the input of the corresponding PDE framework and explain
how to set it up within the software package COMSOL. Following the formulation of both the ODE and PDE approaches in
section II, the results for Andalusia and the respective interpretations and comparisons with reported date are offered in section
III. We provide numerical results for key categories such as cumulative infections and deaths, comparing the PDE results both
with the available data for these regions and the associated ODE results. Finally, in section IV we summarize our findings and
present our conclusions offering a number of possibilities towards future work. The first Appendix summarizes the calculation
of the basic reproduction number by the next-generation matrix approach, whereas the second presents model results for the
mainland of Greece for well-mixed and spatially-distributed populations, mimicking our analysis of the spread of the virus in
Andalusia.

II.

SETUP OF ODE AND PDE MODELS

We first explain the ODE model which is obtained from the full PDE model by removing the convection and diffusion “spatial
aspects” in the convection-reaction-diffusion equations of interest.
At the level of an ODE formulation, a relevant extension of the standard SIR model can incorporate some of the key features
of this virus, such as, e.g., that a fraction of the exposed population remains asymptomatic [46]. We thus start with a population
of susceptibles (S), which may become exposed (E) upon the emergence of the virus within the population. This represents the
well-documented [47] feature that the virus is latent within the host for a period of time, before he/she becomes infectious (able
to transmit the virus to susceptible hosts). After this latent period, exposed individuals, in turn, may become asymptomatically
infectious (A) at rate σA , or (symptomatically) infected (I) at rate σI . We assume here that both A and I can interact with
the susceptibles S with respective rates βAS and βIS to draw new members of the population into the group E of individuals
exposed to the virus. We note that the transmission rates β incorporate the total population size (ODE model) or the total
population density (PDE Model). A fraction of hosts in the I class may need hospitalization, thus giving rise to a population
of hospitalized (H) at rate γM . Among these, a fraction responds to the treatments, thus leading ultimately to a population of
recovered (R) at a rate (1−ω)χ. At the same time, the seriously ill who are hospitalized yield also a number of deceased (D) at a
rate ωψ. Asymptomatically infected hosts recover at a rate MAR (i.e., asymptomatic recovered) and move into class AR and the
seriously ill recover at a rate (1−γ)M . While AR could, in principle, be merged with R, in our view, it is meaningful to maintain

4
these two populations separate since R is a measurable quantity within available COVID-19 data (and, hence, comparable to
model predictions), while AR is not. Notice that the above constants reflect both the population fraction partition (e.g., ω vs
1 − ω) and the (inverse) time scales (e.g., χ vs. ψ) for transition between subgroups.
A weak effect of net change of the population due to other birth or other mortality factors (−µS) can be incorporated in
the susceptibles and can be adequately assessed from census data, yet we do not incorporate it in the D population aiming to
evaluate purely the deaths stemming from COVID-19. Here, we briefly note two points. The pool of susceptible individuals
is not significantly affected (over the time scale of our study) from this term which can be safely neglected for our purposes.
Secondly, one can include such a term in the rest of the populations involved in our study. However, the (underlying) health
conditions often involved in such mortality often lead to complications in the concurrent presence of COVID-19 and when this
leads to mortality, the latter is attributed to COVID-19. Hence, we do not include such a separate term in the rest of the equations.
The above specify the “ODE parameters” within the group; these reflect processes that happen either in an averaged way at
the “well mixed” level (when no spatial dependence is assigned) of the ODEs or processes that happen locally at every point in
space for the PDEs. We will return to this when we discuss parameter conversions in the next section. The relevant populations
and rates of conversion can be seen in a self-contained form in Fig. 1. The ODE version of the proposed model, described in the
figure, is similar to the SEAIHR model used to model the transmission of the MERS coronavirus in the Republic of Korea [48],
but slightly distinct in its treatment of the asymptomatically recovered, the recovered, and the hospitalized who, in the current
model, do not transmit the virus, as they are expected to be in isolation.
.
A
!"# A
S

E
!"% -

$%

,
-

D

AR

&#'

$#

(1-()&

I

R
(1-*) χ

(&
H

*/

D

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram of the SEAIHR model. The dashed lines denote the interaction of the infectious populations, Asymptomatic and
symptomatically Infected, with the Susceptible population that leads to infection.

The relevant population model at the PDE level reads:
St
Et
At
ARt
It
Ht
Rt
Dt

= ∇ (DS ∇S) − (~v · ∇)S − βSA SA − βSI SI−µS,
= ∇ (DE ∇E) − (~v · ∇)E + βSA SA + βSI SI − (σA + σI )E,
= ∇ (DA ∇A) − (~v · ∇)A + σA E − MAR A,
= ∇ (DAR ∇AR) − (~v · ∇)AR + MAR A,
= σI E − M I,
= γM I − (1 − ω)χH − ωψH,
= ∇ (DR ∇R) + (1 − γ)M I + (1 − ω)χH,
= ωψH.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

We now turn to the PDE properties of the model involving spatial spreading of the pandemic. Initially, we note that we do
not anticipate that infected (which should be self-quarantined), hospitalized (or at stages thereafter) will have a diffusivity, i.e.,
DI = DH = 0 in the initial installment of the model. As regards the R and AR, in principle they can have a diffusivity
(although there is a period of recovery), yet since it is fair to assume that these populations have immunity in the immediate

5
interval after their infection, we can assign DR = DAR = 0. However, an interesting possibility within the model is the
inclusion of population time-dependent diffusion, possibly anisotropic, and also directed (along the direction of the velocity
~v ) motion, as considered, for example, in [49] where a laboratory case of epidemic propagation along lines of fast diffusion
is presented to model the spreading of a virus along a highway. As regards the remaining populations, it may be tempting
to examine nonlinear variants where the diffusivity is larger, e.g., where the population is larger, reflecting the existence of a
well-established transportation/mobility network. Nevertheless, in the present work, we will initiate relevant considerations by
assuming constant diffusivity of the susceptibles, the exposed, and the asymptomatics. The latter are the key, given their mobility
and spatial spreading for the corresponding spreading of the pandemic in the context of Eqs. (1)-(8).
An additional important decision that can be incorporated at the level of the PDE model concerns the functional form of
the directional velocity ~v . In principle, this can be used to capture “daily practices” (e.g., going to work, spending time there,
commuting back and resting practices), but also longer temporal or spatial scales (e.g., trips from city to city, or country to
country). Motivated partially by the colloquial understanding of some of the case examples considered such as the spreading of
the pandemic in Greece [50], at the present level, we opt not to incorporate these effects but simply allow diffusion to perform
the relevant spreading. The idea within a given region then is that arriving infected individuals, e.g., from international travel,
form local hotspots within the S population and we examine the diffusional spreading effect of the virus in the presence of the
above local viral dynamics. Hence, the initial infectious seeding within the susceptible population is a rough approximation
intended to emulate long-range transport in the absence of convection. We will see that this approach is not unreasonable given
the results that we obtain for the spreading of the PDE results with both the ODE ones and the data available online for the
cumulative infections and the deaths within the regions of interest. Naturally, it is hoped that this will be a seed study towards a
further refinement of such considerations on the basis of more accurate spatial data for the spreading of the disease.
In the results given in the next section, we have selected as our illustrative example the autonomous community of Andalusia
within Spain. The example of the mainland of Greece is presented in Appendix B. While these examples may seem somewhat
disparate, they bear some significant advantages as regards their nature and their comparison. First off, they are regions of
similar populations of about 8-10 million inhabitants. Greece has been praised in international media [51] regarding its handling
of the first-wave COVID-19 crisis and the effectiveness and promptness of the associated social-distancing measures. Additional
relevant features of this region include (a) day 0 of the infection first wave and (b) the origin of the localized events thereof could
be successfully identified, as well as (c) strict lockdown effects went into place early on. Another example at the opposite end
with very significant numbers of infections and deaths is Spain. However, here there is a significant set of complications. Not
only is Spain far larger in spatial and population size, but importantly for the number of reported cases and especially the number
of deaths, there is no universally accepted way of reaching the relevant conclusive numbers across the 17 different autonomous
communities. For all of the above reasons, and also for reasons of clearer comparison of comparable sizes (and also for ones of
intrinsic interest to the authors, admittedly), we selected the autonomous community of Andalusia.
Having selected our target regions, the next complication is to formulate the solution of Eqs. (1)-(8) at the level of the autonomous community/country as a “two-dimensional spatial grid”. That is one significant complication toward spatial modeling
which we have addressed by utilizing the finite element package COMSOL Multiphysicsr [52]. We have inserted the regions’
map as a geometry within COMSOL and proceeded subsequently to form a triangulated mesh of the computational domain.
The next and also rather complex step is to formulate a population as an initial condition of susceptibles within the relevant
grid. Here, we have leveraged tools from the large scale geographic project World Pop [53]. This methodology encompasses
census data and enables via random forest models [54] the generation of a gridded prediction of the population density at a
resolution of about 90 m. We have imported this type of data within our spatial country grids and via interpolation we are
in a position to simulate models of the type of Eqs. (1)-(8) with arbitrary choices of parameters, and, in principle, also initial
conditions. This is, in our view, a significant combined asset (the spatial grid of a region combined with an interpolated over this
grid realistic representation of population census data) towards modeling spreads of epidemics.
The crucial next step, within this line of modeling the spreading of the epidemic, is to identify suitable parameters, similarly
to what has been done in numerous earlier studies [55, 56] at the ODE level. To do so, we utilized a nonlinear optimization algorithm such as the constrained minimization, fmincon function within Matlab. We determined the optimal model parameters
by minimizing the Euclidean distance N (`2 norm) between the time series generated by the model, identified by the subscript
“num”, and the corresponding “observed” (data) time series, identified by the subscript “obs”,
end

N =

tfit 
X

| log(Cnum (ti )) − log(Cobs (ti ))|2 + | log(Dnum (ti )) − log(Dobs (ti ))|2



(9)

i

where the index “i” identifies a point in the time series. The parameters were optimized to reproduce the time series of the
reported total number of infected cases (C(t) = I(t) + H(t) + R(t) + D(t), the total number of ”cases”) and total number
of deceased (D(t)). We found these two time series to provide the most reliable data. Specifically, for the case of Greece we
note some nontrivial lapses in the apparent curation of the data. Particularly noteworthy is the case of the recovered individuals
in [50]. The data must evidently be significantly inaccurate, as the number of recovered individuals appears to stay fixed at 53
between March 29 and April 5, only then to jump entirely abruptly to 269 recovered, only to stay there between April 6 and

6
April 29, then to jump on to 1374. Admittedly, the unprecedented circumstances were straining the data collection process, yet it
is particularly important to provide accurate data to modelers to calibrate adequately the models towards the future spreading of
the pandemic. It is these two data columns (total cases and deaths) from [50] that we thus compare to our 0D model for Greece
and the columns that were used in the parameter optimization.
As expected for this large parameter space, initial parameter choices and parameter constraints affect the parameters resulting
from the optimization algorithms. In the next section, where we present the ODE parameters, we discuss a number of sensitivity
studies as well as related issues of parameter identifiability. In addition, we argue that the suggested median values are biologically and socially reasonable, and that they are in line with a number of features known about the SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
At the level of parameters within a certain individual and how the virus acts on it “on average”, i.e., as concerns parameters
such as (σA , σI , M, γ, MAR , ω, χ, ψ), we preserve the same values at the PDE level as at the ODE one. The transmission
rates β are more complicated. Keeping in mind that at the PDE level the quantities, S, E, etc. are no longer populations, but
rather population densities [57] which integrate over the region’s spatial surface (through the respective surface integrals) to the
true population of each category, we can immediately infer that the units of such densities are proportional to l−2 where l is a
characteristic length-scale of the analysis. In that vein, the β’s need to be multiplied by l2 to adapt dimensionally between the
ODE and the corresponding PDE model. Indeed, we found these to be the most complicated parameters to select at the level of
the PDE model, as we will explain in the discussion of the results below. It is important to bear in mind that while the results
below are given for these two regions our aim is to develop a set of tools that could be in principle used, alongside with data for
the pandemic from different countries [3], to perform similar analyses of other regions.
III.
A.

COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS

ODE model: Well-mixed populations

We start the exposition of our results by discussing what we will refer to as the “0D” model (the version of Eqs. (1)-(8) without
space dependence) for Andalusia. Data for the evolution of the pandemic in Andalusia were obtained from the AndalusianGoverment COVID-19 site [58]. The relevant results are given in Fig. 2. We obtained the optimal (best-fitting) 0D-model
parameters for Andalusia (and Greece) from 2,000 optimizations that compared model predictions to jointly the number of
cumulative infected and the deceased, as shown in Eq. (9). For each optimization, the initial guess for each parameter and
initial condition was uniformly sampled within a pre-specified range. The upper and lower limits were used as boundaries
in the constrained minimization algorithm (implemented in Matlab via the fmincon function). The parameter ranges were
determined from epidemiological information. We note that at the initial time of model fitting, the number of exposed and
asymptomatic individuals is not known. We thus optimized (and varied) their ratio to the initially infected I(0), a number that
was obtained by subtracting the officially reported number of deaths, recovered, and hospitalized from the (reported) number
of cases. The sensitivity of the predicted model parameters when the ratio of βAS to βIS is allowed to vary within a specified
interval ([0.2, 2]), in steps of 0.02, and parameter-identifiability issues are discussed at the end of this Section.
Upon performing the optimizations we find that the fitting yields the results summarized in Table I. We show the median
parameters, as well as the interquartile range, and the range of variation used to sample the parameters (and initial conditions).
Model predictions (with median parameter values, solid blue or red lines) are compared graphically to data (black dots) in Fig. 2.
Model output sensitivity to parameter (and initial-condition) variations is represented by the shaded regions.
The optimal parameters were obtained for two scenarios (see Table II). The first scenario considers that restrictive measures
(quarantine, lockdown) in Andalusia were strictly enforced on March 16, 2020. To account for the change in parameters induced
by the lockdown, we imposed a time dependence on the transmission rates β


1 − tanh[2(t − tq )]
βIS (t) = βIS ηIS + (1 − ηIS )
(10a)
2


1 − tanh[2(t − tq )]
βAS (t) = βAS ηAS + (1 − ηAS )
2

(10b)

so that the transmission rates βIS and βAS decrease by a factor ηIS and ηAS (respectively) relatively abruptly at the time tq
the lockdown was imposed. The transmission rates effectively incorporate the rate of contact of susceptible individuals with
infectious individuals (infected or asymptomatic in our model) that leads to exposure to the virus. In fact, the transmission rates
β may be expressed as the product of the average daily contacts (contact rate) a susceptible has with any individual times the
probability of infection given a contact: the probability of infection is proportional to the viral load (viral concentration in the
respiratory-tract fluid) of expelled respiratory droplets [8]. Hence, government-imposed restrictive measures, e.g., mobility restrictions, social-distance requirement, face-mask wearing, and limitations on the number of persons in a gathering, are expected
to decrease the transmission rates (for both infected and asymptomatics), an effect that is reflected in the η’s.

7
TABLE I. ODE parameters for Andalusia: optimal (best-fitting), median and interquartile range, and variation range used in the optimization
algorithm. Initial parameters and initial-condition guesses were uniformly sampled within these ranges.
Median (interquartile range) Median (interquartile range)
(tq = 3)
(tq = 16)
Population
N
8,414,240
Initial populations
(I0 , H0 , D0 )
(297, 134, 6)
Non COVID-19 death rate [per day]
µ
5.79 × 10−7
Transmission rate, S → I [per day]
βIS a
0.35 (0.28–0.41)
0.32 (0.29–0.35)
Transmission rate, S → A [per day]
βAS a
0.55 (0.50–0.60)
0.28 (0.26–0.30)
Lockdown effect, S → I
ηIS
0.28 (0.24–0.35)
0.39 (0.36–0.42)
Lockdown effect, S → A
ηAS
0.48 (0.43–0.56)
0.38 (0.35–0.41)
Latent period, E → A [days]
1/σA
4.52 (4.36–4.69)
2.97 (2.87–3.05)
Incubation period, E → I [days]
1/σI
3.15 (2.98–3.33)
3.77 (3.54–4.14)
Infectivity period [days]
1/M
6.06 (5.98–6.12)
5.97 (5.89–6.04)
Recovery period (asymptomatics), A → AR [days]
1/MAR
6.15 (6.08–6.21)
6.85 (6.75–6.94)
Recovery period (hospitalized), H → R [days]
1/χ
8.39 (8.23–8.54)
6.74 (6.60–6.85)
Period from hospitalized to deceased, H → D [days]
1/ψ
9.38 (9.22–9.57)
8.33 (8.17–8.53)
γ

1−γ

Conversion fraction (I −→ H, I −→ R)
1−ω
ω
Conversion fraction (H −→ D, H −→ R)
Initial population fraction, exposed
Initial population fraction, asymptomatic
Diffusivity, S [km2 /day]
Diffusivity, E or A [km2 /day]
a

γ
ω
E0 /I0
A0 /I0
DS
DE or DA

0.58 (0.57–0.59)
0.25 (0.24–0.26)
2.90 (2.39–3.27)
3.33 (2.92–3.77)
—
—

0.55 (0.54–0.57)
0.25 (0.25–0.26)
2.69 (2.42–3.14)
2.93 (2.59–3.34)
10
100

Initial value

c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
1/k, k ∈ U [2, 7]
1/k, k ∈ U [2, 7]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 12]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 12]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 20]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 20]
c ∈ U [0.25, 0.75]
c ∈ U [0.1, 0.5]
c ∈ U [1, 5]
c ∈ U [1, 5]

The transmission rates β have to be divided by N when used in the ODE model.

TABLE II. Time sequence of events and simulation times.
Country

Initial simulation time (tinit = 1)

Andalusia
Greece

March 14, 2020
March 12, 2020

Imposed lockdown (tq )
(Scenario one)
March 16, 2020 (tq = 3)
March 24, 2020 (tq = 13)

Effective lockdown (tq )
(Scenario two)
March 29, 2020 (tq = 16)
April 3, 2020 (tq = 23)

Last fitting day (tend
fit )
May 11, 2020 (tend
fit = 59)
May 11, 2020 (tend
fit = 61)

The two top panels of Fig. 2 illustrate that how well we capture the data for Andalusia depends on the scenario chosen, i.e.,
when the quarantine is imposed (the events time series is summarized in Table II). The red line and shaded region correspond to
imposing the quarantine at tq = 3 (scenario one, modeling the beginning of the quarantine almost immediately when it officially
occurred), whereas the blue solid line and shaded regions present data (median and range) for tq = 16, scenario two. Both
scenarios reproduce reasonably well the number of the fatalities (top right panel), scenario two better, but not so the number of
cases. Moreover, the difference between predictions and data increases with simulation time, with the predictions of scenario one
becoming progressively very high and dissonant with the trend of the data. There is a characteristic feature in the top left panel
(cases) that the first scenario fails to capture: there is an “angle” in the semi-logarithmic plot associated with the curbing of the
observed cumulative number of infections C(t) due to containment measures. It is apparent that the attempt to capture the data,
due to the relevant mismatch in the associated angle, leads to far more significant deviations. While model prediction seems to
minimize the distance to the data by over-predicting C(t) initially, and under-predicting it later, it clearly starts over-predicting
the trend of the quantity towards the end of the available (fitted) data time-series. This results in predicted cumulative infections
of the order of several (more than 4) tens of thousands. A similar over-prediction seems to develop in D(t) leading to nearly five
thousand deaths, while the data seem to clearly tend to values below that.
If we were to shift arbitrarily the time of the application of the quarantine data by 13 days later (tq = 16), we note a nontrivial
difference. While we are not missing on D(t) (in fact, the fit is more accurate), we capture accurately the angle in the C(t)
data. This suitable shift of the quarantine time clearly does a far better job in capturing the actual trends of both C(t) and
D(t) with the C(t) lying between 104 and 2 × 104 and, correspondingly, D(t) staying below 2 × 103 at the end of the fivemonth simulation period. Table I clearly illustrates the source of the discrepancy at a parametric level: compare the medians
reported in the first and second columns. The most noteworthy difference is that while for scenario one (no reproduction of

8

FIG. 2. 0D model for Andalusia with fitting to official data from March 14, 2020 (t = tinit = 1) to May 11, 2020 (tend
fit = 59). Official
confinement started on March 16, 2020 (tq = 3). Top panels show the official data (black dots) and simulations: red line for tq = 3
(scenario one) and blue line for tq = 13 (scenario two, quarantine starting on March 29, 2020). Left top panel: Confirmed cases C(t) =
I(t)+R(t)+H(t)+D(t); Right top panel: Number of deaths D(t). Bottom panels show the other populations: exposed (E(t)), asymptomatic
(A(t)), hospitalized (H(t)), recovered (R(t)) and asymptomatic recovered (AR(t)). Bottom left panel shows these populations for tq = 3
and bottom right panel for tq = 16. In all the panels, shaded regions correspond to the interquartile range for each quantity, whereas the full
line corresponds to simulations with the median parameter (and initial-condition) values.

the angle) βAS > βIS this inequality reverses in scenario two. A concomitant change occurs in the ratio of exposed who turn
asymptomatics (σA /(σI + σA )) from 0.41 (scenario one) to 0.56 (scenario two). The relative importance of these changes is
discussed at the end of this section where parameter identifiability is addressed. Lastly, note the slight change in the recovery
period χ. A potential interpretation of this admittedly somewhat arbitrary shift of the quarantine-parameter imposition may be
that at the model level such measures have an immediate, essentially instantaneous effect, while in the realistic country data,
there is a time lag before this switch in the number of contacts (due to lockdown) has a perceptible effect, depending on how fast
individuals adapt to the imposed restrictions.
Since the second scenario reproduces more satisfactorily the observed data we discuss (with the proviso mentioned at the
end of this section) the biological and societal significance of its median parameters in the second column of Table I. For
instance, the median latent period is approximately 3 days (2.976), whereas the median incubation period is approximately 4
days (3.77), in reasonable agreement with the values reported in [47], 3 and 5 days, respectively. The value of MAR suggests
a time scale of nearly 7 days (6.85) for the recovery of asymptomatics. On the other hand, M suggests a time scale of about
6 (5.97) days for those with symptoms to potentially need hospitalization. The median timescales associated with leaving the
hospitalized compartment imply almost 7 days (1/χ = 6.74) to recovery and almost 8.5 days (1/ψ = 8.33) to fatality. Hence,
the approximate recovery period for mild cases is about 6 days, and for severe cases approximately 13 days, while Ref. [47]
estimates recovery periods of approximately 2 weeks for mild cases and approximately 6 weeks for the quite severe cases. The
value of γ roughly suggests a half-half split between those recovering directly versus those needing some form of hospitalization.
The value of ω suggests that among those needing hospitalization nearly 75% recover, while only 25% die. As discussed above,

9
there is no way to evaluate the initial population of exposed E0 and asymptomatics A0 . We thus opted to introduce their fraction
to the initial population of infected I0 as two additional parameters (referred to as initial conditions), E0 /I0 and A0 /I0 in the
optimization. Our optimization yields initially (at the beginning of the simulations) approximately equal ratios of exposed and
asymptomatics to the infected.
The relative transmission rates of asymptomatics and infected, as well as the ratio of their populations, merit a comment. The
reported median values satisfy βIS > βAS , i.e., infected (with symptoms) are predicted to be more infectious than asymptomatics. We surmise that the contact rate would be significantly smaller for the (expected to be) self-isolating infected individuals,
than for the asymptomatics who continue their life, not knowing that they are carrying SARS-CoV-2 (and most importantly that
they are infectious). Hence, their higher transmission rate would imply a higher emitted viral load. Related to the transmission
rates is the ratio of asymptomatics to symptomatically infected. Assuming that the latent time scale of the virus is similar for
asymptomatics and infected (as is reasonable to assume), the fraction of turning asymptomatic versus turning infected (σA /σI )
is 1.27. Equivalently, the ratio of becoming asymptomatic to the total number of exposed (σA /(σA + σI )) is about 0.56 and
that to becoming symptomatically infected 0.44. This ratio reflects the importance of asymptomatics [46] in the transmission
of SARS-CoV-2, a particularly important feature that differentiates it from the transmission of other respiratory viruses like
influenza and SARS-CoV-1. Lastly, after lockdown measures are imposed, we find that both populations are equally affected,
ηIS ≈ ηAS , possibly because mobility restrictions, and the associated decrease in the average number of daily contacts, apply
equally to both populations.
One final observation at the level of data rather than at that of the model is the significance of the early imposition of restrictive
measures. In Spain these measures were taken when already the number of cumulative infections and deaths was significantly
higher than the corresponding numbers in Greece when the decision was taken. This ultimately appears to have led the smaller
of the two regions (Andalusia having 8.4M inhabitants) to have an order of magnitude larger losses of life and infections than
the larger of the two regions (Greece having 10.7M inhabitants).
We also calculated the basic reproduction number R0 reflecting the number of cases expected to be produced by one infectious
case in a fully susceptible population. This is used to estimate how the epidemic developed initially. We used the next-generation
matrix approach (see Appendix A). The pre-quarantine basic reproduction number (for the second scenario, tq = 16), is R0 =
1.91(1.86 − 1.95), where we report both the median and the interquartile range. The calculated basic reproduction number is
close to the epidemiologically determined range of 2 − 4 [47], a range that encompasses the variation of the basic reproduction
number in space and time. Although our focus is not on the calculation of R0 , which is of principal interest to a wide range of
studies regarding SARS-CoV-2, it is worth noting that a post-quarantine effective reproduction number may be calculated for the
lockdown-decreased transmission rates. We find Reff = 0.763(0.72−0.74) reflecting the decline of the epidemic spreading under
the lockdown measures. A similar calculation with the scenario-one parameters yields a pre-quarantine R0 = 2.65 (2.38−2.90),
and, interestingly, a post-quarantine effective reproduction number Reff = 1.04 (1.03 − 1.04) a value that suggests the epidemic
has not been effectively controlled (as implied by the predicted evolution of the epidemic in Fig. 2, top left).
We conclude the analyses of the ODE model by commenting on the identifiability of model parameters. We partially addressed
it through the previously presented parameter sensitivity analysis with 2000 optimizations. This procedure led to the determination of the median values and their interquartiles. In addition, and as argued in [59], one approach to specifying confidence
intervals is through the Hessian of the variation of the Euclidean norm Eq. (9), the objective function of our optimizations, with
respect to model parameters [60]. Specifically, if we denote model parameters by θ the Hessian is Hij = ∂ 2 N /∂θi ∂θj , suggesting that if it remains invariant to parameter changes, these parameters would not be identifiable (since their changes would not
modify the optimized norm). Alternatively, as discussed in [60], the inversion of the Hessian leads to the confidence intervals
associated with each parameter. When we carried out this programme for a model similar to the 0D model presented here [59],
we found that the Hessian was singular: in fact, it had two zero eigenvalues. Our above line of argumentation (expanded upon
in [59]) suggests that these two “zero-cost” eigendirections are closely connected to the identifiability of the model, and specifically that a number of parameters associated with these eigendirections are not independently identifiable. One eigendirection is
easily specified through inspection of the model. The three parameters ω, ψ and χ may be easily combined to two κ1 = (1−ω)χ
and κ2 = ωψ.
The second combination of parameters that defies identifiability is less immediately transparent. However, we get a hint of
the other zero-eigenvalue eigendirection, and the associated not-independently-identifiable parameters by comparing columns
one versus two in Table I (and also from the runs of Fig. 3; see especially the top panel thereof). When the time the lockdown
was imposed is modified (going from scenario one to scenario two), the transmission rates and the time scales shift from
βIS < βAS and 1/σA < 1/σI (whose ratio, as discussed earlier, determines the fraction of turning asymptomatic to turning
symptomatically infected to be 0.70) to the βIS > βAS and 1/σA > 1/σI (with the corresponding fraction becoming 1.27).
Alternatively, for βAS > βIS the fraction of exposed turning asymptomatic is smaller than when βAS < βIS , i.e., the larger
the asymptomatic transmission rate the smaller their fraction. This inverse relation becomes quantitative in the top panel of
Fig. 3 where we note that as βAS σA decreases βIS σI increases. We chose these two parameter combinations as they appear
naturally in the two summands of the basic reproduction number, Eq. (A1). The optimizations, whose results are reported in
the figure, were performed as previously discussed (i.e., parameters and initial conditions were uniformly sampled within their
range of variation) with an additional constraint on the ratio of the two transmission rates βAS /βIS . We chose their ratio to vary

10

FIG. 3. Sensitivity analysis for Andalusia (tq = 16). The top panel shows the inverse relationship between βAS σA and βIS σI for a series
of optimizations (200) performed by uniformly sampling model parameters and ten fixed equidistant ratios of βAS /βIS within the range [0.2,
2]. Blue dots are simulation results with the medians of the optimized values (the line is a guide to the eye), while the red dots are the results
of all the optimizations. The two bottom panels compare the predicted future number of cases (left panel, red bundle) and fatalities (right,
red bundle) for all the optimizations shown in the top panel; black dots are the reported numbers (and used for model fitting). Despite the
wide variation of transmission rates (times the associated time scales), we observe a rather small uncertainty in the forward, model predicted
evolution of the pandemic, an indication that even though some model parameters are not independently identifiable, they enable an adequate
predictor for the quantities of epidemiological interest.

between 0.2 to 2, sampled in ten equidistant values. For every ratio of the transmission rates we performed 200 optimizations.
The blue line denotes the relationship for the median parameters for each choice of βAS /βIS , the red dots correspond to the
optimal parameters for each optimization. Monitoring the results obtained in Fig. 3, it is natural to conclude βAS and βIS are not
independently identifiable. Instead, there is effectively a monoparametric freedom (associated with the singular eigendirection)
connecting these two parametric combinations.
For this wide range of parameters we also compare the predicted number of cases (bottom left panel Fig. 3) and fatalities
(bottom right panel) to the reported numbers. Importantly, we note that even though the transmission rates times the associated
inverse time scales may vary significantly due to their non-identifiability, the predicted number of cases and fatalities does not
(compare also to Fig. 2). This is, indeed, a manifestation of the singular eigendirection: a wide range of model parameters
provides an equally good predictor of the total number of cases and fatalities. Hence, the uncertainty in the identification
of model parameters, and their non-identifiability, has a relatively small effect on the predictions of the model. We believe
this provides convincing evidence of the predictive ability of the model and its accuracy. A far more relevant question is not
the specification of model parameters and their confidence intervals, but how does the flexibility to specify them, as allowed
by the singular eigendirection, modify model predictions. We find that the optimally determined model parameters provide a
reasonable, within a given range, estimate of the modeled quantity, even though due to the non-identifiability of the model the
model parameters may vary. It is also an interesting direction to explore what additional pieces of data (such as, e.g., on the
asymptomatic infections) may render the model identifiable, enabling a more precise identification of the relevant parameters.

11
B.

PDE model: Spatially distributed populations

We now turn to the PDE simulations. Relevant results for the autonomous region of Andalusia may be found in Fig. 4 for
the same diagnostics as for the 0D model. However, now, we complement them with the space-time evolution simulations of
Figs. 5–7.

FIG. 4. PDE model for Andalusia with fitting to official data from March 14, 2020 (t = tinit = 1) to May 11, 2020. Confinement time starts
on March 29, 2020 (tq = 16, only scenario two is plotted). The solid blue line (top two panels) reproduces the 0D simulation, cf. Fig. 2. The
median parameters shown in Table I (second column) are used, except for the transmission rates that have been scaled by ξ[0.00480, 0.00489].
The optimal scaling factor ξ increases as the diffusion-coefficient reduction factor ηD increases in the interval [0.25, 0.50] in steps of 0.05.
Shaded regions are delimited by the optimal plots for ηD = 0.5 and ηD = 0.25.

We first explain how we selected the model parameters and how we initialized the PDE model of Eqs. (1)-(8) and then we
discuss the numerical results, emphasizing their advantages and deficiencies. At the regional (spatial) level, we must adapt the
0D model parameters. In the PDE model, we retained the same median parameters as the optimized 0D (ODE) model parameters
starting with the σ’s and beyond in Table I. This is because they involve processes occurring at the level of a single individual,
i.e., “locally”, and hence we do not expect them to change at the country level in the transition from the ODE to the PDE model.
In addition, we kept the same reduction factor of the transmission rates ηIS and ηAS to model the effect of restrictive measures
on them.
On the contrary, we do not expect this to be the case for the transmission rates β. They depend on the interaction between
individuals since they may be expressed as the product of the daily average number of contacts times the infectious disease
transmission probability [8]. At the ODE level, the presence of S and A or I immediately leads to the conversion of susceptibles
to exposed. At spatial (region or county) level, this effect does not occur homogeneously as it does at the ODE level, but rather
in a distributed way. As the population is (spatially) distributed over the country in a highly heterogeneous way, the ODE β’s
have to be modified to obtain their “spatially averaged” variant.
We obtained these spatially averaged transmission rates by first keeping the ratio of the β’s the same as that of the ODE, but
scaling each one by a scaling factor ξ. The transition from the ODE to the PDE transmission rates involves the introduction of

12

FIG. 5. Evolution of the Andalusian infected population density I(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 14, 2020), t = 6 days (top right,
March 19, 2020), t = 16 days (bottom left, March 29, 2020), and t = 47 days (bottom right, April 29, 2020). Scenario two (tq = 16),
reduction of diffusion coefficients by ηD = 0.3 and scaling factor ξ = 0.00480. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

two length scales. The first reflects the transition from the number of individuals (e.g., S, I, E, etc.) in the ODE description to
spatial densities of individuals in the PDE description; the other length scale reflects the transition from a spatially homogeneous
to a spatially distributed model. We obtained their product by noting that the β’s have to be multiplied [57] by an effective inverse
density l2 /N , N being the country population, i.e., by multiplying the ODE transmission rates by the scaling factor ξ ≡ l2 /N .
The product length scale l defines an effective spatial scale over which the ODE transmission rates need to be rescaled to obtain
the corresponding PDE transmission rates. The scaling factor was determined by minimizing the `2 norm specified in Eq. (9).
For these optimizations we kept all model parameters at their median values, while diffusivities were varied as subsequently
discussed in Eq. (11).
In addition to the decision regarding the scaling of the β’s, an important decision is that of the selection of the diffusivities.
Recall that in the present first work we decided to avoid attempting to model convection effects, but rather mostly focus on the
role of diffusion. We assume that most of the populations relevant to the infection which have not developed any symptoms,
namely the asymptomatics and the exposed, diffuse with a diffusivity of Dc = 100 km2 /day (i.e., associated with a characteristic
spatial scale of about 10 km). Our motivation for this choice is that in this small population (for the regions and data considered)
associated with the infection, it is relevant to include a wider spatial spread of their motion to enable (through their contacts)
the infection to spatially spread. On the other hand, for the far larger population of susceptibles, we assign a smaller diffusivity
(0.1Dc ) since we consider that the mobility of susceptibles does not significantly change their distribution [49]. In essence
the much larger susceptible population provides a background for the relative motion of asymptomatic and exposed carriers of
the virus. The rest of the populations (most notably, I, H, and D, since the immunity of R and AR renders their diffusion
inconsequential) are assumed to be highly localized/self-isolating and hence bear, for our purposes, a vanishing diffusivity. For
all the non-vanishing diffusivities, we assume that the quarantine reduces them to a fraction ηD of their original value (see

13

FIG. 6. Evolution of the Andalusian fatalities population density D(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 14, 2020), t = 6 days (top right,
March 19, 2020), t = 16 days (bottom left, March 29, 2020), and t = 31 days (bottom right, April 29, 2020). Scenario two (tq = 16),
decrease of diffusion coefficients by ηD = 0.3 and scaling factor ξ = 0.00480. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

Table I) in a similar ramped form as before for the transmission rates:


1 − tanh[2(t − tq )]
D(t) = D ηD + (1 − ηD )
2

(11)

We should also describe the initialization of the model. We selected to populate initially eight key “hotspots” of the infection
as they arose in Andalusia. The selected areas (Almerı́a, Córdoba, Huelva, Granada, Jaén, Jerez de la Frontera, Málaga and
Sevilla) correspond to the most populated cities of each province of the autonomous community. Initial values for the infections
and deaths were provided by the Andalusian Government (“La Junta de Andalucı́a”) [58]. We defined an infection radius of 10
km around the center of each hotspot, within which we placed the source of infection to initialize the epidemic, what we refer
to as “blobs” of infection. These epicenters of infection were modeled via Gaussian profiles whose spatial (variance) scale was
selected to be the infection radius; their amplitude was chosen such that the total number of infections, deaths, recoveries and
hospitalizations, as calculated via the surface integrals of the associated densities through the region, be the same as the one
reported in the original data. The population of asymptomatics and exposed was, similarly to the ODE optimization, selected to
be proportional to the infected one with the proportionality ratios A0 /I0 and E0 /I0 maintained as those of the ODE.
With all these choices, the PDE model was run without optimizing at the PDE level the median parameters that are not
expected to depend on spatial scales. The quantity that we varied was the diffusion-coefficient reduction factor ηD in steps of
0.05 in the interval [0.25, 0.50] (six simulations in total). For each simulation the scaling factor ξ was determined by minimizing
the `2 norm, as previously discussed. We used the second scenario parameters (tq = 16) since this choice reproduced better the
data and the flattening of the epidemic curves with the imposition of the lockdown.
The comparison of the spatially-integrated PDE results to the data for Andalusia and the ODE prediction, shown in Fig. 4 is
quite promising. We show the observed data as black dots, the 0D-model predictions as the solid blue line, and the spatially
integrated results of the PDE model as the shaded region. The bottom and top of the shaded region are enclosed by the curves

14

FIG. 7. Evolution of the Andalusian confirmed case density C(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 14, 2020), t = 6 days (top right, March
19, 2020), t = 16 days (bottom left, March 29, 2020), and t = 47 days (bottom right, April 29, 2020). Scenario two (tq = 16), reduction of
the diffusion coefficients by ηD = 0.3 and scaling factor ξ = 0.00480. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

1500
1000
500

FIG. 8. Map of the COVID-19 outbreak in Andalusia as of April 29, 2020 (t = 47) reproduced with data and their manipulation via an R
code from Ref. [66]. Number of confirmed cases per municipality denoted by color. Compare and contrast with the bottom right panel at time
t = 47 in Fig. 7.

corresponding to ηD = 0.50 and ηD = 0.25 (when the optimal scaling factor ξ is used). We found that both C(t) and D(t)
asymptote to lower values for the optimal scaling factor as ηD increases. As in the case of the 0D model, the change in

15
the transmission rates and diffusion coefficients as a result of the lockdown leads to a flattening of the epidemic curves. An
additional remark on the reported and predicted number of cases, and on the counting of asymptomatics, is in order (Fig. 4,
top left panel). As reported in [61] starting on April 13, 2020 (t = 32) the reported number of cases includes asymptomatic
individuals, i.e., susceptibles that have tested positively to the presence of the virus. This might explain the underprediction of
cases after t = 32.
Clearly, the spatial model can do an adequate job in capturing both the cumulative infections and the number of deaths (with
the caveats to be given in the discussion below). Notice that in the bottom row of the figure, we illustrate the surface integrals of
each of the density of E, A, H, R and AR as a function of time, representing the evolution of the pandemic at the “integrated”
level of the entire country in an illustration similar to the one that we typically obtain from the ODE models.
In addition, we complemented the spatially-averaged results by the space-time evolution simulations of Figs. 5–7. For the
reported cases in the figures, the scaling factor multiplying the β’s is ξ = 0.00480, corresponding to a characteristic scale
l ≈ 0.200km. A comment on the scaling factor ξ is in order. For the different choices of the diffusion-coefficient reduction
factor ηD we determined the optimal scaling factor √
to be in the range ξ[0.00480, 0.00489], for the lower value of which we
obtain the reported characteristic length scale (l = ξN ≈ 0.200 km). It is tempting to associate the scaling factor, and in
particular ξ = 0.00480, with the inverse of the “lived” population density, the population density perceived by a randomly
chosen individual [62]. According to [63] the inverse lived density for Andalusia is approximately 0.0046, remarkably close
to the smaller value of the scaling-factor range. A similar observation holds for the scaling factor for Greece which, in turn,
suggests that this is an important insight (and not a serendipitous occurrence) as concerns the “translation” of the 0D model
coefficients into the PDE ones.
Of course, the PDE model has considerable additional information through its spatial resolution. In Figs. 5–7 we can see the
spatio-temporal evolution of the infections in Andalusia (i.e., the spatial distribution at a few snapshots over time), the deaths and
the cumulative infections C(x, y, t), respectively. We also produced movies of the corresponding evolution that can be found
in [64] (Andalusia) and [65] (Greece). We can observe how the biggest fractions of the infections remain in the most populated
cities of Sevilla and Málaga, and that the provinces of Huelva and Almerı́a are those with the smallest number of infections, in
accordance with the current status of the pandemic [58]. The predicted spatial distribution of the total confirmed cases C(t) may
be compared to the data shown in Fig. 8, where officially reported data are presented per municipality [66]. The comparison
is favorable as both figures show that Málaga is the hardest hit municipality, followed by Sevilla. Nevertheless, the predicted
number of cases in Granada, Córdoba, Jaén and Jerez de la Frontera (in decreasing number of cases), which are lower than in the
previous two cities, is not evident in the scale of Fig. 7. The predictions for the number of deaths in the different provinces shows
a slightly different behavior from the observed data. If the fatalities spatial density is integrated over each province, the predicted
final number of deaths is higher in Málaga than in any other province. From the data, the final number of deaths is almost the
same in Málaga, Sevilla and Granada. This suggests that modeling human mobility in these provinces solely by diffusion, and
specifically by the chosen diffusion coefficients, cannot fully account for this dispersion of the number of fatalities. This may
arise, within our reaction-diffusion model, possibly due to the number and intensity of the chosen hotspots of infection or to the
requirement that a diffusion coefficient of different value should have been chosen.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this work we presented a platform for establishing a compartmental epidemiological model both at the level of ODEs
(0D, no spatial dependencies) in line with numerous earlier works, as well as at the spatially distributed level of PDEs to study
the spatio-temporal spreading of COVID-19. The regions of interest were the mainland of Greece and the Spanish autonomous
region of Andalusia for which there has been a small number of studies. As regards Greece, there are some probabilistic [15, 67],
some network-based approaches for time-series analysis [68], and some based on the SIR variant SEAIR [22]. Studies that focus
on Spain also examine Andalusia as a case example using either probabilistic [14] or POD-based decomposition techniques [69].
Our effort has been to explore a model of the SEIR variety that incorporates some of the particular biological features of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus [47], such as its latent period, and the potential to generate a significant fraction of asymptomatic hosts,
which, in turn, play a crucial role in spreading the infection. The resulting SEAIHR model involves a number of populations:
Susceptible, Exposed, Asymptomatics, symptomatically Infected, Hospizalized, Recovered, and deceased. We found that for
the regions of interest the model reproduces the epidemiological data that we determined to be most reliable, namely the data on
the cumulative infections and especially the number of deaths. Naturally, more accurate data including also spatially resolved
ones (on the spatial scale of our PDE model) would be helpful towards the improved calibration of the results offered herein.
We modeled both the early, pre-quarantine, stage of the epidemic, as well as its development at a later stage when containment
measures had been enforced. The effect of quarantine on the spreading of the disease was imposed via a time-dependent (on the
time scale of a day) change of the transmission rates and of the diffusivities (the latter in the PDE model). While initiating a
quarantine roughly when it was imposed yields more acceptable results in Greece, in Andalusia this is less so. In fact, for both
regions, simulations reproduced more accurately the observed data, and in particular they captured the “angle” indicating the
curbing of the infection due to government-imposed intervention measures, if a time-lag is imposed on the application of the

16
(instantaneous in the ODE model) quarantine set of parameters. We, thus, considered two scenarios, corresponding to different
delays in imposing the quarantine: the second scenarios reproduced the reported data better. We note that this seemingly artificial
time shift in imposing the lockdown reflects the fact that model parameters change over a short time scale upon the introduction
of lockdown measures, whereas the effect of social intervention measures (self-quarantine, social distancing, face masks, etc)
appears to arise later in the epidemiological data.
We determined model parameters via optimizing model predictions with respect to reported total number of (infected) cases
and number of deaths. The optimization algorithm minimized the Euclidean distance between model predictions and observed
data. For the 0D model, we performed 2000 optimizations for model parameters and (the unknown ones among the) initial
conditions uniformly sampled within specified ranges. Median and interquartile ranges for model parameters were determined.
Additional sensitivity analyses were performed to conclude that combinations of parameters, specifically the product of the
asymptomatic transmission rate times the inverse latent period, is non-identifiable. This parametric combination is intimately
connected to the product of the infected transmission rate times the inverse incubation period: in fact, our results suggest that
the relation between these two products can be well approximated via a straight line of negative slope. We interpreted both the
median time scales of, e.g., the conversion of exposed to asymptomatics and (symptomatically) infected, and the fraction of, e.g.,
hospitalized that lead to recoveries or deaths. We found them, for both countries and the second scenario, to be in reasonable
agreement with current epidemiological estimates. Our median results reinforce the feature prevalent in numerous studies about
the importance of asymptomatics in the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, cf. [46, 70], a particularity of this coronavirus.
The asymptomatic transmission rate βAS was found to be smaller than the symptomatically infected rate βIS , coupled to the
fraction of exposed evolving to asymptomatics being larger than those evolving to symptomatically infected. In [71] it was
reported that asymptomatic infectious hosts may account for up to 86% of cases, thus further supporting our prediction of their
importance in the spread of the disease. We remark that of the four cases studied only one (Andalusia, scenario one, early
imposition of lockdown measures) had βAS > βIS (and a lower asymptomatic to infected split), a case that did not reproduce
accurately the data: in the more accurate simulations of scenario two the inequality was inverted. Once again, however, we
caution the reader that issues of identifiability prevent us from assigning a particular weight to the findings about the relative size
of βAS vs. βIS , other than their corroborating the central role of asymptomatics in the transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
We then utilized the median parameters in a spatially distributed, reaction-diffusion model. Here, we overcame the major
challenges of formulating a mesh with the boundaries of a region within the software package COMSOL and also leveraged
state-of-the-art geographical methods such as the World Pop project (for population mapping based on census data) to set up
distributed simulations of the pandemic spreading in the geographical domain. We consider this computational effort a significant
and necessary non-trivial step for the eventual inclusion of more realistic long-range human mobility modeling via the inclusion,
e.g., of convection or other modeling of directed-motion of individual populations. We pondered on how to adapt the parameters
of the ODE model to the PDE framework and argued that “onsite” (i.e., single-individual) parameters can be maintained the
same. We also explained the challenge of adapting contact parameters (such as the transmission rates) to the level of the country:
this process involves issues of homogeneity at the ODE level vs. substantial heterogeneity at the PDE level. We also made a first
series of assumptions at the level of convection (neglected herein) and isotropic diffusion (selected as the primary mechanism
for disease spreading herein) to explore the time-resolved dynamics at the country/autonomous community setting.
At the level of our distributed simulations, there exist some promising results. We were able to seed the infection at some of
its key epicenters and observe it to produce infections, recoveries, deaths, etc., over the entire region. The “hotspot” seeding at
various locations is an indirect attempt to model the movement of infectious individuals as is, e.g., considered by metapopulation
or network models. At the cumulative level of the region, surface integrations enabled comparisons with the collected data at the
regional level yielding reasonable correspondence between model results and the observed cumulative epidemiological reality.
Moreover, the model appears to be promising towards capturing some of the spatial features of the infection progression: for
instance, visual comparison of model predictions with reported spatially distributed data for the cumulative infections shows that
the model reproduces the persistence of infections in highly populated areas, albeit with a possible time lag. At the spatial level
we find that the infection persisted the longest in regions of very high population density. We believe that this effort paves the
way for a distributed observation of the relevant spreading, but it also has some weaknesses, challenges, and improvements that
are worth considering in future steps. As stated in the Introduction, the spatio-temporal modeling of the epidemic by reactiondiffusion PDEs, and specifically with isotropic diffusion being the dominant mechanism of spatially spreading the virus is an
important first step towards developing a continuous description of disease spreading where human mobility is modeled at a
fine spatial scale. This approach should be contrasted to discrete network-based metapopulation models and the length scales
considered in these models. A distinct advantage of the continuous model over the meta-population one is that the former can
model interaction at a finer and more extended inter-nodes scale.
It would be especially useful in the context of the present pandemic of unprecedented information flow [3] to have easily
accessible temporally and spatially resolved data for the evolution of the pandemic in different regions. Such ”seeding” in
a distributed way (rather than the colloquial seeding at hotspots performed herein) would build into the model an accurate
spatial distribution of infected population, and, hence, would be far closer to the country’s pandemic evolution. Indeed, there
is another challenge that is arguably even more significant. Diffusion as a mechanism for spreading a disease is traditionally
associated with diseases that have specific transmission characteristics, as for example vector-borne malaria that is transmitted

17
by mosquitoes [72]. Herein, we considered diffusion as a proxy for short-term human mobility (which via its interplay with
nonlinear contact interactions provides a mechanism for spreading the disease), relegating long-range transport to the initial
seeding of the infection. Yet, admittedly it is not sufficient for expanding the infection at the scale of the country as our results
show, at least not via realistic spatial and temporal scales of individual mobility. In particular, it has not escaped our attention
that this type of spreading does not account for the directed motion of individuals (possibly infected ones) from the city to
the country, or from one city to another for pleasure or business. This is especially important for travel (and hence infection
transport) at a longer spatial scale (rather than the shorter one enabled by diffusion). We note that a form of anisotropic diffusion
was used to model disease spreading primarily along highways in [49].
This suggests that some form of a probabilistic element needs to be inserted in the model. One possibility that we are
exploring is the spatial distribution of the initial condition of the asymptomatic population. This may generate infections in a
more spatially distributed way, leading to the spatial expansion of the pandemic throughout the country in a more consistent
way with the observed data [50]. A perhaps even more significant or possibly complementary perspective worth considering
is, naturally, a probabilistic one. In addition to deterministic processes like diffusion or convection (which is worth integrating
in a subsequent version of the model), it seems relevant to include a probabilistic gain and loss term reminiscent of (a longrange variant of) the conservative Kawasaki dynamics [73] at the level of spins. This type of term would generate infections
in a probabilistic way (possibly with a probability weighed upon the region’s population density) by allowing individuals to
effectively “perform trips” through the country, i.e., disappearing from one location and reappearing (within a short time scale
of less than a day for the regions of interest) in another.
As also discussed in the Introduction, there are other ways by which to bypass the practicalities of the application of PDEs at
the level of a country. One of the canonical ones involves the application of the theory of networks in the realm of metapopulation
models in a way similar to the work of [41]. Such approaches are already being brought to bear, as in the work of [45] or [14] and
are certainly also worth expanding upon and refining, as well as comparing with the data available in the context of the SARSCoV-2 virus. Building such networks for the examples of Greece and Andalusia considered herein (and of course beyond) also
constitutes a worthwhile direction of future research. Clearly, further efforts at the level of data collection and curation, at the
level of model setup and validation, and then at the level of optimization and utilization for prediction are needed. Our hope,
however, is that the approach proposed herein is an initial step towards putting together a number of relevant tools to enable going
beyond the 0D approach of ODE models and gradually considering in more detail the expansion of a pandemic at a combined
spatial and temporal level.

Appendix A: Next-generation calculation of the basic reproduction number R0

We will use the next generation matrix approach of the system of equations Eqs. (1)-(8) without the spatial term to find R0 .
In particular, we set up the vectors:


βSA SA + βSI SI

0



0


0
F =

0


0



0
0





(σA + σI )E


−σA E + MAR A






−σI E + M I



 −γM I + (1 − ω)χH + ωψH
, V = 


βSA SA + βSI SI




MAR A





 −(1 − γ)M I − (1 − ω)χH
−ωψH








.







The idea is that we rearrange the compartments so that the infectious/infected compartments E, A, I, H, appear first. We then
place S, AR, R, D. If we calculate F − V, it should yield a reordered version of the vector field that describes our disease
system.
We then focus on the 4 infectious/infected compartments and ignore the rest. We find the Jacobians of F, V with respect to
E, A, I, H in the order in which they appear. This will yield two 4 × 4 matrices:


0 βSA S ∗ βSI S ∗

0
0
0
F =
0
0
0
0
0
0



0
(σA + σI ) 0
0
0


0
MAR
0
0
 −σA
, V = 

0
−σI
0
M
0
0
0
0 −γM ωψ + d + (1 − ω)χ







18
The basic reproductive number is the spectral radius of F V −1 which in our case is
R0 =

βSI S ∗ σI
βSA S ∗ σA
+
.
(σA + σI )MAR
(σA + σI )M

(A1)

This result is in accordance with epidemiological intuition: the first contribution to R0 is proportional to βSA and S ∗ , namely,
the transmission rate and total susceptible population S ∗ . It is also proportional to σA /(σA + σI ), namely the fraction of
exposed hosts becoming infectious, yet asymptomatic, A. Finally, it is inversely proportional to the loss rate MAR of the
infectious asymptomatic class A. The second contribution to R0 is analogous to the first one and stems from the second mode
of transmission, i.e., through contact with I.

Appendix B: Spatial modeling of Greece
1.

ODE model: Well-mixed populations

We present the “0D” model predictions for Greece in Fig. 9. The data we consider [50] start on March 12, 2020 when losses
of life started to occur and the cumulative number of infected (total number of cases) was already a bit over 100 individuals.
We follow the evolution of the pandemic till May 11, 2020 using official data up to this point to optimize model parameters and
initial conditions. As in the case of Andalusia, we minimized the combined Euclidean distance of model results and observed
data for the total number of cases (C(t) = I(t) + H(t) + R(t) + D(t)) and the total number of deceased (D(t)), see Eq. (9).
A few remarks on the quality of the data and our choice of the most reliable time series (total number of reported cases and
fatalities) are presented in Section II, following Eq. (9). We performed 2,000 optimizations to obtain the parameters shown in
Table III. We present the medians of all model parameters and initial conditions, as well as the interquartile range and the range
of variation of the initial values of parameters.
TABLE III. ODE parameters for Greece: optimal (best-fitting), median and interquartile range, and variation range used in the optimization
algorithm. Initial parameters and initial-condition guesses were uniformly sampled within these ranges.
Median (interquartile range) Median (interquartile range)
(tq = 13)
(tq = 23)
Population
N
10,768,477
Initial populations
(I0 , H0 , D0 )
(117,0,1)
Non COVID-19 death rate [per day]
µ
8.49 × 10−6
Transmission rate, S → I [per day]
βIS a
0.31 (0.29–0.33)
0.24 (0.23–0.25)
Transmission rate, S → A [per day]
βAS a
0.21 (0.19–0.22)
0.18 (0.17–0.19)
Lockdown effect, S → I
ηIS
0.52 (0.49–0.54)
0.48 (0.46–0.50)
Lockdown effect, S → A
ηAS
0.52 (0.49–0.54)
0.48 (0.46–0.50)
Latent period, E → A [days]
1/σA
2.82 (2.76–2.89)
2.89 (2.81–2.97)
Incubation period, E → I [days]
1/σI
4.38 (4.14–4.68)
3.72 (3.55–4.00)
Infectivity period [days]
1/M
6.30 (6.24–6.37)
6.13 (6.07–6.19)
Recovery period (asymptomatics), A → AR [days]
1/MAR
6.95 (6.89–7.02)
6.87 (6.80–6.96)
Recovery period (hospitalized), H → R [days]
1/χ
6.36 (6.31–6.42)
6.20 (6.16–6.26)
Period from hospitalized to deceased, H → D [days]
1/ψ
8.87 (8.75–9.00)
8.76 (8.62–8.92)
γ

1−γ

Conversion fraction (I −→ H, I −→ R)
1−ω
ω
Conversion fraction (H −→ D, H −→ R)
Initial population fraction, exposed
Initial population fraction, asymptomatic
Diffusivity, S [km2 /day]
Diffusivity, E or A [km2 /day]
a

γ
ω
E0 /I0
A0 /I0
DS
DE or DA

0.44 (0.43–0.44)
0.22 (0.21–0.22)
2.65 (2.39–3.01)
2.84 (2.44–3.16)
10
100

0.44 (0.43–0.45)
0.21 (0.21–0.22)
2.71 (2.51–3.04)
2.87 (2.59–3.18)
10
100

Initial value

c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
c ∈ U [0, 1]
1/k, k ∈ U [2, 7]
1/k, k ∈ U [2, 7]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 12]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 12]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 20]
1/k, k ∈ U [5, 20]
c ∈ U [0.25, 0.75]
c ∈ U [0.1, 0.5]
c ∈ U [1, 5]
c ∈ U [1, 5]

The transmission rates β have to be divided by N when used in the ODE model.

The model-predicted evolution of the pandemic shown in Fig. 9 was calculated for the median parameters (solid blue line)
and for the cloud of the parameter variations represented as the shaded region in the figure. Officially reported data are denoted
by black dots. As in the case of Andalusia, optimal parameters are shown for two scenarios, see Table II for the events time

19

FIG. 9. 0D model for Greece with fitting to official data from March 12 (t = tinit = 1) to May 11, 2020 (tend
fit = 59). Official confinement
started on March 22, 2020 (t = 11). The top panels show the official data (black dots) and simulations: red line for tq = 13 (quarantine starting
on March 24, 2020) and blue line for tq = 23 (quarantine starting on April 3, 2020). Left top panel: Confirmed cases C(t) = I(t) + R(t) +
H(t) + D(t); Right top panel: Number of deaths D(t). The bottom panels show the other populations: exposed (E(t)), asymptomatic (A(t)),
hospitalized (H(t)), recovered (R(t)) and asymptomatic recovered (AR(t)). The bottom left panel shows these populations for tq = 13 and
the bottom right panel for tq = 23. In all panels, shaded regions correspond to the interquartile range for each quantity, whereas the full line
corresponds to simulations with the median parameter (and initial-condition) values.

sequence. The first scenario considers that quarantine was strictly enforced at March 24, 2020 (tq = 13). In reality, the lockdown
in Greece started at the end of March 22, 2020; it is reasonable to assume that it was strictly enforced 1-2 days later. In the second
scenario the lockdown was considered to have been imposed on April 3, 2020 (tq = 23). To account for the change in parameters
due to the lockdown, we imposed the time dependence of the transmission rates β as shown in Eq. (10) in the main text. This
time dependence forces the transmission rates βIS and βAS to decrease by a factor ηIS and ηAS , respectively, relatively abruptly
at the time the lockdown was imposed, tq .
The top panels of Fig. 9 compare model predictions for the two scenarios for the total number of cases (left) and fatalities
(right). Scenario-one median parameters, i.e., imposing the quarantine practically at the time when it was officially announced,
capture the data for fatalities in Greece fairly well. However, the number of reported cases, top left panel, is not that accurately
reproduced. We attribute this discrepancy to the previously mentioned characteristic feature of the data (top left panel) that model
predictions fail to capture adequately: the “angle” in the semi-logarithmic plot associated with the curbing of the cumulative
number of infections C(t) due to containment measures. As the optimization algorithm attempts to minimize the distance from
the observed data, initially it slightly over-predicts and then under-predicts the data and eventually the long-term predictions seem
to over-predict the flattening of the cases curve. Nevertheless the overall differences are relatively small: the model prediction
flattening out (over 5 months) around 200 deceased and slight over 3K infected individuals seem reasonable, were the lockdown
measures potentially extendable to such a long time interval. If, as in the case of Andalusia, were we to shift the time of the
application of the quarantine date by about 10 days later (scenario two), then we note in the top panel of the figure a nontrivial
difference. Most notably, without significantly missing on D(t) we capture accurately the angle in the C(t) data. The relevant

20
parameters (medians, interquartile range) are presented in the second column of Table III. As before, we justify our decision to
consider a second scenario in that lockdown measures have an almost immediate effect in model predictions, whereas in reality
there is a time lag before restrictive measures have a measurable effect. Lastly, we note that the effect of the shift of tq is far less
severe than in the case of Andalusia (Fig. 2).
It is worthwhile to compare the scenario-two median parameters (Table III, second column) to those we found for Andalusia.
There are no particularly noteworthy differences, although some do exist. For example, as in the case of Andalusia, the median
incubation period is approximately 4 days (3.72), the latent period approximately 3 days (2.89), the asymptomatic infectious
period about 7 days (6.87) and that of the infected 6 days (6.13). A slight difference is noted in the fraction of infected that need
to be hospitalized (γ ≈ 0.44 instead of 0.55), and the fraction of hospitalized that become fatalities (ω ≈ 0.21 instead of 0.25).
As in the case of Andalusia, we find βIS > βAS , but note the proviso related to parameter identifiability reported later on, and
that the fraction of exposed who turn asymptomatic is approximately 0.56 while the ratio of asymptomatics to symptomatically
infected is 1.29. After lockdown measures are imposed, the two transmission rates decrease by the same amount (ηIS = ηAS ),
again as we found for Andalusia.

FIG. 10. Sensitivity analysis for Greece (scenario two, tq = 23). The top panel shows the inverse relationship between βAS σA and βIS σI
for a series of optimizations (200) performed by uniformly sampling model parameters and ten fixed equidistant ratios of βAS /βIS within
the range [0.2, 2]. The blue dots are the results of calculations with the median of the optimized values (the line is a guide to the eye), while
the red dots denote the results of all the optimizations. The two bottom panels compare the predicted future number of cases (left panel, red
bundle) and fatalities (right, red bundle) for all the optimizations shown in the top panel; black dots are the reported numbers (and those used
for model fitting). While the transmission rates (times the associated time scales) vary significantly, the forward, model-predicted evolution of
the pandemic does not. This is an indication that even though the model parameters are not identifiable, they provide an adequate predictor of
the evolution of the pandemic if chosen within a suitable range.

The calculated basic reproduction number R0 (see Appendix A) for the scenario-one pre-quarantine period (tq = 13), i.e.
calculated with data from the first column of Table III with the η set to unity, is R0 = 1.64 (1.60−1.68), median and interquartile
range. The effective reproduction number, i.e., the reproduction number at the beginning of the quarantine with the associated
change of the transmission rates (η’s as reported in column one) was calculated to be Reff = 0.849(0.842 − 0.854), reflecting
the curbing of the epidemic curves, as shown in Fig. 9. Similarly, the calculated pre-quarantine basic reproduction number for

21
scenario two (tq = 23) is R0 = 1.32 (1.31 − 1.34). This post-quarantine effective reproduction number decreases to Reff = 0.64
(0.63 − 0.65), an indication that intervention measures lead to a curbing of the epidemic.
We conclude this section by a brief discussion of parameter identifiability and the zero eigenvalues of the Hessian of the
variation of the Euclidean norm with respect to model parameters, in the spirit of the corresponding discussion for the case
of Andalusia. Figure 10 presents our calculations relevant to parameter identifiability and sensitivity to parameter variations
(for the more reliable simulations of the second scenario). As for Andalusia, we performed 200 optimization with parameters
uniformly sampled within their variation range with the ratio βAS /βIS fixed at one of ten equidistant values chosen within [0.2,
2]. The top panel in the figure shows the inverse (apparently nearly linear) relationship between properties of asymptomatics
(βAS σA ) and the corresponding properties of infected, a relationship that we argued may be interpreted as the manifestation of
the singular eigendirection of the Hessian. As the fraction of asymptomatics to infected increases the asymptomatic transmission
rate decreases. Lastly, we note that the cloud of points for the total number of cases slightly overpredicts the data initially en
route to eventually (slightly) underpredicting their long-term evolution. The cloud of points follows rather closely the data for
total fatalities, with the data eventually lying near the bottom edge of the prediction interval.

B.

PDE model: Spatially distributed populations

Results relevant to the scenario-two PDE simulations for the mainland of Greece may be found in Fig. 11 for the same
parameters as for the 0D model, and in Figs. 12–14 for the spatio-temporal simulations of the pandemic.
The initialization of the model for Greece consisted of selecting five of the key “hotspots” of the infection, as they arose
in Greece, to populate initially. We defined an infection radius of 10 km around the center of Athens (largest city and capital),
Thessaloniki (second largest city and source of the first infection), Patras (third largest city and the location where a key imported
group of infected individuals was transferred), as well as Kozani and Xanthi. The latter two are two significant peripheral centers
where infections were seeded early on. In Athens, we placed the largest (by a factor of two) source of infection, while similar
“blobs” of infection were initialized in the remaining four cities. As in the case of Andalusia, these epicenters of infection were
initiated via Gaussian profiles whose spatial (variance) scale was selected as the infection radius; their amplitude was chosen so
that the total number of infections, deaths, recoveries and hospitalizations, as calculated via the surface integrals of the associated
densities through the country, be the same as the one reported in the original data. The population of asymptomatics and exposed
was, similarly to the ODE optimization, selected to be proportional to the infected one with the proportionality ratios A0 /I0 and
E0 /I0 maintained as those of the ODE.
As for Andalusia, having initialized the PDE model, it was run without optimizing the median parameters that are not expected
to depend on spatial scales at the PDE level. Instead, we varied the diffusion-coefficient reduction factor ηD in steps of 0.05
in the interval [0.25, 0.50] (six simulations in total). For each simulation the scaling factor was determined by minimizing the
`2 norm, as previously discussed. Similarly to the 0D simulations, the comparison of the spatially integrated PDE results to
the data for Greece (see Fig. 11) is not particularly good for the first scenario (tq = 13, left column) that considers only a
minor shift of the quarantine time. In fact, the 0D results do not fall within the range of the spatially averaged PDE simulations.
Further modification of the quarantine time (scenario two) can also help capture once again the “angle” in the relevant data (right
column). Clearly, the spatial model, via the surface integral of the population densities, does a very adequate job at capturing
both the cumulative infections and the number of deaths. Notice that in the bottom row of the figure, we illustrate the surface
integrals of each of the densities of E, A, H, R and AR as a function of time, representing the evolution of the pandemic at the
“integrated” level of the entire country in an illustration similar to the one that we typically obtain from the ODE models.
That being said, of course, the PDE model provides considerable additional information through its spatial resolution. In
Figs. 12–14, we can see the spatio-temporal evolution of infections (i.e., the spatial distribution at a few snapshots over time),
fatalities and cumulative infections C(x, y, t), respectively. These figures were generated using the median parameters of the
second
√ scenario, and with the transmission rates multiplied by the scaling factor ξ = 0.00246. The corresponding length scale is
l = ξN ≈ 0.163 km, comparable to what we found for Andalusia l ≈ 0.200km. In addition and as in the case of Andalusia,
if we associate the scaling factor with the inverse of the “lived” population density we find that in Greece [74] it is around
1/379 ≈ 0.0026, remarkably close to the numerically-determined ξ. We believe that the identification of the scaling factor as
very closely matching the inverse of the lived population density in two entirely independent (and quite distinct in their number
of infections) cases suggests this scaling as a nontrivial insight stemming from these studies about the connection of ODE and
PDE models.
We also produced movies of the corresponding evolution that can be found in [65]. It is important to re-iterate here that we
have not included the islands of Greece in this effort (i.e., we are looking at the mainland of Greece). Obviously if one were to
model the disease spread in each of these islands it would be relevant to seed the infection in each island individually and study
the spreading there rather than together with the spatially disconnected from the islands mainland of Greece.
We can clearly see how the infection spreads throughout the country, affecting most significantly the regions of higher population density. Indeed, it is clear that over time the infection is extinguished in most regions and it finally persists chiefly in
Attica, the region of highest population density (and where the main metropolitan center of the country, Athens, lies); see, in

22

FIG. 11. PDE model for Greece with fitting to official data from March 12, 2020 (t = tinit = 1) to May 11, 2020 (tend
fit = 61). Confinement
time starts at March 22, 2020 (t = 11). The plots displayed on the left panels correspond to tq = 13 (March 22, 2020) and those on the right
panels hold for tq = 23 (April 3, 2020). The solid blue line (top two rows) reproduces the 0D simulation, cf. Fig. 9. The median parameters
shown in Table III are used, except for the transmission rates that were scaled by ξ[0.00216, 0.00234] for tq = 13 and ξ[0.00245, 0.00248]
for tq = 23. The optimal scaling factor ξ increases as the diffusion-coefficient reduction factor ηD increases. The latter was varied in the
interval [0.25, 0.50] in steps of 0.05. Shaded regions are delimited by the optimal plots for ηD = 0.5 and ηD = 0.25.

particular, the bottom panels of Fig. 12. Nevertheless, it is evident from Fig. 13 that a number of deaths develops in each of the 5
regions where the infection was initially seeded, in line with the corresponding expectation from the country’s data. Indeed, also,
each region features a discernible fraction of cumulative infections in Fig. 14, although clearly once again the lion’s share of
infections pertains to Attica. The second biggest fraction of infections pertains to Thessaloniki (the second biggest metropolitan

23

FIG. 12. Evolution of the mainland Greek infected population density I(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 12, 2020), t = 6 days (top
right, March 17, 2020), t = 11 days (bottom left, March 22, 2020), and t = 21 days (bottom right, April 1, 2020). tq = 23 (April 3, 2020),
ηD = 0.35 and scaling factor ξ = 0.00246. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

center) and so on. It is clear from these figures that the model yields a reasonable prediction of the spatial evolution of the
disease spread, in line with the cumulative totals of deaths and infections throughout the country. Nevertheless, a comparison
with the spatial distribution of the pandemic throughout the country [50], see Fig. 15, suggests also some limitations. The spatial
snapshot of the number of confirmed cases per prefecture shown in that figure was created on March 29, 2020, corresponding to
t = 18. Hence the data are intermediate between the two bottom panels of Fig. 14, at t = 11 and 21 days. The persistence of
the epidemic in Attica (dark red) and to a lesser degree Thessaloniki (red) is evident in both figures. The other areas seem to be
slightly underpredicted. The comparison suggests a partial time mismatch between the simulations and the data. One can also
observe that since the initial spots for Andalusia were spatially close, the infection spreads more easily in that region than in the
mainland of Greece.

24

FIG. 13. Evolution of the Greek fatalities population density D(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 12, 2020), t = 6 days (top right, March
17, 2020), t = 11 days (bottom left, March 22, 2020), and t = 21 days (bottom right, April 1, 2020). tq = 23 (April 3, 2020), ηD = 0.35 and
scaling factor ξ = 0.00246. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

25

FIG. 14. Evolution of the Greek confirmed case density C(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left, March 12, 2020), t = 6 days (top right, March 17,
2020), t = 11 days (bottom left, March 22, 2020), and t = 21 days (bottom right, April 1, 2020). tq = 23 (April 3, 2020), ηD = 0.35 and
scaling factor ξ = 0.00246. Note the different scales of the colorbar.

2000px-COVID-19_Outbreak_Cases_in_Greece_per_regional_unit_(prefecture).svg.png 2.000×1.729 pixels

12/02/21, 15:36

FIG. 15. Map of COVID-19 outbreak in Greece as of March 29, 2020 (t = 18) reproduced from Ref. [75]. Number of confirmed cases per
prefecture (Greece’s regional units) denoted by color: From light cream (1-4 case confirmed) to peach (5-9 cases confirmed) to brown-orange
(10-49 cases confirmed) to red (50-99 case confirmed) to dark red (more than 100 cases confirmed). Compare and contrast with the bottom
panels at times t = 11 and 21 days, Fig. 14.
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/COVID-…break_Cases_in_Greece_per_regional_unit_%28prefecture%29.svg.png

Page 1 of 1

26
Acknowledgments. The authors are indebted to Dr. Maksym Bondarenko for his substantial help with the WorldPop maps
and setup, and also thank Dr. Jinlan Huang for assistance in setting the relevant computation up in COMSOL. In addition, we
thank Francisco Rodrı́guez Sánchez for providing the data and R code used to generate the map with the spatial distribution of
the epidemic in Andalusia, Fig. 8. PGK gratefully acknowledges discussions and input from Andy Ludu including regarding the
layout of Fig. 1. This material is based upon work supported by the US National Science Foundation under Grants No. DMS1815764 (ZR), PHY-1602994, and DMS-1809074 (PGK). ZR and PGK also acknowledge support through the C3.ai Digital
Transformation Institute. PGK also acknowledges support from the Leverhulme Trust via a Visiting Fellowship and hanks the
Mathematical Institute of the University of Oxford for its hospitality during this work.
Disclaimer The views expressed in this manuscript are purely those of the authors and may not, under any circumstances, be
regarded as an official position of the European Commission.

[1] G. Chowell, P. W. Fenimore, M. A. Castillo-Garsow, C. Castillo-Chavez, SARS outbreaks in Ontario, Hong Kong and Singapore: the
role of diagnosis and isolation as a control mechanism, Journal of Theoretical Biology 224 1–8 (2003).
[2] R. Breban, J. Riou and A. Fontanet, Interhuman transmissibility of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus: estimation of pandemic
risk, Lancet 382 694–699 (2013).
[3] https://covid19.who.int
[4] B.S. Graham, J.R. Mascola, and A.S. Fauci, Novel Vaccine Technologies: Essential Components of an Adequate Response to Emerging
Viral Diseases, JAMA 319, 1431 (2018).
[5] World Health Organization Writing Group, Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 88 (2006).
[6] N.M. Ferguson et al., Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduceCOVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial
College, London, (Mar. 2020), https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/covid-19/
[7] See, e.g., https://www.covid19vaccinetrial.co.uk/about
[8] Y. Drossinos and N.I. Stilianakis, What aerosol physics tells us about airborne pathogen trannsmission, Aerosol Sci. Technol. 54, 639
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2020.1751055.
[9] J. Lu, J. Gu, K. Li, C. Xu, W. Su, Z. Lai, D. Zhou, C. Yu, B. Xu, and Z. Yang, Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020, Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26, 1268 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180
[10] M. Kenji, K. Katsushi, Z. Alexander, C. Gerardo, COVID-19 Outbreak Associated with Air Conditioning in Restaurant, Guangzhou,
China, 2020, Euro Surveill. 25(10):pii=2000180 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200764
[11] P. Yang , J. Qi , S. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Bi, Y. Yang, B. Sheng, and G. Yang, Feasibility study of mitigation and suppression strategies
for controlling COVID19 outbreaks in London and Wuhan, PLoS ONE 15(8), e0236857 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0236857
[12] K.-M. Tam, N. Walker, and J. Moreno, Projected Development of COVID-19 in Louisiana, arXiv:2004.02859.
[13] L. Danon, E. Brooks-Pollock, M. Bailey, and M. Keeling, A spatial model of CoVID-19 transmission in England and Wales: early spread
and peak timing, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.12.20022566.
[14] A. Arenas, W. Cota, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, S. Gómez, C. Granell, J.T. Matamalas, D. Soriano-Paños, and B. Steinegger, Modeling the
Spatiotemporal Epidemic Spreading of COVID-19 and the Impact of Mobility and Social Distancing Interventions, Phys. Rev. X 10,
041055 (2020). http://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.041055; Derivation of the effective reproduction number R for COVID-19 in relation
to mobility restrictions and confinement, doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054320
[15] G.D. Barmparis and G.P. Tsironis, Estimating the infection horizon of COVID-19 in eight countries with a data-driven approach, Chaos,
Solitons and Fractals 135, 109842 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2020.109842
[16] F. Aràndiga, A. Baeza, I. Cordero-Carrión , R. Donat, M. C. Martı́, P. Mulet, and D.F. Yáñez, A spatial-temporal model for the evolution
of the COVID-19 pandemic in Spain including mobility, Mathematics 8, 1677 (2020).
[17] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, et al., Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe, Nature 584,
257–261 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7
[18] S.B. Bastos and D.O. Cajueiro, Modeling and forecasting the early evolution of the Covid-19 pandemic in Brazil, Sci. Rep. 10, 19457
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-76257-1
[19] C. Qi, D. Karlsson, K. Sallmen, and R. Wyss, Model studies on the COVID-19 pandemic in Sweden, arXiv:2004.01575
[20] E. Gjini, Modeling Covid-19 dynamics for real-time estimates and projections: an application to Albanian data, https://doi.org/10.1101/
2020.03.20.20038141
[21] M. Gatto, E. Bertuzzo, L. Mari, S. Miccoli, L. Carraro, R. Casagrandi, and A. Rinaldo, Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic
in Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 10484 (2020). www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/
pnas.2004978117
[22] I. Kioutsoukis and N.I. Stilianakis, On the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in a temperate climate, Int. J. Environ, Res. Public
Health 18, 1660 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18041660
[23] C. Yang and J. Wang, A mathematical model for the novel coronavirus epidemic in Wuhan, China, Math. Biosci. Eng. 17, 2708 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2020148
[24] B. Tang, X. Wang, Q. Li, N.L. Bragazzi, S. Tang, Y. Xiao, and J. Wu, Estimation of the transmission risk of the 2019-nCoV and its
implication for public health interventions, J. Clin. Med. ]9, 462 (2020). http://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020462; B. Tang, N.L. Bragazzi, Q.

27

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]

[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]

Li, S. Tang, Y. Xiao, and J. Wu, An updated estimartion of the risk of transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov), Inf. Dis. Model.
5, 248 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.02.001
L. Russo, C. Anastassopoulou, A. Tsakris, G.N. Bifulco, E.F. Campana, G. Toraldo, and C. Siettos, Tracing day-zero and forecasting the
COVID-19 outbreak in Lombardy, Italy: A compartmental modelling and numerical optimization approach, PLoS ONE 15(10), e0240649
(2020).https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240649; C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, C. Siettos, Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak PLoS ONE 15(3), e0230405 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230405
A. Vespignani, H. Tian, C. Dye, J. O. Lloyd-Smith, R. M. Eggo, M. Shrestha, S. V. Scarpino, B. Gutierrez, M. U. G. Kraemer, J. Wu, K.
Leung and G. M. Leung, Modeling COVID-19, Nature Reviews Physics 2 279–281 (2020).
A. Anirudh, Mathematical modeling and the transmission dynamics in predicting the Covid-19-What next in combating the pandemic,
Infectious Disease Modelling 5 366–374 (2020).
M. T. Meehan, D. P. Rojas, A. I. Adekunle,O. A. Adegboye, J. M. Caldwell, E. Turek, B. M. Williams, B. J. Marais, J. M. Trauer, E. S.
McBryde, Modelling insights into the COVID-19 pandemic, Paediatric Respiratory Reviews 35 64–69 (2020).
I. Holmdahl and C. Buckee, Wrong but useful–What COVID-19 epidemiological models can and cannot tell us, N. England J. Med. 383
303–305 (2020).
T. Burki, Understanding variants of SARS-CoV-2, The Lancet 397, P462 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00298-1
H.W. Hethcote, The mathematics of infectious diseases, SIAM Review 42:4, 599-653 (2000); N.T. J. Bailey, The mathematical theory of
epidemics, Charles Griffin & Co., Ltd., London (1957); V. Capasso, Mathematical structures of epidemic systems, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg (1993).
C. Gai, D. Iron, and T. Kolokolnikov, Localized outbreaks in an S-I-R model with diffusion, Math. Biol. 80, 1389 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00285-020-01466-1
T. Reluga, A two-phase epidemic driven by diffusion, J. Theor. Biol. 229, 249 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.03.018
J. Murray, Mathematical biology II: Spatial models and biomedical applications, Vol. 3, Springer-Verlag (2001); M.J. Keeling and P.
Rohani, Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals, Princeton University Press (2011).
J. Gaudart, M. Ghassani, J. Mintsa, M. Rachdi, J. Waku, and J. Demongeot, Demography and Diffusion in Epidemics: Malaria and Black
Death Spread, Acta Biotheor. 58 277–305 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10441-010-9103-z
N.I. Stilianakis and Y. Drossinos, Dynamics of infectious disease transmission by inhalable respiratory droplets, J. R. Soc. Interface 7,
1355 (2010), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2010.0026.
J.V. Noble, Geographic and temporal development of plagues. Nature 250, 726–729 (1974). https://doi.org/10.1038/250726a0
X.-Y. Yan, W.-X. Wang, Z.-Y. Gao, and Y.-C. Lai, Universal model of individual and populatrion mobility on diverse spatial scales, Nat.
Commun. 8, 1639 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01892-8
Y. Mammeri, A reaction-diffusion system to better comprehend the unlockdown: Application of SEIR-type model with diffusion to the
spatial spread of COVID-19 in France, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.03499.pdf
A. Viguerie, G. Lorenzo, F. Auricchio, D. Baroli, T.R.J. Hughes, A. Patton, A. Reali, T.E. Yankeelov, A. Veneziani, Simulating the spread
of COVID-19 via spatially-resolved susceptible - exposed - infected - recovered - deceased (SEIRD) model with heterogeneous diffusion,
Appl. Math. Lett. 111, 106617 (2021).
V. Colizza and A. Vespignani, Epidemic modeling in metapopulation systems with heterogeneous coupling pattern: Theory and simulations, J. Theor. Biol. 251, 450 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.11.028
M.J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Estimating spatial coupling in epidemiological systems: A mechanistic approach, Ecol. Lett. 5, 20 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1461-0248.2002.00268.x
S. Meloni, N. Perras, A. Arenas, S. Gómez, Y. Moreno, and A. Vespignani, Modeling human mobility responses to the large-scale
spreading of infectious diseases, Sci. Rep. 1, 62 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00062
C.W. Gear, J.M. Hyman, P.G. Kevrekidis, I.G. Kevrekidis, O. Runborg, and C. Theodoropoulos, Equation-Free, Coarse-Grained
Multiscale Computation: Enabling Mocroscopic Simulators to Perform System-Level Analysis Comm. Math. Sci. 1, 715 (2003).
https://dx.doi.org/10.4310/CMS.2003.v1.n4.a5
G. Martı́n, D.E. Singh, M.-C. Marinescu, and J. Carretero, Parallel algorithm for simulating the spatial transmission of influenza in
EpiGraph, Parallel Computing 42, 88 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2488551.2488585
M. M. Arons et al., Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections and transmission in a skilled nursing facility, N. Engl. J. Med. 382:20812090 (2020). http:/doi.org//10.1056/NEJMoa2008457
See, e.g., Y.M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo, SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) by the numbers, eLife 9, e57309 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.57309
Z.-Q. Xia, J. Zhang, Y.-K. Xue, G.-Q. Sun, and Z. Jin, Modeling the transmission of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome corona virus in
the Republic of Korea, PLoS ONE 10(12), e0144778 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0144778
H. Berestycki, J.M. Roquejoffre, and L. Rossi, Propagation of epidemics along lines of fast diffusion, Bull. Math. Bio. 83, 2 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-020-00826-8
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19 pandemic in Greece
See, e.g., https://time.com/5824836/greece-coronavirus/, and also
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-04-10/greece-handled-coronavirus-crisis-better-than-italy-and-spain
COMSOL Multiphysicsr v. 5.5. https://www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
https://www.worldpop.org/
F.R. Stevens, A.E. Gaughan, C. Linard, and A.J. Tatem, Disaggregating census data for population mapping using random forests with
remotely-sensed and ancillary data, PLoS ONE 10 (2), e0107042 (2014). http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0107042
R. Dandekar and G. Barbastathis, Neural network aided quarantine control model estimation of global Covid-19 spread,
arXiv:2004.02752.
J.P. Arcede, R.L. Caga-anan, C.Q. Mentuda, and Y. Mammeri, Accounting for Symptomatic and Asymptomatic in a SEIR-type model of

28
COVID-19, Math. Model. Nat. Phenom. 15, 34 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1051/mmnp/2020021
[57] M. Robinson, N.I. Stilianakis, and Y. Drossinos, J. Theor. Biol. 297, 116 (2012), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.12.015
[58] http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/institutodeestadisticaycartografia/salud/index.htm
[59] J. Cuevas-Maraver, P. Kevrekidis, Q.-Y. Chen, G.Kevrekidis, V. Villalobos-Daniel, Z. Rapti, Y. Drossinos, Lockdown Measures and their
Impact on Single- and Two-age-structured Epidemic Model for the COVID-19 Outbreak in Mexico, Math. Biosci. (accepted). medRxiv
2020.08.11.20172833; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.11.20172833.
[60] T.G. Farmer, T.F. Edgar, and N.A. Peppas, Parameter set uniqueness and confidence limits in model identification of insulin transport
models from simulation data. Diabetes Technol Ther. 10(2):128-41 (2008). https//doi.org/10.1089/dia.2007.0254
[61] https://www.juntadeandalucia.es/organismos/saludyfamilias/actualidad/noticias/detalle/234496.html
[62] P. Garland, D. Babbitt, M. Bondarenko, A. Sorichetta, A.J. Tatem, and O. Johnson, The COVID-19 pandemic as experienced by the
individual, arXiv:2005.01167
[63] http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/institutodeestadisticaycartografia/distribucionpob/
[64] See Andalusia.gif in Supplemental Material
[65] See Greece.gif in Supplemental Material
[66] https://pakillo.github.io/COVID19-Andalucia/evolucion-coronavirus-andalucia.html
[67] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, A. et al., Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on
COVID-19 in European countries: technical description update, arXiv:2004.11342
[68] D. Tsiotas and L. Magrafas, The effect of anti-COVID-19 policies on the evolution of the disease: A complex network analysis of the
successful case of Greece, Physics 2(2), 325-339 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3390/physics2020017
[69] T. Chacón Rebollo and D. Franco Coronil, Predictive data assimilation through reduced order modeling for epidemics with data uncertainty, arXiv:2004.12341.
[70] X. He, E.H.Y. Lau, P. Wu, et al., Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19, Nat Med 26, 672–675 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5
[71] R. Li, S. Pei, B. Chen, Y. Song, T. Zhang, W. Yang, and J. Shaman, Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination
of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) Science 368, 489–493 (2020). https//doi.org/10.1126/science.abb3221
[72] Y. Lou and X.-Q. Zhao, A reaction-diffusion malaria model with incubation period in the vector population, J. Math. Biol. 62, 543–568
(2011).
[73] See, e.g., section 6.4 in http://physics.bu.edu/∼redner/896/spin.pdf
[74] https://theconversation.com/think-your-country-is-crowded-these-maps-reveal-the-truth-about-population-density-across-europe-90345
[75] https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archivo:COVID-19 Outbreak Cases in Greece per regional unit (prefecture).svg

