arXiv:2005.14287v1 [physics.bio-ph] 28 May 2020

M ECHANOBIOLOGY PREDICTS RAFT FORMATIONS TRIGGERED
BY LIGAND - RECEPTOR ACTIVITY ACROSS THE CELL
MEMBRANE

A. R. Carotenuto
Department of Structures for Engineering and Architecture, University of Napoli "Federico II" - Italy
angelorosario.carotenuto@unina.it
L. Lunghi
Smiling International School, formerly at the Department of Life Sciences and Biotech., University of Ferrara - Italy
lnglra1@unife.it
V. Piccolo
Department of Civil, Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento - Italy
valentina.piccolo@unitn.it
M. Babaei
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon - USA
mbabaei@andrew.cmu.edu
K. Dayal
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon - USA
kaushik@cmu.edu
N. M. Pugno
Department of Civil, Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento - Italy;
Laboratory of Bio-inspired, Bionic, Nano, Meta Materials & Mechanics, Department of Civil,
Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento - Italy;
School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS- UK
nicola.pugno@unitn.it
M. Zingales
Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università di Palermo, viale delle Scienze ed.8, 90128 Palermo, Italy
massimiliano.zingales@unipa.it
L. Deseri
Department of Civil, Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento - Italy;
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon - USA;
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Material Sciences, SSoE, University of Pittsburgh - USA;
Department of Nanomedicine, The Houston Methodist Research Institute - USA
Lud7@pitt.edu
M. Fraldi
Department of Structures for Engineering and Architecture, University of Napoli Federico II, Italy
fraldi@unina.it

A BSTRACT
Clustering of ligand-binding receptors of different types on thickened isles of the cell membrane,
namely lipid rafts, is an experimentally observed phenomenon. Although its influence on cell’s
response is deeply investigated, the role of the coupling between mechanical processes and multiphysics involving the active receptors and the surrounding lipid membrane during ligand-binding
has not yet been understood. Specifically, the focus of this work is on G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), the widest group of transmembrane proteins in animals, which regulate specific cell
processes through chemical signalling pathways involving a synergistic balance between the cyclic
Adenosine Monophosphate (cAMP) produced by active GPCRs in the intracellular environment and
its efflux, mediated by the Multidrug Resistance Proteins (MRPs) transporters. This paper develops a
multiphysics approach based on the interplay among energetics, multiscale geometrical changes and
mass balance of species, i.e. active GPCRs and MRPs, including diffusion and kinetics of binding and
unbinding. Because the obtained energy depends upon both the kinematics and the changes of species
densities, balance of mass and of linear momentum are coupled and govern the space-time evolution
of the cell membrane. The mechanobiology involving remodelling and change of lipid ordering of
the cell membrane allows to predict dynamics of transporters and active receptors –in full agreement
with experimentally observed cAMP levels– and how the latter trigger rafts formation and cluster on
such sites. Within the current scientific debate on Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome CoronaVirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) and on the basis of the ascertained fact that lipid rafts often serve as an entry port for
viruses, it is felt that approaches accounting for strong coupling among mechanobiological aspects
could even turn helpful in better understanding membrane-mediated phenomena such as COVID-19
virus-cell interaction.

1

Introduction

Cellular communication relies upon binding of ligands to specific cell surface receptors. G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) are key players in initiating and regulating cellular processes as they mediate responses to hormones,
neurotransmitters, metabolites, ions, fatty acids, pathogens, and physical stimuli, such as light, smell, taste, and
mechanical stretch. Moreover they can be activated by synthetic agonists, inhibited by antagonists and inverse agonists,
or affected by allosteric modulators. They actually represent the most important superfamily of clinical targets in
disorders of neural, immune, cardiovascular, endocrine, respiratory system and cancer [1, 2, 3, 4]. In particular, for
disease like asthma, it is known to involve specific GPCRs, called β2 -adrenergic receptors. This is because asthma
entails a continuous use of β2 -agonists, which are located in human airway epithelial cells. Indeed, this results in loss
of bronchoprotective effects and deterioration of asthma control. The importance of such receptors in cancer relates
to the fact that cAMP-based markers have shown to have a great potential for the early diagnosis of certain tumors.
Groundwork for translation of the so called β-blockade as a novel adjuvant to existing therapeutic strategies in clinical
oncology is on its way (see e.g. [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]).
GPCRs are major modulators of communication between the internal and external milieu of cells. These receptors
are integral membrane proteins with an extracellular N-terminus and seven TransMembrane helical domains (TMs),
from TM1 to TM7, connected by loop regions. Nowadays GPCR signaling is recognized to be more complex that
was originally understood [10]. Briefly, their binding to very different kinds of extracellular stimuli induces TM
domain conformational changes and the structural remodelling of the protein. The latter allows for the coupling with
cytoplasmic G proteins, which is followed by the activation of second messenger generating enzymes. The produced
second messenger can activate many downstream signaling pathways inside the cell [11]. This activity of GPCRs is
known to be detected through measurements of cyclyc Adenosyne Monophospate -cAMP-, the detectable signature of
the pathway arising in response to ligands, such as epinephrine. The production of cAMP in the cellular environment
turns out to be modulated by several factors. In particular, the presence of Multidrug Resistance Proteins-MRPs allows
for the efflux of cAMP from the interior of the cell to the extracellular fluid, by so maintaining homeostatic intracellular
concentrations. For this reason, MRPs are called transporters, as they contribute to keep a balance of cAMP inside the
cell. A schematic of this process is depicted in Figure 1.
Historically, adrenergic receptors are some of the most studied GPCRs. Two main subfamilies, α and β, which differ in
tissue localization, ligand specificity, G protein coupling, and downstream effector mechanisms, are present. Diverse
diseases, such as asthma, hypertension, and heart failure, are related to genetic modifications of adrenergic receptors. In
particular, β2-adrenergic receptors (β2ARs) are found in smooth muscles throughout the body, and β2AR agonists are
common treatments for asthma and preterm labor [14]. In [15] it has been demonstrated the presence of β-adrenergic
receptors in HTR-8/SVneo cell line, a well characterized first-trimester human extravillous trophoblast-derived cell line.
Such cells invade the maternal uterine stroma, the decidua and the deeper portion of the myometrium evoking profound

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the ligand-binding between epinephrine (red dots on the top-left) and GPCRs (left, formed by
seven cylindrical Transmembrane Domains-TMs) with production of intracellular and extracellular cyclic-Adenosine MonoPhosphatecAMP- in the presence of transporters-MRPs (yellow unit to the right). Intermediate units are the G-protein (brown circle, near
the GPCRS) and the Adenylate Cyclase (purple unit, across the membrane). The surface density of GPCRs bound to ligands is
denoted by ξ, while the analog for MRPs is labelled as ζ. The letters A, B, C and D display the order in which the chain of events
occurs from the time in which ligand-binding takes place to the effects of the cell response through the production of intracellular
and extracellular cAMP. The scheme highlights that a broad spectrum inhibitor of cAMP phosphodiesterase, labelled as PDE, is
accounted for [12]. Helical domains forming the GPCR are displayed as cylinders in the figure: the TMs, where TM3, TM5 and
TM6 have been reported in colors, to highlight their conformational changes. The latter are displayed at the bottom of this figure.
They consist in a rotation (ω) of such domains about their axis, orthogonal to the (local) mid plane of the membrane (whose unit
vector is denoted by e3 ), and on the shear (µ) of TM6 approximately towards TM5, in the direction s, whose components in the local
mid-plane are also displayed in the figure (see e.g. [13]).

changes within the uterine vessels. A limited trophoblast invasion of maternal vessels has been correlated to both
preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction, whereas an excessive trophoblast invasion is associated with invasive mole,
placenta accreta and choriocarcinoma [16]. Other studies showed the importance of GPCRs during pregrancy [17, 18].
Ghanouni and coworkers [13] focused their studies on β2AR conformational changes induced by agonist binding using
quenching experiments. Their results can best be explained by either a rotation of TM6 and a tilting of TM6 toward
TM5 during agonist-induced activation of the receptor. The structure, activation, and signaling of a GPCR is heavily
influenced by the bilayer environment. This influence seems likely to involve either indirect bilayer effects, specific
membrane-GPCR interactions, or a combination of both [19, 20, 21].
It has been reported that specific properties of this environment result in co-localization with downstream signaling
components providing a rationale for regulation and specificity in GPCR activation [22, 23]. Some subsets of GPCRs
are preferentially segregated to discrete regions of the membrane defined as lipid rafts [24, 25, 20, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29,
23, 30, 31, 32]. Despite lipid rafts are involved in a number of biologically relevant phenomena and their formation has
been demonstrated to often serve as entry port for some viruses, including SARS-CoV ones [33], why is this the case
and what is the physics at the basis of the associated remodelling of the lipid membrane remain still open questions
[29, 34, 35]. Lipid raft are highly dynamic thickened areas on the lipid membrane with different dimensions and a
complex heterogeneous composition. This is due to the fact that such rafts host a variety of transmembrane proteins
responsible of compartmentalizing cellular processes to isolated districts of the cell. These planar regions form localized
microdomains on the cell membrane and are hardly directly observable in vivo [36, 37]. In particular, they appear
as dynamic nanoscale assemblies, where a high glycosphingolipid and cholesterol content in the outer leaflet of the
lipid bilayer is present. This composition gives them a gel-like liquid-ordered organisation in comparison with the
surrounding phospholipid-rich disordered membrane [20, 38].
Each lipid molecule, composed by a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail, may exhibit two different shape conditions
of the tail, either straightened and taller (also known as ordered state, Lo ), or curly and shortened (also known as

disordered state, Ld ). Such states depend on several conditions, among which the temperature and chemical composition
of the lipid mixture are the main factors (see e.g. [39, 40, 41, 42]).
The interplay between lipids and proteins is known to influence the overall behavior of the cell membrane. In
particular,the adenosine A1, α1-AR, β1-AR, β2-AR, AT1R, the endothelin (ETA-A and ET-B) receptors, and the
M2-muscarinic receptors have all been localized to lipid rafts and/or caveolae [19]. The association of β2AR with
caveolin3 in myocytes membranes has been demonstrated, as well as the fact that the confinement of β2-AR to caveolae
is of critical importance for regulation of the intrinsic contraction rate in these membrane preparations [43]. How
cholesterol modifies GPCR activity appears very much receptor-dependent, with regards to both upregulation and
downregulation and of direct and indirect action [21, 44]. The mechanical and chemical response of these amazing
structures depends on many factors, such as the shape of the membrane, the temperature of the environment, the osmotic
pressure, the chemical composition of lipid mixture, etc. [45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52].
Depending on the presence of embedded specialized proteins into the lipid membrane, several predicting models have
been developed [53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 48, 59, 60, 49]. Most of them are based on the characterization of the energy,
with the aim of predicting the ordered-disordered phenomena arising in transition regions for contrasting the external
stimuli. Indeed, thickness reduction of the bilayer is observed by changing the mechanical and chemical conditions in the
environment surrounding the cell. For this reason, several Authors adopted the change in thickness as order parameter
for studying such kind of systems [61, 62, 42]. Without explicitly doing so, a theory for the chemo-mechanical coupling
of lipid bilayers accounting for curvature changes, viscosity, diffusion and Lo − Ld phase transitions has recently been
presented in [63]. The Lo − Ld phase transition has been modelled through a dimensionless order parameter related to
the fraction of dioleoylphosphatidylcholine, known as DOPC. This is known to exhibit disordered features in agreement
with the curliness of the tails mentioned above. Furthermore, binding and diffusion of certain proteins, epsin-1, is
thoroughly analyzed. As pointed out above, the physical behavior of such membranes is regulated by many factors
enabling the occurrence of out-of-plane tractions, while in-plane shear stresses are not transmitted unless their viscosity
is accounted for.
The increasing availability of imaging techniques led indeed to a striking increase of interest in the study of lipid
membranes, often revealing examples of the complex features characterizing their behavior (see, e.g., [50, 51]). Bilayer
elasticity has been fruitfully exploited in the literature for the study of equilibrium shapes of red blood cells [58]
and GUVs (Giant Unilamellar Vesicle) [57, 64]. The effects of embedded proteins or rod-like inclusions in the lipid
membrane have been analyzed in [48, 49, 59], together with the analysis of buds formation [65] with the coexistence of
domains characterized by different bending rigidities [47, 51].
Models for the exhibited order-disorder transition can be found in [66, 67, 68, 61, 41, 69, 70, 62, 71, 72] among others,
while the effects of special molecules (like cholesterol) on such transition have also been studied in [73, 74, 75, 66, 52,
65].
Models of lipid membranes where the bending behavior, the order-disorder transition and the chemical composition
have been consistently taken into account can be found in [55, 56, 76, 48, 49, 77, 78, 60, 71]. In [55, 56], the energetics
regulating the behavior of such membranes was obtained through asymptotic dimension reduction (see also [79]). The
major point in such papers is that the “quasi-incompressibility” of the environment, together with the influence of
chemical composition, is enough to describe the membrane Lo − Ld transition.
With the aim of understanding why GPCRs prefer to live on lipid rafts and, in turn, why the activation of transmembrane
proteins involved in cell processes induce the formation of such thickened microdomains, the mechanobiology of the
remodelling of the lipid bilayer is investigated by focusing on the interplay among membrane elasticity and density
changes of active species. In order to predict the dynamic remodelling of the cell membrane, following thermodynamic
arguments, a chemo-mechanical coupling is found for the obtained chemical potentials of such species. These potentials
regulate active species diffusion through mass balance which, in turn, involves the kinetics of binding through the
occurence of interspecific terms. The potentials of the active species determine a corresponding coupling for the
resulting energetics. Furthermore, it is found that the chemo-mechanical coupling found for such potentials is the
specific work exterted by the lateral pressure (arising across the membrane thickness) against the volume changes
around the interaction sites among the species domains and the surrounding lipids. It is worth noting that accounting for
the aspects mentioned above enables mechanobiology to give a mechanically-based justification to the experimental
findings of Nobel Prizes 2012 Kobilka [10] and Leifkovitz [11].

2

Experimental measurements to trace protein fractions

Experiments involving human trophoblast cells known to contain β-adrenergic receptors have been performed to
the extent of detecting the activity of such GPCR in the human placenta (see e.g. [16], [12]). The occurrence of a

Multidrug Resistant Protein (MRP)-dependent cAMP efflux is also shown in human first-trimester placenta explants.
Extracellular cAMP has been hypothesized to represent a source for adenosine formation that, in turn, could modulate
cAMP-dependent responses in placental tissue. Evidence is provided that adenosine receptor subtypes are present and
functional in Human TRophoblast (HTR)-derived cells. A role for cAMP egress mechanism in the fine modulation of
the nucleotide homeostasis is then highly probable.
2.1

Materials and Methods

In the papers cited above, HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cell line obtained from human first-trimester
placenta ex-plant
,
cultures and immortalized using SV40 large T antigen, donated by Dr. C.H. Graham, Queen s University (Kingston,
ON-Canada) to the Cell Biology Laboratory of the University of Ferrara, were cultured at 37◦ C in a controlled
atmosphere of 5% CO2 /95% air in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and
100 µg/ml streptomycin. These cells were grown to confluence (2-3 days) in a 24-well plate (250,000 cells per well).
The medium was then removed and replaced by serum-free RPMI.
The incubation process took place in wells of capacity Cw = 500 µl of such RPMI. This was carried out in the presence
of isobutylmethylxanthine, otherwise known as IBMX, a broad spectrum inhibitor of cAMP phosphodiesterase (PDE)
[12]. This was performed in the presence and in the absence of a given amount of epinephrine for the indicated times.
Media were then collected and immediately frozen at -70◦ C until extracellular cAMP (cAMPe ) levels were measured.
Ice-cold 0.1 N HCl (0.25 ml) was added to the cells and, after centrifugation at 12,500 x g for 10 min, supernatants
were neutralized adding 0.5 M Trizma base (0.05 ml) and utilized for measuring intracellular cAMP (cAMPi ). Finally,
cAMPi and cAMPe were determined by standard methods (e.g. method of Brown [80]) and the nucleotide levels were
expressed as pmoles/106 cells/time.
Tests with increasing concentration of epinephrine were first performed and cAMP measurements were recorded at a
given time (10 minutes). Epinephrine turned out to enhance intracellular cAMP in a dose-dependent fashion, reaching a
plateau at around 10−4 M (Figure 2A).
Furthermore, the cAMP evolution over time was monitored in the absense and in the presence of 10−6 M concentration
of epinephrine. Such a concentration was chosen because it triggered a cAMPi production close to the half of the
maximum response (Figure 2B).
The cAMP levels were measured in cells incubated up to 60 minutes.
In basal conditions, cAMP concentrations remained almost constant at all tested times (around 6.0 pmoles/106 cells, not
shown). In the presence of epinephrine, cAMPi increased as a function of the incubation time up to 15 min (14-fold),
thereafter a reduction of the nucleotide level was observed.
At the same time, cAMPe gradually increases in time, thereby almost reaching a plateaux, at least during the 60 min of
observation (not shown).
Analogous experimental observations in [15, 16, 12], although with different ligands, showed an analogous trend. For
the present case, when a concentration c = 1 µM of epinephrine was used, the total quantity Q of ligand utilized in the
experiment involving 106 cells can be then computed as follows:
Q = 4 × c Cw = 4 × 1 µM × 500 µL = 2000 pmol.

(2.1)

The experimental diagrams coming from the measurements of cAMP production are displayed in Figure 2.
cAMPi-to-ξ and cAMPe-to-ζ relationships The fields of active receptors density ξ(x, t) and its products, namely
the intracellular cAMPi , are intimately linked by a conversion factor, namely aξ , as follows:

cAM Pi = aξ ξ − ξ¯ ≈ aξ ξ,
(2.2)
where aξ = 104 is estimated experimentally [12] and ξ¯ is the basal value of the density of active receptors. Here, the
cAMP level is referred to a population of 106 cells (and it is expressed in pmol). Taking into account a parameter
c1 = 106 for switching between the population and the single cell, and c2 = 1012 for converting pmol to mol, the
number of active receptors can be computed as follows:


1 1 cAM Pi
ξ# =
NA ,
(2.3)
c1 aξ
c2
where NA is the Avogadro number. An analogous relationship holds for computing the number of transporters:

cAM Pe = aζ ζ − ζ̄ ≈ aζ ζ,
(2.4)

cAMPi = solid line
cAMPe = dashed line

80
cAMP (pmoles / 10 6 cells )

cAMPi (pmoles / 10 6 cells / 10 min)

120
100
80
60
40
20

60
40
20
0

0
- 9

- 8

- 7

- 6

- 5

- 4

Log[epinephrine] M

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

time [min]

Figure 2: Experimental results: (a) value of measured intracellular cAMP after 10 minutes depending on epinephrine concentration,
(b) time evolution of measured intracellular cAMP for a fixed value of epinephrine concentration (10−6 M ).

where ζ̄ represents the basal value of the density of active transporters. In both the cases, direct proportionality between
cAMP concentrations has been used to obtain an indirect estimation of the protein fractions predicted by the dynamics.

3

The biomechanical model

The mechanobiology of lipid raft formation is investigated by accounting for deformation localization phenomena during
binding of receptors, namely GPCRs compounds, with the incoming ligand. To this aim, the cell membrane is modelled
as a thin hyperelastic soft body on which active receptors with density ξ and transporters (i.e. MRPs-Multidrug
Resistant Proteins) with density ζ mediate the communication between the extra-cellular and the intra-cellular
environment. Receptor-Ligand (RL) compounds and MRPs directly initiate different signaling pathways involved in
different cell processes, regulated by the transport and compartmentation of chemicals such as cyclic-AMP. Measuring
cAMP concentrations then allows to indirectly estimate the amount of surface proteins involved, as explained in Section
2. There the experiments used to trace the levels of receptors and transporters are described. In the proposed model, the
cell membrane is characterized according to the constitutive framework proposed by Deseri and Zurlo in [55, 54, 56].
Here, this is explicitly coupled with the dynamics of GPCRs and MRPs activation, apt to describe the growth of active
domains on the membrane surface by means of flow rules that include the receptor-transporter interplay. This dynamics
is modelled according to a theory of interspecific growth mechanics recently proposed by Fraldi and Carotenuto in
[81, 82] and applied to model the growth of solid tumors. Here, the same framework is adapted to model the kinetics
and diffusion of transmembrane proteins triggered by ligand-binding and mediated by the membrane elasticity. Upon
utilizing this approach, the evolution equations for the species provide Lotka-Volterra-inspired interspecific terms aimed
to model the response of GPCRs to affine ligands and the growth of RL complex. The latter stimulate the activation of
MRPs through the intracellular cAMP production. In turn, it is observed a localization of islands of active receptors and
transporters on thickened domains of the cell membrane, known as lipid rafts. Such remodelling phenomenon is then
governed by kinetics, diffusion and energetics, where binding/unbinding events turn out to be strongly coupled to the
mechanical response of the plasma membrane through the energetics. Indeed, the mechanical interaction between the
membrane and the active proteins during their remodelling and the conformational changes of their domains can be
traced through the growth of their corresponding fractions.

3.1

Membrane elasticity model for lipid bilayers

In this Section the main results obtained in [55, 54, 56] are briefly recalled, and a schematic description of the approach
followed in these papers is provided. The formulation of the model is based on the following assumptions:
(i) the effects leading to a spontaneous or natural curvature of the bilayer are ignored, i.e. it is assumed that the
natural configuration is flat;
(ii) the membrane kinematics is restricted to the class of normal preserving deformations, i.e. the normal vector n
remains always normal to the mid-surface.

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the deformation of a prismatic, plate-like reference configuration B0 into the current
configuration B. The gray box depicts the space occupied by two lipid molecules, their volume being conserved during the
deformation. Courtesy of [54].

Under these assumptions, a simplified version of the elastic energy related to the change of the membrane geometry has
been obtained in [55, 54], The deformation mapping is denoted by y = f (x), while its gradient is F = ∇y = ∇x f . The
stored Helmholtz free-energy can be then expressed as
Z
Z Z h0 /2
E(f ) =
Ψ (f ) dV 0 =
Ψ (f ) dz dΩ,
(3.1)
V0

Ω

−h0 /2

where Ψ denotes the Hemholtz energy density per unit of referential volume. It is easy to recognize that the surface
density energy has the form:
Z h0 /2
ψ(f ) =
Ψ (f ) dz.
(3.2)
−h0 /2

For a fixed temperature, the natural configuration B0 of the membrane is assumed to coincide with a thin flat prismatic
shape of homogeneous thickness h0 in direction e3 , width B in direction e2 and length L in direction e1 , with ordered
phase Lo (see Figure 3). The membrane geometry is split into two entities, the two-dimensional mid-plane and the
thickness, hence, the material particles x ∈ B0 are described by:
x = x + ze3 ,

(3.3)

where x = x e1 + y e2 denotes locations of a flat mid-surface Ω, and z spans the whole thickness. The reference
membrane mid-surface θ corresponds to z = 0, and its edges are defined by x = ±L/2 and y = ±B/2. Experimental
evidences suggest that lipid membranes exhibit the so-called in-plane fluidity, i.e. the absence of viscosity does
not allow for sustaining shear stress in planes perpendicular to e3 . Based on this constitutive assumption, it is
possibile to find a relationship for the energy density Ψ depending onpthe three invariants of the deformation gradient,
˜
˜ := det Cαβ represents the areal stretch of planes
namely {J(x),
det F(x), φ̄(x)}. In particular, the quantity J(x)
T
perpendicular to the direction e3 , after setting C = F F = Cij ei ⊗ ej , which is the usual Cauchy-Green stretch tensor.
The remaining invariants are the volume change, det F, and the φ̄(x) = h(x)/h0 thickness stretch in direction e3 ,
respectively [55, 54]. In [65, 42] it is suggested that the volume of lipid membranes does not significantly change. Some
authors showed also that the volume of biological membranes can be assumed constant at several values of temperature
[61, 70]. The following Ansatz (see Figure 3) is assumed for describing the geometrical changes of the membrane:
f (x) = g(x) + zφ(x) n(x)

(3.4)

where g(◦) maps the mid-plane Ω of the membrane from the natural configuration B0 to the current mid-surface of the
membrane (i.e θ = g(Ω)), n denotes the outward normal to θ, and φ(x) = φ̄(x) = h(x)/h0 is the thickness stretch.
The latter is defined as the ratio of the current thickness h over the reference value h0 . It is worth noting that a Monge
representation ḡ(x, y) := g(x) for θ arises upon writing the position of material particles x ∈ Ω in components with
respect to the pair e1 , e2 of orthonormal vectors chosen above. The assumption of the Ansatz (3.4) is then coupled with
a quasi-incompressibility constraint in the following form:
˜ 0)φ(x) = 1.
det F(x, 0) = J(x,

(3.5)

It is worth noting that such quasi-incompressibility is a first-oder approximation of the full iscochoricity requirement.
An explicit expansion of equation (3.2) in powers of the reference thickness h0 (see [56, 55, 54]) can be done by taking

into account the choice of the constraint (3.5). Therefore, a restriction ψ of the energy density Ψ to Ω is considered by
taking into account the requirement (3.5):
˜ det F, φ̄)
ψ(J) = Ψ (J,

z=0

= Ψ (J, 1, J −1 ),

(3.6)

where
˜ 0).
J := J(x,

(3.7)

Note that

J=

h
h0

−1
.

(3.8)

In-plane fluidity, bulk incompressibility, and a dimension reduction yield the following expression for the energy density
of the lipid membrane w per unit area in the reference configuration [55, 54, 83]
b m ||2 ,
w = ϕ(J) + k(J)H 2 + kG (J)K + α(J) ||(gradθ J)|

(3.9)

where J accounts for the areal stretch of the membrane (see e.g. [84] for the importance of this quantity in lipid
h2
membranes), H and K are the mean and Gaussian curvatures of the mid-surface θ, respectively, k(J) = 0 τ 0 (J) and
6
h20
kG (J) =
τ (J) are the corresponding bending rigidities, ϕ(J) := h0 ψ(J) represents the local energy density per
12J
unit area, whereas
h2 τ (J)
(3.10)
α(J) = 0 3 ,
24 J
where
τ (J) = ϕ0 (J).

(3.11)

The quantity α(J) is a higher order extensional modules and it is related to the nonlocal part of the energy density. In
equation (3.9), Jˆ is the spatial description of J , defined by the composition Jˆ ◦ g = J, gradθ is the gradient with
respect to points of the current mid-surface θ, while (·)m gives its material description. The term (3.9) recovers exactly
the Helfrich energy [64] if J is constant. The main ingredient of the two-dimensional membrane model derived in
[55, 54] is the surface Helmholtz energy ϕ(J), which regulates the in-plane stretching behavior of the membrane and
describes the phase transition phenomena taking place in lipid bilayers.
A Landau expansion for ϕ(J) can be constructed because of the lack of more precise information (see, e.g., [68, 61, 73,
70, 62]). This approach results to be useful as it allows for relating the coefficients of the polynomial expansions to
measurable quantities, such as the transition temperature, the latent heat and the order parameter jump (see [61] and
the treatise [42] for a detailed discussion). Under the current assumptions on the natural configuration B0 the Landau
expansion of stretching energy [56] takes the form:
ϕ(J) = a0 + a1 J + a2 J 2 + a3 J 3 + a4 J 4 ,

(3.12)

where the parameters ai (i = 0 ÷ 4) depend on temperature and chemical composition. Because of the lack of avalaible
experimental data, these parameters have been calibrated in [56] by considering experimental estimates provided by
[61, 73, 85]. For a temperature T ∼ 30◦ C we have:
a0 = 2.03, a1 = −7.1, a2 = 9.23
a3 = −5.3, a4 = 1.13

(3.13)

expressed in [J][m]−2 . The related local constitutive stress Σ (3.11) shows the typical S-shaped form, as shown in
Figure 4. The locations where the maximum Σmax and the minimum Σmin of the local stress occur are denoted by Jmax
and Jmin , respectively, and highlighted with squares, while the value of the Maxwell stress (determined by the equal
area rule) is drawn as a straight horizontal dark-grey line (see e.g. [86]). Whenever a generic stress Σ is considered, it is
also possible to identify three intersections between such a stress and the local stress curve. In the case of the Maxwell
stress, these three intersections are denoted with black circles, and the corresponding areal stretch values are called
J∗ , Jm and J ∗ from left to right. As an example, Table 1 collects the numerical values of these quantities for ϕ(J)
obtained by using the coefficients in (3.13).

local energy

φ (J) × 103 [J][m ]-2

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0
12

local stress

10

τ (J) × 103 [N ][m ]-1

8

6

Σmax

ΣM

4

Σmin

2

0
-2

1.0

J*

Jmax 1.1

J

Jm

1.2

Jmin

1.3

J*

Figure 4: The stretching energy ϕ(J) (top) adapted from [61] for a temperature T ∼ 30◦ C, with related local stress ϕ0 (J) = τ (J)
(bottom). The areal stretch Jo = 1 corresponds to the unstressed reference configuration B0 , while ΣM indicates the Maxwell stress.
Table1. Characteristic values of the membrane stretching energy at T ∼ 30◦ . Stress expressed as [Σ] = [J/m2 ] × 10−3

ΣM
5.922
3.1.1

Σmax
10.855

Σmin
0.989

J∗
1.025

Jm
1.167

J∗
1.308

Jmax
1.085

Jmin
1.248

Planar case

The study of the equilibrium for a planar lipid membrane described by the energy (3.9) permits to elucidate the
emergence of thickness inhomogeneities in the membrane. Moreover, this simple energetics allows one to calculate
the corresponding rigidities and the shape of the boundary layer between the ordered and disordered phases. By
fixing temperature, energy density coefficients are fixed to those ones in Table 1. Whenever no curvature changes are
experienced by the lipid bilayer, in the plane strain approximation the elastic energy density in (3.9) takes the form:
1
ψ(J) = ϕ (J) − γ(J)Jx2 .
2

(3.14)

γ(J) = −2 α(J).

(3.15)

We note that the functions
and τ (J), defined by (3.11), can be interpreted as transition and stress-like functions, respectively, as the former drives
the boundary layer wherever transitions between two phases occur. According to the geometry introduced above, the
three-dimensional membrane deformation is further restricted with respect to equation (3.4) as follow:
f (x) = g(x)e1 + ye2 + zφ(x)e3 ,
so that the width B is kept constant and its gradient takes the following form
"
#
gx 0 0
0
1 0 ,
F = ∇f (x) =
zφx 0 φ

(3.16)

(3.17)

where the subscript x denotes differentiation with respect to x. The displacement component along e1 is u(x) = g(x)−x.
After setting
λ(x) = gx (x),
(3.18)
where the function g maps the mid plane of the membrane from B0 to B, see Figure 3. The plane strain approximation
yields
h
φ = λ−1 =
,
(3.19)
h0
so that the membrane deformation is completely determined by
J = λ.
3.2

(3.20)

Membrane remodelling due to GPCR growth via densification

A thermodynamically consistent framework is provided in this section with the aim of evaluating the chemo-mechanical
coupling between transmembrane proteins and membrane elasticity. To this end, a total Helmoltz free energy per unit
volume is introduced, say W ∗ , accounting for both the response of the lipid bilayer and the energetics associated to the
proteins changes. In particular, the rearrangement of protein domains on the cell membrane is modelled as a process of
growth via pure densification [87], i.e. by considering the effect of the variation of the density of activated proteins
on the free-energy of the membrane. In fact, by considering a membrane element with mass dm0 = ρ0 dV 0 in the
inactive (virgin) configuration, as displayed in figure 5, the potential activation of previously dormant receptors on
the membrane is likely assumed not to produce mass variation. However, the submacroscopic changes following the
formation of receptor-ligand binding induce remodelling and conformational changes of the bonded receptors across
the membrane. This is because the variation of the density and of the conformations of those receptors determine the
re-organization of the surrounding lipids (see the Appendix C). By denoting with the superscript a the active (reference)
configuration in which protein activation occurs (see the inermediate global configuration of the membrane in figure 5),
the remodelling Kr affecting the mass element can be written as follows (see the Appendix A):
ρ0 dV 0 = ρa dV a → Kr :=

dV a
ρ0
1 + κu (1 + Σi n0i ∆A )(ρp /ρl − 1)
=
=
.
dV 0
ρa
1 + κu (1 + Σi ni ∆A )(%p /%l − 1)

(3.21)

This factor is calculated by considering that the density of the heterogeneous medium in a certain configuration is the
sum of the true densities weighted by the respective fractions, i.e. ρ = %l φl + %i ni (see [81]), {ni }|{i=1, 2} = {ζ, ξ}
representing the relative fractions of protein species (summation over i) and φl the complementary lipid fraction, the
additional superscript 0 being used for indicating the initial ones. The other constants read as follows :
• κu = Nmax Au /A, i.e. the total areal fraction of inactive proteins (Nmax = 1.13 × 107 is the total number of
potentially activating proteins, estimated from the experimental data, Au is the area of the inactive domain
(with diameter of ≈ 4nm [88], A is the surface of the cell for which a radius of 30µm was considered)
• ∆A = (Aa /Au − 1) is the relative change in area of protein domains passing from inactive to active state, the
sight of the latter exhibiting a diameter of ≈ 5nm [88]
• the terms %p and %l indicate the specific true density of the transmembrane proteins and of the bilayer lipids,
respectively, both assumed constants and calculated from their molecular weights and sizes. In particular,
%p = 100kDa/h0 π(2.5nm)2 and %l = 2 × (1kDa/h0 π(0.5nm)2 ) [89, 90, 91, 92].

In the light of (3.21), the energy stored through remodelling, stretching and species redistribution can be expressed in
terms of the total (three-dimensional) Helmoltz free energy W ∗ of the membrane in the natural configuration (i.e. the
reference configuration in fig. 5) as:
Z
Z
Z
W ∗ dV a =
Kr W ∗ dV 0 =
W0∗ dV 0
(3.22)
Va

V0

V0

where W0∗ is instead the three-dimensional energy density relative to the virgin configuration. In analogy with equation
(3.2), because of the thinnes of the cell membrane relative to its in-plane sizes, a dimension reduction is performed to
obtain a corresponding effective energy density W0 per unit area in the virgin configuration:
Z h0 /2
W0 = Kr W (λ, ∇λ, ni ) =
W0∗ dz = h0 Kr W ∗ (λ, ∇λ, ni ).
(3.23)
−h0 /2

Figure 5: Schematic picture of protein activation and lipid membrane remodelling. A density change of active receptors drives
the system towards an active configuration in which the lipid bilayer shrinks around active domains, this causing membrane
deformation and thickening in the form of lipid rafts. Unlike usual description of finite deformations and multiphysics, all the
three configurations are global. This is justified through a non-standard multiscale geometric framework provided by the theory
of Structured Deformations (see e.g. [93], [94], [79], [95], [96], [97]). Here, each material particle of the body in the virgin
configuration (displayed in the top-left side of this figure) gets first mapped into an intermediate region (center of the figure) through
a pair of smooth bijections (i, K) (where i stands for the vector-valued identity and the tensor K accounts for all the submacroscopic
changes). Indeed, it can be shown that Kr = detK and, hence, this invariant of K accounts for remodelling. Secondly, each
neighborhood of each particle located in this intermediate global configuration gets classically deformed through a pair (y, ∇y),
where y is a smooth deformation field from the intermediate global configuration onto the current one, while the second item in the
pair is the deformation gradient from the intermediate global configuration. Features of Structured Deformations in connection with
the examined biological systems are discussed in more details in Appendix C. There, an alternative scheme of the kinematics is given
in Fig.13.

3.2.1

Mass conservation equations and interspecific terms

The one-dimensional balance of mass for each constituents can be written as
ṅi + Mi,x = Γi

(3.24)

where the dot notation denotes the material time derivative, Mi describes the material species flux and Γi is the rate
term describing the evolutionary behavior of each species. This is done by taking into account intrinsic rates as well as
mutual interactions with other fields characterizing the system by means of suitable coupling terms. The present model
mainly focuses on the active receptors and transport proteins on the cell membrane. In particular, in the presence of
a specific ligand, binding and activation GPCRs kindles cytoplasmatic signaling pathways. The latter allow for both
regulating some intracellular processes and communicating with the extra-cellular environment by expelling molecules
through the activation of specific transport proteins, such as MRPs. This coupled mechanism can be followed in practice
by measuring the levels of intracellular and extracellular concentrations of cAMP, involved in many physiological
processes of the cell. In particular, intracellular cAMP production follows the response of the GPCRs to certain ligands,
such as epinephrine. The level of cytoplasmatic cAMP is modulated by MRPs that permit the efflux of cAMP from
the interior of the cell to the extracellular fluid. In this way, MRPs control cell homeostasis and determine an agonist
interaction with membrane receptors. In order to trace the interplay of the transmembrane proteins, we introduce mass
balances for two selected species, n1 = ξ, representing the G proteins, and n2 = ζ, namely the transport proteins. The

main physiological aspects associated to their activity have been described by means of the following interspecific
(Volterra-Lotka like) equations:
ξ˙ + Mξ,x = αξ ξ − δξ ξ − βξζ ζ ξ
(3.25)
ζ̇ + Mζ,x = βζξ ξ ζ − δζ ζ.

(3.26)

Physical meaning of the species rates parameters. In equation (3.25), the term αξ denotes intrinsic activation in
response to a given ligand concentration (such as the epinephrine), modelled by means of a specific uptake function. In
particular, it is likely assumed that the ligand precipitation rate obeys a generic Gamma distribution with probability
density function Υ (t) = a t e−bt . The coefficients a and b are calibrated by means of experiments. By observing the
time at which Υ is maximum – i.e. Υ̇ (tm ) = 0 – it readily follows that b = t−1
m . Also, the total quantity of ligand
precipitated over the experiment time T then will be
Z T
Q=
Υ (t)dt = ab−2 (1 − e−bT (1 + bT ))
(3.27)
0
T

that allows to estimate the parameter a = Q/(t2m − e− tm tm (tm + T )). Given this, the coefficient αξ results the
relative uptake function multiplied by a suitable binding constant:
αξ = kb Q−1 Υ (T ).

(3.28)

The coefficient δξ denotes an intrinsic deactivation constant, while the interspecific term βξζ is introduced in the
light that the efflux of extracellular cyclic Adenosyne Monophospate, cAM Pe (whose amount is proportional to the
active MRP on lipidic membrane through (2.4)), is assumed to reduce the activity of receptor-ligand compounds by
establishing chemical equilibrium between the extra- and the intra-cellular space. Dually, in equation (3.26), the rate of
activation of transport proteins is stimulated by the level of intracellular cyclic Adenosyne Monophospate, cAM Pi
(which is proportional to the activated G-proteins at time t through (2.2)). This is accounted for through the interspecific
positive term βζξ governing the growth of activating MRPs. Model parameters have been therefore estimated through
the experimental evaluation of intracellular and extracellular cAMP concentrations (see Section 2).
3.3

The Helmoltz free-energy of the membrane proteins

The energy W ∗ accounts for the hyperelastic contribution of the lipid membrane and for the Helmoltz free energy of
the active proteins. The latter interact with the membrane by exchanging mechanical forces and showing remodelling
changes during their activity. We start from the isothermal dissipation inequality. Here, we single out the contribution of
mass transport of the species over the generic elementary volume, say Mi for the ith species, through the action of the
correspoinding (thermodynamically conjugate) chemical potential µ∗i , as well as the presence of thermodynamic driving
forces Fr∗ expending power against the rate of change of remodelling (see e.g. [87, 98]). Hence, for an incompressible
material and under isothermal assumptions, combined energy-entropy equations yield the following form of the second
law of thermodynamics:
Z
V0

P ∗ λ̇ dV 0 −

Z
V0

(µ∗i Mi )x dV 0 +

Z
V0

Fr∗ K̇r dV 0 ≥

d
dt

Z
V0

W0∗ dV 0

(3.29)

where repeated index i means summation over that index. By appealing to relation (3.22), in agreement
with the
Z
dimension reduction performed in (3.23), quantities X per unit area can be introduced by considering that
X ∗ dV 0 =
V0
Z
X dΩ, with X = h0 X ∗ for any field X ∗ per unit volume in the virgin configuration.
Ω

Provided that
W = W (λ, λx , ni )
from (3.23), one also obtains the dimensionally reduced version of (3.29):


Z
Z
Z
Z  
∂W
∂W
∂W
0
P λ̇ dV −
(µi Mi )x dΩ +
Fr K̇r dΩ ≥
Kr
λ̇ +
λ̇x +
ṅi + W K̇r dΩ.
∂λ
∂λx
∂ni
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω

(3.30)

(3.31)

By substituting the mass balance (3.24) in the second integral of the left-hand side and by integrating by parts the
second term on the right-hand side, equation (3.31) can be rearranged as follows:






Z h
Z  
i
∂W0
∂W
∂ ∂W
∂W
P λ̇ − µi,x Mi + µi ṅi − µi Γi + Fr K̇r dΩ ≥
λ̇
+
Kr
−
λ̇ +
ṅi + W K̇r dV 0
∂λx ∂Ω
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
∂ni
Ω
Ω

(3.32)

Provided the condition




∂W
λ̇
=0
∂λx ∂Ω
is satisfied, grouping and localization of the terms in (3.32) yields the following inequality





∂ ∂W
∂W
∂W
P − Kr
−
λ̇ + µi − Kr
ṅi + [Fr − W ] K̇r − µi,x Mi − µi Γi ≥ 0.
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
∂ni

(3.33)

(3.34)

Following the standard Coleman and Noll’s procedure, it is then possible to obtain the following constitutive relations
for the Piola-Kirchhoff stress, the chemical potential and the remodelling driving force, which turns out to be entirely
identifiable with the mechanical energy involved in the process:


∂W
∂ ∂W
P = Kr
−
,
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
∂W
µi = Kr
,
(3.35)
∂ni
Fr = W.
Inequality (3.36) thus reduces to:
− µi,x Mi − µi Γi ≥ 0

(3.36)

that can be fulfilled by expressing proteins movement term as proportional to the gradient of the chemical potential,
i.e. Mi = −Li ni µi,x , where Li ≥ 0 are suitable mobilities. A reduced dissipation inequality in the form µi Γi ≤ 0
remains to be fulfilled in order to ensure thermodynamic compatibility. In otehr words, the evolution of the system is
thermodynamically consistent when the chemical potential becomes negative in the presence of increasing binding
proteins on the membrane. An example of a similar instance was encountered in [99] in which an ad hoc flow rule
respecting such condition was introduced.
3.4

Constitutive equations for the membrane

In presence of the uniaxial kinematics discussed in Section 3.1.1, the problem is entirely governed by a one-dimensional
energetics.
In agreement with (3.23), a complete representation formula for the Helmoltz free energy density introduced in (3.30)
is sought. Indeed W = W (λ, λx , ni ) represents the energy per unit area in the active (reference) configuration for
which no complete expression is yet available. With the aim of providing an explicit representation for W , an additive
decompositon is assumed between the (hyperelastic)energy of the membrane and a second potential associated to the
energetics of the transmembrane proteins. This assumption is stated in the following form:
W = Whyp (λ, λx ) − Wni (φ, ni ) = Whyp (λ, λx ) − Wni (λ−1 , ni ).

(3.37)

it is worth notning that the second term account for the possibility that activation and conformational changes of GPCRs
may affect the membrane thickness, measured through λ−1 . The total differential of W thus gives:
∂W
∂W
∂W
dλ +
dλx +
dni = P̃ dλ + µ̃i dni .
(3.38)
∂λ
∂λx
∂ni
Because of relations (3.35), the following equations for the stress and for the chemical potentials relative to the active
(reference) configurations follow:
dW =

∂ ∂W
∂W
−
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
∂W
∂Wni
µ̃i = Kr−1 µi =
=−
.
∂ni
∂ni
P̃ = Kr−1 P =

(3.39)
(3.40)

A Legendre transformation of (3.38) can now be performed by subtracting the variation d(ni µ̃i ) = µ̃i dni + ni dµ̃i , by
obtaining the coupled potential
dŴ = d(Whyp (λ, λx ) − Ŵµi (λ−1 , µi )) = P̃ dλ − ni dµ̃i

(3.41)

from which it follows that
ni = −

∂ Ŵ
∂ Ŵµi
=
.
∂ µ̃i
∂ µ̃i

(3.42)

Because Whyp is independent of the chemical potentials and since Ŵµi depends on the variables λ−1 and µ̃i , the latter
relation also implies that
!
∂ Ŵ
1 ∂ P̃
∂ 2 Ŵ
dni = −d
= −2
dµ̃i = −cλi dλ−1 + cµi dµ̃i .
(3.43)
dλ−1 −
∂ µ̃i
λ ∂ µ̃i
∂ µ̃2i
Herein, the coefficient cλi and cµi relate the variation of the ith species density ni to the change of the membrane
stretch and of the associated chemical potential µ̃i . It is assumed that the terms cλi and cµi can be modelled as first
order variation coefficients that depend on the current amount of active proteins, i.e. cλi ≈ ni cλi and, in the light of the
antagonism (3.36), cµi ≈ −ni cµi . Under this constitutive assumption, equation (3.43) rewrites as:
dni
= −cλi dλ−1 − cµi dµ̃i
ni
Therefore, integration of Equation (3.44) leads to the following relation:


ni
− log 0 ' cλi λ−1 − 1 + cµi µ̃i − µ̃0i
ni
which allows for evaluating the chemical potential of the species as follows

ni
µ̃i = µ̃0i − ωi λ−1 − 1 − ηi log 0 ,
ni

(3.44)

(3.45)

(3.46)

after setting
ωi := cλi /cµi ,
(3.47)
ηi := 1/cµi .
Equation (3.40) in combination with (3.46) then allows for finding the following (normalized) expression for the
potential Wni :
Z ni


ni
−1
Wni (λ , ni ) = −
µ̃i dni = ηi ni log 0 + (ni − n0i ) ωi λ−1 − 1 − µ̃0i − ηi .
(3.48)
ni
n0i
This relation exhibits a Boltzmann-type entropic contribution related to the chemical species coupled with a mechanical
term. In Appendix B it has been shown that the latter represents the specific work done by the lateral pressure between
the protein domains and the lipids in the cell membrane during conformational changes.
Representation formula (3.48) for Whyp permits to obtain the following relationships for the stress and the chemical
potentials:


∂Whyp
∂ ∂Whyp
∂Wni
P = Kr
−
=
−
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
∂λ


∂ ∂Whyp
(n0i − ni )
∂Whyp
= Kr
−
− ωi
= Pef f − Pn ,
(3.49)
∂λ
∂x ∂λx
λ2



ni
(3.50)
µi = Kr µ̃i = Kr µ̃0i − ωi λ−1 − 1 − ηi log 0 .
ni
In equation (3.49), P can be interpreted as the membrane net stress, while Pef f and Pn respectively represent the
effective (hyperelastic) response of membrane and the chemical stress due to protein specific work. Indeed, the
assumed correlation between the potential associated to transmembrane proteins activation and lipid bilayer thickening
has been introduced in equation (3.37). It can be noted that each term ωi (n0i − ni )/λ2 forming Pn relates to the
change of the corresponding specific work exerted by the lateral pressure arising in species-lipid interactions. In
Appendix C this is explicitly worked out for the active receptors through a bottom-up approach that considers the
surface interactions between receptors and lipids, thereby giving a mechobiological explanation to recently observed
experimental findings.The effective response of the lipid membrane is instead fully identifiable with the hyperelastic
law (3.14) for J = λ, here reported for convenience:
1
Whyp (λ) := ψ(λ) = ϕ(λ) − γ(λ)(λx )2
2

(3.51)

3.5

Mechanical equilibrium of the biological cell membrane

In this Section, the use of total free-energy (3.37) expressed by means of (3.48) and (3.51) as a simplified energy
governing the behaviour of biological membranes allows for searching the set of mechanical equilibria. To this end, the
variational derivative of the resulting Gibbs free energy with respect to the in-plane displacement u will be computed
in order to isolate configurations corresponding to its stationary points. The Gibbs free energy , here denoted by E
is obtained as the difference between the Helmholtz one H, defined by (3.52)2 below,minus the work L done by the
external load, i.e
Z
E := H − L,
H :=
W0 dΩ
(3.52)
Ω

The work L results from the presence of two possible mechanical agents, a traction Σ(t) acting against the displacement,
and a hyperstress H(t) acting against the gradient of the displacement at the boundary, i.e.
L = [Σ u + H ux ]∂Ω ,

(3.53)

Because u(x, t) = g(x, t) − x, since (3.18) holds, a compatibility relation between the stretch and the derivative of the
displacement is obtained λ = 1 + ux . Henceforth, upon considering a perturbation δu, the first variation of (3.52) with
respect to the displacement can be written with the help of relation (3.32):



Z
∂W0
δE =
δux
+
P δux dΩ − [Σ u + H ux ]∂Ω
∂λx
Ω
∂Ω



Z
∂W0
=
− H δux
+ [(P − Σ) δu] −
Px δu dΩ.
∂λx
Ω
∂Ω

(3.54)

Stationary condition of the energy (3.54) supplies the following equations governing the equilibrium of the membrane:

Px = 0, x ∈ Ω
(3.55)
either P = Σ or δu = 0, x ∈ ∂Ω

either γ uxx = H or δux = 0, x ∈ ∂Ω
in which equation (3.51) and compatibility relation have been employed, while the stress P relative to the virgin
configuration reads as follows:


1
ξ − ξ0
ζ − ζ0
P = Kr τ (λ) + γ 0 (λ)(uxx )2 + γ(λ)uxxx − ωξ
−
ω
.
(3.56)
ζ
2
(1 + ux )2
(1 + ux )2
Here τ and γ have been defined through (3.11) and(3.15) respectively.
3.6

Coupling of the equations

For the sake of illustration, prediction the formation of lipid rafts on a cell membrane is obtained in the case of plane
strain. Coupling between the balance of linear momentum (3.55)1 with the evolution laws provided by the mass balance
of transmembrane proteins, (3.25) and (3.26), yields the following set of governing equations:

P = Σ
(3.57)
ξ˙ − (Lξ ξ µξ,x )x = αξ ξ − δξ ξ − βξζ ζ ξ

ζ̇ − (Lζ ζ µζ,x )x = βζξ ξ ζ − δζ ζ.


Here, because of symmetry assumptions, x ∈ [0, L] with L set to L = 1000h0 , while the time t ∈ 0+ , tmax , tmax
being set to 1 hour on the basis the experiments duration (see Sect. appendix 2). The unknowns of the problem are
the displacement u(x, t) and the protein fractions ξ(x, t) and ζ(x, t), subjected to the boundary conditions u(0, t) = 0,
uxx (0, t) = uxx (L, t) = 0, ξx (0, t) = ξx (L, t) = 0 and ζx (0, t) = ζx (L, t) = 0 in absence of hyperstress H and
protein species leakage at the boundaries. Initial conditions provide initial null displacement u(x, 0) = 0, while suitable
initial distribution have been assigned to proteins. In particular, ζ(x, 0) = ζ 0 is assumed constant, while, in order
to take into account localization of lipid rafts on the membrane in response to prescribed ligand distributions, an
initially non-homogeneous spatial profile of inactive GPCRs has been introduced. To do this, the initial condition
ξ(x, 0) = ξ 0 (x) is expressed by means of a suitable generating function:
mraf t
0

ξ (x) = ξo + (ξa − ξo )

X
m=0

Π(x),

Π(x) =

E− (x)
E+ (x)
−
1 + E− (x) 1 + E+ (x)

(3.58)

Table 2. Coefficients used in numerical simulations (e.d.= available experimental data).

Coefficient
kb
δξ
βξζ
βζξ
δζ
ζ0
ξo
ξa
Li

Value [Unit]
5.18
1.1 × 10−3 s−1
4 × 10−6 s−1
3.3 × 10−3 s−1
10−7
10−2
10−4
10−2
−17
1.87 × 10
m4 J −1 s−1

Range [Unit]
3.89 − 5.7
(0.9 − 1.65) × 10−3 s−1
(3 − 6) × 10−6 s−1
(2.5 − 4.15) × 10−3 s−1
10−8 − 10−6

(10−20 − 10−15 ) m4 J −1 s−1

Reference
[102, 103] - e.d.
[102]
[102, 104]
[105, 104, 106] - e.d.
assumed
[88, 107]

where E± (x) = exp [−ca (x − xa ± ∆a /2)], xa and ∆a governing the positioning and the amplitude of the activating
raft. In particular, the formation of a single raft region centred at the origin with amplitude ∆a = 400h0 and multiple
(quasi-periodic, with mraf t = 4) rafts regions with amplitude ∆a = 100h0 have been simulated in the sequel.
Moreover, a stress-free (i.e. Σ = 0) and a stress-prescribed case have been both considered, by imposing that the
nominal traction equals the Maxwell stress of the membrane through the expression Σ(t) = ΣM (1 − e−t ), consistently
with the initial undeformed conditions and with characteristic values of internal cell pressures [100]. Equations (3.57)
have been numerically solved with the aid of the software Mathematica R [101] through the method of lines. Spatial
coordinates and model parameters, reported in Table 2, have been normalized with respect to the reference thickness h0 .

4

Results and discussion

The outcomes of the numerical simulations derived by the biomechanical model introduced above show the lipid bilayer
undergoing dynamic remodelling triggered by the evolution of transmembrane protein activity. In particular, here strain
localization within the cell membrane leading to the coexistence of thicker (ordered Lo -phases) and thinner lipid zones
(disordered Ld -phases) is predicted.
As shown in Figure 6, the densification of lipids across the regions in which active GPCRs tend to cluster is accompanied
by the progressive formation of lipid rafts. In agreement with previous findings (see e.g. [108]), on such sites a difference
of about 0.9 nm between raft and non-raft membrane zones is detected. In particular, in stress-free simulations, there
is a pure chemically-induced thickening of the membrane that forms a single raft and multiple rafts according to the
analysed cases (Figure 6). Under the same initial conditions, rafts also occur in the tensed membrane, where a transverse
contraction and initial longitudinal elongation additionally take place in the Ld -phase as elastic response of the applied
traction.
In Figure 7A the time-evolution of both the type of transmembrane protein fractions occurring on a raft site is reported.
The interplay between RL proteins ξ and transporters ζ is studied as a result of the introduced interspecific dynamics.
More specifically, an initial growth of the GPCRs binding with ligands first occurs. Upon comparing this finding
with the experimentally determined intracellular cAMP (cAMPi ) normalized concentration, an estimate of the binding
Receptor-Ligand (RL) compounds is provided according to (2.2). This is because GPCRs activation directly triggers
the cell response by initiating the cAMP signaling pathway. Homeostatic levels of cAMPi are restored thanks to the
activation of the Multidrug Resistant transport Proteins (MRPs) driving the efflux of part of the produced cAMP towards
the extracellular environment. It is worth noting that a very good agreement is found between the predicted MRPs
fraction and the (normalized) increase of cAMPe .
Furthermore, Figure 7A displays the simultaneous evolution of the ordered (thicker) phases. The latter evolve with
similar trends in both the unconfined and the tensed membranes, exception made for the load-induced shrinkage in the
initial stage, when chemical stress Pn = Kr ωi (n0i − ni )/λ2 (introduced in (3.49)) is not yet acting. At the time at
which such stress is maximum, i.e t ' 642s in the simulations, a clear spatial correspondence between active domains
and raft formation can be recognized in all situations, see Figure 7B. This predicts that active GPCRs localize on lipid
rafts as an effect of the chemo-mechanical coupling between:
• the chemical pressure arising from the deformation of the lipid bilayer;
• the configurational changes of TMs domains, to which a decrease chemical potential as in Figure 9 is associated
according to the above discussed thermodynamic arguments.

Although the model and the associated numerics is carried out for a one-dimensional problem, the findings are
fully consistent with the experimentally observed clustering of ligand-binding receptors on lipid rafts across the cell
membrane (see e.g. [24, 25, 20, 22, 26, 27, 30, 31] among others). In order to investigate how model coefficients
influence the formation of lipid rafts in high coupling with the dynamics of active receptors, the robustness of the model
was tested by considering the variation of both interspecific and chemo-mechanical coefficients. In this regard, more
than two thousands numerical simulations were performed by assigning values within the ranges reported in Table 2
and by then evaluating the associated membrane thickening. In particular, as also shown in Figure 8, analyses revealed
that lipid rafts formation is mainly affected by the level of intrinsic rate of activation in response to ligand concentration
αξ (through the uptake coefficient kb ), and the chemo-mechanical coefficient ωξ , representing the specific mechanical
work that GPCRs exert on the lipid membrane by inducing its thickening.
As displayed in Figure 10, the imposed constant reference traction induces a nonhomogeneous distribution of the
Cauchy stress, which relaxes within the rafts (namely across the thickened regions), thereby exhibiting values lower
than the tension experienced by the thinner (hence disordered) phases. The binding kinetics and protein activation are
instead responsible of a progressive, chemically-induced, compression of the lipids in the raft region. Such compression
decreases over time during the unbinding phase (see Figure 10).
In stress free conditions, the chemical stress exerted by the activating proteins is entirely converted into effective
membrane compression (see Figure 11). From a mechanical point of view, the stress relaxation renders ordered islands
more compliant to demand TMs to undergo conformational changes, and hence GPCRs location on lipid rafts also
implies a reduced energy expenditure during the protein structural re-organization.

Figure 6: Lipid raft formation in stress-free (upper row) and tensed (lower row) membranes. Both the case of a single raft and
multiple raft are analysed, the membrane thickening following the activation of transmembrane proteins.

Conclusions

Figure 7: A. Time evolution of active receptors (blue) and transporters (red) in comparison with the experimental cAMP measurements. It is shown that the raft dynamically follows the binding/unbinding kinetics. B. High degree of localization between lipid raft
formation and active GPCRs in single rafts (top) and multiple raft domains (bottom).

Figure 8: (Left) Variation of the maximum thickening of the lipid membrane as a function of the intrinsic uptake coefficient kb and
of the chemo-mechanical work coefficient ωξ . The red spot indicates the couple {kb , ω ξ } used in the simulation. (Right) Evolution
of the membrane stretch for different values of coefficients kb and ωξ . The red curve highlights the one obtained for the adopted
parameters.

Figure 9: Evolution of chemical potentials associated to protein species during binding/unbinding kinetics.

Predictions and interpretation of the findings provided in this paper allow for explaining why active receptors of the
GPCRs family tend to cluster on lipid rafts. Furthermore, active receptors are predicted to enhance rafts formation.
Such predictions are shown to be in relation with:
i) stress reduction arising within rafts because of the presence of active receptors and transporters that need local
compliant zones to be able to perform conformational changes;
ii) decrease of chemical potential owing (1) binding of the GPRCs with the ligand, thereby favoring the formation of
higher density regions of RL complex and (2) uptaking of intracellular cAMP from the MRPs transporters.
It is shown how the mechanobiology involved at the level of the cell membrane does entail strong coupling among (a)
mechanical equilibrium governed by the (entropic, conformational, elastic) energy, (b) the kinetics of RL-binding and
unbinding, regulated by the chemical potential and traced through the diffusion of GPCRs and MRPs (related to cAMPi
and cAMPe respectively), and (c) the consistency requirement that the effective chemical potential of the RL-compound
must agree both with the energetics and with the fact that lateral pressure arising between lipids surrounding the domains
of the active species and confining their conformational changes. The strict correlation between how cAMP is triggered
by RL-compounds and modulated by MRPs and the tendency of GPCRs to locate on lipid rafts has been shown by the
simulations. It is worth notning that on the basis of the boundary and limit conditions of interest and by considering the
interspecific terms taken into account in the model, coalescence due to Cahn-Hilliard-like dynamics was not expected,

Figure 10: Stress in tensed membranes. The imposed constant reference traction induces a nonhomogeneous distribution of the
Cauchy stress (upper row), which relaxes in thickened raft regions. In the lower row, the chemical stress generated by the protein
species is reported, causing a progressive compression of the lipids inhabiting the raft domains.

Figure 11: Effective and chemical stress balancing in stress-free remodelling membranes.

this phenomenon being object of future investigations. The entire analysis has be done with special regard to an existing
set of experiments involving HTR-8/SVneo cells and β2AR. Diffusive phenomena have been considered and the arising
chemo-mechanical coupling has been accounted for through the kinetics of ligand binding. The outcomes of the model
highlight the mechanobiology of lipid membrane remodelling by providing a mechanical explanation for the observed
correspondence between the membrane regions where distribution density of active receptors is higher and locations
of lipid rafts. These theoretical predictions actually confirm experimental findings by Nobel Prize 2012 Kobilka [10]
and Lefkovitz [11]. Importantly, the predictive potential of the obtained model can help to provide a key support to
quantitative diagnostics, owing for evaluation of cell response to endogenous and exogenous ligands regulated by
GPCRs under different operating conditions of the cells.

Acknowledgements
L.D., N.M.P. and M.F. acknowledge the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research (MIUR) under the (1)
ARS01-01384-PROSCAN and (2) PRIN 2017 20177TTP3S grants. N.M.P. and L.D. also acknowledge the partial
support from (3) the Italian MIUR "Departments of Excellence" grant L. 232/2016. N.M.P. and L.D. are supported by
the European Commission (EC) under (4) the FET Proactive (Neurofibres) grant No. 732344. A.R.C. acknowledges
support from (5) pon-aim1849854-1. M. B. and K. D. acknowledge support from (6, 7, 8) NSF (1150002, 1635407
and 1635435), (9) ARO (W911NF-17-1-0084), (10) ONR Applied and Computational Analysis (N00014-18-1-2528),
and (11) BSF (2018183). The authors wish to acknowledge Prof. Carla Biondi, Prof. Maria Enrica Ferretti and Prof.
Fortunato Vesce, from the University of Ferrara, Italy, for the endless conversations about the role of cAMP, its detection
and its relationships with submacroscopic effects at the level of bound receptors, and their help to Dr. Laura Lunghi
during her experimental work. Prof. Giuseppe Valacchi, from North Carolina State University, USA, and Ferrara, is
also acknowledged. The authors also gratefully acknowledge Prof. Davide Bigoni and Dr. Diego Misseroni, from the
University of Trento (Italy), for the discussions about biomechanics of cancer in relation to the findings of this paper, as
well as Prof. Anne M. Robertson, from the University of Pittsburgh), Prof. David R. Owen, from Carnegie Mellon
University, and Dr. Giuseppe Zurlo, from NUI-Galway-Ireland, for their valuable discussions through the last few years
about various biological and theoretical aspects of this paper.

Appendix A
Density ratio associated to remodelling
The effective density ρ(x, t) of the heterogeneous membrane at any time t and at any point x can be written as the sum
of the products between the true densities %k and the volumetric fractions υk composing the body. The membrane is
essentially inhabited by lipids and by transmembrane proteins. The latter share the same true density, although they can
appear either in an active or inactive state. Furthermore, it is worth notning that in the intermediate active (reference)
configuration displayed in figure 5) the thickness of the membrane h0 is homogeneous. Henceforth, the following
expression can been written for the density ρ(x, t):
ρ(x, t) = υk %k = υu %pu + υa %pa + υl %l





Au
Aa
Au
Aa
p
= Nu
+ Na
% + 1 − Nu
+ Na
%l
A
A
A
A


 p

Au
Aa
%
l
= % 1 + Nu
+ Na
−1
A
A
%l

(A.1)

where %p = dmp /dV p and %l = dml /dV l are the protein and lipid true densities, respectively, while Ak /A is the
areal fraction of the species. By introducing the relation Nu + Na = Nmax , where Nmax denotes an estimate of the
maximum reference value of total proteins present on a surface surface A on the cell membrane, the expression (A.1)
above can be rearranged as follows:



  p

Au
Na
Aa − Au
%
l
ρ(x, t) = % 1 + Nmax
+
−1
A
Nmax
A
%l
"
!
  p
#
X  Aa
Nmax Au
%
l
=% 1+
1+
ni
−1
−1
(A.2)
A
Au
%l
i

where

X

ni = Na /Nmax = ξ + ζ represents the cumulative fraction of activated receptor and transporters. Therefore,

i

the density ratio associated to remodelling, reported in equation (3.21), is finally obtained as Kr = ρ(x, 0)/ρ(x, t).
It is worth notning that Kr has a meaningful multiscale geometric interpretation through the Theory of Structured
Deformations, as highlighted in Fig.11 (see e.g. [93], [79], [83], [95], [96], [97]), as discussed in details in Appendix C.

Appendix B
The chemical potential is influenced by the lateral pressure experienced by the cell membrane


ni
The mechanical term ωi λ−1 − 1 appearing in the chemical potential µ̃i = µ̃0i − ωi λ−1 − 1 − ηi log 0 , i.e.
ni
(3.46), which is the parent of the chemo-mechanical energy (3.48), allows for obtaining the chemical stress through
derivation as in equations (3.49) and (3.56), i.e.
P̃n = (n0i − ni )

∂ µ̃i
∂Wni
(n0 − ni )
.
=−
= ωi i 2
∂λ
∂λ
λ

(B.1)

As the first formula clearly displays, the chemical stress is obtained through the change in chemical potential caused by
local stretch changes, λ (or, equivalently, caused by the local changes of the membrane thickness as (3.19), i.e. φ = λ−1 ,
so that dλ = −φ−2 dφ). The chemical potential of the species is then key for understanding the mechanobiology
involved in ligand-binding of the receptors analyzed in this paper. Because of its high importance, in this section
we provide a more physical understanding of the origins of such a key quantity. Indeed, direct considerations at the
microscale can be performed by taking into account the lateral pressure arising between the active species domains
and the adjacent lipids within the bilayer. Lateral pressure in lipid membranes is known to be present in bilayers even
without receptors. It is worth noting that lateral pressure is known to contribute to the stress across the thickness. In
mechanical terms, such a pressure can be seen as the reaction to incompressibility, thereby not affecting the elastic part
of the energy. When it comes to considering the membrane stress, formed by a hyperelastic part added on a reactive
one, the lateral pressure is indeed such a term in the expression for the stress. In turn, the lateral pressure changes in the
presence of proteins (see e.g. [109, 110, 111, 112]) and it influences their chemical potential.
For the sake of illustration, in the sequel we focus on the active receptors, namely the RL complex, as reported in [113].
In Figure 12 it is shown a schematic of a TM domain involved in the conformational changes and the lateral pressure RL
profile π̂(x, z, t) (marked with the green line in Figure 12.b). Indeed, this lateral pressure exhibits higher magnitudes in
z

(a)

6

receptor
domain

5
3

(b)

(c)

Figure 12: Schematic representation of the lateral pressure between a TM domain and the lipid bilayer as in [113] (see also [111]).

the zones where the lipid head groups interact with the top and bottom sites of the TMs. Therefore π̂(x, z, t) performs
ˆ z, t) at each level z across the thickness.
work against the lateral variation of area, namely the local area change, J(x,
We approximate the lateral pressure profile π̂(x, z, t) = π̂(x, −z, t) with an even piecewise function as displayed in red
in Figure 12.b) and defined as follows:



−p





 q 
h
z−
−φ
π̂(x, z, t) =
 φ/2
 2




h
φ
q

 q−
z−
−
φ/2
2
2

h
0<z < −φ
2
h
h
φ
−φ<z < −
2
2
2
h
φ
h
− <z<
2
2
2

(B.2)

Here h(x, t) is the current thickness of the membrane at x at the time t, q denotes the value of repulsive pressure arising
because of the contrast of the lipid headgroup against the receptor domain, and p is the value of the attractive pressure
along the hydrocarbon chain region arising to produce a self-balanced pressure profile. Balance through the thickness

implies that the following relationship must hold:


h
q φ/2
2p
−φ =4
,
2
2
hence p and q turn out to relate as follows:
p=

q φ
.
2h−φ

(B.3)

ˆ z, t) can be expressed as:
The work w̃ξ done by the lateral pressure (B.2) against the change in lateral stretch J(x,
w̃ξ = π ds h ŵξ ,

(B.4)

where ŵξ denotes the work done per unit area and π ds h is the exhibited lateral surface of the TM.
If we set


θ=z−

h
−φ
2


and

θ0 = z −



h φ
−
2
2


,

the quantity ŵξ can be evaluated as follows:
h
2

Z
ŵξ = 2

ˆ z, t) dz
π̂(x, z, t) J(x,

0

Z φ
2
ˆ z, t) dz + q 1
ˆ θ + h − φ, t) dθ + q φ +
J(x,
θ J(x,
φ/2 0
2
2
0
Z φ
4
4
ˆ θ0 + h − φ , t) dθ0
−q
θ0 J(x,
φ 0
2
2
"
#
Z h −φ h
i
2
φ
ˆ 0, t) + z Jˆz (x, 0, t) dz
≈2 q −p
J(x,
2
0

 

h
φ
−φ J
=2 q −p
2
2
γRL
=
φ (1 − J)
ds
Z

=2

h/2−φ

−p

(B.5)

The result arises after utilizing (B.3) relating p to q and upon recognizing that the surface tension γRL of the RL
compound at the lipid headgroup- is related to the lateral pressure as
q = γRL /ds
where ds denotes the diameter of a TM domain.
Bearing in mind that h = h0 /λ, where λ = J, an approximaion for the work done by the lateral pressure is the
computed through (B.4), namely w̃ξ = π ds h ŵξ , by virtue of (B.5), i.e.


1
w̃ξ = π φ h0 γRL
−1 .
(B.6)
λ
With the identification
ωξ = π φ h0 γRL

(B.7)

equation (B.6) yields



1
−1 .
(B.8)
λ
namely the (opposite of the) work per unit area and per unit receptor, reperesents the contribution to the chemical
potential µξ in (3.50) due to mechanical actions associated with conformational changes, against which the lateral
pressure performs work.
w̃ξ = ωξ

The remaining terms in (3.46), namely the entropic one, ηξ log(ξ/ξ 0 ), and the reference value µ̃0ξ add together and
sum up to w̃ξ to deliver the complete expression of the chemical potential for the RL compound. Obviously, for the
MRPs, namely the transporters, the reasoning is analog, thereby retrieving relation (3.50) for n2 = ζ, i.e. the analog
expression for the chemical potential for such species.

The chemical stress (B.1) can be revisited in the light of (B.8). In particular, for the RL species n1 = ξ it is worth
noting that ∂ µ̃ξ /∂λ = −∂ w̃ξ /∂λ and hence the chemical stress associated with the RL compound reads as follows:
P̃ξ = −(ξ 0 − ξ)

∂ w̃ξ
.
∂λ

(B.9)

It is then worth emphasizing that, in spite of the fact that the lateral stress profile between TMs and lipids is self-balanced
across the thickness, the rate of change of its work (done against the lateral variation of area) times the relative density
of the RL compound actually produces a quota of the membrane stress. Of course for the MRPs an analog reasoning
follows.

Appendix C
Conformational changes, remodelling and associated energetics
A schematic of the kinematics of the cell membrane in the presence of conformational changes and, possibly, remodelling
of the lipid membrane is displayed in the sequel in Fig.13. For the sake of illustration, this focuses on active receptors
alone, although the treatment for active transporters (MRPs) can be done in the same way. Geometrical changes
occuring among the TransMembrane domains of TM3, 5 and 6 (see 1) are shown together with the deformation of the
lipid bilayer. As pointed out in Sect. 3.2, the submacroscopic changes caused by the formation of the RL compound
(i.e. the receptor-ligand binding) do cause a remodelling of the cell membrane. This is due to a change of the density of
active receptors thereby determining the re-organization of the surrounding lipids.
Structured Deformations (see e.g. [93], [79], [83], [95], [96], [97]) is a multiscale geometric framework that permits
to account for both conformational changes and remodelling arising at the submacroscopic level. Such a framework
does allow for envisioning three full configurations for the membrane. In particular, on the top-left side of Fig.13, a

Virgin Conﬁguration

N

(f,G)

hr0

h0

n

ω

G=HF

n

ϕ0

µh

s

h
Current Conﬁguration
h

F= f

(f,F)

hr

(i,H)

Δ

Classically deformed Conﬁguration
Figure 13: Conformational changes and membrane deformation.

schematic of a piece of the membrane in its virgin configuration is sketched. Besides the reference thickness for the
membrane and for the TMs, h0 and hr0 respectively, and their counterparts in the current configurations, h and h0 , the
quantities highlighted there are the normal N to the mid-plane of the lipid membrane in the virgin configuration, its
counterpart n in the deformed configuration, the reference value φT of the diameter of each TM, and the available
diameter φ0 for such movements to arise. The quantity ρT := φ0 /φT denotes the room space available between the
TMs for conformational changes in the virgin configuration,√this indicates the degree of packing of the TMs. The
minimum value of the room space ρT is estimated to be 1 + 2/ 3 (closest packing of the three domains involved in the

movements), hence its value is taken to be between such a value and 3, corresponding to the available room space of a
TM in the middle of TM3, 5 and 6, as shown in the sequel in Fig.14. It is worth notning that this schematic allows
ds
5
3

6

φ0

(r)

(a)

h0

h0

(b)

(c)

Figure 14: Room space for conformational changes in active receptors as in [113]: (a) schematic of TM3, 5 and 6, (b) minimum and
regular room space among the domains involved in the conformational changes.

for distinguishing two different deformed configurations: the classically deformed one and the current configuration.
The latter is represented on the top right side of Fig. 13. Mathematically, this is described through a given Structured
Deformation, namely a pair (y, G), where y is the deformation mapping from the virgin configuration, and G is a tensor
field which would be equal to the gradient of y if no conformational changes would occur. The lower part of Fig. 13
offers an explanation of such interpretation through the multiplicative decompostition (y, G) = (i, H) ◦ (y, F) of the
pair (y, G) introduced above. An intermediate classically deformed configuration is represented in the bottom of this
figure where (y, F), with F = Grad y, maps points in the virgin configuration in this intermediate one. This classical
deformation is followed by a non-classical one. The latter is represented by a pair (i, H) and it is displayed in Fig. 13:
here i is the identity mapping (leaving then the macroscopic configuration untouched), while H = GF−1 is a tensor
field accounting for all the local conformational changes.
It is also worth noting that this representation is fully compatible with the schematic depicted in Fig.11 in the main
text. As pointed out in [93], a factorization of the structured deformation (y, G) = (y, F) ◦ (i, K) such that a classical
deformation follows a non-classical one where the macroscopic deformation of the body does not change, while
conformational changes such that K = F−1 G can occur at the submacroscopic level. Obviously there is a one-to-one
relationship between the configurational changes described (through H) from the classically deformed configuration to
the current configuration and their description starting from the virgin configuration (through K). Indeed, pure geometry
is suggestive of the fact that the deformation of the membrane plays a key role (through F = Grad y) on carrying over
the information related to the conformational changes, as K = F−1 HF.
It is worth noting that the definition of the remodelling factor introduced in (3.21) can be exactly written as
Kr = detK,

(C.1)

as the change in volume between the virgin configuration and the reference configuration is solely due to disarrangements
which, in this case, are due to (submacroscopic) remodelling.
Furthermore, it is obvious that detK = detH. Henceforth, the evaluation of the remodelling factor can either be done
upon following the scheme displayed in Fig.11 ((y, F) ◦ (i, K), namely by letting disarrangements to act first, then
followed by a classical deformation) or the one in Fig.13 ((i, H) ◦ (y, F), i.e. a classical deformation first, then the
conformational changes).
Conformational energy: the case of active receptors
As is has been recalled in Fig.1, conformational changes in active receptors are mainly characterized by a rotation ω of
TM6 about its axis and by a translation µh of the TM6 domain with respect to TM3 and TM5 (see e.g. [13]).
Henceforth, the change in Helmholtz free energy per unit area and per unit receptor relative to the classically deformed
configuration (as displayed in Fig. 13) due to such movements can be then interpreted as a result of two contributions,
both arising in the current configuration (see [113]). For both of such terms, the change in entropy per unit area and per
unit receptor is evaluated as in [113]. The change of entropy due to rotation is accounted for by generalizing the result
obtained in [114], namely
 ω 
(1)
ϕCR = A log
,
(C.2)
2π 2/3

where ω represents the rotation of the TM domains involved in the conformational change about the normal e3 to the
mid-plane of the membrane in the current configuration, A is a normalization constant and A · KB T represents the
conformational energy level per unit receptor per unit area at the reference angle ω ∗ = 2π 2/3 e. The local translation
measure is relative to the free volume available for the conformational changes in the current configuration. This is
calculated by multiplying the current value of the thickness h of the cell membrane by the available area π(d0 /2)2 J,
where d0 represents the referential diameter of the zone in which conformational changes of the TMs can occur. It
is worth recalling that J = h0 /h depends on the location x = (x1 , x2 ) of the mid plane of the bilayer. As recalled
in Sect. 4, it has been shown that J is the order parameter in lipid membranes (see e.g. [56, 55, 54]), allowing for
discriminating whether or not lipids exhibit ordered (J = 1 indicates the completely straight configuration of the
lipid tails) or disordered phases (J > 1, curlier configuration). Henceforth, the resulting change in entropy due to
translational changes may be written as follows:
!
µh
(2)
ϕCR = A log
,
(C.3)
1/3
(J (d0 /2)2 h)
where µ h represents a measure of the local translation of the TMs with respect to current location and
1/3
1/3
is a reference measure of such translation. Upon introducing the “room space"
J (d0 /2)2 h
= (d0 /2)2 h0
parameter
ρT = d0 /ds ,
(C.4)
which measures how much room is available for the conformational changes of the TMs, as ds indicates the diameter of
any of the TMs involved in such changes.
The total conformational energy density per unit area and per unit (distribution density of) receptors is obtained as the
sum of both contributions (C.2) and (C.3) above, i.e.
 η
(1)
(2)
ϕCR = ϕCR + ϕCR = A log κ
,
(C.5)
J
where
η = ωµ
(C.6)
represents the conformational field and κ is a dimensionless geometric constant defined as follows:

 23
1
2 h0
κ=
.
(C.7)
2 π ds ρT
Accordingly to equation (C.7) and a range of geometric quantities collected from literature in Table 3, a range for κ can
be then determined to be κmin ≤ κ ≤ κmax , where κmin = 0.587, κmax = 1.634 and κm = (κmin + κmax )/2 = 1.11
will be used.
thickness h0

diameter ds

[nm]

[nm]

room space ρT

-

3÷6

0.3 ÷ 0.5

2.15 ÷ 3

Table 3. Ranges of values of geometrical parameters assumed from [110, 115, 113], while the room space ρT is estimated from
Figure 14.

In [113] bounds for η are found in in terms of the ratio h/h0 . Nonetheless, for a given set of geometrical parameters
h0 , ds , ρT , it can be shown that η ∗ = K −1 represents the lowest possible value for η. Maximum admissible values of
the conformational changes η can also be estimated by considering extreme configurations of a single TM . Indeed η is
composed by a rotation, ω in the range (0, π] (i.e. the value 0 cannot be achieved), and a shear, µ = tan α where α is
an angle across thickness (see Figure 13). The angle α can conceivably achieve values up to π/4, due to the presence of
the surrounding TMs. Then, the conformational field is found in the following interval: η ∗ ≤ η ≤ π.
The result (C.5) is a generalization of [114] and [116], as the entropic changes are measured while accounting for the
deformation of the lipid membrane.
Conformational energy and work done by the lateral pressure: the case of active receptors
The contribution to the total Helmholtz free energy W of the energetics of active receptors, RL, and transporters, MRPs,
has been worked out in Sect. 3.4. In particular, equation (3.48) for the RL compounds specializes as follows


ξ
Wξ (λ−1 , ξ) = ηξ ξ log 0 + (ξ − ξ 0 ) ωξ λ−1 − 1 − µ̃0ξ − ηξ .
(C.8)
ξ

Equation (3.50) particularized for such a species and integrated over the domain Ωa in the intermediate configuration,
can be considered. Its variational derivative with respect to ξ, the density of RL, leads the following expression for the
chemical potential

ξ
µ̃ξ = µ̃0ξ − ωξ λ−1 − 1 − ηξ log 0 .
(C.9)
ξ

In Appendix C it has been obtained that the term ωξ λ−1 − 1 appearing both in (C.8) and (C.9) solely regards the
work done by the lateral pressure against the local area variation arising across the membrane during conformational
changes.
Mixing of the the RL (active receptors) throughout the membrane contributes to lower the energy of the system in a
purely entropic way (see e.g. [60]). Upon identifying
ηξ = KB T,

(C.10)

where KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature of the bath in which the cells are embedded, i.e.

 
ξ
,
(C.11)
KB T ξ −eRL + log
ξ0
where eRL is the specific activation energy for the complex receptor-ligand.
The corresponding energy density (C.5) per unit receptors, per unit area and per unit KB T due to conformational
changes and ideal mixing allows for writing the quota of the total Helmholtz free energy associated with ξ as follows:

 

Z
ξ
− ϕCR dΩa .
ξ −eRL + log
(C.12)
ξ0
Ωa
The variational derivative of the overall energy with respect to ξ yields the following expression of the corresponding
chemical potential

 

ξ
µ̃ξ = KB T −eRL + 1 + ln
− (ξ ϕCR ),ξ .
(C.13)
ξ0
As in [113], by taking (C.10) into account, the comparison between (C.13) and (C.9) establishes the consistency of
both expressions for the chemical potetial of the RL compound and leads to the following relation among the density of
active receptors ξ, the conformational field η and the membrane thickness change h:
 −1


ξ
C
h
=1−
(C.14)
ln K η .
h
ξ0
h0
−1
h0
where
C=

KB T A
.
πφT h0 γRL

(C.15)

In Figure 15, slices obtained by fixing values of η are shown, namely the quantity X = ξ/ξ 0 as a function of the
6

K = 1.11
C = 0.2

5

η = η*
η = η* + 0.25Δη
η = η* + 0.50Δη
η = η* + 0.75Δη
η=π

X = ξ/ξ0

4

3

lower bound

2

1

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

H = h/h0

Figure 15: Behavior of ξ/ξ 0 vs h/h0 using η as parameter. Here η ∗ = 1.07 represents a basal value and ∆η = 2.06 (see [113]).

relative thickness change H = λ−1 = h/h0 . This shows that relative thickness change H increases with an increase of
active receptor density X. This result, is found to be in agreement with the experimental findings of Lefkovitz [11]
and Kobilka [10]. As in a purification process the addition of cholesterol to the membrane induces lipid ordering, this
actually enhances the clustering of activated receptors on rafts. Our model is then consistent to this observation already
at the constitutive level. Furthermore, in [113] it is shown that equation (C.14) allows one to obtain the conformation in
terms of relative distribution of active receptors X and of the thinning field H, in the following form:


1
(1 − H)(1 − X)
η=
exp −
.
(C.16)
HK
CX
The relative receptor density X is a positive definite quantity and it is increasing with H. In [113] it is shown that the
simultaneous occurrence of both these conditions implies the occurrence of the following inequalities:


1
1−H
= ηU B ,
(C.17a)
η<
exp
KH
C


1
H −1
η≥
exp
= ηLB ,
(C.17b)
KH
H
for given values of H, C and K. Further investigations (see Table 4 below) allow for estimating C in the range
[0.05 ÷ 0.75], while the value taken for this parametric study is C = 0.3.
Table 4 Estimated values for C. For each choice of parameters, the first pair of rows is referred to A = 1, while the second refers to
A = 5. Values of γRL come from literature [112, 111, 113].
h0 [nm]

φT [nm]

γRL [mN/m]

A/C

C

3

0.5

10

11.01

0.091
0.454

6

0.3

10

13.21

0.076
0.379

3

0.5

35

38.52

0.026
0.129

6

0.3

35

42.22

0.022
0.108

References
[1] S. W. Cole and A. K. Sood, “Molecular pathways: Beta-adrenergic signaling in cancer,” Clinical Cancer
Research, vol. 18(5), pp. 1201–1206, 2011.
[2] H. Unal and S. Karnik, “Domain coupling in gpcrs: the engine for induced conformational changes,” Trends in
Pharmacological Sciences, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 79–88, 2012.
[3] J. Allard, Dushek, D. O. Coombs, and P. van der Merwe, “Mechanical modulation of receptor-ligand interactions
at cell-cell interfaces,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 102, pp. 1–9, 2012.
[4] S. Mary, J. Fehrentz, M. Damian, P. Vedié, J. Martinez, K. Marie, and J. Baneres, “How ligands and signaling
proteins affect g-protein-coupled receptors’ conformational landscape,” Biochem Soc Trans, vol. 41, pp. 144–147,
2013.
[5] Y. S. Cho, Y. Lee, and Y. Cho-Chung, “Biochemical characterization of extracellular camp-dependent protein
kinase as a tumor marker,” Biochemistry and Biophysics Research Communications, vol. 278, no. 3, pp. 679–684,
2000.
[6] M. Cvijic, T. Kita, W. Shih, R. S. Di Paola, and K. Chin, “The alpha-1a-adrenergic receptor occupies membrane
rafts with its g protein effectors but internalizes via clathrin-coated pits,” Clinical Cancer Research, vol. 6,
pp. 2309–2317, 2000.
[7] X. Liu, J.-M. Yang, S. S. Zhang, X.-Y. Liu, and D. X. Liu, “Induction of cell cycle arrest at g1 and s phases and
camp-dependent differentiation in c6 glioma by low concentration of cycloheximide,” BMC Cancer, vol. 10,
no. 684, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[8] J. Banerjee, A. Papu John, M. H. Al-Wadei, and H. Schuller, “Raftlike mixtures of sphingomyelin and cholesterol
investigated by solid-state 2h nmr spectroscopy.,” Oncotarget, vol. 130, pp. 44430–44441, 2016.
[9] C. Choi, N. Thi Thao Tran, T. Van Ngu, S. Woong Park, M. Suk Song, S. Hyun Kim, Y.-U. Bae, P. Diskul
Na Ayudthaya, J. Munir, E. Kim, M.-J. Baek, S. Song, S. Ryu, and K.-H. Nam, “Promotion of tumor progression and cancer stemness by muc15 in thyroid cancer via the gpcr/erk and integrin-fak signaling pathways,”
Oncogenesis, vol. 85, no. 7, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[10] B. Kobilka and X. Deupi, “Conformational complexity of g-protein-coupled receptors,” Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 397–406, 2007.
[11] R. Lefkowitz, “Seven transmembrane receptors: something old, something new,” Acta Physiol, vol. 190, pp. 9–19,
2007.
[12] C. Biondi, M. E. Ferretti, L. Lunghi, S. Medici, F. Cervellati, B. Pavan, F. Vesce, D. Morano, E. Adinolfi,
F. Bertoni, and L. Abelli, “camp efflux from human trophoblast cell lines: a role for multidrug resistance protein
(mrp) 1 transporter,” Molecular Human Reproduction, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 481–91, 2010.
[13] P. Ghanouni, Z. Gryczynski, J. Steenhuis, T. Lee, D. Farrens, J. Lakowicz, and B. Kobilka, “Functionally different
agonists induce distinct conformations in the g protein coupling domain of the beta 2 adrenergic receptor,” The
Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 276, no. 27, pp. 24433–6., 2001.
[14] V. Cherezov, D. M. Rosenbaum, M. A. Hanson, S. G. Rasmussen, F. S. Thian, T. S. Kobilka, H. J. Choi,
P. Kuhn, W. I. Weis, B. K. Kobilka, and R. C. Stevens, “High resolution crystal structure of an engineered human
beta2-adrenergic g protein-coupled receptor,” Science, vol. 318, no. 5854, pp. 1258–65, 2007.
[15] C. Biondi, M. E. Ferretti, B. Pavan, L. Lunghi, B. Gravina, M. S. Nicoloso, F. Vesce, and G. Baldassarre,
“Prostaglandin e2 inhibits proliferation and migration of htr-8/svneo cells, a human trophoblast-derived cell line,”
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology, vol. 27, no. 6-7, pp. 592–601, 2006.
[16] L. Lunghi, M. E. Ferretti, S. Medici, C. Biondi, and F. Vesce, “Control of human trophoblast function,” Reproductive biology and endocrinology : RB&E, vol. 5, p. 6, 2007.
[17] P. Le Bouteiller and J. Tabiasco, “Killers become builders during pregnancy,” Nature Medicine, vol. 12, pp. 991–
992, 2006.
[18] J. Hanna, D. Goldman-Wohl, Y. Hamani, I. Avraham, C. Greenfield, S. Natanson-Yaron, D. Prus, L. CohenDaniel, T. I. Arnon, I. Manaster, R. Gazit, V. Yutkin, D. Benharroch, A. Porgador, E. Keshet, S. Yagel, and
O. Mandelboim, “Decidual nk cells regulate key developmental processes at the human fetal-maternal interface,”
Nature Medicine, vol. 12, no. 1065-1074, 2006.
[19] M. T. Drake, S. K. Shenoy, and R. J. Lefkowitz, “Trafficking of g protein-coupled receptors,” Circulation
Research, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 570–582, 2006.

[20] B. Chini and M. Parenti, “G-protein coupled receptors in lipid rafts and caveolae: how, when and why do they go
there?,” Journal of Molecular Endocrinology, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 325–38, 2004.
[21] J. Oates and A. Watts, “Uncovering the intimate relationship between lipids, cholesterol and gpcr activation,”
Current Opinion in Structural Biology, vol. 21, pp. 1–6, 2011.
[22] R. S. Ostrom and P. A. Insel, “The evolving role of lipid rafts and caveolae in g protein-coupled receptor signaling:
implications for molecular pharmacology,” British of Journal Pharmacology, vol. 143, pp. 235–45, 2004.
[23] H. H. Patel, F. Murray, and P. A. Insel, “G-protein-coupled receptor-signaling components in membrane raft and
caveolae microdomains,” Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, vol. 186, pp. 167–84, 2008.
[24] L. Bridge, M. D. Levin, and C. J. Morton-Firth, “Receptor clustering as a cellular mechanism to control
sensitivity,” Nature, vol. 393, pp. 85–88, May 1998.
[25] J. Foster, C. L. de Hoog, and M. Ma, “Unbiased quantitative proteomics of lipid rafts reveals high specificity for
signaling factors,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 100 (10), pp. 5813–5818, 2003.
[26] X. Jiao, N. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Oppenheim, and T. Jin, “Ligand-induced partitioning of human cxcr1 chemokine
receptors with lipid raft microenvironments facilitates g-protein-dependent signaling,” Molecular Cell Biology,
vol. 25, no. 13, pp. 5752—-576, 1996.
[27] A. Becher and R. McIlhinney, “Consequences of lipid raft association on g-protein-coupled receptor function,”
Biochem Soc. Symp., vol. 72, pp. 151–164, 2005.
[28] J. Barnett-Norris, D. Lynch, and P. H. Reggio, “Lipids, lipid rafts and caveolae: their importance for gpcr
signaling and their centrality to the endocannabinoid system,” Life Sciences, vol. 77 (14), pp. 1625–1639, 2005.
[29] M. Gopalakrishnan, K. Forsten-Williams, M. Nugent, and U. Tauber, “Effects of receptor clustering on ligand
dissociation kinetics: Theory and simulations,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 3686–3700, 2005.
[30] E. Watkins, C. Miller, J. Majewski, and T. Kuhl, “Membrane texture induced by specific protein binding and
receptor clustering: active roles for lipids in cellular function,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 108 (17), pp. 6975–6980, 2011.
[31] V. Villar, S. Cuevas, X. Zheng, and P. Jose, “Chapter 1: Localization and signaling of gpcrs in lipid rafts,”
Methods in Cell Biology, vol. 136, pp. 3–23, 2016.
[32] A. Shukla, ed., G Protein-Coupled Receptors. Signaling, Trafficking and Regulation. Methods in Cell Biology,
vol. 132. Elsevier, 1st edition ed., 2016.
[33] Y. Lu, D. X. Liu, and J. P. Tam, “Lipid rafts are involved in sars-cov entry into vero e6 cells,” Biochemical and
biophysical research communications, vol. 369, no. 2, pp. 344–349, 2008.
[34] M. Fallahi-Sichani and J. Linderman, “Lipid raft-mediated regulation of g-protein coupled receptor signaling by
ligands which influence receptor dimerization: A computational study.,” PLoS ONE, vol. 4, no. 8, p. e6604, 2009.
[35] K. Jacobson, O. G. Mouritsen, and R. G. W. Anderson, “Lipid rafts: at a crossroad between cell biology and
physics,” Nature Cell Biology, vol. 9, pp. 7–14, jan 2007.
[36] H. J. Risselada and S. J. Marrink, “The molecular face of lipid rafts in model membranes,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 105, no. 45, pp. 17367–17372, 2008.
[37] K. Dharani, “Chapter 7 - molecular-grid model,” in The Biology of Thought (K. Dharani, ed.), pp. 123–142, San
Diego: Academic Press, 2015.
[38] D. Lingwood and K. Simons, “Lipid rafts as a membrane-organizing principle,” Science, vol. 327, no. 5961,
pp. 46–50, 2010.
[39] H. Bermúdez, D. Hammer, and D. Discher, “Effect of bilayer thickness on membrane bending rigidity,” Langmuir,
vol. 20, pp. 540–543, 2004.
[40] S. Das, A. Tian, and T. Baumgart, “Mechanical stability of micropipet-aspirated giant vesicles with fluid phase
coexistence,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 112, no. 11625-11630, 2008.
[41] A. Iglic, ed., Advances in planar lipid bilayers and liposomes, vol. 15. Academic Press, 1st edition ed., 2012.
[42] E. Sackmann, Handbook of biological physics, ch. 5. Physical Basis of Self-Organization and Function of
Membranes: Physics of Vesicles, pp. 213–303. Elsevier, 1995.
[43] Y. Xiang, V. O. Rybin, S. F. Steinberg, and B. Kobilka, “Caveolar localization dictates physiologic signaling
of beta 2-adrenoceptors in neonatal cardiac myocytes,” The Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 277, no. 37,
pp. 34280–6, 2002.

[44] M. A. Hanson, V. Cherezov, M. T. Griffith, C. B. Roth, V. P. Jaakola, E. Y. Chien, J. Velasquez, P. Kuhn, and R. C.
Stevens, “A specific cholesterol binding site is established by the 2.8 a structure of the human beta2-adrenergic
receptor,” Structure, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 897–905, 2008.
[45] M. Hu, J. Briguglio, and M. Deserno, “Determining the gaussian curvature modulus of lipid membranes in
simulations,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 102, no. 1403-1410, 2012.
[46] D. Norouzi, M. Müller, and D. M., “How to determine local elastic properties of lipid bilayer membranes from
atomic-force-microscope measurements: A theoretical analysis,” Physical Review Letters E, vol. 74, no. 061914,
2006.
[47] A. Agrawal and D. Steigmann, “Coexistent fluid-phase equilibria in biomembranes with bending elasticity,”
Journal of Elasticity, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 63–80, 2008.
[48] A. Agrawal and D. Steigmann, “Modeling protein-mediated morphology in biomembranes,” Biomechanics and
Modeling in Mechanobiology, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 371–379, 2009.
[49] N. Walani, J. Torres, and A. Agrawal, “Endocytic proteins drive vesicle growth via instability in high membrane
tension environment,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 112, no. 12, pp. E1423–E1432,
2015.
[50] T. Baumgart, W. Webb, and S. Hess, “Imaging coexisting domains in biomembrane models coupling curvature
and line tension,” Nature, vol. 423, no. 821-824, 2003.
[51] T. Baumgart, S. Das, W. Webb, and J. Jenkins, “Membrane elasticity in giant vesicles with fluid phase coexistence,”
Biophysical Journal, vol. 89, pp. 1067–1080, 2005.
[52] A. Honerkamp-Smith, P. Cicuta, M. Collins, S. Veatch, M. den Nijs, M. Schick, and S. Keller, “Line tensions,
correlation lengths, and critical exponents in lipid membranes near critical points,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 95,
pp. 236–246, 2008.
[53] L. Deseri, P. Pollaci, M. Zingales, and K. Dayal, “Fractional hereditariness of lipid membranes: Instabilities and
linearized evolution,” J Mech Behav Biomed Mater, 2015.
[54] L. Deseri and G. Zurlo, “The stretching elasticity of biomembranes determines their line tension and bending
rigidity,” Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology, vol. 12, pp. 1233–1242, 2013.
[55] L. Deseri, M. Piccioni, and G. Zurlo, “Derivation of a new free energy for biological membranes,” Continuum
Mechanics and Thermodynamics, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 255–273, 2008.
[56] G. Zurlo, Material and geometric phase transitions in biological membranes. PhD thesis, University of Pisa,
2006.
[57] P. Canham, “The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red
blood cell,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 26, pp. 61–?80, 1970.
[58] J. Jenkins, “Static equilibrium configurations of a model red blood cell,” Journal of Mathematical Biology, vol. 4,
no. 2, pp. 149–169, 1977.
[59] P. Biscari and F. Bisi, “Membrane-mediated interactions of rod-like inclusions,” The European Physical Journal
E, vol. 7, pp. 381–386, 2002.
[60] P. Rangamani, A. Benjamini, A. Agrawal, B. Smit, D. Steigmann, and G. Oster, “Small scale membrane
mechanics,” Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology, vol. 13, pp. 697–711, 2014.
[61] R. Goldstein and S. Leibler, “Structural phase transitions of interacting membranes,” Physical Review Letters A,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 1025–1035, 1989.
[62] J. Owicki and H. McConnell, “Theory of protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions in bilayer membranes,”
PNAS, vol. 76, pp. 4750–4754, 1979.
[63] A. Sahu, R. A. Sauer, and K. K. Mandadapu, “Irreversible thermodynamics of curved lipid membranes,” Physical
Review E, vol. 96, p. 042409, 2017.
[64] W. Helfrich, “Elastic properties of lipid bilayers: theory and possible experiments,” Zeitschrift für Naturforschung
C, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 693–703, 1973.
[65] R. Lipowsky, “Budding of membranes induced by intramembrane domains,” Journal de Physique II France,
vol. 2, pp. 1825–1840, 1992.
[66] S. Akimov, P. Kuzmin, and Z. J., “An elastic theory for line tension at a boundary separating two lipid monolayer
regions of different thickness,” Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, vol. 564, pp. 13–18, 203.

[67] L. Chen, M. Johnson, and R. Biltonen, “A macroscopic description of lipid bilayer phase transitions of mixedchain phosphatidylcholines: Chain-length and chain-asymmetry dependence,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 80,
pp. 254–270, 2001.
[68] M. Falkovitz, M. Seul, H. Frisch, and H. McConnell, “Theory of periodic structures in lipid bilayer membranes,”
PNAS, vol. 79, pp. 3918–3921, 1982.
[69] F. Jahnig, “Critical effects from lipid-protein interaction in membranes,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 36, pp. 329–
345, 1981.
[70] J. Owicki, M. Springgate, and H. McConnell, “Theoretical study of protein-lipid interactions in bilayer membranes,” PNAS, vol. 75, pp. 1616–1619, 1978.
[71] M. Deserno, “Fluid lipid membranes: From differential geometry to curvature stresses,” Chemistry and Physics
of Lipids, vol. 185, pp. 11–45, 2014.
[72] C.-I. Kim and D. J. Steigmann, “Distension-induced gradient capillarity in lipid membranes,” Continuum
Mechanics and Thermodynamics, vol. 27, pp. 609–621, 2015.
[73] S. Komura, H. Shirotori, P. Olmsted, and D. Andelman, “Lateral phase separation in mixtures of lipids and
cholesterol,” Europhysics Letters, vol. 67, no. 2, p. 321, 2004.
[74] J. Pan, S. Tristram-Nagle, and J. Nagle, “Effect of cholesterol on structural and mechanical properties of
membranes depends on lipid chain saturation,” Physical Review E, vol. 80, no. 021931, 2009.
[75] W. Rawicz, K. Olbrich, T. McIntosh, D. Needham, and E. Evans, “Effect of chain length and unsaturation on
elasticity of lipid bilayers,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 79, pp. 328–339, 2000.
[76] M. Maleki, B. Seguin, and E. Fried, “Kinematics, material symmetry, and energy densities for lipid bilayers with
spontaneous curvature,” Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 997–1017, 2013.
[77] D. Steigmann, “A model for lipid membranes with tilt and distension based on three-dimensional liquid crystal
theory,” International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics, vol. 56, pp. 61–70, 2013.
[78] P. Rangamani and D. J. Steigmann, “Variable tilt on lipid membranes,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A,
vol. 470, p. 20140463, 2015.
[79] L. Deseri and D. R. Owen, “Submacroscopically stable equilibria of elastic bodies undergoing disarrangements
and dissipation,” Mathematics and Mechanics of Solids, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 611–638, 2010.
[80] B. Brown, R. Ekins, and J. Albano, “Saturation assay for cyclic amp using endogenous binding protein.,”
Advances in Cyclic Nucleotide Research, vol. 2, pp. 25–40, 1972.
[81] M. Fraldi and A. R. Carotenuto, “Cells competition in tumor growth poroelasticity,” Journal of the Mechanics
and Physics of Solids, vol. 112, pp. 345–367, 2018.
[82] A. Carotenuto, A. Cutolo, A. Petrillo, R. Fusco, C. Arra, M. Sansone, D. Larobina, L. Cardoso, and M. Fraldi,
“Growth and in vivo stresses traced through tumor mechanics enriched with predator-prey cells dynamics,”
Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 2018.
[83] L. Deseri and D. R. Owen, “Moving interfaces that separate loose and compact phases of elastic aggregates: a
mechanism for drastic reduction or increase in macroscopic deformation,” Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics, vol. 25, pp. 311–341, 2012.
[84] T. Shigematsu, K. Koshiyama, and S. Wada, “Effects of stretching speed on mechanical rupture of phospholipid/cholesterol bilayers: Molecular dynamics simulation,” Scientific Reports, vol. 5, 15369, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[85] S. Komura and N. Shimokawa, “Tension-induced morphological transition in mixed lipid bilayers,” Langmuir,
vol. 22, pp. 6771–6774, 2006.
[86] B. Coleman and D. Newman, “On the rheology of cold drawing. i.elastic materials,” Journal of Polymer Science:
Part B: Polymer Physics, vol. 26, pp. 1801–1822, 1988.
[87] V. A. Lubarda and A. Hoger, “On the mechanics of solids with a growing mass,” International Journal of Solids
and Structures, vol. 39, no. 18, pp. 4627–4664, 2002.
[88] V. V. Gurevich and E. V. Gurevich, “Gpcrs and signal transducers: interaction stoichiometry,” Trends in
pharmacological sciences, 2018.
[89] G. Cevc, Phospholipids handbook. CRC press, 1993.
[90] B. Carpenter and C. G. Tate, “Engineering a minimal g protein to facilitate crystallisation of g protein-coupled
receptors in their active conformation,” Protein Engineering, Design and Selection, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 583–594,
2016.

[91] M. I. Mendelson, Learning Bio-micro-nanotechnology. CRC Press, 2013.
[92] P. J. Hume, D. Humphreys, and V. Koronakis, “Chapter twenty - wave regulatory complex activation,” in
Reconstituting the Cytoskeleton (R. D. Vale, ed.), vol. 540 of Methods in Enzymology, pp. 363 – 379, Academic
Press, 2014.
[93] L. Deseri and D. R. Owen, “Toward a field theory for elastic bodies undergoing disarrangements,” Journal of
Elasticity, vol. 70, no. I, pp. 197–236, 2003.
[94] D. R. Owen, “Balance laws and a dissipation inequality for general constituents undergoing disarrangements and
mixing,” ZAMM Journal of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, vol. 88, pp. 365–377, 2008.
[95] L. Deseri and D. R. Owen, “Stable disarrangement phases arising from expansion/contraction or from simple
shearing of a model granular medium,” International Journal of Engineering Sciences, vol. 96, no. 96, pp. 111–
130, 2015.
[96] L. Deseri and D. R. Owen, “Elasticity with hierarchical disarrangements: A field theory that admits slips and
separations at multiple submacroscopic levels,” Journal of Elasticity, vol. 135, no. 1-2, pp. 149–182, 2019.
[97] S. Palumbo, L. Deseri, D. R. Owen, and M. Fraldi, “Disarrangements and instabilities in augmented onedimensional hyperelasticity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, vol. 474, no. 2218, pp. 149–182, 2018.
[98] F. Nappi, A. R. Carotenuto, D. D. Vito, C. Spadaccio, C. Acar, and M. Fraldi, “Stress-shielding, growth
and remodeling of pulmonary artery reinforced with copolymer scaffold and transposed into aortic position,”
Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology, nov 2015.
[99] H. Gao, W. Shi, and L. Freund, “Mechanics of receptor-mediated endocytosis,” PNAS, vol. 102, no. 27, pp. 9469–
9474, 2005.
[100] S. M. Kelly and P. T. Macklem, “Direct measurement of intracellular pressure,” American Journal of PhysiologyCell Physiology, vol. 260, no. 3, pp. C652–C657, 1991. PMID: 2003586.
[101] I. Wolfram Research, Mathematica. Wolfram Research, Inc., 2015.
[102] L. Bridge, J. Mead, E. Frattini, I. Winfield, and G. Ladds, “Modelling and simulation of biased agonism dynamics
at a g protein-coupled receptor,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 442, pp. 44–65, Apr. 2018.
[103] L. Li, J. Hu, X. Shi, Y. Shao, and F. Song, “Lipid rafts enhance the binding constant of membrane-anchored
receptors and ligands,” Soft Matter, vol. 13, no. 23, pp. 4294–4304, 2017.
[104] T. C. Rich, K. A. Fagan, T. E. Tse, J. Schaack, D. M. F. Cooper, and J. W. Karpen, “A uniform extracellular
stimulus triggers distinct cAMP signals in different compartments of a simple cell,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 98, pp. 13049–13054, Oct. 2001.
[105] J. J. Saucerman, E. C. Greenwald, and R. Polanowska-Grabowska, “Mechanisms of cyclic AMP compartmentation revealed by computational models,” The Journal of General Physiology, vol. 143, pp. 39–48, Dec.
2013.
[106] S. R. Agarwal, P.-C. Yang, M. Rice, C. A. Singer, V. O. Nikolaev, M. J. Lohse, C. E. Clancy, and R. D. Harvey,
“Role of membrane microdomains in compartmentation of cAMP signaling,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, p. e95835, Apr.
2014.
[107] M. H. Kim, Y. J. Kim, H. R. Kim, T.-J. Jeon, J. B. Choi, K. Y. Chung, and M. K. Kim, “Computational simulation
of the activation cycle of gα subunit in the g protein cycle using an elastic network model,” PLOS ONE, vol. 11,
p. e0159528, Aug. 2016.
[108] P. S. Niemelä, S. Ollila, M. T. Hyvönen, M. Karttunen, and I. Vattulainen, “Assessing the nature of lipid raft
membranes,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 3, no. 2, p. e34, 2007.
[109] R. S. Cantor, “Lipid composition and the lateral pressure profile in bilayers,” Biophysical journal, vol. 76,
pp. 2625–2639, 1999.
[110] A. G. Lee, “How lipids affect the activities of integral membrane proteins,” 2004.
[111] D. Marsh, “Lateral pressure profile, spontaneous curvature frustration, and the incorporation and conformation
of proteins in membranes,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 93, pp. 3884–3899, 2007.
[112] S. Ollila, Lateral Pressure in Lipid Membranes and Its Role in Function of Membrane Proteins. PhD thesis,
Tampere University of Technology, 2010.
[113] P. Pollaci, Theoretical and numerical models on the diffusive and hereditary properties of biological structures.
PhD thesis, University of Trento, 2016.

[114] A. V. Finkelstein and J. Janin, “The price of lost freedom: entropy of bimolecular complex formation,” Protein
Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 1–3, Oct. 1989.
[115] U. Hiden, C. Wadsack, N. Prutsch, M. Gauster, U. Weiss, H.-G. Frank, U. Schmitz, C. Fast-Hirsch,
M. Hengstschläger, A. Pötgens, A. Rüben, M. Knöfler, P. Haslinger, B. Huppertz, M. Bilban, P. Kaufmann, and
G. Desoye, “The first trimester human trophoblast cell line ach-3p: A novel tool to study autocrine/paracrine regulatory loops of human trophoblast subpopulations – tnf-α stimulates mmp15 expression,” BMC Developmental
Biology, vol. 7, no. 137, 2007.
[116] C. W. Murray and M. L. Verdonk, “The consequences of translational and rotational entropy lost by small
molecules on binding to proteins,” Journal of computer-aided molecular design, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 741–753,
2002.

