Using posterior predictive distributions to analyse
epidemic models: COVID-19 in Mexico City
Ramsés H. Menaa , Jorge X. Velasco-Hernandezb , Natalia B. Mantilla-Beniersc , Gabriel A. Carranco-Sapiénsc , Luis Benetd ,
Denis Boyere , and Isaac Pérez Castillof,g,1
a

Instituto de Investigaciones en Matemáticas Aplicadas y en Sistemas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México CDMX, Apartado Postal 20-726, 01000, México;
Instituto de Matemáticas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Unidad Juriquilla 76230, Querétaro, México; c Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México 04510 CDMX, México; d Instituto de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av. Universidad s/n, Col. Chamilpa, C.P. 62210 Cuernavaca, Morelos,
México; e Departmento de Sistemas Complejos, Instituto de Física, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 20-364, 01000 CDMX, Mexico; f Departmento
de Física Cuántica y Fotónica, Instituto de Física, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 20-364, 01000 CDMX, Mexico; g London Mathematical
Laboratory, 8 Margravine Gardens, London, W68RH, UK
This manuscript was compiled on May 18, 2020

start of the second phase of the epidemic. Phase three would
be declared nearly a month later, on April 21. Distancing
measures included suspension of all non essential activities of
public, private and social sectors, and was initially planned
to last until April 30, but was later extended until May 17
or May 30, depending on the local situation of every municipality of the country. These measures were designed to lower
disease incidence rates of COVID-19 and keep the number of
hospitalized and critical cases manageable. (3, 4)

RA
FT

Epidemiological models contain a set of parameters that must be
adjusted based on available observations. Once a model has been
calibrated, it can be used as a forecasting tool to make predictions
and to evaluate contingency plans. It is customary to employ only
point estimators for such predictions. However, some models may
fit the same data reasonably well for a broad range of parameter values, and this flexibility means that predictions stemming from such
models will vary widely, depending on the particular parameter values employed within the range that give a good fit. When data are
poor or incomplete, model uncertainty widens further. A way to circumvent this problem is to use Bayesian statistics to incorporate observations and use the full range of parameter estimates contained
in the parameters’ posterior distribution to adjust for uncertainties
in model predictions. Specifically, given the epidemiological model
and a probability distribution for observations, we use the posterior
distribution of model’s parameters to generate all possible epidemiological curves, which are encapsulated in posterior predictive distributions. From these, one can extract the worst-case scenario and
study the impact of implementing contingency plans according to
this assessment. We apply this approach to the potential evolution
of COVID-19 in Mexico City and assess whether contingency plans
are being successful and whether the epidemiological curve has flattened.

D

arXiv:2005.02294v2 [q-bio.PE] 15 May 2020

b

Epidemiological Models | COVID-19 | Bayesian Statistics | Monte Carlo
methods

D

ecember 2019 saw the start of an outbreak of pneumonia
of unknown etiology in Wuhan, China. This would be
recognised as result of the disease provoked by a new coronavirus able to infect humans and transmit within human
populations. By January 23, Chinese authorities had taken
severe measures to contain its spread: imposing travel bans,
restricting mobility within Wuhan, isolating suspect and confirmed cases, banning gatherings and shutting schools and
entertainment venues. This did not prevent the virus from
reaching several other countries and all regions of China quickly.
On January 30, with 7,711 confirmed cases in China and 83
in other countries, the World Health Organization declared
SARS-CoV-2 a Public Health Emergency of International
Concern. (1, 2)
Mexico confirmed its first cases of Covid-19 on February 27
in travellers returning from Italy to Sinaloa and Mexico City
respectively. On March 15, the Mexican National Committee
for Safety in Health (Comité Nacional para la Seguridad en
Salud) announced the start, on March 23, of distancing measures to mitigate the transmission of COVID-19, declaring the
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

There are important reasons to expect that the number of
actual infected cases in Mexico City, and the country at large,
are larger than the reported ones. The testing rate in Mexico
is the lowest among the OECD countries (5) and the positivity
rate for testing in Mexico City on the week ending on May
6, for example, ranges between 24.5% to 41.7% depending
on the municipality (6). Both of these factors imply a likely
large sub-reporting of cases. The strain on the Health system
is already important in Mexico City and other large population centers in the country. To the day of submission of this
work, the model used by the Federal Government’s General
Directorate of Epidemiology (Dirección General de Epidemiología) has not been publicly released. There is no technical
information available on the model’s fundamental underlying
(biological, statistical, mathematical) assumptions on contact
rates, initial conditions, percentage of asymptomatic carriers,
basic reproduction number among others. As far as we are
aware of, there is only one peer-reviewed published model on
the Mexican case but this is centered on the analysis of the

Significance Statement
Epidemiological compartmental models are sloppy models:
there exists a wide number of solutions in their parameter space
that can fit equally well a given data describing the beginning
of an epidemic. Under this condition, using only one point of
this set of parameters to predict the evolution of the epidemic
is clearly inappropriate. Using posterior predictive distributions
we can account for all possible epidemic curves compatible with
the data and provide a more robust, and probabilistic forecast.
All authors contributed to the discussions that led to this research, and corrections to the
manuscript. The manuscript was mainly written by IPC and JXVH. The public database provided
by the Mexican Government was processed by GACS and LB to extract the appropriate data. The
calculations were performed by LB and IPC.
Authors declare no competing interests.
1

isaacpc@fisica.unam.mx

PNAS

|

May 18, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

1–6

given the parameters θ. Examples of simple epidemiological models are the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) or
the Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR) models,
for which the states are N = (S, I, R) or N = (S, E, I, R),
respectively. More realistic models, as the one we will use
here, with the aim to estimate disease toll and burden, introduce additional states to follow hospitalized and critically-ill
patients.
Suppose now that we have an observational dataset D ≡
max
, possibly with an observational time- and
{N (obs) (t)}tt=0
compartmental-correlation matrix. From here we can derive
the likelihood P (D|θ) of observing this dataset given a set of
parameters. Using Bayes’ rule, the posterior distribution of the
parameters given the dataset is simply P (θ|D) ∝ P (D|θ)P0 (θ)
where P0 (θ) is the prior distribution of the parameters. The
standard way to calibrate the model is to find the set of parameters, denoted here as θ ? , which maximizes the posterior
distribution P (θ|D), that is, θ ? = arg maxθ P (θ|D). These
are sometimes referred to as maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimators. When the prior distribution is flat, and the posterior
distribution exists, θ ? coincides with the maximum likelihood
estimator. Once the model has been calibrated using this point
estimator, the evolution of the epidemic is given by N (t, θ ? ),
which can then be used to make predictions.
Unfortunately, this method tends to fail for the so-called
sloppy models (8), because the variances in parameter calibration can be rather large in certain directions of the parameter
space, particularly when using data only from the beginning
of the epidemic curve. As a result, there is large uncertainty
in the conditions leading to the desired state, which renders
this deterministic approach inadequate as a forecasting tool to
e.g. implement contingency plans. A full Bayesian approach
considers the uncertainty captured by the whole posterior
distribution P (θ|D), and not only the deterministic point
estimator θ ? . From this principle we can introduce various
posterior predictive distributions. We start by considering the
posterior predictive compartmental distribution given by:

D

RA
FT

efficacy of the implementation of the mitigation strategies still
in effect (7). There is, therefore the urgent need to count
with alternative models able to project feasible scenarios of
the epidemic in Mexico, in order to evaluate, compare and
improve the expected trends, infection levels and public health
strategies in view of the upcoming lifting (May 30) of the mitigation and social distancing measures in effect since March
23.
This pandemic has shown that various parameter estimates
vary wildly from country to country. Thus, comparing fitted
parameters between different countries to either disregard or
confirm a particular model may be misleading. It would be
rather more sensible to run different models for a given population and compare the results for that particular setting. The
reasons as to why fitted parameters vary so much from country
to country, one may speculate, may lay on the particular age
distributions, risk factors, income, access to healthcare, social
norms, climate, to mention but a few.
In this scenario, mathematical models are a natural tool for
identifying what needs to be done in order to avoid saturating
the healthcare system. Models are commonly used to estimate,
for example, the extent of the reduction in the effective transmission rate needed to control an epidemic. However, most
of these models fall in a category commonly known as sloppy
models (8). These are models that depend on a large number of
parameters and for which, once fitted to limited or noisy data,
a broad range of certain parameter values produce similarly
acceptable fits. This is clearly disconcerting, since using different parameter estimates one will surely obtain widely different
predictions from the same model, rendering its application
to forecasting impractical, a problem which unfortunately is
frequently overlooked at times when theoretical expectations
and scientific rigour are directly needed.
Here, we present a Kermack-McKendrick type of model (9)
to evaluate the efficacy of the Sanitary Emergency declaration in containing disease spread in Mexico City, taking into
account parameter uncertainty and data scarcity. One way
to tackle these uncertainties is to use a Bayesian approach
and analyse whether the mitigation measures are being effective and what are the worst-case scenarios to be expected.
Specifically, we introduce the predictive posterior distribution
for epidemiological models. This allows us to analyse a full
spectrum of scenarios, thus enabling us to determine whether
the response is being appropriate in order to avoid the collapse
of the healthcare system. Instead of accurately calibrating
models with data, which is a difficult task to carry out from
the short time series of the early stage of an epidemic, we
focus on the effects of parameter variability in the model’s
predictions.

1. On epidemiological models
The basic idea of epidemiological compartmental models is
to split the host population (often assumed to be of constant
size N ) into r compartments corresponding to states of the
infection, so that Na (t) indicates the population in state a =
1, . . . , r. We thus introduce vector N (t) = (N1 (t), . . . , Nr (t))
and assume the epidemic to follow a set of nonlinear ODEs
dN (t)
= F [N (t), θ] ,
[1]
dt
where θ = (θ1 , . . . , θp ) is a set of p parameters of the model.
Let N (t, θ) denote the solution for the set of equations Eq. (1)
2

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Z
P (n, t|D) =

dθP (θ|D)P [N (t, θ) = n | θ] ,

[2]

where P [N (t, θ) = n | θ] = δ[n − N (t, θ)], since the evolution
equations Eq. (1) modelling the epidemic are deterministic.
Here P (n, t|D) = Prob(N (t, θ) = n | D) corresponds to the
probability of observing a given value of state n = (n1 , . . . , nr )
at time t given the data set D. Clearly, if P (θ|D) has
a marked peak around θ ? , with the extreme case being
P (θ|D) = δ(θ − θ ? ), then P (n, t|D) evolves deterministically
according to N (t, θ ? ), that is P (n, t|D) = δ [n − N (t, θ ? )],
which then recovers the previously mentioned standard approach. However, if the posterior distribution P (θ|D) is spread
wide, so will be P (n, t|D). Thus, we need to consider the whole
distribution P (n, t|D) as a forecasting tool, and use it to analyse the implementation and impact of contingency plans.
Generally, we expect the posterior predictive distribution
P (n, t|D) to have a compact support, since the host population
is taken to be constant. With this in mind, we will denote as
Ω(low) (t) and Ω(up) (t) its lower and upper boundaries, respectively, that is, P (n, t|D) is zero for n 6∈ [Ω(low) (t), Ω(up) (t)].
(low)
(up)
The two boundaries, Ωa (t) and Ωa (t), which correspond
fairly intuitively to the lower and upper envelopes of all possible epidemiological curves Na (t, θ) with θ drawn from P (θ|D),
Pérez Castillo et al.

can be understood in epidemiological terms as the best- and
worst-case scenarios of the epidemic for state a at time t,
respectively. Thus, they are fairly useful to determine the
impact on a healthcare system. For instance, if we were to
have a compartment C modelling critically-ill patients, the
(up)
corresponding upper boundary ΩC (t) gives a bound for the
worst-case scenario. Thus, if a particular healthcare system
has a given maximum capacity, denoted here as B (e.g. total
Intensive Care Units available) to treat critically-ill patients,
(up)
then having ΩC (t) > B at some point indicates that the
healthcare system has demands exceeding its capacity. A
careful, and successful, contingency plan must consider the
worst possible outcome of the epidemic, so that implemented
(up)
measures guarantee that ΩC (t) < B.



P tpeak D =

Z

dS(t)
dt
dE(t)
dt
dI(t)
dt
dH(t)
dt
dC(t)
dt
dR(t)
dt
dD(t)
dt

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

S(t)I(t)
N
S(t)I(t)
E(t)
β(t)
−
N
τ`
E(t)
I(t)
−
τ`
τi
I(t)
C(t)
H(t)
(1 − m)
+ (1 − f )
−
τi
τc
τh
H(t)
C(t)
c
−
τh
τc
I(t)
H(t)
m
+ (1 − c)
τi
τh
C(t)
f
.
τc
−β(t)

dθP (θ|D)δ [tpeak − argmaxt N (t, θ)] . [3]

β(t) =

D

Notice that one would be tempted to predict the peak of the
epidemic based on [2] by first obtaining the mean value for a
given compartment, hna (t)iP (n,t|D) , and then look for the time
at which the mean curve peaks, arg maxt = hna (t)iP (n,t|D) .
(a)
Clearly this is not necessarily equal to htpeak iP (tpeak |D) , so it is
more appropriate to use the posterior predictive distribution
of times, to correctly assess the probability for the peak to
occur at a given time.

2. Model selection, and resulting analysis for COVID19 in Mexico City
A. Model selection. For the compartment model used to analyse the data of COVID-19 for Mexico City, we have chosen
to follow the one used in (10, 11) (and references therein).
Here, susceptible individuals S become exposed (E) to the
virus through contact with infected individuals I. Exposed
individuals progress towards the symptomatic state I within
an average time τ` . As usual, mixing is assumed to be homogeneous. Infected individuals I cause an average of R0
secondary infections over their infectious period. After an
average time τi (days), infected individuals either recover or
progress towards hospitalization. In turn, hospitalized individuals H either recover or worsen towards a critical state
after a time τh . Critical individuals C allow us to model ICU
demand. They either return to state H, or die, moving to D,
after a time scale τc . Recovered individuals R are assumed
to be immune. The dynamics of this model is given by the
Pérez Castillo et al.

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

The fraction of infections that are mild is m, the fraction
of cases that turn critical is c, and the fraction of critical
cases with fatal outcome is f . Other variants of the model
consider, for instance, a recovery time for mild infections which
is different from τi , or a fraction of those infected that are
asymptomatic. Equations [4-10] provide a relatively simple
description of epidemic dynamics, including entry to and exit
from the hospital, that allows us to focus on the number of
hospitalized and critical cases, and foresee whether health
services will be saturated. The transmission parameter in the
model is taken to be

RA
FT

Equally important is to derive the posterior predictive
distribution of times at which the epidemic curve will peak.
(a)
Indeed, let tpeak = argmaxt Na (t, θ) be the time at which the
epidemic reaches its peak for compartment a, and let us further
(1
(r)
denote tpeak = (tpeak , . . . , tpeak ). The corresponding posterior
predictive distribution of times at which the peaks occur reads:

following set of differential equations:

R0 M (t)
τi

[11]

where R0 is the basic reproduction number, and M (t) captures
the mitigation measures. While generally speaking pathogens
affect populations in an uneven way, due to heterogeneity in
the risk experienced by age, comorbidities or other factors
(e.g. behaviour, nutrition and so on), for simplicity we assume
a population homogeneous in all respects. A generalization
to include how a particular age distribution affects model
evolution is straightforward (10), and is ongoing work.
B. Analysis and results for COVID-19 in Mexico City. We ap-

plied this approach to study the evolution of the spread of
SARS-CoV-2 in Mexico City using the public database provided by the Federal Health Secretariat Secretaría de Salud
Federal corresponding to May 7 (12, 13). From here, we have
considered the data starting on February 27 (which we denote
as t = 0) up to April 29, to consider for delays in the reporting
of cases due to delays in requests for medical attention, reporting or test confirmation. The database allows extraction of
incidence time series (new cases), as well as those newly hospitalised and critically-ill (complicated hospitalisations including
the use of mechanical ventilators). It also includes the total
number of deceased patients, patients that were lab confirmed
of being infected of SARS-CoV-2, as well as suspect cases
awaiting results of RT-PCR tests. Note that new cases do not
correspond to the number of cases in each compartment, a
piece of information which is not in the data. When calibrating the model we have considered a cautious approach to add
half of the suspect cases to those confirmed for each of the
aforementioned compartment, based off the estimations of the
positivity test rate for suspect cases. Clearly, not all suspect
cases will be confirmed as SARS-CoV-2, since this epidemic
PNAS

|

May 18, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

3

RA
FT

D

Fig. 1. Top row: results for newly infected, hospitalized, and critical cases per day. In the first plot we indicate the meaning of each curve: the solid red line corresponds to the
deterministic prediction with the mitigation plan; the solid green line is the corresponding deterministic prediction without mitigation. Dashed, solid lines comprise the envelope
for the predictive posterior, while density plots give the actual value of the predictive posterior for the corresponding compartment in each plot; darker regions correspond
to the accumulation of the epidemic curves. Finally, white markers correspond to data for Mexico City. Middle row: in this case the density plots correspond to the CDF for
newly infected, hospitalized, and critical cases per day. The solid black lines correspond to the median curve, while the lower and upper solid red lines are the 5% and 95%
percentiles, respectively. In the middle figure in this row, we have added an inset plot, showing a cut of the CDF for a particular day. Bottom row: Posterior predictive distribution
of times at which the epidemic curves will peak for daily new infected (left panel), hospitalized (middle panel), and critical (right panel) cases. The vertical lines indicate the data
at which the peak would have occurred without mitigation. Note that the offset in dates among the three compartments in these plots can be roughly understood as the mean
time a patient takes to become hospitalized from becoming infected and to become critically ill from being hospitalized.

is concurrently happening with other seasonal diseases and
therefore we are somewhat describing an aggregate of all the
seasonal epidemics currently going on in Mexico City, with
more weight towards SARS-CoV-2. However, we believe it is
important to include some of those suspected cases since they
may add to the demand on the healthcare system. Considering
that the contingency plan was first activated March 23, we
assume the mitigating function M (t) to equal one before that
date, and a constant 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 (considered as a parameter),
after that day.
All in all, given the data, we need to determine the parameters’ posterior distribution P (θ|D) (see Supporting Information for details on the model’s calibration). Notice that while
the data gives some of the initial conditions for some compartments, we do not have information for others, in particular,
for the initial conditions S(0) and E(0). Thus we consider
these to be also parameters of the model.
Once we have estimated P (θ|D), we can use the expressions
[2] and [3] to estimate the predictive posteriors. All the results
from these distributions are summarised in the plots appearing
4

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

in Fig. 1.
The first row of plots in this figure shows the resulting
predictive posterior for daily new cases of infected, hospitalized and critically-ill patients. In all cases, the solid red line
correspond to the calibrated model with θ ? , the white markers
correspond to observational data, the density plots are the
values of the predictive posterior distribution and, finally, the
lower and upper dashed black lines delimit the enveloping region of all possible predictive scenarios for each incidence. This
set of plots are fairly informative and it is worth discussing
them in detail. We first notice that by using the parameter’s
posterior distribution, the deterministic solution (indicated by
a solid red line for each frame in the first row), the solutions
spread fairly widely, with all possible epidemic curves encapsulated by the dashed black lines. Thus, the deterministic
solution is very sensitive to parameter changes, which makes it
unsuitable as a forecasting tool by itself. Secondly, the density
plots show that certain epidemic curves tend to accumulate
in specific (dark) regions. Interestingly enough, there is an
increment in the density of curves symmetrically distributed
Pérez Castillo et al.

inherent to the start of an epidemic means that parameter
estimates based on data from the beginning of an outbreak
will be quite uncertain. In turn, models parametrised with
such data will carry great uncertainty in longer term forecasts.
On the other hand, this uncertainty can be quantified using
techniques from Bayesian statistics, which may then be used
to consider worst-case scenarios.
Although the model analysed here is simple, the main
conclusion of this work is that extrapolating results without
accounting for sensitivity to changes in parameters can result
in predictions way off the mark. We believe that the same
conclusion would hold for more detailed models, e.g., those
which include specific details of the population, since most of
them are also sloppy.
With regards to the mitigation measures implemented in
Mexico City, our results show that they have so far managed
to flatten the curve moderately, thus shifting the peak for
newly infected cases per day to the right, to a date around
June 1. However, this and other compartmental models, are
rather sensitive to parameter calibration. Access to richer
data containing more epidemiological and clinical information
would help to better control model predictions.
Control of the epidemic curve of SARS-CoV-2 in Mexico
City requires evaluating the mitigation strategies that are,
to date, being implemented in the country. Mathematical
models are central to this effort, but certain conditions need
to be considered and evaluated for their efficient application.
Mexico has the lowest testing rate among the OECD countries
(5). A high testing rate is recommended to adequately plan
when to lift mitigation measures now in place. Moreover,
testing is necessary to estimate the true size of the epidemic.
In Mexico, several hundreds of Health Units constitute the
country’s sentinel surveillance system where cases are detected
and followed to identify possible contacts of that case and other
relevant information (14, 15). A case detected by symptomatic
surveillance has to be confirmed by testing, but, to obtain a
concrete, workable estimation of the epidemic, tests must be
widely applied to the general population, not only to suspect
cases already detected by the surveillance system.
The positivity test rate for SARS-CoV-2 in the various
municipalities of Mexico City was around 20%-40% on May 8,
2020 (6). This high positivity rate and the limited number of
tests currently performed may prevent obtaining an accurate
estimate of both the epidemic size and the true growth rate
of the epidemic including the determination of the days where
the epidemic peak is occurring; in particular, identification of
the time of maximum incidence may be confounded. Since
tests are insufficient and, for the particular situation of the
Mexican economy, increasing the testing rate is unfeasible,
mathematical modeling projections can help to evaluate different scenarios that are consistent with the observed trend of the
epidemic curve. Our model provides projections based on confirmed cases corrected for under-reporting that put the more
likely dates of maximum incidence towards the end of May
or early June, 2020. Earlier dates are possible, too, but with
lower probability. These findings are important because lifting
the Sanitary Emergency Measures, firstly implemented in late
March in Mexico City, is programmed for May 30, 2020. If our
scenarios are correct, the risk of a new outbreak is high, given
that the date for ending confinement would coincide with the
dates predicted to be of maximum incidence. Moreover, even

D

RA
FT

above and below the deterministic curve at the beginning of
the epidemic. It turns out that the increased density above
the red solid line corresponds to the epidemic that would have
resulted if no contingency plan had been implemented. The
latter is indicated by a solid dark green line only on the first
plot. We thus conclude that the contingency plan was successful, albeit mildly, managing to flatten the curve and shift
its peak to the right. Actually from the parameters’ posterior
distribution, one can show that prior the activation of the contingency plan, the basic reproduction rate R0 was 2.48, which
was lowered to the value 2.03 once the plan was activated on
March 23. Similarly, the increased density of curves below
the deterministic line indicate what would have happened if
the mitigation had been more successful. We finally observe
that the deterministic curve for daily new critically-ill patients
obtained is above the data, suggesting that we are overestimating the total toll for the number of deceased patients predicted
by our analysis.
The colors of the middle row of Fig. 1 indicate the cumulative distribution function for newly infected, hospitalized, and
critical cases per day. Thus, in this case, the color scale in
the density plot goes from zero (white) to one (black). The
solid black line on these three plots corresponds to the median
curve, while the lower and upper curves (marked in solid red
lines) are the 5% and 95% percentiles. In other words, the
probability that all epidemiological curves generated by the
calibrated model are comprised between the two solid red lines
is 90%. Notice that one shortcoming of using only point estimators in compartmental models is that they yield epidemic
curves which are fairly symmetric around their maximum, a
feature that is not observed in the data from other countries,
where fattening of the tails after the maximum is instead discerned. However, by using Bayesian statistics one can produce
more realistic epidemic curves, with fattened tails, as can be
appreciated in the median curves reported in the second row
of Fig. 1.
We can similarly explore the posterior predictive distribution of times at which the peak of the epidemic occurs. These
are shown at bottom row of Fig. 1 for newly infected, hospitalized and critically-ill patients per day, which were obtained
according to Eq. [3]. These distributions are again very informative: in all of them the peak corresponds to the day at which
the epidemic curve would have peaked with no contingency
plan. Interestingly enough, the support of the distribution of
times is compact, meaning that one could provide a rather
hard and robust interval within which peak actually happens,
admittedly rather large. We can also provide the mean date
for the peak to occur. For instance the mean date for new
infected cases is May 18, with a standard deviation of 17 days.
One may argue that having a rather large standard deviation
does not provide informative predictions for the peak of the
epidemic. However, notice that the total span in days of the
evolution of the first wave of the epidemic, until it finishes, is
around 9 months. A similar analysis follows for the other two
posterior distributions for daily new hospitalised and critical
cases.

3. Conclusions and future work
Contingency plans based on epidemiological models must be
analysed and carried out very carefully. Even with fairly
accurate observational data, the importance of stochasticity
Pérez Castillo et al.

PNAS

|

May 18, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

5

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

RA
FT

if maximum incidence occurs in early May 2020 and incidence
decreases the following days, the number of susceptible individuals will still be large. Since SARS-CoV-2 is a new virus,
there is yet no significant herd immunity in the population. In
Mexico, April 30 (Children’s day) and May 10 (Mother’s day)
are significant dates for family gatherings and celebrations.
To the date of submission, the effect of these perturbations on
the epidemic curve are yet unknown. However, our modelling
approach allows for the consideration of these actions and the
planning of mitigation or other intervention measures because
of its probabilistic nature.
Our model projects, namely, that peak incidence will likely
occur in late May or early June 2020, together with the crucial
lack of sufficient testing to provide a more accurate estimate
of the number of people infected, provides support for recommending a reevaluation of the date, but also a gradual and
slow release of mitigation and social-distancing measures to
prevent a fast rebound of the epidemic.
As for future work, there are a number of avenues we are
currently exploring, both theoretical from the modelling side
and practical, as a predictive tool. For instance, we will shortly
explore the likely impact for Mexico City of lifting Sanitary
Emergency measures too soon. Clearly, we plan to extend this
analysis to other regions of Mexico.
RHM is grateful for the support of
CONTEX project 2018-9B. JXVH acknowledges support from grant
UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IN115720. GACS kindly acknowledges
support from UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IN114717. LB acknowledges
support from UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IG100819. We also thank
SECTEI-CDMX for providing data on the evolution of COVID-19
in Mexico City. We thank Héctor Benitez, IIMAS-UNAM, for his
unwavering support during the elaboration of this work.

D

1. World Health Organization, Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Situation Report 1 (https://www.
who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200121-sitrep-1-2019-ncov.
pdf?sfvrsn=20a99c10_4) (January 30, 2020).
2. World Health Organization, Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/
30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-(2005)
-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)) (2020).
3. Subsecretaría de Prevención y Promoción de la Salud, Secretaría de Salud, Gobierno de
México, Comunicado Técnico Diario Nuevo Coronavirus en el Mundo (COVID-19), Technical
report (February 28, 2020).
4. CA Zaragoza-Jiménez et al, Informe Epidemiológico de la Situación de COVID-19, (Dirección
de Información Epidemiológica, Dirección General de Epidemiología, Secretaría de Salud,
Gobierno de México), Technical report (May 11, 2020).
5. OCDE, Testing for COVID-19 : A way to lift confinement restrictions, Technical report (April
2020).
6. Gobierno de la Ciudad de México, Datos abiertos. (https://datos.cdmx.gob.mx/explore/
dataset/base-covid-sinave/table/) (2020).
7. MA Acuña-Zegarra, M Santana-Cibrian, JX Velasco-Hernandez, Modeling behavioral change
and COVID-19 containment in Mexico: A trade-off between lockdown and compliance. Math.
Biosci., 108370 (2020).
8. RN Gutenkunst, et al., Universally sloppy parameter sensitivities in systems biology models.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 3 (2007).
9. WO Kermack, AG McKendrick, A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proc.
Royal Soc. London. Ser. A, Containing papers a mathematical physical character 115, 700–
721 (1927).
10. S Maslov, N Goldenfeld, Window of opportunity for mitigation to prevent overflow of ICU
capacity in Chicago by COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09564 (2020).
11. Richard Neher et al, COVID 19 scenarios. (https://github.com/neherlab/covid19_scenarios)
(2020) Accessed: 2020-04-20.
12. Dirección General de Epidemiología, Secretaría de Salud, Datos abiertos. (https://www.gob.
mx/salud/documentos/datos-abiertos-152127) (2020).
13. GA Carranco-Sapiéns et al, Mexico-COVID-19. (https://github.com/carranco-sga/
Mexico-COVID-19) (2020).
14. Secretaría de Salud, Gobierno de México, Lineamiento estandarizado para la vigilancia epidemiológica y por laboratorio de COVID-19, Technical report (2020).
15. Secretaría de Salud, Gobierno de México, Lineamiento estandarizado para la vigilancia epidemiológica y por laboratorio de enfermedad respiratoria viral. Abril de 2020, Technical report
(April 2020).

6

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Pérez Castillo et al.

