Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

The Challenges of Deploying Artificial Intelligence
Models in a Rapidly Evolving Pandemic
Yipeng Hu​1,2,4​ Joseph Jacob1,3
​ ​ Geoffrey JM Parker1,5,6
​ ​ David J Hawkes1,2,4
​ ​ John R Hurst3​ ​ Danail Stoyanov1,2,5
​
1​

UCL Centre for Medical Image Computing,
Wellcome / EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences,
3​
UCL Respiratory,
4​
Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, and
5​
Department of Computer Science,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom
6​
Bioxydyn Limited, Pencroft Way, Manchester, M15 6SZ, United Kingdom
2​

Correspondence: yipeng.hu@ucl.ac.uk

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2,
emerged into a world being rapidly transformed by artificial intelligence (AI) based on big
data, computational power and neural networks. The gaze of these networks has in recent
years turned increasingly towards applications in healthcare. It was perhaps inevitable that
COVID-19, a global disease propagating health and economic devastation, should capture
the attention and resources of the world’s computer scientists in academia and industry. ​The
potential for AI to support the response to the pandemic has been proposed across a wide
range of clinical and societal challenges [1], including disease forecasting, surveillance and
antiviral drug discovery. This is likely to continue as the impact of the pandemic unfolds on
the world’s people, industries and economy but ​a surprising observation on the current
pandemic has been the limited impact AI has had to date in the management of COVID-19​.
This correspondence focuses on exploring potential reasons behind the lack of successful
adoption of AI models developed for COVID-19 diagnosis and prognosis, in front-line
healthcare services. We highlight the moving clinical needs that models have had to address
at different stages of the epidemic, and explain the importance of translating models to
reflect local healthcare environments. We argue that both basic and applied research are
essential to accelerate the potential of AI models, and this is particularly so during a rapidly
evolving pandemic. ​This perspective on the response to COVID-19, may provide a glimpse
into how the global scientific community should react to combat future disease outbreaks
more effectively.

The evolving clinical need
The clinical management of COVID-19 has spanned various stages including anticipation,
early detection, containment, mitigation, together aiming towards eventual eradication [​2​].
Each stage differs in its measured and actual disease prevalence, which directly impacts the
availability of clinical resources, and over a matter of weeks, clinical priorities can fluctuate
rapidly. Priorities may range from the provision of robust diagnoses, maintenance of infection
control to ensuring availability of facilities for mechanical ventilation. Such rapid changes
occuring in tandem with enhanced knowledge of virus behaviour and availability of
supporting data, have meant that the outputs required of predictive AI models need to

1

Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

constantly evolve. Accordingly, the AI models that are most urgently needed and which can
be feasibly built are likely to be different at each epidemic stage.
The anticipation and early detection stages: With a relatively low number of positive
cases and many potentially asymptomatic cases during the early stages of the pandemic, a
highly sensitive diagnostic AI model to detect COVID-19 would have been useful. The lack of
pre-existing data from this new disease, meant the feasibility of building such new AI models
to determine diagnosis or prognosis remains an open challenge, yet one that is of particular
interest to an AI community focused on breaking the existing barriers between data domains
using machine learning. Generalising AI models to unseen data (inference), to data coming
from different distributions (domain adaptation, transfer learning) and to data with limited or
no labels (semi- or unsupervised learning), e.g. [3], are all priority areas in the technical
development of AI and such non-fully-supervised methods may benefit all the scenarios
discussed. These early stages of a new disease have been described as overlooked periods
in the general management of infectious diseases [​4​]. The AI community should design
strategies and methodologies for rapid deployment in the event of future epidemic threats, to
enable data collection, model training, testing and wide deployment to be as efficient as
possible.
The containment and mitigation stages: During the containment and mitigation of
COVID-19, data have become increasingly available with the exponential growth of
confirmed positive cases. During this time it is essential to rapidly curate sizable training data
sets and develop stable, well-performing AI models that can respond to emerging clinically
urgent needs, such as rapid, consistent patient triage at scale across a health service.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests via nasopharyngeal
swabbing with nearly 100% specificity are considered the diagnostic ground-truth for
COVID-19. However RT-PCR has limited negative predictive value with variable availability
and diagnostic speed. Alternative methodologies for diagnosing COVID-19 include medical
imaging techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and chest radiographs (CXR) [5].
Some groups have also explored point-of-care ultrasound albeit with limitations. Driven by
data availability, the focus of AI work in COVID-19 has centered on RT-PCR-labelled
diagnostic models, e.g. [6], or the automated evaluation of clinical/imaging features, e.g. lung
involvement on CT imaging [7]. ​Those developing AI-assisted diagnostic tools must
recognise that very high diagnostic accuracies are required to demonstrate added value
above and beyond existing clinical imaging and RT-PCR tests.
It is also important to question which prognostic outcomes require greatest prioritisation
during this period. The majority of existing AI models aim to predict hospitalisation and
mortality, e.g. [8], using predictors such as age, gender, blood biomarkers, pre-existing
co-morbidities and imaging [5]. ​In resource constrained clinical environments, there is great
value in predicting resource consumption as a “surrogate” prognostic outcome, as a lack of
personal protective equipment (PPE) for example can directly affect community prognoses
[9]. Intuitive candidate outcome measures for AI models might include time spent on
mechanical ventilators and/or within intensive care units. Yet as knowledge of COVID-19 has
grown, early intubation of a patient has diminished in priority in the care pathway. Similarly,

2

Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

with limitations in resources pragmatic choices have had to be made regarding patient
selection for intensive care unit admission. Evolving management strategies such as these
have a real-time impact on the outcomes that AI models aim to predict. Disease progression
(or regression following treatment) models can be trained using time series data, such as
longitudinal CT images [10], to quantify the likelihood of development of severe pneumonia
and acute myocardial injury, two leading causes of mortality [​11​], and the cytokine release
syndrome. A lesson from the COVID-19 pandemic has been that AI models motivated
merely by the practical convenience of utilising acquiring labelled data have had limited
clinical value.
The eradication stage and beyond: ​At the later eradication stage, constraints in data
availability, development time and clinical resources would gradually be eased. The number
of positive cases can drop quickly. Yet the need for a real-time, convenient, highly-sensitive
screening tool may persist to control transmission and judiciously recognise potential
outbreaks.
The requirements for prognostic tools may shift to the identification of patients at risk of
developing long term sequelae such as pulmonary fibrosis. Indeed ​cardiopulmonary,
neurological [​12​] and urological [13] damage are all being recognised following COVID-19
infection. ​Given the potentially significant health service resource requirements that may
result from ​long-term complications across large swathes of the population, the post-acute
phase of COVID-19 will be a critical clinical research area, where AI models may play a
central role.

Translating AI models
A typical AI translation workflow includes model development, model deployment and model
adaptation (or model update). The COVID-19 AI research efforts have been concentrated
primarily on new model development and the urgency brought about by the pandemic must
not override the stringent requirements for clinical deployment [​14​]. Despite perceived time
pressures, rigorous validation is key to ensuring that safety and efficacy are tested; models
must be validated before initial deployment, continuously monitored and adapted, when
implemented in local healthcare environments and as outcome likelihoods change due to
evolving patient management strategies. Failing to adhere to such practice will impede
translation and compromise the impact of AI on clinical needs.
Pre-deployment validation: Recent COVID-19 AI models have been criticised for a lack of
transparency in development and a high likelihood of bias towards nonrepresentative patient
populations [5]. Data limitations in availability and quality can be the inherent cause of
problems, for example validation data sets with unrealistically high numbers of control cases
acquired during the beginning or extremely low numbers of control cases at the peak of the
outbreak. These models are unlikely to be directly useful in all stages of the pandemic due to
potential bias.

3

Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

Best practices in rigorous design and analysis of experiments should be adopted for AI
model validation. In addition, model interpretation methods help to explain the reasoning of
the predictions, e.g. [​15, 16​], and may also indicate when certain data-driven methods are
unlikely to generalise [17]. Model transparency could also be key to addressing regulatory
and ethical issues [​18, 19​].
Local adaptation: It is not uncommon to find that an AI model trained with data from one
healthcare centre, or even from multiple centres, does not generalise as well at a new
centre. For example, the accuracy of chest x-ray detection represented by the area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve, was significantly reduced from 0.93 in a
multi-centre internal validation, to 0.82, on external validation data [17]. The pre-deployment
external validation reduces the risk of this overfitting problem based on the assumption that
the external data represent new local data. However, the local data are likely to have unique
characteristics due to centre-specific acquisition features, equipment and protocols, all of
which may have differing clinical constraints and requirements - the local healthcare
environment [​20​]. Moreover, temporal differences in data may increase, adversely affecting
model accuracy, as the demographic and immunity landscape and clinical practice shift
between different stages of the epidemic [21]. AI models therefore should have a continuous
monitoring and adaptation strategy to these changing data to maintain their predictive
accuracy.
Most proposed AI approaches for COVID-19 diagnosis/prognosis have so far been “locked”
algorithms that do not facilitate future adaptation. Model adapting methods from other
medical applications should be tested and integrated in these developments, such as
transfer learning [​22​] and model retraining with a small local data set. Recently, the FDA has
proposed a new approach to allow AI-based software to adapt and improve from real-world
use [​23​], paving the regulatory pathway to address these local adaptation needs.

Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented numerous challenges to virtually every section of
society in all geographic locations. AI can be an enabling technology to support urgent
clinical needs in disease diagnosis and prognosis but is reliant on appropriate infrastructure,
data management and translational pathways. New international cross-disciplinary
collaborations, carefully identifying time-course-and-region-dependent clinical actions in
response to COVID-19 can benefit from scientifically sound AI model development,
validation and deployment to support local healthcare providers. Safe and responsible
translation is the only way for realising the promise for AI models to contribute in combating
the current coronavirus pandemic, its aftermath and, potential future clustered outbreaks or
comparable healthcare emergencies.

4

Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

Competing interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests in relation to the submitted work. Outside of this
submission, J.J. reports consultancy fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and Roche.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences
(203145Z/16/Z). J.J. was supported by a Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Career Development
Fellowship (209553/Z/17/Z) and acknowledges support from the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at
University College London.

References
1. Bullock, J., Pham, K.H., Lam, C.S.N. and Luengo-Oroz, M., 2020. Mapping the landscape of
artificial intelligence applications against COVID-19. ​arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11336​.
2. World Health Organization, 2018. ​Managing epidemics: key facts about major deadly diseases.​
World Health Organization.
3. Cheplygina, V., de Bruijne, M. and Pluim, J.P., 2019. Not-so-supervised: a survey of
semi-supervised, multi-instance, and transfer learning in medical image analysis. ​Medical image
analysis,​ ​54​, pp.280-296.
4. Webby, R.J. and Webster, R.G., 2003. Are we ready for pandemic influenza?. ​Science​, ​302(​ 5650),
pp.1519-1522.
5. Wynants, L., Van Calster, B., Bonten, M.M., Collins, G.S., Debray, T.P., De Vos, M., Haller, M.C.,
Heinze, G., Moons, K.G., Riley, R.D. and Schuit, E., 2020. Prediction models for diagnosis and
prognosis of covid-19 infection: systematic review and critical appraisal. ​bmj,​ ​369​.
6. Li, L., Qin, L., Xu, Z., Yin, Y., Wang, X., Kong, B., Bai, J., Lu, Y., Fang, Z., Song, Q. and Cao, K.,
2020. Artificial intelligence distinguishes covid-19 from community acquired pneumonia on chest
ct. ​Radiology​, p.200905.
7. Huang, L., Han, R., Ai, T., Yu, P., Kang, H., Tao, Q. and Xia, L., 2020. Serial Quantitative Chest
CT Assessment of COVID-19: Deep-Learning Approach. ​Radiology: Cardiothoracic Imaging​, ​2​(2),
p.e200075.
8. Yuan, M., Yin, W., Tao, Z., Tan, W. and Hu, Y., 2020. Association of radiologic findings with
mortality of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. ​Plos one​, ​15(​ 3),
5

Preprint, submitted to Nature Machine Intelligence on 1st May 2020

p.e0230548.
9. Rubin, G.D., Ryerson, C.J., Haramati, L.B., Sverzellati, N., Kanne, J.P., Raoof, S., Schluger, N.W.,
Volpi, A., Yim, J.J., Martin, I.B. and Anderson, D.J., 2020. The role of chest imaging in patient
management during the covid-19 pandemic: A multinational consensus statement from the
fleischner society. ​Chest.​
10.Pan, F., Ye, T., Sun, P., Gui, S., Liang, B., Li, L., Zheng, D., Wang, J., Hesketh, R.L., Yang, L. and
Zheng, C., 2020. Time course of lung changes on chest CT during recovery from 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia. ​Radiology,​ p.200370.
11.Zheng, Y.Y., Ma, Y.T., Zhang, J.Y. and Xie, X., 2020. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system.
Nature Reviews Cardiology,​ ​17(​ 5), pp.259-260.
12.Filatov, A., Sharma, P., Hindi, F. and Espinosa, P.S., 2020. Neurological complications of
coronavirus disease (covid-19): encephalopathy. ​Cureus,​ ​12​(3), p.e7352.
13.Li, Z., Wu, M., Yao, J., Guo, J., Liao, X., Song, S., Li, J., Duan, G., Zhou, Y., Wu, X. and Zhou, Z.,
2020. Caution on kidney dysfunctions of COVID-19 patients. ​DOI:10.2139/ssrn.3559601
14.Zagury-Orly, Ivry, and Schwartzstein, Richard M.,, 2020. Covid-19 — A Reminder to Reason. ​New
England Journal of Medicine.​
15.Lundberg, S.M. and Lee, S.I., 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In
Advances in neural information processing systems​ (pp. 4765-4774).
16.Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J., Viegas, F. and Sayres, R., 2017.
Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
(tcav). ​arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11279​.
17.Zech, J.R., Badgeley, M.A., Liu, M., Costa, A.B., Titano, J.J. and Oermann, E.K., 2018. Variable
generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs: a
cross-sectional study. ​PLoS medicine​, 1
​ 5(​ 11).
18.Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S. and Guestrin, C., 2016, August. "Why should i trust you?" Explaining the
predictions of any classifier. In ​Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining​ (pp. 1135-1144).
19.Goodman, B. and Flaxman, S., 2017. European Union regulations on algorithmic decision-making
and a “right to explanation”. ​AI magazine,​ ​38​(3), pp.50-57.
20.Beede, E., Baylor, E., Hersch, F., Iurchenko, A., Wilcox, L., Raumviboonsuk, P. and Vardoulakis,
L., 2020. A Human-Centered Evaluation of a Deep Learning System Deployed in Clinics for the
Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy.
21.Chen, M., Hao, Y., Hwang, K., Wang, L. and Wang, L., 2017. Disease prediction by machine
learning over big data from healthcare communities. ​Ieee Access,​ ​5,​ pp.8869-8879.
22.Van Opbroek, A., Ikram, M.A., Vernooij, M.W. and De Bruijne, M., 2014. Transfer learning
improves supervised image segmentation across imaging protocols. ​IEEE transactions on medical
imaging,​ ​34​(5), pp.1018-1030.
23.US Food and Drug Administration, 2019. Proposed regulatory framework for modifications to
artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML)-based software as a medical device
(SAMD)—discussion paper and request for feedback. 2019.

6

