Unleashing the power of disruptive and emerging technologies
amid COVID-19
Sonali Agarwala,∗, Narinder Singh Punna , Sanjay Kumar Sonbhadraa , M. Tanveerb , P.
Nagabhushana , K K Soundra Pandianc , Praveer Saxenad
a IIIT

Allahabad, Prayagraj, U.P. India-211015
of Mathematics, IIT Indore, M.P. India-453552
c Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, New Delhi, India
d Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India

arXiv:2005.11507v5 [cs.CY] 29 Dec 2020

b Discipline

Abstract
The unprecedented outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), during early December 2019
in Wuhan, China, has quickly evolved into a global pandemic, became a matter of grave concern,
and placed government agencies worldwide in a precarious position. The scarcity of resources
and lack of experiences to endure the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the fear of future
consequences has established the need for adoption of emerging and future technologies to address the upcoming challenges. Since the last five months, the amount of pandemic impact has
reached its pinnacle that is altering everyone’s life; and humans are now bound to adopt safe
ways to survive under the risk of being affected. Technological advances are now accelerating
faster than ever before to stay ahead of the consequences and acquire new capabilities to build a
safer world. Thus, there is a rising need to unfold the power of emerging, future and disruptive
technologies to explore all possible ways to fight against COVID-19. In this article, we attempt
to study all emerging, future, and disruptive technologies that can be utilized to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. Building on background insights, detailed technological specific use cases
to fight against COVID-19 have been discussed in terms of their strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT). As concluding remarks, we highlight prioritized research areas and
upcoming opportunities to blur the lines between the physical, digital, and biological domainspecific challenges and also illuminate collaborative research directions for moving towards a
post-COVID-19 world.
Keywords: COVID-19, emerging and future technologies, disruptive technologies, post
COVID-19, SWOT analysis of COVID 19 use cases.

Impact Statement
Emerging and future technologies recently coined as disruptive technologies, are going to
change the world while addressing the present need to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. This
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: sonali@iiita.ac.in (Sonali Agarwal ), pse2017002@iiita.ac.in (Narinder Singh Punn),
rsi2017502@iiita.ac.in (Sanjay Kumar Sonbhadra), mtanveer@iiti.ac.in (M. Tanveer),
p.pnagabhushan@iiita.ac.in (P. Nagabhushan), soundra.pandian@cca.gov.in (K K Soundra Pandian),
praveersaxena.edu@nic.in (Praveer Saxena)
Preprint submitted to Journal of arXiv
January 1, 2021

article is an effort to facilitate the swift of technological trends among all researchers with its
novel applications to create a healthier and sustainable post-COVID-19 world. Specifically, in the
present article, we identify the significance of emerging and future technologies and its disruptive appearance worldwide. It is also important to address major challenges involved in possible
solutions, the promising directions for long term sustainability, and most importantly, building
technology for mankind. Covering the broad range of emerging and future technologies, this is
intended to encourage the policymakers to embrace the convergence of technologies for effective
planning, on the other hand, attract the developers to focus on the divergence of technologies to
attain application-specific expertise. This study also enlarges the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of disruptive technologies under the light of COVID-19, so that a safe and
prosperous world may get unfolded.
1. Introduction
The rapidly evolving coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (WHO, 2020) has
changed the life of everyone all over the world with its deadly spread and about 81,278,115
confirmed cases along with 1,774,130 deaths globally as on December 29 2020 (worldometers,
2020). The absence of any effective therapeutic agents and the lack of immunity against COVID19 making the population susceptible. As there are no vaccines available yet, it has now become a
global concern and researchers all over the world are trying hard to come over with this pandemic.
Due to the present crisis, massive frictional ripples have been created thus various sectors such
as tourism, transportation, the supply chain of export and import, healthcare, IT industries, etc.,
are either reeling under pressure or in standstill phase across the borders. Therefore, there is
a constant strain of science and technology to emerge with innovative solutions to mitigate the
situation.
Under COVID-19 crisis, emerging and future technologies are propping up our daily lives
to match with the current need and becoming essential day by day. Since human nature is
adaptive and necessity is the mother of invention, presently people from all sectors are putting
their efforts to explore technological solutions of the problems caused by this global pandemic.
Since there are many advances reported in the last decade; apparently, technology-driven applications are establishing critical infrastructure and offering backbone to day-to-day needs of
human lives (Vaishya et al., 2020).
While using all common keywords to explore the role of technology to fight against COVID19 pandemic, it is evident that most of the search results are URLs of bulletins, press releases,
white papers, blogs and product catalogues of commercial organisations for awareness and promotion campaign purposes. Although it is interesting to get updated about recent technologies
and their advancements; experimental studies and peer-reviewed research papers are essential
to build up trust and confidence in these areas. Following this concern, we intend to present
the detailed study of prospective techniques and advancements, addressing its suitability to fight
against COVID-19.
During the last decade, it is evident that policymakers are taking more interest in the adaptation of novel technologies and this is coming as the operationalization of technological emergence. Emerging technologies are radically novel, relatively growing, and becoming coherent and prominent over time, therefore, have a substantial impact on the socio-economic domain(s) (Rotolo et al., 2015). As technology adoption rate is speeding up day by day, incremental
progress has been witnessed by humans and future technologies are continuously replacing the
2

Figure 1: An example of disruptive technology.

Figure 2: Human-centric and smart-space technologies.

existing work practices. Disruptive technology is a keyword coined by Christensen and Overdorf (2000), which refers to a revolutionary change that uproots an established technology and
spawns new industries, markets and value networks that eventually disrupts an existing lifestyle,
thereby presenting the power to change the way we work, live, think and behave (Bagehot, 2017;
Christensen et al., 2015). We are using the term “disruptive technology” as an “umbrella” that
encompasses a novel perception to see the changes in the technological usage pattern with respect to time. We are also trying to map technologies with respect to physical, digital, and
biological perspectives in order to support the fight against COVID-19. Fig.1 shows an example
of disruptive technology over the past decades.
As mentioned in the study, if we follow the trails of the disruptive technology landscape,
enterprise leaders need to comprehend the nuanced interconnections among people, processes,
services, and things. Following from these notions, it is essential to first understand the context (Christensen et al., 2015) before initiating the utilization of any innovative technology. According to Gartner’s recent report (Rotolo et al., 2015), there are certain trends that will drive
significant disruption and opportunities over the next 5 to 10 years, especially in the area of infrastructure and operations (Gartner, 2020). A Gartner team member, D. Cearley, highlighted
that strategic technology trends now surrounded into two categories: human-centric and smartspace (Fang et al., 2020). According to an article (Shaw and Sui, 2020), human-centric technologies can create various opportunities and can drive disruptions in our lifestyle for the future.
Human-centric approaches keep people in priority to develop solutions which can strengthen
different roles within the organisations such as customers, policymakers, employees, business
partners, etc. On the other hand, a smart-space is termed as a physical environment, which
offers an open, connected, coordinated and intelligent ecosystem to people for their seamless interaction using the technology-enabled systems along with the more immersive, interactive and
3

Table 1: Technology categorization

Disruptive technology theme

Human Centric

Smart Space

Disruptive technology
types
Hyperautomation
Multiexperience
Democratization
Human Augmentation
Transparency
and
Traceability
Empowered edge
Distributed Cloud
Autonomous things
Practical Blockchain
AI Security

Supporting emerging technologies
Machine Learning, Robotics
Virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR) and mixed
reality (MR).
Big Data Analytics.
Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, Virtual Assistants,
Computer Vision, Biometrics.
Blockchain and Big Data Analytics, 5G.
Internet-of-things, Big Data Analytics, 5G
Cloud Computing, Big Data Analytics.
Drones, autonomous vehicles, robotics, 5G.
Blockchain.
Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain.

automated experience. Fig. 2 highlights the various interconnections between human-centric and
smart-space technologies.
COVID-19 becomes a black swan for the entire world and provokes a very strong wave of
change and disruption. The growing impact of the unprecedented human tragedy is not only
affecting the people’s health but also hampered the functioning of several sectors, including aviation, automotive, pharmaceuticals, banking, consumer electronics, travel and tourism, among
others. Thus it is high time to project emerging, future and disruptive technologies to support the
above-discussed sectors and also speeding up the battle against the coronavirus. Table 1 represents the different types of disruptive technology along with the supporting emerging technologies. As an attempt to cover the broad range of emerging, future and disruptive technologies for
the purpose to combat COVID-19, following are our contributions: First, we review the evolving nature of technologies, emphasized on its disruptive nature classified as a human-centric and
smart-space theme. Second, we listed down individual technologies and prepared a timeline
about their emergence to portray continuous evolutions along with coverage of related research
work. Third, we identified technology-enabled COVID-19 use cases in all possible application
domains along with thorough coverage of SWOT analysis. Fourth, we summarize the findings
which can be adopted easily along with the future recommendations. Lastly, we conclude our
findings with some unexplored open research questions to be addressed in the near future by the
researchers.
The rest of this paper is systematized as follows: In Section II, we elaborated the background
of disruptive technologies and their inclusive areas. In Section III, we presented the origin,
conceptual details and research status of various emerging and future technologies. Various use
cases based on emerging and future technologies, to combat against COVID-19 are discussed
in section IV. SWOT analysis of these technological solutions are also discussed in this section.
Next, in section V, we discuss prioritized research areas, common challenges and upcoming
opportunities in this context. Lastly, section VI concludes the paper.

4

Figure 3: An evolution of hyperautomation.

2. Disruptive technologies
The persistent procession of innovative technologies is unfolding in many ways. Almost
every development is counted as a breakthrough, and the list of emerging and future technologies
are nurturing continuously. While considering the impact of emerging technologies on business
or social landscape, it is quite convincing that some technologies actually have the potential
to disrupt the status quo, change the people’s lifestyle, and reorganize value pools. It is thus
necessary that commercial and government organizations should understand the scope of the
technologies to cater the upcoming need and prepare accordingly. According to Gartner (Rotolo
et al., 2015), technological trends emphasized on the following categories:
2.1. Human-Centric technologies
Human-centric technologies are intended to develop solutions based on user requirements,
desires and capacities, keeping prime focus on how individuals can, need and want to perform
tasks, rather than expecting users to fine-tune and accommodate their actions to the product. It is
one of the most transformative and disruptive technology trends that will relate to how humans
interact with the digital world. This method is supported by rigorous testing and engineering
practices for the product development that fulfils user requirements and business objectives. Following are the human-centric technological advancements:
2.1.1. Hyperautomation
Hyperautomation is a term proposed by Gartner, is one of the human-centric disruptive technologies. It is a combination of multiple machine learning (ML) techniques and artificial intelligence to progressively automate processes and augment humans. It covers all steps of automation
such as to discover, analyze, design, automate, measure, monitor and re-assess. It has two components: robotic process automation (RPA) (Aalst et al., 2018) and intelligent business process
management suites (iBPMSs) (Dunie et al., 2015). Here RPA works as a bridge between legacy
and modern systems. It supports knowledge workers on day-to-day routine and eliminates repetitive tasks by means of migrating from the present environment to the next environment with
the help of tightly defined integration scripts structure and data manipulation. iBPMSs is suitable for long term processes and works as an unified solution that coordinates people, processes,
machines and things. It is a collection of rules to trigger a user interface and manage the contextual work items via robust APIs. It also supports the full life cycle of business processes such
as discovery, analysis, design, implementation, execution, monitoring and continuous optimization, to facilitate collaboration among citizens and professionals on iterative development and
improvement of processes and decision models. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of hyperautomation.
5

Figure 4: Multisensory support devices for multiexperience.

2.1.2. Multiexperience
According to Gartner, in the next decade, the users will experience a noteworthy change
in their exposure to the digital world and its interaction techniques. It offers moving from the
conversational platforms composed of technology-literate people to people-literate technology
such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR) and mixed reality (MR) in a revolutionary
way to perceive the digital world (Milgram and Kishino, 1994; Farshid et al., 2018). In this way,
it offers a cohesive change in both perception and interaction models which leads to the future,
based on multimodal experience and empowered by multisensory supports to provide a richer
environment for delivering nuanced information as shown in Fig. 4.
2.1.3. Democratization
Democratization is an intensive way to offer people an easy access to technical and business
expertise by means of radically simplified “citizen access” experience and with minimum training (Garg and Garg, 2020). As mentioned in the report, Gartner emphasizes democratization
on four levels such as data, analysis, design, development and knowledge. In data and analysis democratization tools are designed to target the development community; in development
democratization AI tools are utilized for application development; in design democratization
automated applications are developed from the user’s perspective; and in knowledge democratization application dimensions are further expanded. Fig. 5 describes the democratization of
technology starting from its emergence representing that the cost of technological development
drops whereas its production rate increases with the passage of time, which is divided into phases
as expertise in discipline (core technology) and domain (specific domain), potential (with technical skills) and naive end-users, and finally developed technology operates automatically with
the users’ intervention.
2.1.4. Human augmentation
Human augmentation is an area that discovers the way of enhancing cognitive and physical
components as an integral part of human experience (shown in Fig. 6). This is indicating the
consumerization effect (Raisamo et al., 2019), where workforces can get enhanced capabilities
to contribute to a better working environment. In physical augmentation (Crowell et al., 2018),
people host technological components on their bodies to improve human capabilities such as
a wearable device. These components are classified as sensory augmentation (hearing, vision,
6

Figure 5: Democratization of technology over the time of its emergence.

Figure 6: Components of physical augmentation.

perception) and biological function augmentation (exoskeletons, prosthetics). In cognitive augmentation, human abilities can be utilized for better thinking, decision making, learning and experiencing new things. Cognitive augmentation (Cinel et al., 2019) correspondingly comprises
brain augmentation which can be physically implanted that deals with intellectual reasoning, and
genetic augmentation which covers somatic gene and cell therapy.
2.1.5. Transparency and traceability
The evolving technologies are raising trust issues and due to this users are now becoming
more concerned about their privacy and seeking secure and controlled sharing of data (Veloso
et al., 2020). Many organizations are realizing that managing personal data of the users is a
sensitive issue and needs strict policies about its fair use. To address this genuine requirement,
transparency and traceability are most essential to support these digital ethics and privacy needs
(Fig. 6). It refers to a set of initiatives, actions and supporting technologies along with the practices intended to address regulatory requirements, preserve an ethical approach to use artificial
intelligence (AI) and supplementary progressive technologies, and restore the rising absence of
trust in companies. To build out transparency and trust practices, following three areas are in
prime focus (Haroon et al., 2019): (1) AI and ML; (2) personal data privacy, ownership and
7

Figure 7: Chain of transparency and traceability.

Figure 8: Components of smart-space based technology.

control; and (3) ethically aligned design. As consumers become more aware of how their data
is being collected and used, organizations are also recognizing the increasing liability of storing
and gathering the data.
2.2. Smart-space based technologies
Earlier, ad hoc and wireless communication technologies were used to develop an informationrich working environment which is now replaced by smart-space, that is based on ubiquitous
computing of common objects to facilitate context-aware services to the users in smart living
environments (El-Fakih et al., 2020). It covers design, implementation and evaluation of information domains supported by novel architectures to deliver intelligent services for living society.
Fig. 8 shows typical components of smart-space technology.

8

2.2.1. Empowered edge
Edge computing is a revolutionary area of research in which data acquisition and processing
are placed closer to the sources, repositories and end-users to keep the low transmission overhead and reduced latency (Ji et al., 2020). This approach is closely related to IoT systems and is
extended to related techniques such as robots, drones, autonomous vehicles and operational systems, and supports device democracy. According to Gartner, by the end of 2023, approximately
50% of the companies will migrate from cloud computing and adopt the edge computing models.
2.2.2. Distributed cloud
A distributed cloud is an advancement over cloud computing in which it utilizes geographically dispersed infrastructure that mainly runs services at the edge level. Instead of storing the
data at a centralized repository, it works on the distribution of services at different locations
with well-defined policies for operation, governance, updates and evolution of the services. It
is fully equipped with computation, storage, and networking capabilities in the form of microcloud which is located outside the centralized system. Fog computing (Habibi et al., 2020) and
edge computing (Cao et al., 2020) are different categories of the distributed cloud. Establishing a
distributed cloud comprises data processing computing closer to the end-user, decreased latency
and enhanced security in a real-time environment. A distributed cloud also processes data in
real-time.
2.2.3. Autonomous things
Autonomous things are interconnections of AI-enabled physical devices that are designed
to replace humans for many operations such as robots, drones, autonomous vehicles/ships and
appliances. It is more than automation because it exploits AI to deliver advanced services to
the people (Langley et al., 2020). As technology competence is growing day by day, regulatory
measures and social acceptance is increasing, deployment of autonomous things will be trending
in various societal applications. As autonomous things are flourishing, there is a clear shift from
stand-alone intelligent systems to a swarm of collaborative intelligent systems with multiple
workable devices.
2.2.4. Practical blockchain
Blockchain consists of a secure distributed ledger, a chronologically ordered list of encrypted
signatures, unalterable transactional records shared by all participants in a network. Blockchain
is secure because it allows parties to trace assets back to their origin in any supply chain and
allows safe interaction between two or more parties in a digital environment and easy exchange
of money without any central authority. For example, in a smart contract payment, events can
automatically get triggered after receiving the goods. In many ways, blockchain is now reshaping
the industries by empowering trust, transparency and value exchange across the business ecosystems and potentially lowering costs and latencies (Gatteschi et al., 2020). There are five integral
parts of a blockchain model: A shared and distributed ledger, immutable and traceable ledger,
encryption, tokenization and a distributed public consensus mechanism (Banerjee et al., 2020).
However, blockchain is not feasible to implement with many business operations due to many
technical deficiencies such as poor scalability and interoperability (Fabiano, 2017).
2.2.5. AI security
AI and ML are rapidly integrated into human decision making by means of several use cases
such as in-home voice assistants. self-driving cars, business analytics and many more. It is
9

Figure 9: AI security systems.

Figure 10: Categories of disruptive technologies.

playing a crucial role in many technological advancements and becoming challenging day by
day due to possibilities of attack in IoT, cloud computing, microservices and highly connected
systems in the smart-space. Therefore it is urgently needed that security and risk should be of
prime focus especially with AI-enabled services on three key areas: (1) safety and protection
of AI-powered systems, (2) empowering AI to enhance security defence, and (3) estimating
nefarious use of AI by attackers. Fig. 9 shows the details of AI security systems.
3. Emerging and future technologies
Emerging technologies highlight the technical innovations in various fields while imposing
positive impacts which can benefit the living society. On the other hand, futures technology is the
systematic study of technical advancements and innovations that tends to highlight the purpose
of predicting how people will reside in the future. Due to rapid technological advancement in
innovations, it is always difficult to realise the fine gap between these two phases (emerging and
future) of technology evolution. After extensive behavioural analysis, all technologies discussed
in the present article are classified in following three categories (as shown in Fig. 10):
• Computational intelligent systems.
• Analytics, storage and processing environment.
10

Figure 11: Branches of machine learning and application domains.

• Autonomous transportation and communication technologies.
In the subsequent subsections, the background details of all these emerging and future technologies are covered.
3.1. Computational intelligent systems
3.1.1. Machine learning
Machine learning approaches transformed the world of data analysis in the past few decades.
The learning is possible in supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised modes. Massive data
about COVID-19 is generated incrementally once it was declared as pandemic by WHO. Machine learning algorithms are playing a vital role in COVID-19 diagnosis, infection prediction,
recovery rate, death ratio, surveillance, etc. Machine learning based recommender systems could
play a robust and efficient method to control the spread of coronavirus.
Since the origin of machine learning in 1959 by Samuel (1959), the remarkable work in
this field has revolutionized the world we see today. It is the broad area of study in the field of
information technology that aims to extend the program’s ability to learn from its past experience
without explicitly coding again. Since there is nothing like an alpha algorithm that can solve
everything, Fig. 11 presents the categories of machine learning schemes developed so far along
with their respective application domains. Each of these categories tend to deliver solutions for
real-world problems. Fig. 12 describes the evolution of machine learning approaches over the
years. In Table 2 recent surveys are presented describing the state-of-the-art works proposed for
application specific domains.
3.1.2. Artificial intelligence (AI)
As the COVID-19 eruption continues to spread across the globe, researchers are adopting
artificial intelligence as a way to address the challenges of the pandemic. Ranging from virtualized manufacturing of advanced drugs to apply data analytics for rapid contact tracing, all
such disruptions can be significantly mitigated through AI. It is also true that AI is not going to
11

Figure 12: Evolution of machine learning algorithms.

Figure 13: Evolution of AI since its origin.

replace human experts completely but it has certainly turned out to be a useful tool to monitor
and respond to the crisis with the help of its powerful algorithms and tools. Artificial intelligence also described as machine intelligence was coined by McCarthy et al. (2006) in 1955, is
an emerging area of study that aims to simulate the real-world problems into the binary world
(Information technology), with the aim to maximize the likelihood of decisions to achieve the
desired goals that mimics the human brain. Fig. 13 highlights the disruptive findings, illustrating
the strength of AI since its origin. AI covers a wide range of research approaches to aid in the development of machine intelligent systems e.g. cognitive science, artificial neural networks, faster
computing hardware, algorithmic complexity theory, robotics, swarm intelligence, embodied and
logic-based systems which has been utilized by more than 77% of the consumers (Sharpminds,
2020). Table 3 highlights literature surveys and recent research progress in the field of AI. Over
the last couple of decades, AI concepts have been evolving and are achieving better recognition
from academics, government, industry and other areas.
3.1.3. Computer vision
The COVID-19 contamination has triggered an urgent need to contribute in the combat
against an enormous menace to the human population. As the virus is extremely easy to spread,
12

Table 2: Recent surveys conducted in the field of machine learning.

Authors
Zhang et al. (2020)

Title
Machine learning testing:
Survey, landscapes and
horizons

Year
2020

Wang et al. (2019a)

Machine learning for survival analysis: A survey

2019

Mehrabi et al. (2019)

A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning

2019

Mahdavinejad et al.
(2018)

Machine learning for Internet of Things data
analysis: A survey

2018

Allamanis
(2018)

A survey of machine
learning for big code and
naturalness

2018

A survey of machine
learning for big data processing

2016

et

al.

Qiu et al. (2016)

Main contribution
A comprehensive survey on machine learning testing research while
addressing the correctness, robustness and fairness of the results.
Presents the comprehensive survey
of the survival analysis with censored data and its challenges using
machine learning algorithms.
Analyses the discriminatory behavior of the models in the sensitive
decision-making environment.
Considering smart cities as a major concern, the author addresses the
challenges associated with the IoT
via machine learning approaches.
Highlights the intersection of
software engineering and machine
learning to exploit its programming
patterns.
Presents the machine learning perspective of big data with discussion
on challenges and its solutions.

Table 3: Survey papers on AI to illustrate its research progress in various domains.

Author
Shi et al. (2020)
Tong et al. (2019)

Bannerjee
(2018)

et

al.

Li et al. (2017)

Müller and Bostrom
(2016)

Title
Artificial Intelligence for
Social Good: A Survey
Artificial Intelligence for
Vehicle-to-Everything:
A Survey

Year
2020

Artificial Intelligence in
Agriculture: A Literature
Survey
Applications of artificial
intelligence in intelligent
manufacturing: a review
Future progress in artificial intelligence: A survey of expert opinion

2018

13

2019

2017

2016

Main contribution
Proposes ethical factors and AI4SG
case studies for future initiatives.
Implication of AI driven approaches
to aid in the internet of vehicles
to everything issues in various domains.
Category based AI advancements to
encounter agriculture challenges.
Proposes intelligent manufacturing
framework based on AI advancements.
Raises humanity risks concerns for
the upcoming AI driven super intelligent systems.

Figure 14: Disruptive technologies in computer vision since its origin.

the top safety measure is to limit interaction with others to follow social distancing. Computer
vision, as a subfield of artificial intelligence, has gained attention among researchers as a strong
tool to solve complex problems like monitoring, tracking, medical image analysis, etc. to aid
fight against COVID-19 spread.
Computer vision, emerged from artificial intelligence, is the study of analysis of images and
videos to gain deep understanding to serve the purpose of a concerned task. Starting from the distinguishing handwritten text from typed text in the 1950s, it has grown exponentially. This field
studies the image classification, object detection, object localicalization, object segmentation,
image captioning, etc. This field is also treated as if it provides eyes to the computers (Ibrahim
et al., 2020). Fig. 14 describes the disruptive technologies developed in this field of study since
its origin. It is composed of several image and video processing tasks with a wide area of applications in industrial inspection or quality control, surveillance and security, face recognition,
gesture recognition, medical image analysis, virtual reality, and a lot more (Wiley and Lucas,
2018). With such wide real-world applications of this field, most research communities are exploring its dimensions to understand its potential. Table 4 presents the recent survey articles that
can be utilized to explore its application domain.
3.1.4. Virtual world
As the lockdown period is going long and curfews are imposed for precautionary measures
in many areas, it is bringing localities to a standstill. Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality
(VR) applications are emerging as a powerful tool to accomplish remote socialization, illustrating
experience of virtual shopping, events and conducting business meets. It is not only offering dayto-day, people-to-people interactions with minimum contact but also satisfies the consumers’
expectations of real world experience without any outer exposure and investment in terms of
time and money. With this application, it is evident that this technology could aid in following
the set government protocols while also continuing the personal and daily business requirements.
Virtual reality (VR) technology was invented in 1957 by Morton Heilig as a multimedia device called the Sensorama (Heilig, 1962). However, the term ‘virtual reality’ was coined much
later in 1987 by researcher Jaron Lanier. Virtual reality (VR) (Alturki and Gay, 2019) is a mechanism to create a simulated environment using headsets that blend out the real world, instead
14

Table 4: Recent surveys conducted in the field of computer vision.

Author
Ulhaq et al. (2020)

Title
Computer Vision for
COVID-19 Control: A
Survey
Object detection in 20
years: A survey

Year
2020

Tan et al. (2018)

A survey on deep transfer
learning

2018

Lei et al. (2018)

Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey

2018

Hohman et al. (2018)

Visual analytics in deep
learning: An interrogative survey for the next
frontiers

2018

Salahat and
saimeh (2017)

Recent advances in features extraction and description algorithms: A
comprehensive survey

2017

Shi et al. (2019)

Qa-

2019

Main contribution
Explores the recent contributions in
COVID-19 research with the help of
computer vision approaches.
Presents the technical overview and
comparative analysis of the objection approaches.
Explores the existing deep learning
approaches that can be fine-tuned to
achieve the desired results.
Illustrates the recent research works
for semantic analysis via deep learning approaches.
Highlights the role of visual analytics in the study of deep learning using the human centric interrogative
framework that involves the use of 5
Ws and how.
Addresses the recent advancements
for feature extraction and description algorithms in the area of computer vision.

Figure 15: Timeline of virtual reality.

15

Table 5: Survey papers on advancements in virtual world techniques.

Author
Eiris et al. (2020)

Title
Desktop-based
safety
training
using
360degree panorama and
static virtual reality techniques: A comparative
experimental study

Year
2020

El Jamiy and Marsh
(2019)

Survey on depth perception in head-mounted
displays: distance estimation in virtual reality,
augmented reality, and
mixed reality
A survey on 360 video
streaming: Acquisition,
transmission, and display
Virtual Reality and Its
Applications in Education: Survey
Virtual reality medical
application system

2019

Fan et al. (2019)

Anbarjafari
(2019)
Giap and
(2019)

et

al.

Wong

Contribution
Explores the relationship between
realism and hazard identification
in 360-degree panorama and static
virtual reality however 360-degree
panorama present difficulties for
hazard identification as compared to
VR.
Contributions made to improve
depth perception and specifically
distance perception are discussed.

2019

Discussed the 360-degree headmounted VR system.

2019

Discussed the usability of 3D reality
in education.

2019

Applied VR for patient monitoring.

of watching on a display, immersing a person in a digital 3D environment. Unlike conventional
user display interfaces, VR places users inside an experience. By simulating several senses such
as audio, video, touch, etc., the computer is transformed into a gatekeeper to this artificial world.
Unlike VR, augmented reality (AR) overlays digital objects onto the real world via smartphone
screens or displays, it does not create the whole artificial environment to replace real with a virtual one whereas the mixed reality (MR) is an extension of AR, where users can interact with
digital objects placed in the real world (e.g. playing a holographic piano located in the room via
an AR headset). Augmented means to add or enhance something and in the case of augmented
reality, graphics, sounds, and touch feedback are added in real experience. Virtual intelligence
(VI) (Luck and Aylett, 2000) is an advanced term given to artificial intelligence that applies to
the virtual world. It is a sophisticated program designed to provide convenience to modern computer users. Unlike conventional AI, VIs are only utilized to assist the user and process data.
Some VIs may have ‘personality imprints’, with their behavior parameters, speech pattern and
appearance based on specific individuals, although it is illegal to make VIs based on currently
living people. Extended reality (XR) is a term referring to all real-and-virtual combined environments and human-machine interactions generated by computer technology and wearables, where
the “X” represents a variable for any current or future spatial computing technologies (Chuah,
2018). XR most commonly includes virtual, augmented, and mixed reality. Fig. 15 shows the
incremental growth in VR technology whereas the literature papers are considered in Table 5.
The development of VR/AR/XR must be incorporated with appropriate legal compliances.

16

Figure 16: Timeline of 3D printing Technology.

3.1.5. 3D printing
Presently healthcare systems are at high risk and due to increasing demand, system capacity
has to be elevated in order to maintain the supply of medical hardwares (face masks, ventilators, and breathing filters, PPE kits, bubble helmets, etc.). Thus, it is essential that all around
the world, the government should take extreme measures to boost productivity and enhance the
supply of essential medical equipment. To fulfil these demands, three-dimensional (3D) printing
can contribute positively as a disruptive digital manufacturing technology for better production
and subsequently encourage the effort of hospital workers in the middle of this emergency.
In 1974, David E. H. Jones laid out the concept of 3D printing (Horvath, 2014). It is a technique in which computers are capable of creating three-dimensional objects with raw materials
(such as liquid molecules or powder grains being fused together) (Ntousia and Fudos, 2019).
Originally, it is a process that deposits a binder material onto a powder bed with inkjet printer
heads layer by layer. Presently, the use of 3D printing is limited and majorly used in both rapid
prototyping and manufacturing. The desired objects can be of any geometry or shape and are
typically produced using digital model data from a 3D model or another electronic data source
such as an additive manufacturing file (AMF) (usually in sequential layers) (Roebuck, 2011).
This process is the opposite of subtractive manufacturing which is cutting out / hollowing out
an object through machinery, which is capable of producing complex objects using less material
compared to conventional manufacturing methods (Gibson et al., 2014). 3D printing is useful
in every application domain such as medical infrastructure, drug discovery, defence system, industrial production, etc. Fig. 16 highlights the timeline of 3D printing technology and Table 6
considers related survey papers for discussion.
3.1.6. Biometrics
For monitoring, infrared thermometers along with facial and iris recognition systems are
increasingly being used as most desirable contactless techniques during this pandemic. Due to
the infectious COVID-19 disease, globally, public and private organizations have stopped the
use of contact-based biometric systems. Contactless biometric systems are not only useful for
screening but also useful for tagging a person (suspect or normal) and assurance of his quarantine
17

Table 6: Survey papers on 3D printing.

Author
Huang et al. (2020)

Title
A survey of design methods for material extrusion
polymer 3D printing

Year
2020

Olsson et al. (2019)

3D-Printing Technology
in Construction: Results
from a Survey
The role of 3D printing in
medical applications: a
state of the art

2019

Iaizzo

Medical applications of
3D printing

2019

Rao

3D printing: On its historical evolution and the
implications for business

2015

Aimar et al. (2019)

Durfee
(2019)
Matias
(2015)

and

and

2019

Contribution
Explores the design methods for material extrusion polymer 3D printing
along with the state-of-the-art approaches and research gaps to develop future possibilities.
Investigated the implementation of
3D-printing in the construction sector.
3D-printing Discussed the usefulness, drawbacks and how powerful
technology the 3D printing is in the
medical domain.
How 3D printing has been (and
could be) used in various medical
applications.
Describes the historical evolution of
additive manufacturing technologies
and influencing factors involved in
3D printing.

status.
Alphonse Bertillon, chief of the criminal identification division of the police department in
Paris, developed and then practiced the idea of using a number of body measurements to identify criminals in the mid-19th century (Jain et al., 2004). The term biometrics is derived from
the greek words bio and metric; meaning life and measure respectively (Barde and Agrawal,
2019). The two main types of biometric identifiers depend on either physiological or behavioral characteristics used to digitally authenticate a person to access systems, devices or data.
This is also useful for person tracking in automated surveillance systems. The basic premise of
biometric authentication is that every person can be accurately identified by his or her intrinsic
physical or behavioral traits. Physiological identifiers relate to the composition of the user being
authenticated and include facial recognition, fingerprints, finger geometry (the size and position of fingers), iris recognition, vein recognition, retina scanning, voice recognition and DNA
matching. Behavioral identifiers include the unique ways in which individuals act, including
recognition of typing patterns, walking gait and other gestures. Some of these behavioral identifiers can be used to provide continuous authentication instead of a single one-off authentication
check. In general, contact-based physiological biometrics such as fingerprint recognition pose a
health risk (Sharif et al., 2019), hence contactless biometrics seem more promising such as facial
and iris recognition. Fig. 17 shows the evolution in the biometric systems along with the survey
papers in Table 7.
3.2. Analytics, storage and processing environment
3.2.1. Data analytics
COVID-19’s infectious spread and severe impact in more than 190 countries have made the
situation critical. The bad part of this pandemic over people is psychological weakness like:
18

Figure 17: Evolution of biometrics over the years.

Table 7: Survey papers on biometric systems.

Author
Kumari and
(2019)

Seeja

Sharif et al. (2019)
Gui et al. (2019)
Gomez-Barrero and
Galbally (2020)

Title
Periocular biometrics: A
survey

Year
2020

An Overview of Biometrics Methods
A Survey on Brain Biometrics
Reversing
the
irreversible: A survey on
inverse biometrics

2019

19

2019
2019

Contribution
Gives a deep insight of various aspects such as utility of periocular region as a stand-alone modality.
Discussed all types of biometric systems.
Covers all aspects of brain biometrics.
Discussed the importance of reverse
engineering in the biometrics system.

Figure 18: Breakthroughs in data analytics.

helplessness, scareness, and frustration. Data analytics methods are used to infer the patterns
from available data to decide future actions. In presence of massive incremental data of this
pandemic, advanced data analytics play a vital role. The analysis of the data may also help the
people to know the tentative future behavioural patterns, that may surely become the best way to
reduce panic and make people feel safe and hope in the tragic “pandemic” time. Data analysis
helps health workers, administrators and researchers to prepare action plans in combat against
COVID-19. Availability of COVID-19 related massive Data is an asset that is helping forecast
and understands the reach and impact of coronavirus. In contrast to earlier epidemics, to fully
exploit the potential of big data analytics approaches, the present advancements in computational
hardware and resources are being used by healthcare workers, scientists and epidemiologists to
analyze the data.
The term data analytics is the backbone of every aspect of study that drives the approach
towards its desired goal. Fig. 18 illustrates the advancements achieved over the decades in the
field of data analytics. With the development of big data and advent of data sources, this field has
significantly evolved to address the associated challenges of real-time processing. This area of
research tends to discover the hidden patterns associated with the data by means of data-centric
approaches like data mining, statistical analysis, data presentation and management (Hu et al.,
2014). This mainly comprises of 2D2P analytics defined as descriptive, diagnostic, predictive,
and prescriptive, where descriptive analytics answers what happened and past performance; diagnostic analytics answers why happened i.e. finds the cause of outcome of descriptive analytics;
on the other hand predictive and prescriptive analytics answers what will happen in future and
what should be done respectively (Banerjee et al., 2013). Table 8 describes the recent surveys
conducted to describe the emerging technologies in the area of data analytics.
3.2.2. Blockchain
Since coronavirus is highly infectious in nature, people from all parts of the world are trying
hard to get the appropriate solutions, in the form of fast detection of virus carriers and halting the
spread of infection, and also in vaccine development. In the present context of epidemic man20

Table 8: Survey papers on data analytics covering emerging technologies.

Author
Yurtsever
(2020)

et

al.

Nasiri et al. (2019)

Inoubli et al. (2018)

Elijah et al. (2018)

Marjani et al. (2017)

Singh and
(2015)

Reddy

Title
A survey of autonomous
driving: Common practices and emerging technologies

Year
2020

Evaluation of distributed
stream processing frameworks for IoT applications in Smart Cities
An experimental survey
on big data frameworks

2019

An overview of Internet
of Things (IoT) and data
analytics in agriculture:
Benefits and challenges
Big IoT data analytics:
architecture, opportunities, and open research
challenges
A survey on platforms for
big data analytics

2018

21

2018

2017

2015

Main contribution
Reviews the recent state-of-the-art
approaches for automated driving
systems by comparing the results in
the common platform with real driving settings and environment.
Highlights the large-scale stream
processing frameworks for high
throughput and low latency applications of smart cities.
Presents the best practices in big
data frameworks to store, analyse
and process the data.
Explores the IoT ecosystem and data
analytics concerned with smart agriculture.
Proposes new architecture model for
big data IoT analytics and explores
the relationship between IoT and big
data analytics.
Addresses big data analytics platforms with scalability, fault tolerance, I/O rate, etc.

Figure 19: Development of blockchain scheme.

agement, blockchain is emerging as a crucial technology in order to provide a robust, transparent
and low-priced method of enabling effective decision-making and, as an outcome, could lead to
quicker actions during this crisis. Blockchain is now showing ample possibilities to become an
integral part of the global response to COVID-19 by facilitating reliable track and trace applications for disease carriers, managing secure payments and maintaining the sustainable supply
chain of essential goods and donations.
Blockchain also known as the decentralized ledger, conceptualized by S. Nakomoto in 2008,
is a cryptographic distributed database without any central controller (Nakamoto, 2019) that features cryptography, immutability, provenance, decentralization, anonymity, and transparency. As
illustrated in Fig. 19 the concept of blockchain initiated as the electronic transaction system while
expanding its dimensions in broad application areas e.g. cryptocurrency, banking, supply chain,
property records, healthcare, security, privacy, etc. (Pilkington, 2016). The key components of
blockchain network are node (user or computer within the blockchain), transaction (smallest
building block of a blockchain system), block (a data structure used for keeping a set of transactions which is distributed to all nodes in the network), chain (a sequence of blocks in a specific
order), miners (specific nodes which perform the block verification process), and consensus (a
set of rules and arrangements to carry out blockchain operations). Table 9 describes the recent
advancements in the blockchain technology with the help of survey papers.
3.2.3. Cloud computing
The race for vaccine discovery of COVID-19 is underway, researchers and medical scientists
across the world are working round the clock and sharing their research findings to the communities as an effort to bring the pandemic to an end. Lockdown and social distancing have
triggered massive and sustained surge in users to stick to online platforms for sharing of workrelated information. For all these reasons, cloud computing is facilitating video conferencing,
remote project collaboration, e-education, etc. to meet spectacular and unplanned demand under
this crisis.
With the advancement in the above discussed technologies and data sources, the requirement
of on-demand computation resources has increased. Cloud computing technology aims to provide the requirement based, on-demand high performance computing environment along with the
data storage capability (Voorsluys et al., 2011). The term was first coined in an internal document
by “Compaq” in 1996 (Regalado, 2011). The advancement in cloud computation follows three
22

Table 9: Recent surveys conducted in blockchain technology.

Author
Maesa and
(2020)

Title
Blockchain 3.0 applications survey

Year
2020

A review on the role of
blockchain technology in
the healthcare domain

2019

Blockchain and IoT integration: A systematic
survey

2018

Chen et al. (2018)

A survey of blockchain
applications in different
domains

2018

Joshi et al. (2018)

A survey on security
and privacy issues of
blockchain technology
Untangling blockchain:
A data processing view
of blockchain systems

2018

Mori

Dhia et al. (2019)

Panarello
(2018)

et

Dinh et al. (2018)

al.

2018

Main contribution
Other
than
cryptocurrencies,
explores various application of
blockchain in healthcare records
management, end-to-end verifiable
electronic voting, access control
systems,
identity management
systems, decentralized notary, etc.
Highlights the application of
blockchain in the healthcare sector along with the generalized
implementation framework.
Presents the research trends in
blockchain for IoT enabled environments and challenges associated
with the IoT and blockchain.
Presents the recent advancements in
blockchain in the broad areas of
healthcare, insurance, energy, copyright protection, and societal applications.
Presents an overview of the privacy
and security concerns of the trends
and applications in blockchain.
Proposed blockbench to analyse the
performance of blockchain models
for varying data processing workloads.

Figure 20: Timeline of event of emergence and development of cloud computing.

23

Figure 21: Different service models of cloud computing.

Table 10: Recent surveys conducted in the field of cloud computing.

Author
Almusaylim
Jhanjhi (2020)

Title
Comprehensive Review:
Privacy Protection of
User in Location-Aware
Services
of
Mobile
Cloud Computing
Task scheduling techniques in cloud computing:
A literature
survey

Year
2020

Nguyen et al. (2017)

Virtual machine consolidation with multiple
usage prediction for
energy-efficient
cloud
data centers

2017

Madni et al. (2016)

Resource scheduling for
infrastructure as a service
(IaaS) in cloud computing: Challenges and opportunities
QoS-aware autonomic
resource
management
in cloud computing: a
systematic review

2016

Cloud computing: Survey on energy efficiency

2014

Arunarani
(2019)

Singh and
(2015)

and

et

al.

Chana

Mastelic et al. (2014)

24

2019

2015

Main contribution
Reviews the recent advances in the
securing the privacy and location of
the user in mobile cloud computing
while also highlighting the shortcomings that need to be addressed.
Highlights the exhaustive survey of
task scheduling strategies for cloud
environment along with its related
issues, possible solutions and future
scope.
Describes the energy efficient
framework for cloud based computing based on virtual machine
consolidation to estimate the long
term resource utilization to mitigate
the overload or burnout conditions.
Present the resource scheduling
schemes proposed so far for varying
infrastructural environments along
with the challenges and possible improvements.
Depicts the literature survey for efficient resource management and
workload distribution in the cloud
computational environment for best
quality of offered services.
Proposes a systematic framework
for energy efficient computations on
cloud infrastructure along with the
practice of state-of-the-art standard
approaches.

Figure 22: Development trends of quantum computing.

generations as shown in Fig. 20, where the first generation offered a centralized network with
two tier architecture, the second generation experienced the increase in the types of services and
the number of service providers, and third generation improved the quality of resources by incorporation of GPU enabled accelerators. As per the NIST definition of cloud computing (Mastelic
et al., 2014) services are offered in three different categories of model as shown in Fig. 21. As
per the survey observed (shown in Table 10), the fourth generation of advancement in cloud is
yet to come.
3.2.4. Quantum computing
It was seen in movies or studied in stories about an apocalyptic world where people use
to fight against a deadly pathogen to find a cure. Unfortunately, this pandemic is not a fictional
episode, it is actual, and experts across the globe are frantically observing for patterns in large sets
of data by using powerful processors with the anticipation of finding a quicker breakthrough in
vaccine/drug discovery for the COVID-19. Discovery of vaccine/drug may require screening of
billions of chemical compounds quickly which can be efficiently possible with the hybridization
of high performance computing and machine learning.
Quantum computing brings classical information theory, computer science, and quantum
physics together for faster computation compared to the conventional one (Steane, 1998). This
began with P. Benioff who was the first to theorize quantum computing in 1981 (Benioff, 1982)
and expanded into incredibly powerful machines that make use of the new approaches for processing information. Fig. 22 highlights the evolution of quantum computing over the years. Built
on the principles of quantum mechanics, it exploits complex and fascinating laws of nature that
are always there but usually remain hidden from view. By harnessing such natural behavior,
quantum computing can run new types of algorithms to process information more holistically.
It is believed that in the near future they may lead to revolutionary breakthroughs in materials
and drug discovery, the optimization of complex man-made systems, and artificial intelligence.
Quantum computing is expected to open the doors that were thought to remain locked indefinitely. Table 11 has listed some important review articles on recent improvements in quantum
computation.

25

Table 11: Literature surveys conducted in quantum computing.

Authors
McArdle et al. (2020)

Title
Quantum computational
chemistry

Year
2020

Gyongyosi and Imre
(2019)

A Survey on quantum
computing technology

2019

Savchuk and Fesenko
(2019)

Quantum
Computing:
Survey and Analysis

2019

De Wolf (2019)

Quantum
Computing:
Lecture Notes

2019

Schuld (2019)

Machine learning
quantum spaces

2019

in

Contribution
Explores the approaches that can
aid in building a quantum computer
while also bridging knowledge gap
between quantum computing and
computational chemistry.
Discussed the most recent results
of quantum computation technology
and addressed the open problems of
the field.
Discussed the main concepts and
postulates of the quantum computing model, efficient quantum algorithms, and recent results, capabilities, and prospects in constructing a
scalable quantum computer.
Addressed the possible application
domains, recent algorithms and unexplored area in the field of quantum
computing.
Talks about the feasibility of ML algorithms with quantum computers.

3.3. Autonomous transportation and communication technologies
3.3.1. Internet of things
The entire globe is busy in fighting the menace of the COVID-19. At one hand, death tolls are
shockingly rising and on the other hand new and innovative means of limiting the infection are
widely being explored to stop the spread of the contagion. Since social distancing is continuously
being given a push, all kinds of contactless solutions are receiving special attention. In this
context, Internet of Things (IoT) is playing an important role in the technology arsenal because of
its reduced cost, autonomous and remote caregiving features and easy diagnostic capabilities. In
the pandemic response, smart connected devices can generate enough data for statistical analysis
and subsequently aid in better decision making to gain prevention and control against COVID-19.
The IoT corresponds to the web of interconnected physical devices, connected via internet,
bluetooth or other means of connectivity (Rayes and Salam, 2017). The term IoT was first
coined by Kevin Ashton that evolved from the smart “Coca Cola” vending machine in 1982 to
smart home appliances, smart toys, smart healthcare, and a lot more due to the advancements
in machine learning, artificial intelligence, real-time analytics, embedded systems, and other
technologies. Fig. 23 represents the timeline of the IoT advancements since its origin. With
its diverse application in real-world problems and innovations, it has been widely studied in
integration with artificial intelligence techniques. Table 12 describes the recent literature surveys
that exploits the application domain of IoT technology.

26

Figure 23: IoT timeline of advancement.

Table 12: Recent surveys conducted in the field of IoT.

Author
Younan et al. (2020)

Title
Challenges and recommended technologies for
the industrial internet of
things: A comprehensive
review

Year
2020

Wang et al. (2019b)

Survey on blockchain for
Internet of Things

2019

Gharaibeh
(2017)

Smart cities: A survey on
data management, security, and enabling technologies
Internet of Things security: A survey

2017

A survey on network
methodologies for realtime analytics of massive
IoT data and open research issues
Interne of things: A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and
applications

2017

et

al.

Alaba et al. (2017)

Verma et al. (2017)

Al-Fuqaha
(2015)

et

al.

27

2017

2015

Main contribution
Surveys recent advances and recommended technologies in the IoT research and overview of information
communication technologies along
with its impact on the smart transportation and healthcare.
Elaborate on the existing blockchain
technology from the IoT perspective
along with the critical challenges
that arise with their integration.
Explores the data centric perspective
of IoT for smart cities to ensure consistency, interoperability, reusability
and granularity of the acquired data.
Highlights the advancements in the
security domain of the IoT in context of application, communication
and architecture.
Reviews the state-of-the-art IoT network analytics in real-time with
different use cases and software
platforms along with its respective
shortcomings.
Presents the in-depth overview of
the IoT protocols and its relevance
to the emerging technologies e.g.
big data analytics, cloud computing,
etc. and respective challenges.

Figure 24: Advancements in the field of robotics.

3.3.2. Robotics
Robots are one of the promising technologies supported during the fight against coronavirus.
To contain the spread of coronavirus, robots are offering care to infected patients, quarantine
people and managing social distancing. It is a time when robotics developers have to respond
quickly to address the present need of public health concerns and in a most expedient and safest
way so that the outbreak and its further spread can be grappled. Robotics is an interdisciplinary
field of study that covers physics, mathematics, mechanical engineering, computer science and
engineering, dynamic system modelling, electrical and electronic engineering, etc. (Konstantinos Sirlantzis, 2018). This field studies to replicate the human actions using the automated selflearning robotic machines. The term was first coined in the play “Rossum’s Universal Robots”
or “R.U.R.” by the Czech writer Karel Capek. Starting from its first industrial application by J. F.
Engelberger, as a robotic arm for die-casting, has widened the application area in various fields
e.g. agriculture, automobile, entertainment, health-care, manufacturing, military, transportation,
etc as shown in Fig. 24. Table 13 indicates related works that show advancement in such areas.
In this era, this area of research has faced major development with the advancements in artificial
intelligence especially for creating robots that can replace humans. Many robots are built to do
jobs that are hazardous to people such as defusing bombs, finding survivors in unstable ruins, and
exploring mines and shipwrecks. Moreover, robotics is also used in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) as a teaching aid.
3.3.3. 5G mobile technologies
5G is the fifth generation of wireless communications technologies which is 10 times faster
than fourth-generation technology. Presently, smartphones are very common among people for
voice calls, social networking activities, online banking, telemedicine, etc. COVID-19 is at its
peak and seeking to maintain social distancing as the most prominent solution for stopping the
spread of the virus, people are shifting towards fully online mode like e-learning, conferences,
meetings, shoppings, telemedicine, etc. As the number of active internet users are drastically
increased, existing mobile networks are not sufficient to cope up the situation. Hence, 5G technology is the primary requirement to fulfill the current and future requirements.
28

Table 13: Recent surveys conducted in the field of robotics.

Author
Gualtieri et al. (2020)

Bing et al. (2018)

He et al. (2017)

Polydoros and Nalpantidis (2017)

Eguchi (2016)

Kostavelis
and
Gasteratos (2015)

Title
Emerging research fields
in safety and ergonomics
in industrial collaborative
robotics: A systematic
literature review
A survey of robotics control based on learninginspired spiking neural
networks
A survey of humancentered
intelligent
robots:
issues and
challenges
Survey of model-based
reinforcement learning:
Applications on robotics

Year
2020

RoboCupJunior for promoting STEM education,
21st century skills, and
technological advancement through robotics
competition
Semantic mapping for
mobile robotics tasks: A
survey

2016

2018

2017

2017

2015

Main contribution
Discusses the safety and ergonomics
for industrial collaborative robotics
with human–robot collaboration
technology along with the emerging
challenges and research area.
Explores the advancements in the
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
for the perspective of robotic applications.
Describes the approaches and
mlkchallenges for the advancements in the development of human
centric robots.
Incorporates the proposed approaches on model-based reinforcement learning with its applicability
in the area of robotics.
Highlights the case study of
RoboCupJunior in relation with
STEM based learning for creative
and innovative learning.

Presents the approaches to bridge
the gap between humans and robots
interpretation of information by incorporating semantic mapping techniques.

Figure 25: Evolution of wireless generation of telecommunication technologies.

29

Table 14: Recent surveys conducted in the field of 5G telecommunications.

Author
Mistry et al. (2020)

Title
Blockchain for 5Genabled IoT for industrial
automation: A systematic review, solutions,
and challenges

Year
2020

Su et al. (2019)

Resource allocation for
network slicing in 5G
telecommunication networks: A survey of principles and models
Comprehensive Survey
of Massive MIMO for
5G Communications

2019

Agiwal et al. (2016)

Next generation 5G wireless networks: A comprehensive survey

2016

Yulong et al. (2016)

A survey on wireless security: Technical challenges, recent advances,
and future trends
From 3G to 4G: technology evolution and path
dynamics in China’s mobile telecommunication
sector

2016

Shaikh
(2019)

and

Yu (2011)

Kaur

2019

2011

Main contribution
Provides the comprehensive review
on blockchain based 5G enabled IoT
approach along with its industrial
potential while also addressing the
associated challenges and future research possibilities.
Describes the resource allocation
schemes in 5G networks to highlight
load balancing, resource utilization,
and network performance.
Presents the integration of MIMO
concepts with the 5G networking
along with the best suited mili-meter
wave spectrum this telecommunication.
Presents the exhaustive survey of
all the related technologies and advancements for 5G communication
along with its evolution and challenges.
Highlights the security, vulnerabilities and threat aspects arising with
the advancements in the wireless
telecommunication.
Investigates the technologies or advancements that drove this evolution
in telecommunication along with the
practices of different stakeholders
with the case study of China.

Unlike its predecessor, 5G offers greater bandwidth and higher download speed that can
scale up to 10 gigabits per second (Gbps). Fig. 25 highlights the evolution of wireless technologies (Sharma, 2013). With increased bandwidth in 5G, it can compete with other internet service
providers (ISP) like cable net that is utilized in laptop or desktop devices and can also widen
the scope of applications in IoT and machine-to-machine (M2M) enabled regions. This quality
of telecommunication can serve as a foundation of many aforementioned technologies. 5G is
now recognized as a disruptive technology with its forthcoming deployment between 2020 and
2040 across the world. Table 14 highlights the literature surveys conducted for 5G and related
telecommunication technologies. Since networking and mobile connectivity is the base for every
technology, the implication of 5G will directly impact other technologies in terms of data access
and transfer rates.

30

Figure 26: Timeline of Autonomous vehicles.

3.3.4. Autonomous vehicle
During this global crisis of COVID-19 pandemic, to restrict the spread of the infectious
coronavirus (by means of reducing people-to-people contact), autonomous vehicles are surely
the best transportation medium to deliver essential goods like medicines and food items. Autonomous vehicles are also useful in several areas during this pandemic like: isolation wards in
hospitals, railway stations, airports, etc. The first witnessed application of autonomous vehicles
during this pandemic was accomplished by Apollo (a Baidu’s autonomous vehicle platform) to
supply daily needs, medicines and food to a hospital at Beijing.
Autonomous vehicles (Yurtsever et al., 2020) are one of the most desirable future transportation techniques. The evolution of autonomous vehicles follows from the objective to develop
these vehicles is to take over the art of driving by computing devices for more promising transportation. These vehicles can drive themselves from source to destination in “autopilot” mode
using various in-vehicle technologies and sensors such as adaptive collision control, active steering (steer by wire), anti-lock braking systems (brake by wire), GPS navigation technology, lasers,
etc. An autonomous car is self-guided without any human conduction. Google’s autonomous car
design, have logged thousands of hours on American roads, but they are not yet commercially
available on a large scale (Fagnant and Kockelman, 2015). Studies suggest that significant autonomous car production could cause problems with existing auto insurance and traffic controls
used for human-controlled cars (Bimbraw, 2015). Continuous efforts for promising and robust
autonomous vehicles are underway across the globe. It is only a matter of time before these
kinds of advances allow us to outsource our daily commute to a computer. Table 15 gives a brief
overview of development in autonomous vehicles and Fig. 26 shows timeline of automobile evolution.
3.3.5. Drone technologies
During the lockdown, when social distancing is of utmost priority, drones are being used on
the front line to contain the virus spread. It is supporting disinfection tasks, patrolling activities,
surveillancing and automatic delivery agents of food and other essentials in quarantined districts.
These special needs of worldwide quarantine exercises are becoming a driving factor in the drone
development sector leading to develop special purpose drones for specific tasks such as to help
law and order management through automated surveillance.
31

Table 15: Overview of Autonomous vehicles.

Author
Yurtsever
(2020)

et

Liu and Xu (2020)

Badue et al. (2019)

Dixon et al. (2020)

al.

Title
A survey of autonomous
driving: common practices and emerging technologies
Public attitude toward
self-driving vehicles on
public roads:
Direct
experience
changed
ambivalent people to be
more positive
Driving Cars: A Survey

Year
2020

What drives support for
self-driving car technology in the United States?

2018

2020

2019

Contribution
Discussed the feasibility of existing
automated driving systems (ADSs)
for a safe, comfortable and efficient
driving experience.
Discussed the resistance and negative attitudes to self-driving vehicles.

The overall architecture is organized
into the perception system and the
decision-making system.
Favours the self driving over traditional human driven cars.

An uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) (generally known as a drone) is an unmanned aircraft (Gupta
et al., 2013) initially, (Newcome, 2004). It contains three components: UAV, ground control
station and communication medium. The drones can be differentiated in terms of the type (fixedwing, multirotor, etc.), the degree of autonomy, the size and weight, and the power source (Vergouw et al., 2016). Probably, the basic properties of UAVs will remain unchanged in future,
but the aspects like propulsion, autonomy, and size may vary. The drone types are mainly categorized as fixed-wing, multirotor and hybrid systems (ornithopters). A fixed-wing drone uses
fixed static wings in combination with forwarding airspeed to generate lift like traditional airplanes. Multirotor systems are a subset of rotorcraft (defined as an aircraft that uses rotary wings
to generate lift) e.g. traditional helicopters. Drones use multiple small rotors, whereas hybrid
systems incorporate properties of both fixed-wing and multirotor systems. A hybrid quadcopter
is a perfect example of a hybrid drone. This type of drone uses multiple rotors to lift and land,
whereas wings are helpful to fly for longer distances. Fig. 27 shows the incremental growth in
drone technology whereas Table 16 incorporates several articles on the state-of-the-art of drone
technology.
4. Different ways to use disruptive and emerging technologies against COVID-19
Preceding section offers a brief overview of the technologies currently in use, this section
highlights their foremost features and significance in the fight against the coronavirus pandemic,
converging on the methods of their utilization to monitor and contain the rapid spread of the
virus, and to sensitize the authorities to develop and maintain their capacity toward fulfilling the
ever-increasing needs triggered by this pandemic. Recent research works related to various use
cases concerning COVID-19 are presented in the following subsections:

32

Figure 27: Evolution of drone technology.

Table 16: Recent surveys conducted in the field of drone technology.

Author
Sharma et al. (2020)

Title
Communication and networking technologies for
UAVs: A survey

Year
2020

Kugler (2019)

Real-world applications
for drones
Applications of multirotor drone technologies
in construction management
Drone
technology:
Types, payloads, applications,
frequency
spectrum issues and
future developments
Review of unmanned aircraft system (UAS)

2019

Li and Liu (2019)

Vergouw et al. (2016)

Gupta et al. (2013)

33

2019

Contribution
Discusses the insight of emerging communication technologies for
unanmed aerial vehicles along with
its integration with the recent machine learning approaches to meet
the modern needs of surveillance,
navigation and edge computing.
Talks about various application domains where drones can be applied.
Discussed all important issues and
applicability of drone technology.

2016

Talks about type and application areas of drone technology.

2013

State-of-the-art of drone technology.

Table 17: SWOT analysis in prediction and propagation analysis of COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities

Threats

Remarks
Quick/time-saving analysis of the COVID-19 related parameters without manual intervention.
Rely heavily on the patterns of the already identified COVID-19 cases which may generate
the biasness concerned with the incoming drifting data.
The predictive analysis will give a chance to minimize the amount of loss that may occur based upon the current situation of COVID-19 by generating the follow-up plans and
mitigate the issues with the early planning.
With the possibility of false-negative predictions, an unnecessary panic situation could be
generated. Security concerns related to the private information in the globally shared data.

4.1. Prediction and propagation analysis
The objective of prediction follows from the idea of analyzing the past experience to forecast
the upcoming possibilities. To fulfil this objective, AI-based approaches along with the assistance
of other technologies e.g. cloud computing, IoT, etc., are widely studied. With the uncontrolled,
non-stop exponential growth of the COVID-19 cases, many factors or parameters that drive the
world are impacted in terms of the global economy (McKibbin and Fernando, 2020), medical
resources (Emanuel et al., 2020), business value (Bartik et al., 2020), climate conditions (Wang
et al., 2020), etc. In order to analyse the impact of COVID-19 on such parameters, researchers
use official data collected from publicly available datasets (Kaggle, 2020) to analyse the propagation factor of the COVID-19 via prediction of the possible number of new cases, based on the
susceptible population vulnerable to the exposure of a specific region or across the world (Punn
et al., 2020a). Furthermore, following the same concept and statistical analysis, the peak infection rates can be computed for a certain set of conditions imposed from the proposed hypothesis.
Based on these findings, the table 17 highlights the SWOT analysis performed on these works.
4.2. Detection: diagnosis and prognosis
AI has been playing an essential role in the areas of medical image processing, object detection, text mining, natural language processing, IoT, etc. (Punn and Agarwal, 2020c; Lei et al.,
2018; Young et al., 2018; Punn and Agarwal, 2019). In detection, an object is identified to aid
in the underlying processing of the data. AI-based approaches including deep learning and machine learning are explored by young researchers and laureates to derive measures that could aid
in early detection of COVID-19 by utilizing the data from various sources consisting of medical
images, statistical IoT data, news and reports, etc.
In the study of medical image processing via deep learning approaches, many works have
been proposed that make use of chest X-ray and CT scan images for the detection of COVID-19
at the earliest possible stage (Punn and Agarwal, 2020a; Wong et al., 2020; Li and Xia, 2020;
Narin et al., 2020; Punn and Agarwal, 2020b) . This reduces the overhead time of radiologists
spent into the close monitoring of these images for further diagnosis. Furthermore, till now, no
concrete solution is proposed to fight against COVID-19 and hence social distancing (Greenstone
and Nigam, 2020) is found to be the only feasible solution. Deep learning based object detection
and tracking schemes are proposed, followed by statistical analysis to automate the monitoring
of social distancing via surveillance footage (Punn et al., 2020b). Likewise, many frameworks
are proposed that make use of sensors available on the smartphones and other wearable devices
like GPS, camera, temperature, heart rate monitor, and other inertia based sensors (Maghdid
34

Table 18: SWOT analysis of detection task of COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities

Threats

Remarks
On-time or early detection of COVID-19 resulting in faster cure and treatment.
Proposed AI approaches require heavy computation resources for the detection of COVID19 which might not be available everywhere.
AI enabled techniques support the diagnostic procedure with automated approaches to detect symptoms pertaining to COVID-19 with the help of medical modalities, IoT, drug
discovery, etc. resulting in faster discovery of the virus. More time can be devoted for cure
and treatment instead of manual monitoring of the symptoms of COVID-19.
The AI approaches are not 100% reliable and hence false detection of the COVID-19 could
result in backfire, thereby making manual supervision of the results necessary. Medical data
contains the private and crucial information of the patients and hence should be secured
before it can be shared in the public platform.

et al., 2020), to carefully monitor the victims of COVID-19. The data acquired is then utilized
with machine learning approaches to synthesize the symptoms of the virus and later use it for
its faster detection. This is so-far the quickest approach to detect COVID-19 as compared to the
medical scans or kits, but is prone to false detections. With the help of above discussed works,
table 18 indicates the SWOT analysis performed in the detection area of fight against COVID-19.
4.3. Treatment and drug discovery
AI based approaches are not only focused on analysing the medical data to assist in the diagnosis practice but are also suitable for drug discovery to cure COVID-19. Meanwhile, in the
on-groing research to understand the protein structures associated with COVID-19, Google’s AlphaFold (Senior et al., 2020) model is being utilized to understand how COVID-19 operates and
what are the possibilities of therapeutic drug discovery. Alex et al. (2020) utilized deep learning
based generative approaches e.g. generative autoencoders, genetic algorithm, generative adversarial network, etc., to design protease inhibitors to contain COVID-19. The proposed approach
follows a reinforcement learning scheme to construct complex structures of molecules that can
counter the effects of COVID-19. At the same time, Ton et al. (2020) proposed deep learning
based deep docking (DD) framework for rapid identification of fine inhibitors of COVID-19,
allowing faster computation of docking scores for billions of plausible molecules with virtual
screening. Similarly, Randhawa et al. (2020) aimed to classify the novel COVID-19 pathogens
using their genomic structure with the help of alignment-free whole-genome and decision tree
approach. With extensive trials conducted on over 5000 viral samples, the proposed hypothesis
was found to fit with the bat origin of COVID-19 as claimed by Peng et al. (2020). With these
on-going researches and advancements, Table 19 describes the SWOT analysis.
4.4. Telemedecine and assistance on demand
The rampant of COVID-19 cases has brought global crisis and shortage of healthcare practitioners around the world. To mitigate this issue and reduce the workload, AI based automated
healthcare assistance in terms of chatbots (Viber, 2020), self assessment applications (e Inida,
2020), AI assisted phone calls (Kumar, 2020) and other expert systems (Fendt, 2020b), are developed which would help to increase the reachability of necessary information concerned with
the outbreak, precautionary measures, symptoms, decisive actions, etc. Dedicated chatbot for
COVID-19 is so far the quickest approach possible to resolve the respective concern of a person,
AI assisted phone calls can also do the same job with real-time streaming of audio messages,
35

Table 19: SWOT analysis of computational drug discovery and treatment of COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Cost effective and time efficient approach for the COVID-19 treatment
discovery.
Wrong hypothesis discovery may generate fatal results in the real world.
AI based approaches for treatment discovery can be executed without
causing any harm to the living society.
The artificial simulations of treatment discovery may deviate from the
real world and hence could cause loss of lives. Risk of privacy breach of
the patient’s private information on the public platform.

Table 20: SWOT analysis of the scope of telemedicine during COVID-19 pandemic.

SWOT
Strength

Weakness

Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Quick and cost effective approach for self diagnosis. Reduces the workload of the hospitals and other needed resources. Generate self awareness
about the COVID-19 in the society while staying at home.
Require good quality of resources which may not be available in remote
locations. Spread of false information would generate unnecessary panic
situations.
Gives a chance to the experts to concentrate more on severe cases for
cure, treatment, and drug discovery.
This type of diagnosis may raise the anxiety level among people which
may result in the execution of unwanted actions. People may share false
information on public platforms which could mislead the community.
Security and privacy is also the matter of concern for the people sharing
their vital information globally.

whereas self assessment applications make use of certain set of questionnaire and rankings by
which it declares the status of symptoms being positive or negative for COVID-19. For uncertain
situations where more supervision or guidance is required people can also make use of applications like FreeStyle Libre (Fendt, 2020a) based on cloud technology which can remotely connect
the person with the doctor for distant monitoring of the patient. As for another approach people can share their respective data acquired from equipped sensors (smartwatches, smartphones)
like heart rate, blood pressure on the global platform so that quick and immediate actions can
be taken for the concerned person. Table 20 presents the SWOT analysis of the above discussed
approaches.
4.5. Spread containment
COVID-19 transmits from person-to-person via direct/indirect contact from the infected person (of health and family welfare, 2020), the spread confinement measures are required to be
adopted. The technical advancements have contributed in this area by releasing various technology driven contactless initiatives (Apequip, 2020) e.g. rapid testing kits (Elabscience, 2020), sanitization tunnels (Kwon et al., 2020), face shields (Livingston et al., 2020), bubble helmet (Biffi
et al., 2020), smart sanitization and screening systems (Wosik et al., 2020), personal protective
36

Table 21: SWOT analysis of spread containment measures of COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Cost effective measure to contain the virus spread.
The required resources may not be available world wide. Equipment too needs sanitization
and supervision from an expert.
Encourages to develop healthy habits with self care and self hygiene.
Equipments need to be sterilized after every use, else it would be disastrous.

equipment (PPE) kits (Livingston et al., 2020), thermal cameras (Organization et al., 2020), POD
units (Kwon et al., 2020), etc.
Rapid testing kit is a cost effective approach that offers assistance to the healthcare practitioners in faster diagnosis of the COVID-19 with triaging patients. The sanitization tunnels that
act as disinfection spraying channels along with the thermal supervision to monitor the body
temperature, ensure the hygiene maintenance of the person who was exposed to the outside environment. Though this approach is not cost effective but is necessary to sustain the hygienic
surrounding in the public environment e.g. airport, malls, markets, etc. To maintain self hygiene,
face shields, PPE kits and smart sanitization systems are introduced that make use of IoT devices
to guide a person to follow the suggested measures properly; for instance, washing hands for 20
seconds, wearing a mask and other protective gears while going outside from home, following
the social distancing order, etc. Recently, various cabinet structures like PODs are introduced
to safeguard a person from getting in contact with the other in public places e.g. restaurants in
Amsterdam are equipped with quarantine greenhouses (Raum, 2020), isolation pods are installed
in hospitals and airports, etc. Moreover, various hospitals are now equipped with bubble helmet
based ventilation schemes, which is highly recommended for a patient suffering from severe respiratory syndrome than just by mere face mask (Feng et al., 2020). Following from these spread
containment measures, table 21 presents their SWOT analysis.
4.6. Fighting “infodemic”
There is a growing concern about propagation of false and misleading information about
the COVID-19 pandemic appearing in public discourse, especially on social media. Organisations like WHO and UN are taking initiatives and launching platforms to combat misinformation
around COVID-19 (Zarocostas, 2020; UN, 2020). Trending techniques such as AI can be exploited to develop policies and guidelines about the fair use of all such platforms, for culling
fake news and rumors, thus curbing the “infodemic” to a great extent (John, 2020). There should
be genuine and authentic availability of streamline search engines, so that search queries should
get routed to the authentic and scientific information. In addition, AI chatbots can be used to
propagate correct information about the disease and its symptoms under the strict supervision
of competent authorities such as centers for disease control and prevention (CDCP). There are
many regulatory organizations working in collaboration with various social media platforms to
limit the spread of rumours, which may contain misrepresentation of various facts such as the
virus will automatically vanish in hot seasons, consuming chloroquine can cure the coronavirus
infection, and consuming large amounts of ginger and garlic can prevent the virus. The infodemic
prevention techniques include aggressively filtering out groundless medical advice, hoaxes and
other incorrect information that are fatal to the public health (Cinelli et al., 2020). In table 22,
SWOT analysis for the above discussed solutions for preventing social infodemic is presented.
37

Table 22: SWOT analysis of the technology based solutions in prevention of social infodemic.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Reduces rumors concerning COVID-19 with automated approaches using artificial intelligence schemes.
Intensive natural language processing is needed to identify fake news.
Better learning algorithms can be implemented for more robust solutions to prevent social
infodemic.
False rejection is possible even if the floated information is of public concern.

Table 23: SWOT analysis of discovery approaches for COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
May lead to discover permanent cure for COVID-19.
Several trials would consume a huge amount of resources, efforts, time
and financial support.
Discovery of novel cure, treatment and monitoring procedures along with
the healthcare equipments.
Novel discovered drugs may generate severe side effects.

4.7. Discovery
With the discovered hypothesis of the origin of COVID-19 from bat (Rothan and Byrareddy,
2020), the person experiencing the COVID-19 shows the following symptoms being monitored with the help of data analytics techniques over the course of disease: fever (83–99%),
cough (59–82%), fatigue (44–70%), anorexia (40–84%), shortness of breath (31–40%), sputum
production (28–33%), and myalgias (11–35%) (CDCP, 2020). Currently, most of the clinical
measures on COVID-19 pandemic are focused on infection prevention, containment measures,
and supportive cares for supplementary oxygen and ventilatory support including immunity enhancements; meanwhile, several trials are conducted for the development of concrete solutions
to counter COVID-19 which can be found at ClinicalTrials (national laboratory of medicines,
2020). Following the current situation, the national institute of health (NIH) proposed general
guidelines (NIH, 2020) for clinicians to assist in the treatment of COVID-19 with the use of data
analytics and AI enabled approaches. The data is regularly updated based on the discoveries
made by the authorized departments or from the published data. As per the current guidelines,
recommended treatments are proposed for infection control, hemodynamic support, ventilatory
support and drug therapy. Apart from these practices, the Ayurveda department has also begun
its interventions as indicated by Rastogi et al. (2020) while exploiting its potential for the possibilities in cure and treatment of COVID-19 with the elaborative description of relevant epidemic
conventional measures as mentioned by Jyotirmoy and Rekha (2016). Besides these many efforts, till now, no drug has proven to be effective in successful treatment of COVID-19. Table 23
highlights the SWOT analysis of the above discussed findings.
4.8. Preparedness to economic disruption
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought global crisis with the steep decay in many areas or
sectors like travel, events (sports, concerts, conference, etc.) and business (import-export, construction, market, etc.), due to the economic consequences of boundations and lockdown. If this
38

Table 24: SWOT analysis of the technology based preparedness of economic disruption.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Time efficient automated responses with 24x7 availability.
Never guarantee a cost effective solution and always require expert supervision.
Strengthens the global economy with more promising and robust solutions.
May increase the unemployment ratio.

pandemic continues then GDP growth could fall to zero (Conerly, 2020). However, it is believed
that technological advancements withhold the potential to balance the nation’s economy.
According to the survey of Accenture (Accenture, 2020); by 2035 it is estimated that technological advancements and applications would contribute to balance the global economy. Whereas
NASSCOM (Saxena, 2020) reported that there has been a steep decline in the growth rate of IT
based organizations. With almost every IT firm switching to work from home schemes with remote access, employees’ full potential can be utilized in developing future intensive applications
to meet the demands of the post COVID-19 world (Sood, 2020). In this era of pandemic, the
AI enabled applications can boost up the GDP growth with help of analysing the demand trends
using data analytics and sales forecasting, chatbots to offer assistance and recommendation to
the customers, integration of items availability in the nearby stores with google maps, and digital marketing with big data analytics. With these many efforts we can mitigate the impact of
COVID-19 on the global economy. Table 24 describes the SWOT analysis of the technology
based advancements to prepare for economic disruption.
4.9. Social Control (contact less initiatives)
Since this pandemic spreads via physical contact (even a simple touch) from the infected
person or any surface, it is necessary to develop the habits of social control. With the exhaustive
survey it was observed that various contactless initiatives are undertaken that involves work from
home (Lufkin, 2020), contactless - payment —citepNP111, delivery (Tasks, 2020), drive-through
COVID-19 testing (Yancey-Bragg, 2020), etc. Social distancing solution is designed to combat
the challenges that all essential workforces, and businesses eager to return to normal operations,
are facing in the time of COVID-19. It is based on two basic concepts: passive and active.
Passive approach is based on the interaction records of the workers (or any individuals) which
utilizes the contact tracing in case an individual is tested positive, whereas in active approach,
an alarm (via visual or audio signals) is generated for workers to adjust their current distance for
following the social distancing protocol. Nowadays, there are many social distancing tools are
available for automated monitoring. Landing AI (AI, 2020) is a startup that provides companies
with end-to-end AI platforms and has come up with a useful tool to monitor social distancing.
Proximity Trace (Triax, 2020) is another solution that is based on device-to-device and deviceto-gateway signaling without any dependency on client’s Wi-Fi or internet and location data (on
site or off site). Spotr (Spotr, 2020) also works as a safety and visibility tool for contact tracing
under COVID-19 protocols. Furthermore, since we mostly contact the exposed parts of our body
(eyes, ears, mouth, etc.) with our hands, many hands-free equipments are developed e.g. door
openers (Yaterialise, 2020), biometric verification (innovatrics, 2020), elevators (News, 2020),
smartphones, electrical and electronic household appliances (switch boards, fans, lights, bulbs,
etc.), etc. These developments utilize the IoT enabled systems integrated with the AI technology
to support the desired action. Most of these equipments make use of the combination of the
39

Table 25: SWOT analysis of the social control procedures in COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength

Weakness

Opportunities

Threats

Remarks
Energy efficient and hygienic environments are promoted to restrict the spread of infection.
Helpful in curtailing the epidemic by reducing the chance of infection among high-risk
populations.
Environment adaptability issues, need of self management, infrastructural overhead, requires expert supervision. Change in behavior of individuals, critical for elderly population.
Encourages a viral free nation (even after post-COVID-19 world). Opening new avenues
for smart-space infrastructure development. New standardization and patents are required.
Healthier environment, automated surveillancing with limited manpower.
Too much dependency on technology. Overhead is involved for any alternate adaptation.
Privacy, security and trust issues.

mechanisms like voice-over-commands, action-on presence or motion and gesture-based user
interaction (Mewes et al., 2017). These contactless and hands-free schemes have been adopted
in China, which has emerged as the only nation to be close to victory in the fight against COVID19. With the example set by China, it is evident that these technological driven approaches and
mechanisms can assist in the contactless or almost contactless (handsfree) initiatives to fight
against COVID-19. Table 25 presents the SWOT analysis of above discussed procedures for
social control during COVID-19 pandemic.
4.10. Tracking and tracing
Contact tracing is the process to identify the people who came in contact with infectected
person. Till date no vaccine is reported to cure COVID-19, hence to stop the spread of coronavirus, contact tracing is also one of the effective solutions. Table 26 indicates the different types
of contact tracing methodologies. It is also evident that a minimum of 6 feet of social distance
is sufficient enough to flatten the curve of COVID-19 spread (Singh Punn et al., 2020). The
European center for disease prevention and control (ECDC) found that time of exposure with a
key threshold of greater than 15 minutes in a day for infection. All people who came in contact
are treated as suspects and must be quarantined for at least 14 days because it takes 5 to 14 days
for COVID-19 symptoms to appear. Every country is using their own mobile app for tracing the
people effectively like: Arogya setu in India, Stopp Corona in Austria etc. Table 27 gives the
details of some applications used by different countries along with the SWOT analysis shown in
Table 28.
4.11. Technical expertise for maintenance or problem-solving
Lockdown is the best way to stop the spread of coronavirus. People visiting sites and workplaces are more prone to infection, hence during lockdown engineers and technicians must avoid
traveling and visiting factories, remote areas or crowded places (Spiliopoulos, 2020). However,
it is not always possible to work remotely, specially for field jobs like coal mines, steel plants,
construction sites etc. But IoT based smart equipment can reduce the involvement of people.
Through smart sensors installed in machinery and augmented reality, remote monitoring of machines can be managed efficiently. With the help of smart sensors under the supervision of
experts, it is possible to identify the health of machinery for future troubleshooting that helps to
reduce the physical visits. SWOT analysis of the discussed method is detailed in table 29.
40

Table 26: Different types of tracing technology.

Manual contact tracing
• Healthcare
workers
interview an infected individual to learn about their
movements and people
with whom they have
been in close contact.
• Healthcare workers then
reach out to the infected
person’s potential contacts, and may offer them
help, or ask them to
self-isolate and get a test,
treatment, or vaccination
if available.

Digital contact tracing
Location tracking
Proximity tracking
• Uses GPS data to determine individuals who
were in the same place at
the same time.
• Not accurate to indicate close physical contact (i.e. within 6 feet).
• Accurate enough to expose sensitive, individually identifiable information about a person’s
home, workplace, and
routines.

• Uses bluetooth low
energy (BLE) to
determine whether
two
smartphones
are close enough
for their users to
transmit the virus.
• Better than GPS or
cell site location information.
• Closely
identify
proximity i.e. 6 feet.

4.12. Dashboards
The latest COVID-19 pandemic hits the world badly and everybody in this world is looking for the current status of the number of infections, deaths and other information associated
with this infectious disease. In this regard diverse types of visualization have been provided
to the users for specific requirements (Chaturvedi, 2020). In epidemic thematic service map,
real-time epidemic data can be visualized (Mosenthal and Kirsch, 1990) with the use of aggregation, heat and scattered points to display the epidemic trend in a manner of spatio-temporal
evolution, and displays the development trend of the epidemic in multiple dimensions (Bidhan
et al., 2020; Desk, 2020). In pandemic situation awareness map visual representations of geographical distribution are generated based on the new confirmed cases, cumulative diagnoses and
recovered cases maps. Epidemic correlation research and judgment map is used to find out the
transportation information of COVID-19 diagnosis connected to the network through the realtime comparison of the coordinated traffic ticket information and epidemic observers. Mobile
epidemic maps enable more people to view epidemic information conveniently and in real-time
on portable devices. Furthermore, spatial big data analytics can be applied for better insight
and visualization along with the thematic applications of situational awareness of epidemic prevention and control. Related research findings and observations of epidemic situations can be
provided to the concerned authorities and end users. Country specific authorities are displaying
the data which helps not only for better planning but also in prevention and control of pandemic.
Table 30 describes the SWOT analysis of the dashboard applications.
4.13. Supply chain management
During the current pandemic, maintaining a healthy supply chain of essential goods is a
challenging task. During this pandemic’s peak momentum, several delivery and logistic workers
are risking their lives while delivering the products door-to-door, because there is a high chance
41

Table 27: Details of Contract Tracing App.

Country
Angola
Australia

Name
Covid-19 AO
Coronavirus Australia

Platform
Web
Android, iOS

Alipay Health Code
eRouška

Functionality
self diagnostic
information,
isolation
registration
contact tracing, medical
reporting
contact tracing
contact tracing

Austria

Stopp Corona

China
Czech Republic
Finland
France
Germany
Hong
Kong
Iceland
India
Israel
Italy
Netherlands
North
Macedonia
Norway

Ketju
ROBERT
Ito
Stay Home Safe

contact tracing
contact tracing
contact tracing
quarantine enforcement

Android, iOS
Unknown
Android
Unknown

Rakning C-19
Aarogya Setu
Hamagen
SM-COVID-19
PrivateTracer
StopKorona!

route tracking
contact tracing
contact tracing
contact tracing
contact tracing
contact tracing

Android, IOS
Android, iOS
Android, iOS
Android, iOS
Android, iOS
Android, iOS

Smittestopp

Android, iOS

Tawakkalna

contact tracing, route
tracking
contact tracing
digital contact tracing
and alerting
curfew management

Poland
Russia

ProteGO
Contact Tracer

Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
United
Kingdom
United
States
Vietnam
Worldwide

TraceTogether
Self-Quarantine app

contact tracing
isolation registration

Android, iOS
Android, iOS

COVID Shield
NHS App

Self-Health Checking
multipurpose

Android
Android, iOS

coEpi

self-reporting

Android, iOS

NCOVI
World Health Organization Covid-19 App

medical reporting
information

Android, iOS
Android, iOS

42

Android, iOS
Android, iOS
Android, iOS

Android, iOS
Android
Android, iOS

Table 28: SWOT analysis of tracking and tracing control strategies.

SWOT
Strength

Remarks
Quick alert mechanism for users. Ensures more secure and robust COVID-19 prevention
mechanism to end users.
Environment adaptability issues, involvement of the whole population is needed for more
accurate results. Technological awareness is needed.
Technological advancements and platform compatibility could increase the effectiveness.
Dependency on technology hence sometimes adaptation is difficult. Malfunctioning of
such applications may cause panic among users. Security threat is possible.

Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Table 29: SWOT analysis of smart maintenance and problem-solving technique.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Ensures efficient utilization of machineries and effective diagnosis of the
system without affecting people.
Environment adaptability issues, technological awareness is needed.
Technological advancements and platform compatibility could increase
the effectiveness.
Dependency on technology, hence sometimes adaptation is difficult. Security threat is possible. Unemployment ratio may increase.

Table 30: SWOT analysis of dashboard applications.

SWOT
Strength

Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Effective way to see the current status of COVID-19. Ensures latest updates through multiple sources on a single platform. Easy to integrate
with several heterogeneous sources.
Depends on the authorized sources, hence chances of duplicate information. Micro-level analysis is still missing in most of the applications.
Technological advancements and platform compatibility could increase
the effectiveness. Micro-level analysis could enhance transparency.
Dependency on technology and malfunctioning of such applications may
cause severe panic. Presence of fake or false data is the biggest concern.

43

Table 31: SWOT analysis of supply chain management.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Effective supply-chain mechanism ensures availability of all essentials to
people.
Limited availability of transportation may lead delay in delivery to the
customers
Technological advancements are possible in terms of transportation and
security.
Demand prediction of products is the most crucial issue as due to false
prediction starvation, blackmarketing and hoarding will come into picture.

of exposure to viral infection (Mishra, 2020). Drones and robots (street bots) are more suitable
replacements already implemented in some parts of the world (Ye et al., 2020). The manpower
could be used instead to operate and control these from close proximity, like local warehouses,
without having to come into direct contact with people that may be infected.
Supermarkets and other essential goods chains need to take extra measures to tackle the situation of panic during pandemic. A more promising way of supply chain management is needed
to stop the blackmarketing of essential goods to enable smooth supply to the consumers. In supermarkets, smart shelves, smart fridges, video analytics, and an end-to-end connected supply
chain can help retailers cope with uncertainty in their planning and even mitigate customers’
anxious behavior due to panic. Secure storage and transportation could play a vital role in the
current situation to avoid black-marketing and hoarding of essential goods (Chanyal, 2019). Table 31 presents the SWOT analysis of the measures of supply chain management measures during
COVID-19.
4.14. Antitheft solutions for toilet rolls and antibacterial gels in public spaces
Smart building solutions are the primary requirement of modern society (Buckman et al.,
2014). Smart toilets and washrooms (Plate et al., 2015) are very important to maintain hygiene.
In a smart toilet, an IoT based toilet roll holder (Kyser and Mears, 1989) is an essential prerequisite for fair usage. Objective of smart toilet roll holders is to avoid unavailability of tissue papers
and prevent the stealing of rolls. An IoT-enabled toilet paper holder that locks the paper and
sends notifications when the paper is close to running out or notify if the holder is under threat
could be a fantastic solution. Similarly, antibacterial gels dispensers are equally important to
alert the cleaning staff for refilling and to avoid the stealing of gel. During COVID-19 pandemic,
hygiene is the primary and most important concern to avoid the spread, therefore smart toilet
rolls and antibacterial gel holders could play an important role to maintain the same. Table 32
highlights the SWOT analysis of the smart toilet and washrooms measures.
4.15. 3D Printing of medical supplies
Due to abrupt acceleration of COVID-19 infections, diagnosis and treatment of patients become challenging because of limited health-care equipments. Chances of infection between
corona warriors and patients during treatment depends on the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), gloves, face masks, air-purifier, goggles, face shields, respirators, and gowns. Due
44

Table 32: SWOT analysis of smart toilet and washrooms amid COVID-19.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness

Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Efficient way to maintain hygiene.
It is very difficult to deploy smart washrooms in rural and dense areas
like at Dharavi, Mumbai (India). Washroom etiquette must be followed
by all the people. Need more infrastructure cost.
Technological advancements are possible.
False alarm may cause unnecessary panic. Maintenance is the biggest
concern.
Table 33: SWOT analysis for the research works in 3D printing technology.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
User convenient, high product quality, low cost.
Costly process, sometimes long production time needed, material selection limitations, product quality depends on printer and material.
Customization of devices, technology and materials.
Impact on environment, safety, threat to traditional workforce.

to the unexpected growth on demands of all these items, mass production is needed. But due to
lockdown as a social distance measure, enough resources and manpower are not available, hence
3D printing came as a novel solution to produce these important items (Livingston et al., 2020).
Our health systems were not designed to cope with a pandemic at this scale and, as a result,
shortage of resources are now common across even the most advanced hospitals. 3D printing
could be a lifesaver in the face of supply shortages caused by the coronavirus. 3D printers are
capable of providing vital medical supplies quickly, such as ventilators, replacement valves. In
Table 33 SWOT analysis is presented for the measures proposed with the use of 3D printing.
4.16. 5G – for better connectivity
Due to congestion and increased number of subscribers, present technologies (3G, 4G, etc.)
and existing infrastructure are not sufficient enough for present and future requirements. During
this deadly pandemic, an efficient and faster way of communication technology is desired for several personal, professional and social activities like online classes, online professional meetings,
online conferences, telemedicine, work-from-home, etc. Although still early in experimentation,
5G network is the latest development to provide better communication experience (Ting et al.,
2020), which follows network slicing mechanisms to allocate the right networking resources
in real-time and even in a predictive manner (Alliance, 2016). In addition to above, a smart
healthcare system is the need of today’s world, where an efficient way of communication system
is required among all health workers, security people and administration, to manage this crisis
without panic. A regional hospital, its ambulances and paramedics, and the city authorities can
be interworked in one platform and receive updates in real-time. Therefore almost all personal
and social activities are transforming to a virtual world with focus on online communication like
conferences, training classes, presentations, meetings, etc. All these 5G based implementations
are being tested in several countries like the UK, China, and the USA and it is expected to have
it in commercial use in a few years. SWOT analysis of 5G technology is discussed in Table 34.
45

Table 34: SWOT analysis for the research works in 5G technology.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Effectiveness and efficiency, more bandwidth, high data rates, smoother hands-off, Low
latency.
Security issues, misuse of bandwidth, incompatibility with available hardware.
More intense security, low energy consumption, high reliability.
Security breach is possible, adaptability.

4.17. Community services using drone
COVID-19 has challenged and changed the personal and social life of people dramatically.
During this unbreakable outbreak, contactless task accomplishment has become the most suitable solution to stop the spread of the virus. Drones are the latest disruptive force in the field of
carriers. It is observed that drone technology is very useful in several application domains including healthcare (Scott and Scott, 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Krey and Seiler, 2019). This section
covers some use cases of drone applications like: announcements, monitoring and surveillance,
drug delivery, etc. against the COVID-19 outbreak.
In early April, 2020 at Manhattan, USA, a drone was monitoring the east river park area
which was alerting people to follow the social distancing protocol (Yakas, 2020). It was named
“the Anti-COVID-19 Volunteer Drone Task Force”, and suggested the crowd to maintain a minimum of six feet distance among each other. Similarly, in Kazakhstan, KazUAV drones are
assisting the police department by patrolling the capital city (Drone, 2020). These drones are
equipped with the cameras and infrared sensors, monitoring people to follow lockdown measures. It is found effective to identify multiple road bypass and irregular activities taking place
in the target areas.
In India, IdeaForge, a leading manufacturer of UAVs has deployed drones to monitor public
places in various regions of India (Singh, 2020) along with the thermal cameras to scan the
body temperature of people over a large area (IdeaForge, 2020). Furthermore, GarudaUAV is
helping local police forces to manage vehicular traffic and public overcrowding. While in Spain,
France, and China drones are used to broadcast messages, requesting people to stay indoors,
use masks before going out, etc. This helps to identify new likely cases without touching those
who may be already infected. When it comes to deliveries, in China drones are deployed to
ensure safe transportation of medical and other supplies in various places with minimal infection
possibilities (Cozzens, 2020). Along with it, drones are also used to deliver groceries and other
essential items.
To enable sterilization, DJI (Preetipadma, 2020) repurposed its agricultural drones to spray
disinfectants at public places. Its’ Agras agriculture drone, which previously dispersed liquid
pesticides, fertilizers, and herbicides on-farm plants, is now used to spray chlorine alcohol-based
disinfectant in affected areas. Recently, Aertos 120-UVC, the first indoor drone with C-band
ultraviolet (UVC) lights developed by Digital Aerolus to disinfect critical places like hospitals,
market stores, airports and bus stops, etc. Table 35 presents the SWOT analysis of the measures
of drone based approaches to fight COVID-19
4.18. Innovative contributions developed in India
Although India’s COVID-19 tally is increasing daily, researchers in India are taking no respite
and coming up with ideas and innovations to fight the outbreak. Doctors, engineers, students and
developers from startup firms are pitching-in to make the best use of technology to fight against
46

Table 35: SWOT analysis for the research works in drone technology.

SWOT
Strength
Weakness
Opportunities
Threats

Remarks
Easy deployment, reliable and robust.
Fuel and battery issues, accidental collision, drones cannot carry heavier
payloads and deliver goods long distances.
Size, propulsion technology and coverage area could be improved,
Surveillance in complex areas.
Security breach is possible due to internet involvement. Hackers can
hijack a drone using GPS jammers, drones may interfere with air traffic
and cause confusion to commercial planes.

Figure 28: Impact of COVID-19 on the working environment.

COVID-19 (Varude, 2020; Das, 2020; Siddiqui, 2020). Table 36 presents some of the solutions
developed in India to fight against the pandemic of COVID-19.
5. Challenges, priorities and future directions
With social distancing related measures being the only possibility to fight this pandemic,
it has resulted in diverse technological development across various domains displaying radical
changes on the operating assets, and people; for instance, making the workspace, technologicalintensive rather than people-intensive as shown in the Fig. 28. Minimizing these impacts inculcate various challenges which needs to be tackled by setting certain priorities along with the
future possibilities to achieve sustainable developments.
5.1. Challenges
The technological solutions are facing not only legal and regulatory challenges, but also
socio-ethical dilemmas when applied in different sectors in the present context. A thorough study
of these emerging technological solutions in the context of COVID-19 indicates that technology
standalone cannot handle the crises but it can play a critical role in emergency responses, if proper
policies and regulatory measures have been fixed up. We here analyse the challenges from four
main aspects: regulatory consideration, people’s privacy preservation, security concerns, and the
lack of unified databases.
5.1.1. Regulatory consideration
The use of emerging technologies in the healthcare sector to fight against coronavirus should
be considered carefully with regulatory laws. While the features of various technologies can
bring benefits, it also pose a legal and regulatory challenge if there is no party that is responsible
and can be held accountable. For example, in the blockchain network, it will be important to
47

Table 36: Innovative solutions developed by various Indian researchers to fight COVID-19.

Product
Automatic
mask
creator machines
Ruhdaar: The lowcost frugal innovator
Jeeva Setu ventilators
Low-cost
PPEs:
The Navy’s innovation
Advanced
wash
basins
COVISAFE: Transporting patients

Sanitizer Tunnels:
A ‘jugaad’
Safe swab: Phone
booth testing
UV sanitization device
Robots
Microwave
tizer Atulya

Sani-

Features
Hygienic, fast, cost is expected to be 40% cheaper.
A prototype of a low-cost ventilator, efficient and handy.

An oven-sized, low-cost and portable ventilator.
A low-cost PPE with a special fabric with high ‘breathability’, which is
suitable for hot and humid conditions prevalent in India.
It allows the water tap and the soap dispenser to be mechanically operated
without touch.
To ensure the safe transport of COVID-19 patients, fits well on medical
stretchers and is completely air-tight, equipped with oxygen supply and
ventilators. When the coronavirus patient breathes, the air that comes out
of the box is filtered.
India’s first organic disinfectant tunnel built in just two days using local
materials and workforce, uses an organic fumigant instead of Sodium
Hypochlorite, covered with polythene sheets.
A phone booth coronavirus testing, fast and safe.
Ultraviolet ray contactless sanitizers, both portable and stationary,
cheaper.
To dispense hand sanitizer, deliver public health messages, to carry food
and medicines in isolation wards.
Fast, lightweight, portable, efficient and effective.

48

consider what law might apply to transactions and what appropriate risk management should be
put into place. Likewise, in the case of AI, it might be easier to create standard norms of legal
schemes and internal governance models that will dictate the governing law for AI operations in
healthcare. Specially, we should also consider legal issues about sharing content and personal
information, with copyright, infringement and defamation.
5.1.2. People’s privacy preservation
In the coronavirus tracking applications, privacy protection of people is highly important.
The governments can use mobile location data to track the outbreak spread, but this solution must
ensure the privacy of user data, especially sensitive information, such as home address, banking
details, shopping records, etc. The government agencies may impose privacy laws on the user
tracking mobile apps to ensure the safety and privacy of the public. Nowadays many healthcare
organizations and institutions are collecting data from their patients via electronic healthcare
records that helps monitor the COVID-19 disease symptoms and respective treatments. In such
healthcare activities, the conflict between data collection and user privacy is inevitable that needs
to be solved by laws and reinforcement from the related authorities.
5.1.3. Security concerns
COVID-19 tracking and monitoring applications require secure monitoring platform such as
blockchain, to ensure safety and privacy of the individuals. However, many stakeholders concern
inherent security weaknesses in blockchain, especially related to financial and healthcare issues.
It is also one of the concern that data threats or adversaries can enter the blockchain to hold its
control, which can lead to serious consequences, like modifications of medical transaction, patient records, thereby further raising the privacy concerns. Security is also a sensitive issue of AI
systems for healthcare applications, where malicious attacks can inject false data or adversarial
sample inputs and subsequently affect the performance of the system. Therefore, security issues
should be given high priority during the design and development of any technological solution
during this pandemic.
5.1.4. Lack of unified databases
A critical challenge in the coronavirus fighting is the lack of unified database related to epidemic such as infected cases, affected areas, and medical supply status. Most of the current
coronavirus related databases come from several resources, i.e. social media, health care organizations, etc.; but it is not sufficient for data driven applications, desired to create greater impacts
on COVID-19 fight. Countries are sometimes reluctant to share data, therefore it is challenging to
understand the epidemic characteristics for proactive measures. It is difficult to share appropriate
public health guidelines without local and global data availability.
5.2. Priorities
This pandemic situation has shattered every dimension that defines our world. In order to sustain our living with minimal loss following are the certain set of priorities defined by government
agencies and policymakers which need to be followed:

49

Figure 29: Social distancing leading to flatten the curve.

5.2.1. Flatten the curve
This means to reduce the number of critical care patients to sustain within the healthcare
capacity as shown in Fig. 29. With no availability of the concrete solution aggressive social distancing (lockdown), quarantine, and self-hygiene are the only possible remedies. Technological
advancements have been contributing continuously to develop automated approaches that can aid
in monitoring such measures.
5.2.2. Survivability and resilience
To sustain in the post COVID-19 world, it is necessary to ensure the survivability and recoverability of every value link in the chain of development that includes organizations, agriculture,
society, etc. This is possible if all firms unite to contribute in meeting the necessary demand to
fight against this pandemic, while improving productivity and keeping the long-term relationship
among each other instead of deliberately focusing on the economy.
5.2.3. Digital advancements
Moving towards digital business models with the aim to meet the growing needs, will encourage to set up the workspace with AI technology fused with human ingenuity. These advancements must focus on value creation, rather than being predominantly technology driven
(with human supervision). This would lead towards a contactless working environment while
also improving the productivity and efficiency of the firms.
5.2.4. Handling ecological and environmental threats
Looking back to the past, the last century tolerated extreme upheavals in the form of five
dangerous virus attacks that are far from rare. Coronavirus is one of the most impactful events
also causing climate change, over stressed population and rising worldwide inequality. Here it
would be admirable if technical initiative could handle these unimaginable events. Following the
recent trends, disruptive technologies complemented with a number of computer-assisted algorithms can prevail to minimize the negative impact of COVID-19. As a use case, stakeholders
may also utilize AI and machine-learning methods to enumerate political, economical, ecological and environmental risks grounded on social-media/image/hyperspectral data analytics in the
progression of strategic decision making.

50

Figure 30: 4Rs of technological action plan to fight COVID-19.

5.3. Future directions
2020 has brought an unanticipated set of challenges for economies around the world, more
likely there will be a climax of an impending slump stepping up throughout 2019. Apparently
seems to be an unending COVID-19 pandemic - individuals, organizations, nations, the whole
world is affected. Thus, there is an urgency to accelerate responsible action plans to overcome
this crisis and also turn it into something positive for the society at large and for generations to
come. COVID-19 pandemic situation demands a serious contribution from policymakers and
regulators to demonstrate legal plausibility, ethical soundness, and effectiveness of the deployment of emerging, future and disruptive technologies under time pressure. The action plan can
rely upon 4 horizons: respond, reengineering, reinforce, and rebound as highlighted in Fig. 30.
In the first stage, it is highly imperative to respond proactively and act decisively in order to
have the best possible use of existing and emerging technologies to fight against the COVID-19
pandemic. It will help to maintain continuity, productivity and mental well-being of the individuals so that they can contribute efficiently as per the need. In the case of COVID-19, this stage is
either undergoing or already over in most of the countries. Once the immediate emergencies are
covered up through the respond stage, the next is to seek a serious effort to review and reorganise
the shape of technology-based solutions under the re-engineering stage. It covers established
strategies, detailed plans and structural reformation of rules and guidelines to re-frame the existing setup designed to contain the spread of COVID-19. It is also a time to realign priorities
and allocate resources for each and every technology sector along with balancing between cost
and benefits. The third stage is the reinforce stage which includes sufficient time to strengthen
and build technological capabilities on the basis of previous outcomes. At this stage, to meet
the COVID-19 challenges, the convergence of technology could be performed with efficient process workflows and automation. The last stage would be rebound, a time to drive rapid growth
and sustainable development to gain the momentum in all sectors either conservatively, moderately or aggressively to steer it in the right direction for the future. Following are some of the
technology-enabled future research directions for fighting COVID-19 pandemic:
51

5.3.1. Embracing touchless technology
This pandemic has set a benchmark to lead this world towards touchless technological advancements via AI, IoT, data analytics, machine learning, etc. The advancements are focused
on analysing the commands set by the human gesture, motion, voice, expressions, retina, holographic imaging, etc., where each activity can be mapped with a certain set of actions. For
instance, smart voice-enabled assistants led by iPhone (Siri), Amazon (Alexa), Google assistant,
interpret the speech commands to perform the desired action like make a call, search, set an
alarm, take a picture, etc., facial feature recognition for person identification via smart cameras
and sensor devices, holographic projections can aid in the touchless stimulation of the same set
of commands as by the touch-enabled technologies.
5.3.2. Optimize blockchain for better deployment
Blockchains are computationally expensive and involve high bandwidth overhead and uneven delays. To fight COVID-19 pandemic, a smarter healthcare system is required for patient
monitoring, telemedicine, drug supply, etc., in which an optimized blockchain platform is necessary for reduced network latency, increased throughput, and improved security. More specifically, lightweight blockchain designs in healthcare are necessary to optimize data verification
and transactional communication for ultra-low latency information broadcasting. Seeking for an
optimized blockchain solution, the size of blockchain can be minimized by establishing local and
private blockchain networks to monitor the outbreak in a certain area for the fast response.
5.3.3. Accelerate AI developments
During this COVID-19 pandemic, smart healthcare is the primary need that involves telemedicine,
robotic services, medicine delivery, diagnosis, etc. In this present era of artificial intelligence,
healthcare data can be better understood via advanced machine learning algorithms. Conventional AI approaches are capable of providing smart solutions to existing disease up to some
extent but seem inefficient for pandemic situations, hence more robust algorithms and techniques
are required for the present combat against COVID-19. There is a need to develop adaptive
AI architectures, specialized in medical applications that could empower future intelligent data
analytics with the ability to handle multi-source healthcare data.
5.3.4. Technological convergence for robust development
Security and privacy are the primary concerns of every existing technique. To fight against
COVID-19, secure technological convergence is required for safe and effective utilization of
recent innovations in a public environment. For instance, AI along with blockchain-enabled security can be incorporated with other technologies like IoT, data analytics, etc. to build a more
robust and effective system. Availability of massive storage capacity and high computation capability along with blockchain based security could play an effective and efficient way to process
data related to sample collection, telemedicine, and drug delivery. Meanwhile, the tracking data
of infected people is also to be kept confidential and secure enough from any breach to avoid
panic during such pandemic. Hence, development of a more secure and transparent tracking
system is required in future. Likewise, the transportation system must also be secure enough to
fulfil the people’s trust and confidence.
5.3.5. Strengthen digital infrastructure
The worldwide COVID-19 pandemic demands development of new capabilities and more
cultural power to embrace the transition. Now there is a need to establish optimized technology
52

and environment plans for empowering remote working culture and bridging the communication gap among all stakeholders. It is also crucial to evaluate networking capabilities, accelerate
device deployment, and leverage virtual environments for a sustainable future. Developing a distributed work environment upon strong technological backbone and leveraging a secure network
can help swiftly navigate the crisis with minimum loss.
5.3.6. Real-time monitoring of IoT and big data applications
One of the advantages we have today in the battle against COVID-19 is the availability of
massive storage, extreme computing capability and big data processing tools. COVID-19 case
details are continuously floated by all countries to perform real-time data analytics for improved,
actionable insights with help of robust big data tools which would aid in preparing the necessary
action plan to secure current and future needs. Technological advancements like contactless
biometric and IoT enabled surveillance systems have been playing an effective role during this
pandemic to establish post COVID-19 requirements. Big Data tools could also be supportive in
studying the metrics about population movements, public compliance, health monitoring, etc. to
attain the objective of social distancing and lockdown.
6. Conclusion
In this article, a state-of-the-art survey on the utilization of emerging, future and disruptive
technologies to combat the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is presented. We have first introduced the concept of disruptive technologies and its scope in terms of human-centric and smartspace approaches. We classified various emerging and future technologies either as humancentric or smart-space categories. In the battle against this outbreak, the present article highlights
actively leveraged detailed list of digital technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), big data,
cloud computing, blockchain, 5G, etc., which have exceptionally improved the efficiency of the
country’s efforts in epidemic monitoring, tracking, prevention, control and treatment, and resource allocation along with the SWOT analysis of the discussed techniques. Hence, this article
acts as the foundation for various stakeholders to pursue and convert opportunities into strengths
and prevent weaknesses from turning into threats.
Later, it also covers the associated challenges, insight priorities, and effective future directions. The current COVID-19 pandemic challenges the whole world in all dimensions and still,
there is no assurance of permanent process to stop the spread, even it is also not possible to
predict the day of independence from this deadly coronavirus. People’s privacy and data security along with regulatory consideration are the most challenging issues during this combat with
COVID-19. Meanwhile, priorities during the pandemic have been discussed to attract the global
community for the betterment of mankind. At last, the future directions have been discussed
which offers the most suitable and workable areas to researchers, scientists, and health workers.
It is believed that these future directions will transform the existing infrastructure very soon and
the world will become capable enough to fight this type of crisis in the future.
The health sector is the frontline accountable community to fight against any pandemic, but
the discussed technologies definitely enhance their capability and efficiency. It is obvious that
technology cannot prevent nature originated pandemics; but can prevent the spread of the virus,
and educate, alert, and empower the front-row warriors and society to be aware of the situation
to reduce the impact for the well-being of humanity. In the end of this article, we are sure that
enough data is getting generated around the world about this pandemic, in the form of huge numbers of patients’ profiles, drug test reports, legal frameworks, social churning analysis reports,
53

financial costs, reports from medical, social, governance, financial and technological experts,
that the use of the above discussed emerging technologies would be feasible for the purpose
which will help the scientists build the digital ecosystem to track the virus eruption, insulate the
population from getting infected and help the people coexist with the epidemic in the shortest
possible time.
References
Aalst, W. M., Bichler, M., and Heinzl, A. (2018). Robotic process automation. Business & Information Systems Engineering: Vol. 60, No. 4.
Accenture (2020).
Artificial intelligence is the future of growth.
https://www.accenture.com/in-en/
insight-artificial-intelligence-future-growth. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Agiwal, M., Roy, A., and Saxena, N. (2016). Next generation 5g wireless networks: A comprehensive survey. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 18(3):1617–1655.
AI, L. (2020). Empowering companies to jumpstart ai and generate real-world value. https://landing.ai/. [Online;
accessed August 5, 2020].
Aimar, A., Palermo, A., and Innocenti, B. (2019). The role of 3d printing in medical applications: a state of the art.
Journal of healthcare engineering, 2019.
Al-Fuqaha, A., Guizani, M., Mohammadi, M., Aledhari, M., and Ayyash, M. (2015). Internet of things: A survey on
enabling technologies, protocols, and applications. IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, 17(4):2347–2376.
Alaba, F. A., Othman, M., Hashem, I. A. T., and Alotaibi, F. (2017). Internet of things security: A survey. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, 88:10–28.
Alex, Zhavoronkov, a. A. V., Zhebrak, A., Zagribelnyy, B., Terentiev, V., Bezrukov, D. S., Polykovskiy, D., Shayakhmetov, R., Filimonov, A., Orekhov, P., et al. (2020). Potential covid-2019 3c-like protease inhibitors designed using
generative deep learning approaches. Insilico Medicine Hong Kong Ltd A, 307:E1.
Allamanis, M., Barr, E. T., Devanbu, P., and Sutton, C. (2018). A survey of machine learning for big code and naturalness.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):1–37.
Alliance, N. (2016). Description of network slicing concept. NGMN 5G P, 1:1.
Almusaylim, Z. A. and Jhanjhi, N. (2020). Comprehensive review: Privacy protection of user in location-aware services
of mobile cloud computing. Wireless Personal Communications, 111(1):541–564.
Alturki, R. and Gay, V. (2019). Augmented and virtual reality in mobile fitness applications: a survey. In Applications
of Intelligent Technologies in Healthcare, pages 67–75. Springer.
Anbarjafari, G., Kaminska, D., Sapinski, T., Wiak, S., Tikk, T., Haamer, R. E., Avots, E., Helmi, A., and Ozcinar, C.
(2019). Virtual reality and its applications in education: Survey.
Apequip (2020). Covid-19 equipment capability. https://www.epequip.com/covid-19/. [Online; accessed August
4, 2020].
Arunarani, A., Manjula, D., and Sugumaran, V. (2019). Task scheduling techniques in cloud computing: A literature
survey. Future Generation Computer Systems, 91:407–415.
Badue, C., Guidolini, R., Carneiro, R. V., Azevedo, P., Cardoso, V. B., Forechi, A., Jesus, L., Berriel, R., Paixão, T.,
Mutz, F., et al. (2019). Self-driving cars: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04407.
Bagehot (2017).
Jeremy corbyn, entrepreneur.
https://www.economist.com/britain/2017/06/15/
jeremy-corbyn-entrepreneur. [Online; accessed July 23, 2017].
Banerjee, A., Bandyopadhyay, T., and Acharya, P. (2013). Data analytics: Hyped up aspirations or true potential?
Vikalpa, 38(4):1–12.
Banerjee, S., Das, D., Biswas, M., and Biswas, U. (2020). Study and survey on blockchain privacy and security issues.
In Cross-Industry Use of Blockchain Technology and Opportunities for the Future, pages 80–102. IGI Global.
Bannerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Das, S., and Ghosh, I. (2018). Artificial intelligence in agriculture: A literature survey.
International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science Applications and Management Studies, 7(3):1–6.
Barde, S. and Agrawal, A. (2019). Classification of biometrics and implementation strategies. In Advances in Biometrics,
pages 307–332. Springer.
Bartik, A. W., Bertrand, M., Cullen, Z. B., Glaeser, E. L., Luca, M., and Stanton, C. T. (2020). How are small businesses
adjusting to covid-19? early evidence from a survey. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Benioff, P. A. (1982). Quantum mechanical hamiltonian models of discrete processes that erase their own histories:
Application to turing machines. International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 21(3-4):177–201.
Bidhan, V., Malhotra, B., Pandit, M., and Latha, N. (2020). Mapping the spread of covid-19 outbreak in india.
Biffi, R., Biondi, S., Brescia, F., Buononato, M., Capozzoli, G., Cotogni, P., Deganello, E., Dolcetti, L., Elisei, D., Elli,

54

S., et al. (2020). Considerations on the use of vascular access devices in patients with covid-19 (and some practical
recommendations).
Bimbraw, K. (2015). Autonomous cars: Past, present and future a review of the developments in the last century, the
present scenario and the expected future of autonomous vehicle technology. In 2015 12th International Conference
on Informatics in Control, Automation and Robotics (ICINCO), volume 1, pages 191–198. IEEE.
Bing, Z., Meschede, C., Röhrbein, F., Huang, K., and Knoll, A. C. (2018). A survey of robotics control based on
learning-inspired spiking neural networks. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 12:35.
Buckman, A. H., Mayfield, M., and Beck, S. B. (2014). What is a smart building? Smart and Sustainable Built
Environment.
Cao, K., Liu, Y., Meng, G., and Sun, Q. (2020). An overview on edge computing research. IEEE Access.
CDCP (2020). Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Chanyal, R. (2019). Black markets. Global Journal For Research Analysis (GJRA), 8(9).
Chaturvedi, A. (2020). The china way: Use of technology to combat covid-19. https://www.geospatialworld.
net/article/the-sino-approach-use-of-technology-to-combat-covid-19/. [Online; accessed August 6, 2020].
Chen, W., Xu, Z., Shi, S., Zhao, Y., and Zhao, J. (2018). A survey of blockchain applications in different domains. In
Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Blockchain Technology and Application, pages 17–21.
Christensen, C. M. and Overdorf, M. (2000). Meeting the challenge of disruptive change. Harvard business review,
78(2):66–77.
Christensen, C. M., Raynor, M. E., and McDonald, R. (2015). What is disruptive innovation. Harvard business review,
93(12):44–53.
Chuah, S. H.-W. (2018). Why and who will adopt extended reality technology? literature review, synthesis, and future
research agenda. Literature Review, Synthesis, and Future Research Agenda (December 13, 2018).
Cinel, C., Valeriani, D., and Poli, R. (2019). Neurotechnologies for human cognitive augmentation: Current state of the
art and future prospects. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13:13.
Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W., Galeazzi, A., Valensise, C. M., Brugnoli, E., Schmidt, A. L., Zola, P., Zollo, F., and
Scala, A. (2020). The covid-19 social media infodemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004.
Conerly, B. (2020). Rolling recessions are the likely economic impact of new coronavirus and covid-19. https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/billconerly/. [Online; accessed June 10, 2020].
Cozzens, T. (2020).
China fights coronavirus with delivery drones.
https://www.gpsworld.com/
china-fights-coronavirus-with-delivery-drones/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Crowell, P., Kanagaki, G., O’donovan, M., Haynes, C., Park, J.-H., Neugebauer, J., Hennessy, E., Boynton, A., Mitchell,
B., Tweedell, A., and Girolamo, H. (2018). Methodologies for evaluating the effects of physical augmentation technologies on soldier performance methodologies for evaluating the effects of physical augmentation technologies on
soldier performance.
Das, S. (2020). Exclusive: India’s homegrown uv-c sanitiser to fight covid-19 costs half of imported ones . https:
//www.news18.com/news/tech/india~. [Online; accessed August 3, 2020].
De Wolf, R. (2019). Quantum computing: Lecture notes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09415.
Desk, E. W. (2020). Covid-19 lockdown: Centre identifies red, orange, green zones for week after may 3; check full
list here. https://indianexpress.com/article/india/covid-19-lockdown-centre~/. [Online; accessed
August 6, 2020].
Dhia, H., Chong, Y.-W., Ko, K., Hanshi, S. M., and Karuppayah, S. (2019). A review on the role of blockchain technology
in the healthcare domain. Electronics, 8(6):679.
Dinh, T. T. A., Liu, R., Zhang, M., Chen, G., Ooi, B. C., and Wang, J. (2018). Untangling blockchain: A data processing
view of blockchain systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 30(7):1366–1385.
Dixon, G., Hart, P. S., Clarke, C., O’Donnell, N. H., and Hmielowski, J. (2020). What drives support for self-driving car
technology in the united states? Journal of Risk Research, 23(3):275–287.
Drone, T. (2020). Kazakhstan uses drones to patrol capital city during covid-19 lockdown. https://www.
terra-drone.net/global/2020/04/09/kazakhstan-drones~/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Dunie, R., Schulte, W., Cantara, M., and Kerremans, M. (2015). Magic quadrant for intelligent business process management suites. Gartner Inc.
Durfee, W. K. and Iaizzo, P. A. (2019). Medical applications of 3d printing. In Engineering in Medicine, pages 527–543.
Elsevier.
e Inida, N. (2020). Aarogya setu. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Eguchi, A. (2016). Robocupjunior for promoting stem education, 21st century skills, and technological advancement
through robotics competition. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 75:692–699.
Eiris, R., Gheisari, M., and Esmaeili, B. (2020). Desktop-based safety training using 360-degree panorama and static
virtual reality techniques: A comparative experimental study. Automation in Construction, 109:102969.

55

El-Fakih, K., Mizumoto, T., Yasumoto, K., and Higashino, T. (2020). Energy aware simulation and testing of smartspaces. Information and Software Technology, 118:106201.
El Jamiy, F. and Marsh, R. (2019). Survey on depth perception in head mounted displays: distance estimation in virtual
reality, augmented reality, and mixed reality. IET Image Processing, 13(5):707–712.
Elabscience (2020). Covid-19 igg/igm rapid testing kit. https://www.elabscience.com/p-covid_19_igg_igm_
rapid_test-375335.html. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Elijah, O., Rahman, T. A., Orikumhi, I., Leow, C. Y., and Hindia, M. N. (2018). An overview of internet of things (iot)
and data analytics in agriculture: Benefits and challenges. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 5(5):3758–3773.
Emanuel, E. J., Persad, G., Upshur, R., Thome, B., Parker, M., Glickman, A., Zhang, C., Boyle, C., Smith, M., and
Phillips, J. P. (2020). Fair allocation of scarce medical resources in the time of covid-19.
Fabiano, N. (2017). Internet of things and blockchain: legal issues and privacy. the challenge for a privacy standard. In
2017 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData),
pages 727–734. IEEE.
Fagnant, D. J. and Kockelman, K. (2015). Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: opportunities, barriers and policy
recommendations. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77:167–181.
Fan, C.-L., Lo, W.-C., Pai, Y.-T., and Hsu, C.-H. (2019). A survey on 360 video streaming: Acquisition, transmission,
and display. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 52(4):1–36.
Fang, Y., Lim, Y., Ooi, S. E., Zhou, C., and Tan, Y. (2020). Study of human thermal comfort for cyber–physical human
centric system in smart homes. Sensors, 20(2):372.
Farshid, M., Paschen, J., Eriksson, T., and Kietzmann, J. (2018). Go boldly!: Explore augmented reality (ar), virtual
reality (vr), and mixed reality (mr) for business. Business Horizons, 61(5):657–663.
Fendt, L. (2020a). Freestyle libre. https://www.freestylelibre.us/system-overview/freestyle-14-day.
html. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Fendt, L. (2020b). Health care workers’ stress compounded by long days and concerns about people not taking covid-19
seriously. https://www.cpr.org/~/. [Online; accessed June 23, 2020].
Feng, S., Shen, C., Xia, N., Song, W., Fan, M., and Cowling, B. J. (2020). Rational use of face masks in the covid-19
pandemic. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 8(5):434–436.
Garg, N. and Garg, N. (2020). Democratization of technologies. CYBERNOMICS, 2(1):33–35.
Gartner (2020). Top 10 strategic technology trends for 2020 . https://www.gartner.com/en/publications/
top-tech-trends-2020. [Online; accessed August 2, 2020].
Gatteschi, V., Lamberti, F., and Demartini, C. (2020). Blockchain technology use cases. In Advanced Applications of
Blockchain Technology, pages 91–114. Springer.
Gharaibeh, A., Salahuddin, M. A., Hussini, S. J., Khreishah, A., Khalil, I., Guizani, M., and Al-Fuqaha, A. (2017).
Smart cities: A survey on data management, security, and enabling technologies. IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, 19(4):2456–2501.
Giap, H. and Wong, G. (2019). Virtual reality medical application system. US Patent 10,220,181.
Gibson, I., Rosen, D. W., Stucker, B., et al. (2014). Additive manufacturing technologies, volume 17. Springer.
Gomez-Barrero, M. and Galbally, J. (2020). Reversing the irreversible: A survey on inverse biometrics. Computers &
Security, 90:101700.
Greenstone, M. and Nigam, V. (2020). Does social distancing matter? University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute
for Economics Working Paper, (2020-26).
Gualtieri, L., Rauch, E., and Vidoni, R. (2020). Emerging research fields in safety and ergonomics in industrial collaborative robotics: A systematic literature review. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 67:101998.
Gui, Q., Ruiz-Blondet, M. V., Laszlo, S., and Jin, Z. (2019). A survey on brain biometrics. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 51(6):1–38.
Gupta, S. G., Ghonge, D., Jawandhiya, P. M., et al. (2013). Review of unmanned aircraft system (uas). International
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering and Technology (IJARCET) Volume, 2.
Gyongyosi, L. and Imre, S. (2019). A survey on quantum computing technology. Computer Science Review, 31:51–71.
Habibi, P., Farhoudi, M., Kazemian, S., Khorsandi, S., and Leon-Garcia, A. (2020). Fog computing: A comprehensive
architectural survey. IEEE Access, 8:69105–69133.
Haroon, A., Basharat, M., Khattak, A. M., and Ejaz, W. (2019). Internet of things platform for transparency and traceability of food supply chain. In 2019 IEEE 10th Annual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication
Conference (IEMCON), pages 0013–0019.
He, W., Li, Z., and Chen, C. P. (2017). A survey of human-centered intelligent robots: issues and challenges. IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, 4(4):602–609.
Heilig, M. L. (1962). Sensorama simulator. US Patent 3,050,870.
Hohman, F., Kahng, M., Pienta, R., and Chau, D. H. (2018). Visual analytics in deep learning: An interrogative survey
for the next frontiers. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 25(8):2674–2693.

56

Horvath, J. (2014). A brief history of 3d printing. In Mastering 3D Printing, pages 3–10. Springer.
Hu, H., Wen, Y., Chua, T.-S., and Li, X. (2014). Toward scalable systems for big data analytics: A technology tutorial.
IEEE access, 2:652–687.
Huang, J., Chen, Q., Jiang, H., Zou, B., Li, L., Liu, J., and Yu, H. (2020). A survey of design methods for material
extrusion polymer 3d printing. Virtual and Physical Prototyping, 15(2):148–162.
Ibrahim, M. R., Haworth, J., and Cheng, T. (2020). Understanding cities with machine eyes: A review of deep computer
vision in urban analytics. Cities, 96:102481.
IdeaForge (2020). Drones boost security and surveillance during coronavirus lockdown. https://www.ideaforge.
co.in/blog/drones~/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
innovatrics (2020).
How covid-19 is shaping the biometrics industry.
https://www.innovatrics.com/
how-covid-19-is-shaping-the-biometrics-industry/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Inoubli, W., Aridhi, S., Mezni, H., Maddouri, M., and Nguifo, E. M. (2018). An experimental survey on big data
frameworks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 86:546–564.
Jain, A. K., Ross, A., and Prabhakar, S. (2004). An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE Transactions on circuits
and systems for video technology, 14(1):4–20.
Ji, H., Alfarraj, O., and Tolba, A. (2020). Artificial intelligence-empowered edge of vehicles: Architecture, enabling
technologies, and applications. IEEE Access, 8:61020–61034.
John, Z. (2020). How to fight an infodemic. The Lancet, 395(10225):676.
Joshi, A. P., Han, M., and Wang, Y. (2018). A survey on security and privacy issues of blockchain technology. Mathematical Foundations of Computing, 1(2):121–147.
Jyotirmoy, S. and Rekha, S. D. (2016). Concept of epidemic diseases in ayurveda. IJHRMLP, 2(01):24.
Kaggle (2020).
Covid-19 open research dataset challenge (cord-19).
https://www.kaggle.com/
allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-research-challenge. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Kim, S. J., Lim, G. J., Cho, J., and Côté, M. J. (2017). Drone-aided healthcare services for patients with chronic diseases
in rural areas. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 88(1):163–180.
Konstantinos Sirlantzis, Layla BashirLarsen1, L. K. K. P. (2018). Handbook of electronic assistive technology: 11robotics.
Kostavelis, I. and Gasteratos, A. (2015). Semantic mapping for mobile robotics tasks: A survey. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 66:86–103.
Krey, M. and Seiler, R. (2019). Usage and acceptance of drone technology in healthcare: exploring patients and physicians perspective. In The 52nd Hawaii International Conference on System Science, Grand Wailea, January 8-11,
2019, pages 4135–4144. HICSS.
Kugler, L. (2019). Real-world applications for drones.
Kumar, V. (2020). How ai voice responders help call centers during the outbreak of coronavirus? https://www.
analyticsinsight.net/how-ai-voice-responders-help~/. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Kumari, P. and Seeja, K. (2019). Periocular biometrics: A survey. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and
Information Sciences.
Kwon, K. T., Ko, J.-H., Shin, H., Sung, M., and Kim, J. Y. (2020). Drive-through screening center for covid-19: a safe
and efficient screening system against massive community outbreak. Journal of Korean Medical Science, 35(11).
Kyser, J. L. and Mears, D. D. (1989). Toilet tissue alert system. US Patent 4,882,568.
Langley, D. J., van Doorn, J., Ng, I. C., Stieglitz, S., Lazovik, A., and Boonstra, A. (2020). The internet of everything:
Smart things and their impact on business models. Journal of Business Research.
Lei, Z., Wang, S., and Liu, B. (2018). Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 8(4):e1253.
Li, B.-h., Hou, B.-c., Yu, W.-t., Lu, X.-b., and Yang, C.-w. (2017). Applications of artificial intelligence in intelligent
manufacturing: a review. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, 18(1):86–96.
Li, Y. and Liu, C. (2019). Applications of multirotor drone technologies in construction management. International
Journal of Construction Management, 19(5):401–412.
Li, Y. and Xia, L. (2020). Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): role of chest ct in diagnosis and management. American
Journal of Roentgenology, pages 1–7.
Liu, P. and Xu, Z. (2020). Public attitude toward self-driving vehicles on public roads: Direct experience changed
ambivalent people to be more positive. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 151:119827.
Livingston, E., Desai, A., and Berkwits, M. (2020). Sourcing personal protective equipment during the covid-19 pandemic. Jama.
Luck, M. and Aylett, R. (2000). Applying artificial intelligence to virtual reality: Intelligent virtual environments. Applied
artificial intelligence, 14(1):3–32.
Lufkin, B. (2020). Coronavirus: How to work from home, the right way. https://www.bbc.com/worklife/
article/20200312-coronavirus-covid-19-update-work-from-home-in-a-pandemic. [Online; Accessed August 5, 2020].

57

Madni, S. H. H., Latiff, M. S. A., Coulibaly, Y., et al. (2016). Resource scheduling for infrastructure as a service (iaas)
in cloud computing: Challenges and opportunities. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 68:173–200.
Maesa, D. D. F. and Mori, P. (2020). Blockchain 3.0 applications survey. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing,
138:99–114.
Maghdid, H. S., Ghafoor, K. Z., Sadiq, A. S., Curran, K., and Rabie, K. (2020). A novel ai-enabled framework to
diagnose coronavirus covid 19 using smartphone embedded sensors: Design study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07434.
Mahdavinejad, M. S., Rezvan, M., Barekatain, M., Adibi, P., Barnaghi, P., and Sheth, A. P. (2018). Machine learning for
internet of things data analysis: A survey. Digital Communications and Networks, 4(3):161–175.
Marjani, M., Nasaruddin, F., Gani, A., Karim, A., Hashem, I. A. T., Siddiqa, A., and Yaqoob, I. (2017). Big iot data
analytics: architecture, opportunities, and open research challenges. IEEE Access, 5:5247–5261.
Mastelic, T., Oleksiak, A., Claussen, H., Brandic, I., Pierson, J.-M., and Vasilakos, A. V. (2014). Cloud computing:
Survey on energy efficiency. Acm computing surveys (csur), 47(2):1–36.
Matias, E. and Rao, B. (2015). 3d printing: On its historical evolution and the implications for business. In 2015 Portland
International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET), pages 551–558. IEEE.
McArdle, S., Endo, S., Aspuru-Guzik, A., Benjamin, S. C., and Yuan, X. (2020). Quantum computational chemistry.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 92(1):015003.
McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N., and Shannon, C. E. (2006). A proposal for the dartmouth summer research
project on artificial intelligence, august 31, 1955. AI magazine, 27(4):12–12.
McKibbin, W. J. and Fernando, R. (2020). The global macroeconomic impacts of covid-19: Seven scenarios.
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., and Galstyan, A. (2019). A survey on bias and fairness in machine
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09635.
Mewes, A., Hensen, B., Wacker, F., and Hansen, C. (2017). Touchless interaction with software in interventional radiology and surgery: a systematic literature review. International journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery,
12(2):291–305.
Milgram, P. and Kishino, F. (1994). A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information
and Systems, 77(12):1321–1329.
Mishra, A. (2020). Delhi: Covid-19 positive pizza delivery boy’s contacts test. https://timesofindia.
indiatimes.com/city/delhi/delhi-covid-19-positive-pizza~. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Mistry, I., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., and Kumar, N. (2020). Blockchain for 5g-enabled iot for industrial automation: A
systematic review, solutions, and challenges. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 135:106382.
Mosenthal, P. B. and Kirsch, I. S. (1990). Understanding thematic maps. Journal of Reading, 34(2):136–140.
Müller, V. C. and Bostrom, N. (2016). Future progress in artificial intelligence: A survey of expert opinion. In Fundamental issues of artificial intelligence, pages 555–572. Springer.
Nakamoto, S. (2019). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical report, Manubot.
Narin, A., Kaya, C., and Pamuk, Z. (2020). Automatic detection of coronavirus disease (covid-19) using x-ray images
and deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10849.
Nasiri, H., Nasehi, S., and Goudarzi, M. (2019). Evaluation of distributed stream processing frameworks for iot applications in smart cities. Journal of Big Data, 6(1):52.
national laboratory of medicines, U. (2020). Clinicaltrials. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=
COVID-19&term=&cntry=&state=&city=&dist=. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Newcome, L. R. (2004). Unmanned aviation: a brief history of unmanned aerial vehicles. American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.
News, A. (2020). The contactless elevator with holographic buttons. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
SK-aSzyKXRE. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Nguyen, T. H., Di Francesco, M., and Yla-Jaaski, A. (2017). Virtual machine consolidation with multiple usage prediction for energy-efficient cloud data centers. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing.
NIH (2020).
Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) treatment guidelines.
https://www.
covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Ntousia, M. and Fudos, I. (2019). 3d printing technologies & applications: An overview.
of health, M. and family welfare, I. (2020). Role of frontline workers in prevention and management of corona
virsu. https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/PreventionandManagementofCOVID19FLWEnglish.pdf. [Online;
accessed August 4, 2020].
Olsson, N., Shafqat, A., Arica, E., and Økland, A. (2019). 3d-printing technology in construction: Results from a survey.
In 10th Nordic Conference on Construction Economics and Organization. Emerald.
Organization, W. H. et al. (2020). Rational use of personal protective equipment (ppe) for coronavirus disease (covid-19):
interim guidance, 19 march 2020. Technical report, World Health Organization.
Panarello, A., Tapas, N., Merlino, G., Longo, F., and Puliafito, A. (2018). Blockchain and iot integration: A systematic
survey. Sensors, 18(8):2575.
Peng, Z., Yang, X.-L., Wang, X.-G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.-R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang, C.-L., et al. (2020).

58

A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. nature, 579(7798):270–273.
Pilkington, M. (2016). Blockchain technology: principles and applications. In Research handbook on digital transformations. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Plate, E. M., Bates, M. R., Shen, F., Jiongjun, X., Zhu, A., Cao, M., and Ni, L. (2015). Smart toilet systems and methods.
US Patent 9,170,720.
Polydoros, A. S. and Nalpantidis, L. (2017). Survey of model-based reinforcement learning: Applications on robotics.
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 86(2):153–173.
Preetipadma (2020).
Three ways how drones are helping in the battle against covid-19.
https://www.
analyticsinsight.net/three-ways-drones-helping-battle-covid-19. [Online; accessed August 5,
2020].
Punn, N. S. and Agarwal, S. (2019). Crowd Analysis for Congestion Control Early Warning System on Foot Over Bridge.
Punn, N. S. and Agarwal, S. (2020a). Automated diagnosis of covid-19 with limited posteroanterior chest x-ray images
using fine-tuned deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11676.
Punn, N. S. and Agarwal, S. (2020b). Chs-net: A deep learning approach for hierarchical segmentation of covid-19
infected ct images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07079.
Punn, N. S. and Agarwal, S. (2020c). Inception u-net architecture for semantic segmentation to identify nuclei in microscopy cell images. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM),
16(1):1–15.
Punn, N. S., Sonbhadra, S. K., and Agarwal, S. (2020a). Covid-19 epidemic analysis using machine learning and deep
learning algorithms. medRxiv.
Punn, N. S., Sonbhadra, S. K., and Agarwal, S. (2020b). Monitoring covid-19 social distancing with person detection
and tracking via fine-tuned yolo v3 and deepsort techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01385.
Qiu, J., Wu, Q., Ding, G., Xu, Y., and Feng, S. (2016). A survey of machine learning for big data processing. EURASIP
Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2016(1):67.
Raisamo, R., Rakkolainen, I., Majaranta, P., Salminen, K., Rantala, J., and Farooq, A. (2019). Human augmentation:
Past, present and future. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 131:131–143.
Randhawa, G. S., Soltysiak, M. P., El Roz, H., de Souza, C. P., Hill, K. A., and Kari, L. (2020). Machine learning using intrinsic genomic signatures for rapid classification of novel pathogens: Covid-19 case study. Plos one,
15(4):e0232391.
Rastogi, S., Pandey, D. N., and Singh, R. H. (2020). Covid-19 pandemic: A pragmatic plan for ayurveda intervention.
Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine.
Raum, M. (2020). A restaurant in amsterdam built quarantine greenhouses so diners can eat while social distancing.
https://people.com/food/a-restaurant-in- ~/. [Online; accessed August 4, 2020].
Rayes, A. and Salam, S. (2017). Internet of things (iot) overview. In Internet of Things From Hype to Reality, pages
1–34. Springer.
Regalado, A. (2011). Who coined ‘cloud computing’. Technology Review, 31.
Roebuck, K. (2011). 3D Printing: High-impact Emerging Technology-What You Need to Know Definitions, Adoptions,
Impact, Benefits, Maturity, Vendors. Tebbo.
Rothan, H. A. and Byrareddy, S. N. (2020). The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus disease (covid-19)
outbreak. Journal of autoimmunity, page 102433.
Rotolo, D., Hicks, D., and Martin, B. R. (2015). What is an emerging technology? Research policy, 44(10):1827–1843.
Salahat, E. and Qasaimeh, M. (2017). Recent advances in features extraction and description algorithms: A comprehensive survey. In 2017 IEEE international conference on industrial technology (ICIT), pages 1059–1063. IEEE.
Samuel, A. L. (1959). Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of research and
development, 3(3):210–229.
Savchuk, M. and Fesenko, A. (2019). Quantum computing: Survey and analysis. Cybernetics and Systems Analysis,
55(1):10–21.
Saxena, A. (2020). Impact on technology : Covid-19 outbreak. https://community.nasscom.in/communities/
current-issues/impact-on-technology-covid---19-outbreak.html. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Schuld, M. (2019). Machine learning in quantum spaces.
Scott, J. and Scott, C. (2017). Drone delivery models for healthcare. In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii international
conference on system sciences.
Senior, A. W., Evans, R., Jumper, J., Kirkpatrick, J., Sifre, L., Green, T., Qin, C., Žı́dek, A., Nelson, A. W., Bridgland,
A., et al. (2020). Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning. Nature, pages 1–5.
Shaikh, A. and Kaur, M. J. (2019). Comprehensive survey of massive mimo for 5g communications. In 2019 Advances
in Science and Engineering Technology International Conferences (ASET), pages 1–5. IEEE.
Sharif, M., Raza, M., Shah, J. H., Yasmin, M., and Fernandes, S. L. (2019). An overview of biometrics methods. In
Handbook of Multimedia Information Security: Techniques and Applications, pages 15–35. Springer.
Sharma, A., Vanjani, P., Paliwal, N., Basnayaka, C. M. W., Jayakody, D. N. K., Wang, H.-C., and Muthuchi-

59

dambaranathan, P. (2020). Communication and networking technologies for uavs: A survey. Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, page 102739.
Sharma, P. (2013). Evolution of mobile wireless communication networks-1g to 5g as well as future prospective of next
generation communication network. International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, 2(8):47–53.
Sharpminds (2020). The future of it in a new covid-19 reality: 5 technology trends. https://www.sharpminds.com/
news-entry/~/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Shaw, S.-L. and Sui, D. (2020). Understanding the new human dynamics in smart spaces and places: Toward a splatial
framework. Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 110(2):339–348.
Shi, Z., Guo, Y., and Ye, J. (2019). A survey on deep transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05055.
Shi, Z. R., Wang, C., and Fang, F. (2020). Artificial intelligence for social good: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.01818.
Siddiqui,
H.
(2020).
Covid-19:
Drdo
comes
with
new
technology
to
disintegrate
coronavirus
.
https://www.financialexpress.com/defence/
covid-19-drdo-comes-with-new-technology-to-disintegrate-coronavirus/1945501/.
[Online;
accessed August 3, 2020].
Singh, D. and Reddy, C. K. (2015). A survey on platforms for big data analytics. Journal of big data, 2(1):8.
Singh, P. (2020). Thermal scan: Drones check people for fever in delhi. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.
com/city/delhi/thermal-scan-drones-check-people-for-fever/articleshow/75088774.cms. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Singh, S. and Chana, I. (2015). Qos-aware autonomic resource management in cloud computing: a systematic review.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 48(3):1–46.
Singh Punn, N., Sonbhadra, S. K., and Agarwal, S. (2020). Monitoring covid-19 social distancing with person detection
and tracking via fine-tuned yolo v3 and deepsort techniques. arXiv, pages arXiv–2005.
Sood, R. (2020). The trends shaping the post-covid-19 world. https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/
the-trends-shaping-the-post-covid-19-world/article31552150.ece. [Online; Updated August 5,
2020].
Spiliopoulos, D. (2020). Emerging technologies in the pandemic crisis: 10 use cases and future outlook. https:
//www.iotforall.com/emerging-tech-covid19/. [Online; accessed August 6, 2020].
Spotr (2020). Crowd-curated catalog of product, brands and places endorsed by people you trust, spotted by people like
you. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Steane, A. (1998). Quantum computing. Reports on Progress in Physics, 61(2):117.
Su, R., Zhang, D., Venkatesan, R., Gong, Z., Li, C., Ding, F., Jiang, F., and Zhu, Z. (2019). Resource allocation for
network slicing in 5g telecommunication networks: A survey of principles and models. IEEE Network, 33(6):172–
179.
Tan, C., Sun, F., Kong, T., Zhang, W., Yang, C., and Liu, C. (2018). A survey on deep transfer learning. In International
conference on artificial neural networks, pages 270–279. Springer.
Tasks, G. (2020). Contactless home delivery: How to survive during the covid-19 outbreak. https://gsmtasks.com/
contactless-home-delivery/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Ting, D. S. W., Carin, L., Dzau, V., and Wong, T. Y. (2020). Digital technology and covid-19. Nature Medicine,
26(4):459–461.
Ton, A.-T., Gentile, F., Hsing, M., Ban, F., and Cherkasov, A. (2020). Rapid identification of potential inhibitors of
sars-cov-2 main protease by deep docking of 1.3 billion compounds. Molecular Informatics.
Tong, W., Hussain, A., Bo, W. X., and Maharjan, S. (2019). Artificial intelligence for vehicle-to-everything: A survey.
IEEE Access, 7:10823–10843.
Triax (2020). In the time of covid-19 – how will you maintain safe working distances?. https://www.triaxtec.com/
resource/fact-sheet/proximity-trace/. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Ulhaq, A., Khan, A., Gomes, D., and Pau, M. (2020). Computer vision for covid-19 control: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.09420.
UN, D. o. G. C. (2020). Un tackles ‘infodemic’ of misinformation and cybercrime in covid-19 crisis. https://www.
un.org/en/un-coronavirus-communications-team. [Online; accessed August 3, 2020].
Vaishya, R., Haleem, A., Vaish, A., and Javaid, M. (2020). Emerging technologies to combat covid-19 pandemic. Journal
of Clinical and Experimental Hepatology.
Varude, K. (2020). Innovation and technology in the age of covid-19 . https://www.timesnownews.com/
technology-science/article/innovation-and-technology-in-the-age-of-covid/592598. [Online;
accessed August 3, 2020].
Veloso, B. M., Leal, F., Malheiro, B., and Burguillo, J. C. (2020). A 2020 perspective on online guest profiling and
hotel recommendation: Reliability, scalability, traceability and transparency. Electronic Commerce Research and
Applications, 40:100957.
Vergouw, B., Nagel, H., Bondt, G., and Custers, B. (2016). Drone technology: Types, payloads, applications, frequency

60

spectrum issues and future developments. In The Future of Drone Use, pages 21–45. Springer.
Verma, S., Kawamoto, Y., Fadlullah, Z. M., Nishiyama, H., and Kato, N. (2017). A survey on network methodologies
for real-time analytics of massive iot data and open research issues. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
19(3):1457–1477.
Viber (2020). Who coronavirus info. https://chats.viber.com/coronavirusinfo. [Online; accessed August 4,
2020].
Voorsluys, W., Broberg, J., Buyya, R., et al. (2011). Introduction to cloud computing. Cloud computing: Principles and
paradigms, pages 1–44.
Wang, J., Tang, K., Feng, K., and Lv, W. (2020). High temperature and high humidity reduce the transmission of
covid-19. Available at SSRN 3551767.
Wang, P., Li, Y., and Reddy, C. K. (2019a). Machine learning for survival analysis: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 51(6):1–36.
Wang, X., Zha, X., Ni, W., Liu, R. P., Guo, Y. J., Niu, X., and Zheng, K. (2019b). Survey on blockchain for internet of
things. Computer Communications, 136:10–29.
WHO (2020).
Who corona-viruses (covid-19).
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/
novel-corona-virus-2019,2020. [Online; accessed August 1, 2020].
Wiley, V. and Lucas, T. (2018). Computer vision and image processing: a paper review. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 2(1):29–36.
Wong, H. Y. F., Lam, H. Y. S., Fong, A. H.-T., Leung, S. T., Chin, T. W.-Y., Lo, C. S. Y., Lui, M. M.-S., Lee, J. C. Y.,
Chiu, K. W.-H., Chung, T., et al. (2020). Frequency and distribution of chest radiographic findings in covid-19 positive
patients. Radiology, page 201160.
worldometers (2020). Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. https://www.worldometers.info/. [Online; accessed
December 29, 2020].
Wosik, J., Fudim, M., Cameron, B., Gellad, Z. F., Cho, A., Phinney, D., Curtis, S., Roman, M., Poon, E. G., Ferranti,
J., et al. (2020). Telehealth transformation: Covid-19 and the rise of virtual care. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association.
Yakas, B. (2020). Faa investigating ”anti-covid-19 volunteer drone” filmed admonishing people in nyc. https://
gothamist.com/news/faa-investigating- ~. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Yancey-Bragg (2020).
Going to a drive-thru covid-19 testing site?
here’s a step-by-step
look at what to expect.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/03/20/
drive-thru-coronavirus-testing-step-step-look-what-expect/2873324001/.
[Online; accessed
August 5, 2020].
Yaterialise (2020). Hands-free 3d-printed door openers to help against the spread of coronavirus. https://www.
materialise.com/en/hands-free-door-opener. [Online; accessed August 5, 2020].
Ye, F., Xu, S., Rong, Z., Xu, R., Liu, X., Deng, P., Liu, H., and Xu, X. (2020). Delivery of infection from asymptomatic
carriers of covid-19 in a familial cluster. International Journal of Infectious Diseases.
Younan, M., Houssein, E. H., Elhoseny, M., and Ali, A. A. (2020). Challenges and recommended technologies for the
industrial internet of things: A comprehensive review. Measurement, 151:107198.
Young, T., Hazarika, D., Poria, S., and Cambria, E. (2018). Recent trends in deep learning based natural language
processing. ieee Computational intelligenCe magazine, 13(3):55–75.
Yu, J. (2011). From 3g to 4g: technology evolution and path dynamics in china’s mobile telecommunication sector.
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 23(10):1079–1093.
Yulong, Z., Zhu, J., Wang, X., and Hanzo, L. (2016). A survey on wireless security: Technical challenges, recent
advances, and future trends. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(9):1727–1765.
Yurtsever, E., Lambert, J., Carballo, A., and Takeda, K. (2020). A survey of autonomous driving: Common practices and
emerging technologies. IEEE Access, 8:58443–58469.
Zarocostas, J. (2020). How to fight an infodemic. https://www.thelancet.com/action/. [Online; accessed August
2, 2020].
Zhang, J. M., Harman, M., Ma, L., and Liu, Y. (2020). Machine learning testing: Survey, landscapes and horizons. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering.

61

