arXiv:2005.07269v1 [q-bio.OT] 13 May 2020

Sewage Pooling Test for SARS-CoV-2
Ritam Guha1 , Anik Sengupta*2 , and Ankan Dutta∗3
1

ritamguha16@ieee.org, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Jadavpur University, India
2
senguptaanik8@gmail.com, Department of Electronics and Communication
Engineering, Heritage Institute of Technology, India
3
ankan19d@gmail.com, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Jadavpur University,
India

May 2020

Abstract
CoVID-19 is currently one of the biggest threats to mankind. To date,
it is the reason for infections of over 35 lakhs and death of over 2 lakh
human beings. We propose a procedure to detect CoVID-19 affected localities using a sewage mass testing and pooling mechanism which has gained
ground in recent times. The proposed method named Sewage Pooling Algorithm tests wastewater samples from sewage systems to pinpoint the
regions which are affected by maximum chances of the virus spread. The
algorithm also uses a priority-based backtracking procedure to perform
testing in sewage links depending on the probability of infection in the
sub-areas. For places with very rare CoVID cases, we present a gradientbased search method to prune those areas. The proposed method has less
human intervention and increases the effective tests/million people over
current in-place methods.

Keywords: Covid-19, Sewage testing, Pooling, Priority-based backtracking,
Gradient-based searching, RT-qPCR.

∗ authors

contributed equally

1

1

Introduction

The main routes of transmission of CoVID-19 are respiratory droplets and direct
contact. Current evidence suggests that the virus may be excreted in faeces,
regardless of diarrhoea or signs of intestinal infection. Studies have shown that
CoVID-19 viral RNA fragments can be detected more accurately from patient’s
(even asymptomatic patient’s) stool specimen [6]
No one knows about the actual number of people affected with COVID19. We are only aware of the status of those infectious people who have been
tested. Testing is our only window to handle this pandemic situation as we
get aware of the way virus is spreading and also actual number of infectious
people.In the asymptomatic infectious cases in the community or when people
are not sure whether they are infected or not, community sewage detection
could determine whether there are CoVID-19 carriers in an area so that effective
intervention can be taken as soon as possible. The present testing mechanism
is too slow, cost prohibitive and sometimes provide negative results even if the
person is infectious. As of now in INDIA, number of samples being tested is
0.03 per thousand people [5]. The proposed mechanism of wide sewage testing is
daunting yet more manageable. Studies have shown that SARS COV-2 is highly
similar to SARS COV-1 genetically [7]. Now because of the genetic similarity,
detection method remains quite similar, and there have been studies regarding
the detection method of SARS COV-1 from sewage samples [8].

2
2.1

Proposed Model
Sewage System Structure

To understand the proposed methodology, it is essential to get an overview of
the sewage structure adapted in various places. The most common schematic
diagram of a sewage system is presented in Figure 1. From the structure, it can
be seen that many links are interconnected to form a backbone of the sewage
system.These links carry waster water from different areas to the backbone
structure which is finally dumped in a place which is marked as Initial Point
in the Figure. Sometimes, this initial point is a Waster Water Treatment Plant
(WWTP) which refines the waste water and passes it to rivers, ponds etc.
At any point of any link, the entire area whose wastewater passes through
that point is known as the catchment area of the point. So, a particular link is
responsible to carry the waste water of its catchment area. For easy explanation
and references, the proposed method labels the links in terms of a labelling
system. The links emanating from the initial point are level − 0 links which
further leads to the subsequent levels of links (level − 1, level − 2, . . . , level − n).
All the level − (i + 1) links connected to a level − i link are called the child links
of that level − i while level − i link is called the parent link of its child links.

2

Figure 1: Schematic diagram representing a Sewage System

2.2

Sewage Collection & Testing

In the present scenario, composite or integrated sewage samples are collected
with sampling covering a period usually no longer than 24 hrs using an automatic or mechanical sampler. Throughout this report we assume the sample
taken at any link to be an equally probable sewage collection of any individual
of the sample population of that region represented as the catchment area of
that link. To facilitate this statement with higher certainty, we need to assure
proper mixing of sewage via making the flow more turbulent and by increasing
the sampling frequency and volume. Satisfactory results are also obtained by
collecting a portion of uniform size each time a predetermined amount of flow
had passed the sampling station [3].
For detection of CoVID-19 from sewage, rapid test kit cannot be used as
most of them are based on antibody test. Through the faeces of the human
body, RNA fragments of the virus are excreted and not the antibody generated
inside the body. One-step quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR)
is decided to be used to achieve a faster and highly reproducible test. Recent
studies of sewage test using RT-qPCR has shown better prediction of CoVID
cases and is currently being used in few countries [9, 4, 2]. One such is approved
by ICMR is TRUPCR R SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR kit, based on real-time PCR
technology, for the qualitative detection of (SARS-CoV-2) specific RNA [1].
The precision of RT-qPCR is important to determine the largest sampling
population the method can encounter or in other words, the initial point at
which the pooling method in sewage context can start iterating. Suppose a
3

sewage sample of a CoVID positive person is tested with t viral particles per
ml. We add the sample with sewage of other n − 1 non-CoVID patients and test
the diluted sample in RT-qPCR which will roughly show t/n viral particles per
ml. This value decreases with increasing the sample size n till we get a maximal
n∗ till which the equipment can detect the virus. We then group the region
with a maximum pool size n∗ . The initial points will be links in sewage system
which can capture the population of n∗ independently.

2.3

Database updation

For proper functioning of the proposed procedure, it is important to retrieve
the latest set of information available in the market. Some very important parameters like number of Covid patients already present in the locality, rate of
increase in the catchment area, number of infants and aged inhabitants of the
area, population density of area etc. may play a very important role in selecting
the most optimal set of paths for testing. So, the process needs access to the
latest information in terms of these parameters and current test results. This
should be done by a system which updates the information after regular intervals.

2.4

Sewage Pooling Algorithm

The Covid-19 pandemic requires every patient to recover from the disease without affecting others around. Even the presence of a single patient may result
into exponential spread of the virus thereby affecting a large population. So,
the main aim of the proposed approach is to make an attempt to identify every
Covid-19 affected locality. For this reason, the proposed model tries to collect
test samples from every sewage link possible and test them but the selection of
the links is not done blindly. It uses a probability-guided backtracking approach
to find the most probable links in the current situation.
After finding the starting point of the search procedure, the probability is
calculated for each and every link in the area based on the information extracted
from the demo-graphical study of the locality. Then the testing starts with the
level − 0 links. At any stage, if the probability is less than a certain cutoff,
that particular branch is not tested (pruned) for the time being. Otherwise, the
branches are tested in decreasing order of their probabilities. The procedure
is trivially described in Figure 2. Link − 1 is tested first because it has the
maximum probability of infection followed by Link − 2. Link − 3 is pruned
because its probability value is below the cut-off.

4

Figure 2: Example of the testing procedure
When level − (i + 1) links are done with the testing, subsequent levels are
tested using the same rule until terminal links are tested in a recursive manner.
This procedure is known as Priority-based backtracking as probability is guiding
this searching procedure.The flowchart for the entire procedure is provided in
Figure 3. The entire approach is named as Sewage Pooling Algorithm presented
in Figure 4.

Figure 3: Flowchart of Priority-based backtracking procedure

5

Figure 4: Flowchart of SPA
Regarding quarantining, there are mainly two scenarios:
1. If the search procedure ends at a terminal link which is tested positive, people in its catchment area should be quarantined and confirmatory tested.
2. If an intermediate node is tested positive, then all the people staying at the
unique houses only connected to that intermediate node must be tested.
Gradient Searching: The choice of initial point is dependent on the sensitivity of RT-qPCR. In case of very low concentration or probability area which
are being pruned, there will still be cases of CoVID which cannot be ignored in
the long run. Moreover there may be exception when the sample doesn’t really
abstract the sewage information of the catchment area with equal probability.
To tackle these problems we use gradient i.e. difference in concentration across
depth-wise links. Suppose to test a sample at link level −n∗ or level −0 which is
abstracting the sewage content of n∗ population with m CoVID positive cases
where m << n∗ and the mixing doesn’t equilibrate thus over-estimating n∗ .
We find gradient of all links of level − 1 if the concentration at level − 0 is less
than a threshold (very low) above which the region is denoted as yellow zone in
sewage testing context. As the CoVID cases are less, if the gradient is negative
and the concentration value is less than the precision value, there is no CoVID
case in that catchment region. This is because the sample size at level − 1 is
6

less than level − 0 or n∗ . So if there was a positive CoVID case there must be a
rise in the CoVID level as a percentage. Moreover the concentration must not
be less than precision if even one CoVID case is there as the sample size is much
less than n∗ . We prune the links where gradient is negative and move forward
with positive gradient showing the direction.

3

Unique Features

This approach has many advantages over the currently available methods. The
advantages are outlined in the following portion.
1. Currently the process-in-action for CoVID treatment requires affected people to identify the symptoms, consult doctors, visit hospitals and then if
positively identified, go for treatment¿ During this entire process, some
more people may get affected if the person is positive. But, the proposed
approach should be performed at Govt. level with little to no effort
from the affected patients.
2. This process can detect asymptomatic patients as well.
3. Reduced number of test are required on an average basis. (There may
be scenarios in which most of the patients are affected in the locality. In
this exceptional scenario, number of tests will increase)
4. Even after the pandemic is over, this process can be used to keep a track
of CoVID in different localities.

4

Conclusion

This work presents an approach to identify the CoVID affected localities using
a sewage pooling mechanism. The proposed method known as Sewage Pooling
Algorithm tries to identify the affected areas by performing RT-qPCR testing
on sewage samples collected from these areas in an informative way. It uses
the data extracted from demo-graphic information of the regions to compute
the probability of infections in different sub-areas connected by sewage links.
Priority-based backtracking approach is used to perform testing in sub-areas
with higher probability of infection. Although, to the best of our knowledge,
it is a very efficient way to detect affected areas using less number of tests, it
assumes ideal scenarios in many situations. For example, it requires proper mixing of the pooled sewage samples but in reality it may not be the case. There
may be various organizations in the locality which negatively affects the results.
For example, if the area has a hospital treating CoVID patients or a factory
emanating chemicals which may change the nature of the wastewater samples,
the result will get badly affected. The procedure needs some modifications to
make it applicable to real-life situations which is not possible without practical

7

testing and implementations. In future, if this idea gets approved, modifications can be performed over the procedure based on the new set of information
obtained from the practical testing outcomes.

5

Conflict of Interest

The authors have conflict of interest to declare. AS, AD presented this idea as
QuickSolutions to Techstar India start-up weekend and secured the first prize
in India Chapter.

References
[1] Trupcr R corona virus/covid-19 (sars-cov-2) real time pcr kits. https://
www.3bblackbio.com/covid-19.html. Accessed: 2010-05-02.
[2] CNN. Some scientists are using sewage to measure the prevalence of coronavirus in their communities. https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/26/us/
covid-19-sewage-testing/index.html. Accessed: 2010-05-02.
[3] Water Environment Federation. Sampling of sewage. Journal (Water Pollution Control Federation), 33(6):669–674, 1961.
[4] MIT. Covid-19 testing in city sewage. https://www.biobot.io/covid19.
Accessed: 2010-05-02.
[5] Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Joe Hasell. Coronavirus disease (covid-19). Our World in data, 2020.
[6] An Tang, ZD Tong, HL Wang, YX Dai, KF Li, JN Liu, WJ Wu, C Yuan,
ML Yu, P Li, et al. Detection of novel coronavirus by rt-pcr in stool specimen
from asymptomatic child, china. Emerging infectious diseases, 26(6), 2020.
[7] Huihui Wang, Xuemei Li, Tao Li, Shubing Zhang, Lianzi Wang, Xian Wu,
and Jiaqing Liu. The genetic sequence, origin, and diagnosis of sars-cov-2.
European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, page 1,
2020.
[8] Xin-Wei Wang, Jin-Song Li, Ting-Kai Guo, Bei Zhen, Qing-Xin Kong, Bin
Yi, Zhong Li, Nong Song, Min Jin, Wen-Jun Xiao, et al. Concentration and
detection of sars coronavirus in sewage from xiao tang shan hospital and the
309th hospital. Journal of virological methods, 128(1-2):156–161, 2005.
[9] Fuqing Wu, Amy Xiao, Jianbo Zhang, Xiaoqiong Gu, Wei Lin Lee, Kathryn
Kauffman, William Hanage, Mariana Matus, Newsha Ghaeli, Noriko Endo,
Claire Duvallet, Katya Moniz, Timothy Erickson, Peter Chai, Janelle
Thompson, and Eric Alm. SARS-CoV-2 titers in wastewater are higher
than expected from clinically confirmed cases. medrXiv, April 2020.

8

