WORKSHOPS REPORT

arXiv:2005.06748v1 [cs.IR] 14 May 2020

ECIR 2020 Workshops:
Assessing the Impact of Going Online
Sérgio Nunes (INESC TEC and University of Porto), Suzanne Little (Insight
Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University), Sumit Bhatia,
Ludovico Boratto, Guillaume Cabanac, Ricardo Campos, Francisco M. Couto,
Stefano Faralli, Ingo Frommholz, Adam Jatowt, Alı́pio Jorge, Mirko Marras,
Philipp Mayr, Giovanni Stilo
Preprint of the report submited to ACM SIGIR Forum June edition
See http://sigir.org/forum/
May 15, 2020

1

Introduction

ECIR 20201 was one of the many conferences affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Conference
Chairs decided to keep the initially planned dates (April 14-17, 2020) and move to a fully online
event. In this report, we describe the experience of organizing the ECIR 2020 Workshops in
this scenario from two perspectives: the workshop organizers and the workshop participants. We
provide a report on the organizational aspect of these events and the consequences for participants.
Covering the scientific dimension of each workshop is outside the scope of this article.
The results presented here are based on two online questionnaires involving the participation
of more than 60 people: one sent to all workshop organizers and another one sent to all workshop
paper authors and workshop participants. The former is presented in Section 2 to describe the
workshop organizers’ feedback. The latter is introduced in Section 3 to describe the participants’
perspective. Our general objective is to get a sense of the feeling of both stakeholders in this firsttime experience. Questions such as “What was gained/lost?”; “What was harder/easier?”, “What
worked?”; “What didn’t work?” among many others will be dissected. We conclude this article by
highlighting the main recommendations and lessons learned from this online experience. We believe this to be of potential importance for researchers interested in organizing similar events in the
future.
1

https://ecir2020.org/

Table 1: ECIR 2020 Workshops.
Workshop
Submissions
Accepted
BIAS (full-day)
44
11 long; 6 short
BIR (full-day)
9
8 full
SIIRH (half-day)
7
3 full; 3 short
Text2Story (full-day)
20
10 full; 2 position; 1 demo

2

Participants
> 70
> 70
> 50
> 70

Workshop Organization

2.1

Overview

ECIR 2020 Workshops were held on April 14, 2020 (Tuesday) adopting Lisbon time (CEST+1),
from 09h00 to 18h00. The first call for workshops was issued on July 22, 2019. We received a
total of six proposals, one was later withdrawn, and four were accepted – three as full day events,
one half-day. Workshop notifications were sent on October 1, one month after the submission
deadline. On March 11, the decision to move to a fully online event was announced. We present
a summary of the accepted ECIR 2020 Workshops in Table 1.
The ECIR 2020 Organization adopted Zoom as the official platform for synchronous video
conferencing. A dedicated Zoom room with password access was configured for each workshop
and the details provided to the workshop organisers. A few days before the event, a draft version
of ACM’s best practices guide for virtual conferences [1] was published and shared with the
participants. The ECIR 2020 Organisation also created a slack workspace for use during the event
and a dedicated slack channel for workshop organizers was created. This was used in particular to
connect with technical support during the workshops. The specific details of how each workshop
was organized are described next.
BIAS 2020 [2] was the 1st edition of the International Workshop on Algorithmic Bias in Search
and Recommendation2 . BIAS was organized as a full-day event, chaired by Ludovico Boratto (EURECAT, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya), Mirko Marras (University of Cagliari), Stefano Faralli
(University of Rome Unitelma Sapienza), and Giovanni Stilo (University of L’Aquila). The workshop aimed at collecting novel ideas to detect, measure, characterize, and mitigate bias in data
and algorithms underlying search and recommendation applications. The goal was to provide a
common ground for researchers and practitioners working in this area. The workshop had more
than 70 participants. The keynote speaker – Prof. Chirag Shah from the University of Washington
(USA) – highlighted how bias, especially in relation to search and recommender systems, causes
material problems for users, businesses, and society at large. The scientific program included
demo and paper presentations and a final discussion. The papers covered topics from search and
recommendation in online dating, education, and social media, over the impact of gender bias
in word embeddings, to tools that allow exploration of bias and fairness on the Web. The event
concluded with a discussion session to highlight open issues, research challenges, and briefly summarize the outcomes of the workshop. The workshop proceedings volume is going to be published
soon in Springer’s “Communications in Computer and Information Science” series.
2

http://bias.disim.univaq.it/

BIR 2020 [3] was the 10th edition of the International Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced
Information Retrieval3 . BIR was organized as a full-day event and chaired by Guillaume Cabanac
(Université de Toulouse), Ingo Frommholz (University of Bedfordshire), and Philipp Mayr (GESIS
– Leibniz-Institute for the Social Sciences). BIR tackles issues related to academic search, at the
crossroads between Information Retrieval, Natural Language Processing and Bibliometrics. The
keynote speaker – George Tsatsaronis, VP Data Science at Elsevier – addressed the topic of Metrics
and Trends in Assessing the Scientific Impact. Eight papers were given live (no pre-recorded
videos), each one followed by a Q&A session and greetings for the 10th anniversary edition from
senior scholars in our field. The proceedings are published in open access at CEUR-WS [4].
SIIRH 2020 [7] was the 1st edition of the International Workshop on Semantic Indexing and
Information Retrieval for Health from Heterogeneous Content Types and Languages. SIIRH
was organized as a half-day event and chaired by Francisco Couto (LASIGE, Universidade de
Lisboa) and Martin Krallinger (BSC-CNS). The workshop included an open session covering
novel contributions on IR technologies for heterogeneous health-related content open to multiple
languages with a particular interest in the exploitation of structured controlled vocabularies and
entity linking for document indexing and semantic search applications. The program committee
was composed of 46 international researchers and selected three full papers and three short papers.
A MESINESP/Plan TL Session was also part of the workshop for presentation and discussion of
current work and new advances in the MESINESP shared task or other medical IR, QA or text
categorization evaluation campaigns, as well as the exploitation of evaluation settings and data
collections generated through these kind of community evaluation efforts. The Open Session
included two keynote talks, one by Dr. Cher Han Lau, entitled CoronaTracker: A framework for
managing and tracking data during crisis, and another by Lucy Lu Wang and Kyle Lo, entitled The
COVID-19 Open Research Dataset. The MESINESP/Plan TL Session included one keynote talk,
by George Paliouras, entitled BioASQ: The challenge and the community of biomedical semantic
indexing and question answering. Recordings of all talks are publically available in YouTube4 and
the preliminary proceedings are also publically available online5 .
Text2Story 2020 [5] was the 3rd edition of the International Workshop on Narrative Extraction
from Texts6 , chaired by Ricardo Campos (INESC TEC; Ci2 – Smart Cities Research Center,
Polytechnic Institute of Tomar), Alı́pio Jorge (INESC TEC and FCUP - University of Porto),
Adam Jatowt (Kyoto University) and Sumit Bhatia (IBM Research AI). It was organized as a fullday event and consisted of presentations of ten regular research papers, two position papers and one
demonstration paper. The papers presented at the workshop7,8 , were made available at CEUR [6]
and cover diverse aspects of the narrative extraction problem ranging from applications of deep
learning to narrative extraction, sentiment analysis, event coreference resolution to applications
in different domains such as legal text, news and social media. The program also included two
3

https://sites.google.com/view/bir-ws/bir-2020
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RYRv3A1tLwpD4aTbSVraUZNITbkRxZd
5
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1-sF_0R3uGinq5ybcAM5H54k5yujJE8o6
6
http://text2story20.inesctec.pt
7
https://text2story20.inesctec.pt/text2story2020_slides.zip
8
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC8ysv2TEpQZz_-v5T5nZSSA/featured
4

invited keynote talks. Sebastião Miranda, head of development at Priberam (Portugal), talked
about monitoring multi-lingual, multimedia sources of information to discover relevant stories,
events, and topics of interest to a specific user. Mark Finlayson, assistant professor at the School
of Computing and Information Sciences of the Florida International University (USA), presented
an overview of recent advances in Natural Language Processing applied to the task of narrative
analysis in text.
A more detailed overview of the BIAS, BIR, and Text2Story workshops can be found in this
edition of SIGIR Forum.

2.2

Feedback from Workshop Organizers

To collect feedback from workshop organizers, an online questionnaire was prepared and shared
on May 2, 2020 and kept open until the end of May 5. Out of a total of 13 organizers, we received
responses from 9.
The responses to the questionnaire revealed that most of the organizers had a very positive
experience that generally exceeded their expectations after knowing that the event would be
remote. With a view to the future, while the majority of the respondents stated that they would
be willing to organize future events similarly, a significant number of them also indicated that
they would do so “Only if needed”. Overall, every respondent expressed their support for remote
participation in the future, although some did state that this should be allowed only for specific
cases.
Regarding the effort required for the organization of the event, the respondents had very different experiences ranging from “the same effort as in-person”, “more than in-person” to “less
than in-person”. As a preventive measure, most of the organizers requested the authors to provide pre-recorded videos of their presentations in case of some unforeseen last-minute technical
glitches. Regarding the usefulness of the platforms made available to the organizers, almost all the
respondents found Zoom to be a crucial tool required for organizing the online event, and some of
the respondents also found the Zoom Chat feature helpful for interaction with the participants.
We also note that in addition to the live and synchronous communication media (Zoom Chat and
Slack), traditional email also played a crucial role in planning and communication between the
organizers and participants before, during, and after the event.
A more detailed analysis of the results can be found below.
2.2.1

Analysis of closed and ratings questions

From the respondents, all except one (8) had previous experience in organizing scientific events.
To the question “What is your overall feeling about how the workshop went?”, 4 answered “Very
Happy” (44%) and 5 answered “Happy” (56%). No respondents reported “Unhappy” nor “Very
Unhappy”. To the question “How does it compare with your previous expectations (after knowing
the event would be remote)?” (8 answers), 2 answered “Much better than expected” (25%) and 6
answered “Better than expected” (75%). No answers of “Worse than expected” or “Much worse
than expected” were reported.
To the question “Would you organize this event again in the future in a similar online model?”,
5 respondents answered “Yes” and 4 answered “Only if needed”. None of the respondents answered

Crucial

Important

Used but not important

Did not use

Email

7

Zoom
Zoom Chat
ECIR 2020 Slack
0%

4
0

4
25%

1

1

0

8

1

0 0

4

1

0

2
50%

3
75%

Figure 1: Usefulness of the tools as reported by organizers.
“No” to this. To the question “For scientific events conducted in person, how do you evaluate
the importance of allowing remote participations?”, 4 respondents answered “Should be standard
practice and allowed for anyone” and 5 answered “Should be possible only for specific cases”.
None of the respondents selected “Should be avoided” or “Should not be allowed”. This indicates
that in future, a hybrid organization model for workshops could be used where, for example,
presentations are given by paper authors in person for both the on-site and remote audience at
the same time.
Coming to the questions related to organization, for the question “How do you evaluate the
overall effort associated with the organization of the workshop online?”, the majority answered
“Different, but the same effort as in person” (5), with 2 respondents answering “More than in
person” and 2 answering “Less than in person”. For the question “Did you use pre-recorded
videos or synchronous presentations?”, the answers were 5 “Both, depending on conditions” and 4
“Synchronous”. Figure 2.2.1 presents the results to the question “Rate the usefulness of the tools
used”.
2.2.2

Analysis of comments from open questions
“Undoubtedly, having the workshop online allowed us to reach a broader audience in
terms of participants. We believe that having conferences online in the future will
also enable a higher number of submissions from a number of researchers, which for
different reasons, anticipate not to attend a conference.”

Positive comments from the workshop organisers emphasized the higher levels of participation
and the diversity of world-wide attendees due to not having to travel and the subsequent reduced
costs. BIR, which had run previously, saw an increase in the number of participants from about
30 to almost 100 while other workshops also received very strong attendance – almost double the
expected numbers in one case. Comments on the use of Zoom suggest that it handled the workload
well and removed some of the issues with a projector and shared computers that occur sometimes
in a physical setting. Zoom presentations also meant that the viewers could all clearly see the
slide and post questions on the chat ahead of the Q&A session. Subsequent questions could be

clearly heard and understood by participants. However not all the organisers felt that this was
a positive experience with some respondents unable to identify any specific positive aspects to
running an online workshop.
Comments from the workshop organisers on the negative aspects of the online workshops
identified a number of specific challenges and issues. A common response highlighted the lack
of interactivity and connection between participants – “limited feedback”, “personal interaction
was totally missing”, “chatting between participants”, “start[ing] a profitable discussion”, “[no]
quick chats with colleagues”. Two respondents also said they just missed human touch and hugs
and one commented that although the workshop ran well they “missed the personal contact a
lot”. Attempts to encourage chatting using breakout rooms were not successful, especially where
attendees did not know each other previously. The natural result was the lack of atmosphere –
“things were colder”, “[not able to] joke around with audience”, “[no] stimulating interaction”,
“[no] eye contact”, “[no] spontaneity”. The organisers also commented that as the chairs or
session chairs they needed a much higher level of concentration and intensity through the event to
manage the platform and bilateral discussions. Apart from a specific instance of Zoombombing [9]
in one workshop, there were also some individual network issues that disrupted sessions, challenges
around time zones and communicating the registration policy.
“I felt the online worked as a barrier to have people engaged when compared to a
regular conference.”
“All in all, the entire process is pretty much demanding and tireless. As an organizer,
I didn’t find it much [sic] rewarding in the sense that I didn’t have time to look at the
presentations.”
2.2.3

Recommendations from the organisers

Organisers were asked to give their recommendations for best practise in running an online workshop. Key considerations in preparation include keeping the programme short and dynamic as
the required level of concentration is much greater; communicating detailed instructions via email
both prior to and just before the event starts and planing a test or practise meeting for presenters
are just some of the listed ideas. Pre-recording talks and making them available via a channel
like YouTube was also useful. A good suggestion was to involve student volunteers to help with
managing communications during the event. We all learned that participants should be explicitly warned against (accidental) sharing of Zoom hyperlinks (which include the room’s password)
via social media as this likely led to the Zoombombing incident of one workshop. Furthermore,
when using Zoom, organisers should consider activating the “waiting room” functionality to better
manage the participants.
During the event, the moderator and session chair should proactively mute microphones during talks and then manage the questions either via the chat or through attendees raising hands
and being asked to talk. Organisers made some suggestions to try and incentivise feedback and
participation including asking people to show their face, suggesting to open the microphones to
give a round of applause after talks, introducing the audience (character and number) and using
Zoom Chat to contact people.

A fully online workshop can also have different opportunities post event. Organisers suggest
that you can follow up by publishing the videos, slides or talks, using a chat option like Slack
to have further discussions and trying to use social media and the workshop website to promote
a sense of community. This is particularly difficult when participants haven’t met physically.
Conducting post-event surveys or other contact with presentors and participants is key.

3

Workshop Participation

To collect feedback from workshop participants, an online questionnaire was sent to all workshop
paper authors and participants on May 6, 2020 and was kept open until the end of May 8. A total
of 47 answers were received and the results are presented below.

3.1

Analysis of closed and ratings questions

Approximately 50% of all respondents were not paper authors (24 answers) and for 85% (40
answers) this was their first participation in the respective workshop. For the question “Would
you have attended the workshop in Lisbon (if this pandemic had not happened)?”, 19 answered
“Yes” (43%), 20 answered “No” (40%), and the remaining 8 answered “Not sure”.
From all respondents, a large majority reported previous participation in scientific events
(87%, 41 answers). In the answer to the question “How do you compare this experience with your
previous participations in scientific events?”, 12 answered “Better. The remote model improved
my experience” (26%), 10 answered “Similar. The remote model had no relevant impact” (21%),
18 answered “Worse. The remote model negatively impacted the event” (38%), and 7 selected
“No answer. I have no relevant previous experience to compare with” (15%).
For the question “How does it compare with your previous expectations (after knowing the
event would be online)?”, 12 answered “Much better than expected” (26%), 31 answered “Better
than expected” (66%), 4 answered “Worse than expected” (9%), and no one answered “Much
worse than expected”. Figure 3.1 presents the results to the question “Rate the usefulness of
the following tools”. We can observe that while Zoom was obviously helpful along with email
communication Zoom Chat and Slack were considered as less crucial, although Zoom Chat was
still seen as an important communication channel.
When asked “For scientific events conducted in person, how do you evaluate the importance
of allowing remote participations?”, a majority of 35 respondents answered “Should be standard
practice and allowed for anyone” (75%), 11 answered “Should be possible only for specific cases”
(23%), 1 answered “Should be avoided” and no one answered “Should not be allowed”. This
suggests that conferences and workshops could consider opening up in one way or other for remote
participation. In Figure 3.1 is a comparison between the feedback from organizers and participants.
It is interesting to note the differences depending on the role assumed.

3.2

Analysis of comments from open questions

Workshop attendees who were not paper authors (26 respondents) commented positively on the
improved possibility and ease of attending, reduced travel costs, the quality of the presentations,

Crucial

Important

Used but not important

27

Zoom

7

Zoom Chat

0%

21 1 1

24

Email

ECIR 2020 Slack

Did not use

3

18

24

5

9

5

2

0

7

34

25%

50%

75%

Figure 2: Usefulness of the tools as reported by participants.
Should be standard practice and allowed for anyone
Should be possible only for specific cases

Organizers

Should be avoided

4

5

Participants

0%

Should not be allowed

35

25%

50%

11 1

0 0

0

75%

Figure 3: Importance of allowing remote participations as reported by organizers and participants.
the effectiveness of the platform and the ease of asking questions as well as comments on unexpected benefits like the relaxed dress code and the option to screenshot interesting slides to
follow up. The majority of negative comments referenced the lack of personal interactions and
socialising, missing coffee breaks and networking with colleagues in general. The specific incident
where one workshop was invaded was also a negative experience for attendees. Some found it
difficult to have physical spaces without disruption due to the isolation in their home or other
work commitments, and others faced internet connectivity challenges.
Responses of attendees who were authors or presenters of papers (16 responses) agreed that
it was much easier and cheaper to attend and one noted the particular benefit for students to
participate and the opportunity to present to a wider audience. It also meant that more than
one author per paper could participate. They also liked the Q&A options, especially the chat and
options to screen share. A number of respondents commented positively on the digital presentation
experience and the option to pre-record their presentation that was provided. Amusingly one noted
that it was easier to present without seeing the audience while another liked the option to take a
break without being noticed.
Missing personal contact, networking and lack of interaction also came up most frequently in
the negative comments from paper authors. In particular the lack of extended scientific exchange
and socialisation was a prevailing concern. One commented on the difficulty in giving an engaging
presentation when you cannot see the participants and the lack of eye contact. Some felt that
there were too many emails, different credentials and schedule changes that made participating

challenging. They also found it more difficult to focus for a full day. Many comments also noted
technical difficulties including sound issues, internet access and a good suggestion was made to
invest in a cheap microphone if you have to present in an online event. A comment specific to
workshops was that it felt more difficult to engage with the audience when you were presenting
cross-discipline work.
“I think I really missed networking with the researchers and experts from the workshop”

4

Conclusion

In conclusion, the overall experience of running the ECIR 2020 workshops as synchronous, fully
online events was generally found to be a positive one. Approximately 25% of both organizers and
participants who responded, reported it was “Much better than expected”. The major advantage
was felt to be the increase in both the number of attendees and the breadth, enabling those who
may ordinarily have not been able to travel to participate. Especially for workshops with small
budgets, online events facilitate the process of including keynote speakers. Online presentations,
coupled with the requirement or option to send pre-recorded presentations have potential to alleviate the issue of no-shows which tend to be the concern of many organizers in the past. There
were individual technical challenges (sound, connectivity, etc.) and one security incident but the
major disadvantage was the lack of social interaction, of scientific networking and the ability to
connect with people and discuss topics. Finding solutions to mitigate this decrease in interaction
would greatly improve the online workshop experience.
ECIR 2020 was a fully online event, with more than 1000 registrees. In this report, we presented
the first-hand experience of both ECIR 2020 Workshop organizers and participants, collected using
two online questionnaires. While this was setup to deal with a health emergency situation, we
think that the options for fully, or hybrid, online events will increase in the future. Not only due
to some of the aforementioned advantages but also as proactive actions to reduce academia carbon
footprint associated with air travel [8].

References
[1] Association for Computing Machinery. Virtual Conferences - A Guide to Best Practices
(Report version 1.1 from April 13, 2020). ACM Presidential Task Force. https://www.acm.
org/virtual-conferences, 2020. [Online; accessed 11-May-2020].
[2] Boratto, L., Marras, M., Faralli, S., and Stilo, G. International Workshop on
Algorithmic Bias in Search and Recommendation (Bias 2020). In Advances in Information
Retrieval - 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April
14-17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II (2020), J. M. Jose, E. Yilmaz, J. Magalhães, P. Castells,
N. Ferro, M. J. Silva, and F. Martins, Eds., vol. 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer, pp. 637–640.

[3] Cabanac, G., Frommholz, I., and Mayr, P. Bibliometric-Enhanced Information Retrieval 10th Anniversary Workshop Edition. In Advances in Information Retrieval - 42nd
European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II (2020), J. M. Jose, E. Yilmaz, J. Magalhães, P. Castells, N. Ferro, M. J. Silva,
and F. Martins, Eds., vol. 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 641–647.
[4] Cabanac, G., Frommholz, I., and Mayr, P., Eds. Proceedings of the 10th International
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval co-located with 42nd European Conference on Information Retrieval, BIR@ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14th, 2020 [online
only] (2020), vol. 2591 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-WS.org.
[5] Campos, R., Jorge, A., Jatowt, A., and Bhatia, S. The 3rd International Workshop
on Narrative Extraction from Texts: Text2Story 2020. In Advances in Information Retrieval 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-17, 2020,
Proceedings, Part II (2020), J. M. Jose, E. Yilmaz, J. Magalhães, P. Castells, N. Ferro, M. J.
Silva, and F. Martins, Eds., vol. 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 648–
653.
[6] Campos, R., Jorge, A. M., Jatowt, A., and Bhatia, S., Eds. Proceedings of Text2Story
- Third Workshop on Narrative Extraction From Texts co-located with 42nd European Conference on Information Retrieval, Text2Story@ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14th, 2020
[online only] (2020), vol. 2593 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-WS.org.
[7] Couto, F. M., and Krallinger, M. Proposal of the First International Workshop on
Semantic Indexing and Information Retrieval for Health from Heterogeneous Content Types
and Languages (SIIRH). In Advances in Information Retrieval - 42nd European Conference
on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II (2020),
J. M. Jose, E. Yilmaz, J. Magalhães, P. Castells, N. Ferro, M. J. Silva, and F. Martins, Eds.,
vol. 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 654–659.
[8] Quinton, J. N. Cutting the carbon cost of academic travel. Nature Reviews Earth &
Environment 1, 1 (Jan 2020), 13–13.
[9] Wikipedia contributors. Zoombombing – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. http:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zoombombing&oldid=955836412, 2020. [Online;
accessed 11-May-2020].

