arXiv:2005.06056v2 [cs.CR] 17 Dec 2020

COVID-19 Contact Tracing and Privacy:
Studying Opinion and Preferences
Lucy Simko1,2,3 , Ryan Calo2,4 , Franziska Roesner1,2,3 , Tadayoshi Kohno1,2,3
1

3

Security and Privacy Research Lab, University of Washington
2
Tech Policy Lab, University of Washington
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
4
School of Law, University of Washington
Report Version 1.0, May 8, 2020
https://seclab.cs.washington.edu/covid19

This report (version 1.0) is deprecated: see
arXiv:2012.01553 for our most recent report
(version 2.0), published December 4, 2020,
containing measurements through November
2020.

Abstract
There is growing interest in technology-enabled contact tracing, the process of identifying potentially infected COVID-19 patients by notifying all recent contacts of an infected person. Governments, technology
companies, and research groups alike recognize the
potential for smartphones, IoT devices, and wearable
technology to automatically track “close contacts”
and identify prior contacts in the event of an individual’s positive test. However, there is currently
significant public discussion about the tensions between effective technology-based contact tracing and
the privacy of individuals. To inform this discussion,
we present the results of a sequence of online surveys
focused on contact tracing and privacy, each with 100
participants. Our first surveys were on April 1 and
3, and we report primarily on those first two surveys,
though we present initial findings from later survey
dates as well. Our results present the diversity of
public opinion and can inform the public discussion

on whether and how to leverage technology to reduce the spread of COVID-19. We are continuing to
conduct longitudinal measurements, and will update
this report over time; citations to this version of the
report should reference Report Version 1.0, May 8,
2020.

1

Introduction

Technology companies, university research groups,
and governments are rapidly working to develop and
deploy contact tracing apps to track and mitigate
the spread of COVID-19. Prior work has determined
that contact tracing apps will be most effective when
used by the majority of a population [35, 36]; however, some have raised security and privacy concerns
(e.g., [33, 64]) as well as broader concerns about efficacy (e.g., [63]).
Our research seeks to provide the scientific, technology, and policy communities with a better informed understanding of the public’s privacy values,
concerns, and opinions around the use of proposed
automated contact tracing technologies. We argue
neither for nor against automated contact tracing in
this work, but instead offer a summary of public opinion on potential contact tracing scenarios, as we observe that many regions are moving towards auto-

mated contact tracing programs. We ask the follow- efforts to design contact tracing apps in a privacying research questions:
preserving manner, (2) how the makers of such a contact tracing app or program communicate the privacy
• Data sources. What data sources do people properties of their contact tracing program to their
feel most and least comfortable with being used potential users, and (3) legal and policy discussions
for contact tracing? We ask about multiple data around the appropriate use of such technologies.
sources, including: cell tower data, data from an
To sample some preliminary findings:
existing app, data from a new app by a known
1. From April 1 and 3, 2020 (week 1): if a contact
entity or company, proximity data, credit card
tracing app “protected [their] data perfectly”,
history, and surveillance camera footage.1
72% of participants said they would be at least
somewhat likely to download it; as privacy risks
• Data sharing and usage What are people’s
increase, their self-reported download likelihood
opinions regarding contact tracing data being
decreases (Section 6.4).
shared with or used by different entities for the
purposes of contact tracing? We ask about data
2. From April 1 and 3, 2020 (week 1): particisharing with and usage by multiple entities, inpants preferred a company that they already
cluding: their government, cellular provider or
trust with respect to security and privacy and
cellphone manufacturer, and various well-known
that they perceive to have the resources and dotechnology companies.
main knowledge to add location tracking and
analysis. To some, it is important that location
• Other privacy concerns and mitigations.
tracking is already the primary purpose of the
What other privacy concerns do people have
app, if added to an existing app. Many expressed
when deciding whether to download a contact
a more positive view of specific companies (e.g.,
tracing app? In what circumstances are people
Google) or apps (e.g., Google Maps), even bemost likely to download and use a contact tracfore Google and Apple announced their efforts
ing app?
(Sections 6.3, 6.5).
3. From April 1 and 3, 2020 (week 1): support for
government use of location data (for the purposes of studying or mitigating COVID-19) varied by situation, but was never strongly supported. Participants were more comfortable
than not with their government analyzing their
cell tower location data if they tested positive for
COVID-19, but also expressed a strong lack of
confidence that their government would use the
data only for COVID-19 mitigation; over half
were concerned that data sharing with their government would bring harm to themselves or their
community (Sections 6.2, 6.5, 6.6).

We capture public opinion through online surveys
using an international paid survey platform (Prolific).
Our first two surveys were on April 1 and 3, 2020,
and we are continuing to repeat variants of this online survey at regular intervals. Each survey is with
100 participants. Our April 1 and 3 surveys were
from before the virus had reached its peak infection
rate, before contact tracing apps were ubiquitously
available in many countries, and early in the public
discourse about contact tracing. This version of our
paper focuses on the April 1 and 3 survey results,
though we do also discuss initial findings from later
surveys as well.
We are releasing our results now, although preliminary, so that they can inform (1) ongoing technical

4. From April 17, 23, and May 1 (weeks 3-5): participants may not view proximity tracking as
more privacy-respecting than location tracking.
Participants reported, through separate questions about location tracking apps and proximity tracking apps, they would be no more likely

1 We added in the questions about proximity data, credit
card history, and surveillance camera footage questions after
our initial survey. These questions do not appear in our first
two weeks of survey data, which focus on location data.

2

to download a proximity tracking app than they
would a location tracking app in which the app
makers knew their location. They indicated concerns about the security and privacy of proximity tracking that may not be consistent with
the proximity tracking developers’ threat models. We encourage contact tracing and proximity tracking developers to consider how to
best communicate the threat model that their
protocol defends against to non-technical users,
and whether that threat model matches up with
what their users actually want and need (Section 6.8).

We also stress that these results are preliminary:
we present the raw percentages of participants who
answered each multiple choice question, along with N,
the number of participants who answered that question (sample size). We have not done statistical analysis of variance within questions or correlation across
questions or participant groups. We will update this
paper with additional analyses, including our analysis of longitudinal data and statistical analyses, over
time.

Finally, online surveys such as ours have inherent
limitations. Participants may experience survey fatigue and click through long matrix questions, giving
inaccurate answers in order to finish the survey more
Stepping back, we stress that this report primarily
quickly. From initial qualitative analysis, responses
documents findings from our April 1 and 3, 2020 surto free response questions seem to be on topic and
veys, though we do discuss some results from later
high quality, indicating a low rate of survey fatigue.
survey dates. Public sentiment may change over
Survey fatigue, or any lack thereof, may also be aftime, as the number of infected people changes, as
fected by the fact that participants were payed, and
new technologies emerge, as new policies are protherefore incentivized to finish.
posed or enacted, and as new public discussions enPrior work on Mechanical Turk participants in the
sue. A future version of this paper will report on
United
States — a different survey platform than
our longitudinal measurements. Additionally, we
the
one
we used — has found, with varied results,
stress that our study focuses on the interplay between
that
online
survey participants may not be represenprivacy and contact tracing, and does not consider
tative
of
the
general population [58]. Other studies
the numerous other user-centered challenges around
have
examined
whether online survey participants’
automated contact tracing, such as algorithmic acsecurity
and
privacy
knowledge and behavior accucountability or differences in the availability and usrately
represent
the
general
public, with varying reability of smartphones or apps across populations.
sults
[46,
57].
We surface these questions further in Section 3.3 and
urge other researchers, app developers, technology
companies, and governments to consider these issues
as they consider developing and deploying automated
contact tracing programs.
3 Location tracking during the

COVID-19 pandemic
2

Limitations
Because the pace of development on contact tracing
apps is so rapid, and because the pandemic situation
is rapidly evolving around the world, we expect this
section to be quickly outdated. However, it is important to capture the state of the world on April 1,
when we first deployed our survey (and the results of
which we report on here), and how contact tracing efforts have grown since then, in order to contextualize
our results.

We are presenting these preliminary results without
peer review because we believe our results have the
potential to inform the current rapidly-evolving technical work on contact tracing apps. However, because
the paper has yet to undergo peer review, and despite
our good faith attempts never to mislead or misrepresent our findings, we hope the reader will be especially cautious in interpreting our results.
3

Country
UK
USA
Europe

Total pop
65.8m
332.6m
741.m

4/1 cases
29.9k
213.2k
429k

5/1 cases
178.7k
1.1m
1.4m

ditionally 3 indicated that there was an app available
that they had not downloaded. All others said that
either an app was not available or they were not sure
if an app was available.

Table 1: State of the world on April 1. European
countries represented in our survey on April 1 + 3
are: Portugal (≤15% of participants); Poland (≤10%
of participants); Greece, Italy, Mexico, Netherlands,
Spain, Hungary, New Zealand, Germany, Finland,
Israel, Estonia, Denmark, Slovenia, Turkey, Latvia,
Belgium, and France (≤5% of participants). Other
countries represented in our survey on April 1 + 3
are: Canada, Mexico, Israel, Chile, Australia (≤5%
of participants) [1, 2, 3].

3.1

3.2

Contact tracing efforts

Here we give a brief overview of existing contact tracing app efforts and the conversation around how to
contact trace in a privacy-preserving way, captured at
this point in time (early May). The purpose of this
section is to contextualize our findings and recommendations, not give a comprehensive look at automated or technology-enabled contact tracing efforts.
Why automated contact tracing. Traditionally,
contact tracing is done by a team of public health experts and focuses on tracking down those who might
have been infected by someone who tested positive
for a disease, in combination with widespread testing. There are multiple reasons that a state, region, or other entity might implement or endorse automated contact tracing (likely to augment or complement human-based efforts) though not all experts
agree that automated contact tracing is needed or
will be effective. For example, as areas move toward
stopping “stay at home” orders, automated contact
tracing might be used to keep the rate of infection
low while allowing people to leave the home. Contact tracing technologies might also be used to enforce quarantine for people who have been identified
as COVID-19-positive.

State of the world as of April 1

On April 1, the course of the COVID-19 pandemic
had not yet peaked outside Asia. Table 1 shows the
number of infections on April 1 and May 1 in the
top three broad regions in our survey, the UK, US,
and Europe (minus the UK), representing 88.5% of
survey participants. As of this writing, many European countries—e.g., Spain, Italy, and Germany—
have seen slowing or slightly declining rates of infection [4].
On April 1, many European countries, including
the UK, Germany, Italy, and Spain, were under varying forms of lock down, with some combination of
schools, restaurants, bars, and non-essential shops
closed, public gatherings banned, and citizens urged
or mandated to stay inside except for essential outings [24, 45, 50, 60]. Many in the US were under
similar restrictions, though some states issued statewide mandates after April 1, and other states did not
issue a stay-at-home order (and as of this writing in
early May, some states are lifting or planning to lift
restrictions) [37, 47, 52, 61].
To our knowledge — and our participants’ knowledge — contact tracing apps were not available in
most of the countries from which we drew participants as of April 3. Only 9 of 200 participants indicated that they had downloaded an app whose purpose was studying or mitigating COVID-19, and ad-

Existing automated contact tracing programs
as of early May. Some governments have already
deployed contact tracing apps or programs, using a
variety of devices and data sources [5]. For example,
contact tracing apps exist in Bahrain, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Ghana, India, Israel, the
Republic of North Macedonia, Norway, Singapore,
and some US States [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 27, 39, 53]. Some apps are mandatory (e.g., in
China), and most are optional (e.g., Singapore) but
may struggle with low adoption [32]. Hong Kong
deploys electronic wristbands to those infected with
4

COVID-19 in order to ensure they were not leaving
their homes [59]. In South Korea, the government
sends text messages to everyone in a region with the
details of new COVID-19 cases, and there is a central database available with anonymized information;
however, some entries in the database have been specific enough to be traced back to a single person, and
have started damaging rumors [16, 48]. Taiwan and
Israel both use cell tower data: Taiwan uses it for for
quarantine geofencing, while Israel uses it for contact
tracing (Israel’s data comes from a previously secret
database used for counterterrorism) [39, 43]. There
may also be programs in other regions; this is not
meant to be an exhaustive list.
There is also significant interest in exploring automated contact tracing by other countries and regions,
and growing efforts by technology companies, startups, governments, and universities to develop such
programs [25].
Additionally, several companies have leveraged geolocation data to create “mobility reports” that measure the extent of social distancing in specific areas,
but do not identify or notify individual users [17, 18,
19, 20].

tracing, in which a user’s location is tracked.
Additionally, there are other, non-smartphone
methods that are being used and discussed for future
use in automated contact tracing, such as credit card
purchase history, and facial recognition on surveillance camera footage [44, 62].

3.3

Broader
tions.

issues

and

considera-

Beyond the privacy and security concerns and opinions that our work surfaces, there are many other
broader issues that must be addressed before the
release of a contact tracing application. Our work
does not touch on these issues directly, but we would
be remiss not to mention some of the broader impacts in a report about security and privacy. We
present example issues below, but refer readers to
[28, 38, 51, 54, 56, 63] for broader discussion of equity and efficacy concerns.

Availability for and usability by all. Governments and app makers must consider the implications
of an app being available only in certain languages,
or without accessibility features. If a certain demographic group is left without access, or without usDesign decisions affecting security and priable access, they may experience different rates of
vacy. There are design properties at multiple levels
infection. This lack of access may also lower the efthat affect user security and privacy, some of which
fectiveness of contact tracing.
users may be inherently aware of (e.g., being potentially identified as infectious in some designs), and
some of which are abstracted more from the user Users without smartphones. Not all people
(e.g., broadcast vs narrowcast; centralization vs de- have smartphones, and some high risk groups, such
centralization). For a more complete and in-depth as seniors, may be less likely to regularly use a smartphone. A smartphone app disenfranchises those sets
discussion of these properties, see [56, 67].
Some groups explicitly focusing on privacy- of users.
respecting contact tracing — each of which is making
design decisions based on their threat models and on- Mandatory vs optional use. Some have raised
the-ground situations — include Apple and Google, concerns about the efficacy of optional contact tracthe Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the ing apps [63]; however, mandatory apps raise differUniversity of Washington (UW), PEPP-PT, Inria, ent concerns about state surveillance, particularly if
and DP3T [21, 22, 26, 31, 66]. One high-level distinc- mandatory for only a certain demographic. Opt-in
tion that has gained more traction since our initial automated contact tracing efforts require the public
surveys in early April is proximity tracking, in which to reason about the privacy trade-offs. Mandatory
a user’s phone tracks other nearby phones, rather automated contact tracing efforts, meanwhile, could
than a more traditional implementation of contact force some to use technology that runs counter to
5

their privacy preferences (and potentially take pur- ing [29]. They found that there are statistically sigposefully evasive actions to avoid tracking).
nificant differences between demographic groups delineated by political party, race/ethnicity, and age,
Explainability of contact tracing algorithm with Republicans, Hispanic Americans, and those
and psychological effects. How should an app who are 30 or older being more accepting of the govnotify a user that they may be infected, and how ernment tracking location for the purposes of mitigamuch information should that app give about who tion COVID-19.
Hargittai and Redmiles surveyed around a thouinfected them or when / where they were infected?
sand
adults in the each of Italy, Switzerland, and the
How should an app communicate the expected false
US.
They
found that two thirds of the US participositive and false negative rate? If either false pospants
would
be willing to install a contact tracing
itives or false negatives are too high, users’ mental
app,
“that
would
help slow the spread of the virus
health may suffer, or users may become overly confiand
reduce
the
lockdown
period, even if that app
dent that they are not infected.
would collect information about their location data
Malicious actors. One or more intentionally false and health status” [40, 41]. They found that those in
reports of positive tests could have financial and so- the US would most trust an app from a health agency
cial consequences for businesses or people who either like the CDC or their insurance provider over the
believe they are infected, or whom other people be- other options they asked about, but that there is no
single trusted source. Therefore, in a Scientific Amerlieve are infectious.
ican blog, they recommend multiple applications that
can interoperate, with a shared base technology, in
order to allow users to pick the app that best suits
4 Related Work
their threat and usage model [41].
Other groups have also investigated public opinion on
In a survey conducted April 21-26, a group from
location tracking during COVID-19. Below we briefly The Washington Post and the University of Marydescribe three efforts, and note that although not all land found that 50% of American smartphone users
results match up exactly with respect to preferences would not use an app using the contact tracing techfrom different demographic groups, each survey asked nology proposed by Apple and Google, and that a
different questions, and on different dates.
further 18% of their respondents did not use a smartOur results are also not exactly the same, but phone [23, 65]. The accompanying Washington Post
all seem to indicate (a) reservations about govern- article notes that smartphone usage rate is lower
ment location tracking from a significant portion of amongst seniors, who are more vulnerable to the disthe population and (b) over half of the population is ease. This survey found that Democrats would be
willing to download a contact tracing app under the more willing to download the app, and that many
right circumstances. (However, we note that “the (57%) Americans would trust the CDC to deploy such
right circumstances” may be different for different an app (consistent with Hargittai and Redmiles), but
user groups, and that there is more work needed that fewer (47%) would trust their health insurance
to determine how automated contact tracing might company.
affect marginalized or under-resourced groups, and
Redmiles, in a separate survey conducted May 1-5,
what needs those groups have with respect to con- found that around 80% of Americans would be willing
tact tracing, if any).
to download a contact tracing apps, depending on its
The Pew Research Center, in a survey conducted efficacy, accuracy, and privacy [55].
April 7-12, reported that 60% of Americans do not
Our work adds to these results: though we have
believe that location tracking by the government fewer participants (and participants primarily from
would mitigate the pandemic, and many have con- Europe), we are able to answer more nuanced quescerns about privacy or appropriateness of such track- tions about data sources, privacy preferences, and we
6

also are able to distill some higher level user values
and concerns from qualitative data. Our study is
also longitudinal and positioned to observe changes
in opinions over time.

5

situations, or their “likelihood” of downloading an
app in a certain situation. Each section (except for
demographics) concluded with one or more optional
free-response questions, inviting participants to explain their answers.
The survey had the following main sections (excluding questions for participants who were already
using a contact tracing app).

Methodology

In order to collect rich data and measure public opinion, we designed an approximately 15-minute online
survey with both multiple choice and free response
questions. Our survey was implemented in Qualtrics.
We deployed the survey through Prolific, an online
survey platform based in the United Kingdom.
Our institution’s IRB determined our study was
exempt from further human subjects review, and we
followed best practices for ethical human subjects
survey research, to the best of our knowledge, e.g.,
we paid at or slightly above minimum wage, all questions were optional except the initial questions about
age and smartphone usage, and we did not collect
unnecessary personal information. We did give participants the option to submit their email address in a
separate Google form (not connected to their survey
results) in case they wanted to be contacted about
follow-up surveys.

5.1

Demographics. We asked participants three types
of demographic questions, centered around questions
about COVID-19, or variables we hypothesized might
correlate with their attitude towards COVID-19 and
contact tracing programs: (1) standard demographic
questions, like age, gender, geographic location; (2)
general political views, news sources, and privacy and
technology interest and knowledge (self-described);
(3) COVID-19-specific questions, like their general
level of concern about the pandemic, whether they
live with someone who is in a high-risk group, and
their beliefs and implementation about social distancing. We asked many of the demographic questions at
the end of the survey in order to help mitigate stereotype threat.
Cell tower location data. In this section, we
asked participants how comfortable they were with
their cell phone manufacturer or cellular carrier using their location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19. We presented participants with three variants on the situation: their location data being shared with their government, their location data being shared with their
government if they tested positive, and their location
data being shared publicly if they tested positive.

Survey Protocol

Because we expected most participants to be from
countries where an app to track and mitigate COVID19 was not in ubiquitous use, at least at the time
of our initial survey, most of the survey was designed to elicit user attitudes about contact tracing
in specific hypothetical situations, some more plausible than others (and some actually happening around
the world at the time of the survey). The survey
did include branches for those who had downloaded
an app for tracking or mitigating COVID-19, or who
had the opportunity to but chose not to; only a small
minority of the participants followed these branches.
In order to avoid biasing participants towards presenting themselves as more privacy-conscious than
they are, the survey did not mention “privacy” until the final two questions (demographics), and asked
instead about participants’ “comfort” with various

Existing apps using GPS location data. Next,
we asked participants to imagine that “the makers
of an existing app on your phone started using your
GPS location data to study or mitigate the spread of
COVID-19.” We chose 3 popular apps from each of 5
categories that we expected would use location data
(navigation, social media, messaging, transportation,
fitness) for a total of 15 apps. Participants rated their
comfort with each of the 15 apps using their location
7

data for mitigating the spread of COVID-19 on a 5point Likert scale, with an additional option for “I
don’t use this app.”
We then asked participants about their comfort
level if one of the apps they regularly use, which
might not be one of the ones in the list above, started
using their location data to mitigate the spread of
COVID-19. Next, we asked two free-response questions about the app that they regularly use that they
would most trust and the app that they would least
trust to study or mitigate COVID-19.

how likely they would be to download such an app, as
well as their download likelihood in two variant situations: if the data were shared regardless of whether
they tested positive, and if the government’s use of
the data were supervised by judge.

Other location data sources: Surveillance
camera footage and credit card history. Turning away from location data collected by an app, and
in response to an evolving conversation about alternate data sources, starting in week 3 we asked participants next about their comfort with location history
New app: perfect privacy. We then asked par- derived from surveillance camera footage and credit
ticipants to imagine a new app that would track their card purchase history.
location at all times for the purposes of mitigating the
spread of COVID-19, but that it would protect their
data perfectly. We asked, on 5-point Likert scales, New app: Proximity tracking. Due to the growhow likely they would be to install the app, and how ing discussions about and technical work on proximity tracking protocols and apps after April 1, in
it would change their current behavior.
week 3 we added a group of questions about proximity tracking. We asked about proximity tracking
New app: app makers know location at all by phone manufacturers, phone operating systems,
times but don’t share it. Changing the previous a new app, and several well known companies or
scenario slightly, we asked participants to imagine a generic entities.
new app that would know their location at all times
for the purposes of mitigating the spread of COVID19, and this time the app makers would know their Government use of location data. In this seclocation at all time but would not share it. We again tion, we stepped back from scenarios about specific
asked participants how likely they would be to down- data sources and asked participants questions about
load and use such an app. This time, we asked par- a scenario in which their government acquires their
ticipants to rate their comfort with each of companies location data for studying and mitigating COVIDthat made the same popular 15 apps we had shown 19. We asked about their confidence in their governthem previously making this app. We expanded this ment’s deletion of the data after the pandemic, use
list to include other companies in week 3 of the sur- of data for only COVID-19 tracking, and their genvey. We also asked about their comfort with five eral level of concern for their “personal safety or the
generic entities making such an app: a university re- safety of those in their community.”
search group, an activist group, an industry startup,
your government, and the United Nations.
Desired features in a new COVID-19 mitigation app. We then asked participants about a wide
variety of roles that a potential new COVID-19 mitigation app might have in enforcing isolation or notifying people of potential infections, drawn from existing contract tracing apps or programs. For example,
one feature we asked about was “notify you if you
came close to someone who later tested positive for
COVID-19” while another was “automatically notify

New app: app makers know location at all
times and share with your government if you
are diagnosed with COVID-19. Changing the
previous scenarios again, we asked participants this
time about a situation in which the new app’s makers share their location history with the government
if they test positive for COVID-19. We asked, again,
8

the authorities if people were not isolating as man- each survey run,2 all questions were optional, and
dated.”
a small minority already had an app that tracked
COVID-19 and thus did not take the main branch of
the survey (we do not report on this small minority
Location sharing with their government prehere).
pandemic. Finally, we asked participants to rate
their level of comfort with their location data being
shared with their government in October 2019, i.e.,
6 Results
before COVID-19. Since participants may not accurately recall their own previous beliefs, and may Here we report primarily on initial analysis of quanhave been primed towards privacy-sensitivity by the titative results from week 1 of our survey, with 100
rest of the survey, any results from this data must be Prolific participants on April 1 and April 3 each (200
treated with caution.
total). For this initial report, our current analysis do

5.2

not include rigorous statistical analysis, but instead
report only on the percentages of users that give each
response to a question. We present these initial results — with caveats — because the issue is timely.
9 of the 200 participants from April 1 and 3 followed a survey branch indicating they already had a
COVID-19 tracking app; we do not report on these 9
participants here.
Two notes on terminology: we use the term ‘contact tracing’ as a superset of ‘location tracking’, and
‘proximity tracking’. When reporting qualitative results, we use the format W1P100 to mean participant
100 from week 1.
In the text below, our notation X[N ], where N is a
number, refers to unique identifiers in the Qualtrics
survey platform that we used. We use this notation
for internal bookkeeping and question disambiguation as we continue to collect more data and revise
this report over time.

Recruitment

We recruited participants through Prolific, an online
survey platform, with no demographic restrictions,
since Prolific already requires that all participants be
18 or older. The first two questions of our survey
screened participants as required by our IRB. We
asked: (1) are you at least 18 years old? and (2)
do you use a smartphone regularly?. If participants
answered ‘Yes’ to both, they proceeded to the rest of
the survey.
We ran the survey on Prolific on April 1, 3, 8, 10,
and every Friday thereafter, with 100 people each
time, around the same time (3pm Pacific). We exclude participants who have taken any previous version of the survey. On the initial release of the survey,
in early April, we also recruited participants using the
snowballing technique through our own contacts on
social media and over email. In this paper, we report primarily on the Prolific participants recruited
on April 1 and 3, as well as cursory results of data
collected on May 1; in future papers, we plan to include the participants recruited more organically, as
well as deeper studies of the longitudinal data from
the weekly deployments on Prolific.

5.3

6.1

Participant Demographics

Participants resided primarily in the UK (26%),
the US (16%), 15 European countries (46.5%), and
7 other countries (11.5%). Our participants were
mostly young, with nearly half being less than 25
years old, and 56% male. Four participants identified
as agender or genderfluid, and one participant identified openly as transgender and male. We manually

Analysis

In this initial report, we present raw percentages, no
statistical analysis. When presenting percentages, we
give the number of participants who answered that
question; although we recruited 100 participants for

2 In week 3, although we recruited 100 participants, we actually ended up with 102, due to two participants finishing after the time allotted by Prolific, the survey platform through
which we recruited

9

Figure 1: Participants’ general concern about
COVID-19 and the average time they spent away
from home per day in the last week.
bucketed gender identities as reported by participants
in a free response text field; we believe we have stayed
true to participants’ gender identities when bucketing (e.g., by bucketing a ‘man’ response as ‘male’),
though we note that participants gender identities
may change over time, and that our participants may
have included more trans or gender non-conforming
participants than disclosed as so. To avoid the effect of stereotype threat, we asked most demographic
questions at the end of the survey.

Figure 2: Attitudes towards cell tower location data
being used for COVID-19 tracking. Columns sum to
1 and represent only the participants who answered
37% of participants said they were either in a high
risk group or living with someone considered high risk
(X43).

Participants concerned about COVID19 and believe in social distancing

Mostly positive attitude toward
use of cell tower data for COVID19 mitigation so long as it is not
released publicly

The majority of participants were concerned about
COVID-19 (79%, X6) and believed that social distancing is an important tool for slowing the spread
of COVID-19 (96.5%, X7). 80% reported leaving
their home less than one hour per day in the prior
week, with 28.5% not leaving their home at all (X8).
However, a distinct minority (19%) were unconcerned
(X6) and a quarter spent 6 or more hours per day out
of their home (though that is not necessarily at odds
with social distancing) (X8), as shown in Figure 1

Many participant were at least somewhat comfortable with their cell tower data being used for contact tracing; from the situations we presented, participants were most comfortable with their government being given the data only if they tested positive, and much less comfortable with the data being released publicly, as shown in Figure 2. However, even amongst participants who were comfortable with their data being used (generically, as in
X12, or shared with the government, as in X13 and

6.1.1

6.2

10

X14), more were somewhat comfortable rather than
extremely comfortable, signifying their reservations.
Even in the situation that participants were most
comfortable — the data being shared with the government if they tested positive — 13% were extremely
uncomfortable, and a further 15% were somewhat uncomfortable.
Of the situations presented, participants were most
uncomfortable with the idea of their cell tower location history being shared publicly if they tested
positive (61% uncomfortable) (X15). This situation is reminiscent of South Korea’s initial handling
of location tracking: location data and biographical details were posted publicly and were not sufficiently anonymized, as groups discovered the identities of those who had tested positive and rumors
started about extramarital affairs and plastic surgery
trips [49]. South Korea has since started anonymizing
the publicly released data more thoroughly [62].
This sentiment of being uncomfortable with public
disclosure more generally underscores the importance
of location data being properly protected when and
if it is collected, to avoid data being made public or
being exposed to other parties through a data breach.

6.3

Amongst existing apps, participants are most comfortable with
an already-trusted mapping app
adding COVID-19 tracking

Figure 3 shows a heatmap of user comfort with each
of 15 apps hypothetically using their location data
to study or mitigate COVID-19, showing only responses for participants who reported actually using
the app. Participants were generally uncomfortable
with the idea of most apps using their location data
for COVID-19 tracking: 49% would be extremely uncomfortable with TikTok adding this features; 3036% of participants would be extremely uncomfortable with any of the apps owned by Facebook that we
asked about (Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and
Messenger), and 21-28% somewhat uncomfortable for
the same apps.
Participants indicated the most comfort with
Google Maps or Apple Maps using their location data

to study or mitigate COVID-19 (among the 15 app
options given): 63% were at least somewhat comfortable with Google Maps, and 52% were at least
somewhat comfortable with Apple maps. This result
was collected before Apple and Google announced
their collaboration on a contact tracing app on April
10, but user comfort reported on weeks 2-5 remained
approximately the same (63-65% at least somewhat
comfortable with Google Maps; 49-54% at least somewhat comfortable with Apple Maps) [26].
We note that some of these apps have a smaller
sample size (e.g., TikTok, AllTrails), so that data
should be interpreted with more caution. Additionally, there may be self-selection bias present in these
results: if an app has a more privacy-conscious user
base, its users may appear to be less comfortable with
it using location data for COVID-19 tracking, and it
may appear that that app is less trusted by all users.
Preliminary analysis of qualitative results from
week 1 in this section reveals common themes around
user values and concerns regarding what apps they
would trust most (X23) and least (X24) to use their
location data for the purposes of COVID-19 tracking.
In line with the quantitative results reported above,
most users picked Google Maps as their most trusted
app, and Facebook as their least trusted app, at least
in the context of using location data for COVID-19
tracking.
Participants’ reasons for picking their most trusted
app, or for not picking their least trusted app, include
(a) the general reputation or public image, (b) a good
history with privacy and security, (c) confidence in
the company having the resources to add COVID19 tracking to its services, and (d) location tracking
already being central to the app’s purpose.
Participants also mentioned several concerns,
which extend to any contact tracing program: (a)
stalking or personal harm due to poorly anonymized
data; (b) data leakage or privacy breaches; (c) data
being sold by the company; and (d) a “slippery slope”
in which this sort of tracking becomes the norm.

11

Figure 3: Participant comfort with an existing app using their location to study or mitigate COVID-19
(numbers in columns add to 1 and are percentages; N = number of participants who use that app) (X18)

6.4

Privacy concerns reduce likeliIf the app makers knew their location but did not
hood to install a new COVID-19 share with anyone, participants were less comforttracking app, from 72% with per- able: only 19% would be extremely likely to download this app, and 36% would be somewhat likely.
fect privacy

In response to three general data-sharing situations
that might be present with a new COVID-tracking
app, participants indicated that in the “best possible” privacy situation — “an app that protects your
data perfectly” — 72% would be at least somewhat
likely to download the app, as shown in Figure 4.
Estimates vary on how much of a population needs
to participate in contact tracing in order for it to
be effective and depend other interventions, but recent work suggests a rate of around 60% [35, 36] to
70% [42].

Further, 35% would be extremely or somewhat unlikely to download the app.
Finally, participants were least comfortable with
app makers knowing their location and sharing it
with their government, though more were still likely
to download the app than unlikely: 49% were at least
somewhat likely, while 34% were somewhat or extremely unlikely.
These situations show that even in the best possible situation, with “an app that protects your data
perfectly,” most participants have reservations about
using an app to study or mitigate COVID-19. It

12

The Washington Post and University of Maryland
effort found that 50% of American smartphone owners would definitely or probably use a contact tracing app, while Hargittai and Redmiles found that
about two-thirds of Americans would download such
an app [40, 41, 65]. Separately, Redmiles found that
82% of Americans would be willing to download a
contact tracing app in perfect privacy and accuracy
conditions, but that their willingness to download
would drop dramatically if data could leak [55].

6.5

Figure 4: Self-reported likelihood of downloading a
new app to study or mitigate COVID-19, given three
privacy situations: (X50) perfect privacy, (X55) app
makers know location, (X61) app makers know location and share with the government if positive.

is worth noting that only about 20% of Singaporeans had downloaded Singapore’s contact tracing app,
TraceTogether, as of April 1 [30, 32, 35].
Further, 74.8% said that using such an app would
cause no change in their behavior, 20.9% said they
would be less social, and 4.2% reported that they
would be more social (X51). Being less social
while being tracked by an app could indicate that
those 20.9% of participants would feel uncomfortably
surveilled when using the app or that they think the
app’s notifications might alter their behavior, while
the 4.2% who would be more social might feel protected by such an app.
Results from later surveys by others, and from our
later surveys, show similar willingness to download.

Participants care that app developers don’t share data; are most
comfortable with Google and the
UN developing a new app

Participant opinions about existing companies making a new app followed similar trends as in Section 6.3, shown in Figure 5: most participants were at
least somewhat comfortable with Google (61%), and
many were somewhat comfortable with Apple (33%;
10% extremely comfortable), though just as many
were uncomfortable with Apple (34% somewhat or
extremely uncomfortable). Participants were overwhelmingly uncomfortable with the other companies
creating such an app.
Participants also indicated general mistrust for a
potential new COVID-19-tracking app created by an
industry startup (64% somewhat or extremely uncomfortable) or an activist group (58% somewhat
or extremely uncomfortable), as show in Figure 6.
Responses indicate the most trust in a universitydeveloped app (74% somewhat or extremely comfortable), but we note that at the beginning of the
survey, participants were shown our university’s logo
and told that this survey was an academic endeavour, which may have caused responses bias, as found
by [34]. Participants were largely split on generic
trust for a government- or United Nations-developed
app.
Initial analysis of qualitative responses to X58 echo
the values and concerns reported in Section 6.3: participants were concerned about sharing and selling
of their data, and lack of trust in multiple companies and activists and startups, with some perceived

13

Figure 5: Participant comfort level with companies hypothetically creating a new app to mitigate COVID-19,
assuming that app would know their location at all times, but would not share the data (X56).
to have ulterior motives. W1P198 explained: “if it
saves lives then i would use the app if it was made by
any company, i would be much happier if a university
did it as they have little to gain by having my data,
other than to use it for its intended reason.” Similar, W1P186 wrote: “I[t] leaves me uncomfortable as
I currently don’t trust many companies for data protection, I could however be convinced if it were made
by a trusted university or worldwide organization.”
In contrast, Hargattai and Redmiles found that
universities would be one of the least trusted entities,
at less than 10%, while the survey by the Washington Post and the University of Maryland found they
were relatively trusted, at 57%. This discrepancy
highlights the need for multiple surveys and qualitative data to better understand the nuances of public
opinion.

6.6

Unease over government use of
data

Stepping back from asking about a specific data
source, we asked participants about their confidence
in general in their government’s handling of any location data marked for COVID-19 tracking.
Participants largely indicated a lack of trust that
their government would use its citizens’ location data
conservatively. 72% responded that they thought it
was somewhat or extremely unlikely that their government would delete the data (X66; N=190), and
65% said it was somewhat or extremely unlikely that
their government would use it only for the purposes
of tracking COVID-19 (X67; N=191). However, 26%
thought it was at least somewhat likely that their
government would use the data only for studying and

14

mitigating COVID-19 tracking.
Participants also indicated concern that such data
sharing or collection would be harmful to their safety
or the safety of those in their community (X68;
N=191) with 26% saying they were extremely concerned, and 34% saying they were somewhat concerned. 19% were somewhat unconcerned, and only
5% were extremely unconcerned, as shown in Figure 7.

6.7

Desired app features

Participants responded positively to four of the ten
potential app features we presented, shown in Figure 8: they desire contact tracing notifications (a, b)
and general studying of trends (h, j). They are fairly
evenly split on other features, even the more privacyviolating features, like (d), in which the app would
make public a database of location history for anyone
who tested positive for COVID-19, and (g), in which
the app would automatically notify the authorities if
Figure 6: Participant comfort level with various people were not isolating as mandated.
generic entities creating a new app to mitigate
Interestingly, 49% of participants were at least
COVID-19, assuming that app would know their lo- somewhat comfortable with feature (c), “make your
cation at all times, but would not share the data location history for the past two weeks publicly avail(X57).
able if you tested positive for COVID-19,” whereas
in Section 6.2 X15 only 27% were at least somewhat
comfortable with cell tower data being made public
if they tested positive. The same difference occurs
in the May 1 data. This difference could be due to
users having different perceptions of control and autonomy in the two scenarios, with users perceiving
(and perhaps having) more control over the behaviors of their apps versus the behaviors of the cellular
infrastructure.

6.8

Cursory analysis of later responses: similar trends; mixed
feelings about proximity tracking; negative towards other data
sources

Figure 7: Participants’ concern over government data
use “harming [their] personal safety or the safety of Due to growing conversations about proximity tracking and alternate sources of location data, we added
those in [their] community”(X68).
sections to our survey in week 3. Here we present a
15

Figure 8: Features desired by participants in a COVID-19 tracking app (X72). Popular features bolded.
(a) Notify you if you came close to someone who later tested positive for COVID-19
(b) Notify anyone you came close to in the past two weeks if you tested positive for COVID-19
(c) Make your location history for the past two weeks publicly available if you tested positive for COVID-19
(d) Make public a database of the location histories of anyone who tested positive for COVID-19
(e) Notify you if your neighbors were not isolating themselves as recommended or mandated
(f ) Let you notify the authorities if you saw people you suspected or knew to be breaking the isolation
recommended or mandated
(g) Automatically notify the authorities if people were not isolating as mandated
(h) Used by scientists to study trends, not individuals
(i) Geofence to enforce mandatory or voluntary quarantine
(j) General assessment of social distancing in an area to display areas of high congregation

16

preliminary analysis of the data from weeks 3, 4, and
5, focusing on the most recent, week 5 (May 1).
In an initial (non-statistical) comparison with survey data from April 17, 23, and May 1 (weeks 3,
4, and 5 of our survey), many of the same general
opinions captured on April 1 and 3 appear. We also
present preliminary results about opinions on proximity tracking and the use of surveillance camera
footage and credit card data history as location data
sources, questions which were also added in week 3.
Geographic, gender, and age distribution for weeks
3, 4, and 5 were similar to week 1: participants were
primarily young, from the UK or Europe, and the
gender split was fairly even. In week 5 less than 10%
of participants were from the US (lower than other
weeks) and participants were 59% male.
Comparison with April 1 and 3 data. In comparison to Section 6.4, on May 1 approximately
the same percentage of participants said they would
download a new app to study or mitigate COVID19 “that protects your data perfectly” — 68% — but
fewer would be likely to download an app that shared
their location with their government (24% somewhat
or extremely likely), down from 51% on April 1 (Figure 4). April 17 and 23 show similar numbers to May
1, with fewer participants being likely to download a
location-tracking app that would share their location
with their government. We present these numbers
without analysis of statistical significance: this drop
could be due to randomness in our samples, or it
could indicate less willingness in later dates to download an app if the data would be shared with the
government.
Participants’ opinions about cell tower data (Section 6.2), trusted existing apps (Section 6.3), and
trusted companies and entities (Section 6.5) remained
similar to those from April 1 and 3, with participants
expressing comfort in companies and entities that
align with results from April 1 and 3: Universities,
Apple, Google, and Microsoft (Microsoft was added
as an option after our April 3 survey, and Google
and Apple’s announcement about creating a contact
tracing protocol occurred on April 10 [26]).

Figure 9: Participant self-reported likelihood of
downloading a proximity tracking situation on April
17, 23, and May 1.

Proximity tracking. One new addition after the
initial April 1 and 3 survey (in week 3, on April 17)
was a section about proximity tracking, as the conversation about proximity tracking has continued to
grow amongst the privacy community and the public.
Because of the significant current public discussions
about proximity tracking apps, we focus a sizeable
portion of our preliminary analysis on surfacing example qualitative results, which we turn to after our
quantitative summaries.
In weeks 3-5, slightly less than half of the participants (46%-48%) were somewhat or extremely comfortable with their phone manufacturer or operating
system conducting proximity tracking (X121). In
weeks 3 and 4, participants were approximately as
comfortable with that same data being shared with
their government (50% both weeks); on week 5, 33%
of participants were somewhat or extremely comfort-

17

able with proximity data being shared with their government by their phone manufacturer or operating
system (X122). This drop may either represent less
confidence in government, or it may be due to randomness in our data.
Participants’ self-reported likelihood of downloading a proximity tracking app was approximately the
same as their likelihood of downloading a locationtracking app in weeks 3 and 4 (X124; figures for
download likelihood for all situations and all 5 weeks
are available in Appendix B). In week 5, proximity
tracking received a more mixed response, as shown
in Figure 9. While the mixed response may be either due to sample randomness (more participants
from week 5 were from Europe) or declining support
for proximity tracking, these results show that, as a
whole, the public would not strongly prefer a proximity tracking app or protocol instead of a location
tracking app, at least at the time of the survey.
Initial analysis of qualitative data shows values and
concerns in line with those presented in Section 6.3:
participants reasoned about privacy, security, a “slippery slope”, and data sharing. Some reasoned that
they would prefer proximity tracking, and others, location tracking.
Several participants preferred proximity tracking
for security and privacy reasons. W5P42 mentioned
adversarial intentions: “I think proximity is better
than location as it does not track a persons whereabouts, which I think can be manipulated more easily for nefarious things (e.g. stalking). Proximity
tracking seems more anonymous and safer in that aspect.” W3P4 reasoned that is more private and that
additionally it might be more accurate than location
tracking: “proximity tracking seems better from a privacy perspective. Perhaps even more accurate? ” For
W4P25 and their community, proximity data is less
sensitive than location data: “It is better. My family and friends are paranoid about the government
knowing their whereabouts at all or any given location. This will give more peace to consumers.”
Some felt that both methods were too privacy invasive. W5P72 wrote “They both seem shady to
me.”; W5P12 said “Not as intrusive but still terrifying.” Others would be begrudgingly willing to install:
W3P54 said, “Again, I believe I could get used to it

if that is what this comes down to.” W3P45: “It is
for a good cause, but the idea of this kind of tracking
makes me uncomfortable.”
Others preferred location tracking. Their reasoning generally fell under the following themes:
• Direct and automatic communication between
phones is a security risk. W5P73: “I’m honestly more comfortable with location tracking
than my phone automatically exchanging information with another phone.” W5P102: “Seems
possible for a safety breach between devices sharing data.” W3P45: “This crosses the line a bit
I feel personally, I would want to know that this
information is secure and cannot be intercepted.”
• It will be less accurate than location tracking.
W5P87: “Location tracking would probably be
easier to get people on board for as it feels less invasive, however, I think proximity tracking would
provide far more information and drastically increase the efficiency of the whole process.”
• It is more privacy-invasive than location tracking. W5P88: “The government doesn’t have to
know with who I am.” W3P86: “It feels more of
an invasion of privacy, due to the subtleness of
it.”
• Physical security and spoofing. W3P27: “It
could be used for break-ins (checking if there is
someone home)”.
W5P83 commented the following, showing how the
accuracy for either location or proximity tracking
apps might be impacted be (perhaps unintentionally)
by evasive actions: “I believe an app like this is a fallacious system as many people that I know of, at the
moment, avoid taking their smartphones outside of
the house unless strictly necessary.”
We are not here to comment on the accuracy of
participants’ mental models: our results reveal that
proximity tracking does not feel more private or secure than location tracking to many potential users.
As shown in Section 6.3, many participants had similar concerns about location tracking apps. Therefore, developers of both location and proximity tracking apps must consider the various threat and men-

18

were largely uncomfortable with their credit card history being used to derive their location (51% uncomfortable when not shared with their government;
63% uncomfortable when shared with their government), and were less comfortable with the idea of
their government deriving their location from surveillance camera footage (69% uncomfortable), as shown
in Figure 10.
In comparison to cell tower data — another data
source that already exists and does not require a new
technology or application — participants were much
less comfortable with credit card history and surveillance camera footage (compare to Figure 2; numbers
are similar for May 1 participants). W5P14 wrote,
“It’s totalitarian”, and W5P85 would “...find it too
similar to a police state situation.” However some
participants acknowledged that these data sources
may already exist: W5P63 wrote that “I’m already
being watched by surveillance camera footage when I
am outside so it would be just utilizing already present
stuff.”

Figure 10: May 1 — Participant comfort level with
their location data being derived from credit card history or surveillance camera footage.

tal models of their potential users, and communicate
the threat model to which their protocol or app responses best. W4P41 directly addressed this issue: “I
am not quite comfortable with this tracking as I don’t
quite understand the mechanism behind such tracking
technology.”
Another overarching theme from Section 6.3 is that
public image matters. Participants reasoned about
the app, company, or data source best suited to automated contact tracing on multiple occasions; while
the general public may or may not be able to reason
accurately about what entities, algorithms, or technical protocols are best suited for contact tracing, it
is still driving their decisions.
Other data sources:
surveillance camera
footage and credit card history. Participants

7

Conclusion

Here we have presented preliminary results from surveys about public opinion surrounding location privacy during the COVID-19 pandemic. We have been
conducting our surveys longitudinally, but report
here primarily on our April 1 and 3, 2020 survey results. We have also sampled findings from later runs
of the survey. As we have stated throughout the report: these results are preliminary, presented without
statistical analysis, and without peer review.
The report adds to other concurrent work about
public opinion on potential contact tracing technologies and privacy concerns, and we strongly encourage
contact tracing developers, policy makers, and others to consider the user values and concerns presented
here, as user cooperation is crucial.
We plan to update this report with more indepth analysis and longitudinal data over time.
Updates will be published at https://seclab.cs.
washington.edu/research/covid19/.

19

8

Acknowledgements

We are very thankful to Karl Weintraub for general
discussions, sanity, and his Pandas knowledge. We
are also thankful to Gennie Gebhart for early discussions about this work. We thank Christine Chen,
Ivan Evtimov, Joseph Jaeger, Shrirang Mare, Alison
Simko, Robert Simko, and Eric Zeng for their valuable feedback on pilot versions of our survey. Additionally, we are thankful to Gennie Gebhart, Joseph
Jaeger, and Elissa Redmiles for their valuable feedback on a draft of this paper. We are also very thankful to Prolific for supporting our research by waiving
their fees as part of their COVID-19 fee waiver program.
This research was supported in part by a University of Washington Population Health Initiative’s
COVID-19 Rapid Response Grant and by the University of Washington Tech Policy Lab, which receives
support from: the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation, Microsoft, the Pierre and Pamela Omidyar Fund at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation.

References

[8] https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=co.gov.ins.guardianes&hl=en_
US.
[9] https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=cz.covid19cz.erouska&hl=en_
US.
[10] http://ghcovid19.com/.
[11] https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=nic.goi.aarogyasetu&hl=en_US.
[12] https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.hamagen&hl=en_US.
[13] https://stopcorona.app/.
[14] https://helsenorge.no/coronavirus/
smittestop.
[15] https://ndresponse.gov/covid-19resources/care19.
[16] https://coronamap.site/.
[17] https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility.
[18] https://www.google.com/covid19/
mobility/.

[1] https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.

[19] https://www.cuebiq.com/visitationinsights-covid19/.

[2] https://www.statista.com/statistics/
1102896/coronavirus-cases-developmenteurope/.

[20] https://www.unacast.com/covid19/socialdistancing-scoreboard.
[21] pact.mit.edu.

[3] https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/.
[4] https://www.evaluate.com/covid-19daily-update.
[5] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID19_apps.
[6] https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg.
[7] https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=bh.bahrain.corona.tracker&
hl=en_US.

[22] https://github.com/ROBERT-proximitytracing/documents.
[23] https://context-cdn.washingtonpost.com/
notes/prod/default/documents/37ccb851364b-46bc-84b4-cb0881048b16/note/
f6debda9-0e4a-421b-8aa8-98eda9339069.
#page=1.
[24] COVID-19 media surveillance - 31 March 2020.
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/scienceupdate/covid-19-media-surveillance20200331. [accessed 22-April-2020].
20

[25] Unified research on privacy-preserving contact [34] Dell, N., Vaidyanathan, V., Medhi, I.,
tracing and exposure notification. https://
Cutrell, E., and Thies, W. ” yours is betbit.ly/virustrackertracker. [accessed on 6ter!” participant response bias in hci. In ProMay-2020].
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (2012), pp. 1321–
[26] Apple and google partner on COVID-19
1330.
contact tracing technology.
https://web.
archive.org/web/20200410202023/https:// [35] Doffman, Z. Forget Apple and Google—here’s
www.blog.google/inside-google/companythe real challenge for COVID-19 contactannouncements/apple-and-google-partnertracing.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/
covid-19-contact-tracing-technology/,
zakdoffman/2020/04/12/forget-apple-andApril 2020. [accessed 10-April-2020].
google-heres-the-real-challenge-forcovid-19-contact-tracing/#4f9426092709,
[27] State of Utah releases “Healthy Together” beta
April 2020. [accessed 21-April-2020].
app.
[36] Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M.,
[28] Alkhatib, A. We need to talk about digital
Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Abeler-Dörner, L.,
contact tracing. https://ali-alkhatib.com/
Parker, M., Bonsall, D., and Fraser,
blog/digital-contact-tracing, May 2020.
C. Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests
[accessed on 6-May-2020].
epidemic control with digital contact tracing.
Science (2020).
[29] Anderson, M., and Auxier, B. Most americans don’t think cellphone tracking will help [37] Gershman, J. A guide to state coronavirus
limit COVID-19, are divided on whether it’s aclockdowns. The Wall Street Journal (March
ceptable. Pew Research Center (April 2020).
2020).
[30] Aravindan, A., and Phartiyal, S. Bluetooth phone apps for tracking COVID-19 show
modest early results. Reuters (2020). [accessed
21-April-2020].

[38] Guariglia, M., and Schwartz, A. Protecting civil liberties during a public health crisis.
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/
03/protecting-civil-liberties-duringpublic-health-crisis, March 2020.

[31] Chan, J., Foster, D., Gollakota, S.,
Horvitz, E., Jaeger, J., Kakade, S., [39] Halbfinger, D. M., Kershner, I., and
Kohno, T., Langford, J., Larson, J., SinBergman, R. To track coronavirus, Israel
ganamalla, S., Sunshine, J., and Tessaro,
moves to tap secret trove of cellphone data. The
S. PACT: Privacy-sensitive protocols and mechNew York Times (March 2020). [accessed 29anisms for mobile contact tracing, 2020.
March-2020].
[32] Chong, C. About 1 million people have down- [40] Hargittai, E., and Redmiles, E. Covid-19
loaded TraceTogether app, but more need to do
study on digital media and the coronavirus panso for it to be effective: Lawrence Wong. The
demic. http://webuse.org/covid/. [accessed
Straits Times (April 2020). [accessed 24-Aprilon 30-April-2020].
2020].
[41] Hargittai, E., and Redmiles, E. Will ameri[33] Crocker, A., Opsahl, K., and Cyphers,
cans be willing to install covid-19 tracking apps?
B. The challenge of proximity apps for COVIDScientific American (April 2020).
19 contact tracing. https://www.eff.org/
deeplinks/2020/04/challenge-proximity[42] Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A.,
apps-covid-19-contact-tracing, April 2020.
Bosse, N. I., Jarvis, C. I., Russell, T. W.,
21

Munday, J. D., Kucharski, A. J., Ed- [52] Mervosh, S., Lee, J. C., Gamio, L., and
munds, W. J., Sun, F., et al. Feasibility
Popovich, N. See which states are reopening
of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation
and which are still shut down. The New York
of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health
Times. [accessed on 6-May-2020].
(2020).
[53] Mozur, P., Zhong, R., and Krolik, A. In
coronavirus fight, China gives citizens a color
[43] Hui, M. How Taiwan is tracking 55,000 peocode, with red flags. The New York Times
ple under home quarantine in real time. Quartz
(March 2020).
(March 2020). [accessed 26-April-2020].
[54] Raskar, R., Schunemann, I., Barbar, R.,
Vilcans, K., Gray, J., Vepakomma, P.,
Kapa, S., Nuzzo, A., Gupta, R., Berke,
A., Greenwood, D., Keegan, C., Kanaparti, S., Beaudry, R., Stansbury, D., ArJones, J. Spain toughens restrictions as coroncila, B. B., Kanaparti, R., Pamplona, V.,
avirus death toll surges. Reuters (March 2020).
Benedetti, F. M., Clough, A., Das, R.,
[accessed 22-April-2020].
Jain, K., Louisy, K., Nadeau, G., Pamplona, V., Penrod, S., Rajaee, Y., Singh,
Kang, R., Brown, S., Dabbish, L., and
A., Storm, G., and Werner, J. Apps gone
Kiesler, S. Privacy attitudes of mechanical
rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an epiturk workers and the us public. In Symposium on
demic, 2020.
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS) (2014),
vol. 4, p. 1.
[55] Redmiles,
E. M.
What does it
mean for a COVID app to “work”?
Kates, J., Michaud, J., and Tolbert, J.
http://www.cs.umd.edu/~eredmiles/howStay-at-home orders to fight COVID-19 in the
good-good-enough.pdf.
United States: The risks of a scattershot ap[56] Redmiles, E. M. User concerns & tradeoffs in
proach. KFF (April 2020).
technology-facilitated contact tracing, 2020.
Kim, M. J., and Denyer, S. A ‘travel log’ of
[57] Redmiles, E. M., Kross, S., and Mazurek,
the times in South Korea: Mapping the moveM. L. How well do my results generalize? comments of coronavirus carriers. The Washington
paring security and privacy survey results from
Post (March 2020). [accessed 26-April-2020].
mturk, web, and telephone samples. In 2019
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP)
Kim, N. ’more scary than coronavirus’: South
(2019), IEEE, pp. 1326–1343.
Korea’s health alerts expose private lives. The

[44] Ilyushina, M. How Russia is using authoritarian tech to curb coronavirus. CNN (March
2020).
[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

Guardian (March 2020).

[58] Ross, J., Irani, L., Silberman, M., Zaldivar, A., and Tomlinson, B. Who are the
[50] Knapton, S. How long will the UK coronavirus
crowdworkers?: shifting demographics in melockdown last? Telegraph (April 2020). [accessed
chanical turk. In CHI’10 extended abstracts
27-April-2020].
on Human factors in computing systems (2010),
ACM, pp. 2863–2872.
[51] Landau, S., Lopez, C. E., and Moy,
L.
The importance of equity in con- [59] Saiidi, U. Hong Kong is putting electronic
tact tracing. https://www.lawfareblog.com/
wristbands on arriving passengers to enforce
importance-equity-contact-tracing, May
coronavirus quarantine. CNBC (March 2020).
2020.
[accessed 24-April-2020].
22

[60] Schmitz, R. In Germany, high hopes for new
Binns, R., and Cattuto, C. DecentralCOVID-19 contact tracing app that protects
ized privacy-preserving proximity tracing.
privacy.
https://www.npr.org/sections/
https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/
coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/02/
blob/master/DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf,
825860406/in-germany-high-hopes-forApril 2020.
new-covid-19-contact-tracing-app-thatprotects-privacy, April 2020.
[accessed [67] Vaudenay, S. Centralized or decentralized?
The contact tracing dilemma.
23-April-2020].
[61] Shear, M. D.
Trump extends social distancing guidelines through end of
April.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/
03/29/us/politics/trump-coronavirusguidelines.htmll, March 2020.
[accessed
23-April-2020].
[62] Singer, N., and Sang-Hun, C. As coronavirus surveillance escalates, personal privacy plummets.
https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/03/23/technology/coronavirussurveillance-tracking-privacy.html,
March 2020. [accessed 24-March-2020].
[63] Soltani, A., Calo, R., and Bergstrom, C.
Contact-tracing apps are not a solution to the
covid-19 crisis.
[64] Stanley, J., and Granick, J. S. The
limits of location tracking in an epidemic.
https://www.aclu.org/aclu-white-paperlimits-location-tracking-epidemic, April
2020.
[65] Timberg, C., Harwell, D., and Alauna, S.
Most Americans are not willing or able to use
an app tracking coronavirus infections. That’s
a problem for Big Tech’s plan to slow the pandemic. The Washington Post (April 2020).
[66] Troncoso, C., Payer, M., Hubaux, J.-P.,
Salathé, M., Larus, J., Bugnion, E.,
Lueks, W., Stadler, T., Pyrgelis, A.,
Antonioli, D., Barman, L., Chatel, S.,
Paterson, K., Čapkun, S., Basin, D.,
Beutel, J., Jackson, D., Preneel, B.,
Smart, N., Singelee, D., Abidin, A.,
Guerses, S., Veale, M., Cremers, C.,
23

A

Survey Protocol

A.2

The survey protocol is below. We give section headings and descriptors for the reader’s reference here;
participants did not see headers. Unless otherwise
specified, all questions were answered on a five-point
Likert scale.
The logo of our institution (with the institution
name prominent) appear as a header to each survey
page. Our lab and department name did not.
On April 10 (week 2), we fixed typos, and added
‘tax agency’ as an option for the government sectors.
On April 17 (week 3) we made the following
changes to the survey:
• fixed typos;
• standardized the use of italics and bold text;
• added ‘Microsoft’ as an option in Section A.7;
• added a group of questions about other location
data sources (Section A.9);

A.1

This survey involves questions about COVID19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 (commonly
known as coronavirus).
X6: How concerned are you about COVID-19?
X7: Do you believe that social distancing is an
important tool for slowing the spread of COVID-19?
[yes, no]
X8: Averaged over the past week, approximately
how many hours much time per day did you spend
out of your home, within 6 feet (2 meters) of other
people? (e.g., getting groceries, working at an essential job like in a hospital, in a grocery store, etc). [‘I
did not leave my home’, 0-1 hours per day, 2-3 hours
per day, ... , 7-8 hours per day, 8+ hours per day]
X9: In which country do you currently reside?
[drop-down country list]
X10: For respondents in the USA: in which state
do you currently reside? [drop-down US state list]

A.3

• added a group of questions about proximity tracing (Section A.10).

Consent and Screening

This is a survey about location tracking and
Coronavirus (COVID-19) by researchers at the
University of Washington, in Seattle, Washington,
USA. The University of Washington’s Human Subjects Division reviewed our study, and determined
that it was exempt from federal human subjects regulation. We do not expect that this survey will put
you at any risk for harm, and you don’t have to answer any question that makes you uncomfortable. In
order to participate, you must be at least 18 years
old, regularly use a smartphone, and able to complete the survey in English. We expect this survey
will take about 15-20 minutes to complete.
If you have any questions about this survey, you
may email us at [study-specific-email].
Thanks for taking our survey! To start, please answer the two questions below...
Are you at least 18 years old? [yes, no]
Do you use a smartphone regularly? [yes, no]

Demographics I

Cell phone manufacturer and
provider location data

Cell phone manufacturers and cellular providers have
access to your physical-world location.
X12: How comfortable are you with your cell phone
manufacturer or your cellular carrier using your location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating
the spread of COVID-19?
X13: How comfortable are you with your cell phone
manufacturer or your cellular carrier sharing your location data for the past two weeks with your government for the purposes of studying or mitigating
the spread of COVID-19? (Regardless of whether
you test positive for COVID-19.)
X14: If you tested positive for COVID-19,
how comfortable would you be with your cell phone
manufacturer or your cellular carrier sharing your location data for the past two weeks with your government for the purposes of studying or mitigating
the spread of COVID-19?
X15: If you tested positive for COVID-19,
how comfortable would you be with your cell phone
manufacturer or your cellular carrier sharing your location data for the past two weeks publicly?

24

X16: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
• AllTrails
about your cell phone manufacturer or your cellular
carrier sharing your location data for the purposes
Suppose that one of the apps that you regularly use
of studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19? – not necessarily one of the ones above – started using
[free response]
your location data to study or mitigate the spread of
COVID-19.
A.4 Existing app location data
X20: How comfortable are you with this app using
your location data for the purposes of studying or
Some phone applications have access to your physicalmitigating the spread of COVID-19?
world location, either when the application is in use
X22: If you tested positive for COVID-19,
or all the time. Suppose the makers of an existhow
comfortable would you be with this app sharing
ing app on your phone started using your GPS
your
location data for the past two weeks publicly?
location data to study or mitigate the spread
X23:
Consider all the apps you regularly use on
of COVID-19. For example, this could include disyour
phone
(not just the apps listed earlier). Which
closing past locations of known positive COVID-19
app
would
you
most trust to use your location data
cases to the public or to the government, or alerting
for
the
purposes
of studying and mitigating COVIDpeople who have crossed paths with the positive case.
19?
Why?
[free
response]
X18- Below we’ve listed 15 commonly-used apps.
X24: Which app that you currently use would you
For the apps that you use regularly: how comfortable
least
trust to use your location data for the purposes
are you with the following apps using your location
of
studying
and mitigating COVID-19? Why? [free
data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the
response]
spread of COVID-19? [“I don’t use this app” + 5point Likert scale for each of the following apps]
• Google Maps
• Apple Maps
• Waze
• Facebook
• Instagram
• TikTok
• WhatsApp
• Facebook Messenger
• Zoom
• Uber
• Lyft
• Airbnb
• Calorie Counter (MyFitnessPal)
• FitBit

A.5

Current use of COVID-19 app

X25: Have you used any apps that help track the
spread of COVID-19? (i.e. Singapore’s “TraceTogether”) [yes, no]
If yes, participants branch to ‘already have app.’
If no, participants continue.

A.6

New app, perfect privacy

Imagine there is a new app that would track your
location at all times for the purposes of mitigating
the spread of COVID-19.
Suppose that this app protects your data perfectly.
X50: How likely would you be to install and use
this app?
X51: Would this app change your current behavior?
X52: Optionally, please use this space tell us any
initial thoughts you have about such an app. [free
response]
25

A.7

• A university research group

New app, app makers know location

• An activist group
Imagine there is a new app that would track your location at all times for the purposes of studying or
• An industry startup
mitigating the spread of COVID-19.
Suppose now that the makers of the application
• Your government
would know your location at all times, but would not
share your location with any other entity.
• The United nations
X55: How likely would you be to install and use
this app?
X58: Optionally, please use the space below to
X56: Now, suppose that the app is made by one elaborate on your thoughts about one or more comof the following companies, all of which already have panies using your location data for the purposes of
created popular apps. Please rate how comfortable tracking COVID-19. [free response]
you would be if each company were responsible for
this new app. [“I don’t know enough about this company to make a decision” + 5-pt Likert scale for each A.8 New app, app makers share data
of the following]
with government
• Google (Google Maps, Waze, etc)

Again, imagine there is a new app that would track
your location at all times for the purposes of studying
or mitigating the spread of COVID-19.
• Facebook (Facebook, Facebook Messenger, InSuppose now that the makers of the application
stagram, WhatsApp)
would know your location at all times, and would also
• Microsoft (Skype, OneDrive, etc)3
share that data with your government if you were diagnosed with COVID-19.
• ByteDance (TikTok)
X61: How likely would you be to install and use
• Zoom Video Communication
this app?
X62: If the government’s use of the data were su• Uber
pervised by a judge, how likely would you be to
• Lyft
install and use this app?4
Now suppose that the makers of the application
• AirBnb
would share your location data with your government
only if you tested positive for COVID-19.
• MyFitnessPal
X112: How likely would you be to install and use
• AllTrails
this app?
• FitBit
X64: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about
a company that is doing COVID-19 tracking
X57: Suppose that the app is made by one of the
sharing
your location with your government? [free
following general entities. Please rate how comfortresponse]
able you would be if one of the following were responX115: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
sible for this new app, which would use the location
about
judicial oversight of the government’s usage of
data they collect from your smartphone to track the
location
data? [free response]
spread of COVID-19. [5-pt Likert scale for each of
the following]
4
• Apple (Apple Maps)

3 Added

April 17 (week 3).

This question, and the rest of this section, was added on
April 17 (week 3) as a previous version was ambiguous.

26

A.9

Other location data sources:
X123: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about
your cell phone manufacturer or phone operCredit card history and surveilating
system
tracking other phones nearby? [free relance camera footage

There are other ways to track someone’s location.
One is the use of video cameras in public places. Another is the use of credit card purchasing histories.5
X115: How comfortable would you be with your
credit card company deriving your location history for the past two weeks for the purposes of studying and mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
X116: How comfortable would you be with your
credit card company deriving your location history for the past two weeks and sharing it with
your government for the purposes of studying and
mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
X117: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about your location history being derived from your
credit card purchase history?

A.10

sponse]
Imagine instead there is a new app that would conduct proximity tracing for the purposes of studying
or mitigating COVID-19: that is, it would not track
your location, but would instead keep track of other
phones that you are nearby (and, vice versa, other
phones with this app will record that they have been
in the proximity of your phone).
X124: How likely would you be to download this
app?
X125: Now, suppose that the proximity tracing
app is made by one of the following companies.
Please rate how comfortable you would be if each
company were responsible for this new app. [“I don’t
know enough about this company to make a decision”
+ 5-pt Likert scale for each of the following]
• Google (Google Maps, Waze, etc)

Proximity tracing

• Apple (Apple Maps)
One alternative to location tracking for the purposes
of studying or mitigating COVID-19 is proximity
• Facebook (Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Intracing, in which your phone would automatically
stagram, WhatsApp)
exchange information with every phone within 6 feet
• Microsoft (Skype, etc)
(2 meters) of your phone, keeping track of your
close physical encounters, but not tracking
• ByteDance (TikTok)
your actual location. This data could then be used
to reconstruct your close encounters if you contracted
• Zoom Video Communication
COVID-19, or could alert you if someone you had
• Uber
been in close physical proximity to tested positive for
6
COVID-19.
• Lyft
X121: Imagine that your cell phone manufacturer or phone operating system would conduct
• AirBnb
proximity tracing for the purposes of studying or mit• MyFitnessPal
igating COVID-19 (and, vice versa, other phones will
record that they have been in the proximity of your
• AllTrails
phone). How comfortable would you be with this?
X122: Suppose that your cell phone manufac• FitBit
turer or phone operating system would share
X126: Now, suppose that the proximity tracing
this proximity data with your government if you
app
is made by one of the following general entities.
tested positive for COVID-19. How comfortable
Please
rate how comfortable you would be if each
would you be with this?
entity were responsible for this new app.
5 This
6 This

section added April 17 (week 3)
section added April 17 (week 3)

• A university research group
27

• An activist group

X70: Optionally, please use the space below to
elaborate on your thoughts about the government
having access to your location data for the purposes
of COVID-19 tracking. [free response]

• An industry startup
• Your government
• The United nations

A.12

App features

In some countries, such as South Korea, China, and
Singapore, there do exist apps to monitor the spread
of COVID-19 through location tracking. These apps
can have multiple purposes, including:
- Alerting the user if they have come into contact
with someone who later tests positive with COVID19;
A.11 Government use of data
- Helping the community or law enforcement enforce
isolation and quarantine edicts;
If the government acquired your location data
Tracing
viral strains through the community.
7
or proximity data (i.e. from an app on your
X72:
If
a
new app were deployed in your country
phone, from your cell phone carrier, etc) for the
to
mitigate
the
spread of COVID-19, which of the
purposes for studying and mitigating COVIDfollowing
features
would you want it to have? (519....
point
Likert-scale
for
each of the following:)
X66: How likely do you think it is that your government would delete the data after the pandemic
• Notify you if you came close to someone who
ends?
later tested positive for COVID-19
X67: How likely do you think it is that your gov• Notify anyone you came close to in the past two
ernment would only use the data for the purposes of
weeks if you tested positive for COVID-19
tracking COVID-19?
X68: How concerned would you be about your gov• Make your location history for the past two
ernment’s use of your location data harming your
weeks publicly available if you tested positive for
personal safety or the safety of those in your comCOVID-19
munity?
X69: Suppose your location was shared with only
• Make public a database of the location histories
a specific sector of the government. For each of the
of anyone who tested positive for COVID-19
following sectors of government, please rate how com• Notify you if your neighbors were not isolating
fortable you would be with them having access to
themselves as recommended or mandated
your location data.
X127: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about an app that tracks other phones nearby?
X128: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about proximity tracking versus location tracking for
the purposes of studying or mitigating COVID-19?

• Let you notify the authorities if you saw people
you suspected or knew to be breaking the isolation recommended or mandated

• Federal Disease Tracking Agency (US: CDC)
• Your state or City Health Department

• Automatically notify the authorities if people
were not isolating as mandated

• Tax Agency (US: IRS)
• Local law enforcement (state, country, city, etc)

• Used by scientists to study tends, not individuals

• Immigration authorities (US: CBP or ICE)
7 ’or

• Geofence to enforce mandatory or voluntary
quarantine

proximity data’ added April 17

28

• General assessment of social distancing in an
area to display areas of high congregation
X73: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about what you would want such an app to do? [free
response]
X74: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts
about what you would want such an app to NOT do?
[free response]
X75:
Is such an app available in your
country?
[Yes / No / I’m not sure]
If yes, participants branch to ‘App available’

A.13

Section 5.0: Prior privacy preferences

We’re now going to ask you about your thoughts
about location sharing with your government BEFORE COVID-19.
80 - In Oct 2019 (before the first known cases of
COVID-19), how comfortable would you have been
with your location data being shared with the government in general?
81 - In Oct 2019 (before the first known cases of
COVID-19), how comfortable were you with your location data being shared with the following sectors
of government? [5-Point Likert scale for each of the
following:]
• Federal Disease Tracking Agency (US: CDC)

X39: What is your age? (you may answer approximately if you do not know, or wish not to say exactly)
[free response]
X40: What is your gender identity? [free response]
X41: What political party do your views typically
align with? [free response]
X42: What are your top three news sources? (i.e.
Twitter, Facebook, Fox News, CNN, NPR, New York
Times, etc) [free response]
X43: Regarding COVID-19, are you in high risk
group or live with someone with high risk? [yes / no]
X44: Are you generally interested in or concerned
about privacy and technology? [yes / no]
X45: Do you know how to change location permissions for apps on your phone? [yes / no]

A.15

Branch: app is available

X76: Have you downloaded the app in your country
to mitigate or study the spread of COVID-19? [yes,
no]
X77: If you have not downloaded the app: why
not? what changes, or assurances by the manufacturer or government (if any) would you want to see
to the app before downloading? [free response]
X78: What are your thoughts about the privacy
properties of this app? [free response]

A.16

• Your state or City Health Department

Branch: Already have app

You indicated that there is an app (or apps) available
in your country to track, study, or mitigate COVID• Tax Agency (US: IRS)
19. This section will ask about that app.
X27: What is the name of the app, or apps?
• Local law enforcement (state, country, city, etc)
X28: Why did you install and use it?
X29: Do you know anyone who did not download
• Immigration authorities (US: CBP or ICE)
the app? [yes, no]
X30: If so, why did they not install it?
82 - Optionally, please use the space below to elaborate on your thoughts about one or more companies
X31: What concerns, if any, do you have about the
sharing your location data with some part of the gov- app?
ernment (before COVID-19). [free response]
X32: If you had or have concerns, what outweighed
the concerns and lead you to the decision to download
the app?
A.14 Demographics II
X33: What concerns, if any, do you have about
Almost done!
your government having access to your location data?
29

X34: What concerns, if any, do you have about the
app makers having access to your location data?
X35: Do you expect the app makers to stop storing
your location data after the pandemic is over?
X36: Do you plan to delete the app after the pandemic?
X37: Anything else you’d like to say about the app
and/or your concerns?

30

B

Participants’
Download
Likelihood of Contact Tracing Apps: Weeks 1-5

Week 2:

This appendix shows the download likelihood data in
each situation for Weeks 1-5.
Week 1:

Week 3:

31

Week 4:

Week 5:

32

