Human Mobility in Response to COVID-19 in France, Italy and UK
Alessandro Galeazzi,1, ∗ Matteo Cinelli,2 Giovanni Bonaccorsi,3 Francesco Pierri,4 Ana
Lucia Schmidt,2 Antonio Scala,5, † Fabio Pammolli,3, 6 and Walter Quattrociocchi2, ‡
1
University of Brescia, Via Branze, 59, 25123 Brescia , Italy
Ca’Foscari Univerity of Venice, via Torino 155, 30172 Venezia, Italy
3
Department of Management, Economics and Industrial Engineering, Politecnico di Milano
4
Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano
5
Applico Lab – ISC CNR, Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Roma, Italy
6
CADS, Joint Center for Analysis, Decisions and Society, Human Technopole

arXiv:2005.06341v1 [cs.SI] 13 May 2020

2

The policies implemented to hinder the COVID-19 outbreak represent one of the largest critical
events in history. The understanding of this process is fundamental for crafting and tailoring
post-disaster relief. In this work we perform a massive data analysis, through geolocalized data from
13M Facebook users, on how such a stress affected mobility patterns in France, Italy and UK. We
find that the general reduction of the overall efficiency in the network of movements is accompanied
by geographical fragmentation with a massive reduction of long-range connections. The impact,
however, differs among nations according to their initial mobility structure. Indeed, we find that
the mobility network after the lockdown is more concentrated in the case of France and UK and
more distributed in Italy. Such a process can be approximated through percolation to quantify the
substantial impact of the lockdown.

INTRODUCTION

The pandemic outbreak of the COVID-19 virus has
resulted in a unprecedented global health crisis with high
fatality rates and heavy stress to national health systems [1, 2] and to the economic and social structure of
countries [3, 4]. As a result, an impressive effort is being
exerted to understand on one side the epidemiological
features of the outbreak [5–8] and on the other side its
economic consequences [9–11]. The majority of countries
governments have responded with non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPI) aimed at reducing the mobility of citizens to decrease the rate of contagion [12]. This calls for
a better understanding of the patterns of human mobility
during emergencies and in the immediate post-disaster relief. Indeed the study of mobility habits is a foundational
instance for several issues ranging from traffic forecasting,
up to virus spreading and urban planning [13–16]. However, a quantitative assessment of its statistical properties
at different geographical scales remains elusive [17–21].
The availability of rich datasets on mobility of individuals,
coupled with the urgency of the current situation, has
fostered the collaboration between tech giants, such as
Facebook and Google, institutions and scholars [7, 22–24].
Along this path, the present work builds upon a collection of data from social network users and addresses the
dynamics of spatial redistribution of individuals as a response to mobility restrictions applied to limit the disease
outbreak. We perform a massive analysis on aggregated
and de-identified data provided by Facebook through its
Disease Prevention movement maps [25] to compare the

∗
†
‡

a.galeazzi002@unibs.it
antonio.scala.phys@gmail.com
w.quattrociocchi@unive.it

effects of lockdown measures applied in France, Italy and
UK in response to COVID-19. The overall dataset spans
over 1 month of observations and accounts for movements
of over 13M people. We model countries as networks
of mobility flows and we find that restrictions elicit a
transition toward local/short run connections, thus causing a loss in the network efficiency. Our result mirrors
previous results in the literature which found that critical
phenomena are an intrinsic feature of mobility networks,
leading to transition between isolated short-range flows
and collective long range flows [26]. Moreover we contribute to the literature on mobility disruption during
critical events [27–31] by studying the effect of movement
limitations across the whole territory of the countries in
our dataset, with a geographic scope which is unparalleled
in the literature.
We provide a model that simulates the effects of movement restrictions, finding that transitions can be approximated by means of different percolation strategies. The
general reduction of the overall efficiency in the network
of movements is accompanied by geographical fragmentation with a massive reduction of long-range connections.
However, the effect changes according to the starting
mobility structure of each nation. In particular, we find
that the network of UK and France after the lockdown
is more concentrated while in Italy is more distributed.
We conclude the paper by showing how the the effect of
restrictions in Italy, UK and France can be approximated
through percolation analysis. Furthermore, our analysis
reveals several interesting features. First, the three countries display differentiated mobility patterns that reflect
the structural diversity in their underlying infrastructure:
more centralized around their capital cities in the case of
France and UK and more clustered in the case of Italy.
Such infrastructural characteristics, together with different responses to national lockdown, contributed to the
emergence of very distinctive configurations in terms of

2
residual mobility patterns. France has one big cluster centered in Paris and many smaller centers that disconnect as
soon as the percolation process begins, Italy exhibits four
interconnected clusters, centered approximately in Napoli,
Roma, Milano and Torino, that remain interconnected
over time thus showing a high persistence and resilience.
Finally, UK has one cluster centered around London, but
most of England exhibits a higher persistence with respect to France and Italy, thus suggesting the presence of
a more capillary network structure.
The understanding of the different resilience features
of national mobility networks is fundamental to craft and
tailor specific release policies and to smooth the economic
impact of lockdown. Indeed, the correlation among mobility, disease spreading and economic prosperity is crucial
both in emergency scenarios and in ordinary times, since
the different resilience of mobility networks could be both
a predictor of the severity of future systemic crises and
a guide to improve the economic and social impact of
policies.

CONNECTIVITY OF NATIONAL MOBILITY
NETWORKS

We represent national mobility networks as weighted
directed graphs, based on movement maps made available
by Facebook through their Data for Good program [25]
(see Materials and Methods for further details). Nodes
correspond to municipalities and edges are weighted with
the amount of traffic between two municipalities.
We first aggregate mobility flows in two symmetric
disjoint windows before and after the day of lockdown
(see Materials and Methods), as shown in panels (A to F)
of Figure 1. By comparing the mobility network during
the pre-lockdown phase (panels A-B-C of Figure 1) to
the mobility network during the post-lockdown phase, we
note a significant reduction of the overall connectivity.
However, we notice that mobility restrictions have a higher
impact on the connectivity of France, whereas they yields
more limited effects in the other two countries. In fact,
UK and Italy show a reduction of 21% and 16% in the
size of the largest weakly connected component (LWCC,
that is, the maximal subgraph of a network in which any
two vertices are interconnected through an undirected
path), whereas France exhibits a reduction of almost 79%.
Such different impact on the LWCC across countries may
depend on several co-existing factors, among which we
can list the structural features of the underlying networks
and the population density, that is 199,82/km2 for Italy,
270.7/km2 for UK and 101/km2 for France. In panels GH-I of Figure 1, we further characterize daily connectivity
patterns by computing the number of weakly connected
components (No. WCC) and the size of the LWCC of the
mobility networks. In all cases, we observe a decreasing
trend on the size of LWCC and an increase of the number
of WCCs. It is worth noticing that these trends are
present even before the lockdown dates, but they reach a

steady state only during the days after the intervention.
Hence, the number of WCCs and the size of the LWCC
well capture the response of the countries to the lockdown.
In the case of France (where the LWCC is Paris-centric),
we notice a strong fragmentation of the network from
the beginning: in fact, the number of WCCs is larger
than the size of the LWCC, signaling that the mobility
is well distributed along the whole country. However,
Paris remains connected by long-range connections to
the remaining most active areas of Bordeaux, Toulouse,
Marseille and Lyon. In the case of Italy (where the
LWCC contains all the main Italian cities, i.e. Napoli,
Roma, Milano and Torino), the lockdown enhances the
importance of local mobility. Notice that, while in the
centre and the south of Italy mobility remains localised
mainly at regional level (in Fig. 1E one can notice Sicilia,
Campania, Lazio and Toscana), the lockdown reveals
that northern Italy is more interconnected, showing a
clustered mobility for the main industrial regions, i.e.
Piemonte, Lombardia, Veneto and Emilia-Romagna. The
UK is clearly London-centric: the size of the LWCC
remains higher than the number of WCCs, with strong
local mobility patterns only in the Bristol area and in the
Manchester-Liverpool area. Hence, the situation in terms
of number of WCCs and the size of the LWCC reflects
the different underlying structure of the three countries:
France with a huge hub in Paris that is star-connected
via long-range links to the local city-centered areas, Italy
with mobility distributed mostly over the center-northern
region, and UK that appears as an extension of London,
whose mobility network remains pervasive even after the
lockdown.

EFFICIENCY OF NATIONAL MOBILITY
NETWORKS

We further investigate the effect of lockdown focusing on
the global efficiency [32] of mobility networks, as shown in
Figure 2. The global efficiency is a measure that quantifies
how optimal is the information flow in a network (further
details are reported in Materials and Methods).
We notice a decreasing trend of the efficiency in the
period before national lockdown and a steady state in
the days after the intervention (Figure 2), which is consistent with the observed decrease in global connectivity
(Figure 1).
Since the network efficiency is a measure that condensates information related to both clustering (i.e. connectedness of neighbours) and small world effect (i.e. presence of long-range connections that act as shortcuts), the
trends observed in Figure 2 (top panels) well describe the
effect of an ongoing shock that cuts both long range connections and the overall cohesiveness. Moreover, the three
countries experience different amounts of decentralization
as a consequence of the lockdown. In order to capture the
differences among them in more detail, we measure the
heterogeneity of nodes in terms of their contribution to the

3

FIG. 1: Outlook on national mobility networks for France, Italy and UK during COVID-19 pandemic.
Panels (A to F) show the largest weakly connected components (LWCC) of national mobility networks built on two disjoint
symmetric windows: respectively 2 weeks before (panels A-B-C) and 2 weeks after (panels D-E-F) the day of national lockdown.
The lockdown dates is March 17th for France; March 9th for Italy; March 24th for UK. Bright dots represent municipalities that
belong to the LWCC. We observe the following reductions in terms of nodes that disappear from the main cluster. France: from
5,495 to 1,174 nodes. Italy: from 2,733 to 2,293 nodes. UK: from 1,072 to 844 nodes. Panels (G-H-I) show the temporal
evolution of daily connectivity for national mobility networks of municipalities, in terms of number of weakly connected
components (No. WCC) and size of the LWCC. We visualize trends by means of a LOESS regression (dashed lines with 95%
confidence intervals shaded in grey) and highlight lockdown and week-end days with vertical red lines, respectively solid and
dashed.

4
global efficiency using the Gini index [33] (see Materials
and Methods). We first observe that, in correspondence
of the initial decrease of global efficiency, the Gini index
displays an increasing trend that becomes steady after the
lockdown date (Figure 2). The observed trend means that
the contribution of nodes to the global efficiency becomes
more and more heterogeneous over time, until it reaches
a steady state. This result indicates that the progressive
disruption has very heterogeneous effects on the single
nodes, suggesting that policies should be carefully tailored
to avoid enhancing unequal treatments of different areas:
as an example, in Italy it has been observed that the
lockdown could enhance economic disparities [24]. Such
an effect could be even more pronounced in France, that
shows a higher level of dishomogeneity in connectivity
both at the municipal and at the provincial level when
compared to Italy. Indeed, nodes that get disconnected
are more likely to remain isolated as compared to a country such as Italy that is based on a more distributed
mobility network Conversely, UK seems to have a different response to the shock distributing it more evenly
among its nodes (refer to SI for further details).
FR

IT

UK

0.5

Efficiency

1.0

0.0

0.5

Gini index

1.0

apr 15

apr 01

mar 15

mar 01

apr 15

apr 01

mar 15

mar 01

apr 15

apr 01

mar 15

mar 01

0.0

FIG. 2: Evolution of global efficiency and of its
heterogeneity.
Top panels display the temporal evolution of global efficiency
(normalized by its maximum value during the period of
observation), for the mobility network of municipalities. We
visualize trends using a LOESS regression (dashed lines with
95% confidence intervals shaded in grey) and highlight
lockdown dates using a solid vertical line. Bottom panels
display the temporal evolution of the Gini index of the nodal
efficiency. The Gini index is used as measure of heterogeneity
and it is computed considering the nodal contributions to
global network efficiency.Overall, we observe an increase of
the Gini index indicating an increasing heterogeneity over
time.

RESILIENCE OF NATIONAL MOBILITY
NETWORKS

The drivers behind the empirical results reported in
previous sections can be investigated by modeling the
process that led to the disruption of mobility networks.
Therefore, in order to model the lockdown effect, we per-

form an analysis based on percolation theory [34] on the
aggregated graph related to the period before the national
lockdown. We assume that such a graph is a proxy for the
structure of the mobility network in standard conditions
(see Materials and Methods). We implement bond percolation on the aggregated networks by iteratively deleting
edges following an increasing (respectively decreasing)
weight order. During the process of network dismantling,
we keep track of measures related to both cohesiveness
and distance, namely the LWCC size, the global efficiency
and the node persistence. In more detail, the node persistence measures the extent to which a node remains
connected to the LWCC, that is, how much the node is
resilient to percolation (see Materials and Methods).
The top row of Figure 3 shows the results of the percolation process in terms of node persistence, carried out
by removing edges in increasing weight order for France,
Italy and UK. To each node we assign an area on the
map calculated by means of Voronoi tessellation [35] and
colored according to node persistence (see Materials and
Methods).
The empirical evidence displayed in previous sections
finds support in the percolation results. Comparing the
three cases, the differences in the network structure among
countries clearly emerge: while France has one big cluster
centered in Paris and many smaller centers that disconnect as soon as the process proceeds, Italy exhibits four
interconnected clusters, centered approximately in Napoli,
Roma, Milano and Torino (that roughly correspond to
the high speed train lines), that remain interconnected
thus showing a high persistence. Conversely, UK has one
cluster centered around London, but most of England
exhibits a higher persistence with respect to France and
Italy, thus suggesting the presence of a more capillary
network structure. Surprisingly, deleting stronger edges
first does not disconnect any of the three networks as fast
as deleting weaker edges. This effect can be explained
by assuming a ”rich club” structure, where links corresponding to higher mobility flows are concentrated around
core regions. Indeed, the largest fragility of the mobility
network toward the deletion of weaker edges hints at a
core-periphery structure.
To provide further insights regarding the different effects of the percolation process on each of the three countries, in the middle row Figure 3 we compare the trends
of LWCC size and global efficiency throughout the percolation process.
We first notice that the decay of the LWCC size differs
depending both on country and edge removal strategy:
removing edges sorted by decreasing weight seems to affect less the decay of the LWCC size than removing edges
sorted by increasing weight, for all countries. However,
we notice some differences in the decay of LWCC size
among the three nations in the increasing case: while
France exhibits an almost linear trend, UK shows a significant drop only after a notable amount of connections
is removed. Finally, Italy seems to be in a intermediate
condition, showing an almost linear decay interspersed

5

FIG. 3: Results of the percolation process in terms of node persistence and edge removal strategies .
Percolation process is performed by iterating a cutting procedure on edges according to their weights calculated in the whole
period before lockdown. Top panels: node persistence during the percolation process. Node persistence is defined as the number
of iterations a node remains connected to the LWCC over the maximum number of iterations before the network is completely
disconnected; the more persistent the node, the brighter the color. Notice that we are defining persistence upon deleting edges
by their increasing strength: hence, brighter nodes are not only the last to be disconnected, but are also those embedded in
stronger mobility flows. Central panels: size of the LWCC (largest weakly connected component) as a function of the residual
edges. Green curves correspond to deleting edges from the strongest to the weakest, while blue curves correspond to deleting
edges according to their increasing weights. Bottom panels: variation of global network efficiency obtained deleting edges by
increasing (green curves) or decreasing (blue curves) strength. In both the central and the bottom panels, we plot the
”empirical” values of LWCC and of the global efficiency for the mobility networks calculated aggregating flows in the weeks
before (circles), during (triangles) and after (diamonds) the lockdown date. Notice that, while lockdown has cut out the
peripheries of the networks (central panels, but see also panels D-E-F of Figure 1), the effect of the reduced mobility also
severely affects the network efficiency (lower panels).

6
with steps.
The bottom row of Figure 3 displays the normalized
global efficiency as a function of the residual edge percentage. Also in this case, France has a smoother decay
with respect to Italy and UK, especially for what concerns
the percolation process based on increasing weight sorting. Moreover, fixed the percentage of residual edges, UK
has a higher efficiency when we consider the increasing
percolation case. However, such a relationship changes
when the decreasing percolation strategy is taken into
account: in this case UK has a somewhat steeper decay
of global efficiency, suggesting the presence of a higher
number of high weight connections among nodes. Again,
we observe that core regions (the ones where strong links
are concentrated, i.e. the most persistent regions in the
upper panels) are the most relevant: in fact, the steepest
decrease in efficiency happens when deleting strongest
edges first. On the other hand, periphery regions only
mildly contribute to the network efficiency, as demonstrated from the slowest decrease upon cutting weakest
edges first.
In order to shed light on the impact of the lockdown on
the network edges, we report the trends followed by empirical networks superimposing them over the results of the
percolation process. Each point in the curve corresponds
to a certain statistic computed on a mobility network
aggregated over one week (see Materials and Methods).
The mobility networks are divided into three categories
based on the period taken into account: the weeks before
the lockdown, the week in which the lockdown happened
and the weeks after the lockdown.
We note that the residual amount of edges decreases
over time and it differs from country to country. France
displays the lowest percentage of residual edges, while
Italy and UK tend to retain a higher percentage of their
edges. Moreover, we notice how Italy and UK strongly
differ in terms of the evolution of LWCC size: although
they loose roughly the same fraction of edges, there is
a strong difference in terms of the amount of connected
nodes. In spite of such differences, the increasing percolation strategy is able to approximate the reduction in terms
LWCC size quite accurately for all nations. The case of
the normalized global efficiency is somewhat different: all
the countries seems to have a similar loss proportionally
to their initial efficiency. Additionally, the trend of the
empirical curves is closer to that of the decreasing percolation strategy. The major difference observed in the
middle and bottom rows of Figure 3 is based on the fact
that the considered empirical statistics follow opposite
link removal strategies. This effect is due in part to the
nature of the two measures; the former more related to
the density and to the structure of connections and the
second more related to their weight. In any case, despite
eventual differences related to the network measures that
we take into into account, it is interesting to observe how
the lockdown cannot be modeled by a removal strategy
based only on edge weights. Rather, it is the result of a
joint effect deriving from the removal of links based both

on their structural importance and weight.

CONCLUSIONS

The COVID-19 pandemic is testing the structural
strength of our global society. Most national governments have simultaneously reacted to the contagion by
applying mobility restrictions to contain the disease outbreak. The resulting disruption is similar to that caused
by a natural disaster, but the effect is on a global scale.
For this reason, in this work we analyze the effects of the
lockdown on three different national mobility systems,
the French, Italian and British, by means of a 13M users
dataset from Facebook. We provide a structural analysis
of the mobility network for each nation and quantify the
effect of mobility restrictions applied to hinder COVID19 outbreak by means of percolation analysis. We find
that lockdown mainly affects national smallwordness i.e.,
strong reduction of long-range connections in favor of
local paths. Our analysis suggests that the national resilience to massive stress differs and depends upon the
inner connectivity structure. Indeed, the three countries
display very different mobility patterns that reflect the
diversity in their underlying infrastructure, more concentrated in the case of France and UK and more distributed
in the case of Italy. Our results may provide insights on
the interplay between mobility patterns and structural
dependencies in the network of movements at national
level and may help design better transportation networks,
improve system efficiency during natural catastrophes and
contain epidemics spreading.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mobility data and networks
We analyzed human mobility leveraging data provided by
Facebook through its Data for Good program [25]. The platform provides movement maps which are based on de-identified
and aggregated information of Facebook users who enabled
their geo-positioning.
Movements across administrative regions (i.e. municipalities in our case) are aggregated with a 8-hours frequency, and
describe the amount of traffic flowing between two municipalities in a given time window. Similar to data analyzed in
recent research on mobility restrictions applied in China [5, 6],
Facebook does not really provide the number of people moving
between two locations but rather an index, constructed with
proprietary method to ensure privacy and anonymization, that
highly correlates with real movements [25].
We collected data relative to mobility in Italy, France and
United Kingdom until April 15th, with different starting times
depending on the availability of Facebook maps (respectively
February 23th, March 10th and March 4th). The average number of daily users with their location enabled during the period
of interest is 13,669,145 (France: 4,110,226; UK: 5,801,979;
Italy: 3,786,940).

7
For the sake of our analysis we represent mobility flows
using a weighted directed graph where nodes are municipalities and edges are weighted based on the amount of traffic
flowing between two locations. To represent mobility networks
before/during lockdown we aggregate daily traffic on windows
of 12-13-14 days (respectively for France, UK and Italy) before/after the day of intervention depending on the availability
of data.
From these data, we build several graphs for each country.
We consider an oriented daily graph at municipality levels,
where there can be only one edge per day from municipality
A to municipality B, whose weight is the daily sum of all
edges from A to B. The same procedure is applied for building
aggregate networks at different time scales such as weekly
graphs of pre/post lockdown graphs.

Network efficiency
The efficiency is a global network measure that combines
the information deriving from the network cohesiveness and
the distance among the nodes. It measures how efficiently
information is exchanged over the network [32] and it can be
defined as the average of nodal efficiencies eij among couples
of vertices of the network. Given a weighted network G(V, E)
with n = |V | nodes and m = |E| edges, the connections of
G are represented by the weighted adjacency matrix W with
elements {wij } where wij ≥ 0 ∀ i, j. The global efficiency can
be written by means of the following expression:

Gini index
The Gini index is a classic example of a synthetic indicator
used for measuring inequality of social and economic conditions.
The Gini index can be defined starting from the Gini absolute
mean difference ∆ [36] of a generic vector y with n elements,
that can be written as:
∆=

n
n
1 XX
|yi − yj |
n2 i=1 j=1

(3)

The relative mean
Pdifference is consequently defined as ∆/µy
where µy = n−1 n
i=1 yi . Thus, the relative mean difference
equals the absolute mean difference divided by the mean of
the vector y. The Gini index g is one-half of the Gini relative
mean difference.
∆
g=
(4)
2µy
Values of g ∼ 1 signal that the considered vector displays high
inequality in the distribution of its entries, while values of
g ∼ 0 signal a tendency towards equality.

Percolation process and node persistence

Beside the geographical distance between two nodes of the
graphs, a proximity can also be defined considering that two
locations are closer if many movements happen between them.
To compute network efficiency in our case we use the reciprocal
of weights on links to obtain the shortest path distance among
couples of nodes.

To measure the extent to which a node resists to percolation
process, we define the following quantity as node persistence.
Consider a graph G with nodes V ={v1 , . . . , vk } and edges
E={e1 , . . . , eh }. Suppose that the edges weights assume values
in the set W = [w1 , . . . , wn+1 ] with w1 < w2 < · · · < wn+1 ,
and suppose that we run a percolation process that consists of
deleting edges in increasing order, that is, in the first iteration
we delete all the edges with weight less or equal than w1 , in
the second iteration we delete all the edges with weights less
or equal than w2 and so on until the last iteration, n + 1,
where we delete all the edges in the network. Notice that the
percolation process can be performed similarly in the case
edges are removed following a decreasing weight order. Thus,
at iteration i, we delete all the edges with weight less or equal
than wi . Consider now a node vj ∈ V . At each step of the
process, vj may or may not be part of the LWCC of the network
G. Clearly, if vj does not belong to the LWCC of G at step i,
it will not be in the LWCC of G at step i + 1, i + 2, . . . , n + 1.
Defining Mvj as the maximum number of iterations i such
that vj belongs to the LWCC of G, the persistence of node vj
is defined as:
Mvj
ρ=
(5)
n
That is, if the whole process takes n + 1 iterations to disconnect the whole network, the persistence of a node vj is defined
as the maximum number of iterations for which vj is connected
to the LWCC over the maximum number of iteration for which
there are connected nodes in the network.

[1] Andrea Remuzzi and Giuseppe Remuzzi. Covid-19 and
italy: what next? The Lancet, 2020.
[2] Shengjie Lai, Nick W Ruktanonchai, Liangcai Zhou,
Olivia Prosper, Wei Luo, Jessica R Floyd, Amy
Wesolowski, Mauricio Santillana, Chi Zhang, Xiangjun
Du, et al. Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions to

contain covid-19 in china, 2020.
[3] Brennan Klein, Timothy LaRock, Stefan McCabe, Leo
Torres, Filippo Privitera, Brennan Lake, Moritz U G
Kraemer, John S Brownstein, David Lazer, Tina EliassiRad, and et al. Reshaping a nation: Mobility, commuting,
and contact patterns during the covid-19 outbreak, 2020.

Eglob (G) =

X
X 1
1
1
eij =
n(n − 1)
n(n − 1)
dij
i6=j∈V

(1)

i6=j∈G

where dij is the distance between two generic nodes i and j,
defined as the length of the shortest path among such nodes.
The shortest path length dij is the smallest sum of the weights
wij throughout all the possible paths in the network from i to
j. When node i and j cannot be connected by any path then
dij = +∞ and eij = 0. Following the methodology of [32],
the global efficiency Eglob (G) is normalized in order to assume
maximum value E(G) = 1 in the case of perfect efficiency. In
such a setting the nodal efficiency, i.e. the contribution of
each node to the global efficiency, can be simply written as:
ei =

1 X 1
.
n−1
dij

(2)

j6=i

8
[4] Giulia Pullano, Eugenio Valdano, Nicola Scarpa, Stefania
Rubrichi, and Vittoria Colizza. Population mobility reductions during covid-19 epidemic in france under lockdown,
2020.
[5] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado
Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun,
et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of
the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science,
368(6489):395–400, 2020.
[6] Moritz UG Kraemer, Chia-Hung Yang, Bernardo Gutierrez, Chieh-Hsi Wu, Brennan Klein, David M Pigott, Louis
du Plessis, Nuno R Faria, Ruoran Li, William P Hanage,
et al. The effect of human mobility and control measures
on the covid-19 epidemic in china. Science, 368(6490):493–
497, 2020.
[7] Nuria Oliver, Bruno Lepri, Harald Sterly, Renaud Lambiotte, Sébastien Delataille, Marco De Nadai, Emmanuel
Letouzé, Albert Ali Salah, Richard Benjamins, Ciro Cattuto, et al. Mobile phone data for informing public health
actions across the covid-19 pandemic life cycle, 2020.
[8] Marino Gatto, Enrico Bertuzzo, Lorenzo Mari, Stefano
Miccoli, Luca Carraro, Renato Casagrandi, and Andrea
Rinaldo. Spread and dynamics of the covid-19 epidemic
in italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020.
[9] Andrew Atkeson. What will be the economic impact of
covid-19 in the us? rough estimates of disease scenarios.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2020.
[10] Roy M Anderson, Hans Heesterbeek, Don Klinkenberg,
and T Déirdre Hollingsworth. How will country-based
mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19
epidemic? The Lancet, 395(10228):931–934, 2020.
[11] Warwick J McKibbin and Roshen Fernando. The global
macroeconomic impacts of covid-19: Seven scenarios,
2020.
[12] Nicholas G Davies, Adam J Kucharski, Rosalind M
Eggo, Amy Gimma, W John Edmunds, CMMID COVID19 Working Group, et al. The effect of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on covid-19 cases, deaths and demand for
hospital services in the uk: a modelling study. medRxiv,
2020.
[13] Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo
Barabasi. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. nature, 453(7196):779–782, 2008.
[14] Zhihang Dong, Yen-Chi Chen, and Adrian Dobra. A
statistical framework for measuring the temporal stability
of human mobility patterns. Journal of Applied Statistics,
pages 1–19, 2020.
[15] S Eubank, H Guclu, VSA Kumar, M Marathe, A Srinivasan, Z Toroczkai, and N Wang. Controlling epidemics in
realistic urban social networks. Nature, 429(180-184):25,
2004.
[16] Caroline O. Buckee, Satchit Balsari, Jennifer Chan, Mercè
Crosas, Francesca Dominici, Urs Gasser, Yonatan H. Grad,
Bryan Grenfell, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Moritz U. G. Kraemer, Marc Lipsitch, C. Jessica E. Metcalf, Lauren Ancel
Meyers, T. Alex Perkins, Mauricio Santillana, Samuel V.
Scarpino, Cecile Viboud, Amy Wesolowski, and Andrew
Schroeder. Aggregated mobility data could help fight
covid-19. Science, 2020.
[17] Dirk Brockmann, Lars Hufnagel, and Theo Geisel. The
scaling laws of human travel. Nature, 439(7075):462–465,

2006.
[18] Shlomo Havlin and Daniel Ben-Avraham. Diffusion in
disordered media. Advances in physics, 51(1):187–292,
2002.
[19] Chaoming Song, Tal Koren, Pu Wang, and Albert-László
Barabási. Modelling the scaling properties of human
mobility. Nature Physics, 6(10):818–823, 2010.
[20] Chaoming Song, Zehui Qu, Nicholas Blumm, and AlbertLászló Barabási. Limits of predictability in human mobility. Science, 327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.
[21] Hugo Barbosa, Marc Barthelemy, Gourab Ghoshal, Charlotte R James, Maxime Lenormand, Thomas Louail,
Ronaldo Menezes, José J Ramasco, Filippo Simini, and
Marcello Tomasini. Human mobility: Models and applications. Physics Reports, 734:1–74, 2018.
[22] Gregory A Wellenius, Swapnil Vispute, Valeria Espinosa,
Alex Fabrikant, Thomas C Tsai, Jonathan Hennessy,
Brian Williams, Krishna Gadepalli, Adam Boulange,
Adam Pearce, et al. Impacts of state-level policies on
social distancing in the united states using aggregated mobility data during the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10172, 2020.
[23] Cristina M Herren, Tenley K Brownwright, Erin Y Liu,
Nisrine El Amiri, and Maimuna S Majumder. Democracy
and mobility: A preliminary analysis of global adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions for covid-19.
Brownwright, Tenley and Y. Liu, Erin and El Amiri,
Nisrine and Majumder, Maimuna, Democracy and Mobility: A Preliminary Analysis of Global Adherence to
Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions for COVID-19 (April
7, 2020), 2020.
[24] Giovanni Bonaccorsi, Francesco Pierri, Matteo Cinelli,
Francesco Porcelli, Alessandro Galeazzi, Andrea Flori,
Ana Lucia Schmidth, Carlo Michele Valensise, Antonio
Scala, Walter Quattrociocchi, and Fabio Pammolli. Economic and social consequences of human mobility restrictions under covid-19. Available at SSRN 3573609, 2020.
[25] Paige Maas, Shankar Iyer, Andreas Gros, Wonhee Park,
Laura McGorman, Chaya Nayak, and P Alex Dow. Facebook disaster maps: Aggregate insights for crisis response
and recovery. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and
Management (ISCRAM), Valencia, Spain. 2019, 2019.
[26] Daqing Li, Bowen Fu, Yunpeng Wang, Guangquan Lu,
Yehiel Berezin, H Eugene Stanley, and Shlomo Havlin.
Percolation transition in dynamical traffic network with
evolving critical bottlenecks. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(3):669–672, 2015.
[27] James P. Bagrow, Dashun Wang, and Albert-Laszlo
Barabasi. Collective response of human populations to
large-scale emergencies. PLOS ONE, 6(3):e17680, Mar
2011.
[28] X. Lu, L. Bengtsson, and P. Holme. Predictability
of population displacement after the 2010 haiti earthquake. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
109(29):11576?11581, Jul 2012.
[29] Qi Wang and John E. Taylor. Quantifying human mobility
perturbation and resilience in hurricane sandy. PLoS ONE,
9(11):e112608, Nov 2014.
[30] Qi Wang and John E. Taylor. Patterns and limitations of urban human mobility resilience under the influence of multiple types of natural disaster. PLOS ONE,
11(1):e0147299, Jan 2016.
[31] Yago Martin, Zhenlong Li, and Susan L. Cutter. Lever-

9
aging twitter to gauge evacuation compliance: Spatiotemporal analysis of hurricane matthew. PLOS ONE,
12(7):e0181701, Jul 2017.
[32] Vito Latora and Massimo Marchiori. Efficient behavior of small-world networks. Physical review letters,
87(19):198701, 2001.
[33] Corrado Gini. Measurement of inequality of incomes. The
Economic Journal, 31(121):124–126, 1921.
[34] John W Essam. Percolation theory. Reports on progress
in physics, 43(7):833, 1980.

[35] Georges Voronoi. Nouvelles applications des paramètres
continus à la théorie des formes quadratiques. deuxième
mémoire. recherches sur les parallélloèdres primitifs.
Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik,
1908(134):198–287, 1908.
[36] Maurice G Kendall and Alan Stuart. TheAdvanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 1, DistributionTheory. New York:
Hafner Publishing Company, 1958.

