Heterogeneous contact networks in COVID-19 spreading: the role of social deprivation
Arnab Majumdar
ArcVision Technologies, 34 Mahatma Gandhi Road, Kolkata 700009, India

Anita Mehta∗

arXiv:2005.00491v1 [physics.soc-ph] 1 May 2020

Centre for Linguistics and Philology, Walton Street, Oxford OX1 2HG, UK and
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstraße 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
We have two main aims in this paper. First we use theories of disease spreading on networks to
look at the COVID-19 epidemic on the basis of individual contacts — these give rise to predictions
which are often rather different from the homogeneous mixing approaches usually used. Our second
aim is to look at the role of social deprivation, again using networks as our basis, in the spread of
this epidemic. We choose the city of Kolkata as a case study, but assert that the insights so obtained
are applicable to a wide variety of urban environments which are densely populated and where social
inequalities are rampant. Our predictions of hotspots are found to be in good agreement with those
currently being identified empirically as containment zones and provide a useful guide for identifying
potential areas of concern.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The global crisis caused by the onset of the novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has caused a flurry of academic activity across many disciplines, ranging from epidemiology to statistical physics. Most ongoing statistical
physics research has been geared towards getting concrete
answers in terms of infected populations, deaths, and preventive measures as quickly and simply as possible. This
is, of course, an extremely useful approach to take, given
that policy-makers need simple models to craft broad and
easily understandable solutions. In our opinion, however,
a balance needs to be struck between simplicity and accuracy in the interests of efficiency of outcome. It is for
this reason that we focus on an approach that is both
more rigorous and more intuitive, which asserts that it
is not sufficient to treat this problem within the homogeneous mixing approaches so far used by physicists; we
need in fact to focus on the contact networks of individuals, so that we can account for the stark difference in
impact of those who have a larger number of contacts
and are much more likely to contract the infection and
subsequently propagate the disease, than those who live
relatively isolated existences.
The Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model is one
of the first to have been used for disease propagation
[1, 2], and consists of a population that is Susceptible,
some of whom can be Infected, while others are Removed
(recover or die). This has been widely used in the current
pandemic and has given rise to the popular use of the
parameter R0 , which is the number of individuals that
are on average infected by a person who is infected. The
simple idea behind this is that for values of this parameter
greater than 1, the disease spreads and will eventually
become an epidemic (at a rate proportional to R0 ), while
if the number of people infected by an infected person is

∗

Corresponding author: anita.mehta@ling-phil.ox.ac.uk

kept well below 1, the epidemic will die out.
This takes no account of the fact that such a model
assumes that the parameter R0 is universal across a population, i.e. everyone has an equal likelihood of transmitting the infection to the same number of people. This is
based on an assumption that the population is homogeneous and well mixed, and that everyone is capable of
transmitting the infection to everyone else. Such an “on
average” assumption, however, fails dangerously in the
case of epidemics. Newman [3] was the first to take into
account that individuals needed to be resolved in terms of
their ‘degree distribution’, i.e. the number of people that
they were in contact with, and his pioneering solutions to
the disease propagation network have since been widely
used [4–7] for epidemics ranging from HIV to SARS-1. In
the following section (Materials and Methods), we review
some of the formalism that is relevant to our modelling.
One of the important fallouts of the networks approach
is the natural occurrence of hotspots, i.e. of regions of
high connectivity, which are particularly vulnerable to
the spread of disease. Given the lack of widely available contact network data for such situations, we focus
on the conditions of strict lockdown and postulate that
the size of an individual’s contact network is primarily determined by the size of their household. Regions
where household sizes are large are often those which are
socially deprived, e.g. when low-income groups live in
cramped conditions. These poorer areas provide flashpoints for the propagation of disease even in cities where
most of the population live in more privileged conditions.
We use available data on the city of Kolkata in India as
an example of a city with a high population density which
contains many areas of social deprivation, and show how
both factors contribute strongly to epidemic propagation.
We begin with an analysis of the city as a whole, specialising next to the wards (local areas) that comprise it, so
that the heterogeneities of contact networks are probed
on smaller scales; we find that this more microscopic
analysis has the effect of enhancing outbreaks, and speeding up transitions to epidemics locally. This tendency is

2
even further amplified when we extend our analysis to
the population of slum dwellers, where social deprivation
adds to cramped living conditions to create even larger
contact networks among people who are forced to access
basic facilities together. One of the consequences of the
above analysis is that we can outline a geographical map
of hotspots where quarantining and testing should, in
fact, be focused; our predictions are in good agreement
with empirical estimates by the government and will, we
hope, provide guidelines for future planning in the case
of areas not yet identified empirically.
II.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
A.

=

Model of contact networks

We first provide a brief review of Newman’s seminal
work [3] on disease propagation on networks. Individuals on a network are linked by disease-causing contacts,
which Newman uses to define the probability of transmission of the disease as the transmissibility T , in terms of
which relevant quantities are defined. The contact network is defined by the number of contacts or ‘degree’ ki
that an individual i is in contact with. The degree ki is
a random variable drawn from a degree distribution pk .
Here we follow Newman in considering a network with
degree distribution defined by
pk = Ck −α e−k/κ

for k ≥ 1

(1)

where C is a normalizing constant, α is the power-law
exponent, and κ defines the cut-off. Such a distribution
is both flexible in expressing various real-world networks
as well as stable [3]. The importance of this in our case
is to do with the fact that we would expect a lot of our
degree distributions to have long tails, which are characterised by power-law distributions; these will be critically important for the eventual evolution to epidemics.
However, power-law distributions are an idealisation to
infinite systems and are, in reality, cut off by exponential
tails [3].
Newman [3] obtained closed analytical expressions for
various entities based on this form of pk . The normalization constant C, mean connectivity hki and the mean
squared connectivity hk 2 i can be computed as
1


Liα e−1/κ


Liα−1 e−1/κ


hki =
Liα e−1/κ


Liα−2 e−1/κ
2


hk i =
Liα e−1/κ
C=

an infected individual could potentially infect a subset of
k connected individuals who were initially susceptible but
uninfected. The probability that an infected individual
transmits the infection to a connected uninfected contact
is defined as the transmissibility T . For low values of
T , the number of transmissions do not reach epidemic
proportions so that a relatively small cluster of people
is infected. Beyond a critical threshold Tc a transition
occurs and a significant proportion of the population are
infected. The threshold Tc can be computed [3, 4, 6, 7]
as


Liα−1 e−1/κ




Tc =
(3)
Liα−2 e−1/κ − Liα−1 e−1/κ

(2a)
(2b)
(2c)

where Lin [x] is the n-th polylogarithm of x.
In the context of epidemics, we are concerned with
the size of an infected cluster beginning with a single
infected individual. By virtue of his or her connectivity,

hki
hk 2 i − hki

This is akin [8] to the percolation threshold on the
underlying contact network, defined purely by topological parameters. Since κ determines the cut-off for the
power-law domain of the distribution pk , the limit k → ∞
corresponds to pk ∼ k −α and the results obtained for
pure power-law distributions hold. Equation (3) takes
the form
Tc →

ζ(α − 1)
ζ(α − 2) − ζ(α − 1)

as k → ∞,

where ζ(·) is the Riemann Zeta function. As a consequence, Tc < 0 for α < 3. However, for finite κ, Tc can
be finite even for these smaller values of α.
For T < Tc , the mean cluster size of infected individuals hsi can be computed as

2
Liα−1 e−1/κ


hsi = 1 +
×
Liα e−1/κ
T
 (4)



−1/κ
(T + 1) Liα−1 e
− T Liα−2 e−1/κ
Similar to percolation, this mean cluster size diverges
at the transition as
−γ

hsi ∼ |Tc − T |

for T → Tc−

(5)

where γ is the critical exponent.
For T > Tc , the cluster of infected individuals S(T )
is a finite fraction of the population and can be computed by solving a self-consistent relation as shown in [3].
Again, analogous to percolation, S(T ) is the order paβ
rameter which grows as S ∼ |T − Tc | for T → Tc+ . In
the limit κ → ∞, we have a pure power-law distribution
where the scaling exponent β is related to the distribution exponent α [5], as


1/ (3 − α) for α < 3
β = 1/ (α − 3) for 3 < α ≤ 4

1
for α > 4

3
We note that the basic reproduction number R0 , which
is the average number of people to whom an infected individual transmits the disease in homogeneous approaches,
is related to the topological parameters α and κ, as well
as the transmissibility T via:
R0 = T

hk 2 i − hki
hki

(6)

The above relationship ensures that at the epidemic
threshold T = Tc , R0 = 1, as it should be [4, 6, 7].
B.

Estimating model parameters from Census data

To estimate the parameters of our model we make
use of publicly available data from the Census of India,
2011 [9].
We use the HH-01CITY dataset which contains the
number of households with sizes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7-10,
11-14, and 15+ for the entire city of Kolkata. From this
distribution, we compute the distribution of contact degree k. We assume that for a household of size H, each
of the H members has a degree k = H − 1 [10]. Combining this with the number NH of households obtained
from the data, we construct the cumulative distribution
Pk . The cumulative distribution is matched to our model
from Eq. (1), by fitting the parameters α and κ. Since α
is connected to the fundamental structure of the contact
network, we fix its value for all subsequent estimations
and adjust the cut-off parameter κ.
We use the primary census abstract DDW-PCA which is
granular to the level of the 141 wards within the Kolkata
Municipal Corporation (KMC) to obtain the heterogeneity of the contact networks within the city. For this purpose, the contact network is adjusted to match the results
for the mean household size for the ward, while the computation for the mean cluster-size above Tc is scaled to
the population of the ward.
Some of the information about slum populations is extracted from the “Kolkata Municipal Corporation Percentage of Slum Population to Total Population” published for the 2011 Census of India [9]. Each ward is then
segregated into “slum” and “non-slum” sub-populations.
For the non-slum population, the computation in the
paragraph above is retained. For the slum population,
we rely on more recent data [11] which suggests that 83%
of the households do not have in-house sanitation facilities or water supply and are thus forced to be in contact
with at least one other household, thereby increasing the
size of the contact network of each member living there.
III.

determine the spread of the infection — infected people
who live secluded existences have few, if any, people to
infect in turn, while those with large familial and social
networks are capable of infecting many people once they
are themselves infected.
As policy-makers realise this, the importance of tools
that provide data on contact networks is being increasingly realised both at the levels of academia [12] and government [13]. However, the difficulty of getting accurate
data, as well as the fact that people are mobile in general and tend to infect people even without knowing them
(e.g. in public places) makes this a difficult enterprise.
Although efforts are currently in place to estimate global
data in the way people move, at a macroscopic level (i.e.
without reference to individual infected people) [14], it
may be a while before accurate data on contact networks,
relevant to the spread of infection, are publicly available
in most democratic countries.
This inherent complexity has had the consequence
that much of the discussion among scientists and policymakers has centred around ‘homogeneous’ SIR theoryrelated approaches, which are both easier to understand
and which via somewhat sweeping assumptions that every individual is equal on average to every other from
the point of infection-spreading, are much more tractable.
While there are situations [15] where such assumptions of
homogeneous mixing may well hold, there are many more
situations where local and heterogeneous aspects are critical, and where predictions from homogeneous models
can be somewhat misleading.
We demonstrate this here in the context of the city of
Kolkata, which captures two aspects critical to our thesis
— strong heterogeneity in terms of personal contact networks, as well as areas of great social deprivation, both
of which, as will be seen, can lead to the rapid spread
of epidemics. While this is a specific choice made by
our access to publicly available data [9, 11], its relevance

RESULTS

The network formalism is, as mentioned above, the
most appropriate one to examine the transmission of
COVID-19 since all transmission takes place through human contacts. Individual contact networks completely

FIG. 1. The cumulative household size distribution for the
city of Kolkata from 2011 census data [9]. The total population size is 4,261,627, the number of households is 1,007,365,
and the mean household size is 4.23.

4

FIG. 2. Cumulative probability distribution of contact networks of Kolkata under strict lockdown. The data (blue dots)
yields a mean contact network size of hki = 4.158, which is fitted (red line) to the Newman model [3] with a mean contact
network size of hki = 4.1568, yielding parameters α = 1.0,
κ = 10.44 and a variance hk2 i = 45.509.

is global. Social deprivation and high population densities among migrant workers in Singapore have recently
been held responsible for a second wave of COVID-19
spreading [16, 17], and similar conditions among migrant
workers in the UAE are a portent of similar trends. We
assert therefore that our highlighting of these issues in
the context of Kolkata has global and urgent relevance
to the current pandemic.
In the first subsection we focus on the role of heterogeneity, where infections spread via the contact networks
of individuals, while in the second, we focus on the role
of social deprivation in infection spreading.

A.

Profiles of infection spreading via contact
networks of individuals

In most democracies such as India, it would be considered a violation of privacy to have extensive lists of
individual contacts made publicly available; additionally,
the surveillance required to gather details of where people
move and thus whom they might infect in public places,
would be even more a violation of democratic rights. We,
therefore, focus on conditions of strict lockdown, which
are (at least theoretically) valid in India as this paper
is being written. Under these conditions, we postulate
that the contact network of an individual is limited to
contacts within his or her household. For Kolkata, publicly available data [9] leads to the plot in Fig. 1 of the
cumulative probability distribution of the household size.
This leads to the plot in Fig. 2, which is the cumulative distribution of the number of contacts a person
has (blue dots) which was subsequently fitted (red line)
by a power-law/exponential form [3]. The fit preserves
the mean contact network size of hki = 4.158 to a very

FIG. 3. The number of people infected for the city of Kolkata
with a population of 4, 261, 627, as a function of transmissibility T . A transition to an epidemic happens at a critical
value of T , for Tc = 0.1005.

good approximation, and yields the parameters α = 1.0,
κ = 10.44, which will be used in the analysis that follows.
Using the analysis of the previous section, Eq. (4),
we obtain the curve of infected people vs transmissibility
shown in Fig. 3. The prediction for a transition to an
epidemic is at a critical value of Tc = 0.1005, which is
much lower than Tc = 0.3167 for a homogeneous model
with the same hki; the homogeneous model thus clearly
underestimates the risk of the epidemic here and in general.
The mean cluster size of infected people diverges with
an exponent γ of 1 (see Eq. 5), as shown in Fig. 4.
The above city-wide prescription is strongly modified
when we look at granularity at the ward-level — a ward
in Kolkata is defined as a locality for which census data
are available [9] in terms of various demographics. Wards
are a first indicator of heterogeneity since some are more

FIG. 4. The mean cluster size hsi of infected people against
Tc − T (blue line) fitted to a value of γ = 1 (red line).

5

FIG. 5. (A) The population density of the city of Kolkata measured by no. of persons/square kilometre, as a function of
the city wards which are delineated above. The legend alongside indicates the colour coding in terms of population density.
(B) The household size distribution across different wards in Kolkata. The legend to the right is a colour-coded key encoding
household size, so that, e.g. household sizes of 6 and over are indicated by the darkest shades of green.

densely populated than others, as shown in Fig. 5A. The
household size distribution per ward, which is independently available from the data, is given in Fig. 5B. As we
might expect, there is a reasonable correlation between
the two (Fig. 6), i.e. areas where there is a high density
of population are also those where the household sizes
are large. These seem to be clustered to the north and
the west of the city (Figs. 5A and 5B).
The heterogeneity introduced by wards in terms
of their household sizes introduces important heterogeneities into the contact networks of the individuals in
them. Using the formalism above, this in turn introduces important differences in the number of individuals
infected, since the populations of the wards have distinct
characteristics. As a consequence, the transition to an
epidemic sets in much faster if we use this level of description, as is seen in Fig. 7. Since, under strict lockdown, it is reasonable to assume that people will interact
more within their wards than city-wide, we believe that
the orange curve is a better representation for the spread
of the epidemic than the blue (city-wide) curve.
Another way of seeing this is to say that if we assume
that the wards are self-contained, each one is associated
with a specific critical transmissibility Tc (Fig. 8). The
epidemic spreads as soon as Tc is attained within a ward,
with a corresponding explosion in the number of people infected. Note that the higher the Tc , the slower
the spread of infection. The most vulnerable areas in
terms of epidemic spread are to the north and west of the
city (lightest colours), which correlate well with the areas
of high population density and household size shown in
Figs. 5A and 5B.
We have designed a web application [18] to demonstrate the spread of the epidemic. Fig. 9A demonstrates
this for a single value of the transmissibility T = 0.10
which is the threshold for the city taken as a whole. The

heterogeneous nature of outbreaks is apparent, as some
vulnerable wards (mainly to the north, centre and west)
have an infected population numbering several thousands, while others (mainly in the south) are yet to see
any significant infections at all. As T increases (e.g. by
easing the lockdown and increasing the frequency of contacts between people), more wards would cross their local

FIG. 6.
A linear scatter plot of mean household size vs.
population density in Kolkata. The histogram of population
density is shown on top of the main scatter plot, while that
for mean household size is on the right of the main scatter
plot.

6
critical threshold and begin to see significant infections.
While some of the hotspots predicted in Fig. 9A have not
yet been empirically observed, we assert that these are
areas of potential risk.
We compare these results of our model to the situation in the city as of late April 2020. Since the locations of infectious clusters have not yet been published,
we look at the number and locations of those regions
which have been designated as containment zones. Containment zones are set up by the government to contain
the disease within a defined geographical area (usually a
city block) following multiple confirmed infections in the
area, with a view to breaking the chain of transmission
and preventing the spread of the infection to new areas.
Each zone is geographically quarantined with enhanced
active surveillance [19]. As on April 28, 2020, out of 287
such containment zones in the city of Kolkata, 227 have
been identified by ward [19]. Figure 9B shows the number
of such zones within each ward. Although most containment zones in Fig. 9B are geographically aligned with the
areas we have identified as being at risk (Fig. 9A), there
are a few areas of local outbreaks which our model did
not predict in the south-east of the city. This area was
urbanized relatively recently and became densely populated in the period after 2011, the date of the last census
[9], which is the source of our data for this part of our
research.
Before leaving this subsection, we summarise the nature of our findings. Heterogeneity of contact networks
plays a crucial role in the transmission of disease, even
if we take a macroscopic viewpoint on the population of

FIG. 8. The distribution of critical transmissibility Tc , wardby-ward, across the city of Kolkata. Note that the higher the
Tc , the slower the spread of infection. The most vulnerable
areas (lightest colours) in terms of epidemic spread are to the
north and west of the city.

a city like Kolkata. When we take a look at individual
wards and use available data to construct more realistic contact networks of individuals, we note that areas
of high population density are strongly correlated with
large household sizes, and so, within our present approximation, with extended contact networks. These are in
turn of crucial importance in the spread of disease, as
our predictions demonstrate, predictions which in fact
are well correlated (Fig. 9) with existing governmental
preventive approaches [19].
In the next subsection, we will focus on areas of high
social deprivation. These could, in general, be migrant
housing in Singapore or Dubai, but in the present instance, are based on data on the slums in Kolkata. It
will be seen that such areas are particularly vulnerable
to becoming hotspots for disease transmission.

B.

FIG. 7. The number of people infected as a function of transmissibility T using a) a ward-based picture (orange line) and
b) a city-based picture (blue line). The granularity of the
ward-based picture results in strong heterogeneities of contacts, which allow for a faster spreading of the epidemic than if
one assumes the more macroscopic picture of contact networks
following the same degree distributions across the city. While
the city-based picture corresponds to a single Tc = 0.1005
(Fig. 3), the ward-based picture allows a distribution of Tc
from 0.055 to 0.138.

The role of social deprivation in disease
transmission — a case study of slums

We have used existing data [11] on slums in Kolkata as
well as publicly available census data [9] for our analysis
in this section. In addition to dismal living conditions
wherever overcrowding is the norm (and a major mechanism for the forced enhancement of human contacts), a
major indicator of social deprivation is the lack of literacy
that usually obtains in slums. The latter is particularly
important in the context of COVID-19 spreading since it
translates into a lack of awareness for the very necessary
preventive measures at an individual and collective level
that would help fight the virus.
We first use the census data to look at the lack of literacy in the slum population. Fig. 10A shows the ward-by-

7

FIG. 9. (A) Ward-based numbers of infected people for the city of Kolkata for transmissibility T = 0.1, similar to the Tc for
the entire city. Note that the infections that are localized to the vulnerable areas of the north, centre, and west of the city
gradually include the south for higher values of T . [18] (B) Number of containment zones per ward in the city of Kolkata as of
April 28, 2020 [14].

FIG. 10. The distribution of the (A) fraction of population living in slums, and (B) fraction of literate individuals, ward-byward, across the city of Kolkata.

ward fraction of slum dwellers in Kolkata; this appears to
be the complement of Fig. 10B, which shows the fraction
of literate people computed ward-by-ward for the city.
In Fig. 11, we quantify the above picture by scatter
plots showing the correlation between (A) literacy and
household size, and (B) the fraction of population living
in slums and literacy. All the data clearly show there is a
strong negative correlation between literacy and household size, and that in slums, in particular, literacy rates
tend to be low.
We now use recently collected data specific to slums
in Kolkata [11] that, in addition to providing a household size distribution for them, also provides a measure
of deprivation, in this case, due to overcrowding. Many

slum families share toilet facilities and often depend on
public borewells to get their water. From the point of
view of our research, this, even under strict lockdown,
forcibly extends their contact networks. In Fig. 12A we
show that the household size distribution for slums [11] is
only slightly larger overall than that for the overall population computed based on census data [9]. However, the
fact that 83% of the slum population in Kolkata share
toilet facilities as opposed to 17% who have private toilets, causes a dramatic change in the degree distribution
of contacts as shown in Fig. 12B. The orange curve corresponds to the degree distribution for slum dwellers with
private toilet facilities, while the blue one corresponds to
that where facilities are shared with at least one other

8

FIG. 11. The distribution of the (A) fraction of population living in slums, and (B) fraction of literate individuals, ward-byward, across the city of Kolkata.

FIG. 12. (A) Plot of the cumulative probability distribution for household sizes for all (blue line) and slums (red dots). (B)
Plot of the cumulative probability distribution for contacts for households with private toilets (red line), for those who have to
share common facilities (blue line) and for the resultant (green line), based on a percentage ratio 83:17.

family, so that with the percentages mentioned above,
the resulting degree distribution is given by the green
curve.
As we will see, this sharing of facilities has a dramatic
effect first, on the degree distribution (Fig. 13A), and
next, on the critical transmissibility Tc (Fig. 13B) for the
slums. For both Figs. 13A and 13B, the green distribution represents the entire population, while the blue one
is specifically for the slums. We note that the sharing of
facilities such as toilets leads to a large effective shift in
the mean degree distribution for the slums vis-à-vis that
of the general population, cf. the shift of the blue curve
from the green curve in Fig. 13A — despite our rather

conservative estimate of this (see the Discussion for further details). This has an even more dramatic effect on
the critical transmissibility Tc for slums, as will be seen
in Fig. 13B. The sharp peak for the slum population sets
in at a much lower value of Tc , so that the slum population are much more vulnerable to epidemics than the
general population taken as a whole.
In Fig. 14A, we take into account the effect of the slum
population obtained from the data of [11] to compute the
number of people infected ward by ward (orange curve),
to be compared with the city-wide computation (blue
curve). We notice a much sharper increase in the number of people infected, relative even to the ward-by-ward

9

FIG. 13. The probability density function of ward-by-ward (A) mean degrees, and (B) transmissibility Tc, for the general
(green) and the slum populations (blue) of Kolkata. Mean degrees are shifted to the right for the slum population [9, 13].
The Tc curves indicate that the critical transmissibility Tc sets in much earlier for the slum population than for the general
population.

FIG. 14.
(A) Comparison of city-wide transmissibility curve which shows a transition at 0.1005 with the ward-by-ward
transmissibility curve, now including the effect of slums, which shows that the transition to an epidemic occurs even earlier
than what is predicted by the ward-by-ward graphs in Fig. 7. (B) The probability density function of the ward-by-ward basic
reproduction number R0 for the general (green) and slum (blue) populations in the city.

graph of Fig. 7. As a result, the effective mean reproduction number R0 , obtained from Eq. (6) is greater for
the slum population than the general population for the
same value of Tc , as will be seen from Fig. 14B.

IV.
A.

DISCUSSION

Key findings of our study, in the context of past
approaches

Most approaches to date on the COVID-19 spread have
involved homogeneous mixing (see e.g. [15]), whereas
ours is based on heterogeneous mixing, depending on the

degree of the nodes of the underlying contact network.
The main effect of this heterogeneity is to reduce the
threshold to the epidemic, so that the epidemic spreads
faster than it would with homogeneous mixing.
Our aims in this paper are, therefore: first, to insert
the heterogeneity of contact networks in theoretical approaches to model the spread of COVID-19 and second,
to use this formalism to provide an insight into the role of
social deprivation. We have looked at slums as a source
of high-degree connectivity, which, combined with low
economic development (e.g. the anti-correlation with literacy) provide explosive ingredients for a transition to
an epidemic. Both of these ingredients have the effect of
considerably advancing this transition in the areas where

10
they are prevalent, and hence to the entire population of
the city of which they are part. While our data analysis
is specific to Kolkata, it is very much more general in
its applicability to cities with areas of high connectivity
and social deprivation, of which the recent example of
Singapore [16, 17] is only one example [20].
Our approach is also able to identify hotspots on the
basis of individual contact networks in a scientific and objective way, thus allowing for an impartial way of identifying areas where containment should be enforced as
an overall means of prevention. Our predictions are in
good agreement with empirically obtained government
data [19], where the latter identify containment zones as
areas where infections have already occurred. On the
other hand, our approach goes further, allowing for such
identification even before infections have occurred, based
on household sizes and individual contact networks obtained therefrom; this would form a good basis for preventive measures.

B.

Potential Limitations

Without access to data on individual contact networks,
we are limited to household sizes as measures of degree
distributions, which they are only under (difficult to implement) conditions of strict lockdown. From this point
of view, the level of agreement between our predictions
and empirical data on containment zones is indeed remarkable. However, we assert that our results should
be interpreted qualitatively rather than quantitatively as
a means of highlighting the difference between predictions arising from heterogeneous and homogeneous contact networks; for example, our predictions for Tc show
clearly that contact network heterogeneity causes infections to spread much more rapidly than might be imagined on the basis of homogeneous theories.
Another limitation arises from the availability of data
on slums. In [11], 800 slums in Kolkata were studied via
sampling methods, without any information on their exact location. We have therefore had to study the slums
collectively, without any information on where exactly,
and how extensive, they are in any particular area. The
best that we have been able to do is, via census statistics on the percentage of slums per ward [9], compute the
ward-based slum statistics to give a qualitative estimate
of the ward-based Tc . Obviously, the approximation involved in doing this, i.e. treating the slums per ward
as a contiguous unit when they are in fact distributed,
is considerable, but in the absence of data, this is an
approximation that we are forced to make. Another approximation involves the way in which we compute the
revised degree distribution for slums due to shared toilet facilities. In the absence of spatial information on
how many families share these facilities, we have taken a
conservative approach, assuming that a family of size n
shares facilities with only one other family of size n1 , and
using this idea to construct the relevant distributions.

Of course in actuality, many families may well share the
same toilet, (or indeed the same access to drinking water via public borewells, which we have not even considered), so we are, if anything, underestimating the severity
of the resulting overcrowding and epidemic spread. Another point in this context concerns what we mean by
the “general” population. The census data [9] that we
have based this on includes people of all classes, including slum dwellers, in the city of Kolkata; the specific data
on slums [11] is both more recent and focuses only on the
800 slums considered in Kolkata. We reiterate therefore
that, as mentioned above, our estimates should be taken
as a conservative qualitative indicator of the effects of
social deprivation, rather than an accurate quantitative
estimate. On a more positive note, our methods can be
applied, if the requisite data become available in a rigorous and detailed format, to areas of social deprivation
worldwide with a view to estimating their vulnerability
to epidemics. Last but not least, while our predictions
on hotspots in Fig. 9A are quite well correlated with the
empirical data on containment clusters in Fig. 9B, we
mention here that our predictions are based on 2011 census data, when some of the areas in the south-east of
the city were far less developed and populated than they
now are. Had we had access to recent data, this new
demography would have been reflected in revised contact
network data, and consequent vulnerability to hotspots.

C.

Integrations into current understanding of
problem

There are several ways in which our approach will integrate into current developments. First, there is an emphasis in many countries such as India on containment
zones in hotspots — this is done by looking in hindsight
at available data and deciding that areas should be declared as containment zones based on existing infection
and death rates, rather than by using network theory. On
the other hand, our network-based theoretical approach
is predictive; i.e. we can, on the basis of degree-based
data, predict where hotspots could occur, and take a preventive rather than curative approach. Also, and importantly, our approach provides a non-controversial way of
suggesting hotspots, without touching on sensitive ethnic
or religious characterisations.
Another way is for our methods to be used in conjunction with contact tracing apps that are being developed
in several countries. An issue that some of these have is
that the identification of contacts is done via telephonic
links, rather than individual and intimate contact, which
is typically how infections spread. If, for example, people in hotspot areas and their contacts within the same
neighbourhood are identified, this would be a way of extending the contact network from beyond the household
to a larger range; this would reflect conditions where
lockdowns are gradually relaxed so that people can move
around within a given radius of where they live.

11
Most importantly, policy-makers in several countries
are implementing many empirical measures relating to
the gradual relaxation of lockdown, at the time of writing
of this paper. These usually involve maintaining strict
lockdown in areas that continue to be at risk, while relaxing restrictions in those where there have been few,
or no, infections within the recent past. Our formalism,
with its detailed predictions of levels of risk in the component areas of a large city, would be invaluable in assisting this process by identifying regions that could be, or
should not be, opened up. This is of special importance
as economic contingencies compel the world to exit strict
lockdowns where possible, while public health contingencies demand that the COVID-19 epidemic is contained
to the extent possible.

D.

Future directions

From a scientific point of view, we would like to look
at the temporal evolution of the COVID-19 epidemic, in
different national contexts, from a network-based point
of view. More generally, given the threat that humankind
faces from this pandemic, we would welcome collaborations with governmental or other agencies in the design
of realistic counter-measures.

DECLARATION

The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Anita Mehta is grateful to the Max Planck Institute
for Discrete Mathematics, Leipzig and the Centre for
Linguistics and Philology, University of Oxford for their
support.

[1] Bailey, N. T. J. (1975). The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases and its Applications. New York: Hafner
Press.
[2] Anderson, R. M., and May, R. M. (1991). Infectious Diseases of Humans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[3] Newman, M. E. J., Spread of epidemic disease on networks, 2002. Phys. Rev. E 66, 016128.
[4] Meyers, L. A., Pourbohloul, B, Newman, M. E. J.,
Skowronski, D., and Brunham, R. C., (2005). Network theory and SARS: predicting outbreak diversity. J.
Theor. Biol. 232 (2005) 7181.
[5] Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P. and
Vespignani, A. (2015). Epidemic processes in complex
networks. Rev. Mod. Phys 87, 3, 925-978.
[6] Meyers, L. A., Newman, M., and Pourbohloul, B., (2006).
Predicting epidemics on directed contact networks. J.
Theor. Biol. 240, 400-418.
[7] Meyers, L. A., (2007). Contact network epidemiology;
bond percolation applied to infections disease prediction
and control. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 44, 1, 63-86.
[8] Grassberger, P., (1983). On the critical behavior of the
general epidemic process and dynamical percolation.,
Math. Biosci. 63, 157-172.
[9] Census of India (2011). Office of the Registrar General &
Census Commissioner, New Delhi.
[10] Jing Q.-L., et al. (2020). Household Secondary Attack Rate of COVID-19 and Associated Determinants.
Preprint, available at https://bit.ly/3bMTgPL
[11] Bag S., Seth S., Gupta A. (2016). A Comparative Study
of Living Conditions in Slums of Three Metro Cities in
India. Leeds University Business School Research Papers Series, no. 16-07. Available at http://ssrn.com/

abstract=2727005
[12] Klepac, P., et al. (2020). Contacts in context: largescale setting-specific social mixing matrices from the
BBC Pandemic project. Preprint, medrxiv, available at
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023754.
[13] Zastrow, M. (2020). South Korea is reporting intimate
details of COVID-19 cases: has it helped? Nature
News, available at https://www.nature.com/articles/
d41586-020-00740-y
[14] Lambiotte, R. and Dong, X. (2020) Oxford Covid-19
Impact Monitor, acceible at https://oxford-covid-19.
com
[15] Bianconi, G., and Krapivsky, P. L., (2020). Epidemics
with containment measures. Preprint, available at https:
//arXiv:2004.03934
[16] The Guardian, (2020). “Singapore’s cramped migrant
worker dorms hide Covid-19 surge risk”, available at
https://bit.ly/2SokTqK
[17] The Wall Street Journal (2020). “Singapore Had a Coveted Coronavirus Plan. What Went Wrong?”, available
at https://on.wsj.com/2VOD6jo
[18] Majumdar, A. and Mehta, A. (2020). COVID-19 Networks, accessible at https://covid19-networks.web.
app/
[19] Business Insider (2020). “Heres a list of all containment zones in West Bengals Kolkata, Howrah, North
Parganas and Purba Medinipur”, available at https:
//bit.ly/2yXxZo5
[20] Channel News Asia, (2020). “Sick, stranded and broke:
COVID-19 crisis hits Gulf’s migrant workers”, available
at https://bit.ly/2VQBRjH

