Challenges in Combating COVID-19 Infodemic
- Data, Tools, and Ethics
Kaize Ding, Kai Shu, Yichuan Li, Amrita Bhattacharjee, and Huan Liu

arXiv:2005.13691v1 [cs.SI] 27 May 2020

Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
{kding9, kai.shu, yichuan1, abhatt43, huanliu}@asu.edu

Abstract
While the COVID-19 pandemic continues its global devastation, numerous accompanying challenges emerge. One important challenge we face is to efficiently and effectively use
recently gathered data and find computational tools to combat
the COVID-19 infodemic, a typical information overloading
problem. Novel coronavirus presents many questions without
ready answers; its uncertainty and our eagerness in search of
solutions offer a fertile environment for infodemic. It is thus
necessary to combat the infodemic and make a concerted effort to confront COVID-19 and mitigate its negative impact
in all walks of life when saving lives and maintaining normal
orders during trying times. In this position paper of combating the COVID-19 infodemic, we illustrate its need by providing real-world examples of rampant conspiracy theories,
misinformation, and various types of scams that take advantage of human kindness, fear, and ignorance. We present three
key challenges in this fight against the COVID-19 infodemic
where researchers and practitioners instinctively want to contribute and help. We demonstrate that these three challenges
can and will be effectively addressed by collective wisdom,
crowd sourcing, and collaborative research.

Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The World Health Organization
(WHO) recently declared the COVID-19 outbreak a Public
Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and a
pandemic due to its high morbidity and mortality rates. As of
April 15, 2020, more than 2.04 million cases have been reported across 210 countries and territories, resulting in over
133,000 deaths1 . These numbers are continuing to rise and
the health systems in many countries are overwhelmed to
provide treatment. Concomitant with the pandemic are many
unknowns that create a conducive environment for misinformation, fake news, political disinformation campaigns,
scams, etc. Those malicious contents instigate fears or anger,
capitalize on human vulnerability, and exploit human emotion, kindness, and/or wishes for miracles.
As the coronavirus spreads like fire in the world, disinformation machines also accelerate their campaigns on various fronts, rendering a new infodemic battlefield. Social
1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coronavirus disease 2019

media platforms such as Facebook/Instagram, Twitter, and
Google/YouTube have been abused to disseminate erroneous
contents. When the whole world is scrambling to fight the
COVID-19 pandemic, governments and WHO also have to
combat an infodemic, which is defined as “an overabundance of information some accurate and some notthat makes
it hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable
guidance when they need it” (Donovan 2020). The COVID19 infodemic causes confusion, sows division, incites hatred, promotes unproven cures, and provokes social panic,
which directly impacts emergency response, treatment, recovery, and financial and mental health during the difficult
time of self-isolation. Therefore, combating the COVID-19
infodemic is a challenging yet imperative task.
In this paper, we first present some COVID-19 related examples to illustrate the variety and range of infodemic cases
in representative categories: conspiracy theories and misinformation, and scams and security attacks to reinforce the
urgency and need for addressing the COVID-19 infodemic
via scalable and timely solutions. We then discuss the essential challenges in designing and developing corresponding
AI solutions from three perspectives: data, computational
tools, and ethics. The last challenge of ethics is particularly
easy to overlook when we rush to confront the immediate
threats. Therefore, it is important to understand unintended
consequences when developing AI solutions to ensure sustainable and healthy use and deployment. Last, we use some
current efforts to demonstrate the feasibility of addressing
the three challenges in combating the COVID-19 infodemic;
by understanding the challenges and what we have, we also
appreciate the importance of collaborative research to effectively and efficiently combat the COVID-19 infodemic.

Examples of COVID-19 Infodemic
To illustrate what the COVID-19 infodemic looks like, how
expansive, active, and devastating it is, and why it is important to thwart or mitigate its present threats, we first present
various examples regarding conspiracy theories and misinformation, and scam and security attacks.

Conspiracy theories and misinformation
With the spread of COVID-19 pandemic, the World Health
Organization (WHO) recently warned of an “infodemic” of
rampant conspiracy theories about the coronavirus. Those

conspiracy theories have appeared in both social media and
mainstream news outlets and are often intertwined with
geopolitics. One example is about how the new coronavirus originated: according to a Pew Research Center survey, nearly three-in-ten Americans believe COVID-19 was
a bio-weapon made in the lab. Some top 10 conspiracy
theories include SARS-CoV-2 virus was created as a biologic weapon from a lab, GMOs are the culprit, COVID19 actually doesn’t exist, and coronavirus is a plot by big
Pharma (Lynas 2020).
Coronavirus misinformation is also flooding the internet through social media, text messages, and propagated
by celebrities, politicians, or other prominent public figures.
According to the report in (Kornbluh and Goodman 2020),
“among outlets that repeatedly share false content, eight of
the top 10 most engaged-with sites are running coronavirus
stories.” For instance, there are plenty of supposed “cures”
on social media that will likely mislead people to risk their
lives for quick fixes. Disregarding the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) warning of many hearsay cures without evidence of curing being effective, there are endless claims
such as herbs and teas, or something of the sort that can prevent the coronavirus. Recently, some wireless towers were
damaged in the UK due to a false claim that radio waves
sent by 5G technology are causing small changes to people’s
bodies that make them succumb to the virus.

Scam, spam, phishing, and malware attacks
As more and more people start working or studying from
home, cyber criminals recently shift focus to target remote
workers. Different attacks such as scam, spam, phishing and
malware, which prey on people’s willingness to help, fear
of supply shortage, and moments of weakness, have become
increasingly active. Researchers have found that the volume
of coronavirus email scams nearly tripled in one week, with
almost 3% of all global spam now estimated to be COVID19 related. During the coronavirus pandemic, as state governments and hospitals have scrambled to obtain masks and
other medical supplies, scammers attempted to sell a fake
stockpile of 39 million masks to a California labor union.
According to The Hill (Miller 2020) , “Hackers are taking
advantage of the increased reliance on networks to target
critical organizations such as health care groups and members of the public, stealing and profiting off sensitive information and putting lives at risk.”

Data, Tool, and Ethics Challenges
The scale, volume, and reach of the COVID-19 infodemic
entails the reliance on AI and machine learning (ML) algorithms to react promptly and respond rapidly. The success
of AI and ML algorithms requires large amounts of multimodal data for their efficiency and effectiveness, which introduces a data challenge. Data extraction and curation from
multi-source data needs different computational tools to accurately categorize and sort out various types of data, which
presents a tool challenge. When we rush to deal with present
threats, we should be aware of potential side-effects, unexpected consequences, and biases of our solutions, which

suggests an ethic challenge. In this section, we will discuss
these three challenges in detail.

Data challenge
Though numerous COVID-19 data sources are available online, their datasets are available on various websites for
different needs. The major data challenge of isolated data
sources is the awareness of their existence. Another related
issue is that they are collected from different sources or under different crawl settings. For example, Allen Institute for
AI (AI2) released the scholarly articles dataset2 collected
from PMC, medRxiv and bioRxiv; the Frontiers3 provided
the latest research articles, and LitCovid (Chen, Allot, and
Lu 2020) collected the scientific information from PubMed.
Combining different data sources leads to higher quality of
data and better coverage.
To address the data challenges, we need to overcome
some shortcomings: disorganization – most of them merely
list all the collected datasets on their websites without
information summarizing the relationships among them;
specificity – data collected for a specific topic, for example, Amazon provides the epidemic dataset on cloud4 and
COVID-19 GIS Hub5 only contain the academic findings
and geospatial-related datasets respectively; and inconvenience – most sites merely provide the reference links to
the source datasets and do not provide data utility tools like
covid19datahub (Guidotti and Ardia 2020) for easy access.

Computational tool challenge
There are existing resources that can assist users to identify malicious intent in websites. Google’s Safe Browsing API, for instance, allows the user to enter a URL and
check it against Google’s constantly updated lists of unsafe
web resources. Similar resources include isitPhishing.org,
malwareurl.com, and antivirus software, among many others. Additionally, users can check malicious domain lists
through different sources such as phishtank.com or the
aforementioned Google’s Safe Browsing lists. As many malicious sites use URL shorteners to disguise themselves, to
counteract potential attacks, it would be safe to first use URL
expanders to figure out what they are before clicking them.
Despite the easy access of those computational tools, they
are not available conveniently in a single place where different tools can be called up whenever needed.
The awareness of these existing tools and efficient use of
them for quick response is vital for combating COVID-19.
An associate issue is the requirement for current and frequently updated black-lists (Sahoo, Liu, and Hoi 2017). As
we know, it is infeasible to manually maintain a dynamically
changing list of malicious URLs, with new sites being generated everyday. Therefore, it is necessary to develop AI/ML
identifiers that can learn from the old malicious sites to estimate the threats of new ones.
2

https://allenai.org/data/cord-19
https://coronavirus.frontiersin.org/
4
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/big-data/a-public-data-lakefor-analysis-of-covid-19-data/
5
https://coronavirus-disasterresponse.hub.arcgis.com/
3

Ethics challenge
The COVID-19 pandemic is ushering in a new era of digital surveillance since governments are employing tools that
track and monitor individuals. South Korea and Israel, for
instance, have demonstrated the effectiveness of harnessing different digital surveillance tools. However, such a new
practice can breach data privacy in the meantime and may
even remain in use after the pandemic. In this section, we
discuss the potential privacy concerns, trade-offs between
stringent disease monitoring and patient privacy and ethical
issues behind the disruption of civil liberties.
Gauging the war-like severity of the coronavirus pandemic, academics, researchers, companies and non-profits
alike have come forward to contribute in any possible way.
However, given the rapid nature of such responses and the
subsequent lack of policy checks, these otherwise novel endeavors may have ethical loopholes. In an attempt to provide a transparent view of the degree of infection and prevent community spread of the virus, many counties and
states in the United States have decided to publicly release
data corresponding to cases, including the number of cases
per zip-code (Mallory 2020). Smartphone applications with
geo-locating capabilities have come out for users to log
their symptoms. But the use of such applications has significant privacy concerns (Wetsman 2020). Contact tracing
has been identified as an effective way to control the spread
of the virus in communities where the infection is not yet
widespread or has slowed down significantly, and companies including Google and Apple are currently developing
applications to make this possible. Only when a sufficient
number of people use the application and voluntarily report
their cases can it be used as a reliable tool of tracking. In this
situation, there is an obvious trade-off between user health
privacy and data transparency and it is challenging to identify well-defined ethical boundaries when it comes to public
health during a pandemic. The success of such an app requires a majority of the population to download and use it.

Feasibility Discussion
In this section, we present some current efforts that address
the aforementioned challenges and show that the three challenges are solvable with collaborative research.
For the data challenge, we collect the publicly available COVID-19 datasets and cluster them into several
groups6 . Under each group, researchers can reference complete datasets from different sources or settings. For example, in social media data, we gather available tweet corpus on
COVID-19 (Banda et al. 2020)(Chen, Lerman, and Ferrara
2020) with different query keywords and time spans. The
hierarchy cluster structure in Figure 1 helps the researchers
to quickly locate the dataset. Lastly our data repository includes areas in academics, news, social media, and epidemic
reports for multi-disciplinary research. For example, if a researcher wants to analyze the influence of the news or academic findings on social media like Twitter, s/he can use the
data in academic or news topics and social media.
6

https://github.com/bigheiniu/awesome-coronavirus19-dataset

Published
Pre-print

Academic

COVID-19 Datasets

Social Media

Resource Report

Epidemic Report
Case Report

Rumor
Fact Checked

Twitter

News

Geo-Spatial

Mobility

Figure 1: A taxonomy of collected datasets
To help a researcher easily access the datasets in the
repository, we build a data-loader7 . It is a Python package
with a pandas Dataframe (pandas development team 2020)
by calling data = DataLoader().download(url). This widely
used data format can help the downstream data analysis.

Figure 2: The components of the TellMe system.
To tackle the too challenge, we develop TellMe, a computational tool that provides an estimate if a piece of news or
text is disinformation. Its input includes URLs and text, and
its output is a score based on different functions of TellMe
as shown in Figure 2: URL Checker, Fake News Classifier,
Website Matcher, Credibility and Trusty. The Trusty (Moturu, Yang, and Liu 2009) and Credibility (Abbasi and Liu
2013) scores are based on contents’ social engagements that
malicious users share more similarity than general users.
The fake news score is returned from a state-of-the-art fake
new detector (Shu et al. 2020). The website matcher compares the input URL with websites that publish false information about the virus found by NewsGuard (Brille and
Crovitz 2019).
Now, we use fake news as an example to illustrate our
attempts to learn with weak social supervision to detect
COVID-19 disinformation more effectively and with explainability. First, for effective fake news detection, we consider the relationships among publishers, news pieces, and
consumers, which is motivated by existing sociological studies on journalism on the correlation between the partisan
bias of publishers, the credibility of consumers, and the veracity degree of news content; and explore various auxiliary information from these relations to help detect fake
news (Shu, Wang, and Liu 2019). Second, for explainable
fake news detection, we aim to derive explanation of prediction results to help decision makers and practitioners; we
attempt to explore user comments as a source and mine informative and relevant pieces to help explain why a piece of
news is predicted as fake, and pinpoint more fictional text in
news text simultaneously (Shu et al. 2019).
To tackle the ethics challenge due to the increase in government surveillance and prevalence of smartphone apps to
collect and gather user/patient data, we need to take into account legitimate concerns regarding privacy and the degree
to which such a regime of monitoring and enforcement will
affect democracy after the pandemic ends. It requires us to
understand and acknowledge the fact that there is a clear
7

https://github.com/bigheiniu/COVID-19-Dataloaders

difference between standard biomedical ethics versus privacy concerns and ethics during a public health crisis. Governments and public health officials may need to take certain measures aimed at minimizing the damage caused by
the virus and for the common good during this trying time,
which under normal circumstances might have been inappropriate. Nevertheless, measures could be taken to avoid
potential misuse of data. One possible way to have better
guarantees on user privacy would be to make these contact tracing smartphone applications communicate in an encrypted peer to peer way rather than storing all the data in a
central server. These technologies should also be deployed
in a way that is as transparent as possible, so that the user
is fully aware of what and how much personal information
he/she permits the application to use. Furthermore, there is
significant ongoing discussion among experts, researchers
and policy-makers regarding a steady recovery into a normal functioning society. For example, the ethics research
group at Harvard University makes efforts at finding solutions without compromising user privacy to keep civil liberty and democracy at the forefront.

Looking Ahead
The significance of combating the COVID-19 infodemic lies
at protecting people from falling victims to the pandemic in
this unexpected front and from disrupting otherwise already
inconvenient daily routines so as to improve our resilience in
our fight to contain the pandemic. In this position paper, we
show a good number of problems posed by the COVID-19
infodemic, the vast amounts of data generated in the world’s
effort to contain the pandemic, and the need for concerted
efforts at various levels to efficiently and effectively deal
with current and future challenges in medical and information fronts.
It is evident that (1) we face both immediate and future
challenges in this unprecedented fight, (2) existing data will
grow fast, and existing computational tools are insufficient
to contain and mitigate the COVID-19 infodemic, and (3)
short-term solutions can have potential long-term impact.
Therefore, when we face hard choices, we need to resist the
temptation to trade-off so as to minimize long-term negative impact; when we search for solutions, we should consider those employing crowdsourcing and take long views
for fairness and responsibility; when we design methods, we
should rely on collective wisdom and diversity to aim for
robustness; and when we form teams, we should give priority to multi-disciplinary collaboration and preemptively address hidden biases. Our future will always be uncertain, but
with the advancement in science and technology and with
our preparedness trained and tested in our concerted efforts
to contain the pandemic in all fronts, our future will surely
be brighter and healthier.

Acknowledgments
This work is, in part, supported by Global Security Initiative
(GSI) at ASU and by NSF grants (#2029044 and #1614576).
We would like to thank Denis Liu for helping develop earlier
versions of TellMe and for carefully proofreading an earlier
version of this paper.

References
[Abbasi and Liu 2013] Abbasi, M.-A., and Liu, H. 2013.
Measuring user credibility in social media. In SBP-BRiMS.
[Banda et al. 2020] Banda, J. M.; Tekumalla, R.; Wang, G.;
Yu, J.; Liu, T.; Ding, Y.; and Chowell, G. 2020. A large-scale
covid-19 twitter chatter dataset for open scientific research
– an international collaboration.
[Brille and Crovitz 2019] Brille, S., and Crovitz, G. 2019.
Newsguard now available on microsoft edge mobile apps for
ios and android.
[Chen, Allot, and Lu 2020] Chen, Q.; Allot, A.; and Lu, Z.
2020. Keep up with the latest coronavirus research. Nature.
[Chen, Lerman, and Ferrara 2020] Chen, E.; Lerman, K.;
and Ferrara, E. 2020. Covid-19: The first public coronavirus
twitter dataset.
[Donovan 2020] Donovan, J.
2020.
Here’s how social media can combat the coronavirus ‘infodemic’.
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/615368/facebooktwitter-social-media-infodemic-misinformation/.
[Guidotti and Ardia 2020] Guidotti, E., and Ardia, D. 2020.
Covid-19 data hub.
[Kornbluh and Goodman 2020] Kornbluh,
and
Goodman, E. P.
2020.
Safeguarding digital democracy.
Report by German Marshall Fund of the United
States.
http://www.gmfus.org/publications/safeguardingdemocracy-against-disinformation.
[Lynas 2020] Lynas, M.
2020.
Covid:
Top
10
current
conspiracy
theories.
https://allianceforscience.cornell.edu/blog/2020/04/covidtop-10-current-conspiracy-theories/.
[Mallory 2020] Mallory, L. 2020. Sc health officials update
list of confirmed and estimated coronavirus cases by zip
code.
https://www.wtoc.com/2020/04/10/dhec-releasesnumber-confirmed-estimated-coronavirus-cases-by-zipcode/.
[Miller 2020] Miller, M.
2020.
Virtual army rising up to protect health care groups from hackers. https://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/493997-virtualarmy-rising-up-to-protect-healthcare-groups-from-hackers/.
[Moturu, Yang, and Liu 2009] Moturu, S. T.; Yang, J.; and
Liu, H. 2009. Quantifying utility and trustworthiness for
advice shared on online social media. In CSE.
[pandas development team 2020] pandas development team,
T. 2020. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas.
[Sahoo, Liu, and Hoi 2017] Sahoo, D.; Liu, C.; and Hoi,
S. C. 2017. Malicious url detection using machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07179.
[Shu et al. 2019] Shu, K.; Cui, L.; Wang, S.; Lee, D.; and
Liu, H. 2019. defend: Explainable fake news detection. In
KDD.
[Shu et al. 2020] Shu, K.; Zheng, G.; Li, Y.; Mukherjee, S.;
Awadallah, A. H.; Ruston, S.; and Liu, H. 2020. Leveraging
multi-source weak social supervision for early detection of
fake news. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01732.

[Shu, Wang, and Liu 2019] Shu, K.; Wang, S.; and Liu, H.
2019. Beyond news contents: The role of social context for
fake news detection. In WSDM.
[Wetsman 2020] Wetsman, N. 2020. Personal privacy matters during a pandemic but less than it might at other times.
https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/12/21177129/personalprivacy-pandemic-ethics-public-health-coronavirus/.

