1

Comment:
A socio-technical framework for digital contact tracing
Ricardo Vinuesa1*, Andreas Theodorou2, Manuela Battaglini3 and Virginia Dignum2**
1

SimEx/FLOW, Engineering Mechanics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden
Responsible AI Group, Department of Computing Science, Umeå University, SE-90358 Umeå, Sweden
3
Transparent Internet, Tårup Bygade 30, DK-5370 Mesinge, Denmark
Corresponding authors: *rvinuesa@mech.kth.se; **virginia@cs.umu.se
2

Abstract
In their efforts to tackle the COVID-19 crisis, decision makers are considering the development and use of
smartphone applications for contact tracing. Even though these applications differ in technology and methods,
there is an increasing concern about their implications for privacy and human rights. Here we propose a
framework to evaluate their suitability in terms of impact on the users, employed technology and governance
methods. We illustrate its usage with three applications, and with the European Data Protection Board (EDPB)
guidelines, highlighting their limitations.

Introduction and motivation
Around the world, policymakers and public-health experts are calling for the use of contact-tracing applications
as means to fight COVID-19. The aim is to track those who come in contact with infected people with the aid of
smartphone applications (referred to as apps in this paper). The basic premise behind these apps is that
whenever an individual is diagnosed with the coronavirus, every person who had possibly been near that
infected individual during the period in which they were contagious is notified and told to either self-quarantine
or request COVID-19 testing. Proponents of this approach point out that the apps can help to stop the chain of
transmission in order to control the outbreak without the need of a full lockdown.
Many tracking apps are being introduced via a fast-tracked development circle, often paid with public resources,
with very limited socio-economic impact assessment and concern for fundamental rights and values such as
fairness and inclusion [1,2]. It is therefore important to critically consider the actual usefulness, necessity and
effectiveness of the apps, as well as their impact on the broader social system, including our fundamental rights
and freedoms, considering that these apps set a precedent for future use of similar invasive technologies, even
after the COVID-19 crisis.
Central to the decision to employ such apps, is the question of their effectiveness for the containment of spread.
Some studies suggest that a penetration of 60% of the population [3] would be needed, while others show that as
much as 80-90% penetration would be required1. Current implementations in different countries do not seem to
achieve penetration higher than 25%. Furthermore, as indicated by the World Health Organization (WHO)2,
discrimination may arise against users, or against those that for various reasons are not able to use the app, and
history has shown that the interplay of surveillance and epidemiology can unfortunately also lead to threats and
violence against certain groups.
In order to aid in the evaluation of these apps, here we propose a framework which is adapted from the one used
in our recent article on artificial intelligence (AI) and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) [2], to
evaluate current approaches and concerns related to development, deployment and usage of tracking apps.

Evaluation criteria and example cases
The proposed evaluation framework is based on a total of 19 criteria, divided into the three following categories:
Impact on the citizens, Technology and Governance. These criteria are derived from different regulations and

1

See the work by the Agent-based Social Simulation of the Coronavirus Crisis research group (ASSOCC):
https://simassocc.org/scenario-effect-of-tracktrace-apps/
2
See the WHO report: https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/world_report/en/summary_en.pdf

2
guidance documents [4,5] and from the concerns raised by experts3. Each criteria is measured on a scale from 0
to 2 as discussed next.

Impact on the citizens
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.
6.

Respecting fundamental rights of individuals: This includes the rights to safety, health, nondiscrimination and freedom of association (2). Unclear information/only partially respecting these
rights (1), or not respecting them (0) are not adequate.
Privacy and data protection: Data collection should be compliant with the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) [6] and respect the privacy of the individual. A Data Protection Impact Assessment
(DPIA) must be carried out before the deployment of any contact-tracing system. The purpose of the
app and the mechanisms to assess its usage need to be clearly defined. All these requirements should be
fulfilled (2), whereas fulfilling them only partially (1) or not at all (0) are not adequate.
Transparency rights: They include the right of users to be notified, to control their own data,
transparency regarding which personal data are collected, and of explanation of app-produced output.
The app should be auditable. Fulfillment of all requirements (2) is suitable, whereas fulfilling them
only partially (1) or not at all (0) are not adequate.
Avoid discrimination: The app needs to prevent stigmatization due to suspected infection (2). Unclear
information/measures to avoid this (1), or the lack of a plan to address this issue (0) are not adequate.
Accessibility: Possibility to be used by all regardless of demographics, language, disability, digital
literacy and financial accessibility. All these requirements should be fulfilled (2), whereas addressing
them only partially (1) or not at all (0) are not adequate.
Education and tutorials: Ensure that users are informed and capable of using the app correctly,
including e.g. in-app help (2), or external materials, e.g. website (1). Absence (0) is not adequate.

Technology
7.

Decentralized protocol: E.g. use of the Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T)
architecture [7]. Furthermore, the app needs to allow interoperability. Bluetooth is preferred over GPS.
A fully decentralized protocol is best (2), whereas mixed (1) or completely centralized approaches are
not adequate (0).
8. Data management: Ensure data-minimization principle, i.e. usage of local and temporary storage, and
encryption, based on principles of data protection by design. Ensure that only data strictly necessary are
processed. All these requirements are needed (2), whereas unclear documentation (1) or lack of
compliance with all of them (0) are not adequate.
9. Security: User authentication to prevent risks such as access, modification, or disclosure of the data.
Use unique and pseudo-random identifiers, renewed regularly and cryptographically strong.
Compliance with these requirements is needed (2), whereas unclear (1) or lack of compliance (0) are
not adequate.
10. App easy to deactivate/remove: Either through clear instructions or automatically by sunset clause
(2). Unclear (1) or difficulties for removing the app and the data (0) are not adequate.
11. Open-source code: Participatory and multidisciplinary development, access to the code and methods
used for adaptation to new knowledge on the virus (2). Open-source code without the possibility of
contributing (1) is not recommended, and non open-source code is undesirable (0).
Governance
12. Public Ownership: Ownership by State is preferable (2), whereas Health Agency (1), a research
institute (1) or a private/commercial party (0) are less adequate.
13. Data governance should be made public: Open data governance is preferable (2), while intermediate
(1) or private/opaque settings (0) are not suitable.
14. Use: Downloading the app needs to be voluntary (2). Furthermore, the use of the app cannot be
mandatory to access certain places (1) or otherwise be legally enforced (0).

3

See for example a letter to the prime minister of the Netherlands by a group of scientists: http://allai.nl/wpcontent/uploads/2020/04/Online-version-Letter-to-President-Rutte-Ministers-De-Jonge-Van-Rijn-Grapperhaus-re.-COVID19-apps.pdf; and also a similar letter to the Spanish government: https://www.transparentinternet.com/es/transparencia/cartaal-gobierno-de-espana-covid-19/

3
15. Sunset clause: This needs to be clearly specified with a clear date and procedure (2), while unclear
information (1) or the lack of such a clause (0) are not adequate.
16. Legislation and Policy: Clear, broader legal framework voted through parliament (2), partial
governmental policy (1) whereas no policy or unknown is not desirable (0).
17. Incidental Findings and dual-use policy: Purposes beyond contact tracing (e.g. placing people into
crime scenes, identification of behaviour patterns) are strictly prohibited (2). If not, at least a policy
stating what are the other potential uses of the data collected (1) needs to be in place.
18. Design Impact Assessment and Open Development Process: Explicit design process, including
clear description about aims and motivation, stakeholders, public consultation process and impact
assessment (2). Unclear information (1) or the lack of such an assessment (0) are not adequate.
19. Right to contest/liability. Users need to be able to contest decisions or demand human intervention
(2). Partial/unclear compliance (1) or the lack of this feature (0) are not adequate.

As an example of application of this framework, Figure 1 shows the result for three apps: Stopp Corona [8]
(currently under development in Austria), NHS COVID-19 [9] (being developed in the United Kingdom) and
TraceTogether [10] (which has been deployed and utilized in Singapore since March 20, 2020). In addition, we
also analyze the European Data Protection Board (EDPB) guidelines [4], and assess to what extent they comply
with our framework. We observe that all the apps have low scores in Governance, and none of them complies
with criteria 15, 17 and 19, which are in our view important areas for any digital contact tracing. The EDBP
guidelines provide a clause to halt the use of apps once the situation returns to ‘normal’. This can be seen as
vague, since ‘normal’ is open to interpretation considering the socio-economic changes lockdowns brought. A
more clear date, unless further action is taken, would be preferred. The EDPB guidelines also require criterion
19, but they do not include any requirement regarding geotagging (relevant for criterion 17). It is also important
to remark the importance of using a decentralized protocol (criterion 7), a feature which is not exhibited by the
NHS COVID-19 app and it is not required by the EDPB guidelines, while TraceTogether only partly complies
with it through a mixed centralized/decentralized protocol. We believe that this approach should be
implemented in any digital contact-tracing app, in order to fully ensure the safety of citizen data.

Discussion and concluding remarks
The COVID-19 pandemic is revealing two conflicting perspectives: governments need sufficient
epidemiological information to manage the pandemic, whereas citizens while wanting safety are concerned
about privacy, discrimination, and personal-data protection. In order to ensure that the goals from both
perspectives are achieved, transparency regarding the problems associated with collection and processing of
personal data is essential [11,12]. Information about which measures are in place to safeguard human rights and
freedoms, and about how the app is developed and governed is a primary condition for the acceptance of these
apps.
This work contributes to this goal by providing decision makers that are considering the introduction of digital
contact-tracing apps a framework to assess possible alternatives in terms of societal impact, technology, and
principles of responsible development and governance. The tool can also be used by individuals considering the
use of these apps to assess how they align with their needs and concerns.

Acknowledgements
R.V. acknowledges funding provided by the Swedish Research Council (VR). A.T. is funded by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 825619 (AI4EU project).
V.D. is supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP), funded by the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. The authors also acknowledge Steen Rasmussen and Loïs Vanhée for
constructive discussions about the technical issues and social impact associated with digital contact-tracing
apps.

4
Author contributions
The study was ideated and designed by R.V., A.T., M.B. and V.D. The four authors analyzed the data and wrote
the article.

a) Stopp Corona [8] (76% compliance).

b) NHS COVID-19 [9] (42% compliance).

c) TraceTogether [10] (66% compliance).

d) EDPB guidelines [4] (71% compliance).

Figure 1: Application of the proposed framework to three apps and the EDPB guidelines, as indicated in each
panel. The numbers represent each of the criteria, and the compliance with the criteria from the three main
groups are shown in the outer circle.

References
[1] Dignum, V. Responsible Artificial Intelligence: How to Develop and Use AI in a Responsible Way. Springer
International Publishing (2019).
[2] Vinuesa, R., Azizpour, H., Leite, I., Balaam, M., Dignum, V., Domisch, S., Felländer, A., Langhans, S.D.,
Tegmark, M. and Fuso Nerini, F. The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nat.
Commun. 11, 233 (2020).
[3] Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Abeler-Dörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall, D. and Fraser, C.
Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science 368, no. 6491 (2020).

5
[4] European Data Protection Board (EDPB). Guidelines 04/2020 on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the
context of the COVID-19 outbreak (2020). Available at: https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/ourdocuments/usmernenia/guidelines-042020-use-location-data-and-contact-tracing_en
[5] O’Neill, P. H., Ryan-Mosley, T. and Johnson, B. A flood of coronavirus apps are tracking us. Now it’s time to keep track
of them. MIT Technol. Rev. (2020) Available at: https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittrcovid-tracing-tracker/
[6] European Union General Data Protection Regulation (2016). Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
[7] Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T) Protocol (2020). Available at: https://github.com/DP3T/documents
[8] Tschohl, C., Scheichenbauer, H., Kastelitz, M., Hötzendorfer, W., Hospes, J., Eisenberger, T. and Rothmund-Burgwall,
M. W. Stopp Corona-App des Österreichischen Roten Kreuzes (2020). Available at:
https://www.roteskreuz.at/fileadmin/user_upload/Bericht_Datenschutzfolgeabschaetzung_StoppCorona_App.pdf
[9] National Health Service (NHS) COVID-19 (2020). Available at: https://covid19.nhs.uk/
[10] Bay, J., Kek, J., Tan, A., Sheng Hau, C., Yongquan, L., Tan, J. and Quy, T. A. BlueTrace: A privacy-preserving
protocol for community-driven contact tracing across borders. White Paper (2020). Available at:
https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf
[11] Battaglini, M. and Rasmussen, S. Transparency, automated decision-making processes and personal profiling. J. Data
Protection & Privacy 2, 331–341 (2019).
[12] Mello, M. M. and Wang, C. J. Ethics and governance for digital disease surveillance. Science, DOI:
10.1126/science.abb9045 (2020).

