arXiv:2005.10948v3 [cs.CY] 20 Jul 2020

CovidNet: To Bring Data Transparency in the Era of COVID-19
Kai Shen∗

Tong Yang∗

Sixuan He

University of Kiel
Kiel, Germany

Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA

ADP
Roseland, New Jersey, USA

Enyu Li

Peter Sun

Pingying Chen

Texas Department of Transportation
Austin, Texas, USA

Duke University
Durham, North Carolina, USA

1Point3Acres
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA

Lin Zuo

Jiayue Hu

Yiwen Mo

Duke University
Durham, North Carolina, USA

New York University
New York City, New York, USA

San Diego State University
San Diego, California, USA

Weiwei Zhang

Haonan Zhang

Jingxue Chen

South Dakota State University
Brookings, South Dakota, USA

University of Texas at Dallas
Dallas, Texas, USA

1Point3Acres
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA

Yu Guo
1Point3Acres
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA

Figure 1: Home page of 1Point3Acres CovidNet Project

ABSTRACT

1

Timely, creditable, and fine-granular case information is vital for
local communities and individual citizens to make rational and datadriven responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. This paper presents
CovidNet, a COVID-19 tracking project associated with a large
scale epidemic dataset, which was initiated by 1Point3Acres. To the
best of our knowledge, the project is the only platform providing
real-time global case information of more than 4,124 sub-divisions
from over 27 countries worldwide with multi-language supports.
The platform also offers interactive visualization tools to analyze
the full historical case curves in each region. Initially launched as
a voluntary project to bridge the data transparency gap in North
America in January 2020, this project by far has become one of the
major independent sources worldwide and has been consumed by
many other tracking platforms [4, 9]. The accuracy and freshness of
the dataset is a result of the painstaking efforts from our voluntary
teamwork, crowd-sourcing channels, and automated data pipelines.
As of May 18, 2020, the project website has been visited more than
200 million times and the CovidNet dataset has empowered over
522 institutions and organizations worldwide in policy-making and
academic researches. All datasets are openly accessible for noncommercial purposes at https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com via a
formal request through our APIs.

Starting from December 2019 or earlier, the outbreak initially detected and reported in Wuhan (Hubei, China) due to a novel type
of coronavirus, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), has been rapidly spreading firstly across regions in
China and other east-Asian countries, and then, since late February, to nearly all the continents in the world. As of May 15, there
have been more than 4.42 million cases confirmed across 225 countries and regions, associated with 302 thousands deaths. Declared
as a pandemic by World Health Organization on March 11, the
coronavirus outbreak has brought severe challenges to not only
local medical systems (especially in underdeveloped areas) but our
society as a whole.
Governments across the world have been taking various measures at different levels in response to the pandemic. To be able to
make scientific and data-driven decisions, local communities rely on
timely and accurate epidemic data to understand the spread and the
trend of the COVID-19 outbreak. Case information in cities and/or
provinces is especially valuable to promptly adjust local policies in
response to the rapid change of the pandemic situation. At the same
time, nearly every individual’s daily life has been severally affected
by the crisis. To minimize the ramification of community spread,
it is of extreme importance to provide the public with transparent
and accurate local information to guide their daily life decisions.
Overall, there is a huge need for timely, creditable, and fine-granular
data which can be easily accessed via a single platform.

∗ Corresponding

authors with equal contributions

INTRODUCTION

Kai Shen, Tong Yang, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Pingying Chen, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo

convenient application programming interface to access the CovidNet dataset. And, to assist the worldwide battle against COVID-19,
we would like to encourage more users, with both governmental
and academic backgrounds, to take advantage of our data collection.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides
an overview of the 1Point3Acres CovidNet project on both datasets
and visualization. We discuss our data collection practice in details
in Section 3 (North America data) and Section 4 (global data). We
elaborate our quality control mechanism in Section 5, and introduce
the rich set of interactive visualization tools in Section 6. In Section 7, we explain briefly about how to access our datasets; related
projects and platforms are mentioned in Section 8. We summarize
our work in Section 9 and discuss various ways that CovidNet could
aid the battle against COVID-19. A disclaimer is highlighted in the
end emphasizing the role of the CovidNet Project and associated
contents.
Figure 2: Global COVID-19 case distribution and trend.
On January 31, our team initiated a project as a data website
in response to the ongoing COVID-19 emergency. The original
purpose of the project was to provide real-time case information
in North America to compensate the delayed official reporting at
the time. In less than three months, the platform has grown into
a Global COVID-19 tracker which includes geographic information of COVID-19 spread with sub-division level breakdown for
more than 27 countries and territories. Up to now, we have become
one of the very few completely independent reporting sources of
COVID-19 case data integration. As the United States has become
the epidemic center of the world since late March where a realtime data collection across the country was unavailable from most
official channels, we have been the original data provider to the
platforms like [4, 9] and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) since March 2020. To provide a full picture about
COVID-19, we have also collaborated with another project team
[1] to integrate testing and hospitalization statistics in the U.S., and
delivered a richer visualization of local pandemic status combined
with our real-time case data.
Our COVID-19 dataset, named as CovidNet, offers the full historical case trends with a fine-granular regional breakdown. The
name addresses the hierarchical structure of the geographical network the data is embedded in. CovidNet is constantly been updated
to include the most up-to-date case information in real-time. To
achieve data accuracy, real-time update, and worldwide coverage,
the CovidNet features:
• The data is collected from only reliable sources. Various
quality control assurances have been applied;
• The data is updated in real-time with the effort of crowdsourcing and automated data collection;
• The data is collected with fine geographical granularity
worldwide.
We have been providing data both to the public and academic institutes for pure research purposes. As of May 18, 2020, the project
website has been visited more than 200 million times and has empowered over 522 institutions and organizations. We have built a

2

PROJECT OVERVIEW

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, there has been
overwhelming related information from numerous resources. A
major challenge, therefore, is to integrate the scattered information
on a single platform with consistent quality and credibility. The
1Point3Acres project focuses on the following three aspects in
collecting and presenting the CovidNet data:
• Data Accuracy and Consistency. We extract information
from local health authorities and trustful media reports. Media reports are used when official data is significantly delayed, and are cross-checked with official data afterwords.
No data from other tracking platforms is used in CovidNet
to eliminate loops of references.
• Timely Update. Since the launch of our project, CovidNet
data has been updated in nearly real-time. Crowd-sourcing
has been implemented to ensure timely updates. This sets
us apart from official channels like WHO [7] and U.S. CDC
whose updates are delayed by days. To our best knowledge,
most other non-governmental platforms [4, 6] have also
experienced a 1 - 2 days delay by far.
• Worldwide Data with Regional Breakdown. CovidNet
provides case information with finer geographical granularity in over 27 countries and we are still expanding the
coverage. After the initial launch with county-level case data
in the U.S. and Canada, we have received numerous feedback from local authorities and residents on how it helped
local communities in decision making, which motivated us to
bring the finer data granularity to more countries impacted
by COVID-19.

2.1

CovidNet Dataset

Our CovidNet dataset provides real-time epidemic information in
three major categories: confirmed, deceased, and recovered cases
when they are publicly available1 . The complete history since the
outbreak in each local region is available in the CovidNet dataset.

1 We follow the definition of different categories provided by health authorities in each

country.

CovidNet: To Bring Data Transparency in the Era of COVID-19

• Geographical Distribution. The COVID-19 case distribution is presented in various ways, including epidemic maps,
doughnut charts and tabular views. Figure 3 showcases a few
examples of visualization. World, State, and county level epidemic maps are provided for user exploration. The tabular
view can be customized to rank by different case dimensions,
such as the infection rate, the death rate, etc.
• Temporal Epidemic Curves. Temporal trends of the outbreak are captured in various epidemic curves, including
basic time-series lines and burn down charts. Users can choose
and compare curves of different regions with our interactive
tools. One such example is shown in Figure 4.

Table 1 summarizes granularity, information source, and update
frequency of the current dataset2 .
U.S./Canada
Hardest Hits*
county/city
province/state
3169
974
health dept. health dept. &
& local media state institution
Update frequency 1 hr
1 hr
Number of source 1064
974
Cumulative cases
1.5M
1.9M
Total Deaths
92K
161K
Table 1: Summary of CovidNet dataset. *We now
cluded 27 countries, with more to come.
Granularity
Number of regions
Original sources

2.2

Others
country
161
WHO
2 hrs
1
1M
49K
have in-

Interactive Tools on 1Point3Acres Tracker

Figure 3: Example visualization tools for geographical distribution.
Left: county level interactive case map in state of New York, U.S.
Right: a doughnut chart of case distribution in U.S by states. Figure
best visualized in color.

3

NORTH AMERICA DATA COLLECTION

The United States has been the epidemic center since March, 2020,
and the most challenging area to integrate creditable case information in real-time due to data inconsistency at different levels of
the public health system. Our platform was initially launched to
confront this challenge and the severe delay by official authorities.
This section describes our data collection and validation practice
during different stages of the outbreak amid a timely, reliable, and
county-level COVID-19 dataset.
Before discussing the data collection practice in detail, we highlight the specific features of the CovidNet dataset in the U.S. and
Canada in addition to Section 2.1. The tracking in North America
started on January 21, 2020 when the first case was officially confirmed in the U.S. The data covers 3169 sub-country-level regions
across the North America3 . All data is collected from publicly available sources, including both local health official announcements
and reliable media reports, and is integrated from 1064 distinct websites. In addition to case information in the CovidNet, our project
also includes testing locations and statistics thanks to the COVID
Tracking Project [1].

3.1

A Change Log of Data Collection Practice

The epidemic situation underwent several stages in North America
since January 2020, each with unique challenges in data collection
and validation. We now elaborate different stages of the data collection practice along with the evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Figure 4: Example burn down charts for visualizing trends of active, deceased, and recovered cases in Lombardia, Italy.

With a flood of available COVID-19 data, we offer a suite of interactive analysis and visualization tools to provide the general
public more insights about the current situation of the COVID-19
pandemic. We focus on presenting both the temporal trends (i.e.,
epidemic curves) as well as the geographical distribution of the
case spread. (See Section 6 for details.) The interactive tools are
available in four different languages.
2 The

geographical granularity differs in different countries, although one shall not
interpreter that the official US/Canada data has a better granularity than ones in other
countries. While city level and per-case level case data are accessible in many regions
outside U.S./Canada, systematically aggregating such information worldwide, however,
is beyond the capability of our voluntary team.

3.1.1 Initial stage: January to Late February. The first North
America COVID-19 case was officially reported on Jan 21 [5] and the
total cases had remained at a low level until late February4 . During
this period, both federal and local official health departments had
not developed a systematic reporting schedule. Each individual case,
however, received plenty of media coverage with both geographic
and demographic details. The most timely data source had been
local media reports.
The CovidNet project was initially launched in Jan 31, 2020 as
a platform for real-time case data aggregation of related media report5 . Since active crowed-sourcing was the most effective way to
track the sparsely emerging cases, we organized a volunteer team
3 This

includes all counties/districts in U.S./Canada, U.S. Federal Bureau of Prisons
system, U.S. Military and Veteran Affairs systems, and U.S. territories. Cases from
cruises have been separately presented.
4 As of Feb 29, 2020, a total of 72 cases were officially reported in U.S. and 20 in Canada.
5 Our searching had traced media sources including CBSN (U.S.), Seattle Times (U.S.),
Global News (Canada), National Post (Canada), etc.

Kai Shen, Tong Yang, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Pingying Chen, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo

working 24/7 for real time updates and focused on data accuracy.
We recorded each single confirmed case with all accessible data
features including geo-location, demographic information, infection cause, and a summary of news report. In additional to per-case
information, the reference links to original news were also attached
to each record in our dataset and were visible to all users on the
website. This helped us account for double counting and to cross
validate against later official reports.
3.1.2 Expanding stage: Late February to End of March. The
epidemic outbreak in North America started expanding geographically since late February. While numbers were still closely tracked
by local media, the task of integrating all available sources manually by volunteers had become more and more challenging. Health
official departments also started to actively release case information but yet to provide a real-time data. With limited capacity, in
addition to active searching for media reports by volunteers, we
offer an issue report submission form to all users, through which
anyone can provide useful information back to us. The submission
form categorizes information reports into 9 different classes: "New
Case", "Recover Case", "Death Case", "Error Report", "Feature Request",
"Breaking News", "Further Details", "Testing Location", and "Question".
Whenever a delay of our data or an error was noticed, a user could
directly report the issue to us with trustful links. The reputation
we built up during the initial stage has rewarded us with a large
number of visits and users, which in turn provides us informative
feedback frequently. As of May 14, 2020, we have received and
resolved 16240 issue reports from our users, which have been a
significant part of the data source. After an issue gets reported
by users, a volunteer would be assigned to manually check the
provided information (via media or official sites), and compare the
report with all currently recorded cases (within the same county). 6
3.1.3 Rapid Increasing Stage: Since April. The total number
in the U.S. surpassed 10,000 on March 27, 2020, which significantly
elevated the difficulty for data collection and validation. While local
media remained to be a valuable data source, in regions with large
increasing numbers, there appeared to be also a delay even in media
reports. On the other hand, more local health departments started
to develop official announcement schedules (generally from 1 to
3 times per day). Therefore, while still accumulating local media
reported data in real-time, we attempted to adapt our collection
process to include most up-to-date official health reports, which
would prevent a possible delay in the data integration procedure.
We now give a brief introduction about the construction of this
pipeline by using U.S. health systems as an example.
There is a three-level hierarchy structure of the official public
health system: the overall country-level CDC, the state-level health
departments, and local county-level health departments. With a
bottom-to-up data flow, the CDC database has experienced the
most delay, which, is also the exact reason to launch a project like
ours. As for state-level and county-level reports, the situation has
been mixed: some state health departments have tracked local cases
closely and hence provided a trustful source for update checking,
while others are in general behind county-level statistics. There
6 We

have also used the help from several twitter alarm accounts at the beginning of
this stage.

are in total 3,243 counties in the United States. To monitor all local
reports manually is impossible for the volunteer team. We, therefore,
initiated an automated data fetching pipeline, which enables a
24/7 checking for updates from local health department sites. Any
fetched data update would be assigned to the volunteer team for a
second-round check, as official reports potentially contain several
types of noise which we discuss in detail in Section 5. Only verified
updates would be finally recorded in the database.
We want to address the three important facts below about our
automated official-data checking pipeline:
(1) We collect both official health authority reports and media
report to stay close to real-time.
(2) While most official health authority provide case data to
public, it remains of significant importance to integrate all
local data into a complete dataset.
(3) We account for potential noise in data from local health officials and implement various quality assurance steps before
adding into our database.
This automation pipeline has been integrated into our workflow
since April, 2020, and has become one of the dominant components
of our data collection process.

3.2

The Structural Evolution of the Data
Format

We used the cloud collaboration service provided by Airtable. Our
team members can simultaneously work on the same tabular data.
There are three major tabular formats we have used:
• Expanded Tabular (ET) format: we document every case
(sometimes a small cluster of cases) into a single row to provide a per-case view to our user. We also provide a summary
of the original report for each case-cluster. In this ET format,
all information including the reference link to the source is
presented directly to users for the full transparency.
• Compact Tabular (CT) format: given a table content topic
(e.g. recovered case table) and a fixed (geographic) granularity, we assign each row with a region, and each column with
a date. The number in a cell therefore indicates the accumulative counting in the row-labeled region on the columnlabeled date. And each row represents a time series of data
in a specific region. While CT is easy to consume compared
to ET, the CT format cannot easily summarize the full set
of references and losses certain demographics information.
We keep such dimensions only internally visible for quality
control purpose.
• Statistic Assistant (SA) format: this type of table is used
to present statistics of currently collected data. We usually assign each row a region, which could be of countryequivalence level, state-equivalence level, or county-equivalence
level. Different columns are used to represent different information categories associated with each region like region
name, total confirmed number, fatality rate, contact of the local
health official. SA is mostly used for tabulated presentation
and other interactive maps on our project web-page.
During initial stage (section 3.1.1) , we used a single database to
record all cases in the ET format. It was later divided into two

CovidNet: To Bring Data Transparency in the Era of COVID-19

separate ones in early March: one for U.S. cases and the other for
Canada cases. Corresponding SA tables have also been updated
automatically since then.
The ET format continued to be the dominant one until the end
of the Expanding stage (section 3.1.2). Maintaining ET format when
U.S. official only reports aggregated statistics became impossible
and we have transformed our data table into the CT format in late
March. We kept deceased case table and recovered case table in ET
format until mid-April and transformed into CT format then.

4

WORLD WIDE DATA COLLECTION

Most mainstream COVID-19 data platforms [3, 4, 6–10] offer case
information at country-level, with only exceptions for China by [3]
and North America (e.g. by our project and subsequent platforms
that aggregate our data [4, 9]). International organizations like
WHO [7] and ECDC aggregate worldwide data but are often delayed
without sub-division regional breakdown. Creating a platform with
consistent freshness, credibility, and granularity for worldwide data
is the key to present the full picture of the COVID-19 spread, which,
however, poses a great challenge.
Determined to confront this challenge, we have exploited a combination of manual data collection, crowd-sourcing channels, and
automated data pipelines to solve the problem. As of May 18, 2020,
the CovidNet dataset has covered data in 1055 state-level regions
and 3169 county-level regions of more than 27 countries and territories. While collecting the most updated data in a timely fashion,
we also retrieved all the case history since the outbreak within each
region.
We choose to only present daily aggregated numbers in CovidNet
in each region for consistency. We note that some health departments have provided richer information than a daily aggregated
number. A full list of countries can be found in Appendix. We prioritize countries with the most confirmed cases and attempt to cover
major countries in all continents of the world. We highlight that
this is an ongoing effort to expand to as many countries as our
resource permits.
Subdivision Naming Convention. We adopt the ISO-3166 standard 7 to normalize provinces or states names in CovidNet. Official
names in English and local languages are both available.

4.1

Case Reporting Paradigms in Different
Countries

Local health authorities reports are used as data source for consistent credibility8 . While the data reporting systems differ across
countries, they mostly fall into the following two categories.
The first class of countries offers open access to the full historical data starting from the outbreak. Within this paradigm, case
information is provided in either the per-patient level or per-region
daily statistic level. Examples are the public repository of Italy 9
and the open data API of Colombia 10 . We transform all data into
7 https://www.iso.org/iso-3166-country-codes.html#2012_iso3166-2
8 The

only exception is North America discussed in Section 3.
9 Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri official github repository: https://github.com/
pcm-dpc/COVID-19
10 El portal web de Datos Abiertos del Ministerio de TecnologÃŋas de la InformaciÃşn
y las Comunicaciones: https://www.datos.gov.co/en/Salud-y-Protecci-n-Social/Casospositivos-de-COVID-19-en-Colombia/gt2j-8ykr/data

per-region-day statistics and discard detailed demographics. While
this simplifies the full history retrieval, it requires systematical quality control, due to the modification of historical data and changes
of reporting criteria. For instance, the official data repository of
Spain changed confirmed case definition and data fields in late
April, which led to mismatches in our time-series within a short
time window. 11 We apply alarms whenever a suspicious decrease
in the curve gets observed, which is then assigned to manual check
by volunteers.
The second class of countries reports only the most recent case
data, through a data-accessing interface. In most locales, the historical data is collectively archived and stored in various formats
(pdf, csv, json), or retrievable from official daily reports. Examples
include the official COVID report by Korean CDC12 and the South
Africa COVID news portal13 . We collect all archived information
and create an integrated dataset. As in such data-accessing systems, there lacks a consistent way to track edits in historical data,
we hence only retrieve the historical data once. Occasionally, we
failed to trace back all the historical data archive. We resort to local
non-official data platforms to back fill the earlier case data14 .

4.2

Data Collection Pipeline

We check all the official data sources every 2 hours and update the
most recent data in our database accordingly. For countries that
provide open access to the full case history, we also implement
scheduled (daily) checking for modifications of official historical
data. The timestamp associated with each record is in agreement
with the local time of the publishing authority15 .
Given different stages of the outbreak, the data accessibility and
publishing channels are constantly evolving in each country. For
instance, official data is provided in per-patient level in the initial
stage in most countries, and slowly evolves into an aggregated
format during the outbreak stage. We combine our data pipeline
along with the volunteer’s manual effort to ensure the data quality
and consistency. Section 3 highlights this issue in the North America
as an example.

5

DATA QUALITY CONTROL

The data quality control (QC) is always the first priority of the
CovidNet project, as both local communities and researchers might
make critical decisions based on the data. Note that we only have
access to the case information released by health officials and/or
media reports, and the quality of the original case data is beyond
our capability. We control the CovidNet dataset to accurately reflect
the information provided by local health authorities. This section
focuses on specific quality control challenges in a rapidly evolving
pandemic and the practices we adopted in the voluntary teamwork.

11

https://cnecovid.isciii.es/covid19/#documentaci%C3%B3n-y-datos
Release Archive of Korean Center of Disease Control: https://www.cdc.go.kr/
board/board.es?mid=a30402000000&bid=0030
13 https://sacoronavirus.co.za/category/press-releases-and-notices/
14 We specifically acknowledge the effort from [2] for their endeavor.
15 We notice that a subset of countries provides official data with a 1-day delay, which
is annotated accordingly on the web page.
12 Press

Kai Shen, Tong Yang, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Pingying Chen, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo

5.1

Quality Control with different Reporting
Paradigms Worldwide

As discussed in Section 4.1, our data comes from distinct reporting systems in different countries. While each paradigm requires
a specific quality model, the general principle is to start with the
data with the finest granularity and/or with the full history. For
instance, when per-case data are provided (e.g. open data projects
in Columbia 16 and Philippine 17 health ministries), the pipeline
would aggregate from such per-case dataset to get daily case statistics and geographical distributions. Following the same principle,
when health officials release and update the entire aggregated daily
history (e.g., Italy and Spain), we update the entire time series
whenever edits are made officially.
We dedicated our effort mostly in health reporting systems with
a federated administration structure. The key challenge presented
with such a system is the asynchronized natural of data from different levels. Taking the United State as an example: county health
departments release case statistics following their own schedules
while state officials may update at a lower frequency, typically 1-3
times a day. At any given time, aggregated county-level data may
differ from state-level ones. In extreme cases, state-level reports
could be delayed by days. This asynchronized nature has brought
difficulty for QC. The situation gets further complicated when an
unassigned category is presented.
Quality Control practice in federated systems: As discussed
in section 3, our database records the finest granularity, and has
included the full set of references either publicly visible (in the early
stage) or internally traceable (in the current stage). All volunteers
follow the same protocol to determine whether an inconsistency is
due to human mistakes or not, by investigating data from different
levels of health departments and also internal comments. On the
website, a note would be left to users when presented numbers
differ from official statistics. We also created an Inconsistency
Diary (maintained by the volunteer team) as an internal reference
to track discrepancies, and periodically revisit issues that persist.

5.2

Timely Updates with Potential Noise in
Official Data

We acknowledge that any case data is subject to edit and change in
a rapidly growing pandemic situation, and have assumed potential
noise in the official data collected. While most of noise would be
corrected eventually, to present timely update, we have categorized several noise mechanisms and implemented quality assurance
accordingly.
• Suspicious jump in case number: an issue would be created
when a large jump in case numbers appears18 , and updates
in the sub-region would be temporarily suspended (typically
for 2 to 6 hours) to allow for potential subsequent corrections
in official data.
16 El

portal web de Datos Abiertos del Ministerio de TecnologÃŋas de la InformaciÃşn
y las Comunicaciones: https://www.datos.gov.co/en/Salud-y-Protecci-n-Social/Casospositivos-de-COVID-19-en-Colombia/gt2j-8ykr/data
17 Department of Health Data Drop https://ncovtracker.doh.gov.ph/
18 The definition of jump is determined empirically in practice. For example, a number
change larger than 3 times would be defined as a jump, given that the initial value is
larger than 100.

• Decrease in accumulated numbers: most number decreases
would be considered as history corrections19 . When this happens, if the full official historical data is accessible, we update
the dataset according to the most recent official time series.
In systems where only the current statistics is available, we
adjust the most recent historical case data to maintain the
non-decreasing property of each time series20 .
In a nutshell, continuous update mechanism is instrumental in
reducing noise in the CovidNet dataset. We also implemented dailyscheduled checks and cross validations with official and other independent platforms. Many of the noises have been identified and
corrected thanks to the manual efforts of our volunteer team.

5.3

Quality Control in a Decentralized
Volunteer Team

Unlike many other platforms, the CovidNet project has been conducted by a fully decentralized volunteer team. This presents a
unique challenge to the data control quality.
Repeated entry of the same data In the decentralized team, multiple volunteers might be working on the same update (overlapping
work), or failing to recognize existing duplicated records (duplicated
records).
To prevent overlapping work, our volunteers will first check potentially related open updates before their own updates. Duplicated
records was prominent in the early stage of CovidNet project when
we used ET format. If accumulated numbers were available in the
reports, the volunteer would directly check the total number in the
specific area, and prevent duplicated cases. If accumulated numbers
were unavailable, the volunteer would check within all existing
records, especially case-clusters sharing the similar attributes as
described in the report, and leave out duplicated reports.
Uncoordinated Deployment All volunteers can deploy data updates to the front-end website. This was designed earlier to avoid delayed data presentation to the public. However, when one attempts
to deploy a correctly completed number change, other members
might be in the middle of updating and validating case information in a different region. For instance, on April 15, 2020, when a
volunteer attempted to modify the confirmed number in Okaloosa,
Texas from 102 to 103, the data entry experienced a transit state as
"102103", which was quickly corrected by the volunteer. However,
during the short transit stage, there happened to be a website deployment, which resulted in an abrupt number jump by more than
100000, and then got corrected within minutes after the subsequent
deployment. 21
These type of issues are not typical "data errors", but due to the
decentralized deployment setup, which is, however, necessary to
prevent delayed website presentations. To minimize disadvantages
associated with, we gradually constructed a list of rules that would
be automatically checked before each deployment. Any deployment
would be forbidden (unless being manually interfered), if one of
the following criteria is triggered:
19 A large decrease might be an error, and falls into the jump

category described earlier.
longer time-series may requires modification in practice. This may not be optimal
but the ideal solution requires data we have no access to.
21 This accidental jump then appeared rapidly also on other platforms [4, 10] and media
reports.
20 A

CovidNet: To Bring Data Transparency in the Era of COVID-19

(1) the number is smaller than the one from the previous day;
(2) the number of a county-level region increases more than
4000 in a single day;
(3) the daily increase is more than 300%, while the previous
day’s number is larger than 10;
(4) the daily increase is more than 200%, while the previous
day’s number is larger than 50;
(5) the daily increase is more than 50%, while the previous day’s
number is larger than 1000;
where all thresholds applied above are deduced empirically.

6

INTERACTIVE TOOLS FOR VISUALIZATION

The CovidNet project offers a rich set of data visualization tools
for all users visiting our website. As outlined in Section 2, these
interacted tools are integrated for better presenting both the temporal trends and the geographical distribution about the COVID-19
pandemic. We discuss the details in this section.

6.1

Geographical Distribution of Current Cases

The geographical distribution of the COVID-19 spread is important
for communities and individuals to make decisions. We visualize the
current case statistics via two visualization modules: epidemic maps
and doughnut charts as showcased in Figure 3. For both the whole
world and each single country, we present a detailed epidemic map
which shows the statistics22 in each state-level region, where darker
colors indicate a larger number in the area. We also implement
doughnut chart representation mostly to spot areas associated with
largest proportion of the cases.

6.2

Temporal Epidemic Curves

The time series of case data, often referred to as epidemic curve,
helps general public to understand the full history and the current
stage of the COVID-19 spread. Our project includes both basic
trends charts with plain numbers and burn-down charts which provide further insights into the varying condition. Users can explore
these epidemic curves for all sub-divisions in our dataset.
Basic trend charts We provide basic trend charts at daily resolution for the following type of statistics: confirmed cases, deceased
cases, positive/negative testing cases, positive testing rates, and
hospitalized cases. For both confirmed and deceased curves, users
can choose to view them in either linear or logarithm scale. For
example, Figure 2 shows the cumulative and daily new confirmed
cases worldwide.
Analytic trend charts We have implemented the burn down chart
to show simultaneously the trends of active cases and recovered/
deceased cases, which provides a clearer picture about the local
progress over time (see Figure 4 ).

6.3

Cross Region Comparison

We offer several ways for users to compare the COVID-19 trends
across different countries and sub-divisions over the whole period.
One such example were shown in Figure 5. User can choose the set
of countries or sub-divisions they are interested in. In addition to
22 Statistics

includes local populations, confirmed numbers and density (per million),
deceased numbers, deceased density (per million population), testing numbers (if
available), and testing density (per million population).

Figure 5: Comparison of the total confirmed cases in a few
countries. X-axis are the relative days since the case reached
100 in each location.

static plots, we make available several animations on our project
website to show the evolution of the comparative statistics across
different regions.

7

ACCESSING COVIDNET DATASET

We would grant open access to CovidNet for any non-commercial
data usage. Our dataset is accessible by filling a data request form at
https://airtable.com/shrMqS4C6wjpZLCP0, before which the user
should have read carefully about terms of data usage at https:
//coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en/data. We do prohibit crawling,
scraping, caching or otherwise accessing any content on the platform via any automated means, due to the expensive bandwidth
consumption which has brought a huge financial burden on the
project. To continue providing timely information to the general
public, we welcome only fair access to our dataset and other contents.

8

RELATED WORK

We briefly discuss some other platforms which are also taking
efforts in serving COVID-19 related epidemic information to the
general public.
Dingxiangyuan [3] . Initiated in early January, 2020, the Dingxiangyuan (DXY) project has been among the most popular dashboards for COVID-19 information in China. They provide daily
update by collecting data from all levels of official health departments, which has been quite trustful, and we have adopted their
data as our source in China. Compared with the case in U.S., the
data collection in China has been relatively easy and well-organized,
as official channels have started a formal reporting schedule since
the early stage and no extra media reports were required. We have
seen the success and the impact brought by DXY’s integrated data
platform, which helped local communities in China to response
effectively to the outbreak. This inspired us to start our own project
for North America and eventually as a global tracker. We also studied their data presentations which helped us build our own system.
While their focus has been the condition in China, data in the rest
part of the world is collected and presented only in country level,
with a delayed update for data in U.S. due to the reason we explained
earlier.

Kai Shen, Tong Yang, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Pingying Chen, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo

John Hopkins COVID-19 Dashboard [4] . A previous paper[4] described the effort of a team from John Hopkins University in a
global COVID-19 data platform which consumes dataset provided
by DXY in China and later ours in U.S for a global visualization. As a
completely independent data-collection source, our North America
dataset has been continuously used by [4] as one of their sources in
the county-level breakdown data in the U.S. area. Unlike our close
to real-time update, there has been a delay of U.S. data on the JHU
Dashboard (1 or more days) since the end of April23 . Last but not
least, similar as DXY, worldwide data is only provided at country
level on the JHU Dashboard.
Worldmeter COVID-19 Tracker [10] . This is another COVID-19
tracker which offers partial regional breakdown in U.S. while providing country-level numbers in the rest of the world. For several
states in U.S.24 , Worldmeter updates information in real-time which
has been more up-to-date than the JHU Dashboard.
Other related projects. The COVID Tracking Project [1] has collected and provided data in testing, hospitalization, and, very recently, the demographic distribution in different states in U.S.. We
have been using their data for both testing and hospitalization visualizations, which provide an enriched description about local
epidemic conditions especially when the testing does not widely
cover the local community. The DriveThruLocation [1] is another
valuable project which collects detailed information on locations
providing drive-through COVID-19 testing services in U.S.. While
not closely related to the pure data practice, we have collaborated
with this project team as testing information is vital for local communities, which fits our purpose of serving the public in general.

9

DISCUSSION

This paper delivers a detailed introduction about the 1Point3Acres
CovidNet project, elaborating both the data collection process and
the quality control mechanism.
We would like to share some lessons we have learnt from the
project. The real time nature and the exhaustive geographical distribution of CovidNet have attracted a large number of users on
the platform. While we have been trying our best to provide a creditable data integration, our practice has also suggested the necessity
of constructing an official information integration pipeline to confront potential public health challenges, especially in the current
era when human interaction has become an essential component
of the modern society. At the same time, as inter-national connections have been much stronger than any previous time, global level
pandemic information sharing would be of vital importance in both
learning from experiences of other countries and assessing a local
public health risk level according to interactions among different
countries and regions. On the other hand, when more public challenges have upgraded to the global level, we have also seen the
strength of data driven approaches in tackling large scale problems.
With real time update of sub-division level COVID-19 information across more than 27 countries, the CovidNet dataset could
benefit everyone in various ways. For general public, the analytic
23 This

had urged us to enhance our own data quality to prevent errors when serving
as the most up-to-date independent data platform in U.S. to the public.
24 As of May 8, 2020, the county-level breakdown is provided for 8 states in U.S. by
[10], including NJ, CA, PA, FL, TX, LA, OH, and WA.

trend charts have provided more intuitive descriptions about the
local epidemic situation, and would help local communities to make
decisions about working and traveling. For local governors, a comparison with situations and trends in other states/counties would
be instructive for evaluating different policy scenarios, including restrictive orders and economy reopening. For academic community,
the CovidNet dataset could lead to researches in diverse potential
directions: time series data could be combined with conventional
epidemiological models to make prediction about the near future;
the sub-division breakdown has provided detailed geographical
distribution of COVID-19 outbreaks and may be used to analyze
the impact of different external factors associated with each local region, e.g. weather, economy, population, industries, races,
restrictive-order levels, and so on; the worldwide dataset together
with information on inter-national activities offers the potential to
study the global spreading behavior of the disease.
We welcome and encourage users from all industries utilizing
the CovidNet to assist the battle against COVID-19. We especially
look forward to more insights offered from academic researches by
investigating the rich dataset provided by CovidNet project.

DISCLAIMER
The CovidNet project, including all data, mapping, analysis, copyright 2020 1Point3Acres, LLC, all rights reserved, is provided for
the public with general information purpose only. All information
is collected from multiple publicly available sources that do not
always agree. While we will try our best to keep the information
up to date and correct, we make no representations or warranties
of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness, accuracy,
reliability, with respect to the website or the information. We do not
bear any legal responsibility for any consequence caused by the use
of the information provided. We strictly prohibit unauthorized use
of the information in commerce or reliance on the information for
medical guidance. 1Point3Acres disclaims any and all representations or warranties with respect to the project, including accuracy,
fitness of use, and merchantability. Screenshots of the website are
permissible so long as appropriate credit is provided.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank all contributors to the CovidNet projects
who have not been directly listed in authors, including all engineers and volunteers: Yixin Wan, Maggie Hou, Lily Wang, Daisy
Fang, Mark Lee, Yao Xu, Vivian Jiang, Chenyang Wu, Mingtian
Zhou, Zhenzhuo Lan, Hongmin Li, Yun Han, Jie Zong, Clara Zhang,
Gretchen Zhang, Huijie Tao, Huihui Shang, Zhenyu Jiang, Minchen
Wang, Chuya Guo, Krystal Zhang, Konka Shi, Jonathon Jing, Xuan
Chen, Ziyi Yan, Junrui Zhao, Yi Chen, Allison Li, Liyan Tian, Jiuyue
Cai, Ning Cao. Besides, we want to thank all our users, who have
continued provided us with data source associated with excellent
advice, which helps us keep improving the project.
At the same time, the whole project would not be possible without help from other teams and organizations. We would like to thank
other project teams who have shared rich data and information
to us, including The COVID Tracking Project and the DriveThruLocation Project. We also want to give special thanks to Airtable,
who granted us a package with 5000 free credits for the usage of

CovidNet: To Bring Data Transparency in the Era of COVID-19

upgraded plan which make the collaboration possible with a large
volunteer team. We claim no conflict of interests.

REFERENCES
[1] Covid Tracking Project Team. [n.d.]. Covid Tracking Project.
https://
covidtracking.com/
[2] J De Bruin. 2020. Number of diagnoses with coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in The
Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3711575
[3] Ding Xiang Yuan and Ding Xiang Doctor. 2020. COVID-19 Global Pandemic
Real-time report. https://ncov.dxy.cn/ncovh5/view/en_pneumonia
[4] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020. An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases (2020).

[5] Michelle L Holshue, Chas DeBolt, Scott Lindquist, Kathy H Lofy, John Wiesman,
Hollianne Bruce, Christopher Spitters, Keith Ericson, Sara Wilkerson, Ahmet
Tural, et al. 2020. First case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the United States. New
England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[6] New York Times. 2020. Coronavirus Map. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/
2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html
[7] World Health Organization. [n.d.]. WHO COVID-19 Tracker. https://covid19.
who.int/
[8] 1Point3Acres COVID-19 Tracker Team. [n.d.]. 1Point3Acres COVID-19 Tracker.
https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/
[9] Wikipedia contributors. 2020. 2019âĂŞ20 coronavirus pandemic. https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/2019%E2%80%9320_coronavirus_pandemic [Online; accessed
25-April-2020].
[10] worldmeter team. [n.d.]. WorldMeters COVID-19 Tracker.
https://www.
worldometers.info/coronavirus/

Kai Shen, Tong Yang, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Pingying Chen, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo

Table 2: List of official worldwide data source
Country
Austria

Belgium
Switzerland
Chile
Germany
Spain
United Kingdom
India
Italy
Japan
South Korean
Malaysia
Netherland

South Africa
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Sweden
Mexico
Peru
Brazil
Portugal
Pakistan
France
Ecuador
Indonesia
Philippine
Liechtenstein
China
United States
Canada

subdivision
Bundesland

Information Source
Bundesministerium fÃĳr Soziales,
Gesundheit, Pflege und Konsumentenschutz
Region/ Province
Sciensano, the Belgian Institute for
Health
Conton (States)
Zurich Statistisches Amt
Region (Province)
Ministerio de Salud
Stadtstaaten/ FlÃďchenlÃďn- Robert Koch Institute
der
Autonomous Communities
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Upper Tier Local Authorities National Health Service
States/ Territories
Ministry of Health
Region
Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri
To/ DÅŊ/ Ken/ Fu
Ministry of Health, Labour and
Welfare
Do/ Jachido
Korean CDC, & Ministry of Health
and Welfare
States/ Territories
Director General of Health
Malaysia
Province
Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu Ministerie van
Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport
Province
Nation Institute for Communicable
Diseases
Federal Subjects
Federal Service Human Well Being
Governorates
King Abdullah Petroleum Studies
and Research Center
Landsting
FolkhÃďlsomyndigheten
State
Gobierno De Mexico
Departamentos
Ministerio de Salud
State/ Federal District
MinistÃľrio da SaÃžde
RegiÃčo
MinistÃľrio da SaÃžde
Province
Ministry of National Health Services
RÃľgion/ RÃľgions d’outre- Saute Publique France
mer
Region
Ministerio de Salud
Provinsi
Graha Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana
Region
Department of Health Datadrop
Country
Zurich Statistisches Amt
Province/ SARs
DXY tracker
States
1point3acres tracker
States
1point3acres tracker

Available Data
confirmed, deceased, recovered

confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
recovered at country level
recovered info not available
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
deceased and recovered reported at country level
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed and recovered
confirmed and deceased
confirmed and recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered
confirmed, deceased, recovered

