A chatbot architecture for promoting youth
resilience
CHESTER HOLT-QUICKa,b, JIM WARRENa 1, KAROLINA STASIAKb, RUTH
WILLIAMSb, GRANT CHRISTIEb, SARAH HETRICKb, SARAH HOPKINSb,
TANIA CARGOb, SALLY MERRYb
a
School of Computer Science bDepartment of Psychological Medicine,
University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, NEW ZEALAND

Abstract. E-health technologies have the potential to provide scalable and
accessible interventions for youth mental health. As part of a developing an
ecosystem of e-screening and e-therapy tools for New Zealand young people, a
dialog agent, Headstrong, has been designed to promote resilience with methods
grounded in cognitive behavioral therapy and positive psychology. This paper
describes the architecture underlying the chatbot. The architecture supports a range
of over 20 activities delivered in a 4-week program by relatable personas. The
architecture provides a visual authoring interface to its content management system.
In addition to supporting the original adolescent resilience chatbot, the architecture
has been reused to create a 3-week ‘stress-detox’ intervention for undergraduates,
and subsequently for a chatbot to support young people with the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic, with all three systems having been used in field trials. The
Headstrong architecture illustrates the feasibility of creating a domain-focused
authoring environment in the context of e-therapy that supports non-technical expert
input and rapid deployment.
Keywords. Mobile applications, consumer health informatics, mental health,
software engineering

1.

Introduction

Most young people growing up in New Zealand report good overall wellbeing; however
emotional difficulties are still prevalent, with young people reporting high levels of
depressive symptoms, self-harming behavior and suicidal ideation [1]. Most mental
health disorders have an onset during adolescence, a time associated with poor helpseeking and access to services [2] setting the scene for longer-term negative outcomes
such as adverse mental health and economic outcomes in early adulthood [3]. Schools
are aware of students’ mental health issues and the lack of readily available interventions;
62% of principals reported being frustrated they could not get help for students with
mental health issues and students in lower socio-economic areas were in greater need of
support [4].
Providing e-Health interventions has shown to lead to improved emotional wellbeing in general [5] and in school settings [6]. E-Health interventions can provide near1

Corresponding Author

universal reach and access, and potentially appeal to young people concerned about the
stigma of using the conventional mental health system. Dialog agent or ‘chatbot’ style
interaction for digital mental health has attracted interest since Eliza in the 1960’s and
evidence of effectiveness has been demonstrated for the modern system, Woebot [7].
The Health Advances through Behavioural Intervention Technologies (HABITs)
project is developing an ecosystem of screening and e-therapy tools designed to meet the
needs of New Zealand young people with a co-design approach emphasizing input from
Māori and Pacific youth. In keeping with this approach, the objective is to deliver
evidence-based therapy in a form tailored to resonate with local young people. As part
of HABITs we developed a chatbot providing dialog-based intervention grounded in
cognitive behavioral therapy and positive psychology, called Headstrong. In this paper
we present the architecture underlying the Headstrong chatbot, and related chatbots,
starting with the conceptual design.

2.

Conceptual Design of a Chatbot for Resilient Youth

A tender process was used to select a contractor with experience in innovative design
and health IT. RUSH Digital were selected to partner with the university-based team and
our community stakeholders to create the chatbot. A hybrid user-centered design / codesign process was used, beginning with scoping interviews of young people and
experienced counselors. This was followed by design workshops including young
people, counselors, researchers and developers. The resulting design focuses on daily
user engagement in key activities over a 4-week intervention program, including:
relaxation strategies; problem solving techniques; recognizing and tackling negative
thoughts; interpersonal and communication skills, using a gratitude journal; and
scheduling positive activities.
While Headstrong is fundamentally text dialog based, avatars were designed (see
figure 1) to make the chat agent relatable. The avatars are rendered as young people
slightly older and more experienced than the intended users, and giving a choice of
gender and ethnicity representative of the target population. These avatars appear in
various poses during the chat, such as providing a ‘selfie’ when initially building rapport
with the user and with various expressions as appropriate to the messages in the activities.

Figure 1. The four Headstrong avatars - from left: Olivia, Manaia, Aroha and Ravi.

3.

Headstrong Architecture

Google’s Dialogflow (https://dialogflow.com/) and other similar technologies such as
Watson Assistant by IBM (https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-assistant/) offer simple
off-the-shelf solutions to configure and deploy a chatbot and are becoming widely used.
Such solutions are well suited to limited question-answering type help chatbots often
employed in businesses, but configuring and managing (and visualizing) large amounts
of content quickly becomes untenable. Implementing the Headstrong design required
dialog encompassing more than 20 distinct activities each of which engages the user for
5-10 minutes. Such a rule-based dialog graph contains thousands of dialog nodes. We
needed an architecture that facilitates managing this amount of content. Further, to
streamline the knowledge engineering process, and to provide ease of adaptation for
differing audiences and uses, authoring of dialog content should be possible by users
without technical expertise. We wanted enhanced functionality within the conversational
channel such as media or minigames; and for research requirements, we needed detailed
but ethical tracking of chatbot usage.
Figure 2 illustrates the Headstrong architecture. Facebook Messenger was selected
as the front-end so the chatbot could engage young people with a familiar interface likely
to be already installed on their phones. The Headstrong server leverages existing
components RUSH Digital had deployed to other industries, and uses Dialogflow for
matching user input to intents. It interfaces to the HABITs digital platform [8] to record
usage data for research. The browser-based interface for dialog authoring is described in
the next section.

Figure 2. Components of the Headstrong architecture.

4.

Content management and authoring

To give domain experts the ability to directly author content, a graphical user interface
is provided that creates a directed graph structure. Node types are color-coded and
dragged down from a toolbar into a working canvas. For example, Figure 3 includes a
condition-checking node (pink), with conditions along each branch (beige), a question

node (green) with quick reply options (beige) and two modules (lime). The ‘+’ icon on
the lower-right of some nodes can be clicked to add conditions or options to the parent
node. The resulting graph is a logical flow diagram, intuitive to non-technical users.
There remain aspects of dialog authoring that are too challenging for non-technical
users. One such example is configuring an appropriate chatbot introduction based on
whether the chatbot is responding to unprompted user engagement, or handling a
response from chatbot prompted engagement; and at the same time making appropriate
reference to any important prior user state, such as whether the user had expressed
distress and triggered the emergency escalation module during the prior engagement.
This use case requires defining and managing user variables and setting up conditional
branches to a degree that is generally just beyond the purview of a non-technical user.
Psychologists and other mental health specialists principally authored the activity
modules. These modules consist predominantly of statement nodes (where text is
output), questions with quick replies and output media files such as images and animated
GIFs.

Figure 3. A portion of the daily loop routine as shown on the working canvas.

5.

Use and Re-use of the Dialog Architecture

Figure 4 illustrates a snippet of a dialog session as it appears to the end user. After a
period of iterative refinement based on feedback from both experts and young people, a
field trial was set up using online consent in the HABITs portal. In late 2019, users were
recruited from two local secondary schools. While the trial results are outside of the
scope of this paper, it can be said that there were no issues from a technical perspective.
Here two technical features warrant mention. Firstly, the Headstrong architecture
contains a dialog duplication function which allows the authored content of one dialog
version to be copied, altered and re-used for deployment as another chatbot. Secondly,

the Headstrong architecture supports the deployment of multiple chatbots with distinct
dialog versions, connected to distinct channels (i.e. different Facebook pages) from one
running server instance.
Even before the Headstrong field trial commenced, the architecture was re-used for
another chatbot called “21-Day Stress Detox”, developed as a Masters research project
[9] with the intention of fostering stress resilience in undergraduate university students.
The dialog content, spanning 21 days, was designed for users to engage with the chatbot
once per day, wherein each day the chatbot would check in with the user at a chosen time
(set at onboarding), ask them to rate their stress level, and then begin a new activity
module. Each day ends with a choice of a motivational quote, joke, or an entry into a
gratitude journal. The activity modules are unique for each day while other components
of the ‘daily loop’ are re-used; although for variation chatbot statements such as
introductions are drawn randomly from a pre-authored set. The chatbot was successfully
field tested with over 120 undergraduates recruited from several large classes.
A moderate amount of dialog content from Headstrong was able to be reused for
“21-Day Stress Detox” with minor modification tailored to a slight difference in target
age group. Specifically, modules for greeting and farewell, minigames, jokes,
meditation, gratitude journaling and risk phrase management were all reused; as was the
intent classifier at the Dialogflow endpoint. Reused content constituted roughly one half
of “21-Day Stress Detox”.

Figure 4. Screen capture of a fragment of Headstrong conversation within one of six cognitive modules
targeted at negative thinking.

The novel dialog content was almost completely authored by the psychology
Masters student in under 2 months. This required an initial 2-hour teaching session by a
software developer, followed by two further sessions to build on the first session and

troubleshoot any issues. Additionally, the developer set up the overall logical
architecture for the program including more complicated aspects of authoring such as
management of user variables and resolving errors. In total approximately 30 hours of
developer time were required. Minimal developer time was required for authoring the
unique daily activities.
This set the scene for the very rapid development and deployment of Aroha, a
chatbot targeted to young people to support them with the various impacts related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The overall conversation design was newly created, tailored to
support expected one-off user-driven engagement with Aroha, hence differing from the
conversation design for Headstrong and 21-Day Stress Detox. Some content (i.e.
gratitude journaling, minigames, meditation) from those two projects was re-used
through module duplication, with minor context-sensitive modification to the dialog. The
main new content for Aroha was developed by two experienced clinical psychologists
over one weekend before lockdown in New Zealand. Dialog refinement, testing and
implementation of feedback took place over 10 days and then a clinical trial begun.

Discussion and Conclusion
We have developed an architecture that supports easy authoring and deployment
encompassing key requirements of a chatbot to promote resilience in young people, and
have reported its use for three distinct deployments with different content and audiences.
Through the graphical authoring canvas, content creation was largely accomplished by
domain experts with technical support required only around areas such as definition of
working variables to support branching and reminder logic.
Headstrong dialog is the result of expert adaptation of evidence-based psychological
therapies and co-design with target users. In contrast, the performance of XiaoIce, a
social chatbot emphasizing emotional connection that has communicated with over 660
million active users [10], shows that deep learning can be successfully applied to dialog.
An outstanding challenge is integrating expert-crafted dialog with the engagement
capability of deep-learning based systems in a single e-therapy agent. We believe there
are possibilities in the medium-term including machine learning of dialog policy (e.g.
sequencing activities) and use of deep-learnt dialog for rapport building and discovery
while retaining crafted dialog for evidence-based activities. Integrating such deep
learning-based capabilities is a key direction for development of the architecture with the
objective of achieving longer retention in evidence-based programs.
In conclusion, the Headstrong architecture illustrates the feasibility of creating a
domain-focused authoring environment for e-therapy. The architecture supports expert
input through its visual interface to the content management system. Further, the
architecture allows rapid deployment to field studies and sufficient flexibility to support
interventions of different lengths and for different target audiences. Work continues to
enhance the chatbot’s ability to tailor responses for maximum user engagement.

Acknowledgements
We thank all the participants in the development process and field trials. The authors
have no commercial interest in RUSH Digital but may be designated inventors in
Intellectual Property relating to novel dialog components and/or content described in this

paper. This work was funded by A Better Start (grant UOAX1511) and CureKids
(Discretionary grant 5050) .

References
[1] T. Clark et al., "Health and well‐being of secondary school students in New Zealand: Trends between
2001, 2007 and 2012," Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 925-934, 2013.
[2] N. Reavley, S. Cvetkovski, A. Jorm, and D. Lubman, "Help-seeking for substance use, anxiety and
affective disorders among young people: results from the 2007 Australasian National Survey of Mental
Health and Wellbeing," Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 729-735,
2010.
[3] D. Fergusson, J. M. Boden, and L. J. Horwood, "Recurrence of major depression in adolescence and early
adulthood, and later mental health, educational, and economic outcomes," British Journal of Psychiatry,
vol. 191, pp. 335-342, 2007.
[4] L. Bonne and J. MacDonald, "Secondary Schools in 2018: Findings from teh NZCER National SUrvey,"
New Zealand Council for Educational Research, Wellington2019.
[5] D. D. Ebert et al., "Internet and computer-based cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression
in youth: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled outcome trials.," PLoS ONE vol. 10, no. 3, p.
e0119895., 2015.
[6] Y. Perry et al., "Trial for the Prevention of Depression (TriPoD) in final-year secondary students: study
protocol for a cluster randomised controlled trial," Trials [Electronic Resource], Research Support, NonU.S. Gov't vol. 16, p. 451, 2015.
[7] K. K. Fitzpatrick, A. Darcy, and M. Vierhile, "Delivering Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Young Adults
With Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety Using a Fully Automated Conversational Agent (Woebot):
A Randomized Controlled Trial," JMIR Ment Health, vol. 4, no. 2, p. e19, Jun 6 2017.
[8] J. Warren, S. Hopkins, A. Leung, S. Hetrick, and S. Merry, "Building a digital platform for behavioural
internvention technology research and deployment," in Proc 53rd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 2020.
[9] R. Williams, "Development of a pilot trial of a chatbot as a digital wellbeing intervention to reduce stress
in tertiary students," Thesis submitted for Master of Science in Psychology, University of Auckland, 2020.
[10] L. Zhou, J. Gao, D. Li, and H.-Y. Shum, "The Design and Implementation of XiaoIce, an Empathetic
Social Chatbot," Computational Linguistics, pp. 1-62, 2020.

