Sustaining the economy under partial lockdown: A pandemic centric
approach

arXiv:2005.08273v1 [physics.soc-ph] 17 May 2020

Saket Saurabh1 , Ayush Trivedi1 , Nithilaksh P. Lokesh1 , Bhagyashree Gaikwad1
Abstract— As the world fights to contain and control the
spread of the Novel Coronavirus, countries are imposing severe
measures from restrictions on travel and social gatherings to
complete lockdowns. Lockdowns, though effective in controlling
the virus spread, leaves a massive economic impact. In a
country like India with 21.9% of its population below the
poverty line, lockdowns have a direct impact on the livelihood
of a large part of the population. Our approach conforms to
healthcare and state practices of reducing human to human
contact, by optimizing the lockdown strategy. We propose
resuming economic activities while keeping healthcare facilities
from being overwhelmed. We model the coronavirus pandemic
as SEIR dynamic model for a set of states as nodes with
certain population and analyze the model output before and
after complete lockdown. Social distancing that people would
willingly follow, in the no lockdown situation is modeled as
being influenced with the knowledge of the current number of
infection by imitating Granovetter threshold model. We then
provide optimal lockdown policy solutions for the duration of
ten weeks using NSGA-II optimization algorithm. While there
are many studies that focus on modelling the transmission of
COVID-19, ours is one of the few attempts to strike a balance
between number of infections and economic operations.

D ISCLAIMER
We wish to clearly inform that none of the authors is an
epidemiologist. The current professional interest of all the
authors is Operations Research, Machine learning, System
Dynamics Modeling and Deep learning. Required data was
present at an aggregate level. Multiple approximations were
made to estimate certain values, therefore the model lacks
state-level details. We are currently working on improving
the model and are awaiting new details to surface online.
As the testing rate varies across geographies, approximated
Transmission rate has been as used by referring to WHO
report.
The toy model of interconnected states as nodes is
based on multiple assumptions to analyze the effect of
the pandemic and to demonstrate a possible solution to
minimize infected population as well as the cost due to
Covid-19. We have not attempted to model any state in
a real-world context. The experiments are not intended to
forecast infected population or cost. We only intend to
demonstrate an optimization process that could be used with
availability of state-specific data. Our model only assumes
certain characteristics of each state in isolation and is not an
imitation of the state.
1 All authors are researchers at the Tata Research Design and
Development Centre (TRDDC), Pune, India

I. I NTRODUCTION
The first case of coronavirus is believed to be originated
during the month of November in the year 2019 [9] and
in a matter of less than six months, the confirmed cases
across the globe are over 4 Million. In order to contain the
rising morbidity and mortality, governments are pursuing
policies from those that restrict travel, to policies that
ensure a nationwide lockdown [7]. With a plummeting
global economy, there is an increasing concern regarding
the state of the global financial system. A recent study
ascertains the economic impact of the pandemic on GDP
growth, mentioning that every month of shutdown could cost
approximately 2-2.5% of global GDP growth [3]. Although
public health recovery is in progress, the rising number of
cases of the virus and its uncontrollable transmission has
caused uncertainty among private and public sectors about
how or when to continue day to day operations in order to
begin economic recovery. While the WHO Director-General
and IMF Managing Director recently mentioned that the
trade-off to save lives or save livelihoods is a false dilemma
[7], for getting the right balance the intervention must take
place at the policy level which not only ensures restoration
of public health but also incorporates strategies to mobilize
economic operations by limiting enforced lockdowns within
countries.
We attempt to test certain lockdown strategies by
modelling the pandemic and calculating the indicators of
good public health as well as indicators of the economy
during partial lockdown to evaluate which lockdown strategy
triumphs over complete lockdown. A system dynamic model
of the virus is used to help predict the spread of the virus in
a number of states modeled as nodes with a fixed population.
Certain characteristics of the population in these nodes have
been modeled as parameters for the system dynamics model.
These parameters are optimized to find a partial shutdown
that satisfies healthcare constraints as well as economic
viability.
II. O PTIMAL P OLICY
A strategy ensuring sequential time bound lockdown to
satisfy low cost to the economy as well as less infected
population would constitute an optimal policy. We first
model states in which the suppression strategy is to be
implemented due to rising COVID-19 cases as nodes with
inter-connectivity. Each state is populated with a certain
number of citizens and an initial number of infected citizens.
Currently we have not included citizen level detail to model
the state. Instead, we used the aggregate level data and have

In both the cases where people are infected or susceptible,
the fraction of asymptomatic and untested people () can still
find themselves likely and willing to travel to other states.
Equation 3 gives the rate of infected people.

made assumptions in absence of data to model the pandemic
as a SEIR system dynamic model.
A. The Pandemic as a System Dynamics Model
Many disease spread models are usually derived from
the SEIR model which has been useful in predicting
disease spread in human to human transmission when
recovery fom disease takes some time. A state’s population
comprises of a susceptible population, infected population
and a recovered population which changes with time. The
population dynamics is centered around the question of how
the susceptible population S might get exposed to the disease
and enters the bucket E. After an incubation period the
exposed become infected, I which is followed by recovery
R [3]. Each state has health care facilities with health care
capacities, H which can vary from 1% to 2% of the state’s
population [13]. We evaluate the system from a point where
a few people in each state are already infected, since our
interest lies more heavily on the rise in infection and it being
controlled by practicing a partial lockdown. We do not intend
to do a micro level observation of the disease transmission
and therefore, we directly employ the transmission rate of
COVID-19 from modeling as well as other related aggregate
data.
The following notations are used to denote the variables
used in the differential equation to model the virus spread.
The notations used are in table I.
Notation
S
E
I
D
N
ni,j
H
C
β
f
γ

η
Tinc
Tprog
h
α

dEi
Si Ii X
= ηβ(αi )
+
nji (αi αj )Ej
dt
N
i6=j
X
Ei
−
nij (αi αj )Ei −
Tinc

(2)

i6=j

The Exposed component of SEIR model takes that
population into account which has been exposed but not yet
infectious for the duration of the incubation period (T inc)
and will transition into infectious population bucket with a
probability 1 at the rate of 1/Tinc . The rate of change of the
exposed population also contains components for interstate
travel of the exposed population given in equation 2.
X
X
Ei
Ii
dIi
=
−
+
nji (αi αj )Ij −
nij (αi αj )Ii
dt
Tinc Tprog
i6=j
i6=j
(3)
The recovery rate is directly proportional to the fraction
of the population that recovers. The death rate is similarly
proportional to the death rate (Equation 5).
Ii
dR
= (1 − fi )
dt
Tprog
Ii
dD
= fi
dt
Tprog

Explanation
Susceptible population
Exposed population
Infected population
Deaths
Initial population
Fraction of population travelling between states i & j
Hospital capacity
Number of serious cases
Transmission rate
Fatality rate
Fraction of serious cases
Fraction of asymptomatic cases
Social distancing parameter
Incubation period of disease
Progression time of disease
Strain of health care system
State of lockdown(0 for lockdown, 1 otherwise)

(4)
(5)

In addition we include a component of hospital strain
that influences the death rate since we expect the death rate
to increase as the number of serious cases exceed hospital
capacities. This component is from [6].
Ci = γIi
Ci
hi =
Hi
fi = 0.04 −

TABLE I: Notations used for SEIR model

(6)
(7)
0.03
1 + h0.01
i

(8)

The following equations help model the population
dynamics in each state which acts as a node in a network.
Each state is connected with every other state and People
can travel between states which are not in lockdown. Under
lockdown, travel is restricted within the state and beyond the
state.

Equation 1 gives the rate of change susceptible population
over time. The susceptible population is directly proportional
to the transmission rate β, the current susceptible population
and the probability that an infected person comes into contact
(I/N ). In addition we add the rates of travel between states.
The interstate travel population fraction (nij = nji ) is
assumed to be the proportional to the inverse of the distance
between two states. The multi-state model we have used is
very similar to the model given by [4].

B. Modeling Social Distancing
We assume that the transmission rate is dependent both
on the lockdown condition of a city as well as the social
behaviour of people. This is accounted by the parameter ηi
which is dependent on the fraction of people infected in a
state at any time.

X
dSi
Si Ii X
nji (αi αj )Sj −
nij (αi αj )Si
= −ηβ(αi )
+
dt
N
i6=j
i6=j
(1)

ηi = f (Ii )
2

(9)

Notation
Cmed
Cabs
sec
Csd
ct
csp
pinc
psec
inc
P sec
sdsec

Social distancing during no lockdown has been incorporated
by taking inspiration from the Granovetter model (Equation
9) [8]. We assume that a population takes up social distancing
measures only when a certain fraction of population starts
getting infected. The larger population acts collectively only
when their threshold value of the fraction who are infected
is exceeded. We modeled the threshold curve with the
assumption that certain fraction of population (2%) would
pick up social distancing only when 0.05% population
are infected. After a certain point, an increase in infected
population does not result in an increase of people following
social distancing (this to model the fraction of population
who might not still take the virus seriously).

TABLE II: Notations for Equations 12

middle and lower income group (Data from PwC 2012 report,
Table III). Due to low economic activity the earning of this
group is lost as they are mostly paid on daily basis [11].

C. Economic cost
A policy of suppressing the pandemic by minimising
any contact can have severe economic consequences. Social
distancing and lockdowns have proven to be effective,
especially if applied well before large population becomes
infected. The objective is to prevent over-burdening and
failure of healthcare facilities which can occur when the
number of infected exceeds the healthcare capacity. A study
by the Imperial College in London generated estimates using
their model that show the use of various control strategies
to ensure a functioning health care capacity [15]. Their
work mentions that the impact of such suppression strategies
on economic contribution could be substantial which is in
agreement with the widespread understanding of the global
economy.
There are various methods to model the economy. Shared
variance international model uses the annual fractional
change in GDP by modelling it as a normal distribution [14].
However, we want to optimize policy for a certain time frame
and lack state-wise cross sectional data. Therefore, we have
modelled the direct costs to the economy due to the Covid-19
pandemic. The cost includes medical cost as well as the cost
incurred for each revenue generating sector in the economy
such as agriculture, manufactuing and service sectors. The
following equations represent how the cost is calculated.
Cmed = ct × I + csp × γI
Cabs = pinc × I
sec
Csd

=

psec
inc

×P

sec

× sd

Household
income/year

Economic class

< 1, 50, 000
1, 50, 000 − 3, 00, 000
3, 00, 000 − 8, 50, 000
> 8, 50, 000

Lower
Emerging middle
Middle
Upper middle+

$ day
per
capita
< 1.7
1.7−5
5 − 10
> 10

Population
(Millions)
in 2010
460
470
170
460

TABLE III: Economic Data. Source: Profitable growth for the
globally emerging middle, PwC, 2012 [11]

D. Optimization
The economic cost increases during no lockdown due to
a rise in infected population which leads to a rise in medical
cost, whereas during lockdown the cost will also increase due
to loss of work in different economic sectors. An attempt to
minimize the cost by using an optimal policy has been done.
The generated optimal policy will provide a solution to allow
economic activities only when the chance of rise in infection
is low, thus that would allow lower medical costs as well as
an escape from loss of work.
To generate an optimal policy we use the Non-dominated
Sorting Genetic Algorithm -2 (NSGA-2) for optimization
[5]. Given that the dynamics of the SEIR model is higly
non-linear, the NSGA-2 algorithm is ideal for optimization.
Moreover, this algorithm provides the pareto front when there
are more than one objective functions. The objectives used
here are:

(10)
(11)

sec

Explanation
Medical cost
Absenteeism cost
Sectoral social distancing cost
Cost of treatment per person
Special life support cost
Per capita income
Sectoral per capita income
Working population in sector
%population following social distancing in sector

1) Cost to the economy
2) Average number of infected people over the period of
policy

(12)

In the absence of available sector-wise per capita incomes,
we have estimated the distribution of per capita income as
shown in Equation

For each candidate policy which represents one individual
in the genetic algorithm (GA), we use the system dynamics
model to predict the number of infected people and hence the
Total income in sector
cost to the economy. These objectives act as the fitness values
(13)
psec
=
inc
Population working in sector
needed for the GA. The lockdown policy is kept constant for
Total income × % share of sector to income
a period of time (say 1 week) and is determined statewise.
=
Total population × %population working in the sector We assume lockdown is represented by 0 and no-lockdown as
(14) 1. Thus, the optimization is done over the domain of binary
The cost is calculated with the assumption that matrices of size S × T where, S is the set of states and T
absenteeism or social distancing will lead to loss of earning. is the time periods with each element determining the state
More than 50 percent of Indian population lies in emerging of lockdown at a given state and period of time.
3

State
Andhra Pradesh
Delhi
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Maharashtra
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

Population

Initial Infected

Income(INR)

49577103
16787941
32988134
61095297
112374333
27743338
72147030
199812342
91276115

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

52814
129746
27132
52191
74027
62605
63547
23392
41837

Economic Sector
Agri. Manuf. Serv.
19.04
57.34
23.61
0.64
90.16
9.2
16.65
16.8
45.86
13.5
59.42
27.08
7.54
64.03
28.43
20.84
50.86
28.3
7.28
63.7
29.02
22.19
56.63
21.19
16.6
65.05
18.35

% working in lockdown
Agri. Manuf. Serv.
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66
100
77
66

TABLE IV: Economic data of 9 states used in experiments. The income is the average per capita income per year for the state across
three sectors: Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services. We calculate the cost for each state using sector wise earning and per capita
earning of individuals in each state. The data tables were available at the Planning Commission: Government of India website [10].

fraction of people adopting social distancing rises quickly,
as people realize the seriousness of the pandemic.
In figure 2, people suddenly follow social distancing after
a certain threshold and is modeled as an step function.
The social distancing factor is taken as, η = 1 −
fraction of population following social distancing.

III. E XPERIMENTS
In this study, we obtain an optimal policy for 9 states
for a period of 10 weeks with intial infection period of 22
days where no lockdown is imposed. Optimization is done
over the average number of infected population and the total
economic cost over 300 days. We collected data for nine
states in India and selected these states due to the variation of
workforce distribution in different sectors. These states have
been modeled with the assumption that it is free from the
effect of other economic factors such as international trade,
production in other factors etc. We do not intend to model an
actual state, our interest is limited to study of COVID-19 in
the presence of few factors of interest in order to demonstrate
the generation of an optimal policy. Some details of the states
are in Table IV
The treated fraction rate is set uniformly at 20% of the
infected population collected from currently available data
[13] and the untreated fraction rate is 10% of the infected
population. The studies and observations around COVID-19
specify in general that the average disease incubation period
is around 5 days while the average disease infection period
(progression time) is about 14 days; the data has been taken
from the WHO[1].
In each state the fraction of asymptomatic (and untested)
cases, A is assumed to be 20% of the infected population
of the state and the fraction of serious cases is also taken
as 20% percent of the infected population. We assume that
the asymptomatic and untested population are able to move
freely between cities during a no lockdown period. Using the
current data available, the transmission rate is on average 2.2
during no lockdown and is assumed to be 1 during the time
when lockdown is in effect.

Fig. 1: Threshold curve -1: This represents a gradual adoption
of social distancing as infections rise with a more steep increase
as infections reach 20% of the population. The social distancing
fraction is capped at 0.8.

A. Effect on policy on infections
To study the effect of social distancing, we use two models
of the social distancing factor η. Threshold curve - I in
figure 1 represents a gradual adoption of social distancing
as the number of infections begin to rise. We assume that
a relatively high threshold of 20% of infected population,

Fig. 2: Threshold curve 2: A sudden rise in adoption of social
distancing is modelled by using a step function.

4

We generate results for a period of 300 days for a certain
policy decision to demonstrate the effect of lockdown and
social distancing on the infection curve. Without a complete
lockdown, the infection peaks early (Figure 3) but applying
social distancing causes the curve to flatten (Figures 4
and 5). On the other hand, when a complete lockdown
is in effect the curve flattens completely. The Figure 6
shows a situation where people might not conform to social
distancing measure during a no lockdown policy. They only
follow social distancing (Step social distancing) when a
collective threshold of infected population is reached. Even
though people follow social distancing after knowing that a
large population is infected, the delay in intervention leads
to early rise in overall infected population.
Figures 7 and 8 show the effect of change in lockdown
policy. The figure 7 shows the number of infected people,
if the lockdown is implemented after 22 days from the first
infection and then removed after 150 days. This shows a
flatten curve but also shows a rise in infected population
later in time. The curve 8 shows infected population if the
lockdown is implemented for 22 days and then removed after
22 days: this leads to a sharp early rise in the number of
infected population.
The figures 9 and 10 show effect of lockdown for the state
of Andhra Pradesh with the curves for susceptible, infected,
recovered populations and deaths.

policy is generated over 100 generations with a population
of 50 for the Genetic Algorithm.
We initialize the simulation for 30 days with seed
infections in each state as 10 infected individuals. The
optimal policy is generated in week wise blocks for 10
weeks. Each policy decision in each state for lockdown
is thus maintained for 7 successive days. The rest of the
parameters are the same as in the previous sections. The
policy generated is a week schedule containing lockdown
status of each state for that week.
An optimal lockdown strategy involves removing a
suppression strategy to engage safe economic activity in
a state with an extremely low infected population. Each
solution of the pareto front (Figure 16) shows the lockdown
status for all states at different locations for a time period
10 weeks. Lockdown status remains constant for the period
of first 2 weeks which is complete lockdown followed by
altering the lockdown status of few states. The solutions
vary from minimizing people getting infected to minimizing
ecnonomic cost. The choice of selection could be made to
conform to other factors in place such as hospital capacity,
fraction of population that might not need treatment, etc. We
demonstrate only one of the pareto-optimal policies since it
was observed that all the candidate pareto-optimal solutions
have almost indistinguishable objective values.
The effect of the optimal policy on the cost to economy
and the number of infected people is shown in figures 17, 18,
19 and 20. The optimal policy clearly has a lower economic
costs when no lockdown is applied or a complete lockdown
is applied. On the other hand the number of infections lie
between the two extreme cases demonstrating the effect of
competing objectives.
Moreover, when we modelled social distancing with
threshold curve-I, it resulted in a lower infection rate and
a slightly higher cost when compared to social distancing
modelled with Threshold curve II.Thus, an optimal policy
can help reducing economic costs while controlling the
number of infections.

B. Effect of policy on Economy
The effect of policy on the cost to economy is simulated
for three hundred days in figures 12 - 13. The most
anticipated effect of lockdown occurs at the time of infection
peak, where more people get infected leading to rise in
cost. When no suppression there is a positive correlation
of COVID-19 cases and the GDP, which is found by the
research group (Zhang et.al, 2020) [16].
Figures 12 and 13 shows the cost during no lockdown
with social distancing in effect while figure 14 shows the
cost during lockdown whereas the figure 11 shows the cost
with no suppression strategy such social distancing in effect.
Clearly, not imposing a lockdown imposes large costs in a
quick span of time primarily due to the large medical costs
incurred. On the other hand a full lockdown also imposes
large economic cost due to the loss of income for people
who cannot work due reduced work capacity of different
sectors of the economy.
Hence, an optimal policy must be sought in order to
reduce both medical and absenteeism costs while keeping
the number of infections low.

IV. L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A. Limitations
We consider the three major direct costs to economy
during a pandemic, viz. medical cost consisting of, special
life support equipment cost and medical treatment cost
inclusive of testing, work absenteeism cost encountered due
to work absentees of infected population, and economic
sector wise cost due to either government imposed or
threshold social distancing. Cost components encountered
due to lifestyle changes such as reduced consumption of
certain types of goods and services and other indirect costs
are not considered for simplicity. We further do not consider
the effect of delays in economic recovery as well and other
indirect costs as well.
According to a WHO news report April, 2020 [2], due
to lack of evidence, it is currently unclear if recovered
population that have antibodies is protected from second
infection. We assume recovered population to develop

C. Optimal policies
For our policy optimization experiment, we take the nine
states mentioned in table IV with transmission rates as β = 1
for no lockdown and β = 0.1 during lockdown. .
The NSGA-2 algorithm is used to derive the pareto front
against competing objectives of minimizing total cost to the
economy and the average number of infections. The optimal
5

immunity and not get infected again. It should be noted that,
SEIR is a generic infectious disease model and is not specific
to COVID-19. Finally, there exist inherent limitations of
deterministic models since these do not consider of time
variance of infectivity and recovery rates [12].

[10] Planning Comission Govt. of India Planning commission, Govt.
of India. Databook compiled for the use of Planning Commission.
Planning Commission.
[11] PWC. Future of India: The winning Leap. 2012.
[12] Mick Roberts, Viggo Andreasen, Alun Lloyd, and Lorenzo Pellis. Nine
challenges for deterministic epidemic models. Epidemics, 10:49–53,
2015.
[13] Rukmini S, Abhay Mishra, Shivam Vij, and Rahul Sampal. At current
rate, india can see 30,000 covid-19 deaths by may, no hospital bed by
june: Data, Mar 2020.
[14] Pär Stockhammar and Lars-Erik Öller. On the probability distribution
of economic growth. Journal of Applied Statistics, 38(9):2023–2041,
2011.
[15] P Walker, C Whittaker, O Watson, M Baguelin, K Ainslie, S Bhatia,
S Bhatt, A Boonyasiri, O Boyd, L Cattarino, et al. Report 12:
The global impact of covid-19 and strategies for mitigation and
suppression. 2020.
[16] Yi Zhang, Hanwen Tian, Yinglong Zhang, and Yiping Chen. Is the
epidemic spread related to gdp? visualizing the distribution of covid-19
in chinese mainland, 2020.

B. Future work
Better economic models can help get us more accurate
results, such as use of the Cobb-Douglas production function
to estimate production value, so that the effect of the
pandemic on the production value could be measured. The
characteristics of COVID-19 as well as its transmission
remains unknown therefore any developments could help
us drive the model to include more agreed upon parameter
values.
V. C ONCLUSION
Given the rapid spread of COVID-19 across the globe and
countries imposing severe lockdown measures to fight the
virus. It has become essential to come up with a balance
between cost imposed by the pandemic to the economy
and the number of infections so that medical facilities are
not overwhelmed. Over the basic SEIR model, we have
considered interstate movement of population and have built
a strategy to obtain optimal policy solutions. We have also
modelled the fraction of population that willingly follows
social distancing despite no government imposed lockdowns
which makes the model coherent with COVID-19 situation.
The optimal policy solution was generated by using the
NSGA-II which offers a possible solution involving partial
lockdown varying with time and place on the basis of
infected population and cost incurred.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Arun Ramamurthy for assisting us
with initial discussions. We would like to acknowledge Aruns
contribution with NSGA-II optimization. Arun is a researcher
at Tata Research Design and Development Center, Pune. We
also want to thank Dr. Arnab Chatterjee (Scientist at TCS
Innovation Labs, Delhi) and Dr. Shirish Karande (Senior
Scientist at Tata Research Design and Development Center,
Pune) for their valuable evaluations and suggestions.
R EFERENCES
[1] Coronavirus disease 19 (Covid-19) Situation Report 46. Mar 2020.
[2] ”immunity passports” in the context of covid-19, Apr 2020.
[3] David Adam. Special report: The simulations driving the world’s
response to covid-19, Apr 2020.
[4] Julien Arino and P. van den Driessche. A multi-city epidemic model.
Mathematical Population Studies, 10(3):175–193, 2003.
[5] Kalyanmoy Deb, Samir Agrawal, Amrit Pratap, and Tanaka
Meyarivan. A fast elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for
multi-objective optimization: Nsga-ii. In International conference on
parallel problem solving from nature, pages 849–858. Springer, 2000.
[6] Tom Fiddamman. Ventana systems, 2020.
[7] Kristalina Georgieva and Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. Some say
there is a trade-off: save lives or save jobs this is a false dilemma,
Apr 2020.
[8] Mark Granovetter. Threshold models of collective behavior. American
journal of sociology, 83(6):1420–1443, 1978.
[9] Josephine Ma. China’s first confirmed covid-19 case traced back to
november 17, Mar 2020.

6

Fig. 3: No lockdown, no Social Distancing - infections peak early
and overwhelm the healthcare capacity.

Fig. 4: No lockdown but with social Distancing in effect according
to Threshold Curve - I

Fig. 5: No lockdown but with step social Distancing in effect
according to Threshold Curve - II

Fig. 6: Complete Lockdown

Fig. 7: No lockdown for 22 days, lockdown for 150 days

Fig. 8: No lockdown for 22 days, then lockdown for 22 days

Effect of policy

7

Fig. 9: No lockdown

Fig. 10: Lockdown
Effect of lockdown for Andhra Pradesh

Fig. 11: No lockdown, no Social Distancing

Fig. 12: No lockdown but with social Distancing in effect according
to Threshold Curve - I

Fig. 13: No lockdown but with step social Distancing in effect
according to Threshold Curve - II

Fig. 14: Complete Lockdown

Effect of policy on the cost to economy

8

Fig. 15: Optimal policy for Threshold curve - I

Fig. 16: Optimal policy for Threshold curve - II
Optimal lockdown schedules for 10 weeks for 9 states. Filled rectangles represent lockdown while empty rectangles represent no
lockdown.

9

Fig. 17: Threshold curve - I

Fig. 18: Threshold curve - II

Cost to economy of different states for 100 days using optimal policy

Fig. 19: Threshold curve - I

Fig. 20: Threshold curve - II

Number of infections of different states for 100 days using optimal policy

10

