#lockdown: network-enhanced emotional profiling at the
times of COVID-19
Massimo Stella1,? , Valerio Restocchi2 , and Simon De Deyne3
1

Complex Science Consulting, 73100 Lecce, Italy
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, EH8 9AB Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
3
Human Complex Data Hub, School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, 3010 Victoria, Australia
?
Corresponding author: massimo.stella@inbox.com

arXiv:2005.04404v1 [cs.SI] 9 May 2020

2

May 12, 2020
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic forced countries all over the world to take unprecedented measures like nationwide lockdowns. To adequately understand the emotional and social repercussions, a large-scale reconstruction of how people perceived these unexpected events is necessary but currently missing. We address
this gap through social media by introducing MERCURIAL (Multi-layer Co-occurrence Networks for Emotional Profiling), a framework which exploits linguistic networks of words and hashtags to reconstruct social
discourse describing real-world events. We use MERCURIAL to analyse 101,767 tweets from Italy, the first
country to react to the COVID-19 threat with a nationwide lockdown. The data were collected between
11th and 17th March, immediately after the announcement of the Italian lockdown and the WHO declaring
COVID-19 a pandemic. Our analysis provides unique insights into the psychological burden of this crisis,
focussing on: (i) the Italian official campaign for self-quarantine (#iorestoacasa), (ii) national lockdown
(#italylockdown), and (iii) social denounce (#sciacalli). Our exploration unveils evidence for the emergence of complex emotional profiles, where anger and fear (towards political debates and socio-economic
repercussions) coexisted with trust, solidarity, and hope (related to the institutions and local communities).
We discuss our findings in relation to mental well-being issues and coping mechanisms, like instigation to
violence, grieving, and solidarity. We argue that our framework represents an innovative thermometer of
emotional status, a powerful tool for policy makers to quickly gauge feelings in massive audiences and devise
appropriate responses based on cognitive data.
Keywords: COVID-19, social media, hashtag networks, emotional profiling, cognitive science, network
science, sentiment analysis, computational social science.

1

Introduction

The stunningly quick spread of the COVID-19 pandemic catalysed the attention of worldwide audiences, overwhelming individuals with a deluge of often contrasting content about the severity of the
disease, the uncertainty of its transmission mechanisms, and the asperity of the measures taken by
most countries to fight it [1, 2, 3, 4]. Although these policies have been seen as necessary, they had
a tremendous impact on the mental well-being of large populations [5] for a number of reasons. Due
to lockdowns, many are facing financial uncertainty, having lost or being on the verge of losing their
source of income. Moreover, there is much concern about the disease itself, and most people fear
for their own health and that of their loved ones [6], further fueled by infodemics [2, 3, 1]. Finally,
additional distress is caused by the inability of maintaining a normal life [7]. The extent of the
impact of these factors is such that, in countries greatly struck by COVID-19 such as China, the
population started to develop symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder [8].
During this time more than ever, people have shared their emotions on social media. These
platforms provide an excellent emotional thermometer of the population, and have been widely
explored in previous studies investigating how online social dynamics promote or hamper content
diffusion [2, 9, 1, 10, 11] and the adoption of specific positive/negative attitudes and behaviours
[9, 12, 13].
1

1.1

Research aim

Building on the above evidence, our goal is to draw a comprehensive quantitative picture of people’s
emotional profiles, emerging during the COVID-19 crisis, through a cognitive analysis of online
social discourse. We achieve this by introducing MERCURIAL (Multi-layer Co-occurrence Networks
for Emotional Profiling), a framework that combines cognitive network science [14, 15, 16] with
computational social sciences [9, 12, 2, 17, 18]. Before outlining the methods and main contributions
of our approach, we briefly review existing research on understanding emotions in social media.

1.2

Past approaches bridging cognitive, computer and network science

Much of the research on emotions in social media has been consolidated into two themes. On the
one hand, there is the data science approach, which mostly focused over large-scale positive/negative
sentiment detection [9] and recently identified the relevance of tracing more complex affect patterns
for understanding social dynamics [19, 20, 21, 16]. On the other hand, cognitive science research
makes use of small-scale analysis tools, but explores the observed phenomena in much more detail
in the light of its theoretical foundations [22, 23, 24]. Specifically, in cognitive science the massive
spread of semantic and emotional information through verbal communication represent long-studied
phenomena, known as cognitive contagion [24] and emotional contagion [24, 25, 23], respectively.
This research suggests that ideas are composed of a cognitive component and an emotional content,
much alike viruses containing the genomic information necessary for their replication [1]. Both these
types of contagion happen when an individual is affected in their behaviour by an idea. Emotions
elicited by ideas can influence users’ behaviour without their awareness, resulting in the emergence
of specific behavioural patterns such as implicit biases [23]. Unlike pathogen transmission, no direct
contact is necessary for cognitive and emotional contagion to take place, since both are driven by
information processing and diffusion, like it happens through social media [26, 27]. In particular,
during large-scale events, ripples of emotions can rapidly spread across information systems [27]
and have dramatic effects, as it has recently been demonstrated in elections and social movements
[28, 12, 25].
At the intersection of data- and cognitive science is emotional profiling, a set of techniques
which enables the reconstruction of how concepts are emotionally perceived and assembled in usergenerated content [17, 18, 9, 19, 15, 29]. Emotional profiling conveys information about basic affective
dimensions such how positive/negative or how arousing a message is, and also includes the analysis
of more fine-grained emotions such as fear or trust that might be associated with the lockdown and
people’s hopes for the future [9, 30, 22].
Recently, an emerging important line of research has shown that reconstructing the knowledge
embedded in messages through social and information network models [31, 14, 32] successfully highlight important phenomena in a number of contexts, ranging from the diffusion of hate speech during
massive voting events [12] to reconstructing personality traits from social media [17]. Importantly,
to reconstruct knowledge embedded in tweets, recent work has successfully merged data science and
cognitive science, introducing linguistic networks of co-occurrence relationships between words in
sentences [16, 33, 21] and between hashtags in tweets [12]. However, an important shortfall of these
works is that these two types of networked knowledge representations were not merged together,
thus missing on the important information revealed by studying their interdependence.

1.3

Main contributions

We identify three important contributions that distinguish our paper from previous literature, and
make a further step towards consolidating cognitive network science [14] as a paradigm suitable to
analyse people’s emotions.
First, we introduce a new framework exploiting the interdependence between hashtags and words,
addressing the gap previously discussed. This framework, multi-layer co-occurrence networks for
emotional profiling (MERCURIAL), combines both the semantic structure encoded through the
co-occurrence of hashtags and the textual message to construct a multi-layer lexical network [34].
This multi-layer network structure allows us to contextualise hashtags and, therefore, improve the
analysis of their meaning. Importantly, these networks can be used to identify which concepts or
words contribute to different emotions and how central they are.
Second, in contrast to previous work, which largely revolved around English tweets [4, 20], the
current study focusses on Italian Twitter messages. There are several reasons why the emotional
2

response of Italians is particularly interesting. Specifically, i) Italy was the first Western country to
experience a vast number of COVID-19 clusters; ii) the Italian government was the first to declare
a national lockdown 1 ; iii), the Italian lockdown was announced on 10th March, one day before the
World Health Organization (WHO) declared the pandemic status of COVID-19. This enables us to
address the urgent need of measuring the emotional perceptions and reactions to social distancing,
lockdown, and, more generally, the COVID-19 pandemic.
Third, thanks to MERCURIAL, we obtain richer and more complex emotional profiles that we
analyse through the lens of established psychological theories of emotion. This is a fundamental step
in going beyond positive/neutral/negative sentiment and to provide accurate insights on the mental
well-being of a population. To this end, we take into account three of the most trending hashtags,
#iorestoacasa (English: "I stay at home"), #sciacalli (English: "jackals"), and #italylockdown,
as representative of positive, negative, and neutral social discourse, respectively. We use these
hashtags as a starting point to build multi-layer networks of word and hashtag co-occurrence, from
which we derive our profiles. Our results depict a complex map of emotions, suggesting that there
is co-existence and polarisation of conflicting emotional states, importantly fear and trust towards
the lockdown and social distancing. The combination of these emotions, further explored through
semantic network analysis, indicates mournful submission and acceptance towards the lockdown,
perceived as a measure for preventing contagion but with negative implications over economy. As
further evidence of the complexity of the emotional response to the crisis, we also find strong signals of
hope and social bonding, mainly in relation to social flash mobs, and interpreted here as psychological
responses to deal with the distress caused by the threat of the pandemic.

1.4

Manuscript outline

The paper is organised as follows. In the Methods section we describe the data we used to perform our analysis, and describe MERCURIAL in detail. In the Results section we present the
emotional profiles obtained from our data, which are then discussed in more detail in the section
Discussion. Finally, the last section highlights the psychological implications of our exploratory
investigation and its potential for follow-up monitoring of COVID-19 perceptions in synergy with
other datasets/approaches.
We argue that our findings represent an important first step towards monitoring both mental
well-being and emotional responses in real time, offering policy-makers a framework to make timely
data-informed decisions.

2

Methods

In this section we describe the methodology employed to collect our data and perform the emotional
profiling analysis. First, we describe the dataset and how it was retrieved. Then, we introduce cooccurrence networks, and specifically our novel method that combines hasthag co-occurrence with
word co-occurrence on multi-layer networks. Finally, we describe the cognitive science framework
we used to perform the emotional profiling analysis on the so-obtained networks.

2.1

Data

We gathered 101,767 tweets in Italian to monitor how online users perceived the COVID-19 pandemic
and its repercussions in Italy. These tweets were gathered by crawling messages containing three
trending hashtags of relevance for the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy and expressing three different
sentiment polarities:
• #iorestoacasa (English: "I stay at home"), a positive-sentiment hashtag introduced by the
Italian Government in order to promote a responsible attitude during the lockdown;
• #sciacalli, (English: "jackals"), a negative sentiment hashtag used by online users in order to
address unfair behaviour rising during the health emergency;
• #italylockdown, a neutral sentiment hashtag indicating the application of lockdown measures
all over Italy.
1 https:/en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020_Italy_coronavirus_lockdown,

3

Last Access: 20/04/2020

We refer to #iorestoacasa, #sciacalli and #italylockdown as focal hashtags to distinguish them
from other hashtags. We collected the tweets through Complex Science Consulting (@ComplexConsult),
which was authorised by Twitter, and used the ServiceConnect crawler implemented in Mathematica 11.3. The collection of tweets comprises 39,943 tweets for #iorestoacasa, 26,999 for #sciacalli
and 34,825 for #italylockdown. Retweets of the same text message were not considered. For each
tweet, the language was detected. Pictures, links, and non-Italian content was discarded and stopwords (i.e. words without intrinsic meaning such as “di” (English: "of") and “ma” (English: "but")
removed. Other interesting datasets with tweets about COVID-19 are available in [35, 20].

2.2

Multi-layer co-occurrence networks

Word co-occurrence networks have been successfully used to characterise a wide variety of phenomena
related to language acquisition and processing [16, 36, 37]. Recently, researchers have also used
hashtags to investigate various aspects of social discourse. For instance, Stella et al. [12] showed
that hashtag co-occurrence networks were able to characterise important differences in the social
discourses promoted by opposing social groups during the Catalan referendum. In this work we
introduce MERCURIAL (Multi-layer Co-occurrence Networks for Emotional Profiling), a framework
combining:
• Hashtag co-occurrence networks (or hashtag networks) [12]. Nodes represent hashtags and links
indicate the co-occurrence of any two nodes in the same tweet.
• Word co-occurrence networks (or word networks) [16]. Nodes represent words and links represent the co-occurrence of any two words one after the other in a tweet without stop-words (i.e.
words without an intrinsic meaning).
We combine these two types of networks in a multi-layer network to exploit the interdependence
between hashtags and words. This new, resulting network enables us to contextualise hashtags,
and capture their real meaning through context, thereby enhancing the accuracy of the emerging
emotional profile. To build the multi-layer network, we first build the single hashtag and word
layers. For sake of simplicity, word networks are unweighted and undirected2 . Note that the hashtag
network was kept at a distinct level from word networks, e.g. common words were not explicitly
linked with hashtags. As reported in Figure 1, each co-occurrence link between any two hashtags A
and B (#coronavirus and #restiamoacasa in the figure) is relative to a word network, including all
words co-occurring in all tweets featuring hashtags A and B.
The hashtag and word networks capture the co-occurrence of lexical entities within the structured
online social discourse. Words possess meaning in language [31] and their network assembly is evidently a linguistic network. Similar to words in natural language, hashtags possess linguistic features
that express a specific meaning and convey rich affect patterns [12]. The resulting networks capture
the meaning of a collection of tweets by identifying which words/hashtags co-occurred together.
This knowledge embedded in hashtag networks was used in order to identify the most relevant or
central terms associated within a given collection of thematic tweets. Rather than using frequency
to indicate centrality, which makes it difficult to compare hashtags that do not co-occur in the same
message, the current work relies on distance-based measures to detect how central a hashtag is in
the network.
The first measure that implements this notion is closeness centrality. Closeness c(i) identifies
how many links connect i to all its neighbours and is formalised as follows:
N
c(i) = PN

j=1

dij

,

(1)

where dij is the network distance between i and j, i.e. the smallest amount of links connecting nodes
i and j. In co-occurrence networks, nodes (i.e. hashtags and words) with a higher closeness tend
to co-occur more often with each other or with other relevant nodes at short network distance. We
expect that rankings of closeness centrality will reveal the most central hashtags in the networks
for #iorestoacasa, #sciacalli and #italylockdown, in line with previous work in which closeness
centrality was used to measure language acquisition and processing [39, 14, 32].
Importantly, closeness is a more comprehensive approach compared to the simpler frequency
analysis. Imagine a collection of hashtags A, B, C, D, .... Computing the frequency of hashtag
2 Robustness checks were performed for various cut-offs in co-occurrence frequency, e.g. pruning co-occurrence networks according
to co-occurrence weights did not change the most central hashtags.

4

Figure 1: Top: Example of co-occurrence networks for different hashtags: #distantimauniti (English: distant
but united) in #iorestoacasa on the left, #incapaci (English: inept) in #sciacalli in the middle, and #futuro
(English: future) in #italylockdown on the right. Clusters of co-occurring hashtags were obtained through
spectral clustering [38]. These clusters highlight the co-occurrence of European-focused content, featuring
hashtags like #BCE (i.e. European Central Bank), #Lagarde and #spread (i.e. spread between Italian and
German bonds) together with social distance practices related to #iorestoacasa. Bottom: In MERCURIAL,
any link in a co-occurrence network of hashtags (left) corresponds to a collection of tweets whose words co-occur
according to a word network (right). Larger words have a higher closeness centrality.
A co-occurring with hashtag B is informative about the frequency of the so-called 2-grams "AB"
or "BA" but it does not consider how those hashtags co-occur with C, D, etc. In other words,
a 2-gram captures the co-occurrence of two specific hashtags within tweets but does not provide
the simultaneous structure of co-occurrences of all hashtags across tweets, for which a network of
pairwise co-occurrences is required. On such a network, closeness can then highlight hashtags at
short distance from all others, i.e. co-occurring in a number of contexts in the featured discourse.
In addition to closeness, we also use graph distance entropy to measure centrality. This centrality
measure captures which hashtags are uniformly closer to all other hashtags in a connected network.
Combining closeness with graph distance entropy led to successfully identifying words of relevance
in conceptual networks with a few hundreds of nodes [32].
The main idea behind graph distance entropy is that it provides info about the spread of the
distribution of network distances between nodes (i.e. shortest path), a statistical quantity that
cannot be extracted from closeness (which is, conversely, a mean inverse distance). Considering
the set d(i) ≡ (di1 , ..., dij , ..., diN ) of distances between i and any other node j connected to it
(1 ≤ j ≤ N ) and Mi = M ax(d(i) ), then graph distance entropy is defined as:
h(i) = −

M
i −1
X
1
(i)
(i)
pk logpk ,
log(Mi − 1)

(2)

k=1

where pk is the probability of finding a distance equal to k. Therefore, h(i) is a Shannon entropy of
5

distances and it ranges between 0 and 1. In general, the lower the entropy, the more a node resembles
a star centre [34] and is at equal distances from all other nodes. Thus, nodes with a lower h(i) and
a higher closeness are more uniformly close to all other connected nodes in a network. Words with
simultaneously low graph distance entropy and high closeness were found to be prominent words for
early word learning [34] and mindset characterisation [32].

2.3 Attributing meaning and emotions to focal hashtags by using word
networks
In addition to hashtag networks, we also build word networks obtained from a collection of tweets
containing any combination of the focal hashtags #iorestocasa or #sciacalli and #coronavirus. For
all tweets containing a given set of hashtags, we performed the following:
1. Subdivide the tweet in sentences and delete all stop-words from each sentence, preserving the
original ordering of words;
2. Stem all the remaining words, i.e. identify the root or stem composing a given word. In
a language such as Italian, in which there is a number of ways of adding suffixes to words,
word stemming is essential in order to recognise the same word even when it is inflected for
different gender, number or as a verb tense. For instance, abbandoneremo (we will abandon)
and abbandono (abandon, abandonment) both represent the same stem abband;
3. Draw links between a stemmed word and its subsequent one. Store the resulting edge list of
word co-occurrences.
4. Sentences containing a negation (i.e. "not") underwent an additional step parsing their syntactic
structure. This was done in order to identify the target of negation (e.g. in "this is not peace",
the negation refers to "peace"). Syntactic dependencies were not used for network construction
but intervened in emotional profiling, instead (see below).
The resulting word network also captures syntactic dependencies between words [16] related by
online users to a specific hashtag or combination of hashtag. We used closeness centrality to detect
the relevance of words for a given hashtag. Text pre-processing such as word stemming and syntactic
dependencies was performed using Mathematica 11.3, which was also used to extract networks and
compute network metrics.
The presence of hashtags in word networks provided a way of linking words, which express
common language, with hashtags, which express content but also summarise the topic of a tweet.
Consequently, by using this new approach, the meaning attributed by users to hashtags can be
inferred not only from hashtag co-occurrence but also from word networks. An example of MERCURIAL, featuring hashtag-hashtag and word-word co-occurrences, is reported in Figure 1 (bottom).
In this example, hashtags #coronavirus and #restiamoacasa co-occurred together (left) in tweets
featuring many co-occurring words (right). The resulting word network shows relevant concepts such
as "incoraggiamenti" (English: encouragement) and "problemi" (English: problems), highlighting a
positive attitude towards facing problems related to the pandemic. More in general, the attribution
and reconstruction of such meaning was explored by considering conceptual relevance and emotional
profiling in one or several word networks related to a given region of a hashtag co-occurrence network.

2.4

Emotional profiling

As a first data source for emotional profiling, this work also used valence and arousal data from
Warriner and colleagues [40], whose combination can reconstruct emotional states according to the
well-studied circumplex model of affect [41, 30]. In psycholinguistics, word valence expresses how
positively/negatively a concept is perceived (equivalently to sentiment in computer science). The
second dimension, arousal, indicates the alertness or lethargy inspired by a concept. Having a high
arousal and valence indicates excitement and joy, whereas a negative valence combined with a high
arousal can result in anxiety and alarm [30]. Finally, some studies also include dominance or potency
as a measure of the degree of control experienced [40]. However, for reasons of conciseness, we focus
on the two primary dimensions of affect: valence and arousal.
Going beyond the standard positive/negative/neutral sentiment intensity is of utmost importance
for characterising the overall online perception of massive events [9]. Beyond the primary affective
dimension of sentiment, the affect associated with current events [12] can also be described in terms
of arousal [42] and of basic emotions such as fear, disgust, anger, trust, joy, surprise, sadness, and
6

anticipation. These emotions represent basic building blocks of many complex emotional states [23],
and they are all self-explanatory except for anticipation, which indicates a projection into future
events [18]. Whereas fear, disgust, and anger (trust and joy) elicit negative (positive) feedback,
surprise, sadness and anticipation have been recently evaluated as neutral emotions, including both
positive and negative feedback reactions to events in the external world [43].
To attribute emotions to individual words, we use the NRC lexicon [18] and the circumplex model
[30]. These two approaches allow us to quantify the emotional profile of a set of words related to
hashtags or combinations of hashtags. The NRC lexicon enlists words eliciting a given emotion.
The circumplex model attributes valence and arousal scores to words, which in turn determine
their closest emotional states. Because datasets of similar size were not available for Italian, the
data from the NRC lexicon and the Warriner norms were translated from English to Italian using
a forward consensus translation of Google Translate, Microsoft Bing and DeepL translator, which
was successfully used in previous investigations with Italian [44]. Although the valence of some
concepts might change across languages [40], word stemming related several scores to the same
stem, e.g. scores for "studio" (English: "study") and "studiare" (English: "to study") were averaged
together and the average attributed to the stem root "stud". In this way, even if non-systematic
cross-language valence shifting introduced inaccuracy in the score for one word (e.g. "studiare"),
averaging over other words relative to the same stem reduced the influence of such inaccuracy. No
statistically significant difference (α = 0.05) was found between the emotional profiles of 200 Italian
tweets, including 896 different stems, and their automatic translations in English, holding for each
dimension separately (z-scores < 1.96).
Then, we build emotional profiles by considering the distribution of words eliciting a given emotion/valence/arousal and associated to specific hashtags in tweets. Assertive tweets with no negation
were evaluated directly through a bag of words model, i.e. by directly considering the words composing them. Tweets including negations underwent an additional intermediate step where words
syntactically linked to the negation were substituted with their antonyms [45] and then evaluated.
Source-target syntactic dependencies were computed in Mathematica 11.3 and all words targeted
by a negation word (i.e. no, non and nessuno in Italian) underwent the substitution with their
antonyms.
To determine whether the observed emotional intensity r(i) of a given emotion in a set S of
words was compatible with random expectation, we perform a statistical test (Z-test) using the
NRC dataset. Remember that emotional intensity here was measured in terms of richness or count
of words eliciting a given emotion in a given network. As a null model, we use random samples as
follows: let us denote by m the number of words stemmed from S that are also in the NRC dataset.
Then, m words from the NRC lexicon are sampled uniformly at random and their emotional profile
is compared against that of the empirical sample. We repeated this random sampling 1000 times for
each single empirical observed emotional profile {r(i)}i . To ensure the resulting profiles are indeed
compatible with a Gaussian distribution, we performed a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (α = 0.05).
All the tests we performed gave random distributions of emotional intensities compatible with a
Gaussian distribution, characterised by a mean random intensity for emotion i, r∗ (i) and a standard
deviation σ ∗ (i). For each emotion, a z-score was computed:
z=

r(i) − r∗ (i)
.
σ ∗ (i)

(3)

In the remainder of the manuscript, every emotional profile incompatible with random expectation was highlighted in black or marked with a check. Since we used a two-tailed Z-test (with a
significance level of 0.05), this means that an emotional richness can either be higher or lower than
random expectation.

3

Results

The investigated corpus of tweets represents a complex multilevel system, where conceptual knowledge and emotional perceptions are entwined on a number of levels. Tweets are made of text and
include words, which convey meaning [31]. From the analysis of word networks, we can obtain information on the organisation of knowledge proper of social media users, which is embedded in their
generated content [16]. However, tweets also convey meaning through the use of hashtags, which
can either refer to specific words or point to the overall topic of the whole tweet. Both words and
7

hashtags can evoke emotions in different contexts, thus giving rise to complex patterns [17]. Similar
to words in natural language, the same hashtags can be perceived and used in language differently
by different users, according to the context.
The simultaneous presence of word- and hashtag-occurrences in tweets is representative of the
knowledge shared by social media users when conveying specific content and ideas. This interconnected representation of knowledge can be exploited by simultaneously considering both hashtag-level
and word-level information, since words specify the meaning attributed to hashtags.
In this section we use MERCURIAL to analyse the data collected. We do so by characterising
the hashtag networks, both in terms of meaning and emotional profiles. Precedence is given to
hashtags as they not only convey meaning as individual linguistic units but also represent more
general-level topics characterising the online discourse. Then, we inter-relate hashtag networks with
word networks. Finally, we perform the emotional profiling of hashtags in specific contexts. The
combination of word- and hashtag-networks specifies the perceptions embedded by online users
around the same entities, e.g. coronavirus, in social discourses coming from different contexts.

3.1

Conceptual relevance in hashtag networks

The largest connected components of the three hashtag networks included: 1000 hashtags and 8923
links for #italylockdown; 720 hashtags and 5915 links for #sciacalli; 6665 hashtags and 53395 links
for #italylockdown. All three networks are found to be highly clustered (mean local clustering
coefficient [38] of 0.82) and with an average distance between any two hashtags of 2.1. Only 126
hashtags were present in all the three networks.
Table 1 reports the most central hashtags included in each corpus of tweets thematically revolving
around #iorestoacasa, #sciacalli and #italylockdown. The ranking relies on closeness centrality,
which in here quantifies the tendency for hashtags to co-occur with other hashtags expressing analogous concepts and, therefore, are at short network distance from each other (see Methods). Hence,
hashtags with a higher closeness centrality represent the prominent concepts in the social discourse.
This result is similar to those showing that closeness centrality captures concepts which are relevant
for early word acquisition [39] and production [46] in language. Additional evidence that closeness
can capture semantically central concepts is represented by the closeness ranking, which assigns
top-ranked positions to #coronavirus and #COVID-19 in all three Twitter corpora. This is a consequence of the corpora being about the COVID-19 outbreak (and of the network metric being able
to capture semantic relevance).
In the hashtag network built around #italylockdown, the most central hashtags are relative to
the coronavirus, including a mix of negative hashtags such as #pandemia (English: "pandemic")
and positive ones such as #italystaystrong. Similarly, the hashtag network built around #sciacalli
highlighted both positive (#facciamorete (English: "let’s network") and negative (#irresponsabili
- English: "irresponsible") hashtags. However, the social discourse around #sciacalli also featured
prominent hashtags from politics, including references to specific Italian politicians, to the Italian
Government, and hashtags expressing protest and shame towards the acts of a prominent Italian
politician. Conversely, the social discourse around #iorestoacasa included many positive hashtags,
eliciting hope for a better future and the need to act responsibly (e.g. #andratuttobene - English:
"everything will be fine", or #restiamoacasa - English: "let’s stay at home"). The most prominent
hashtags in each network (cf. Table 1) indicate the prevalence of a positive social discourse around
#iostoacasa and the percolation of strong political debate in relation to the negative topics conveyed
by #sciacalli. However, we want to extend these punctual observations of negative/positive valences
of single hashtags to the overall global networks. To achieve this, we use emotional profiling.

3.2

Emotional profiling of hashtag networks

Hashtags can be composed of individual or multiple words. By extracting individual words from the
hashtags of a given network, it is possible to reconstruct the emotional profile of the social discourse
around the focal hashtags #sciacalli, #italylockdown and #iorestoacasa. We tackle this by using
the emotion-based [18] and the dimension based [30] emotional profiles (see Methods).
The emotional profiles of hashtags featured in co-occurrence networks are reported in Figure
2 (top). The top section of the figure represents perceived valence and arousal represented as
a circumplex model of affect [30]. This 2D space or disk is called emotional circumplex and its
coordinates represent emotional states that are well-supported by empirical behavioural data and
brain research [30]. As explained also in the figure caption, each word is endowed with an (x, y)
8

Table 1: Top-ranked hashtags in co-occurrence networks based on closeness centrality. Higher ranked hashtags
co-occurred with more topic-related concepts in the same tweet. In all three rankings, the most central hashtag
was the one defining the topic (e.g. #italylockdown) and was omitted from the ranking.
Rank
#italylockdown
#sciacalli
#iostoacasa
1
coronavirus
coronavirus
iorestoacasa
2
COVID19
COVID19
coronavirus
3
ItaliaZonaRossa
Salvini
COVID19
4
iorestoacasa
Lega
andratuttobene
5
Covid19
iorestoacasa
Covid19
6
Italia
Conte
restiamoacasa
7
italystaystrong
facciamorete
quarantena
8
Italy
Governo
COVID2019
9
pandemia
COVID2019
COVID19italia
10
COVID2019
Meloni
iorestoincasa
11
coronavirusitalia
Covid19
coronarvirusitalia
12 italiazonaprotetta
6marzo
italia
13
restiamoacasa
coronvirusitalia
andràtuttobene
14
lockdown
mascherine
covid19italia
15
iostoacasa
zonarossa
pandemia
16 coronarvirusitalia Salvinivergognati coranavirusitalia
17
coranavirusitalia
Coronavirus
CoronaVirusitaly
18
CoronaVirusitaly coranavirusitalia
covid19
19
Conte
irresponsabili
Italia
20
COVID19italia
restiamoacasa
coronavirusitalIa

coordinate expressing its perceived valence (x) and arousal (y). Different points indicate different
emotional combinations. For instance, (1,0) is the point of maximum/positive valence and zero
arousal, i.e. calmness; (0,-1) is the point of zero valence and minimum arousal, i.e. lethargy;
(-0.6,+0.6) represents a point of strong negative valence and positive arousal, i.e. alarm.
Figure 2 reports the emotional profiles of all hashtags featured in co-occurrence networks for
#italylockdown (left), #sciacalli (middle) and #iorestoacasa (right). To represent the interquartile
range of all words for which valence/arousal rating are available, we use a neutrality range. Histograms falling outside of the neutrality range indicate specific emotional states expressed by words
included within hashtags (e.g. #pandemia contains the word "pandemia" with negative valence and
high arousal).
3.2.1

Emotional profiling of hashtag networks through the circumplex model

In Figure 2 (left, top), the peak of the emotional distribution for hashtags associated with #italylockdown falls within the neutrality range. This finding indicates that hashtags co-occurring with
#italylockdown, a neutral hashtag by itself, were also mostly emotionally neutral conceptual entities. Despite this main trend, the distribution also features deviations from the peak mostly in the
areas of calmness and tranquillity (positive valence, lower arousal) and excitement (positive valence,
higher arousal). Weaker deviations (closer to the neutrality range) were present also in the area of
anxiety.
This reconstructed emotional profile indicates that the Italian social discourse featuring #italylockdown was mostly calm and quiet, perceiving the lockdown as a positive measure for countering
responsibly the COVID-19 outbreak.
Not surprisingly, the social discourse around #sciacalli shows a less prominent positive emotional profile, with a higher probability of featuring hashtags eliciting anxiety, negative valence and
increased states of arousal, as it can be seen in Figure 2 (center, top). This polarised emotional
profile represents quantitative evidence for the coexistence of mildly positive and strongly negative
content within the online discourse labelled by #sciacalli. This is further evidence that the negative
hashtag #sciacalli was indeed used by Italian users to denounce or raise alarm over the negative
implications of the lockdown, especially in relation to politics and politicians’ actions. However, the
polarisation of political content and debate over social media platforms has been encountered in
many other studies [21, 13, 12] and cannot be attributed to the COVID-19 outbreak only.
Finally, Figure 2 (top right) shows that positive perception was more prominently reflected in
the emotional profile of #iorestoacasa, which was the hashtag massively promoted by the Italian
Government for supporting the introduction of the nationwide lockdown in Italy. The emotional
9

Figure 2: Emotional profiles of all hashtags featured in co-occurrence networks for #italylockdown (left),
#sciacalli (middle) and #iorestoacasa (right). Top: Circumplex emotional profiling. All hashtags representing
one or more words were considered. For each word, valence (x-coordinate) and arousal (y- coordinate) scores
were attributed (see Methods) resulting in a 2D density histogram (yellow overlay) relative to the probability
of finding an hashtag in a given location in the circumplex, the higher the probability the stronger the colour.
Regions with the same probabilities are enclosed in grey lines. A neutrality range indicates where 50% of the
words in the underlying valence/arousal dataset would fall and it thus serves as a reference value for detecting
abnormal emotional profiles. Distributions falling outside of this range indicate deviations from the median
behaviour (i.e. interquartile range, see Methods). Bottom: NRC-based emotional profiling, detecting how
many hashtags inspired a given emotion in a hashtag network. Results are normalised over the total number of
hashtags in a networks. Emotions compatible with random expectation were highlighted in gray.
profile of the 6000 hashtags co-occurring with #iorestoacasa indicate a considerably positive and
calm perception of domestic confinement, seen as a positive tool to stay safe and healthy. The prominence of hopeful hashtags in association with #iorestoacasa, as reported in the previous subsection,
indicate that many Italian Twitter users were serene and hopeful about staying at home at the start
of lockdown.
3.2.2

Emotional profiling of hashtag networks through basic emotions

Hashtag networks were emotionally profiled not only by using the circumplex model (see above) but
also by using basic emotional associations taken from the NRC Emotion lexicon (Figure 2, bottom).
Across all hashtag networks, we find a statistically significant peak 3 in trust, analogous of the
peaks close to emotions of calmness and serenity an observed in the circumplex models. However,
all the hashtag networks included also negative emotions like anger and fear, which are natural
human responses to unknown threats and were observed also with the circumplex representations.
The intensity of fearful, alarming and angry emotions is stronger in the #sciacalli hashtag network,
which was used by social users to denounce, complain and express alertness about the consequences
of the lockdown.
In addition to the politically-focused jargon highlighted by closeness centrality alone, by combining closeness with graph distance entropy (see Methods and [32]) we identify other topics which are
uniformly at short distance from others in the social discourse around #sciacalli, such as: #mascherine (English: "protective masks", which was also ranked high by using closeness only), #amuchina
3 The

computed z-scores were: 2.89 > 1.96 (#italylockdown), 2.79 > 1.96 (#sciacalli) and 2.66 > 1.96 (#iorestoacasa).

10

(the most popular brand, and synonym of, hand sanitiser), #supermercati (English: "supermarkets"). This result suggests an interesting interpretation of the negative emotions around #sciacalli.
Beside the inflaming political debate and the fear of the health emergency, in fact, a third element
emerges: Italian twitter users feared and were angry about the raiding and stockpiling of first aid
items, symptoms of panic-buying in the wake of the lockdown.

3.3 Assessing conceptual relevance and emotional profiles of hashtags via
word networks
The above comparisons indicate consistency between dimension-based (i.e. the circumplex) and
emotion-specific emotional profiling. Since the latter offers also a more precise categorisation of
words in emotions, we will focus on emotion-specific profiling. Importantly, to fully understand the
emotional profiles outlined above, it is necessary to identify the language expressed in tweets using
a given combination of hashtags (see also Figure 1, bottom). As the next step of the MERCURIAL
analysis, we gather all tweets featuring the focal hashtags #italylockdown, #sciacalli, or #iorestoacasa and any of their co-occurring hashtags and build the corresponding word networks, as explained
in the Methods. Closeness centrality over these networks provided the relevance of each single word
in the social discourse around the topic identified by a hashtag. Only words with closeness higher
than the median were reported.
Figure 3 shows the cloud of words appearing in all tweets that include #sciacalli, displayed
according to their NRC emotional profile. Similar to the emotional profile extracted from hashtags
co-occurring with #sciacalli, the words used in tweets with this hashtag also display a polarised
emotional profile with high levels of fear and trust. Thanks to the multi-layer analysis, this dichotomy
can now be better understood in terms of the individual concepts eliciting it.
By using closeness on word networks, we identified concepts such as "competente" (English: "competent"), "continua" (English: "continue", "keep going"), and "comitato" (English: "committee") to
be relevant for the trust-sphere. These words convey trust in the expert committees appointed by
the Italian Government to face the pandemic and protect the citizens. We find that other prominent words contributing to make the discourse around #sciacalli trustful are "aiutare" (English: "to
help"), "serena" (English: "serene"), "rispetto" (English: "respect") and "veritÃă" (English: "truth"),
which further validate a trustful, open-minded and fair perception of the political and emergency
debate outlined above. This perception was mixed with negative elements, mainly eliciting fear but
also sadness and anger. The jargon of a political debate emerges in the word cloud of fear: "difficoltÃă" (English: "difficulty"), "criminale" (English: "criminal"), "dannati" (English: "scoundrel"),
"crollare" (English: "to break down"), "banda" (English: "gang"), "panico" (English: "panic") and
"caos" (English: "chaos"). These words indicate that Twitter users felt fear directed to specific targets. A speculative explanation for exorcising fear can be finding a scapegoat and then target it with
anger. The word cloud of such emotion supports the occurrence of such phenomenon by featuring
words like "denuncia" (English: "denouncement"), "colpevoli" (English: "guilty"), "vergogna" (English: "shame"), "combattere" (English: "to fight") and "colpa" (English: "blame"). The above words
are reflected also in other emotions like sadness, which features also words like "cadere" (English:
"to fall") and "miseria" (English: "misery", "out of grace").
These prominent words in the polarised emotional profile of #sciacalli, suggest that Twitter
users feared criminal behaviour, possibly related to unwise political debates or improper stockpiling
of supplies (as showed by the hashtag analysis). Our findings also suggest that the reaction to
such fearful state, which also projects sadness about negative economic repercussions, was split into
a strong, angry denounce of criminal behaviour and messages of trust for the order promoted by
competent organisations and committees. It is interesting to note that, according to Ekman’s theory
of basic emotions [23], a combination of sadness and fear can be symptomatic of desperation, which
is a critical emotional state for people in the midst of a pandemic-induced lockdown.
The same analysis is reported in Figure 4 for the social discourse of #italylockdown (top) and
#iorestoacasa (bottom). In agreement with the circumplex profiling, for both #italylockdown and
#iorestoacasa the intensity of fear is considerably lower than trust.
However, when investigated in conjunction with words, the overall emotional profile of #italylockdown appears to be more positive, displaying higher trust and joy and lower sadness, than the
emotional profile of #iorestoacasa. Although the difference is small, this suggests that hashtags
alone are not enough to fully characterise the perception of a conceptual unit, and should always be
analysed together with the natural language associated to them.
11

Figure 3: Emotional profile and word cloud of the language used in tweets with #sciacalli. Words are organised
according to the emotion they evoke. Font size is larger for words of higher closeness centrality in the word
co-occurrence network relative to the hashtag (see Methods). Every emotion level incompatible with random
expectation is highlighted with a check mark.
The trust around #italylockdown comes from concepts like "consigli" (English: "tips", "advice"), "compagna" (English: "companion", "partner"), "chiara" (English: "clear"), "abbracci" (English:"hugs") and "canta" (English: "sing"). These words and the positive emotions they elicit suggest
that Italian users reacted to the early stages of the lockdown with a pervasive sense of commonality and companionship, reacting to the pandemic with externalisations of positive outlooks for the
future, e.g. by playing music on the balconies4 .
Interestingly, this positive perception co-existed with a more complex and nuanced one. Despite
the overall positive reaction, in fact, the discourse on #italylockdown also shows fear for the difficult
times facing the contagion ("contagi") and the lockdown restrictions ("restrizioni"), and also anger,
identifying the current situation as a fierce battle ("battaglia") against the virus.
The analysis of anticipation, the emotional state projecting desires and beliefs into the future,
shows the emergence of concepts such as "speranza" (English: "hope"), "possibile" (English: "possible") and "domani" (English: "tomorrow"), suggesting a hopeful attitude towards a better future.
The social discourse around #iorestoacasa brought to light a similar emotional profile, with a
slightly higher fear towards being quarantined at home (quarantena (English: "quarantine"), comando (English: "command", "order", emergenza (English: "emergency"). Both surprise and sadness were elicited by the the word "confinamento" (English: "confinement"), which was prominently
featured in the network structure arising from the tweets we analysed.
In summary, the above emotional profiles of hashtags and words from the 101,767 tweets suggest
4 This phenomenon was also mimicked in other countries later, and extensively reported by traditional media, see
https://tinyurl.com/balconicovid , Last Access: 20/04/2020 )

12

Figure 4: Emotional profile and word cloud of the language used in tweets with #italylockdown (top) and
#iorestoacasa (bottom). Words are organised according to the emotion they evoke. Font size is larger for words
of higher closeness centrality in the word co-occurrence network relative to the hashtag (see Methods). Every
emotional richness incompatible with random expectation is highlighted with a check mark.

13

that Italians reacted to the lockdown measure with:
1. a fearful denounce of criminal acts with political nuances and sadness/desperation about negative economic repercussions (from #sciacalli);
2. positive and trustful externalisations of fraternity and affect, combined with hopeful attitudes
towards a better future (from #italylockdown and #iorestoacasa);
3. a mournful concern about the psychological weight of being confined at home, inspiring sadness
and disgust towards the health emergency (from #iorestoacasa).

3.4 Hashtag co-occurrence contextually influences hashtag emotional profiles
In the previous section we showed our findings on how Italians perceived the early days of lockdown
on social media. But what about their perception of the ultimate cause of such lockdown, COVID19? To better reconstruct the perception of #coronavirus, it is necessary to consider the different
contexts where this hashtag occurs. Figure 5 displays the reconstruction of the emotional profile of
words used in tweets with #coronavirus and either #italylockdown, #sciacalli, or #iorestoacasa.
Our results suggest that the emotional profiles of language used in these three categories of
tweets are different. For example, when considering tweets including #sciacalli, which the previous
analysis revealed being influenced by political and social denounces of criminal acts, #coronavirus
is perceived with a more polarised fear/trust dichotomy. Although #coronavirus was perceived as
trustful as random expectations when co-occurring with #sciacalli (z-score: 1.69 < 1.96), it was
perceived with significantly higher trust when appearing in tweets with #iorestoacasa (z-score: 3.05
> 1.96) and #italylockdown (z-score: 3.51 > 1.96). To reinforce this picture, the intensity of fear
towards #coronavirus was statistically significantly lower than random expectation in the discourse
of #iorestoacasa (z-score: -2.35 < -1.96) and #italylockdown (z-score: -3.01 < -1.96).
This difference is prominently reflected in both the circumplex model (Figure 5, right) and the
NRC emotional profile (Figure 5, left), although in the latter both emotional intensities are compatible with random expectation. These quantitative comparisons provide data-driven evidence that
Twitter users perceived the same conceptual entity, i.e. COVID-19, with a higher trust when associating it to concrete means for hampering pathogen diffusion like lockdown and house confinement,
and with a higher fear when denouncing the politics and economics behind the pandemic.
However, social distancing, lockdown and house confinement clearly do not have only positive
sides. Rather, as suggested by our analysis, they bear complex emotional profiles, where sadness,
anger and fear towards the current situation and future developments have been prominently expressed by Italians on social media.

4

Discussion

This study delved into the massive information flow of Italian social media users in reaction to the
declaration of the pandemic status of COVID-19 by WHO, and the announcement of the nationwide
lockdown by the Italian Government in the first half of March 2020. We explored the emotional
profiles of Italians during this period by analysing the social discourse around the official lockdown
hashtag promoted by the Italian Government (#iorestoacasa), together with a most trending hashtag
of social protest (#sciacalli), and a general hashtag about the lockdown (#italylockdown).
The fundamental premise of this work is that social media opens a window on the minds of millions
of people [17]. Monitoring social discourse on online platforms provides unprecedented opportunities
for understanding how different categories of people react to real world events [9, 12, 15].

4.1

Impact of cognitive network science for social media analysis

Here we introduced a new framework, Multi-layer Co-occurrence Networks for Emotional Profiling
(MERCURIAL), which is based on cognitive network science and that allowed us to:
(i) quantitatively structure social discourse as a multi-layer network of hashtag-hashtag and
word-word co-occurrences in tweets;
(ii) identify prominent discourse topics through network metrics backed up by cognitive interpretation [14];
14

Figure 5: Left: Emotional profiles with the NRC lexicon of the words occurring in tweets with the hashtag
#coronavirus when it co-occurs with #italylockdown (outer circle), #sciacalli (middle circle) and #iorestoacasa
(inner circle). Right: The same emotional profiles detected through the valence/arousal emotional circumplex.
Every emotional richness incompatible with random expectation is highlighted with a check mark.

(iii) reconstruct and cross-validate the emotional profile attributed to each hashtag or topic of
conversation through the emotion lexicon and the circumplex model of affect from social psychology
and cognitive neuroscience [30].
Our interdisciplinary framework provides a first step in combining network and cognitive science
principles to quantify sentiment for specific topics. Our analysis also included extensive robustness
checks (e.g. selecting words based on different centrality measures, statistical testing for emotions),
further highlighting the potential of the framework.
The analysis of concept network centrality identified hashtags of political denounce and protest
against irrational panic buying (e.g. face masks and hand sanitiser) around #sciacalli but not in the
hashtag networks for #italylockdown and #iorestoacasa. Our results also suggest that the social
discourse around #sciacalli was further characterised by fear, anger, and trust, whose emotional intensity was significantly stronger than random expectation. We also found that the most prominent
concepts eliciting these emotions revolve around social denounce (anger), concern for the collective
well-being (fear), and the measures implemented by expert committees and authorities (hope). This
interpretation is supported also by Plutchik’s wheel of emotions [22], according to which combinations of anger, disgust and anticipation can be symptoms of aggressiveness and contempt. However,
within Plutchik’s wheel, trust and fear are not in direct opposition.
15

4.2

Evidence for emotional polarisation around COVID-19

The polarisation of positive/negative emotions observed around #sciacalli might be a direct consequence of a polarisation of different social users with heterogeneous beliefs, which is a phenomenon
present in many social systems [21] but is also strongly present in social media through the creation
of echo chambers enforcing specific narratives and discouraging the discussion of opposing views
[13, 2, 47, 11, 10].
Emotional polarisation might therefore be a symptom of a severe lack of social consensus across
Italian users in the early stages of the lockdown induced by COVID-19. In social psychology, social
consensus is a self-built perception that the beliefs, feelings, and actions of others are analogous to
one’s own [48]. Destabilising this perception can have detrimental effects such as reducing social
commitment towards public good or even lead to a distorted perception of society, favouring selfdistrust and even conditions such as social anxiety [48]. Instead, acts such as singing from the
balconies together can reduce fear and enhance self-trust [42], as well as promote commitment and
social bonding [49], which is also an evolutionary response to help coping with a threat, in this case a
pandemic, through social consensus. When interpreted under the lens of social psychology, the flash
mobs documented by traditional media and identified here as relevant by semantic network analysis
for #italylockdown and #iorestoacasa become important means of facing the distress induced by
confinement [48, 42, 49].

4.3 Implications of the detected anger and fear over self-awareness and
violence
Anger and fear permeated not only #sciacalli but were found, to a lesser extent, also in association
with other hashtags such as #iorestoacasa or #italylockdown. Recent studies (cf. [50]) found that
anger and fear can drastically reduce individuals’ sense of agency, a subjective experience of being
in control of our own actions, linking this behavioural/emotional pattern also to alteration in brain
states. In turn, a reduced sense of agency can lead to losing control, potentially committing violent,
irrational acts [50]. Consequently, the strong signals of anger and fear detected here represent red
flags about a building tension manifested by social users which might contribute to the outbreak of
violent acts or end up in serious psychological distress due to lowered self-control.
One of the most direct implications of the detected strong signals of fear, anger and sadness
is represented by increased violent behaviour. In cognitive psychology, the General Aggression
Model (GAM) [51] is a well-studied model for predicting and understanding violent behaviour as the
outcome of a variety of factors, including personality, situational context and the personal internal
state of emotion and knowledge. According to GAM, feeling emotions of anger in a situation of
confinement can strongly promote violent behaviour. In Italy, the emotions of anger and anxiety we
detected through social media are well reflected in the dramatic rise in reported cases of domestic
violence. For instance, the anti-violence centers of D.i.Re (Donne in Rete Contro la Violenza)
reported an anomalous increase of +74.5% in the number of women looking for help for domestic
violence in March 2020 in Italy5 . Hence, monitoring social media can be insightful about potential
tensions mediated and discussed by large populations, a topic in need for further research and with
practical prominent repercussions for fighting COVID-19.

4.4

Contextual shifts in emotions around the novel coronavirus

As discussed, we found the hashtag #coronavirus to be central across all considered hashtag networks. However, our analysis outlined different emotional nuances of #coronavirus across different
networks. In psycholinguistics, contextual valence shifting [52] is a well-known phenomenon whereby
the very same conceptual unit can be perceived wildly differently by people according to its context. This phenomenon suggests the importance of considering words in a contextual manner, by
comparison to each other, as it was performed in this study, rather than alone. Indeed, contexts
can change the meaning and emotional perception of many words in language. We showed here
that the same connotation shifting phenomenon [52] can happen also for hashtags. Online users
perceived #coronavirus with stronger intensities of trust and lower fear (than random expectation)
when using that hashtag in the context of #iorestoacasa and #italylockdown, but not when associated to #sciacalli. This shifting underlines the importance of considering contextual information
5 (see

the official report in Italian https://tinyurl.com/direcontrolaviolenza , Last Access: 20/04/2020)

16

surrounding a hashtag in order to better interpret its nuanced perception. To this aim, cognitive
networks represent a powerful tool, providing quantitative metrics (such as graph distance entropy)
that would be otherwise not applicable with mainstream frequency approaches in psycholinguistics.

4.5

Limitations and future research

MERCURIAL facilitates a quantitative characterisation of the emotions attributed to hashtags and
discourses. Nonetheless, it is important to bear in mind that the analysis we conducted relies on
some assumptions and limitations. For instance, following previous work [12], we built unweighted
and undirected networks, neglecting information on how many times hashtags co-occurred. Including
these weights would be important for detecting communities of hashtags, beyond network centrality.
Notice that including weights would come at the cost of not being able to use graph distance entropy,
which is defined over unweighted networks and was successfully used here for exposing the denounce
of panic buying in #sciacalli. Another limitation is relative to the emotional profiling performed
with the NRC lexicon, in which the same word can elicit multiple emotions. Since we measured
emotional intensity by counting words eliciting a given emotion (plus the negations, see Methods),
a consequence was the repetition of the same words across the sectors of the above word clouds.
Building or exploiting additional data about the predominance of a word in a given emotion would
enable us to identify words which are peripheral to a given emotion, reduce repetitions and offer even
more detailed emotional profiles. Recently, forma mentis networks [29, 32] have been introduced as a
method to detect the organisation of positive/negative words in the mindsets of different individuals.
A similar approach might be followed for emotions in future research. Acting upon specific emotions
rather than using the circumplex model would also solve another problem, in that the attribution of
arousal to individual words is prone to more noise, even in mega-studies, compared to detecting word
valence [53]. Another limitation is that emotional profiles might fluctuate over time. The insightful
results outlined and discussed here were aggregated over a short time window, thus reducing the
impact of aggregation itself. Future analyses on longer time windows should adopt time-series for
investigating emotional patterns, addressing key issues like non-stationary tweeting patterns over
time and statistical scarcity due to tweet crawling (see also [12]).
The current analysis has focused on aggregated tweets, but previous studies have shown both
stable individual and intercultural differences in affect [54], especially for dimensions such as arousal.
Similarly, some emotions are harder to measure than others, which might affect reliability and thus
underestimate their contribution. The current approach estimates emotional profiles on the basis
of a large set of words, which will reduce some language-specific differences. The collection of
currently missing large-scale Italian normative datasets for lexical sentiment could further improve
the accuracy of the findings. This study approaches the relation between emotions and mental
distress mostly from the perspective that attitudes and emotions of the author are conveyed in the
linguistic content. However, the emotion profile might also have implications for readers as well,
as recent research suggests that even just reading words of strong valence/arousal can have deep
somatic and visceral effects, e.g. raising heart beat or promoting involuntary muscle tension [55].
Furthermore, authors and readers participate in an information network, and quantifying which
tweets are liked or retweeted depending on the structure of social network can provide further
insight on their potential impact [12, 21, 10, 4, 56], which calls for future approaches merging social
networks, cognitive networks and emotional profiling.
Finally, understanding the impact of nuanced emotional appraisals would also benefit from investigating how these are related to behavioural and societal outcomes including the numbers of the
contagion (e.g. hospitalisations, death rate, etc.) and compliance with physical distancing [57].

5

Conclusions

Given the massive attention devoted to the COVID-19 pandemic by social media, monitoring online
discourse can offer an insightful thermometer of how individuals discussed and perceived the pandemic and the subsequent lockdown. Our MERCURIAL framework offered quantitative readings of
the emotional profiles among Italian twitter users during early COVID-19 diffusion. The detected
emotional signals of political and social denounce, the trust in local authorities, the fear and anger
towards the health and economic repercussions, and the positive initiatives of fraternity, all outline
a rich picture of emotional reactions from Italians. Importantly, the psychological interpretation of
MERCURIAL’s results identified early signals of mental health distress and antisocial behaviour,
17

both linked to violence and relevant for explaining increments in domestic abuse. Future research
will further explore and consolidate the behavioural implications of online cognitive and emotional
profiles, relying on the promising significance of our current results. Our cognitive network science
approach offers decision-makers the prospect of being able to successfully detect global issues and
design timely, data-informed policies. Especially under a crisis, when time constraints and pressure
prevent even the richest and most organised governments from fully understanding the implications of their choices, an ethical and accurate monitoring of online discourses and emotional profiles
constitutes an incredibly powerful support for facing global threats.

6

Acknowledgements

M.S. acknowledges Daniele Quercia, Nicola Perra and Andrea Baronchelli for stimulating discussion.

7

Data Availability

The IDs of the tweets analysed in this study are available on the Open Science Foundation repository:
https://osf.io/jy5kz/.

References
[1] John Zarocostas. How to fight an infodemic. The Lancet, 395(10225):676, 2020.
[2] Matteo Cinelli, Walter Quattrociocchi, Alessandro Galeazzi, Carlo Michele Valensise, Emanuele
Brugnoli, Ana Lucia Schmidt, Paola Zola, Fabiana Zollo, and Antonio Scala. The covid-19 social
media infodemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004, 2020.
[3] Riccardo Gallotti, Francesco Valle, Nicola Castaldo, Pierluigi Sacco, and Manlio De Domenico.
Assessing the risks of "infodemics" in response to COVID-19 epidemics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.03997, 2020.
[4] Cristina M Pulido, Beatriz Villarejo-Carballido, Gisela Redondo-Sama, and Aitor Gomez.
COVID-19 infodemic: More retweets for science-based information on coronavirus than for false
information. International Sociology, 0(0):0268580920914755, 2020.
[5] C. Wang, R. Pan, X. Wan, Y. Tan, L. Xu, C.S. Ho, and R.C Ho. Immediate psychological
responses and associated factors during the initial stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID19) epidemic among the general population in China. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 17:1729, 2020.
[6] World Health Organization. Mental health during COVID-19 outbreak. Technical Report, 2020.
[7] S. Zhu, Y. Wu, C.Y Zhu, W.C. Hong, Z.X Yu, Z.K Chen, and Y.G. Wang. The immediate
mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic among people with or without quarantine
managements. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, IN PRESS, 2020.
[8] C. Wang, R. Pan, X. Wan, Y. Tan, L. Xu, R.S. Mclntyre, F.N. Choo, B. Tran, R. Ho, V.K.
Sharma, and C. Ho. A longitudinal study on the mental health of general population during the
COVID-19 epidemic in China. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, IN PRESS, 2020.
[9] Emilio Ferrara and Zeyao Yang. Quantifying the effect of sentiment on information diffusion in
social media. PeerJ Computer Science, 1:e26, 2015.
[10] Jessica T Davis, Nicola Perra, Qian Zhang, Yamir Moreno, and Alessandro Vespignani. Phase
transitions in information spreading on structured populations. Nature Physics, pages 1–7, 2020.
[11] Fabio Ciulla, Delia Mocanu, Andrea Baronchelli, Bruno Gonçalves, Nicola Perra, and Alessandro Vespignani. Beating the news using social media: the case study of american idol. EPJ Data
Science, 1(1):8, 2012.
18

[12] Massimo Stella, Emilio Ferrara, and Manlio De Domenico. Bots increase exposure to negative
and inflammatory content in online social systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 115(49):12435–12440, 2018.
[13] Christopher A Bail, Lisa P Argyle, Taylor W Brown, John P Bumpus, Haohan Chen, MB Fallin
Hunzaker, Jaemin Lee, Marcus Mann, Friedolin Merhout, and Alexander Volfovsky. Exposure
to opposing views on social media can increase political polarization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 115(37):9216–9221, 2018.
[14] Cynthia SQ Siew, Dirk U Wulff, Nicole M Beckage, and Yoed N Kenett. Cognitive network
science: A review of research on cognition through the lens of network representations, processes,
and dynamics. Complexity, 2019.
[15] Massimo Stella. Text-mining forma mentis networks reconstruct public perception of the stem
gender gap in social media. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08835, 2020.
[16] Diego R Amancio. Probing the topological properties of complex networks modeling short
written texts. PloS one, 10(2), 2015.
[17] Daniele Quercia, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, and Jon Crowcroft. Our twitter profiles,
our selves: Predicting personality with twitter. In 2011 IEEE third international conference
on privacy, security, risk and trust and 2011 IEEE third international conference on social
computing, pages 180–185. IEEE, 2011.
[18] Saif M Mohammad and Peter D Turney. Emotions evoked by common words and phrases:
Using mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010
workshop on computational approaches to analysis and generation of emotion in text, pages 26–
34. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010.
[19] Saif Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Mohammad Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko.
Semeval-2018 task 1: Affect in tweets. In Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 1–17, 2018.
[20] Bennett Kleinberg, Isabelle van der Vegt, and Maximilian Mozes. Measuring emotions in the
COVID-19 real world worry dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04225, 2020.
[21] Ana Caroline Medeiros Brito, Filipi Nascimento Silva, and Diego Raphael Amancio. A complex
network approach to political analysis: Application to the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies. Plos
one, 15(3):e0229928, 2020.
[22] Robert Plutchik. The Emotions. University Press of America, 1991.
[23] Paul Ed Ekman and Richard J Davidson. The nature of emotion: Fundamental questions.
Oxford University Press, USA, 1994.
[24] Elaine Hatfield, John T Cacioppo, and Richard L Rapson. Emotional contagion. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 2(3):96–100, 1993.
[25] Sigal G Barsade. The ripple effect: Emotional contagion and its influence on group behavior.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(4):644–675, 2002.
[26] Adam DI Kramer, Jamie E Guillory, and Jeffrey T Hancock. Experimental evidence of massivescale emotional contagion through social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(24):8788–8790, 2014.
[27] Seth Frey, Karsten Donnay, Dirk Helbing, Robert W Sumner, and Maarten W Bos. The
rippling dynamics of valenced messages in naturalistic youth chat. Behavior Research Methods,
51(4):1737–1753, 2019.
[28] James M Jasper. Emotions and social movements: Twenty years of theory and research. Annual
Review of Sociology, 37:285–303, 2011.
[29] Massimo Stella, Sarah De Nigris, Aleksandra Aloric, and Cynthia SQ Siew. Forma mentis
networks quantify crucial differences in stem perception between students and experts. PloS
one, 14(10), 2019.
19

[30] Jonathan Posner, James A Russell, and Bradley S Peterson. The circumplex model of affect:
An integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology.
Development and Psychopathology, 17(3):715–734, 2005.
[31] Simon De Deyne, Yoed N Kenett, David Anaki, Miriam Faust, and Daniel J Navarro. Largescale network representations of semantics in the mental lexicon. Big data in Cognitive Science:
From Methods to Insights, pages 174–202, 2016.
[32] Massimo Stella and Anna Zaytseva. Forma mentis networks map how nursing and engineering
students enhance their mindsets about innovation and health during professional growth. PeerJ
Computer Science, 6:e255, 2020.
[33] Alexander Mehler, Rudiger Gleim, Regina Gaitsch, Wahed Hemati, and Tolga Uslu. From
topic networks to distributed cognitive maps: Zipfian topic universes in the area of volunteered
geographic information. Complexity, 2020, 2020.
[34] Massimo Stella and Manlio De Domenico. Distance entropy cartography characterises centrality
in complex networks. Entropy, 20(4):268, 2018.
[35] Emily Chen, Kristina Lerman, and Emilio Ferrara. Covid-19: The first public coronavirus
twitter dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07372, 2020.
[36] Vanessa Queiroz Marinho, Graeme Hirst, and Diego Raphael Amancio. Labelled network subgraphs reveal stylistic subtleties in written texts. Journal of Complex Networks, 6(4):620–638,
2018.
[37] Hendrik Vankrunkelsven, Steven Verheyen, Gert Storms, and Simon De Deyne. Predicting lexical norms: A comparison between a word association model and text-based word co-occurrence
models. Journal of Cognition, 1(1), 2018.
[38] Mark Newman. Networks. Oxford university press, 2018.
[39] Massimo Stella. Modelling early word acquisition through multiplex lexical networks and machine learning. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 3(1):10, 2019.
[40] Amy Beth Warriner, Victor Kuperman, and Marc Brysbaert. Norms of valence, arousal, and
dominance for 13,915 English lemmas. Behavior Research Methods, 45(4):1191–1207, 2013.
[41] James A Russell. A circumplex model of affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39(6):1161, 1980.
[42] Margaret M Unwin, Dianna T Kenny, and Pamela J Davis. The effects of group singing on
mood. Psychology of Music, 30(2):175–185, 2002.
[43] Peter Fonagy, Gyorgy Gergely, and Elliot L Jurist. Affect regulation, mentalization and the
development of the self. Routledge, 2018.
[44] Massimo Stella. Forma mentis networks reconstruct how italian high schoolers and international
stem experts perceive teachers, students, scientists, and school. Education Sciences, 10(1):17,
2020.
[45] George A Miller. WordNet: An electronic lexical database. MIT Press, USA, 1998.
[46] Nichol Castro and Massimo Stella. The multiplex structure of the mental lexicon influences
picture naming in people with aphasia. Journal of Complex Networks, 7(6):913–931, 2019.
[47] Emanuele Brugnoli, Matteo Cinelli, Walter Quattrociocchi, and Antonio Scala. Recursive patterns in online echo chambers. Scientific Reports, 9(1):1–18, 2019.
[48] Joachim Krueger. On the perception of social consensus. In Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, volume 30, pages 163–240. Elsevier, 1998.
[49] Eiluned Pearce, Jacques Launay, and Robin IM Dunbar. The ice-breaker effect: Singing mediates fast social bonding. Royal Society Open Science, 2(10):150221, 2015.
20

[50] Julia F Christensen, Steven Di Costa, Brianna Beck, and Patrick Haggard. I just lost it! fear
and anger reduce the sense of agency: a study using intentional binding. Experimental Brain
Research, 237(5):1205–1212, 2019.
[51] C Nathan DeWall, Craig A Anderson, and Brad J Bushman. The general aggression model:
Theoretical extensions to violence. Psychology of Violence, 1(3):245, 2011.
[52] Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. Contextual valence shifters. In Computing attitude and affect
in text: Theory and applications. Springer, 2006.
[53] Saif M. Mohammad. Obtaining reliable human ratings of valence, arousal, and dominance for
20,000 English words. In Proceedings of The Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Melbourne, Australia, 2018.
[54] Peter Kuppens, Francis Tuerlinckx, Michelle Yik, Peter Koval, Joachim Coosemans, Kevin J
Zeng, and James A Russell. The relation between valence and arousal in subjective experience
varies with personality and culture. Journal of Personality, 85(4):530–542, 2017.
[55] Alessandra Vergallito, Marco Alessandro Petilli, Luigi Cattaneo, and Marco Marelli. Somatic
and visceral effects of word valence, arousal and concreteness in a continuum lexical space.
Scientific Reports, 9(1):1–10, 2019.
[56] Mike Thelwall and Saheeda Thelwall. Retweeting for COVID-19: Consensus building, information sharing, dissent, and lockdown life. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02793, 2020.
[57] Juliet Bedford, Delia Enria, Johan Giesecke, David L Heymann, Chikwe Ihekweazu, Gary
Kobinger, H Clifford Lane, Ziad Memish, Myoung-don Oh, Anne Schuchat, et al. COVID-19:
towards controlling of a pandemic. The Lancet, 2020.

21

