Dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic in India
Subhas Khajanchi,1, ∗ Kankan Sarkar,2 and Jayanta Mondal3
1 Department

of Mathematics, Presidency University,

86/1 College Street, Kolkata 700073, India

arXiv:2005.06286v2 [q-bio.PE] 12 Jan 2021

2 Department

of Mathematics, Malda College, Malda, West Bengal 712101, India

3 Department

of Mathematics, Diamond Harbour Womens University,

Diamond Harbour Road, Sarisha 743368, India

Understanding the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic is crucial for improved control
and social distancing strategies. To that effect, we have employed the susceptible-exposedinfectious-recovered model, refined by contact tracing and hospitalization data from Indian
provinces Kerala, Delhi, Maharashtra, and West Bengal, as well as from overall India. We
have performed a sensitivity analysis to identify the most crucial input parameters, and we
have calibrated the model to describe the data as best as possible. Short-term predictions
reveal an increasing and worrying trend of COVID-19 cases for all four provinces and India
as a whole, while long-term predictions also reveal the possibility of oscillatory dynamics.
Our research thus leaves the option open that COVID-19 might become a seasonal occurrence. We also simulate and discuss the impact of media on the dynamics of the COVID-19
pandemic.

∗

Electronic address: subhas.maths@presiuniv.ac.in

2
I.

INTRODUCTION

According to the World Heath Organization (WHO), 1,878,489 confirmed cases (119,044 confirmed deaths) of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (2019-nCoV) has been reported throughout the
world, as of April 15, 2020, including 11,439 confirmed cases (377 deaths) from India [1]. The
outbreak was first announced by the “Health Commission of Hubei province”, China, a cluster of
unexplained cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cases) [2], which is lethal, was
first identified in Wuhan, the capital city of Hubei and seven largest city of China, on December 31,
2019 [3–5]. Later on, the novel coronavirus disease was called officially as COVID-19 by WHO
[1]. The epidemic was announced a major public concern worldwide on January 30, 2020 by the
World Health Organization [2]. Coronavirus, an enveloped virus described by a single-stranded,
positive-sense RNA belonging to the family of Coronaviridae and the Nidovirales order and extensively disseminated among humans as well as mammals [6]. The ongoing coronavirus epidemic
has been announced a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on January 30, 2020,
and the Govt. of India has announced 21 days nationwide lockdown from March 25, 2020 to April
14, 2020, to prevent stage-III spreading of the virus or human-to-human transmission.
Coronavirus causes typically mild infections but sometimes lethal communicable disorders
leading to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
(MERS) and in present COVID-19 pandemic, and in general it can be thought as SARSr-CoV
[7], which is mostly observed in bats-could create a future disease outbreak [8, 9]. The most
important modes of transmission of coronavirus are respiratory droplets and contact transmission
(contaminated hands) and it has incubation period 2-14 days [3, 10]. From the confirmed cases
of coronavirus, the symptoms range from fever, sneeze, or even a runny nose, dry cough fatigue
breathing problem and lung infiltration to severely ill and dying [10]. Shared surfaces are also
an important risky since the virus clings on to surfaces and propagates as soon as another person
touches the shared surface. The virus also can remain active for about 3 hours after aerosolization
(droplets carrying virus mixed with air), on plastic for fifteen hours, and on metallic surfaces for
five-six hours.
The continuing coronavirus outbreak has been announced a widespread by the World Health
Organization, as of March 16, 2020, the United Nations’ Public Health Agency has authenticated
1,67,511 confirmed cases, including 6,606 deaths across 151 countries throughout the world [1, 3].
As countries start shutting down borders, cutting off international marketing and quarantining their

3
individuals, the key to safeguard our families, near ones and communities lies in understanding
the nature and behavior and why and how this particular virus is developing. Some other factors
like population mobility by air travel, the documented human-to-human transmission, low air
temperature and low humidity highly affect the transmission of coronavirus [1, 11].
Throughout the world, the air travel is one of the most important dynamic network, and India
is in 17th position worldwide the countries with highest chance of importation of coronavirus
through air traveler [12, 13]. The probability of an infected air traveler to reach to India at final
destination is 0.383% (as on April 07, 2020), with maximum relative import risk in Delhi (0.124%,
as on April 07, 2020), Mumbai (0.064%, as on April 07, 2020), Kolkata (0.021%, as on April 07,
2020), Madras, Kochi, Bangalore, Hyderabad and so on [13].
At the beginning, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Govt. of India suggested to discontinue to travel from China to India and send to quarantine who are coming from
China [14]. Those who return from Wuhan, the sprawling capital city of Hubei province in China,
later on January 15, 2020 were to be examined for coronavirus. Also, those who are feeling sick
within one month of returning from China were suggested to admit the nearby health center in
addition to maintain self-isolation at home [15]. At the very beginning, thermal entry screening of
travelers from Wuhan (China) was set up around twenty one airports throughout the country with
international screening for flights from Tiwan, China, Singapore, South Korea, Italy, Hong-Kong,
Japan and so on. Symptomatic ill travelers are suggested to volunteer for screening test. Similar
screening test has also be taken into account at the international harbor [16].
Governments will not be competent to diminish both fatalities from coronavirus epidemic and
the economic impact of viral outbreak. Maintaining the fatality rate as minimum as possible will be
the utmost importance for the populations; therefore the Governments must put in place measures
to mitigate the unavoidable economic downturn. In our viewpoint, coronavirus has turned into a
pandemic, with small chains of transmission in several countries and big chains of transmission
resulting in large-scale outbreak in most of the countries, namely United States, Spain, Italy, South
Korea, Germany, France and so on [1].
Till date, there is no specific licensed vaccine, antivirals or effective therapeutics to treat
coronavirus infections.

Due to absence of coronavirus therapeutics, we utilized the Non-

Pharmacological interventions (NPIs) - focused at minimizing transmission by reducing contact
rates among individuals. As for examples the measures adopted in this time incorporated social
distancing, closing schools, universities, offices, churches, bars, avoid mass gatherings, other so-

4
cial places as well as contacts of cases (quarantine, surveillance, contact tracing) [17].
The route of an outbreak can be described by a series of important factors, but some of which
are extremely difficult to understand at present coronavirus disease. The basic reproduction number R0 is one of the most crucial quantities in infectious diseases, as R0 measures how contagious
a disease is. R0 designates the number of secondary infections infected by one infected individual
in a whole susceptible class, or more specifically the area under epidemic curve. For R0 < 1,
the disease is expected to stop spreading, but for R0 = 1 an infected individual can infect on an
average 1 person, that is, the spread of the disease is stable. The disease can spread and become
epidemic if R0 must be greater than 1. R0 can help us to understand the effectiveness of the disease, that is, under what condition the disease can stop or spread ? The values for R0 in China is
around 2.5 in the primary stage of the outbreak of coronavirus [18].
The spread of coronavirus outbreak depends on the infectivity of the virus and the availability of susceptible individuals. Mathematical modeling play a vital role to better understand the
disease dynamics and designing policies to manage quickly spreading infectious diseases in lack
of effective vaccine or specific antivirals [19]. Recently, many mathematical model have already
been studied to understand the complicated dynamics of novel coronavirus, and some of these
are cited in our references [3, 5, 12, 20–25]. A novel coronavirus model has been established by
Chen et al. [20] and find the basic reproduction number. Imai et al. [21] studied a computational
model for novel coronavirus disease 2019 in Wuhan, a city of China and their model mainly focused on human-to-human transmission. Tang et al. [5] established a compartmental model for
coronavirus by incorporating symptomatic ill class to obtain the patients’ epidemiological status.
They obtained the basic reproduction number 6.47, which is very high for the infectious diseases.
Nadim et al. [23] studied a mathematical to investigate the coronavirus disease, where they performed stability analysis and they validated their model with the data from Hubei, the city of
China. Their model is originally established by Gumel et al. [7] for Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) outbreak. Wu et al. [25] established a coronavirus model by considering four
classes, namely susceptible, exposed, infected and recovered to study the human-human transmission dynamics based on the data from December 31, 2019 to January 28, 2020. They computed
the reproduction number approximately 2.68 for coronavirus disease.
The conventional models governing the outbreak of infectious diseases mainly depend on the
interplays among susceptible, infected and exposed classes. Moreover, the other aspects, such as
vaccination, huge news coverage, educational campaigns and rapid information flow can create

5
great psychological effects on the population, and thus remarkably change the publics’ behavior
and affect the implementation of individuals’ intervention and control strategies [26]. It is mainly
the awareness program due to media which make the individuals enlighten regarding the disease
to take safeguards such as vaccination, wearing protective masks, social distancing etc., to minimize their risks of being infected [27, 28]. How long and how effectual media related impact
persists is thus an important issue for future outbreak, and quantifying this impact through a modeling process falls within the scope of our investigation. Several mathematical models have been
incorporated with the assumption that the media related awareness has an impact on reducing the
contact rate of susceptible and infected population [26, 29–33]. Influenced by those literatures we
develop and analyze a mathematical model for coronavirus to study the impact of media related
awareness program.
To obtain a better insight into the important factors related with the control of novel coronavirus
in a community and throughout the world, we investigate a dynamic model to study the epidemic
of coronavirus and its control in four mostly affected states, namely Maharashtra, Delhi, Kerala,
West Bengal and the overall India. We estimated most important parameters, namely βs , ξa , qa ,
αh ξh , ξi and γi by using least square method. We calculate the basic reproduction for our model
for four different states as well as the India.

II.

DYNAMIC MODEL WITHOUT EFFECTIVE CONTROL MEASURES

Here, we extend the classical deterministic susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (SEIR) compartmental model refined by introducing contact tracing-hospitalization strategies to study the epidemiological properties of coronavirus (COVID-19). We calibrate our mathematical model using
data gained form confirmed cases of coronavirus in India and estimated the basic reproduction
number for the disease transmission. In order to make our mathematical model more realistic, we
consider the following assumptions:
• the model involves a net inflow rate of susceptible individuals Λs per unit time,
• the model has no zoonotic infections of coronavirus, considering only the epidemic spread
through human beings,
• there is no effective control measures before April 10, 2020,

6
• the model involves some demographic effects by accepting a proportional natural mortality
in each of the sub-populations.
In the underlying dynamic model, the total population N(t) is classified into six subpopulations (classes), namely susceptible S(t), exposed E(t), asymptomatic A(t), clinically ill
or symptomatic I(t), hospitalized H(t) and recovered R(t), respectively.
The coronavirus outbreaks in the population throughout the world and so the news concerning
coronavirus epidemics through different media including television, social networking sites and
newspaper as well as educational programs from government, non-government organization and
local bodies. The source of information density of media is assumed to be proportional to the
number of symptomatic/infective individuals and will alter as the symptomatic population alters.
Herein, M(t) denotes the cumulative density of media in individual such that M(t) = 0, for I(t)
= 0. This is mimic to the mathematical model developed by d’Onofrio et al. [27], in the case of
non-delayed model and mimics to the media variable as incorporated there. This media creates
the behavioral alteration in the susceptible populations to save themselves from contracting infection. As for example, Government of Senegal has taken an initiative through SMS campaign to
spread the information regarding Ebola awareness [34]. Albeit individuals are informed through
media, not everyone responses to it due to insufficiency of resources, irresponsive nature and
economic condition etc. Therefore a part of susceptible individuals with news regarding coronavirus, responding to the news for corona symptoms and altering their behavior to avoid infection,
and will move to the recovered individuals. The rate of behavioral response through media has
been considered to be a function of both the densities for susceptible populations and media, that
is, f (S(t), M(t)). Moreover, we assume that the source of media is a function of I(t), that is,
fm (I(t)), as the source of media depends on the density of symptomatic populations. A schematic
representation of the above biological mechanism of coronavirus in human upon which our model
is based is shown in the Figure 1. The dynamics of novel coronavirus model is governed by the
following system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations:

A. Dynamics of Susceptible individuals S(t)

The susceptible individual is recruited into the population with a constant inflow rate Λs and decreased by a natural mortality mortality rate δs . Here, βs αa represents the transmission coefficient
of the asymptomatic individuals to susceptible, βs αi is the transmission coefficient of symptomatic

7
infected classes to the susceptible, and βs αh denotes transmission coefficient of the hospitalized
classes to susceptible population. We consider βs is the disease transmission coefficient for both
the infectiousness of COVID-19 and contact rates, with adjustment factors αa (for asymptomatic
classes), αi (for symptomatic classes) and αh (for hospitalized individuals).
Albeit, coronavirus is supposed to be spread completely by symptomatic populations, a very
lower rate of transmission by asymptomatic populations cannot even be ruled out. The adjustment
parameter αa ≥ 0 take into accounts for varying levels of hygiene preventions through asymptomatic, an analogous explanation can be drawn to the adjustment parameters αi and αh during
symptomatic and hospitalization, respectively. As the asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalization programmes and hygiene preventions during asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalization were executed and enriched progressively after an epidemic of coronavirus, the spreading
coefficients αa βs , αi βs and αh βs , asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalized rates could be
modeled as a time-dependent parameters in computations. Moreover, the interplay among susceptible and infected population (asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalized) is modeled utilizing
standard homogeneous mixing incidence [35, 36], in the form of total individuals. The rate of
change of susceptible individuals can be represented by the following ordinary differential equation (ODE):

βs S(αa A + αi I + αh H)
dS
= Λs −
− δs S − f (S, M).
dt
N

(1)

B. Dynamics of Exposed individuals E(t)

The population who are exposed individuals but not yet developed clinical symptoms of coronavirus. The exposed individual is declined by asymptomatic individuals at the rate γe and natural
death at the rate δe . The constant per-capita rate γe modeled progression from the exposed individuals (E) to either the asymptomatic individuals (A) or symptomatic individuals (I); the constant
qa (0 < qa < 1) represents budget for the rate of progress of population who move to either the
asymptomatic partially-infectious class (A) or symptomatic class (I) at the per-capita rate γe . The
corresponding model dynamics for exposed population can be presented by the following ODE:

βs S(αa A + αi I + αh H)
dE
=
− δe E − γe E.
dt
N

(2)

8
C. Dynamics of Asymptomatic individuals A(t)

Asymptomatic populations were exposed to the coronavirus but not infectious for the community.
The exposed classes move to the asymptomatic classes at the rate γe by a constant portion (1 − qa ).
The asymptotic individuals progress to the recovered class at the per-capita rate ξa and natural
mortality rate δa . The rate of change of asymptomatic individuals is govern by the following
ODE:

dA
= (1 − qa )γe E − δa A − ξa A.
dt

(3)

D. Dynamics of Symptomatic individuals I(t)

The symptomatic individuals are produced after the progression of clinical symptoms of coronavirus (diagnosed by the clinicians) by the asymptomatic individuals. The exposed individuals
move to the symptomatic classes at the per-capita rate γe by a constant portion qa . The symptomatic or clinically ill individuals progress to the hospitalized or isolated class (H) at the percapita rate γi and natural mortality rate δi . It can be assumed that γi , the per-capita rate at which
symptomatic or clinically ill classes seek clinical attention and are therefore put into the hospitalized class, is bigger than γe , the per-capita rate at which the exposed individuals progress to the
asymptomatic classes. The clinically ill classes (class I) are moved to the recover classes without
being diagnosed at the per-capita rate ξi . The transmission dynamics of symptomatic populations
are governed by the following ODE:

dI
= qa γe E − δi I − ξi I − γi I.
dt
E.

(4)

Dynamics of Hospitalized individuals H(t)

These are the populations who have progressed clinical symptoms for coronavirus and have been
isolated at the hospital for medical treatment. The hospitalized individuals are came from the
clinically ill classes or symptomatic community (class I) at the per-capita rate γi and it has natural mortality rate δh . Hospitalized or isolated populations recover at the per-capita rate ξh . We
assumed that ξh > ξi , as an hospitalized populations are likely to obtain a partially efficacious

9
during isolation or hospitalization. The dynamics of hospitalized individuals are modeled by the
following ODE:

dH
= γi I − δh H − ξh H.
dt

(5)

F. Dynamics of Recovered individuals R(t)

It can be assumed that the recovered population have enduring immunity against coronavirus albeit to date this has neither been confirmed nor contradicted. The asymptomatic, symptomatic and
hospitalized individuals recover from the coronavirus at the per-capita rates ξa , ξi and ξh , respectively. The recovered individuals die at the per-capita rate δr . The rate of change of recovered
individuals can be written by the ODE:

dR
= ξa A + ξi I + ξh H − δr R + f (S, M).
dt

(6)

G. Information variable or media awareness program M (t)

The function f (S, M) indicates the behavioral response for the susceptible population, induced
by the effects of media related information of the prevalence of coronavirus, by considering
accessible precautionary measures to become aware about the coronavirus disease. The behavioral response is not completely efficacious due to the financial assistance, lack of the proper
resources and an irresponsive behavior among the populations, we consider the media term as
f (S, M) = ηm dm SM. Here, ηm represents the corresponding response rate and 0 ≤ ηm ≤ 1
determines the response intensity. The parameter dm indicates the media related information
index rate by which the population alter their behavior due to the prevalence of coronavirus. The
parameter δm represents the natural degradation of media related information index, which can be
occurred due to the fading of memory about media related information with time in addition to
the complacent behavior of population.

We assume that the source of media related information index is proportional to the number
of symptomatic individuals. The function fm (I) represents the growth of information index

10
rate, which depend on the symptomatic individuals. While the coronavirus outbreaks, the World
Health Organization (WHO), health agencies, social media, government and non-government
organization become dynamic to spread the information or media awareness in concerning the
prevalence of coronavirus.

′
As for the function fm (I), one can consider any function satisfying fm (0) = 0 and fm
(I) > 0

[33]. The most easiest example is fm (I) = αm I with αm ∈ (0, 1), that is, I is linear function of
the present prevalence of the coronavirus, which could represent for instance current standardized
incidence of serious cases of the coronavirus [27]. One more example could be fm (I) =

αm I
,
1+βm I

where I indicates the nonlinear increasing function for the prevalence of the coronavirus, which
could be considered as a measure of the perceived risk for the infection rather than the original
one [28, 37]. Here αm represents the source rate of the information index and βm is half saturation
constant. Thus, we consider the following ODE model for media awareness program:

dM
= fm (I) − δm M.
dt

(7)

Based on the above biological assumptions and schematic representation of coronavirus (see the
Figure 1) together with specific forms, we formulate a mathematical model of novel coronavirus
with media awareness given by the following seven-dimensional nonlinear system of ODEs:








































βs S(αa A+αi I+αh H)
− δs S − ηm dm SM,
N
βs S(αa A+αi I+αh H)
− δe E − γe E,
N

dS
dt

= Λs −

dE
dt

=

dA
dt

= (1 − qa )γe E − δa A − ξa A,

dI
dt

= qa γe E − δi I − ξi I − γi I,

dH
dt

= γi I − δh H − ξh H,

dR
dt

= ξa A + ξi I + ξh H − δr R + ηm dm SM,

dM
dt

(8)

= αm I − δm M,

the model is satisfied the following positive initial conditions:
S(0) = S0 , E(0) = E0 , A(0) = A0 , I(0) = I0 , H(0) = H0 , R(0) = R0 , M(0) = M0 .(9)
Since the model system (8) monitors the dynamics of human population, all state variables are
assumed to be positive.

11
H. Basic reproduction number

The basic reproduction number, symbolized by R0 , is ‘the expected number of secondary cases
produced, in a completely susceptible population, by a typical infective individual’ [38, 39]. The
dimensionless basic reproduction number provides a threshold, which play a crucial role in determining the disease persists or dies out from the individual. In a more general way R0 can be
stated as the number of new infections created by a typical infective population at an infection
free equilibrium. R0 < 1 determines on average an infected population creates less than one new
infected population during the course of its infective period, and the infection can die out. In reverse way, R0 > 1 determines each infected population creates, on average, more than one new
infection, and the disease can spread over the population. The basic reproduction number R0 can
be computed by using the concept of next generation matrix [38, 39]. In order to do this, we consider the nonnegative matrix F and the non-singular M−matrix V, expressing as the production
of new-infection and transition part respectively, for the system (8), are described by


F =











S
β (αa A
N s





+ αi I + αh H) 




,





0
0
0

V=



(δe + γe )E






 −(1 − qa )γe E + (δa + ξa )A 

.


 −qa γe E + (δi + ξi + γi )I 




−γi I + (δh + ξh )H

The Jacobian matrix for the system (8), can be computed at an infection free state (E = A =
I = H = 0), we have


F =



 0 βs αa βs αi βs αh 









0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0












V =











δe + γe

0

−(1 − qa )γe (δa + ξa )

0

0

0

0

−qa γe

0

(δi + ξi + γi )

0

0

0

−γi

(δh + ξh )












The basic reproduction number R0 = ρ(F V −1 ), where ρ(F V −1 ) represents the spectral radius
for a next generation matrix F V −1 . Thus, from the system (8), we get the basic reproduction
number R0 is
ρ(F V −1 ) = R0 =

qa γe βs αi
qa βs αh γe γi
(1 − qa )γe βs αa
+
+
. (10)
(δe + γe )(δa + ξa ) (δe + γe )(δi + ξi + γi ) (δe + γe )(δi + ξi + γi )(δh + ξh )

12
III.

MODEL CALIBRATION AND CORONAVIRUS DATA SOURCE

A detailed elucidation on the computer simulations for the coronavirus model system (8) is investigated in this section. We start by building up on the parameter estimations followed by some
computer simulation results, which provide insights on the eradication and development of the
dynamics of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic. Parameter values are taken from literature
and some of the parameters are estimated from the observed data. List of the parameter values with
description are given in the Table I and the values of the remaining parameters estimated from the
observed data, which are given in the Table II. Due to the lack of the data of coronavirus diseases
related to the effect of media related awareness, we have simulated our model without the effect of
media awareness. But, we have simulated our model with the effect of media related awareness for
four different states, namely Delhi, Maharashtra, Kerala and West Bengal as well as the Republic
of India. The initial population sizes for different states, namely Kerala, Maharashtra, Delhi, West
Bengal and the Republic of India are stated in the Table IV. Also the recruitment rate Λs for four
different states and overall India are listed in the Table IV.

A. PRCC sensitivity analysis

To identify the most sensitive parameters with respect to symptomatic population, we performed
a sensitivity analysis by using Partial Rank Correlation Coefficient (PRCC) technique for all the
input parameters against the variable I. The set of most sensitive parameters, which have the
ability to reduce the outbreak of coronavirus diseases, can be estimated from the available data
from different states (Kerala, Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal) as well as the scenario of entire
India. In our coronavirus system (8) has 17 parameters (without media) for which we varied all
the system parameters simultaneously. PRCC quantifies the relationship among a state equation of
interest and each of model parameters. As a result PRCC aid to obtain the important parameters,
which contribute most to the system variability. For model simulation, we consider the PRCC
values between -1.0 and +1.0.

Following the method established by Marino et al. [40], we performed Latin hypercube sampling and generated 2800 samples to compute the PRCC and the p-values with reference to the
symptomatic classes at the day 60. The Figure 2 designates the PRCC results, which implies that

13
the highest positively correlated parameters are the disease transmission coefficient rate βs , proportion rate of exposed individuals qa , the rate ξh by which the hospitalized class converted to
recovered class, the rate αh by which susceptible individuals converted to exposed class and the
highly negatively correlated parameters are the rate ξi by which symptomatic individuals become
recovered, the rate γi by which symptomatic individuals converted to hospitalized class, and the
rate ξa by which the asymptomatic individuals moved to recovered individuals, account for most
uncertainty with respect to the symptomatic population. Thus, our PRCC analysis yields these 7
parameters βs , qa , ξi , γi , ξh , αh and ξa are the most effective parameters out of 17 parameters.
Therefore, we estimated the 7 parameters by using least square method.

B. Parameter estimation

Now, we have calibrated our coronavirus disease model (8) with daily confirmed new coronavirus
cases for the entire India and four states namely, Kerala, Delhi, West Bengal and Maharashtra.
Data of daily confirmed new coronavirus cases for whole India obtained from World Health
Organization (WHO) situation report for the period January 30, 2020 - March 30, 2020. Data
of daily confirmed new coronavirus cases for the state West Bengal obtained from Health &
Family Welfare Department, Government of West Bengal for the period March 17, 2020 - March
31, 2020. Data of daily confirmed new coronavirus cases for the state Kerala obtained from
the Directorate of Health Services, Government of Kerala for the period January 30, 2020 March 31, 2020. The data of daily confirmed new coronavirus cases for the state Delhi obtained
from the Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of the National Capital Territory of Delhi for the
period March 4, 2020 - March 30, 2020. Also, the data of total coronavirus cases for the state
Maharashtra obtained from India COVID-19 Tracker (https://www.covid19india.org/) for the
period March 15, 2020 - March 31, 2020. We fit our coronavirus model system (8) (without
media related awareness program) with daily new coronavirus cases for the four states (Delhi,
Kerala, Maharashtra and West Bengal) and for India. Also, the cumulative coronavirus cases has
been fitted with our model system. The observed data were fitted in the optimization toolbox of
Matlab using nonlinear least squares method and we have estimated the parameters βs , ξa , qa ,
ξh , γi , ξi and αh as these parameters found more sensitive in the PRCC analysis. The biological
interpretations of the model parameters are given in the Table I. The estimated values of the model
parameters for all the data sets are given in the Table II. The initial population sizes for all the

14
data sets are also estimated to match with the confirmed new coronavirus cases (see Table IV).
The output of our model for daily new cases are shown in Figure 3. Also, the observed daily new
coronavirus cases are overlapped on the Fig. 3. It is also important to observe the total number of
coronavirus cases in a province only. So, the observed daily cumulative confirmed coronavirus
cases and the model simulation has been plotted in the Fig. 4.

To assure the performance of our coronavirus system without media (8), we have computed
Mean Absolute Error (EM AE ) and Root Mean Square Error (ERM SE ). Here, EM AE and ERM SE
are given by
Σni=1 |O(i) − Q(i)|
,
n
s
Σni=1 (O(i) − Q(i))2
=
,
n

EM AE =
ERM SE

where O(i) represents the observed value, Q(i) is the model output and n is the sample
size of the observed data. The values of EM AE and ERM SE for the four states (Delhi, Kerala,
Maharashtra and West Bengal) and the Republic of India are presented in Table III.

The fitting data enables us to quantify the basic reproduction number R0 from the expression of
(10). The basic reproduction number for coronavirus in different states, for Kerala, R0 = 4.78435;
Delhi, R0 = 3.28271; West Bengal, R0 = 2.73854; Maharashtra, R0 = 3.03971; and for India,
R0 = 2.58792. Let us observe that the basic reproduction is relatively high in Kerala, relative to
the other three states and the overall India considered here. From the basic reproduction number
R0 in overall India, it can be conclude that the coronavirus outbreaks is pandemic and the Govt.
should take a necessary action to keep social distancing and necessary precautions. The basic
reproduction number R0 for four provinces and overall India are presented the Table V.
From the data fitting, it can be observed that our model performs relatively good in all the
states namely, Kerala, Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra. This is showing a good agreement with
the observed data and curve fitting with the coronavirus disease model (8) under consideration.
However, the model performance less well in the case of whole India as the number of confirmed
coronavirus cases is relatively high. Though, the increasing trend of the daily confirmed coronavirus cases have been nicely captured by the model for all the data sets. We also compute the

15
numerical errors for computing the numerical simulations for our model and the corresponding
lowest value of EM AE and ERM SE have been obtained for the state West Bengal, since the size of
the data is lower than the other data sets.

C. Short-term prediction

Due to absence of any effective vaccine or treatment strategies for novel coronavirus, predictive
mathematical models can aid in understanding the complicated dynamics of coronavirus transmission and its control as well as its intricate epidemiological cycle. In order to study the short
term prediction for our model system (8), we have simulated the cumulative symptomatic classes
of coronavirus cases for the time period April 01, 2020 to April 10, 2020 using the estimated
parameters values in the Table II with initial population sizes in the Table IV. The other baseline
parameter values are specified in the Table I. The simulated results for the period April 01, 2020
to April 10, 2020 for the three provinces, namely Kerala, West Bengal, Maharashtra and the union
territory Delhi and the Republic of India have shown in the Figure 5. The black solid curves are
the model simulation and the solid black circles are the observed values, as plotted in the Figure
5. Our model simulation represents that the model performs well and successfully able to capture
the increasing trends of all the four cases (Delhi, Maharashtra, West Bengal and the overall India)
whereas the slope of the simulated curve is relatively high for the state Kerala.

D.

Sensitivity analysis for R0

To describe how best to diminish human impermanency and morbidity due to novel coronavirus, it
is very essential to see the relative significance of various factors responsible for its transmission.
The initial disease transmission is completely associated to the reproduction number R0 , and we
calculate the sensitivity indices with regard to R0 , to the parameters for the system (8). The
sensitivity indices describe us whether or not the infectious diseases will develop throughout the
individulas. Sensitivity analysis is mainly utilized to describe the robustness of the reproduction
number R0 to fluctuation in the system parameters. It also give us to identify the relative change
in a state variable when a system parameter alters. The normalized forward sensitivity index for
R0 with respect to the parameter p is defined as follows:
0
ΓR
=
p

p
∂R0
×
.
∂p
R0

16
As we have the explicit expression for R0 in (10), we obtain the analytical formulae for sensitivity
0
indices of R0 , ΓR
p , to each of fourteen parameters stated in the Table VI.

As for example, the sensitivity index of R0 with regards to βs is
0
ΓR
βs =

βs
∂R0
×
= 1,
∂βs
R0

independent of any parameters. This represents that R0 is the increasing function with respect to
βs . It implies that the probability of disease transmission has a high impact on coronavirus control
and management. Other parameters have their sensitivity indices are specified in the Table VI.
From the Table VI, it can be noticed that some of the indices are positive and some of the
indices are negative, which indicate that the indices having ‘+’ signs increase the value of R0
as one increase them and those having ‘-’ signs decrease the value of R0 , as they are increased.
The most sensitive parameter is the disease transmission coefficient βs , where sensitivity index
0
ΓR
βs = 1 indicates that the increasing βs by 10% will increase R0 by 10%. Also, the sensitivity
0
index of ξa , that is, ΓR
βs = − 0.844286 represents that increasing ξa by 10% will decrease R0 by

8.44286%. Similarly, we can interpret the other parameters too.
We plot the sensitivity indices of R0 , for each of the model parameters using in the Table VI
has been shown in the Figure 6. In order to control the coronavirus outbreaks, we must target
the most sensitive parameters who has the great impact in controlling the system dynamics. For
instance, the disease transmission coefficient βs is the most effective parameter in controlling the
coronavirus diseases, which can easily be identified from the Figure 6 as well as in the Table VI.
To control the coronavirus outbreaks, the draw the contour plots for the R0 with respect to
the positively correlated parameters, namely disease transmission coefficient βs and the clinical
outbreak rate qa for all the infected classes in the Figure 7. The contour plot represents the dependence of R0 for the four states (Kerala, Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra) and the Republic
of India. Contour plot indicates that for the higher values of βs and qa the reproduction number
R0 become high, which means the coronavirus may enter the stage-3 and it spread through the
community. Therefore, to control R0 must be restrict the values of the transmission coefficient βs
and the portion qa by which the exposed class become symptomatically ill. To keep the mortality
rate as low as possible, we must be take the values of βs and qa as small as possible. The Figure
6 and Table VI represents that the adjust factors αa , αi and αh are positively correlated with the
basic reproduction number R0 . Thus, we must have to reduce the adjust factors too. Thus, we may
conclude that to reduce the coronavirus disease outbreak we need to maintain social distancing,

17
limit or stop taking fairs and theaters performances etc.

E.

Effect of media related awareness

To study the impact of media related awareness for the coronavirus disease we simulate our system
(8) for four provinces, namely Kerala, Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal and the Republic of India,
with respect to the parameter values specified in the Table I and rest of the parameter values
estimated and are given in the Table II with initial population sizes are given in the Table IV.
The Figure 8 represents the simulation of our model with media awareness for daily confirmed
new cases of coronavirus of infected patients. The first sub-figure of the Figure 8 represents the
corresponding profiles of symptomatic individuals for the overall India in absence and presence of
media awareness programme with the available time period 60 days. Observe that the blue curve
has the highest peak or the proliferation of symptomatic population is high and sharp in compare to
the other curves, which indicates that the sizes of symptomatic individuals increases and reaches
to its maximum peak in absence of media awareness as the source of information index (αm )
and the rate of media response (ηm ) both are zero. To investigate how often and/or how long the
media awareness effect remains dynamic, we simulate our coronavirus disease model (8). But in
presence of active media awareness, both αm and ηm are nonzero, and for fixed αm = 0.01 when
we varied the rate of media response ηm = 0.1 and ηm = 0.5, the thick red curve and dotted
red curve decreases but the peak of both the red curves are below the thick blue curve. For fixed
media response ηm = 0.15 when we varied the source rate of information index αm = 0.015 and
αm = 0.025, it can be noted that the thick green curve and dotted green curve decreases but the
peak of both the green curves are below the thick blue cure. The model simulation (in case of
overall India) showed in the first figure of Figure 8, it can be noted that in presence of media effect
the count of symptomatic individuals decreases. It is worthy to mention that the media has an
impact on the prevalence of the outbreak of coronavirus diseases. It is fascinating to observe that
the media effect remains dynamic almost until the highest peak of the disease outbreak, has been
shown in the Figure 8. Similar interpretations can be made for the four provinces of the Republic of
India, namely Delhi, Maharashtra, Kerala and West Bengal, in presence of media related awareness
programme for daily confirmed new cases of coronavirus diseases of symptomatic individuals.
From the model simulation, we can conclude that the media awareness has an impact on the
reduction of coronavirus diseases for the symptomatic individuals, as shown in the Figure 8.

18
We also investigate the media related awareness for the novel coronavirus diseases for the
Republic of India and four provinces, namely Kerala, Maharashtra, West Bengal and Delhi, with
respect to parameters listed in the Table I and rest of the estimated parameters listed in the Table
II with initial individuals are listed in the Table IV. The impact of media awareness effect for the
daily cumulative confirmed cases of coronavirus diseases for symptomatic classes are shown in the
Figure 9. In the first sub-figure of the Figure 9 indicates the model simulation of (8) corresponding
to the profiles of symptomatic individuals for overall Indian scenarios with the available time
period 60 days. In this case the thick blue curve showing the maximum peak or the growth of
cumulative symptomatic individuals in compare to other curves, which represents that the sizes
of cumulative symptomatic or clinically ill population reached their maximum peak in absence of
media information as the source of information index (αm ) and the rate of media response (ηm )
both are considered as zero. In presence of effective media awareness, that is, both αm and ηm are
nonzero, and for fixed αm = 0.01 when varied the media response rate ηm = 0.1 and ηm = 0.5
the thick red curve and dotted red curve decreases significantly and both the peak remains below
the thick blue curve. The same scenarios has been observed when we vary information index
rate αm = 0.015 and αm = 0.025 with fixed value for media response rate ηm = 0.15 the
thick green curve and dotted blue curve reduces noteworthy and remains below the thick blue
curve. Thus, the media related awareness reduces the peak of symptomatic individuals in case
of cumulative confirmed coronavirus diseases, which shows that the media awareness play a key
role on the prevalence of the outbreak of coronavirus diseases, as shown in the Figure 9. It is
very interesting to note that the media effect remains effectual almost until the maximum peak
of the disease epidemic. Similar conclusions can be drawn for four provinces of India, namely
Kerala, Maharashtra, Delhi and West Bengal in presence of effective media awareness for daily
cumulative confirmed cases of symptomatic populations. Thus, the media awareness has a great
impact to control the coronavirus diseases, as shown in the Figure 9.

F. Long-term dynamics

To study the future outbreaks of coronavirus diseases, we simulate our system (8) for a long
days of the infected individuals, namely asymptomatic individuals and symptomatic or clinically
ill individuals for the parameters are listed in the Table I and we have considered the estimated
parameters for the Table II in case of Indian data only with initial population sizes are given in

19
the Table IV. The model simulation represented that the people from overall India can experience
future epidemics if the control policies are not implemented more effectively, as shown in the
Figure 10. The number of infected individuals (asymptomatic and symptomatic) are oscillate
around 130 days and around 320 days. This can be interpreted as the reproduction number R0
is always greater than unity in India (see the Table V for India). Otherwise, we can say that
the impact of media related awareness is a dynamic process and the media has a great impact in
reducing the transmission of coronavirus outbreaks at the initial stage of an epidemic. The factors
like low air temperature and as well low humidity has a great impact on the transmission of novel
coronavirus [11]. Moreover, to control the future outbreaks of novel coronavirus the media related
awareness programme and the control strategy must be implemented properly.

IV.

DISCUSSION

According to the INDIA COVID-19 TRACKER report, 7,598 confirmed cases and 246 deaths due
to novel coronavirus outbreaks in India [41], as of April 10, 2020. The total number of new cases
and new deaths are occurred everyday reported from different cities across the India [41]. This is a
terrifying circumstances as India has approximately 139 crores population and may enter stage-3
of coronavirus disease transmission. Till date, there is no specific vaccine, antivirals or effective
therapeutics to treat coronavirus diseases. During this period, forecasting is the utmost priority
for the planning of heath care and control the novel coronavirus diseases. Thus, mathematical
modeling can aid us in designing to control the outbreak of coronavirus diseases in absence of any
treatment or any specific diagnostic test.
In this manuscript, we propose a compartmental epidemic model on novel coronavirus diseases
by incorporating the effect of media awareness to predict and control the outbreak. In our model we
noted that media awareness play a key role in generating public consciousness and encouraging
disease measures [42]. In our proposed model, we consider two infectious individuals, namely
asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals with former being a fast spreader of the coronavirus
diseases. Our model formulation is based on the work by Gumel et al. [7], where we estimate
the system parameters based on the PRCC sensitivity analysis at an early stage of the outbreak, in
which the number of cumulative classes grow exponentially.
We calibrated the proposed model to fit with the data from four different states, namely Maharashtra, Kerala, Delhi, West Bengal and the Republic of India. The most important part is to

20
perform the sensitivity analysis of 17 model parameters and its estimation. To identify the key
input parameters which contributed to the symptomatic outcome, strongly assisted the implementation of an integrated policy for various measures, involving the epidemic during different phases
of the diseases, we use the sensitivity analysis by using PRCC techniques. PRCC analysis yields
the most sensitive parameters are βs , qa , γi , αh , ξa and ξh out of 17 input parameters without
incorporating media impact. Then we estimated these 7 parameters based on the data from four
different states and from the entire India. By fitting data on novel coronavirus cases during January 30, 2020 to March 31, 2020, in the four different states of India and the overall India to our
proposed model, we were able to get estimates of the unknown parameters for our system.
By fitting our proposed model (simply the classical model without considering media impact)
system (8) with real data obtained from India COVID-19 Tracker (https://www.covid19india.org/),
we were able to get acceptable estimations for the system parameters and curve fitting, as shown
in the Figures 3 and 4. To ensure the performance of our system without media, we compute
the numerical errors, namely EM AE and ERM SE . Within the reasonable set of parameters, the
model simulations without incorporating media awareness, obtained relatively good fits to novel
coronavirus data, as plotted in the Figures 3 and 4.
From the basic reproduction number R0 in Table V, it can be compared that the province Kerala is highly effective by coronavirus diseases compare to other three provinces and the Republic
of India. Nevertheless, our model-based analysis also demonstrates that the basic reproduction
number in India and four different provinces remains greater than unity. The estimation of basic
reproduction number R0 indicates that the strengthen control involvements are mandatory to reduce and/or eradicate the future coronavirus diseases. Thus, in this scenario the public must have
to give utmost priority to stay home quarantine and successful the lock-down to combat against
coronavirus pandemic. In this situation, media related awareness is mandatory to aware each and
every people such that they can maintain social distancing, wear mask to protect themselves and
avoid cultural programme.
From the sensitivity indices (see Table VI and the Figure 6) for the basic reproduction number
R0 , we observed that the disease transmission coefficient βs and the portion qa clinical outbreak
rates in all infected classes are positively correlated with R0 . This indicates that to reduce coronavirus diseases the social distancing is the most important factor and we reduce the values for βs
and qa to control the diseases. As we know, for R0 < 1 the diseases can be died out. Thus, to keep
control the value of R0 we must reduce βs and qa . While investigating the contour plot, we observe

21
that for the lower values for βs and qa , the reproduction number can be controlled and reduced to
less than unity, as shown in the Figure 7. Thus, if we are able to control the social distancing, then
we are able to control the basic reproduction number R0 and hence we are able to eradicate the
coronavirus diseases. Since R0 quantifies the initial epidemic transmission, its sensitivity indices
enable us to establish the relative significance of various parameters in coronavirus transmission.
From the sensitivity of basic reproduction number R0 , we can conclude that the most effective
control measures are the isolation of all close contacts and strengthening the self-protection ability
for susceptible individuals.
We have checked our calibrated epidemic model for the short term prediction in the four
provinces and the republic of India. The simulation of our calibrated model successfully able
to capture the increasing growth patterns for three different provinces, namely Delhi, Maharashtra, West Bengal and the Republic of India, whereas in case of the province Kerala, the model
fitting is not good compare to other states and overall India, as plotted in the Figure 5. To get an
answer regarding the question why the model prediction is perfectly matched with Delhi, Maharashtra, West Bengal and the overall India but not effective for Kerala, we have closely look into
the estimated parameters (Table II) and come to the conclusion that in Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra and overall India there is a large number of symptomatic individuals whereas in Kerala
the symptomatic population are decreasing due to effective precautions for coronavirus diseases.
Thus, our calibrated model predicted that the increasing pattern of coronavirus diseases will be
continued if the people not aware about the diseases. Thus, the public must have to take the precautions and the health care agencies should concentrate on successful implementation of control
mechanisms to reduce and/or eradicate the disease.
In order to study the long-term dynamics of our model, we observed the most interesting
switching phenomena, as plotted in the Figure 10. Maybe this is happen due to the impact of
media awareness as it is a dynamic process on disease epidemic. Also, the media awareness has a
good impact in mitigating the disease transmission at an initial stage of an epidemic. It is worthy
to mention that the media impact is not always remain efficacious for mitigating disease transmission throughout the epidemic [43]. A detailed understanding of media awareness during an
outbreak can help in the progression of an implementable public health strategy. A particular interest to the designers of such strategies are the effects of media awareness on some significant
epidemic features such as the size of the peak, its timing and the whole number of diseases. Our
proposed model and its simulation, like those in earlier investigations [26–33, 37, 42, 43], allow

22
that quantifying these media effects gives additional insights.
Our model simulation and prediction suggests that the novel coronavirus diseases has a potentiality to exhibit oscillatory dynamics in the future but can be controllable by maintaining social
distances and effectiveness of isolation or hospitalization. Our model forecasts that isolation or
hospitalization of populations with coronavirus symptoms, under stringent hygiene safeguards and
social distancing, be able to effectual control in a community and may even eliminate the diseases.
Our study also suggests that the size and duration of an epidemic can be considerably affected by
timely implementation of the hospitalization or isolation programme. Based on the model simulations and prediction to control the coronavirus diseases, we provide some particular inferences to
face with emerging diseases:
i. avoidance of mass gatherings, rallies, social distancing and implement extensive lock-down;
ii. provide essential personal safeguard to the staff who are involved in emergency services;
iii. timely give the statistics of the coronavirus diseases to the community, including the number
of asymptomatic cases, symptomatic cases, hospitalized cases and so on;
iv. increase the media awareness to aware the population, organize the targeted health care education and self-protection and remove the public mental disorder.

23

[1] Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak situation, https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019 (2020).
[2] Zhu, N. et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in china, 2019. N Engl J
Med 382, 727–733 (2020).
[3] Fuk-Woo, C. J. et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus
indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 395, 514–523 (2020).
[4] Cohen, J. & Normile, D. New SARS-like virus in China triggers alarm. Science 367, 234-235 (2020).
[5] Tang, B., Wang, X., Li, Q., Bragazzi, N. L., Tang, S., Xiao, Y. & Wu, J. Estimation of the transmission
risk of the 2019-ncov and its implication for public health interventions. J Clin Med 9(2), 462 (2020).
[6] Chen, Y., Liu, Q. & Guo, D. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J Med Virol 92, 418–423 (2020).
[7] Gumel, A. B., Ruan, S., Day, T., Watmough, J., Brauer, F., Van den Driessche, P., Gabrielson, D.,
Bowman, C., Alexander, M. E., Ardal, S., Wu, J. & Sahai, B. M. Modelling strategies for controlling
sars outbreaks. Proc R Soc Lond B 271, 2223–2232 (2004).
[8] Drosten, C., Gnther, S., Preiser, W., Werf, S., Brodt, H., Becker, S. & Rabenau, H. Identification of
a Novel Coronavirus in Patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. N Engl J Med 348, 1967–
1976 (2003).
[9] Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270–273 (2020).
[10] Centers

for

Disease

Control

and

Prevention.

Coronavirus

Disease

2019

(COVID-

19), https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html (2020).
[11] Jingyuan, W., Ke, T., Kai F. & Weifeng, L. High Temperature and High Humidity Reduce the Transmission of COVID-19, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3551767 (2020).
[12] Mandal, S., Bhatnagar, T., Arinaminpathy, N., Agarwal, A., Chowdhury, A., Murhekar, M., Gangakhedkar, R. R. & Sarkar, S. Prudent public health intervention strategies to control the coronavirus disease 2019 transmission in India: A mathematical model-based approach. Indian J Med
Res, doi:10.4103/ijmr.IJMR-504-20 (2020).
[13] Event

Horizon

-

COVID-19.

Coronavirus

COVID=19

ment, http://rocs.hu-berlin.de/corona/relative-import-risk (2020).

Global

Risk

Assess-

24
[14] National Centre for Disease Control. Travel Advisory, https://ncdc.gov.in/WriteReadData/l892s/
63950984511580999086.pdf (2020).
[15] National

Centre

for

Disease

Control.

COVID-19

outbreak

in

China, https://ncdc.gov.in/WriteReadData/l892s/34827556791580715701.pdf (2020).
[16] Bhargava,

B.

&

Sudan,

P.

Prepared

for

the

coronavirus.

The

Hindu,

https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/prepared-for-the-coronavirus/article30785312.ece (2020).
[17] Ferguson,

N. M. et al. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce

COVID- 19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team ,1–
20, https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fellowships/ImperialCollege-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf (2020).
[18] Anderson, R. M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D. & Hollingsworth, T.D. How will country-based
mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic? Comment 395, (2020) 931–934.
[19] Egger, M., Johnson, L., Althaus, C., Schni, A., Salanti, G., Low, N. & Norris, S.L. Developing WHO guidelines: Time to formally include evidence from mathematical modelling studies. F1000Research 6, 1584 (2017).
[20] Chen, T., Rui, J., Wang, Q., Zhao, Z., Cui J. & Yin, L. A mathematical model for simulating the
phase-based transmissibility of a novel coronavirus. Infect Dis Poverty 9, 24 (2020).
[21] Imai, N. et al. Estimating the potential total number of novel coronavirus cases in wuhan city,
china, https://www.preventionweb.net/news/view/70092 (2020).
[22] Liu, Z., Magal, P., Seydi, O. & Webb, G. Predicting the cumulative number of cases for the COVID-19
epidemic in China from early data, arXiv:2002.12298 (2020).
[23] Nadim, S. K., Ghosh, I. & Chattopadhyay, J. Short-term predictions and prevention strategies for
COVID-2019: A model based study, arXiv:2003.08150 (2020).
[24] Tang, B., Bragazzi, N. L., Li, Q., Tang, S., Xiao, Y. & Wu, J. An updated estimation of the risk of
transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov). Infect Dis Model 5, 248–255 (2020).
[25] Wu, J. T., Leung, K. & Leung, G. M. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic
and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling
study. Lancet 395, 689–697 (2020).
[26] Funk, S., Gilad, E., Watkins, C. & Jansen, V. A. A. The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic
outbreaks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106, 6872–6877 (2009).
[27] d’Onofrio, A., Manfredi, P. & Salinelli, E. Vaccinating behaviour, information, and the dynamics of

25
SIR vaccine preventable diseases. Theor Popul Biol 71, 301–317 (2007).
[28] d’Onofrio, A. & Manfredi, P. Information-related changes in contact patterns may trigger oscillations
in the endemic prevalence of infectious diseases. J Theor Biol 256, 473–478 (2009).
[29] Kumar, A., Srivastava, P. K. & Takeuchi, Y. Modeling the role of information and limited optimal
treatment on disease prevalence. J Theor Biol 414, 103–119 (2017).
[30] Sun, C., Yang, W., Arino, J. & Khan, K. Effect of media-induced social distancing on disease transmission in a two patch setting. Math Biosci 230, 87–95 (2011).
[31] Das, D. K., Khajanchi, S. & Kar, T. K. The impact of the media awareness and optimal strategy on the
prevalence of tuberculosis. Appl Math Comput 366, 124732 (2020).
[32] Xiao, X., Tang, S. & Wu, J. Media impact switching surface during an infectious disease outbreak. Sci
Rep 5, 7838 (2015).
[33] Buonomo, B., d’Onofrio, A. & Lacitignola, D. Global stability of an SIR epidemic model with information dependent vaccination. Math Biosci 216, 9–16 (2008).
[34] Government

of

Senegal

boosts

Ebola

awareness

through

SMS

cam-

paign, http://http://www.who.int/features/2014/senegal-ebola-sms/en/∼(2014).
[35] Anderson, R. M. & May, R. M. Infectious diseases of humans. (Oxford University Press, 1991).
[36] Diekmann, O. & Heesterbeek, J. A. P. Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases: model building, analysis and interpretation. (New York: Wiley, 2000).
[37] Reluga, T., Bauch, C. T. & Galvani, A. Evolving public perceptions and stability in vaccine uptake. Math Biosci 204, 185–198 (2006).
[38] Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J. S. P. & Metz, J. A. J. On the definition and the computation of the
basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations. J Math
Biol 28, 365–382 (1990).
[39] van den Driessche, P. & Watmough, J. Reproduction numbers and subthreshold endemic equilibria for
compartmental models of disease transmission. Math Biosci 180, 29–48 (2002).
[40] Marino, S., Hogue, I. B., Ray, C. J. & Kirschner, D. E. A methodology for performing global uncertainty and sensitivity analysis in systems biology. J Theor Biol 254, 178-196 (2008).
[41] India covid-19 tracker, https://www.covid19india.org/ (2020).
[42] Funk, S., Gilad, E., Watkins, C. & Jansen, V. A. A. Modelling the influence of human behaviour on
the spread of infectious diseases: A review. J R Soc Interface 7, 1247–1256 (2010).
[43] Collinson, S. S. & Heffernan, J. Modelling the effects of media during an influenza epidemic. BMC

26
Public Health 14, 376 (2014).
[44] Open Government Data (OGD) Platform India or data.gov.in, https://data.gov.in/resources/crudedeath-rate-india-2011 (2020).
[45] Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), WHO Situation Report 46, https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200306-sitrep-46-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=96b04adf-2 (2020).

27

Data availability
All data supporting the findings of this study are in the paper and available from the corresponding
author on reasonable request.

Author contributions statement
Subhas Khajanchi, Kankan Sarkar, and Jayanta Mondal designed and performed the research as
well as wrote the paper.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

28

FIG. 1: The schematic flow diagram represents the biological mechanism of novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
infection in India, which influences the formulation of the mathematical model (8). The mathematical model
consists of seven sub-populations including media related information index: susceptible S(t), exposed
E(t), asymptomatic A(t), symptomatic or clinically ill I(t), hospitalized or isolated H(t), recovered R(t)
and media awareness M (t) individuals in a total population of N (t) = S(t) + E(t) + A(t) + I(t) + H(t) +
R(t) individuals.

29

1

PRCC

0.5

0

-0.5

-1
Λs

βs

αa

αi

αh

ξh

γe

δe

qa

δa

δi

ξa

ξi

γi

δh

δs

δr

FIG. 2: Partial rank correlation coefficients illustrating the dependence of symptomatic individuals I on
each of the system parameters at the day 60 with p < 0.02.

150

40

India

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Daily Confirmed New Cases

30

100

50

30
20
10

0

0

30/1/20 8/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

30/1/20 8/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

25

5

Delhi

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Keral

20
15
10
5
0

West Bengal
4
3
2
1
0

4/3/20 8/3/20

13/3/20 18/3/20 23/3/20 28/3/20

17/3/20

21/3/20

26/3/20

31/3/20

Daily Confirmed New Cases

100

Maharashtra
80
60
40
20
0
15/3/20

19/3/20

24/3/20

29/3/20

FIG. 3: Daily new confirmed positive coronavirus cases. Observed data are shown in red circles, whereas
the blue curve is the best fitting curve of the model system (8), without media awareness.

1000

India

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

31

800
600
400
200

300

200

100

0

0

120

Delhi
100
80
60
40
20
0

30

13/3/20 18/3/20 23/3/20 28/3/20

West Bengal

20

10

0

4/3/20 8/3/20
Cumulative Confirmed Cases

30/1/20 8/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20
Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

30/1/20 8/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

300

Kerala

17/3/20

21/3/20

26/3/20

31/3/20

Maharashtra

200

100

0
15/3/20

19/3/20

24/3/20

29/3/20

FIG. 4: Daily cumulative confirmed coronavirus cases. Observed data are shown in red circles, whereas the
blue curve is the best fitting curve of the model system (8), without media awareness.

8000

India

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

32

6000
4000
2000
0

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

09/3/20

29/3/20 10/4/20

900 Delhi

600

300

0
04/3/20

400
300
200
100
0

18/2/20

30/1/20
Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

30/1/20

500 Kerala

18/2/20

09/3/20

29/3/20 10/4/20

100

West Bengal
80
60
40
20
0

13/3/20

23/3/20

02/4/20

10/4/20

17/3/20 21/3/20

26/3/20

31/3/20

05/4/20

10/4/20

1500 Maharashtra

1000

500

0

15/3/20 19/3/20

24/3/20

29/3/20

03/4/20

08/4/20

FIG. 5: Model simulations shows the short term predictions for the four provinces, namely Kerala, Delhi,
West Bengal, Maharashtra and the Republic of India. The solid black curve represents the model predictions
without incorporating media impact for the new infected cumulative coronavirus cases, whereas the solid
black circles are the real data. The baseline parameter values are listed in the Table I and rest of estimated
parameters are listed in the Table II. Our model able to capture the increasing tends for three states, namely
Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra and the Republic of India, of newly infected cumulative coronavirus
diseases. In case of Kerala, model performance is slightly difference in compare to other states and the
overall India.

33

1

1

India

0.5

0.5
γi δe δa ξ a δi

ξi

δh ξ h

0

0

β s α a α i α h q a γe

δe δa ξ a δi

ξi

δh ξ h

ξi

δh ξ h

β s α a α i α h q a γe

-1

-1
1

1

Delhi

West Bengal

0.5

0.5
δe δa ξ a δi

ξi

δh ξ h

β s α a α i α h q a γe γi

0

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

1

γi

-0.5

-0.5

0

Kerala

δe δa ξ a δi
β s α a α i α h q a γe γi

Maharashtra

0.5
δe δa ξ a δi

0

ξi

δh ξ h

β s α a α i α h q a γe γi

-0.5
-1

FIG. 6: Result shows the normalized forward sensitivity indices of basic reproduction number R0 with
respect to each of the baseline parameter values using in the Table VI.

34

FIG. 7: Contour plots of basic reproduction number R0 for the four different provinces and the Republic of
India. Plot contours of R0 versus the disease transmission coefficient βs and the portion qa of exposed class
after being clinically ill due to novel coronavirus. For (a) the Republic of India, (b) the province Kerala, (c)
Delhi, (d) West Bengal and (e) Maharashtra. The contour plots exhibits that the higher disease transmission
probability of coronavirus disease will remarkably increase the basic reproduction number. The baseline
parameter values are obtained from the Table I and rest of the parameter values are estimated and obtained
from the Table II.

150

India

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.01
m
m

m

=0.5, m =0.01
=0.15, m =0.015

m

=0.15, m =0.025

m

100

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Daily Confirmed New Cases

35

50

30
m
m

20

m

=0.25, m =0.08

10

=0.9, m =0.1
=0.12, m =0.20
m
m

m

5

30/1/20 08/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Daily Confirmed New Cases

Delhi

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.1
m

=0.12, m =0.40

0

6

4

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.2, m =0.6
m
m

West Bengal

=0.9, m =0.6
=0.45, m =0.55
m
m

m

=0.45, m =0.85

2

0

04/3/20 08/3/20

Daily Confirmed New Cases

=0.80, m =0.03
=0.25, m =0.05

0

m

40

m

m

Kerala

10

0
30/1/20 08/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

60

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.20, m =0.03

13/3/20

18/3/20

23/3/20

28/3/20

17/3/20

20/3/20 22/3/20 24/3/20 26/3/20 28/3/20 30/3/20

Maharashtra

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.1
m
m

=0.9, m =0.1
=0.15, m =0.20
m
m

m

=0.15, m =0.40

20

0
15/3/20

19/3/20

24/3/20

29/3/20

FIG. 8: Illustrations of the media related effect for the daily confirmed new cases of coronavirus infected
patients for four different states (Kerala, Delhi, Maharashtra, West Bengal) and the Republic of India. The
model baseline parameters are taken from the Table I and rest of parameters are estimated and taken from
the Table II for different states and overall India. The initial values are taken from the Table IV.

36

India

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.01
m
m

800

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

300
1000

=0.5, m =0.01
=0.15, m =0.015
m
m

600

m

400

=0.15, m =0.025

200

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.20, m =0.03
m
m

m

=0.25, m =0.08

100

0

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.1
m

Delhi

m

100

=0.9, m =0.1
=0.12, m =0.20
m
m

m

50

30/1/20 08/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Cumulative Confirmed Cases

=0.80, m =0.03
=0.25, m =0.05
m

200

0
30/1/20 08/2/20 18/2/20 28/2/20 09/3/20 19/3/20 29/3/20

=0.12, m =0.40

0

50

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.2, m =0.6
m
m

40

West Bengal

=0.9, m =0.6
=0.45, m =0.55
m
m

30
20

m

=0.45, m =0.85

10
0

04/3/20 08/3/20

13/3/20

18/3/20

500
Cumulative Confirmed Cases

Kerala

m

23/3/20

28/3/20

17/3/20

20/3/20 22/3/20 24/3/20 26/3/20 28/3/20 30/3/20

Maharashtra

=0.0, m =0.0
=0.1, m =0.1
m
m

400
300
200

=0.9, m =0.1
=0.15, m =0.20
m
m

m

=0.15, m =0.40

100
0

15/3/20

19/3/20

24/3/20

29/3/20

FIG. 9: Illustrations of the media related effect for the daily cumulative confirmed cases of coronavirus
infected patients for four different states (Kerala, Delhi, Maharashtra, West Bengal) and the Republic of
India. The model baseline parameters are taken from the Table I and rest of parameters are estimated and
taken from the Table II for different states and overall India. The initial values are taken from the Table IV.

37

5

× 104

15000

4

A(t)

I(t)

10000

3
2

5000

1
0
0

150

300

Time (Day)

450

600

0
0

150

300

450

600

Time (Day)

FIG. 10: Long term dynamics for the coronavirus disease system (8) for the infectious individuals (asymptomatic and symptomatic populations). The value of the parameters used for the numerical simulation is
given in Table I. The other parameters values are βs = 1.8326, γi = 0.1423, qa = 0.4110,ξa = 0.1738,
ξh = 0.2100 and Λs = 1600 with the initial individuals S(0) = 50000, E(0) = 5000, A(0) = 10,
I(0) = 1, H(0) = 1, R(0) = 10.

38
TABLE I: Table of biologically relevant parameter values and their description for the coronavirus model
system (8).

Parameter Biological meaning

Values (Unit)

Source

Λs

Inflow rate of susceptible individual

-

-

βs

Disease transmission coefficient

-

Estimated

αa

Adjustment factor for asymptomatic classes

0.20 day −1

[7]

αi

Adjustment factor for symptomatic classes

0.45 day −1

[23]

αh

Adjustment factor for hospitalized individuals

-

Estimated

δs

Natural death rate of susceptible classes

0.1945 ×10−4 day −1 [44]

δe

Mortality rate of exposed individuals

0.1945 ×10−4 day −1 [44]

δa

Mortality rate of asymptomatic individuals

0.1945 ×10−4 day −1 [44]

δi

Mortality rate of symptomatic individuals

0.03 day −1

δh

Mortality rate of hospitalized individuals

0.1945 ×10−4 day −1 [44]

δr

Mortality rate of recovered individuals

0.1945 ×10−4 day −1 [44]

γe

Conversion rate from exposed to asymptomatic individuals 1/7 day −1

[1]

γi

Rate at which symptomatic individuals become hospitalized -

Estimated

qa

Proportion of exposed individuals

-

Estimated

ξa

Rate of recovery from asymptomatic individuals

-

Estimated

ξi

Rate of recovery from symptomatic individuals

-

Estimated

ξh

Rate of recovery from hospitalized individuals

-

Estimated

δm

Degradation of media related information

0.06

[29]

ηm

Rate of media response

(0, 1)

[32]

dm

Media related information index rate

0.017 day −1

[29]

αm

Source rate of the information index

(0, 1)

[27, 33]

[45]

39
TABLE II: Estimated parameter values from the observed data.
Parameters

India

Kerala

Delhi

West Bengal

Maharashtra

βs

1.8326

2.6822

1.7880

1.5013

1.7781

ξa

0.1738

0.1121

0.1105

0.1101

0.1203

qa

0.4110

0.0028

0.0430

0.0125

0.0448

ξh

0.2100

0.2137

0.1358

0.1332

0.1124

γi

0.1423

0.0348

0.8900

0.8953

0.5213

ξi

0.2100

0.2105

0.2091

0.2097

0.2109

αh

0.3500

0.3491

0.3506

0.3489

0.3501

40
TABLE III: Accuracy of the model (8) for the four different states and the Republic of India.
Performance Metrics

India

Kerala

Delhi

West Bengal

Maharashtra

EM AE

10.0600

2.4286

3.3326

1.0294

8.7160

ERM SE

17.6314

4.9185

5.8537

1.4416

15.4680

41
TABLE IV: Estimated values values of the initial population size and the constant inflow rate
Parameters

India

Kerala

Delhi

West Bengal

Maharashtra Source

S(0)

50000

40000

2500

12000

15000

Estimated

E(0)

0

8

300

1000

1700

Estimated

A(0)

0

1

13

100

250

Estimated

I(0)

1

1

1

1

1

Data

H(0)

1

1

1

1

1

Estimated

R(0)

0

0

0

0

0

Data

M (0)

0

0

0

0

0

Estimated

Λs

1600

500

500

1100

1100

Estimated

42
TABLE V: Basic reproduction number of the four different provinces and the Republic of India.
Basic reproduction number

India

Kerala

Delhi

West Bengal

Maharashtra

R0

2.58792

4.78435

3.28271

2.73854

3.03971

43
TABLE VI: Table of sensitivity indices of basic reproduction number R0 for the coronavirus model system
(8) for four different states and the Republic of India. The baseline parameter values taken from the Table I
and other parameters are estimated and taken from the Table II.
Parameters

Sensitivity

Indices

India

Kerala

Delhi

West Bengal

Maharashtra

βs

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

αa

0.478462

0.99711

0.943025

0.983684

0.928715

αi

0.341547

0.00256553

0.00933187

0.0021075

0.0154709

αh

0.179991

0.000324077

0.0476427

0.0142081

0.0558138

qa

0.187671

0.0000898542

0.0146025

0.0038639

0.0277269

γe

0.000136131

0.000136131

0.000136131

0.000136131

0.000136131

γi

-0.0141361

-0.0000411902 0.00273315

0.00133818

0.00705925

δe

-0.000136131 -0.000136131

-0.000136131

-0.000136131

-0.000136131

δa

-0.0000535388 -0.000172974

-0.00016596

-0.000173745

-0.00015013

ξa

-0.478408

-0.996937

-0.942859

-0.983511

-0.928565

δi

-0.0409264

-0.000314886

-0.0015138

-0.000431249

-0.00280575

ξi

-0.286484

-0.00220945

-0.0105512

-0.00301443

-0.0197244

δh

-0.0000166691 -2.94934×10−8 -6.82266×10−6 -2.07434×10−6 -9.6565×10−6

ξh

-0.179975

-0.000324048

-0.0476359

-0.014206

-0.0558041

