1

BeepTrace: Blockchain-enabled Privacy-preserving
Contact Tracing for COVID-19 Pandemic and
Beyond

arXiv:2005.10103v2 [cs.DC] 21 May 2020

Hao Xu, Lei Zhang, Oluwakayode Onireti, Yang Fang, William Bill Buchanan, Muhammad Ali Imran

Abstract—The outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic has exposed
an urgent need for effective contact tracing solutions through
mobile phone applications to prevent the infection from spreading
further. However, due to the nature of contact tracing, public
concern on privacy issues has been a bottleneck to the existing
solutions, which is significantly affecting the uptake of contact
tracing applications across the globe. In this paper, we present
a blockchain-enabled privacy-preserving contact tracing scheme:
BeepTrace, where we propose to adopt blockchain bridging the
user/patient and the authorized solvers to desensitize the user
ID and location information. Compared with recently proposed
contract tracing solutions, our approach shows higher security
and privacy with the additional advantages of being battery
friendly and globally accessible. Results show viability in terms
of the required resource at both server and mobile phone
perspectives. Through breaking the privacy concerns of the
public, the proposed BeepTrace solution can provide a timely
framework for authorities, companies, software developers and
researchers to fast develop and deploy effective digital contact
tracing applications, to conquer COVID-19 pandemic soon.
Meanwhile, the open initiative of BeepTrace allows worldwide
collaborations, integrate existing tracing and positioning solutions
with the help of blockchain technology 1 .
Index Terms—COVID19, Coronavirus, Digital contact tracing,
Privacy-preserving, Distributed system, Blockchain, Distributed
Ledger Technology, Pandemic, BeepTrace

I. I NTRODUCTION
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious
disease that is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1]. The disease has spread into
most nations across the globe thus sending billions of people
into lockdown as health services across the globe struggle to
cope. As of 18th May 2020, there have been 4,769,177 cases
and 316,898 deaths confirmed across 188 countries and territories [2]. At the time of writing this paper, there are still no
vaccines for COVID-19. Hence, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), which aims at slowing down the transmission of
H. Xu, L. Zhang (corresponding author), O. Onireti and M. A. Imran are
with the James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK;
E-mail: h.xu.2@research.gla.ac.uk; Lei.Zhang@glasgow.ac.uk; Oluwakayode.Onireti@glasgow.ac.uk; Muhammad.Imran@glasgow.ac.uk.
Y. Fang is with the Business School, University of Aberdeen, UK; E-mail:
r01yf17@abdn.ac.uk.
W. B. Buchanan is with Centre for Distributed Computing, Networks and Security at Edinburgh Napier University, UK; Email:
B.Buchanan@napier.ac.uk
1 Note: This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no
longer be accessible.

the disease by reducing the contact rate of people in the general
public [3], have been implemented by various countries across
the globe. NPIs largely targets social distancing (also known as
physical distancing) by keeping a certain distance from others
and avoiding gathering together in large groups [4]. Strict
measures are adopted in most countries include the closing
of workplace, schools, social venues, and travel restrictions,
etc.
NPIs were found to be very effective in the H1NI influenza
pandemic (1918-1919), which was the last disease pandemic
at the scale of the COVID-19 pandemic, and without existing
vaccines [9]. Communities and cities that implemented NPI
early in COVID-19 pandemic are successfully reducing the
number of cases while the adopted measure remaining in
place. This resulted in a significant reduction in the mortality
rate. However, strict measures pose an immediate threat to
the economy. This matters as economic decline itself has an
adverse effect on many aspects of society including health.
Goldman Sachs has predicted that the US economy could
shrink by 24% in the second quarter of 2020, more than twice
as much as any decline ever recorded [10]. Most countries
across the globe are developing balanced strategies to take both
economy and a rebound of the COVID-19 into consideration.
Contact tracing has been a pillar of communicable disease
control in public health for decades and shows its effectiveness
on COVID-19 control in some countries. With no obvious
prospect of vaccines on the horizon [11], the strategy of
most governments across the globe (e.g. US, Spain, UK, Italy,
Germany, etc.) for easing out the social distancing restrictions
centers more on track and trace approach. This approach will
further help to rescue the economy while also saving lives
and restoring some normality, especially when the lockdown
is lifted (or partially lifted) and the society steps into a “New
Normal”.
A. Contact tracing
Contact tracing is the process of identifying persons who
may have come into contact with an infected person and subsequent collection of further information about these contacts
[12]. Contact tracing has a long history in preventing infectious
diseases, in the early stage of epidemiology, contact tracing
takes part with labor-intensive methods. The process relied
heavily on the recall of a (far from complete) list of people
whom they have been in contact with over the previous weeks,
or locations the confirmed person has been. Letters, phone

2

TABLE I
C OMPARISONS OF CURRENT CONTACT TRACING SOLUTIONS WITH P ROPOSED B LOCKCHAIN - BASED SOLUTION (B EEP T RACE )

Name of solutions
Singapore TraceTogether [5]
Google/Apple Contact Tracing [6]
UK NHS Contact Tracing [7]
China Health Code System [8]
BeepTrace (proposed solution)

Positioning/grouping technology

Power Usage

Bluetooth
Bluetooth
Bluetooth
GPS, QR code
GPS, Bluetooth, Cellular and WiFi

High
High
High
Low
Medium

calls or emails can be used to inform people who might
be contacted. Thus, completeness and accuracy of the list,
timeliness and efficiency of the tracing are limited by such
a traditional contact tracing approach.
Until very recently, digitized contact tracing through smartphone apps are developed and deployed in some countries
to solve the bottlenecks of the labor intensive-methods. One
of the mainstream contact tracing approaches is to use Bluetooth signals from smartphones to detect encounters with
people with COVID-19. This approach does not use location
tracking or store users’ location data. In this approach, if
someone develops COVID-19 symptoms, an alert could be
sent to others that they might have infected, with minimum
intervention. There are two variants of the Bluetooth-based
contract tracking, namely, the centralized and the decentralized
model. Singapore’s TraceTogether [5] is an example of a
centralized model. On the other hand, the information is
kept on the user’s smartphone in the decentralized model
and this gives more control to the user. Processing and
matching for people who may have contacted COVID-19 are
made on the user’s smartphone in a decentralized model.
Moreover, the decentralized model has been promoted by an
international consortium including Google and Apple as it
promotes consent, transparency, and privacy [6]. In the former,
gathered anonymous data is uploaded to the server. Matches
are made with other contacts via processing on the server
if someone starts to develop the COVID-19 symptoms. For
simplicity, in the next, we omit the word “digital” and use the
term “contact tracing” representing the smartphone App-based
digital contact tracing.
B. Review of existing contact tracing solutions
In Table I, we review four of the most recently proposed
contact tracing approaches namely, TraceTogether from Singapore [5], Google/Apple joint contact tracing project [6],
NHS COVID-19 App [7], and China Health code system [8].
The metrics used in our evaluation include the positioning or
grouping technology, power usage, security of the technology,
coverage, and the level of privacy preservation.
TraceTogether is an App powered by Bluetrace [5] protocol
and it makes use of Bluetooth low energy (LE) to discover
and locally record clients in close proximity of a user. In
this scheme, the user is required to keep the device in an
active broadcasting state, hence drains the battery of the user
device. The Bluetooth technology has security concerns on
its vulnerable wireless interface, threats including bugging,
sniffing, and jamming are prominent to all Bluetooth-based

Security of
technology
Low
Low
Low
Medium
High

Coverage

Privacy-preserving

Low
Low
Low
High
High

No
Yes, Partially
Yes, Partially
No
Yes

contact tracing solutions. There is a high risk of replay attacks
to the contact tracing network, which may later cause a
massive scale of panic to the public.
Meanwhile, the Bluetooth protocol is potentially liable to be
used against user security, since the identification of hardware
on the Bluetooth physical layer may not be concealed, which
brings the exposure of the physical hardware.
Such privacy may be considered preserved in terms of the
macro-scale public, but it is almost transparent inside a local
group with Radio Frequency vulnerability. Meanwhile, the
problem of locally initiated proximity solutions is limited due
to the transmission power limit on the user device and existing
wireless interference. As we discussed earlier, TraceTogether
is a centralized service in terms of the user’s real identity
and notification, though user privacy is not known to the
third party but the authority. Therefore, it is considered not
genuinely privacy-serving, if the malicious activity is by the
central service provider.
Google Apple Contact Tracing employs a similar approach
with Bluetooth LE too. It is different from TraceTogether from
the user’s privacy perspective since the service provider does
not get hold of the user’s real identity, hence becomes privacypreserving. However, the user is required to use their central
server for contact matching and notification, which brings the
concern of trajectory attack on user privacy and enables the
reconstruction of the user’s profile using access information
to the server. Similarly, the NHS COVID-19 App has risks of
potential exposures of user privacy in the same way.
Health Code System is different from the above methods, as
it does not use Bluetooth nor proximity detection. It is based
on relational cross-match by scanning the QR code, which is
associated with the user. In this system, user privacy is not
respected due to centralization, and the identity of the user is
not hidden to the authority. However, the health code is only
scanned at the time of passing checkpoints, hence saves the
user battery and does not consume data. Additional, thanks
to its highly central hierarchy, the coverage can be extended
easily.
Many other protocols and solutions are emerging to deal
with pandemic contact tracing, such as Aarogya Setu, COVIDSafe, Decentralised Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing,
Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing [13]–
[16], etc. They are similar to the solutions described above
with their tweaks on certain features.

3

C. Blockchain basis for contact tracing
The nature of contact tracing brings challenges in privacy
since the information has to be collected, matched and distributed. Other issues include guaranteeing the protection of
the identity of users with COVID-19. Though the opt-in option
could ensure some control over participation, it is yet to be
seen how we ensure that only the relevant data are shared.
Blockchain can play a neutral role in a distributed manner to
bridge the user/patient and the authorized solvers to desensitize
the user ID and location information. It can provide a solution
for privacy-preserving from technical design rather than relying on the obey the regulations or laws in a centralized system.
Furthermore, blockchain technology when combined with the
use of encryption and anonymization technologies can further
protect the users’ identity. Blockchain in nature is non-regional
thus provide a suitable global access platform for COVID19 pandemic tracing and control. The transparency feature
can prevent the public from intentional misinformation by
authorities or other third parties. More details about blockchain
will be provided in Section II.
D. Motivation
Recognizing the challenges and issues above, enhanced
privacy preservation, better tracing performance, and better
capability to fight against misinformation are required for the
post-pandemic contact tracing. We deem that no compromise
should be made between the privacy and tracing performance,
hence we present our blockchain-enabled contact tracing that
satisfies both privacy and performance requirements. We have
summarized these aspects below:
a) Enhanced privacy as the main focus: Contact tracing
in nature is sensitive to the general public’s privacy and
security, hence the privacy should be respected in the solution
framework design. It is the most concerning factor in all
contact tracing proposals we have seen recently. Meanwhile,
and the more information collected, the better performance of
contact tracing. However, privacy should never be sacrificed.
Meanwhile, the secured data sharing is another challenge for
privacy, it would be a hard decision to make, choosing between
health and the consent of centralized privacy collection, since
the centralization brings the risk of manipulation and corruption. Nevertheless, it is not a trouble for blockchain, where
the identity is removed at the beginning, offering the tracing
participants with ultimate confidence in privacy.
b) No compromise of tracing performance: By preserving the privacy from the users, we believe the performance of
contact tracing also matters. The performance of the tracing
network should be valued from its effectiveness of infection
prevention, including the level of technology and the coverage
of the network. The current decentralized solutions are limited
to a local network, hence do not have impacts on a wider range
of users. For example, people who travel across different areas
for work and leisure in the post lockdown period may benefit
from a wider range of tracing. Blockchain in nature can be
the key to enable the globally accessible tracing network. It
is also a challenge for government-initiated tracing projects
or Apple Google joint effort [5]–[7], since their reach is

limited either by political or technical reasons, for instance,
Google has no accessibility in China. We aim to utilize the
blockchain, making all users connected to the chain without
violating their privacy. Moreover, to make use of all the
possible tracing information, a framework for supporting all
means of positioning technologies is required. The information
shared on the blockchain can hence be propagated further and
is a lot richer than Bluetooth interactions.
c) No panic from misinformation: Misinformation is
harmful to pandemic prevention and causes panic to the
general public. The main reason for the misinformation can
be concluded into two categories: information inaccuracy and
information transparency. The public health agencies have
strong reasons to get the trusted authorities involved in the
result confirmation, geographical matching, and notification,
in order to fight against misinformation of inaccuracy. Though
getting the authorities involved might not sound promising for
the fact of privacy, it is not the case for the blockchain network,
thanks to the privacy-preserving ability. The panic should not
be caused by the tracing and never will be. Meanwhile, the
authorities have the motivation to hold back information or
provide false statistics due to their favor of decisions enabled
by the centralization of data. With the help of the transparency
provided by the blockchain technology, it enables the easy
verifiable trusted tracing information by the public rather than
a closed group of informants.
d) Full life cycle privacy protection: It is acknowledged
widely that privacy should be valued from the start to its
end, hence a full life cycle solution of privacy for contact
tracing is necessary. The shared data should have its life
cycle managed from users’ tip of fingers. The users of contact
tracing shall have full privilege to share and revoke sharing
at any time using key management. Public agencies are also
required to limit the sharing of users’ sensitive information
within a trusted partnership. The proposed blockchain platform
is capable of providing users and agencies with thorough
credential management functionality with cryptography. The
user’s privacy is protected throughout the tracing scheme, and
the length of data storage should also be regulated under
GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) [17], and health
agencies’ recommendations, for example, WHO recommended
that 14 days is the minimum length of tracing cycle. In short,
the user will have all its privacy protected through generation,
sharing, and deposition.
E. Contributions
Considering all the motivations listed above, there is a
need for a novel solution that copes with issues in existing labor-intensive and restrained Bluetooth contact tracing
solutions. This paper proposes a well defined BlockchainEnablEd Privacy-preserving contact Tracing (BeepTrace) for
maximum privacy preservation, making an efficient network
of contact tracing, breaking the information barriers without
scarifying privacy. User privacy is respected with full life
cycle awareness, as it can be generated, shared, and disposed
of safely. Meanwhile, BeepTrace proposes an architectural
view of blockchain address and transaction design making

4

Handling geodata
WiFi

Encrypting user privacy

GPS

Querying blockchain
Inputing data to blockchain
Bluetooth

Celluar Tower

1

bu

istri

d
Key

Ke

Gov/PKI CA

yd

Key distribution

Location/Intereaction of users

tion

ist
rib

uti

on
Matched results
10

2

Geo public Key
4

Geo private Key
9
Read geodata

6
5

Address generation
& initial appearance

Address fusion with pseudoname
and Certified Geo data seceret

11
Endorse matched suffix with level of risks
Contact Tracing
Blockchain

12
Query blockchain for risks

8

Patient’s (Private) Key

Diagnostician
endorsement

3

Test diagnostician private key

Regular updating
with step 1,2,3,4,5,6

Contact Tracing User

7
Infected patient gives consent
Confirmed Patient to diagnostician of the pseudonyms

Fig. 1.

Geo Solver

Diagnostician

Once the user is diagnosed

Framework of Blockchain-enabled Privacy-preserving contact tracing scheme (BeepTrace)

use of two chains, to facilities the analysis of geodata and
passive notification. We propose a novel scheme to decouple
user privacy by using two distributed blockchains. The tracing
chain with desensitized personal location information is accessible by authorized solvers for contact matching. And the
notification chain, where the match results (only pseudonym
or its fingerprint) will be published on for the exposed usersself matching locally. Through this Gemini chain design, all
users’ privacy can be preserved effectively. We also provide
numerical results to give an overview of the network storage
and computing capacity requirement with typical parameters
setting. In addition to network cost, an analysis of data
consumption for an individual user is also calculated to address
the concerns of the device requirement.
The solution proposed in Fig. 1 of this paper provides
an open initiative framework for governments, authorities,
companies, software developers and researchers around the
world to develop and deploy a fast and trusted platform for
tracing information sharing, to minimizes the damage COVID19 does to humanity and to save lives and economy without
invading the basic human rights of privacy.

II. B LOCKCHAIN AS THE BACKBONE FOR
PRIVACY- PRESERVING INFORMATION SHARING
Blockchain technology, which has shown great potentials
in various fields such as financial services, energy trading,
supply chain, identity management, and the Internet of Things
(IoT) [18], [19] could address the trust, privacy, security, and
transparency issues associated with the existing contact tracing
technologies. Blockchains are distributed databases organized
using a hash tree, which is naturally tamper-proof and irreversible [20]. In particular, data introduced into the blockchain
platform are organized into blocks. Each block has an associated hash value for that block, this applies to the previous
block as well and thus ensures a retroactive linkage between
blocks. Blockchain offers an immutable, transparent, secure,
and auditable ledger in a trust-less distributed environment, to
verify the integrity and tractability of information/assets during
their life cycle.
Blockchain can be integrated into contract tracing applications to provide much need security, trust, transparency, and
privacy which are either missing or partially provisioned in the
existing schemes. Besides its chain-link data structure nature,

5

the Consensus Mechanism (CM) is of great importance to
achieving the unique gains of blockchain. The CM ensures
an unambiguous ordering of transactions and guarantees the
integrity and consistency of the blockchain across geographically distributed nodes. The CM largely determines blockchain
system performance, such as transaction throughput, delay,
node scalability, and security level, etc. As such, depending on
application scenarios and performance requirements, different
CMs have been considered for blockchain. Important requirements to be considered when selecting the CM in BeepTrace
include network throughput, delay, storage, and scalability.
Commonly used CMs include Proof of Work (PoW), Proof
of Stake (PoS) and Direct Acyclic Graph (DAG) based CM.
PoW was proposed in the original blockchain application
(Bitcoin) and its core idea is the competition of computing
power. Each node involved in the CM uses its computing
resource for the hash process to compete for the right to the
new block while receiving some bonus. This leads to the use
of computing resources and meaningless energy consumption.
PoS, on the other hand, relies on coin age competition rather
than computing power competition. PoS is thus beneficial
for the wealthy miner and it could cause near-monopolies,
which can result in the generation of a powerful third-party.
This could also be a challenge in BeepTrace where the users’
privacy at stake. By design, a more balanced weighting scheme
on coin age can solve such a problem. Both PoW and PoS
CM work on a single chain architecture. To maintain a single
version of the blockchain among the users, the CM must
reduce the access rate of new blocks [18]. This could lead
to some bottlenecks in applying PoW and PoS CMs to a large
number of contact tracing participants (e.g., a country with a
large population like China, India).
In particular, to reduce the access rate of new blocks and
prevent the PoW or PoS based BeepTrace system from attack,
the CM will consume many resources, which is too costly
for such a resource-constrained system. Furthermore, with the
limited capacity of the new blocks in PoS and PoW, the system
will be unable to cope with the exponential growth in the
number of users. For instance, the throughput is normally
limited to 7 transactions per second (TPS) in Bitcoin and 20
to 30 TPS in Ethereum [21]. The low access rate of new
blocks in PoW and PoS CMs implies a long confirmation
delay for the CMs. Typical confirmation delays of 60 minutes
in Bitcoin and three minutes in Ethereum are too long for
the BeepTrace system since other delays within the network
such as access delay, processing delay must be incorporated
as well. Nevertheless, the throughput and delay performance
can be significantly enhanced by reducing the difficulty level
of harsh calculation security level (e.g., in BeepTrace, there
is no need to wait for the block confirmation after 6 blocks
are generated after it). Furthermore, a small to medium size
population city could be used for contact tracing.
DAG-based CM can overcome the shortcomings of PoW
and PoS consensus when applied in BeepTrace. Unlike PoW
and PoS, there are no competitions to create a new block in
DAG and all transactions are connected directly or indirectly.
DAG-based consensus mechanism allows users to insert their
blocks into the blockchain at any time, as long as they process

the earlier transactions. In this way, many branches would be
generated simultaneously, which is referred to as forking. With
forking the confirmation rate and the TPS are both unlimited
in DAG-based CM. Moreover, with the forking integrated
into DAG, the resource consumption can be very low for
a user to create a new block, thus making it very suitable
for the BeepTrace system. Other key benefits of DAG-based
CM which make it more suitable for BeepTrace include zero
transaction fees and low computing power [18].
III. B LOCKCHAIN E NABL E D P RIVACY-P RESERVING
C ONTACT T RACING
In this section, we give a detailed workflow description and
an explanation of key concepts. In the following parts, we will
first introduce the entities involved in the system, their roles,
and how they interface with each other. The workflow of the
contact tracing framework will be proposed next, then we will
explore the details of blockchain pseudonym generation and
sharing.
It is worth noting that the framework works with an open
initiative that allows everyone to share the contact tracing
information with different methods, authorities, and cryptography, and it can become a piece of open interface information tracing hub for all privacy-preserving contact tracing
providers globally. Moreover, the proposed framework does
not limit the selection of blockchain CM and the incentive
mechanism of the blockchain. As long as the CM fits the
network’s performance requirement, it can be plugged into the
framework. Besides, the framework does not limit the selection
of positioning services.
A. Entities, functions and interfaces
In the following, we define the parties involved in BeepTrace and explain their roles and interfaces one by one:
• Users (see Fig. 1, includes confirmed patients and healthy
users), is an abstract term of contact tracing App users
on a mobile device. We use “user” to represent user
equipment (UE), the App, and the device in the rest of the
paper. All users will upload their encrypted TraceCode to
tracing blockchain and read from notification blockchain
for self matching.
• Diagnosticians (see Fig. 1), diagnose and endorse confirmed COVID-19 user’s geodata with a signed prefix and
send to tracing blockchain for solver matching.
• Geodata solvers (see Fig. 1), server or server clusters associated with the trusted third party or user, interacts with
the geodata and provides endorsement on the notification
chain. Reads raw data from tracing blockchain for matching and send matched data to notification blockchain.
• Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)/Certified Authority (CA)
(see Fig. 1), a trusted third party (e.g., governments,
public health agencies), interacts in key distribution to
the user, diagnostician, and solvers.
• Positioning service providers (see Fig. 1), including but
not limited to GPS, Bluetooth, Cellular Tower and WiFi
whichever is supported by the user. Data supplied by the
provider will be labeled as geodata throughout this paper.

6

•

•
•

Tracing blockchain (see Fig. 2), is one of two chains
(will be introduced in detail in Section III-C) that accept
TraceCode registration by user and diagnostician. It is
also read by the solver for geodata matching.
Notification blockchain (see Fig. 2), is the chain dedicated
to risk registration to the affected users’ TraceCode.
TraceCode (see Fig. 2), is a mask name for the blockchain
address introduced in the paper, it has two parts, the front
part is the user pseudonym, called prefix, the rear part is
geodata cyphertext, called suffix.

B. Workflow of the BeepTrace
We explain BeepTrace using Fig. 1 and we give details stepby-step.
The first step (step 1) of our proposed BeepTrace is that
PKI/CA distributes the keys to the above parties, as suggested
in Fig. 1. Users will collect raw geodata from the positioning
service providers, indicated with Step 2, and generate multiple
local private keys over time (e.g., one for each day), these
keys will be stored in users local storage, preferably, in an
encrypted chip like Apple T2 Security Chip [22], as in Step 3.
Such encryption will be strong enough to protect users’ privacy
from any known threats and avoid human mistakes. These keys
will be used to generate a pseudonym, which is used as the
prefix of a blockchain address, the front part of TraceCode.
Note that, both symmetric-key and asymmetric, aka. publickey encryption can be used for the user’s key generation and
management.
On the other hand, the user generates another cyphertext
using a public key, which is certified by a CA (a trusted party),
to encrypt its current geographical or topological location
data with a timestamp in step 4, and forms the rear part of
TraceCode. Note that CA is introduced to provide confidence
to the public but not tempering the independence of BeepTrace
as it does not obtain any privacy from the user. We call
this geodata cyphertext, and it will be used as a suffix of a
blockchain address which is associated with the pseudonym,
stated as address fusion in Step 5. At this point, we have
successfully established the first link of a user pseudo-identity
and the geodata in the form of blockchain addresses. Once the
address is generated, the user will declare it on the blockchain
network (see details in Section III-C) in Step 6, hence the
address becomes index-able using its suffix by the trusted
third party, and the users’ privacy remains protected due to the
anonymous identity by the pseudonym. Note that, all users in
the network will repeat steps 1 to 6 until the user is diagnosed
with COVID-19. The following steps are for the confirmed
patient.
Once a user is diagnosed by a diagnostician, the user has
options to exchange its existing pseudonyms with the current
handler by giving the patient’s consent to this very specific
diagnostician in step 7. After receiving all the pseudonyms
from the users, this diagnostician tracks down all the related
addresses using the prefix thanks to the users. During the
pseudonym exchange, the trusted one needs to verify the
pseudonyms (see details in Section III-C). Meanwhile, this
trusted person decouples all the user private key related

prefix from the geodata suffix, and replace the pseudonym
section with another private key encrypted cyphertext, which is
designated to the diagnosticians. The diagnostician generates a
new blockchain address by re-coupling the new prefix and new
suffix, which can be generated with man-made drifting/noise
encryption technique for further protection, then endorse it on
the blockchain network, as in step 8.
From this point, the users’ privacy is completely protected/preserved. The privacy is only revealed in the process
of been diagnosed due to the nature of the diagnosis, and
it is protected under regulations and laws, for instance, the
confidentiality of the UK NHS (National Health Service) code
of practice [23] and GDPR.
After the confirmed patient’s status has been updated on the
tracing blockchain, illustrated in blue in Fig. 2, anybody with
access to the chain will be able to read the cyphertext and
know the update made by the diagnostician, though access to
the geodata is exclusive to the geo private key holder, issued by
a public trusted parties with the previously mentioned public
keys. Again, the information has no user info, at step 9 in Fig.
1. At the same time, the link of the pseudonym is only known
to the user itself.
Now we have all the required information for contact tracing
(that is, an irreversible link of pseudonyms and geodata, and
the diagnostician’s endorsement to the geodata), the only thing
left is to match them, as shown in Step 10. Any interested
parties/users (in Fig. 1) who are authorized by the CA can start
backtracking the geodata from confirmed patients which are
marked by the diagnosticians by decryption of the geodata and
timestamp. By doing so, if cross-infection is likely between
several blockchain addresses, the solvers will make an update
of risk level to related addresses by looking up the suffix and
endorse it on the blockchain, but they will not be able to
know the user’s information due to the decoupled data and
pseudonyms. The marked addresses are declared again on the
notification blockchain (see details in Section III-C) in Step
11.
As the user is using the tracing App, when the download
of notification has finished locally in Step 12 (details are
given in Section III-C), the user can look up its addresses
from the notification blockchain, which is a separate chain
exclusive for risk level notification, and now the users are been
notified passively once the match of addresses has occurred
with endorsements made to any of users’ addresses. In the case
of compressed results on the notification chain, the user needs
to match its prefix’s fingerprint with them. In this process,
the user’s privacy is well preserved locally, as no one without
knowing the users’ keys can link the user to the geodata.
A sub addresses scheme can be introduced to power the selfmarking with symptoms code, without the involvement of CA.
The code can be a plaintext hash and installed as the prefix
of blockchain address with public key encrypted geodata.
The solver can also dedicate to search the symptoms and
warn others using the same technique in the previous scenario
(steps 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 3 is dismissed due to plaintext), but
the information propagated through unsigned address are not
trusted, and should only be taken seriously if the community
has a wide range trust basis. No personal keys are revealed in

7

User only privacy - Identity related

User Private Key

User and CA authroized privacy - Geodata and diagnosis related
Public information - Cyphertext and risk level

Geo Public Key Pair from CA

Tracing blockchain

Diagnostician Key Pair from CA

Notification blockchain

Blockchain Address

Tracing Blockchain

Coupled blockchain address for normal users
User Private Key encrypted cyphertext

User’s Private Key

+

Blockchain Header

Trusted Public Key encrypted cyphertext

Geo Public Key

Binding

Previous Hash
Transactions:

Address declaration

Geo data cypher

User pseudonym

timestamp

Address declaration
Enties ...

geodata

Decoupled blockchain address for confirmed case
Unbinding

User pseudonym

Geo data cypher

Recoupled blockchain address for confired case
Swap pseudonym
Diagnostician Private Key

Address declaration

Geo data cypher
Binding

Diagnostician signed pseudonym

timestamp

Read all diagnoser signed addresses

geodata

Decryption with key pairs issued by CA

Notification Blockchain

Risky blockchain address endorsement from solver

Blockchain Header

Unbinding

Geodata matching
&
Risk level assessing

Endorsement making
Binding

Matched user pseudonym
Fig. 2.

Previous Hash

geodata and time stamp

Diagnostician signed pseudonym

Risk level endorsement

Risk level endorsement

Transactions:
Risk level
endorsements
to
affected addresses

BeepTrace blockchain address architecture (TraceCode)

this process, hence the privacy is well preserved too.
C. Blockchain pseudo-identity sharing
In Fig. 2, we illustrate the generation of blockchain addresses and the mechanism to decouple the users’ privacy
with the diagnosis (a signature by diagnostician) and geodata
sharing. Sharing of the pseudonym generated by users’ private
keys are considered safe to be public. A handful of cryptography algorithms can be applied to pseudonym generation,
including both symmetrical and asymmetrical encryption. In
the figure, we can see that the address is divided into two
parts, pseudonym prefix and geodata suffix. The user uses the
private key to generate a cyphertext as its pseudonym for the
front part of the address, as in Fig. 1 step 3, and uses a public
key offered by regional/global CA to encrypt its geodata, in
step 4. It then puts the cyphertext of geodata into later part
of the blockchain address as the suffix. A complete address
shall provide a direct link between the pseudo-identity and

the geodata in step 5. Besides, the diagnostician will need to
verify whether the user is the rightful holder of pseudonyms
by verifying the private keys held by the user. This ensures
that the diagnosis information is shared responsibly, and is
thus a critical step to avoiding public panic.
By sharing this address with the blockchain network, the
information carried by the address itself will be known as a
cyphertext, and potential readers will know how to separate the
cyphertext into pseudonym and geodata cyphertext. However,
only the authorized users/servers who have the private key
from the authority can decrypt the geodata but they have
no clue of the pseudonym, therefore protecting users’ privacy. Interactions between tracing blockchain and notification
blockchain in Fig. 2 are designed to offload the needs of
a heavy tracing chain and enable a trusted blockchain with
trusted users/servers, as only selective information will be published to this dedicated chain from trusted sources. Meanwhile,
the users’ traces of internet connectivity are also concealed by

8

blockchain, hence we can assure that what on the blockchain
is nothing but a pseudonym and a geodata. Miners of the
blockchain may receive connectivity trace from the user, but
it is not inherited on the blockchain, either received constantly
by one miner due to rapid changes of non-geographical related
miners. In other words, users access information such as IP
addresses, routing information, and even the ISP records are
completely isolated from the blockchain network, hence the
network is born to be real privacy-preserving. This advantage
may be overkill for some countries’ regulations, but it will be
a gem of privacy-preserving.
IV. G EODATA GENERALIZATION FOR PRIVACY
PROTECTION AND SOLVING

Contact tracing blockchain is not limited to any specific
geographical or topological information collected by GPS,
Wifi, Bluetooth, base station, and any other indoor or outdoor
positioning technologies. It is a platform that fuses all types
of geodata and shares them for geodata matching. With the
help of BeepTrace, the user privacy is in safe hands, however,
it still faces a challenge of geodata overhearing issued. This
is a critical challenge during the geodata capturing and the
protection of privacy and granularity of data accuracy in
addition to the secured mainframe design. We present our
geodata generalization plan to guide geodata capturing and
storing.
The raw geodata is generated by GPS/Wifi/Cellular tower
when the services are available to the users. Next, the users’
device will upload them to the blockchain network with
a public key issued by CA. Meanwhile, the geodata will
undergo perturbations here to avoid identical suffix match
tracing against the patient’s private key, by either adding salt to
geodata or transform the geodata. The relevant transformations
can be achieved in three ways:
• Use geo datum with an elliptical encrypted system with
perturbation, a well-known example of the implementation is GCJ-02 datum reference system.
• Convert GPS geo datum (WGS84) [24] to the Grid
reference system (OSNG: OSGB36, where the accuracy
is limited).
• GIS aggregation/ geodata generalization and perturbation
to avoid trajectory privacy tracking.
The user has the freedom to choose which level of detail it
intends to provide to the blockchain tracing network, as long
as the accuracy level fits within the regulation made by the
local agency. In addition to that, the diagnostician can use
the above methods again to convert the users’ geodata into a
coarser grain to avoid trajectory tracing by malicious users or
even completely reconstructing the geodata with a dedicated
key for secured geodata sharing if required. The management
of geodata allows fine-grained access control to be achieved
on the blockchain.
A. Geodata solving and reverse topological cross-infection
warning
Contact tracing is closely related to geographical intersections of the traced target, which is represented as a set of

geodata. A first-party or third-party solver is needed to decrypt
the geodata from the cyphertext first, then run the patients’
every record against the whole data collected within 14 days
for COVID-19 tracing (recommended by WHO and it could be
different for other pandemics). The most simple way to this is
to calculate a distance-vector which will be used as the metric
along with the contact duration for the risk level assessment.
Besides the geographical information, the Bluetooth group
information can also be integrated into the network, if the
users are willing to link them. This will solve the limited
proximity issues for all Bluetooth technology-based contact
tracing solutions [5], [7] by extending the tracing to more
possible positioning services, and enriching the geo solving
model in the solver side.
Third-party GIS (Geographical Information System) services can be integrated. For example, any solver can link the
geodata with OSM (Open Street Map) [25] to get GIS data
from OSM and make use of the information like object type,
road topology, building name and function, the height of the
object, etc., which can be fused into risk level management.
For instance, the road topology can indicate the trajectory,
determine if the user is outdoor or indoor. Such information
fusion and processing can bring the contact tracing not only
beyond the geodata, but also explores social connections.
Speaking of which, it is unimaginable if the privacy is exposed or hijacked by any malicious party, therefore, privacypreserving is not an option but a must. By adding the GIS
into the solving loop, the external topology can be taken into
account, for example, if the geodata is found out to be at the
center of a shopping mall, then the shopping mall’s topological
information can be obtained from OSM and used to warn the
rest of the people who were in the shopping mall at the same
time. This method provides more flexibility compared to solely
coordinates/proximity, as portrayed in TraceTogether [5] and
NHSX contact tracing [7].
B. Risk level management and notification
Once the geodata solver extracts the high profile geodata
using a clinical endorsement, the matching is conducted. The
risk level, therefore, can be worked out using the government
guideline on the distance and contact time. For instance, any
users who were within the proximity of 10 meters more than
15 minutes will be marked as High-risk exposure [26], and
those who were further and stayed less than 15 minutes will
receive a low-risk exposure endorsement. With the enhanced
topological matching, the details can be set up by the solver
itself with certified guides by authority, for example, if the
authority thinks the indoor activity brings the risks to every
people in the facility, then the topological information can be
used for marking. The result will be linked to the address who
has an endorsement from the solver. The address is considered
to be notified passively at this stage. It is worth noting that the
risk level endorsement is public information, but the only way
to make use of them is to look up the prefix and identify users
themselves actively. The process is like a radio broadcast, and
the receivers are listening to it passively. There are drawbacks
of passive notifications regarding its performance (discussed

9

in Section VI-C), but this will again double assure the users’
privacy is protected by design (no trust is needed).
C. Complete freedom of pseudonym revoking and sifting
In the geodata matching process, there is a risk of trajectory
tracing against users’ pseudonym, however, users have complete freedom to change their private key more frequently to
avoid any possible leak of privacy, with the cost of increasing
data consumption and storage.
Users can renounce the private key at any time and start
using a new private key at will, in order to prevent anyone
from retrospectively using the logs to reveal the users’ activity
pattern.
In the case that a user wants to revoke shared data from
BeepTrace, it can do so by informing the PKI/CA to revoke
the public key assigned to its geodata, hence revoking the
information back and forth.
V. R ESULTS
In the results, we first present an analysis of existing
solutions to contact tracing, which we compare with our
proposed solution referred to as BeepTrace. Then we provide
numerical results to show BeepTrace’s performance in terms
of blockchain requirements of throughput and storage. Next,
we analyze the computing resource requirement for geodata
matching with some illustrative figures. In the end, we work
out the user side requirement regarding data consumption and
storage.
A. Comparisons with existing contact tracing solutions
By comparing the efforts made by different countries and
agencies, there are clearly two divisions both technical-wise
and privacy-wise. Technical-wise, there are two types of
tracing mechanisms, one uses health code while the other
utilizes Bluetooth. Detailed comparisons of the contact tracing
solutions can be seen in Table I, where we list our BeepTrace
with four widely acknowledged solutions. As discussed earlier
in Section I-B, Bluetooth based solutions, are energy starving
for users, since the device must be kept active and broadcasting
all the time to achieve such functionality. On the other hand,
the health code system only uses the QR code on demand.
Also, due to the fact that Bluetooth processes and matches
local grouping information, and QR code requires a central
server with limited privacy-preservation.
BeepTrace solution sits between them, by recording the
information in the background, but only transmitting at a
suitable time. For instance, while charging or docking the device, hence BeepTrace is not only privacy-preserving but also
power preserving and battery friendly. Furthermore, BeepTrace
brings a higher level of security to the user physical device as
it overcomes the issue of Bluetooth wireless vulnerability and
avoids the bureaucracy flaws in the health code system.
Meanwhile, since the Bluetooth only works locally, the
coverage is also limited, whereas BeepTrace, using integrated
services from the user and third party suppliers, the coverage
can be boosted globally without much effort.

Besides, as opposed to centralized solutions or partially
decentralized service, for example, Google and Apple need
a central service to respond to APIs and geodata matching,
which is risky as the access tracking is possible. BeepTrace
demonstrates the incomparable benefits of security and privacy
preservation as a completely decentralized service. While
BeepTrace employs third-party servers for matching, it keeps
the user privacy protected and preserved thanks to the passive
listening mechanism to avoid triggering access tracking. In
addition to the power and privacy concern, BeepTrace is a
unique solution to handle the user’s location with full life cycle
care without giving up on privacy.
Next, we will numerically analyze the BeepTrace performance in terms of the storage at blockchain, computing
complexity at the server, and data at the user.
B. Blockchain performance requirement
Storing massive amounts of blockchain addresses is a bold
challenge of contact tracing blockchain, due to the accumulating data uploaded by users. Therefore, a certain period of
lifespan should be considered for the application of such a
system. Thankfully, the contact tracing only requires a certain
number of days of records (14 days only for COVID-19
according to WHO, which will be used as an example later),
hence any data older than that number can be discarded. By
estimating the number of participants and the size of each
blockchain address, we plot in Fig. 3 the maximum allowed
storage of 14 days with new addresses declared every 30
minutes from each user, against the number of participants.
In addition, we plot the number of TPS against an increasing
number of users. The lines in blue and red compare the
capacity between using 512 bit (64byte) and 256 bit (32byte)
address, both of them end at approximately 200TB of data.
It is worth pointing out that only the geodata solver requires
such an amount of data for problem-solving, but for miners,
the required blocks can be set to the newest dozens of blocks,
which may just take a few megabytes.
In terms of notification blockchain, at the scale of 10,000
confirmed cases per day (see details in user side analysis),
the total amount of storage required is far less (a few GB
comparing with several hundreds of TB).
Transaction per second is a critical performance metric for
the blockchain network. Using the assumption above, each
user generates 1 address in 30 minutes, with N users, the
addresses uploaded to the system per second is calculated as
1
. Such an amount of TPS is the core challenge
N × 30×60
for BeepTrace deployment on a large scale, hence mitigation
should be considered to address the large TPS threshold, which
is detailed in Section VI.
C. Geodata computing resource requirement
Once the users start uploading their geodata, the server is
involved with the job of geodata matching. It is a simple job
of looking up the geodata coordinates and comparing it with
all existing records. In this process, we define the workflow
of address lookup and match as: 1. Read one of the confirmed
patient’s geodata; 2. Compute the distance between it and all

10

Number of geodata records

1010
108
106
104

15

4 Billion users
70 Million users

10 10

0

Storeage of 32byte addresss (TB)
Storeage of 64byte address (TB)
Total address over 14 days (millions)
Transaction per second

10-2
-4

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Number of daily confirmed cases

8

9

Number of servers vs tracing throughput

100

10

10

2

Number of servers

10

Number of geodata records vs Number of confirmed cases per day

10 20

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Number of Participants

7

8

9

10

109

Fig. 3. Storage and Capacity of Contact Tracing Blockchain address and
transactions

records from the latest one and; 3. Make a transaction to the
relevant address with risk level endorsement.
It is reasonable to assume that address lookup would take
less than 0.1 ms a record (as a baseline, many modern processors are faster) on single CPU thread or CUDA core [27].
Hence we can obtain an estimation of computing resource
requirement against the number of users and daily confirmed
cases. In Fig. 4(a), using the same setup from the previous
simulation, i.e., 30 minutes an address regularly in 24 hours a
day, we can see the number of records increases linearly with
the number of daily confirmed cases, but exponentially with
the overall participants’ number. It shows that the system is
linear against increasing confirmed cases but not very scalable
if the network gets larger.
The scalability is also simulated with the above parameters
in Fig. 4(b), where the large tracing network needs more
computing resources by comparing a system of 70 million and
4 billion population. It is evident that the cost of maintaining
a network consisting of billion of users with Quint-scale
message counts is not practical with current technology but
completely manageable if the network scales down. In fact,
for a medium-sized country with 70 million population (For
example, UK, France), the cost of geodata solving is manageable with a handful of high-performance cluster servers, which
cost far less than what is required for the larger network. A
detailed breakdown of scalability challenges can be found in
Section VI.
D. User-side resources requirements
Every user is considered as a thin-node of the blockchain
tracing network, so the retrieving data and lookup records will
take place on the local user and local user only, where the
user privacy is preserved. It is going to consume the user’s
computing, storage, and network resources. In BeepTrace,
the geodata solver marked addresses are announced on the
notification blockchain, which is exclusive to the matching
results. Assuming in each location it stayed, there will be
R = 15 blockchain addresses associated with the patient’s

10

5

10

0

Nvidia GV100 GPU

10

10 4

4 Billion users At Max of 10,000 daily confirmed cases
70 Million users At Max of 1,000 daily confirmed cases

AWS p3dn.24xlarge instance

10 -5
10 12

Summit / Folding@home

10 14
10 16
10 18
Number of geodata matching per day

10 20

Fig. 4.
Computing Resource Requirement for Contact Tracing Geodata
matching

geodata. Therefore, assume that the patient was traveling
constantly and stayed in different places every 30 minutes
in 14 hours (typical active time for an adult during a day).
It means each patient will incur 420 records for the geodata
solving and accumulating up to 5880 records for a 14 days
interval. Note that, in the real world situation, the patient might
interact with hundreds or even thousands of addresses in one
time at one address, but only the most closed contact will
lead to infection, hence the number of users being tagged by
the geodata solver will be significantly less than the crowds
the patient interacted. By adding all the records up, there is
a challenge of processing and storing such a large volume of
data, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The raw data recorded on the
blockchain will be too heavy for the user side, therefore, we
have to compress the associated blockchain addresses with
MD5 checksum [28] or other fingerprints to reduce the size
of files. Meanwhile, the solver side will need to employ a
mechanism to remove duplicates and produce a single risk
level endorsement for all the match geodata that associated
with a single pseudonym. The number of records can be
reduced to 210 and 16byte for each address’s fingerprint,
which is calculated based on a 14 hour active time per day in
14 days (14 x 15) since the daily records of 28 are summarized
by the solver into one record, and pseudonym changes daily.
By compressing the data using the above methods, we can see
a dramatic drop in data consumption, 33.6MB for R = 15,
6.7MB for R = 3 per day, hence enabling a wider user range
and minimizing the users’ cost. More details regarding storage
optimization can be found in Section VI. As for the uploading
cost, the total amount of data upload to tracing blockchain
throughout a day will be 28 addresses of 64byte, which is
considerably less than download from notification blockchain.

11

23 of Summit [29] (the fastest supercomputer in 2019) and
hardly achievable using current technology, though it will be
possible in the near future.

Data cosumption per UE (MB)

104

102

B. Battery drainage and storage optimization
100

10-2

10-4

Fig. 5.

Raw R = 15
Raw R = 3
Compressed R = 15
Compressed R = 3

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Number of daily confirmed cases

10000

User data consumption

VI. C HALLENGES AND D ISCUSSIONS
A. Network throughput and scalability
The major issues with our proposed contact tracing scheme
are the massive traffic caused by a large amount of addresses
declaration due to frequent (globe) geodata update, and the
computing resources required for geodata matching. Meanwhile, we face a great challenge of blockchain processing
throughput for single-chain operation. It is a great challenge
running the desired hundreds of millions of transactions per
second on any existing blockchain solution. Luckily, the needs
of such high TPS is rare in the real world, for example, it is
reasonable to assume that a user does not travel internationally
often, therefore the needs of the user data are completely
met in the domestic blockchain network. In addition, all
parameters are selected at typical maximum values to see the
peak requirement. For instance, it is not reasonable to assume
all people (in all ages) are active 14 hours every day. We
also encourage the use of multiple blockchains by regionally
grouping the users via PKI and public keys management. By
dividing users into smaller groups, the network capacity can be
easily scaled up. Besides, the emerging high throughput ready
blockchain can be introduced to the deployment of BeepTrace,
for instance, DAG (Directed acyclic graph) in theory has no
throughput limit thanks to its intentionally designed forking
schemes [18]. And when the technology is ready for high
throughput performance, we can easily migrate two or more
regional chains together and speed up the sharing of the
information.
The computing resources are limited from time to time,
however, the geodata complexity can be dramatically reduced
if the user’s quantity on a single chain is below thresholds. In
the case of international passengers, the country can employ
the server to look up the data in both regional networks, hence
reduces the needs of massive networks in all time. We have
made a comparison of simulations based on an assumption of
different size networks. For a medium-sized country with 70
million population, the required computing resource is as little
as dozens of AWS EC2 p3dn.24xlarge instances, however, for
the large population bases, such as the combined population
match of the top 7 most populated countries (a sum of 4 billion
people), it takes tremendous computing resources equaling to

All the recently proposed contract tracing programs have the
challenge of battery drainage and storage optimization, which
are not avoidable due to the requirements of active broadcast
and recording of GPS coordinates. However, our scheme can
be more energy efficient by separating the recording and
uploading in two steps. The user can store the recorded
geodata on the local device and wait until it is plugged in
and within the WiFi coverage. By sending the data only when
the mobile device is being charged, our scheme becomes more
battery-friendly. Delaying the information upstream can induce
lower performance in the contact tracing network, but it is
completely acceptable to be notified a few hours later rather
than immediate response due to the nature of tracing lag. Also,
geodata generation is paused if the user’s locations remain the
same, which also reduces the entries to the blockchain. From
the solver side, if the duplicates of endorsement are made, the
solver will only upload the unique address to the blockchain,
which reduces the pressure on the user.
C. Technology for elders and minors
Technology has certain advantages to the general public,
however, elders and minors are often left out. The limits of
technology reach to certain groups of people may become a
major issue at rolling out digital contact tracing. But it is not
completely impossible to include them. Wearable technology
and wireless IoT [30] can be used by the elders and minors
to enable them for the contact tracing program. Under the
scheme developed in the earlier section, the private keys were
stored locally, but are transferable to guardians and carers. By
transferring the private keys in a secured D2D channel [31],
the parents and carers can take responsibility to keep their
beloved under protection, without giving up on their privacy.
As discussed earlier, the risk level assessment is notified
only via a passive broadcast, however, it is not limited to the
passive-only situation. It is very likely that elders and minors
will not be putting enough effort to receive the notifications,
hence a trusted third party is needed in this case. By giving
consent of privacy to some other users or third-party service
providers, they can start sending push messages to the vulnerable once there is a risk. People naturally do give their
privacy consent to the above parties, for example, care homes,
online health companies, parents and adult children of elders.
By combining these avenues, we believe no one should be left
out in this crisis.
D. Economical and social aspects
It is well-known that centralized systems are more efficient
and economical than decentralized systems in most cases.
Blockchain is a representative of distributed systems and
deploying such a system in a nationwide manner may cost
taxpayers more. However, from another side, the decentralized

12

blockchain system is also well-recognized among citizens as
a non-governmental solution that can preserve privacy in a
much better way than a centralized system. Such a consensus
can effectively minimize the resistance from human rights
organizations and fear of citizens of infringing rights or other
fundamental civil liberties. This will increase the uptake of
the digital contact tracing among the citizens and is thus of
paramount importance to winning the battle with COVID-19
as early as possible and to save billions each day.
From the blockchain mining perspective, attracting sufficient independent miners to contribute the blockchain construction is key to maintaining its nature of the distribution. In
the most successful blockchains such as Bitcoin, the reward
to the miners are from the transaction fees and/or creating
a new block. In BeepTrace, it could be difficult to build
such an ecosystem in a short time and there are no real
transactions (thus no transaction fees) in such a system. As
solutions, the reward can come from the government by paying
the miners who created and maintained the blockchain, or
in the case of sharing some existing blockchains, transaction
fees can be claimed back from the government. Of course,
conquering COVID-19 is the common mission of all mankind
thus each user could be part of the miners to voluntarily
support, legitimize, and monitor the blockchain network.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
A blockchain-enabled solution is proposed to solve the
critical privacy-preserving issues in digital contact tracing for
COVID-19 pandemic. The blockchains are enabled between
the user/patient and the authorized solvers to desensitize
the geodata from the user identity. Detailed procedures and
functions of each entity are presented and compared with
existing solutions to show the advantages. Challenges are
also discussed from blockchain performance, solvers complexity, user’s battery and storage, economic and social aspects,
respectively. Our numerical results show that the proposed
BeepTrace is all around winner from security, privacy, battery,
coverage perspectives. This solution provides an in time framework for governments, authorities, companies, and research
institutes over the world to develop a trusted platform for
tracing information sharing, to win the fight with the COVID19 pandemic.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. E Gorbalenya et al., “The species Severe acute respiratory syndromerelated coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV2,” Nat Microbiol, vol. 5, pp. 536–544, 2020.
[2] “Covid-19 dashboard by the center for systems science and engineering
(csse) at johns hopkins university (jhu).” [Online]. Available:
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
[3] M. C. J. Bootsma and N. M. Ferguson, “The effect of public health
measures on the 1918 influenza pandemic in u.s. cities,” vol. 104, pp.
7588–7593, 2007.
[4] C. C. Harris, Margaret; Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Tedros; Liu,
Tu; Ryan, Michael ”Mike” J.; Vadia; Van Kerkhove, Maria D.;
Diego; Foulkes, Imogen; Ondelam, Charles; Gretler, “WHO audio
emergencies coronavirus press conference,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/transcripts/who
-audio-emergencies-coronavirus-press-conference-full-20mar2020.pdf
[5] J. Bay, J. Kek, A. Tan, C. S. Hau, L. Yongquan, J. Tan, and T. A.
Quy, “BlueTrace : A privacy-preserving protocol for community-driven
contact tracing across borders,” p. 9, 2020.

[6] Apple Inc. and Google LLC., “Exposure Notification,” May 2020.
[7] J. Snow and M. Mallon, “The security behind the NHS contact tracing
app,” pp. 1–14, 2020.
[8] P. Mozur, R. Zhong, and A. Krolik, “In Coronavirus Fight, China
Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags,” New York, NY, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/chi
na-coronavirus-surveillance.html
[9] Neil.
Ferguson
et
al.,
“Report
9:
Impact
of
nonpharmaceutical
interventions
(NPIs)
to
reduce
COVID19
mortality and healthcare demand,” London: Imperial College
London, Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fel
lowships/Imperial-College-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf
[10] M. McKee and D. Stuckler, “If the world fails to protect the economy,
covid-19 will damage health not just now but also in the future,” Nature
Medicine, pp. 1–3, 2020.
[11] “The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. CEPI welcomes
UK Government’s funding and highlights need for $2 billion to
develop a vaccine against COVID-19 ,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://cepi.net/news cepi/2-billion-required-to-develop-a-vaccine-aga
inst-the-covid-19-virus/
[12] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay, L. AbelerDörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser, “Quantifying sarscov-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact
tracing,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6491, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6491/eabb6936
[13] India Goverment, “Aarogya Setu Mobile App,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.mygov.in/aarogya-setu-app/
[14] Department
of
Health
Australia,
“The
COVIDSafe
Application,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2020/04/covidsaf
e-application-privacy-impact-assessment-agency-response.pdf
[15] D.-T. task group, “Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing,”
no. April, p. 33, 2020.
[16] P.-P. e.V. i.Gr, “Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.pepp-pt.org/content
[17] P. Voigt and A. v. d. Bussche, The EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR): A Practical Guide, 1st ed. Springer Publishing
Company, Incorporated, 2017.
[18] B. Cao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Mumtaz, Z. Zhou, and M. Peng,
“When internet of things meets blockchain: Challenges in distributed
consensus,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 133–139, 2019.
[19] H. Xu, P. Klaine, O. Onireti, B. Cao, M. A. Imran, and L. Zhang,
“Blockchain-enabled Resource Management and Sharing for 6G Communications,” Digital Communications and Networks, 2020.
[20] S. Underwood, “Blockchain beyond bitcoin,” Tech. Rep., tech. Rep. 11,
Sutardja Center for Entrepreneurship & Technology Technical Report.
UC Berkeley (jun 2016.
[21] C. Bendiksen, S. Gibbons, and E. Lim, “The bitcoin mining networktrends, marginal creation cost, electricity consumption & sources,”
CoinShares Research, vol. 21, 2018.
[22] Apple, “Apple T2 Security Chip,” Tech. Rep. October, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.apple.com/euro/mac/shared/docs/Apple T2 Sec
urity Chip Overview.pdf
[23] Department of Health, “Confidentiality: NHS code of practice,”
Published following a major public consultation, pp. 1–45, September
2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/syste
msandservices/infogov/codes/confcode.pdf
[24] U. Department Of Defense, “Global Positioning System Standard
Positioning Service,” Www.Gps.Gov, no. September, pp. 1 – 160, 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://www.gps.gov/technical/ps/2008-SPS-perfo
rmance-standard.pdf
[25] OpenStreetMap, “OpenStreetMap.” [Online]. Available: https://www.
openstreetmap.org/
[26] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, “Contact tracing:
Public health management of persons, including healthcare workers,
having had contact with COVID-19 cases in the European Union,”
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, Tech.
Rep. February, 2020.
[27] “John the Ripper benchmarks,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//openwall.info/wiki/john/benchmarks
[28] R. Rivest, “The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm,” Tech. Rep., apr
1992. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1321
[29] Oak Ridge National Laboratory, “ORNL Launches Summit
Supercomputer,” Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ornl.gov/news/ornl-launches-summi
t-supercomputer

13

[30] Y. Sun, L. Zhang, G. Feng, B. Yang, B. Cao, and M. A. Imran,
“Blockchain-enabled wireless internet of things: Performance analysis
and optimal communication node deployment,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2019.
[31] Y. Sun, J. Cao, M. Ma, H. Li, B. Niu, and F. Li, “Privacy-preserving
device discovery and authentication scheme for d2d communication in
3gpp 5g hetnet,” 02 2019, pp. 425–431.

