COVID-19 PUZZLE IN CHINA: A SERENDIPITOUS INTERPLAY BETWEEN
TRANSMISSIBILITY AND SOCIAL DISTANCING MEASURES

Magdalena Djordjevic,1,†,*, Marko Djordjevic,2,† ,* Igor Salom,1 Andjela Rodic,2 Dusan Zigic,1
Ognjen Milicevic,3 Bojana Ilic1
1

Institute of Physics Belgrade, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

2

Computational Systems Biology Group, Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

3

Department for Medical Statistics and Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,

Serbia.
*

Correspondence: magda@ipb.ac.rs, dmarko@bio.bg.ac.rs

†

Equally contributed to this work.

Abstract:

A number of models in mathematical epidemiology have been developed to account for control
measures such as vaccination or quarantine. However, COVID-19 has brought unprecedented social
distancing measures, with a challenge on how to include these in a manner that can explain the data,
but avoid overfitting in parameter inference. We here develop a simple non-homologous model,
where social distancing effects are introduced analogous to course grained models of gene
expression control in systems biology. We apply our approach to understand drastic differences in
COVID-19 infection and fatality counts (observed between Hubei (Wuhan) and other Mainland
China provinces), which we explain through interplay of transmissibility and effective protection
differences. That is, we obtain a negative feedback (also commonly encountered in systems biology)
between transmissibility and effects of social distancing, with Hubei being an outlier with both large
transmissibility and lower social distancing effects. While Case Fatality Rate is significantly larger
for Hubei, we find that Infection Fatality Rates (IFRs) are much more uniform/consistent across all
the provinces. Even for Wuhan, our inferred Infection Attack Rate is much below the herd immunity
threshold, raising a major reemission risk. The obtained results demonstrate applicability of our
developed method to extract key infection parameters directly from the data (publicly available for
a number of countries), so that it can be applied globally to potential future outbreaks of COVID19, or other infectious diseases.

Introduction
On January 31st, The World Health Organization (WHO) classified COVID-19 outbreak as the
Public Health Emergency of International concern [1], due to the epidemics in the People’s Republic
of China (PRC) that originated in Wuhan (Hubei province) [2] . WHO classified the infection spread
as a pandemic [3] on March 11th, which followed large secondary outbreaks in Europe, while later
US became a new hotspot [4]. The imposed restrictions in different countries ranged from mild to
severe, with a significant impact on people’s lives, and likely notable future economic consequences
[3,5]. After unprecedented containment and infection suppression measures, PRC announced the
end of the epidemics on March 29th [6].
Progression of the infection in PRC seems highly intriguing, as Hubei (with only 4% of PRC
population) shows an order of magnitude larger number of confirmed infection cases (Fig. 1A), and
two order of magnitude higher fatalities (Fig. 1B) compared to the total sum in all other Mainland
China provinces. The epidemics was unfolding well before the Wuhan closure (with the reported
symptom onset of the first patient on December 1st 2019), and within the period of huge population
movement, which started two weeks before January 25th (the Chinese Lunar New Year) [7]. As a
rough baseline, a modeling study [8] based on the Wuhan infection dynamics, estimated as many as
150,000 confirmed cases per day in Chongqing alone (due to its large population coupled with
intense travel volume with Wuhan) – instead, the actual (reported) peak number for all Mainland
China provinces outside Hubei was just 831.

Fig. 1. Infection and fatality counts for Hubei vs. all other provinces. Number of (A) Confirmed infections, (B)
Fatality cases. Zero on the horizontal axis corresponds to the time from which the data are taken (January 23 rd), which
also coincides with the Wuhan closure. Red circles correspond to the observed Hubei counts. Blue squares correspond
to the sum of the number of counts for all other provinces. The figure illustrates a puzzling difference in the number of
counts between Hubei alone, and the sum of all other mainland China provinces.

Magnitude of the subsequent outbursts in Europe and USA is comparably even more surprising. For
example, Ireland, with the population size of 4.9 million (two orders of magnitude smaller than PRC
population), as of June 15th has almost two times more confirmed infection cases than all Mainland
China except Hubei (~25.000 compared to ~13.000) and more than order of magnitude larger
number of fatalities (~1.700 compared to 116). Such extreme disproportions have created a public
media controversy [9,10], where e.g., “The New York Times” reported that the Central Intelligence
Agency has been warning the USA administration that China is underreporting their coronavirus
cases [11]. A political controversy also unfolded, where similar concerns have been publicly
expressed by the highest ranking USA, France and UK officials [12], and subsequently strongly
denied by PRC [13].
The controversy above underlines a challenge for computational modeling. The drastic differences
may be a consequence of an interplay between the virus transmissibility (influenced by
environmental and demographic factors) and the effectiveness of the protection measures. Both can
significantly change between different provinces (more generally different countries/regions), and
the model has to infer this from available data (commonly the number of infection counts, publicly
available for a large number of countries/regions). While the measures such as vaccination or
quarantine are well established in mathematical epidemiology[14-16], COVID-19 brought a
challenge to account for previously unprecendated social distancing measures, taken by majority of
countries, but which have been particularly drastic in China. Social distancing has been (up to now)
accounted for by the direct changes in the transmissability term [17,18], which, however,
corresponds to introducing a phenomenological dependence in otherwise mechanistic model (see
also the section below). That is, to be included consistently, the social distancing should move
individuals from one compartment to the other, as also standardly implemented for vaccination or
quarantine. Moreover, while the control measures are commonly accounted for by homologous
models [15] (with time independent terms) social distancing should depend on time, as it is
introduced at a certain point in epidemics (in a more complicated case, it may also progress
gradually).
To account for a time dependent control measures we will here use analogies with modeling
intracellular processes from systems biology. Both systems biology and mathematical epidemiology
use compartmental models based on the mass action law (or sometimes more complex kinetics, like
Michaelis-Menten law, taking saturations into account). Moreover, in systems biology, one often
has to account for both growth (analogous to disease transmission) and strong regulation (analogous
to control measures)[19]. To address the balance between model complexity and applicability to real

data, coarse-grained models of gene regulation (where this regulation is also often time-dependent,
e.g. turned on by a regulatory signal), have been used with success [20-23]. For example, we
previously used such models to explain experimental measurements (including those at single-cell
level) [24-26], infer system design principles [27], and analyze system dynamical features [28]. We
will here apply a similar approach, where a minimal mechanistic model will be constructed in terms
of ability to explain the data with smallest number of parameters, so that relevant infection
progression properties can be inferred without overfitting.
In this study, we will therefore develop a method to analyze the puzzling differences in dynamics
trajectories in Mainland China provinces, which will also be more generally applicable in terms of
understanding regional differences in outburst dynamics. The unintuitive data from PRC may put
strong constraints on the underlying infection progression parameters and allow understanding:
1. What interplay between the transmissibility and the suppression measure effects is responsible
for the large difference in the count numbers between Hubei and the rest of PRC?
2. What is the Infected Fatality Rate (IFR, the number of fatalities per total number of infected
cases) in PRC? Case Fatality Rate (CFR, the number of fatalities per confirmed/detected cases)
can be obtained directly from the data, but is highly sensitive to the testing coverage. IFR is a
more fundamental mortality parameter, as it does not depend on the testing coverage, but is
however much harder to determine, due to the unknown number of infected cases.
3. What is the infection attack rate (AR), i.e. a fraction of population that got infected (and
presumably became resistant afterwards), in Hubei and other provinces? Estimating AR allows
understanding the risks that the epidemic will reinitiate. As this study is completed, PRC
announced that they will assess AR in Wuhan through serology tests on almost entire Wuhan
population [29], which will allow a direct comparison with our predictions.
Addressing these questions allows understanding of both different response policies, and inherent
risks posed by the pandemics, and will enable future cross-country comparisons. The developed
methodology will allow to readily analyze future outbreaks of COVID-19 and other infectious
diseases, as it depends on inference from straightforward and publically available data.
Model and parameter inference
We developed a model that takes into account all main qualitative features of the infection
progression under suppression measures. The model however remains simple enough to estimate
the key dynamics parameters, individually for each of the provinces. We opt for a deterministic
model, as it allows a robust and computationally less demanding parameter inference [30]. The case

counts are also well in a commonly considered deterministic range (>10), while the transmission
process is not strongly non-linear (see below) – for a linear system, mean of the stochastic
trajectories corresponds to the deterministic solution [31].
Classical SIR or SEIR models (or their modifications) were up to now used to predict or explain
different features of COVID-19 infection dynamics [17,32-35]. We here utilize SEIR framework,
due to COVID-19 latency period, which (due to a latency delay) shows significantly different
dynamics compared to the infected population. We thus modify SEIR model, to take into account
social distancing (lockdowns, school and university closures, infection induced behavioral changes),
consistent with drastic non-pharmaceutical interventions applied in PRC. Quarantine by detecting
(and subsequently containing) some fraction of the infected is also explicitly taken into account,
which accounts for (presumably) large number of the infected that are not detected [5]:
dS / dt    I  S / N    t   S

(1)

dE / dt    I  S / N    E

(2)

dI / dt    E    I      I

(3)

dD / dt      I  h  D  m  D

(4)

dH / dt  h  D

(5)

dF / dt  m  D

(6)

S, E, I, D, H, F, N are, respectively: susceptible, exposed, infected, active detected, healed
(recovered), fatalities and the total population number. The parameter notation is the following: β the infection rate in a fully susceptible population; α(t) - the time dependent protection rate, i.e., the
rate with which the population moves from susceptible to protected category, quantifying the impact
of the social protection measures. σ - inverse of the latency period; γ - inverse of the infectious
period; δ - inverse of the period of the infected detection/diagnosis; ε - the detection efficiency
quantifying the fraction of diagnosed infected population; h - the recovery rate; m - the mortality
rate.
In Eq. (1), the susceptible pool is depleted due to both the infection process, and the social distancing
measures - moving the susceptible to the protected compartment. Note that we here introduce social
distancing consistent with the SEIR compartmental mechanistic structure, so that susceptible move
to the protected category with rate α(t). The nonlinearity appears only through the “infection”
(β·S·I)/N term. In Eq. (2), the latent population increases due to the infection events, and decreases
due to a delayed transition to the infected with rate σ. In Eq. (3), the infected population is increased
due to this transition, removed with rate γ, or detected (and isolated/quarantined) with rate ε·δ. Eq.

(4) describes the dynamics of active detected cases, which increase due to detection of the infected,
or decrease due to the recovery or fatalities. Eqs. (5) and (6) follow directly from Eq. (4). Note that
the dynamics of the protected dP/dt = α(t)S, and the resistant dR/dt = γI compartments is not
explicitly included in Eqs. (1) - (6), as it does not impact the observable variables (D, H, F). The
corresponding conservation is S+E+I+D+H+F+P+R=N.
The main difficulty in parameter inference is that healing and mortality rates (h and m) are timedependent, i.e. they, respectively, significantly increase and decrease with time – this can be directly
obtained from Eqs. (5) and (6). Consequently, instead of the active detected cases D (which depend
on time-dependent h and m rates), we propose as the main observable the total number of detected
(diagnosed) cases Dt=D+H+F, i.e. the sum of active cases, recovered cases and fatalities:

dDt dt      I ,

(7)

where this equation substitutes Eqs. (4) - (6), conveniently removing the rates h and m from our
analysis.
The protection rate α(t) is taken as 0 before t0 (the onset of social measures), and constant value (α)
afterwards. The social distancing is therefore introduced analogously to regulation by protein or
transcript decay in systems biology, with onset at t0. Instead of the step function used here, a more
gradual switch is often introduced through a Hill function, but this would introduce an additional
parameter (Hill constant), which is here not necessary due to a very rapid introduction of social
distancing measures (i.e. a large value of Hill constant is assumed, where in this limit Hill function
becomes unit step function). Introduction of α(t) in this form also allows to more easily
conceptualize parameter inference. Before t0, social distancing does not take effect, and the measures
introduced at t0 will take effect on Dt only ~10 days later, as this is about the time between infection
and detection/diagnosis [2]. Consequently, for the first t0+10 days. Dt curve reflects transmission
without suppression measures, characterized by R0,free (see below); social distancing takes effect
afterwards, and α can be inferred from the subsequent suppressed growth of Dt.
Consequently, by combining Eq. (1) before t0 (when α(t)=0) with Eq. (3), we obtain the basic
reproduction rate in the absence of applied social distancing measures (α), R0,free = β/(γ+ε·δ).
Notation R0,free corresponds to a definition of R0 in a completely susceptible population in the
absence of social distancing [36,37]. R0,e, which corresponds to the definition of R0 that does not
require the absence of social distancing (only non-resistant population) can be obtained from


R0,e    S  t  N exp   t  dt
0

[18]. From this, R0,e = β/(γ+ε·δ+) [32] can be recovered, under the

assumption of sufficiently strong α and small t0 (immediately effective measures), so that from Eq.

(1) S(t) ~ exp (αt); R0,e is consequently always smaller than R0,free. We use R0,free in the further
analysis, in line with a goal of our work, to separate the transmissibility influenced by biological,
climate and sociodemographic qualities, from social distancing interventions.
In addition to R0,free, α and t0, two initial conditions (I0 and E0), and the detection efficiency ε, are
unknown and may differ between the provinces. σ and γ characterize the fundamental infection
processes, not expected to change from one province to another, and have consistent values between
independent studies (γ = 0.4 days-1, σ = 0.2 days-1) [38,39]. How different properties of Dt curve
determine these unknown parameters? Early in the infection, almost the entire population is
susceptible (S≈N), so Eqs. (2) and (3) become linear, and decoupled from the rest of the system.
This sets the ratio of I0 to E0, through the eigenvector components with the dominant (positive)
Jacobian eigenvalue, where this eigenvalue, corresponding to the initial slope of log(Dt) curve, sets
the value of β. From Eq. (7) one can see that the product of I0 and ε·δ is set by dDt/dt at the initial
time (t=0). Later dynamics of the Dt curve is determined by the combination tα = t0 + 1/α (which we
denote as protection time), setting the time at which ~1/2 of the population moves to the protected
category. We also numerically checked this, i.e. t0 can be lowered at the expense of increasing 1/α,
without affecting the fit quality. For the remaining independent parameter (I0), Dt curve saturates
when the infected are depleted, so the saturation time depends on the scale (height) of the infected
curve, which sets I0. Therefore, as the number of characteristic dynamics features is at least equal to
the number of fit parameters, over-fitting is not expected. For few provinces, we however observed
that I0 can be decreased compared to the best fit value, without noticeably affecting the fit quality.
For these provinces, we chose the lowest I0 value that still leads to a comparably good fit. This
allows to obtain the most conservative (i.e., as high as consistent with the data) IFR estimate, as the
reported number of fatalities for provinces other than Hubei are surprisingly low.
Model, parameter inference, and uncertainties, are estimated separately for each province. However,
within a given province, demographic, special, or population activity (network effects)
heterogeneities [14,40], or seasonality effects [41], are not taken into account. These are potentially
important, particularly for projections (longer term predictions of infection dynamics under different
scenarios), and can be readily included in our model. Such extensions would however complicate
parameter inference, due to increase in parameter number, as this may either lead to overfitting, or
require special/additional data that may be available only for a limited number of countries/regions
(which would limit generality of our proposed method). More complex model structure may also
obscure a straightforward relationship between the model parameters and distinct dynamical
features of the confirmed case count curve analyzed above. In this work we therefore employ the

model structure and parameter inference introduced above on widely available case count data, as a
proof of the principle for generality of our proposed approach, while the inclusion of additional
effects is left for future work.
We further denote our model as εα-SEIR, where εα denotes that it takes into account not only the
basic (unsuppressed) infection dynamics, but also the effective social distancing (through α) and
joint quarantine/detection processes (through ε). εα-SEIR was numerically solved by Runge-Kutta
method [42] for each parameter combinations. Parameter values were inferred by exhaustive search
over a wide parameter range, to avoid reaching local minimum of the objective function (R2). To
infer the unknown parameters, we fit (by minimizing R2) εα-SEIR to the observed total number of
detected Dt for each province. As an alternative to exhaustive search, some of many optimization
techniques used in epidemics modelling, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach,
can be used instead [16,41] – exhaustive search is however straightforward, guarantees that global
minimum were estimated through Monte-Carlo simulations [43], individually for each province
with assumption that count numbers follow Poisson distribution. Monte-Carlo simulations were
found as the most reliable estimate of the fit parameter uncertainties for non-linear fit [44], where in
our case a closed form expression is moreover not available. Monte-Carlo simulations also serve as
an independent check for overfitting, as in that case datapoint perturbations would lead to large
parameter uncertainties. P values for extracted parameter differences between provinces are
estimated by t-test.
Results
We used εα-SEIR with the parameter inference described above, to analyze all Mainland China
provinces, with the exception of Tibet, where only one COVID-19 case was reported. Parameters
were estimated separately for each of the 30 provinces. In Fig. 2A and B, we show that our model
can robustly explain the observed Dt, in the cases of large outburst (Hubei on Fig. 2A), as well as
for all other provinces, where Dt is in the range from intermediate (e.g., Guangdong) to low (e.g.,
Inner Mongolia). Provinces in Fig. 2B were selected to cover the entire range of observed Dt (from
lower to higher counts), while comparably good fits were obtained for other provinces, which were
all included in the further analysis. Our method is also robust with respect to data perturbations
(which might be frequent), e.g., in the case of Hubei (Wuhan), a large number of counts was added
on Feb. 12th, based on clinical diagnosis (CT scan) [2], which is apparent as a discontinuity in
observed Dt in Fig. 2A. The model however interpolates this discontinuity, finding a reasonable
description of the overall data.

We back propagated the dynamics inferred for Hubei, to estimate that January 5th (±4 days) was the
onset of the infection exponential growth in the population (not to be confused with the appearance
of first infections, which likely happened in December [2]). This agrees well with [2] (cf. Fig. 3A),
which tracked cases according to their symptom onset (shifted for ~12 days with respect to
detection/diagnosis, cf. Fig. 3B), and coincides with WHO reports on social media that there is a
cluster of pneumonia cases – with no deaths – in Wuhan [45]. Since our analysis does not directly
use any information prior to January 23rd, this agreement provides confidence in our I0 (see above)
estimate.

Fig. 2. Model predictions: comparison with data and key parameter estimates. Predictions (compared to data) of
confirmed infection counts and for (A) Hubei, (B) other Mainland China provinces. The observed counts are shown by
dots, and our model predictions by dashed curves. Names of the provinces are indicated in the legend, with provinces
selected to cover the full range of the observed total detected counts. The distribution with respect to provinces of (C)
the basic reproduction number, in the absence of social distances, R0,free, (D) the protection time tα. (E) Case Fatality
Rate. (F) Infected Fatality Rate. The values for Hubei are indicated by the red bars.

Key parameters inferred from our analysis are summarized in Fig. 2C-F, with individual results and
errors for all the provinces shown in the Supplement table S1. Fig. 2C shows the distribution of
R0,free. Note that R0,free might depend on demographic (population density, etc.) and climate factors
(temperature, humidity…), which are not controllable, but is unrelated to the applied social
distancing measures (see above). It is known that R0 value can strongly depend on the model, e.g.
the number of introduced compartments[16]; accordingly, a wide range of R0,e values were reported
for China in the literature [46,47]. Consequently, a clear advantage of our study is that parameters
for all China provinces were determined from the same model and data set, which allows direct

comparisons. Our obtained average R0,free for provinces outside of Hubei is 5.3±0.3, in a reasonable
agreement with a recent estimate (≈5.7) [47]. Furthermore, we observe that R0,free for Hubei is a far
outlier with the value of 8.2±0.4, which is notably larger than for other provinces with p~10-11. This
then strongly suggests that demographic and climate factors that determine R0,free, played a decisive
role in a large outburst in Hubei vs. other provinces, which we further address below.
Distribution of protection time tα for the provinces is shown in Fig. 2D, with the value for Hubei
indicated in red. The mean for the other provinces is 6.6±0.2 days. That is, we observe that the
suppression measures were efficiently implemented, with ~½ of the population moving to the
protected category within a week from Wuhan closure. The protection time for Hubei of 8.3±0.2
days was longer, which is statistically significant at p~10-11 level. The estimated less efficient
protection in the case of Hubei may also be an important contributing factor in the surprising
difference in Hubei vs. other provinces, which we further investigate below.
CFR distribution, based on the fatality numbers reported for Hubei and other provinces is shown in
Fig. 2E. These numbers are not based on the model predictions, i.e. can be straightforwardly
obtained by dividing the total number of fatalities with the total number of detected cases. CFR for
other provinces with a mean of 1.2±0.4%, is significantly smaller compared to CFR for Hubei, which
was 4.6% before the correction on April 17th, and 6.5% after the correction (with 1290 fatalities
added to Wuhan). This large difference in CFR between Hubei and other provinces further
accentuates the differences noted in Fig. 1.
IFR distribution, which provides a much less biased measure of the infection mortality, is shown in
Fig. 2F. In distinction to CFR, estimated IFR shows a much smaller difference between Hubei
(0.15%±0.09%) and other provinces (0.056±0.007%). Therefore, while Hubei is a clear outlier with
respect to CFR, we observe similar IFR values for all PRC provinces, where few provinces have
even higher IFR than Hubei. The ratio of IFR to CFR equals the fraction of all infected that got
detected (detection coverage). We estimate that the mean detection coverage for all provinces except
Hubei is higher than detection coverage for Hubei (4.5±0.9% vs. 2±2%). This difference is
responsible for decrease by a factor of two from CFR to IFR for Hubei, compared to the other
provinces, and consequently for more uniform mortality estimates at IFR level. Xinjiang has the
highest IFR of 0.25±0.09%, so that Hubei is not an outlier anymore.
In Fig. 3A, two key infection progression parameters are plotted against each other: protection time
tα vs. transmissibility R0,free. Unexpectedly, there is a high negative correlation, with Pearson
correlation coefficient R =  0.70, which is statistically highly significant p~10-5, where these two
are a priori unrelated (see above). Even for R0,e, stronger social distancing measures would decrease

it (see above), leading to a tendency to be positively correlated with tα, oppositely from the strong
negative correlation in Fig. 3A. Therefore, higher transmissibility is genuinely related with a shorter
protection time (larger effect of the suppression measures). Intuitively, this could be understood as
a negative feedback loop, commonly observed in systems biology [22,48], where larger R0,free leads
to steeper initial growth in the infected numbers, which may elicit stronger measures.

Fig. 3. Interplay of transmissibility and effective social distancing. (A) The correlation plot of tα vs. R0,free for all
provinces, where the point corresponding to Hubei is marked in red. (B) The effect (on the Hubei dynamics of infected
and latent cases) of reducing R0,free and tα to the mean values of other PRC provinces. Both the unperturbed Hubei
dynamics and the sum of infected and latent cases for all other provinces are included as a references.

The two main properties of the Hubei outburst are therefore higher R0,free and tα compared to other
provinces. In Fig. 3B, we investigate how these two properties separately affect the Wuhan outburst
for latent and infected cases, where unperturbed Hubei dynamics is shown by the red full curve. We
first reduce only R0,free from the Hubei value, to the mean value for all other provinces (the dashdotted green curve). We see that this reduction substantially lowers the peak of the curve, though it
still remains wide. Next, instead of decreasing R0,free, we decrease the protection tα to the mean value
for all other provinces (dashed orange curve). While reducing tα also significantly lowers the peak
of the curve, its main effect is in narrowing the curve, i.e. reducing the outburst time. Finally, when
R0.free and tα are jointly reduced, we obtain the (dotted purple) curve that is both significantly lower
and narrower than the original Hubei progression. This curve comes quite close to the curve that
presents the sum of all other provinces (full blue curve) - the dotted curve remains somewhat above
this sum, mainly because the initial number of latent and infected cases is somewhat higher for
Hubei compared to the sum of all other provinces. This synergy between the transmissibility and the
suppression measures, will be further discussed below.

Discussion
We here formulated a new method for analyzing infection transmission dynamics, under strong
suppression measures. In addition to its main contribution of taking into account social distancing
in a manner suitable for parameter inference, the model also takes into account quarantine and
diagnosis of only a fraction of the infected pool, and goes around the problem of time dependent
recovery and mortality rates. The non-homologous introduction of the social distancing allows to
clearly separate the infection transmission in the absence of social distancing, for the subsequent
suppressed growth. The model is introduced with the minimal number of parameters in the case of
China, but can be straightforwardly generalized to the case of more gradually introducing the social
distancing measures.
We applied our method to the infection progression in PRC, where it allowed the comprehensive
parameter inference for all the provinces, consistently from the same model. Specifically, we
analyzed the puzzling difference in the number of counts observed between Hubei and other
Mainland China provinces, which has in part created first public media, and then high-level political,
controversy (see Introduction). A naive explanation of the puzzle might be that closing Wuhan
prevented the influx of the infected to other Chinese provinces. It was however previously shown
that, at the start of the travel ban, most Chinese cities had already received many infected travelers
[49,50], which is also consistent with the fact that the initial number of detected (and our estimates
of the infected) cases, were similar in Wuhan compared to the sum in all other provinces.
We here obtained that Hubei was an outlier with respect to two key infection progression parameters:
having significantly larger R0,free, and a longer time needed to move a sizable fraction of the
population from susceptible to protected category. It is interesting that the initial origin of the
epidemic (Hubei) has also a significantly larger R0,free compared to all other provinces, as in principle
these two do not have to be related. While stricter measures were formally introduced in Hubei, the
initial phase of the outburst put a large strain on the system, arguably leading to less effective
measures compared to other provinces [13].
The fact that the initial epidemic in Hubei was not followed by similar outbursts in the rest of PRC
may be understood as a serendipitous interplay of the two factors noted above. While both smaller
R0,free and lower half-protection time (more efficient measures) significantly suppress the infection
curve, their effect is also qualitatively different. While lowering R0,free more significantly suppresses
the peak, decreasing the half-protection time significantly reduces the outburst duration.
Consequently, the synergy of these two effects appears to lead to drastically suppressed infection
dynamics in other Mainland China provinces compared to Hubei. The number of detected

(diagnosed) cases in entire PRC is therefore, though unintuitive, well consistent with the model, and
is explainable by a seemingly reasonable combination of circumstances.
On April 17th Wuhan fatality count was increased for 50%, which is taken into account by our
analysis, but which makes the difference in fatalities between Hubei and other provinces even more
drastic. As, at least, a partial explanation for the fatality rates, we here find a significant change in
relative differences between CFR and IFR. While CFR is more than five times larger for Hubei, the
numbers appear much more self-consistent at the level of IFR, with Hubei comparable to other PRC
provinces. We show that this is due to smaller testing coverage in Hubei, which appears to be
consistent with known testing capacities (10000 tests per day in Hubei, vs. 40000 tests per day in all
other provinces with significantly smaller total infection cases) [51]. Ethnicity might also contribute
to IFRs, as we inferred the highest IFR (surpassing that of Hubei, even with the most recent revision)
for Xinjiang province. Uyghur majority in Xinjiang have been genetically linked with mixed
European/West Asian and East Asian ancestry [52], which in that respect might better reflect
apparently larger mortality in European and US hotspots; these observations are in line with our
large scale analysis of current COVID hotspots (in preparation).
Our analysis also indicates a very low overall infection attack rate (AR). That is, we obtained that a
fraction of PRC population that got infected (and possibly resistant), is just 5±3% for Hubei, and
about two orders of magnitude lower for other provinces. The obtained low AR (i.e. the associated
low fraction of presumably resistant population), is well below both classical [14] and recently
recalculated (by taking into account age and activity structured population) heard immunity level
[40]. This may be concerning in a longer term, since what really quelled the infection was rapidly
moving the population from susceptible to protected category through social distancing measures.
These measures forced the infection curve to an essentially unstable fixed point, as stochastic
simulations showed that as few as 5 individuals are sufficient for the infection onset [53].
Summary and outlook
In this study, we extracted key infection parameters from the data that are readily available and
publicly accessible (both for PRC and a number of other countries), so that, in a nutshell, our
approach is of a wide applicability. To our best knowledge, such parameters (necessary to assess
any future COVID-19 risks), were not extracted by other computational approaches. Overall, our
study infers that COVID-19 in PRC has been a highly contagious disease, with transmissibility
significantly larger than one for all the provinces. Moreover, COVID-19 spreads in an almost
completely naive population, even after the first infection wave (AR is much below the heard
immunity level, even for Hubei). We showed that unintuitive dissimilarity in the infection

progression for Hubei vs. other Mainland China provinces is consistent with our model, which
demonstrates that regional differences may drastically shape the infection outbursts. This also shows
that comparisons in terms of confirmed case or fatality counts (even when normalized for population
size), between COVID-19 and other infectious diseases, or between different regions for COVID19, are not feasible, and that parameter inference from quantitative models (individually for different
affected regions) is necessary. While impact of intervention measures is clear (a significant decrease
in AR, including corresponding decrease in fatalities), the exact demographic and climate factors
that determine severity of outbursts are likely complex, and remain as a significant open research
problem.
Acknowledgmentѕ: MagD, IS, BI and DZ thank European Research Council for their support.
MarD acknowledges exchange of ideas through Shanghai-Islamabad-Belgrade joint innovation
center on Antibacterial Resistance (Grant No. 19430750600), “One Belt And One Road”
International Cooperation Projects.
Funding: Serbian Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development.
Autor Contributions: Conceptualization: MarD and MagD; Formal Analysis and Investigation: all
authors; Visualization: all authors; Writing – original draft: MarD and MagD; Writing – review and
editing: all authors.
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no clonflict of interest.
References
1. Organization WH (2020) Situation Report-11 Novel Coronavirus (2019-ncov) 31 January 2020.
2. Feng et al. Z (2020) The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases
(COVID-19)—China, 2020. China CDC Weekly 2: 113-122.
3. Organization WH (2020) Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): situation report, 70.
4. Dong E, Du H, Gardner L (2020) An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time.
The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20: 533-534.
5.
Organization
WH
Coronavirus
disease
2019
(COVID-19)
situation
reports.
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation.
6. Xinhua China publishes timeline on COVID-19 information sharing, int'l cooperation.
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-04/06/c_138951662.htm.
7. Chen S, Yang J, Yang W, Wang C, Bärnighausen T (2020) COVID-19 control in China during mass
population movements at New Year. The Lancet 395: 764-766.
8. Ting V (2020) China coronavirus: Hong Kong medical experts call for ‘draconian’ measures in city as
research estimates there are already 44,000 cases in Wuhan. South China Morning Post.
9. Campbell C, Gunia A (2020) China Says It's Beating Coronavirus. But Can We Believe Its Numbers?
TIME: Time Inc.
10. BBC (2020) Coronavirus: Why China's claims of success raise eyebrows.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-52194356.

11. Barnes JE (2020) C.I.A. Hunts for Authentic Virus Totals in China, Dismissing Government Tallies. The
New York Times: The New York Times.
12. McDonnel S (2020) Coronavirus: China outbreak city Wuhan raises death toll by 50%. BBC.
13. Xinhua (2020) Reality Check of US Allegations Against China on COVID-19
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-05/10/c_139044103.htm: Xinhua.
14. Diekmann O, Heesterbeek H, Britton T (2012) Mathematical tools for understanding infectious disease
dynamics: Princeton University Press.
15. Martcheva M (2015) An introduction to mathematical epidemiology: Springer.
16. Keeling MJ, Rohani P (2011) Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals: Princeton University
Press.
17. Tian H, Liu Y, Li Y, Wu C-H, Chen B, et al. (2020) An investigation of transmission control measures
during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science 368: 638-642.
18. Chowell G, Sattenspiel L, Bansal S, Viboud C (2016) Mathematical models to characterize early epidemic
growth: A review. Physics of life reviews 18: 66-97.
19. Djordjevic M, Rodic A, Graovac S (2019) From biophysics to ‘omics and systems biology. European
Biophysics Journal: 1-12.
20. Vilar JM, Guet CC, Leibler S (2003) Modeling network dynamics: the lac operon, a case study. The
Journal of cell biology 161: 471-476.
21. Ciliberto A, Novák B, Tyson JJ (2005) Steady states and oscillations in the p53/Mdm2 network. Cell
cycle 4: 488-493.
22. Phillips R, Kondev J, Theriot J, Garcia H (2012) Physical biology of the cell: Garland Science.
23. Narula J, Smith AM, Gottgens B, Igoshin OA (2010) Modeling reveals bistability and low-pass filtering
in the network module determining blood stem cell fate. PLoS computational biology 6.
24. Bogdanova E, Djordjevic M, Papapanagiotou I, Heyduk T, Kneale G, et al. (2008) Transcription
regulation of the type II restriction-modification system AhdI. Nucleic acids research 36: 1429-1442.
25. Morozova N, Sabantsev A, Bogdanova E, Fedorova Y, Maikova A, et al. (2016) Temporal dynamics of
methyltransferase and restriction endonuclease accumulation in individual cells after introducing a
restriction-modification system. Nucleic acids research 44: 790-800.
26. Klimuk E, Bogdanova E, Nagornykh M, Rodic A, Djordjevic M, et al. (2018) Controller protein of
restriction–modification system Kpn2I affects transcription of its gene by acting as a transcription
elongation roadblock. Nucleic acids research 46: 10810-10826.
27. Rodic A, Blagojevic B, Zdobnov E, Djordjevic M, Djordjevic M (2017) Understanding key features of
bacterial restriction-modification systems through quantitative modeling. BMC systems biology 11:
1.
28. Rodic A, Blagojevic B, Djordjevic M, Severinov K, Djordjevic M (2017) Features of CRISPR-Cas
regulation key to highly efficient and temporally-specific crRNA production. Frontiers in
microbiology 8: 2139.
29. Ni V (2020) Coronavirus: Can China test all of Wuhan in only 10 days? BBC: BBC.
30. Wilkinson DJ (2018) Stochastic modelling for systems biology. London: Chapman and Hall/CRC.
31. Gadgil C, Lee CH, Othmer HG (2005) A stochastic analysis of first-order reaction networks. Bulletin of
mathematical biology 67: 901-946.
32. Maier BF, Brockmann D (2020) Effective containment explains subexponential growth in recent
confirmed COVID-19 cases in China. Science 368: 742-746.
33. Weitz JS, Beckett SJ, Coenen AR, Demory D, Dominguez-Mirazo M, et al. (2020) Modeling shield
immunity to reduce COVID-19 epidemic spread. Nature Medicine. pp. 1-6.

34. Perkins A, Espana G (2020) Optimal control of the COVID-19 pandemic with non-pharmaceutical
interventions. medRxiv.
35. Maslov S, Goldenfeld N (2020) Window of Opportunity for Mitigation to Prevent Overflow of ICU
capacity in Chicago by COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:200309564.
36. Eubank S, Eckstrand I, Lewis B, Venkatramanan S, Marathe M, et al. (2020) Commentary on Ferguson,
et al.,“Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce COVID-19 Mortality and
Healthcare Demand”. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 82: 1-7.
37. Bar-On YM, Flamholz AI, Phillips R, Milo R (2020) SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) by the numbers. arXiv
preprint: arXiv:2003.12886.
38. Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, et al. (2020) Early dynamics of transmission
and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20: 553558.
39. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, et al. (2020) Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of
novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine.
40. Britton T, Ball F, Trapman P (2020) The disease-induced herd immunity level for Covid-19 is
substantially lower than the classical herd immunity level. arXiv preprint arXiv:200503085.
41. Wong GN, Weiner ZJ, Tkachenko AV, Elbanna A, Maslov S, et al. (2020) Modeling COVID-19
dynamics in Illinois under non-pharmaceutical interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:200602036.
42. Dormand JR, Prince PJ (1980) A family of embedded Runge-Kutta formulae. Journal of computational
and applied mathematics 6: 19-26.
43. Press WH, Flannery BP, Teukolsky SA, Vetterling WT (1986) Numerical recipes: The art of scientific
computing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
44. Cunningham RW (1993) Comparison of three methods for determining fit parameter uncertainties for the
Marquardt Compromise. Computers in Physics 7: 570-576.
45. WHO (2020) WHO Timeline - COVID-19. https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/27-04-2020-whotimeline---covid-19: World Health Organization.
46. Wu JT, Leung K, Bushman M, Kishore N, Niehus R, et al. (2020) Estimating clinical severity of COVID19 from the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nature Medicine 26: 506-510.
47. Sanche S, Lin YT, Xu C, Romero-Severson E, Hengartner N, et al. (2020) High Contagiousness and
Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerging infectious diseases
26.
48. Alon U (2019) An introduction to systems biology: design principles of biological circuits: CRC press.
49. Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova M, et al. (2020) The effect of travel restrictions
on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science 368: 395-400.
50. Quilty BJ, Diamond C, Liu Y, Gibbs H, Russell TW, et al. (2020) The effect of inter-city travel restrictions
on geographical spread of COVID-19: Evidence from Wuhan, China. medRxiv.
51. Wolfson LJ, Grais RF, Luquero FJ, Birmingham ME, Strebel PM (2009) Estimates of measles case
fatality ratios: a comprehensive review of community-based studies. International journal of
epidemiology 38: 192-205.
52. Xu S, Huang W, Qian J, Jin L (2008) Analysis of genomic admixture in Uyghur and its implication in
mapping strategy. The American Journal of Human Genetics 82: 883-894.
53. Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, et al. (2020) Feasibility of controlling COVID-19
outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health 8: 488-496.

