Spatial Modeling of COVID-19: Greece and Andalusia as Case Examples
P. G. Kevrekidis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003-4515, USA and
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

J. Cuevas-Maraver

arXiv:2005.04527v2 [q-bio.PE] 24 May 2020

Grupo de Fı́sica No Lineal, Departamento de Fı́sica Aplicada I,
Universidad de Sevilla. Escuela Politécnica Superior, C/ Virgen de Africa, 7, 41011-Sevilla, Spain and
Instituto de Matemáticas de la Universidad de Sevilla (IMUS). Edificio Celestino Mutis. Avda. Reina Mercedes s/n,
41012-Sevilla, Spain, Avda Reina Mercedes s/n, E-41012 Sevilla, Spain

Y. Drossinos
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, I-21027 Ispra (VA), Italy

Z. Rapti
Department of Mathematics and Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

G.A. Kevrekidis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003-4515, USA
We examine the spatial modeling of the outbreak of COVID-19 in two regions: the country of Greece and
the autonomous community of Andalusia in Spain. We start with a zero-dimensional (ODE-level) compartmental epidemiological model consisting of Susceptible, Exposed, (symptomatically) Infected, Hospitalized,
Asymptomatic, Recovered, and Deceased populations (SEIHARD). We emphasize the importance of the viral
latency period (reflected in the exposed population) and the key role of an asymptomatic population. We optimize model parameters for both regions by comparing predictions to the cumulative number of infected and
total number of deaths, the reported data we found to be most reliable. We model both the pre-quarantine and
post-quarantine evolution of the epidemic by a time-dependent change of the viral transmission rates that arises
in response to the containment measures. Subsequently, a spatially distributed version of the 0D model in the
form of convection-reaction-diffusion equations is developed. We consider that, after an initial localized seeding
of the infection, its spread is governed by the diffusivities of the asymptomatic and symptomatically infected
populations. We show that these models bear significant potential towards capturing both the well-mixed, zerodimentional description and the spatial expansion of the pandemic in the two regions. Veins of future work are
also explored.

2
I.

THE LAY OF THE LAND

In December 2019 in the 11 million people city of Wuhan in central China a severe outbreak of a respiratory disease emerged.
The responsible virus, SARS-CoV-2, is of zoonotic origin, and it is believed to have originated from bats and transmitted to
humans. It is a member of the Coronaviridae family, as were the viruses responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS) identified in 2002 in China and the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) that originated in Saudi Arabia a decade
later. However, contrary to its predecessors SARS-CoV-2 has a very significant transmissivity leading to substantially higher
morbidity and mortality. This resulted in the disease COVID-19 being declared a Public Health Emergency of International
Concern (PHEI) by January 30, and eventually a pandemic disease by the World Health Organization on March 11th 2020.
By the 1st of April, this global pandemic had already led to 823,626 confirmed cases worldwide in more than 200 countries.
As of this writing, the number of confirmed infections throughout the world has already eclipsed 5 million individuals with
well over 328 thousand deaths, a number rapidly increasing as major new focal points of the pandemic have emerged, first at
the south of Europe (Italy, Spain and France) and more recently in the UK and especially in the US, as well as Russia. The
race is presently on to identify a suitable vaccine (as well as to adapt therapeutic treatments against symptoms of COVID-19,
perhaps most notably pneumonia). Yet such efforts may be still a considerable time away and may not be immediately relevant
to (almost certainly the first wave and likely even to the second wave of) the current pandemic [1]. Hence, so-called “nontherapeutic interventions” [2, 3] have been brought to bear (often strictly so), most notably social distancing, self-quarantining
(when infected), and the use of personal protective equipment so as to mitigate the growth of the number of infections. In an
unprecedented for at least a two-generations setting, more than half of the planet’s population was under the effect of different
levels of such measures.
The urgency of this ongoing and rapidly developing global pandemic has redirected a significant volume of the research
community’s efforts in this particular direction. For biologists/clinicians, as well as for computational physicists/chemists, a
race against time is underway to understand the binding properties of the virus and its hacking of the RNA, the action of its
spike protein and how to inactivate it via suitable antibody mechanisms [4]. Aerosol scientists and virologists are trying to
understand the role of expelled, virus-loaded respiratory droplets in the transmission of the virus, and the importance of the
aerosol transmission mode, as opposed to direct or indirect contact transmission [5]. At the same time, a clear sense of urgent
need has emerged for mathematicians and epidemiologists to consider the spreading of the virus over the population. The focal
points of such studies have been extremely diverse: from isolated (or nearly isolated) entities such as small villages and cruise
ships [6], and cities [7], to states/provinces [8–10], and a large number of countries [11–15], aside of course from the prototypical
examples of Wuhan, China [16], as well as some of the hard-hit Italian provinces such as Lombardy [17]. Indeed, as of the present
writing there are around 5000 articles in arXiv, medRxiv and bioRxiv centered around the theme of COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2
alone, a rather staggering number given the (roughly) four months since the beginning of the pandemic.
Within this extremely diverse and rapidly evolving landscape, our team has identified a niche of significant deficiency in
the current level of modeling. In particular, the vast majority of the models developed essentially ignores the spatial element,
considering the country in the form of a well-mixed population that can be addressed at the level of ordinary differential equations
of the extremely widely (within the above references) used form of SIR models and multi-component, as well as multi-age
group generalizations thereof. While spatial generalizations of such models do exist [18, 19], they are more often at the level
of interesting models of pattern formation, rather than that of realistic population level settings. At the same time, there exist
isolated examples of models that take into account the structure of different types of networks. A particularly nice example in
this direction is the work of [20], which leverages the availability of Enron, Facebook and social graphs in the form of adjacency
matrix patterns that can be used to represent the connectivity within a country’s network.
Our aim is to expand along this vein and to enable a broad scale of spatial modeling, at the same time leveraging the unprecedented availability of data about this pandemic and the spatial connectivities/mobility data of the human population. The
approach that one can select along this niche of spatial resolution of the pandemic is, indeed, multifold. On the one hand, one
can aim to formulate a PDE model incorporating the ingredients of a generalized SIR formulation. At the same time, a complementary viewpoint that is far less computationally expensive but possibly quite informative in its own right is a metapopulation
network approach in the spirit of the work of [21]. Moreover, one can envision techniques (such as the equation-free modeling
framework [22]) that may enable the cross-linking of the above two approaches, e.g., the use of metapopulation network systems
to perform PDE-level tasks.
In the present work we focus on the PDE spatio-temporal modeling on the basis of an expanded variant of the classical SIR
model. We incorporate particularities of this virus, such as its latency period, i.e., that individuals exposed to the virus may be
infected but not infectious during the latency period, the significant fraction of infected and infectious individuals that do not
develop symptoms, etc. In Section II we present the spatial model, analyze first its ODE variant that will be used to perform
appropriate optimization of its parameters in the cases of the country of Greece (but without the islands, i.e., the mainland of
Greece) and the Spanish autonomous community of Andalusia. The selection may appear a bit disparate, yet we argue these
to be particularly interesting examples. Aside from their intrinsic interest to the authors, these roughly equally sized regions,
with similar population densities, exhibit significantly different, i.e., by an order of magnitude, number of deaths, illustrating
the potential impact of different policies. Upon optimizing the ODE results, we use their output to formulate the input of

3
the corresponding PDE framework and explain how to set up the latter within the software package COMSOL. Following the
formulation of both the ODE and PDE approach in section II, the results for the mainland of Greece and for Andalusia and their
respective interpretations and comparisons are offered in section III. We provide numerical results for key categories such as
cumulative infections and deaths, comparing the PDE results both with the available data for these regions and the associated
ODE results. Finally, in section IV we summarize our findings and present our conclusions offering a number of possibilities
towards future work.

II.

SETUP OF ODE AND PDE MODELS

We first explain the ODE model which is obtained from the full PDE model by removing the convection and diffusion “spatial
aspects” in the convection-reaction-diffusion equations of interest.
At the level of an ODE formulation, a relevant extension of the standard SIR model can incorporate some of the key features
of this virus, such as, e.g., that a fraction of the exposed population remains asymptomatic [23]. We thus start with a population
of susceptibles (S), which may become exposed (E) upon the emergence of the virus within the population. This represents the
well-documented [24] feature that the virus is latent within the host for a period of time, before he/she becomes infectious (able
to transmit the virus to susceptible hosts). After this latency period, exposed individuals, in turn, may become asymptomatically
infectious (A) at rate σA , or (symptomatically) infected (I) at rate σI . We assume here that both A and I can interact with
the susceptibles S with respective rates βSA and βSI to draw new members of the population into the group E of individuals
exposed to the virus. We note that the transmission rates β incorporate the total population size (ODE model) or the total
population density (PDE Model). A fraction of hosts in the I class may need hospitalization, thus giving rise to a population
of hospitalized (H) at rate γM . Among these, a fraction responds to the treatments, thus leading ultimately to a population of
recovered (R) at a rate (1 − ω)χ. At the same time, the seriously ill who are hospitalized yield also a number of deceased (D)
at a rate ωψ. Asymptomatically infected hosts recover at a rate MAR (i.e., asymptomatic recovered) and move into class AR
and the seriously ill recover at a rate (1 − γ)M ; in what follows, we have set these two rates to be equal. While AR could, in
principle, be merged with R, in our view, it is meaningful to maintain these two populations separate since R is a measurable
quantity within available COVID-19 data (and, hence, comparable to model predictions), while AR is not. Notice that the above
constants reflect both the population fraction partition (e.g., ω vs 1 − ω) and the (inverse) time scales (e.g., χ vs. ψ) for transition
between subgroups.
A weak effect of net change of the population due to other birth or other mortality factors (−µS) can be incorporated in
the susceptibles and can be adequately assessed from census data, yet we do not incorporate it in the D population aiming to
evaluate purely the deaths stemming from COVID-19. Here, we briefly note two points. The pool of susceptible individuals
is not significantly affected (over the time scale of our study) from this term which can be safely neglected for our purposes.
Secondly, one can include such a term in the rest of the populations involved in our study. However, the (underlying) health
conditions often involved in such mortality often lead to complications in the concurrent presence of COVID-19 and when this
leads to mortality, the latter is attributed to COVID-19. Hence, we do not include such a separate term in the rest of the equations.
The above specify the “ODE parameters” within the group; these reflect processes that happen either in an averaged way at
the “well mixed” level (when no spatial dependence is assigned) of the ODEs or processes that happen locally at every point in
space for the PDEs. We will return to this when we discuss parameter conversions in the next section. The relevant populations
and rates of conversion can be seen in a self-contained form in Fig. II.
The relevant population model at the PDE level reads:
St
Et
At
ARt
It
Ht
Rt
Dt

= ∇ (DS ∇S) − (~v · ∇)S − βSA SA − βSI SI−µS,
= ∇ (DE ∇E) − (~v · ∇)E + βSA SA + βSI SI − (σA + σI )E,
= ∇ (DA ∇A) − (~v · ∇)A + σA E − MAR A,
= ∇ (DAR ∇AR) − (~v · ∇)AR + MAR A,
= σI E − M I,
= γM I − (1 − ω)χH − ωψH,
= ∇ (DR ∇R) + (1 − γ)M I + (1 − ω)χH,
= ωψH.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

We now turn to the PDE properties of the model involving spatial spreading of the pandemic. Initially, we note that we do
not anticipate that infected (which should be self-quarantined), hospitalized (or at stages thereafter) will have a diffusivity, i.e.,
DI = DH = 0 in the initial installment of the model. As regards the R and AR, in principle they can have a diffusivity
(although there is a period of recovery), yet since it is fair to assume that these populations have immunity in the immediate
interval after their infection, we can assign DR = DAR = 0. However, an interesting possibility within the model is the
inclusion of population, as well as time dependent diffusion, and possibly also directed (along the direction of the velocity ~v )

4
𝐴
AR

A
𝑀𝐴𝑅

𝜎𝐴
𝛽𝑆𝐴 A
S

E
𝛽𝑆𝐼 𝐼

𝜎𝐼

𝜇
D

(1-𝛾)𝑀
𝐼

I

R
(1-𝜔) χ
𝛾𝑀
H
𝜔𝜓

D

FIG. 1. SEIHARD model

motion. As regards the remaining populations, it may be tempting to examine nonlinear variants where the diffusivity is larger
e.g. where the population is larger, reflecting the existence of a well-established transportation/mobility network. Nevertheless,
in the present work, we will initiate relevant considerations by assuming constant diffusivity of the susceptibles, the exposed,
and the asymptomatics. The latter are the key, given their mobility and spatial spreading for the corresponding spreading of the
pandemic in the context of Eqs. (1)-(8).
An additional important decision that can be incorporated at the level of the PDE model concerns the functional form of
the directional velocity ~v . In principle, this can be used to capture “daily practices” (e.g., going to work, spending time there,
commuting back and resting practices), but also longer temporal or spatial scales (e.g., trips from city to city, or country to
country). Motivated partially by the colloquial understanding of some of the case examples considered such as the spreading of
the pandemic in Greece [25], at the present level, we opt not to incorporate these effects but simply allow diffusion to perform the
relevant spreading. The idea within a given region (such as the mainland of Greece or Andalusia) then is that arriving infected
individuals, e.g., from international travel, form local hotspots within the E population and we examine the diffusional spreading
effect of the virus in the presence of the above local viral dynamics. We will see that this approach is not an unreasonable one
given the results that we obtain for the spreading of the PDE results with both the ODE ones and the data available online for the
cumulative infections and the deaths within the regions of interest. Naturally, it is hoped that this will be a seed study towards a
further refinement of such considerations on the basis of more accurate spatial data for the spreading of the disease.
In the results given in the next section, we have selected as our illustrative examples the case of the mainland of Greece and
of the autonomous community of Andalusia within Spain. While these examples may seem somewhat disparate, they bear some
significant advantages as regards their nature and their comparison. First off, they are regions of similar populations of about
8-10 million inhabitants. Greece has been praised in international media [26] regarding its handling of the COVID-19 crisis and
the effectiveness and promptness of the associated social-distancing measures. Additional relevant features of this region include
(a) day 0 of the infection and (b) the origin of the localized events thereof could be successfully identified, as well as (c) strict
lockdown effects went into place early on. Another example at the opposite end with very significant numbers of infections and
deaths is Spain. However, here there is a significant set of complications. Not only is Spain far larger in spatial and population
size, but importantly for the number of reported cases and especially the number of deaths, there is no universally accepted way
of reaching the relevant conclusive numbers across the 17 different autonomous communities. For all of the above reasons, and
also for reasons of clearer comparison of comparable sizes (and also for ones of intrinsic interest to the authors, admittedly), we
selected the autonomous community of Andalusia.
Having selected our target regions, the next complication is to formulate the solution of Eqs. (1)-(8) at the level of the autonomous community/country as a “two-dimensional spatial grid”. That is one significant complication toward spatial modeling
which we have addressed by utilizing the finite element package COMSOL Multiphysicsr [27]. We have inserted the regions’
map as a geometry within COMSOL and proceeded subsequently to form a triangulated mesh of the computational domain.
The next and also rather complex step is to formulate a population as an initial condition of susceptibles within the relevant
grid. Here, we have leveraged tools from the large scale geographic project World Pop [28]. This methodology encompasses

5
census data and enables via random forest models the generation of a gridded prediction of the population density at a resolution
of about 90 m. We have imported this type of data within our spatial country grids and via interpolation we are in a position to
simulate models of the type of Eqs. (1)-(8) with arbitrary choices of parameters, and, in principle, also initial conditions. This
is, in our view, a significant combined asset (the spatial grid of a region combined with an interpolated over this grid realistic
representation of population census data) towards modeling spreads of epidemics.
The crucial next step, within this line of modeling the spreading of the epidemic, is to identify suitable parameters, similarly
to what has been done in numerous earlier studies [30, 31] for the spread of the disease at the ODE level. To do so, we utilized
nonlinear optimization algorithms such as fmincon or the genetic algorithm based ga within Matlab. The parameters were
optimized to reproduce the time series of the reported total number of infected cases (C(t) = I(t) + H(t) + R(t) + D(t)) and
total number of deceased (D(t)). As expected for this large parameter space, initial parameter choices and parameter constraints
affect the parameters resulting from the optimization algorithms. In the next section, where we present the ODE parameters,
we argue that the suggested values are biologically and socially reasonable, and that they are in line with a number of features
known about the SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
At the level of parameters within a certain individual and how the virus acts on it “on average”, i.e., as concerns parameters
such as (σA , σI , M, γ, MAR , ω, χ, ψ), we preserve the same values at the PDE level as at the ODE one. The transmission
rates β are more complicated. Keeping in mind that at the PDE level the quantities, S, E, etc. are no longer populations, but
rather population densities [32] which integrate over the region’s spatial surface (through the respective surface integrals) to the
true population of each category, we can immediately infer that the units of such densities are proportional to l−2 where l is a
characteristic length-scale of the analysis. In that vein, the β’s need to be multiplied by l2 to dimensionally adapt between the
ODE and the corresponding PDE model. Indeed, we have found these to be the most complicated parameters to select at the
level of the PDE model, as we will explain in the discussion of the results below. It is important to bear in mind that while the
results below are given for these two regions our aim is to develop a set of tools that could be in principle used, alongside with
data for the pandemic from different countries [33], to perform similar analyses of other regions.

III.
A.

COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS

ODE model: Well-mixed populations

We start the exposition of our results by discussing what we will refer to as the “0D” model (the version of Eqs. (1)-(8) without
space dependence) for Greece and Andalusia. The relevant results for the two regions are given in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. In
Greece, the data we consider [25] start on March 12, when losses of life started to occur and the cumulative number of infected
(total number of cases) was already a bit over 100 individuals. For some technical reasons (namely the lack of data around April
19 and a significant jump in the data nearly immediately thereafter), we only compare to the data up to that date. Speaking of
the relevant data, it is worthwhile to mention some nontrivial lapses in the apparent curation of the data. Particularly noteworthy
is the case of the recovered individuals in [25]. The data must evidently be significantly inaccurate, as the number of recovered
individuals appears to stay fixed at 53 between March 29 and April 5, only then to jump entirely abruptly to 269 recovered, only
to stay there between April 6 and April 29, then to jump on to 1374. Admittedly, the unprecedented circumstances are straining
the data collection process, yet it is particularly important to provide accurate data to modelers to calibrate adequately the models
towards the future spreading of the pandemic. In that connection, we found the most adequate data sources to be, for Greece,
the number of cumulative infected (C(t) = I(t) + H(t) + R(t) + D(t)), i.e., the total number of “cases”, and the number of
deaths due to COVID-19 (D(t)). It is these two data columns from [25] that we thus compare to our 0D model, and the columns
that were used in the parameter optimization.
Our observations are as follows. Upon performing the optimization mentioned in the previous section, we find that the fitting
yields the results in Table I and the corresponding comparison with the data is shown in Fig. 2. We discuss the parameters
corresponding to first column of Table I: similar arguments apply to all columns. The data stemming from the table appear to be
biologically and socially meaningful. For instance, assuming that the latency time scale of the virus is similar for asymptomatics
and infected (as is reasonable to assume), then the rate of turning to asymptomatic versus turning to infected is about 1.704. The
value of MAR suggests a time scale of nearly 7 days (7.161) for the recovery of asymptomatics. On the other hand, M suggests
a time scale of about 3.5 days for those with symptoms to potentially need hospitalization. The value of γ roughly suggests
a half-half split between those recovering directly versus those needing some form of hospitalization. The value of ω for the
data of Greece suggests that among those needing hospitalization nearly 80% recover, while only 20% die. In this case, nearly
6 days are needed for the recovery, while the time scale for ψ is associated with a time interval of 10 days for the death. One
of the most significant unknowns is the initial population of exposed E0 and asymptomatics A0 , as there is no way to evaluate
them. We opted to introduce their fraction to the initial population of infected I0 as two additional parameters, E = E0 /I0 and
A = A0 /I0 in the optimization. Our optimization yields initially around twice as many exposed than infected, and about 1.25
as being the ratio of asymptomatic to infected. The above guideline suggests how to interpret the data in the format of Table I.
The optimal parameter results as compared against the cumulative infected and the deceased are shown in Fig. 2 for two

6
TABLE I. Best-fitting and other parameters for Greece and Andalusia.
in the ODE model.

?

The reported transmission rates β have to be divided by N when used

Greece
Greece Andalusia Andalusia
(tq = 13) (tq = 23) (tq = 3) (tq = 16)
Population
N
10,768,477
8,414,240
Initial populations
(I0 , H0 , D0 )
(117,0,1)
(297, 134, 6)
Non COVID-19 death rate [per day]
µ
8.49 × 10−6
5.79 × 10−7
?
Transmission rate, S → I [per day]
βIS,1
0.0718
0.0554
0.1312
0.0725
βIS,2 ?
0.0505
0.0350
0.0734
0.0449
Transmission rate, S → A [per day]
βAS,1 ?
0.4742
0.3689
0.8701
0.4847
βAS,2 ?
0.1496
0.1113
0.2390
0.1457
Latency period, E → A [days]
1/σA
2.705
3.258
3.199
2.844
Incubation period, E → I [days]
1/σI
4.600
3.776
4.067
4.125
Infectivity period [days]
1/M
3.447
3.421
3.351
3.195
Recovery period (asymptotics), A → AR [days]
1/MAR
7.161
6.819
6.632
7.344
Recovery period (hospitalized) H → R [days]
1/χ
5.912
5.993
29.187
6.500
Period from hospitalized to deceased H → D [days]
1/ψ
10.039
10.071
10.161
7.661
γ

1−γ

Conversion fraction (I −→ H, I −→ R)
1−ω
ω
Conversion fraction (H −→ D, H −→ R)
Initial population fraction, exposed
Initial population fraction, asymptomatics
Diffusivity, S [km2 /day]
Diffusivity, E or A [km2 /day]

γ
ω
E = E0 /I0
A = A0 /I0
DS,1
DS,2
DE,1 or DA,1
DE,2 or DA,2

0.5186
0.1873
2.1032
1.2527
10
7
100
70

0.4983
0.2004
2.2998
1.4259
10
1
100
10

0.4946
0.1751
1.4678
5.8376
—
—
—
—

0.5649
0.2200
1.4620
2.6124
10
3
100
30

scenarios. The first scenario considers that quarantine was strictly enforced at March 24. In reality, the lockdown started at the
end of March 22; it is reasonable to assume that it was strictly enforced 1-2 days later. To account for the change in parameters
due to lockdown, we imposed a time dependence of the β parameters, according to:
β(t) = β1 + (β2 − β1 )

1 − tanh[2(t − tq )]
,
2

(9)

ramping through this functional form from β1 to β2 , relatively abruptly at tq . The parameter β effectively captures the rate of
contact of susceptible individuals with infected or asymptomatic that leads to exposure to the virus. In fact, the transmission
rates β may be expressed as the product of the average daily contacts (contact rate) a susceptible has with any individual times
the probability of infection given a contact: the probability of infection is proportional to the viral load (viral concentration in the
respiratory-tract fluid) of expelled respiratory droplets [5]. Recent work suggests comparable viral loads in asymptomatic and
symptomatic patients [23]. Furthermore, the contact rate should be significantly smaller for the (expected to be) self-isolating
infected individuals, than for the asymptomatics who continue their life, not knowing that they are carrying SARS-CoV-2 (and
most importantly that they are infectious). Similar viral load coupled to higher contact rates of asymptomatics than infected
with susceptibles suggest that the transmission rates βSA would be higher than βSI . Such an expected trend in the transmission
rates is reflected in our optimized parameters shown in Table I. The transmission rate inequality reflects the importance of
asymptomatics in the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, a particularly important feature that differentiates it from the transmission
of other respiratory virus like influenza and SARS-CoV-1. After lock down measures are imposed, the two contact rates become
more “comparable”, as the number of contacts of both A’s and I’s decreases significantly.
The left panel of Fig. 2 illustrates that with these parameters we capture the data of Greece fairly well, imposing the quarantine
practically at the time when it was officially announced. This is especially true as concerns the number of deceased individuals
in the middle (left) row. Nevertheless, there is a characteristic feature in the top (left) row which we fail to adequately capture:
in particular, there is an “angle” in the semi-logarithmic plot associated with the curbing of the cumulative number of infections
C(t) due to containment measures. This angle is present both in the optimized model results and in the original data. Yet, it
occurs at slightly different instances (by about 10 days between the optimized model results and the country data). As this takes
place, the optimization code attempts to minimize the distance from the observed data, slightly over-predicting around the time of
the (model) angle, and arguably slightly under-predicting at later times. Nevertheless the overall differences are relatively small.
Moreover, the model prediction flattening out (over 5 months) around 200 deceased and slightly over 3K infected individuals

7

FIG. 2. 0D model for Greece with fitting to official data from March 12 (t = t0 = 1) to April 19. Confinement time starts at March
22 (t = 11). Left panels show the relevant populations supposing that tq = 13 (quarantine starting on March 24) and right panels when
tq = 23 (quarantine starting on April 3). Top panels show the official data (red dots) and simulations (blue line) for the confirmed cases
C(t) = I(t) + R(t) + H(t) + D(t); middle panels show the official data and simulations for the deaths D(t); bottom panels display the
remaining populations, namely exposed (E(t)), asymptomatic (A(t)), hospitalized (H(t)), recovered (R(t)) and asymptomatic recovered
(AR(t)).

seem reasonable, were the lock down measures potentially extendable to such a long time interval. Obviously this is highly
improbable for economic reasons, not to mention that as of this writing such measures are in the process of being gradually
lifted. Nevertheless, if we were to shift arbitrarily the time of the application of the quarantine data by about 10 days later, then

8
we note in the right panel of the figure a nontrivial difference. Most notably, without significantly missing on D(t) (although
the fit is slightly less accurate there), we capture accurately the angle in the C(t) data. The relevant parameters are presented in
the second column of Table I. There are no particularly noteworthy differences here, although some do exist (e.g., the fraction
of exposed that turn to infected now is closer to 46%, with 54% asymptomatics). A potential interpretation of this admittedly
somewhat arbitrary shift of the quarantine parameter imposition may be that at the model level such measures have an immediate,
essentially instantaneous effect, while in the realistic country data, there is a time lag before this switch in the number of contacts
(due to lock down) has a perceptible effect.
In the data from Greece, the role of the above shift is more one of quantitative nature, yet the numbers of both the parameters
and of the resulting C(t) and D(t) do not significantly change. The effect of the shift of tq is far more severe in the case of
Andalusia (Fig. 3). Here, it is apparent that the attempt to capture the data, due to the relevant mismatch in the associated
angle leads to some far more significant deviations. While the model prediction seems to minimize the distance to the data by
over-predicting C(t), under-predicting it later, it clearly starts over-predicting the trend of the quantity towards the end of the
available data time-series, in turn resulting in cumulative infections of the order of several (more than 5) tens of thousands. A
similar over-prediction seems to be developing in D(t) leading to nearly 10 thousand deaths, while the data seem to clearly tend
to values below that. A suitable (ad hoc, but possibly rationalized as above) shift of the quarantine time clearly does a far better
job in capturing the actual trends of both C(t) and D(t) with the C(t) lying between 104 and 2 × 104 and, correspondingly,
D(t) staying below 2 × 103 . Table I clearly illustrates at a parametric level the source of the discrepancy, as the attempt to fit
the data without the correct angle location leads some of the parameters (such as χ or A ) to unrealistic values and this, e.g., the
large fraction of asymptomatics, leads eventually to a considerably enhanced result of the pandemic.
Another interesting observation, but at the level of the data rather than at that of the model is the significance of the early
imposition of restrictive measures. In Spain these measures were taken when already the number of cumulative infections and
deaths was significantly higher than the corresponding numbers in Greece when the decision was taken. This ultimately appears
to have led the smaller of the two regions (Andalusia having 8.4M inhabitants) to have an order of magnitude larger losses of
life and infections than the larger of the two regions (Greece having 10.7M inhabitants).
We also calculated the basic reproduction number R0 reflecting the number of cases expected to be produced by one case
in a population. This is used to obtain an estimate of how the epidemic developed initially in the two regions. We used the
next generation matrix approach (see the Appendix) of the system of equations Eqs. (1)-(8) without the spatial terms. The
pre-quarantine basic reproduction number was calculated to be R0 = (2.23, 3.42) on the basis of the first and third columns of
Table I for Greece and Andalusia, respectively. These numbers are close to the epidemiologically determined range of 2−4 [24],
a range that encompasses the variation of the basic reproduction number in space and time. Although our focus is not on the
calculation of R0 , which is of principal interest to a wide range of studies regarding SARS-CoV-2, it is worth noting that an
effective reproduction number may be calculated with the more quantitatively accurate (as regards the data) parameters of the 2nd
and 4th columns in Table I. Accordingly, we find that for Greece the pre-quarantine effective reproduction number Reff = 1.44
moves to a post-quarantine Reff = 0.46 and, respectively, for Andalusia from 2.2 to 0.69, reflecting in both cases the decline of
the epidemic spreading under the lockdown measures.

B.

PDE model: Spatially distributed populations

We now turn to the PDE simulations for the country of Greece. Relevant results may be found in Fig. 4 for the same
diagnostics as for the 0D model. However, now, we complement them with the space-time evolution simulations of Figs. 5–7.
We first explain how we initialized the PDE model of Eqs. (1)-(8) and how we selected the model parameters, and then we
discuss the numerical results, emphasizing their advantages and deficiencies. At the country level, we must adapt the 0D model
parameters. In the PDE model, we retained the same parameters as the optimized 0D (ODE) model parameters starting with the
σ’s and beyond in Table I. This is because they involve processes occurring at the level of a single individual, i.e., “locally”, and
hence we do not expect them to change at the country level in the transition from the ODE to the PDE model.
On the contrary, we do not expect this to be the case for β’s. The β’s are transmission rates and depend on the interaction
between individuals since they may be expressed as the product of the daily average number of contacts times the infectious
disease transmission probability. At the ODE level, the presence of S and A or I immediately leads to the conversion of
susceptibles to exposed. At the country level, this effect does not occur homogeneously as it does at the ODE level, but rather in
a distributed way. As the population is (spatially) distributed over the country in a highly heterogeneous way, the ODE β’s have
to be modified to obtain their “spatially averaged” variant.
We obtained these spatially averaged transmission rates by first keeping the ratio of the β’s the same as that of the ODE, but
multiplying all the values of the β’s by a factor of 0.002698 or 0.00289, depending on whether tq = 13 or tq = 23. The transition
from the ODE to the PDE transmission rates involves the introduction of two length scales. The first reflects the transition from
the number of individuals (e.g., S, I, E, etc.) in the ODE description to spatial densities of individuals in the PDE description;
the other length scale reflects the transition from a spatially homogeneous to a spatially distributed model. We obtained their
product by noting that the β’s have to be multiplied by an effective inverse density l2 /N , N being the country population. We

9

FIG. 3. 0D model for Andalusia with fitting to official data from March 14 (t = t0 = 1) to April 27. Confinement time starts at March
14 (t = 1). Left panels show the relevant populations supposing that tq = 3 (quarantine starting on March 16) and right panels when
tq = 16 (quarantine starting on March 29). Top panels show the official data (red dots) and simulations (blue line) for the confirmed cases
C(t) = I(t) + R(t) + H(t) + D(t); middle panels show the official data and simulations for the deaths D(t); bottom panels displays
the remaining populations, namely exposed (E(t)), asymptomatic (A(t)), hospitalized (H(t)), recovered (R(t)) and asymptomatic recovered
(AR(t)).

found the length scale to be l = 0.170 km for tq = 13 and l = 0.176 km for tq = 23. This product length scale defines a rough
effective spatial scale over which the ODE transmission rates need to be rescaled to obtain the corresponding transmission rates
to be used in the PDE model. The rescaling factor was chosen empirically through the comparison of the PDE simulation data

10

FIG. 4. Same as Fig. 2 but for the PDE model. All transmission rates β were multiplied by 0.002698 (tq = 13) or 0.0289 (tq = 23), and the
diffusion coefficient decreased to 70% (left) or 10% (right) of the original (pre-quarantine) value during quarantine.

with the cumulative country data presented in Fig. 4.
For Andalusia, which at the PDE level was solely analyzed for tq = 16, the relevant results may be found in Fig. 8, complemented by the space-time evolution simulations of Figs. 9–11. In this case, the rescaling factor relating β’s is 0.01299. The
corresponding length scale for Andalusia is l = 0.331 km. Hence, even though the population densities and the areas of the two
regions are comparable we found that the rescaling length for Greece is approximately half that of Andalusia.
In addition to the decision regarding the rescaling of the β’s, an important decision is that of the selection of the diffusivities.
Recall that in the present first work we decided to avoid attempting to model convection effects, but rather mostly focus on the

11

FIG. 5. Evolution of the mainland Greek infected population density I(x, y, t) for t = 1 day (top left), t = 6 days (top right), t = 11 days
(bottom left), and t = 21 days (bottom right).

role of diffusion. We assume that most of the populations relevant to the infection which have not developed any symptoms,
namely the asymptomatics and the exposed, diffuse with a diffusivity of Dc = 100 km2 /day (i.e., associated with a characteristic
spatial scale of about 10 km). Our motivation for this choice is that in this small population (for the regions and data considered)
associated with the infection, it is relevant to include a wider spatial spread of their motion to enable (through their contacts) the
infection to spatially spread. On the other hand, for the far larger population of susceptibles, we assign a far smaller diffusivity
(0.1Dc ) since a large diffusivity would tend to distribute more evenly the susceptible population, a feature that does not appear
to be very realistic (especially so over the course of a pandemic). The rest of the populations (most notably, I, H, and D, since
the immunity of R and AR renders their diffusion inconsequential) are assumed to be highly localized/self-isolating and hence
bear, for our purposes, a vanishing diffusivity. For all the non-vanishing diffusivities, we assume that the quarantine reduces
them to a fraction of their original value (see Table I) in a similar ramped form as before:
Dc (t) = Dc1 + (Dc2 − Dc1 )

1 − tanh[2(t − tq )]
.
2

(10)

We should also briefly describe the initialization of the model. Here, we selected to initially populate five of the key “hotspots”
of the infection as they arose in Greece. In particular, we defined an infection radius of 10 km around the center of Athens (largest
city and capital), Thessaloniki (second largest city and source of the first infection), Patras (third largest city and the location
where a key imported group of infected individuals was transferred), as well as Kozani and Xanthi. The latter two are two
significant peripheral centers where infections were seeded early on. In Athens, we placed the largest (by a factor of two) source
of infection, while similar “blobs” of infection were initialized in the remaining four cities. These epicenters of infection were
initiated via Gaussian profiles whose spatial (variance) scale was selected as the infection radius; their amplitude was chosen so
that the total number of infections, deaths, recoveries and hospitalizations, as calculated via the surface integrals of the associated
densities through the country, be the same as the one reported in the original data. The population of asymptomatics and exposed

12

FIG. 6. Evolution (once again from top left to bottom right; the same pattern is followed in all the relevant figures) of the mainland Greek dead
population density D(x, y, t) at t = 1, t = 6, t = 11, and t = 21 days.

was, similarly to the ODE optimization, selected to be proportional to the infected one with the proportionality ratios A and
E maintained as those of the ODE. A similar procedure is followed in Andalusia; in this case, eight “hotspots” were selected
corresponding to the most populated city of each province of the autonomous community (Almerı́a, Córdoba, Huelva, Granada,
Jaén, Jerez de la Frontera, Málaga and Sevilla) using as initial values for the infections and deaths the values provided by the
Andalusian Government (“La Junta de Andalucı́a”) [34].
With all these choices, the PDE model was run without optimizing it at the PDE level (aside from the calibration of the β’s
discussed above, which was performed empirically and not via an optimization routine). The comparison of the PDE results to
the data for Greece (see Fig. 4) is very good even with a very minor adaptation of the quarantine time (left column). Further
modification of the quarantine time can also help capture once again the “angle” in the relevant data (right column). Clearly the
spatial model does a very adequate job at capturing both the cumulative infections and the number of deaths (with the caveats to
be given in the discussion below). Notice that in the bottom row of the figure, we illustrate the surface integrals of each of the
density of E, A, H, R and AR as a function of time, representing the evolution of the pandemic at the “integrated” level of the
entire country in an illustration similar to the one that we typically obtain from the ODE models. A similar trend is observed for
Andalusia in Fig. 8, where the PDE analysis was performed only for the highly modified quarantine time.
That being said, of course, the PDE model has considerable additional information through its spatial resolution. In Figs. 5–7
for Greece (Figs. 9–11 for Andalusia), we can see the spatio-temporal evolution of the infections (i.e., the spatial distribution at
a few snapshots over time), the deaths and the cumulative infections C(x, y, t), respectively. We also produced movies of the
corresponding evolution that can be found in [35] and [36]. It is important to re-iterate here that we have not included the islands
of Greece in this effort (i.e., we are looking at the mainland of Greece). Obviously if one were to model the disease spread in
each of these islands it would be relevant to seed the infection in each island individually and study the spreading there rather
than together with the spatially disconnected from the islands mainland of Greece. In the case of Greece, we can clearly see how
the infection spreads throughout the country, affecting most significantly the regions of higher population density. Indeed, it is

13

FIG. 7. Evolution of the mainland Greek confirmed case density C(x, y, t) at t = 1, t = 6, t = 11, and t = 21 days.

evident that over time the infection is extinguished in most regions and it finally persists chiefly in Attica, the region of highest
population density (and where the main metropolitan center of the country, Athens, lies); see, in particular, the bottom panels of
Fig. 5. Nevertheless, it is evident from Fig. 6 that a number of deaths develops in each of the 5 regions where the infection was
initially seeded, in line with the corresponding expectation in the country’s data. Indeed, also, each region features a discernible
fraction of cumulative infections in Fig. 7, although clearly once again the lion’s share of infections pertains to Attica. The
second biggest fraction of infections pertains to Thessaloniki (the second biggest metropolitan center) and so on. It is clear
from these figures that the model yields a spatial evolution of the disease spread in line with the cumulative totals of deaths
and infections throughout the country. Nevertheless, a comparison with the spatial distribution of the pandemic throughout the
country [25] suggests also some limitations that we will discuss in the next section. For the case of Andalusia, we can observe
how the biggest fractions of the infections remain in the most populated cities of Sevilla and Málaga, and that the provinces of
Huelva and Almerı́a are those with the smallest number of infections, in accordance with the current status of the pandemic [34];
however, the number of deaths seems to be very much higher in the province of Málaga where the pandemic data show that
this number is almost the same as in Sevilla and Granada. One can also observe that since the initial spots for Andalusia were
spatially close, the infection spreads more easily in this region than in the mainland of Greece.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this work we presented a platform for establishing a a compartmental epidemiological model both at the level of ODEs (0D,
no spatial dependencies) in line with numerous earlier works, as well as at the spatially distributed level of PDEs to study the
spatio-temporal spreading of COVID-19.. The regions of interest were Greece and Andalusia for which there has been a small
number of studies. As regards Greece, there are some probabilistic [11, 37] and some network-based approaches for time-series
analysis [38]. Studies that focus on Spain also examine Andalusia as a case example using either probabilistic [10] or POD-

14

FIG. 8. Same as Fig. 4 but for Andalusia. Only the case tq = 16 is considered. All transmission rates β were multiplied by 0.01299, and the
diffusion coefficient decreased to 30% of the original (pre-quarantine) value during quarantine.

based decomposition techniques [39]. Our effort has been to explore a model of the SEIR variety that incorporates some of the
particular biological features of the SARS-CoV-2 virus [24], such as its latency period, and the potential to generate a significant
fraction of asymptomatic hosts, which, in turn, play a crucial role in spreading the infection. The resulting SEIHARD model
involves a number of populations: Susceptible, Exposed, symptomatically Infected, Hospizalized, Asymptomatics, Recovered,
and Deceased. We found that for the regions of interest the model reproduces the epidemiological data that we determined to be
most reliable, namely the data on the cumulative infections and especially the number of deaths. Naturally, more accurate data
including also spatially resolved ones would be helpful towards the improved calibration of the results offered herein.

15

FIG. 9. Evolution of the Andalusian infected population density I(x, y, t) for t = 1, t = 6, t = 16, and t = 31 days.

We modelled both the early, pre-quarantine, stage of the epidemic, as well as its development at a later stage when containment
measures had been enforced. The effect of quarantine on the spreading of the disease was imposed via a time-dependent (on
the time scale of a day) change of the transmission rates. While initiating a quarantine roughly when it was imposed yields
acceptable results in Greece, in Andalusia this is less so. For Andalusia, the “angle” indicating the curbing of the infection due
to the measures can be captured more accurately if a time-lag is provided for the application of the (instantaneous in the ODE
model) quarantine set of parameters. We note that the change of the model parameters followed the imposition of lockdown
measures over a short time scale, whereas the effect of social intervention measures (self-quarantine, social distancing, etc)
appears to arise later in the epidemiological data.
We determined model parameters via optimizing model predictions with respect to reported total number of (infected) cases
and number of deaths. We interpreted both the time scales of, e.g., the conversion of exposed to asymptomatics and (symptomatically) infected, and the fraction of, e.g., hospitalized that lead to recoveries or deaths. The importance of asymptomatics
in the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, a particularity of this coronavirus, was manifested in the relative importance of
the viral transmission rates between susceptibles and asymptomatics (βSA ) or infected (βSI ). We attributed the increased βSA
to the considerably larger mobility of asymptomatics, thence higher contact rates, coupled to the asymptomatics viral load being
comparable to that of (symptomatically) infected [23]. In [42] it was reported that asymptomatic infectious hosts may account
for up to 86% of cases, thus further supporting our prediction of their importance in the spread of the disease. Likewise, in a
study of only patients with confirmed disease [43], there was no difference in viral load due to disease severity and transmission
potential was found to be high before the onset of symptoms.
We then utilized these parameters in a spatially distributed model. Here, we overcame the major challenges of formulating
a mesh with the boundaries of a region within COMSOL and also leveraged state-of-the-art geographical methods such as the
World Pop project (for population mapping based on census data) to set up distributed simulations of the pandemic spreading in
the geographical domain. We pondered on how to adapt the parameters of the ODE model to the PDE framework and argued that
“onsite” (i.e., single-individual) parameters can be maintained the same. We also explained the challenge of adapting contact

16

FIG. 10. Evolution of the Andalusian dead population density D(x, y, t) for t = 1, t = 6, t = 16, and t = 31 days.

parameters (such as the transmission rates) to the level of the country: this process involves issues of homogeneity at the ODE
level vs. substantial heterogeneity at the PDE level. We also made a first series of assumptions at the level of convection
(neglected herein) and diffusion (selected as the primary mechanism for disease spreading herein) to explore the time-resolved
dynamics at the country/autonomous community setting.
At the level of our distributed simulations, there clearly exist some promising results. We were able to seed the infection
at some of its key epicenters and observe it to produce infections, recoveries, deaths, etc., at the level of the entire region. At
the cumulative level of the region, surface integrations enabled comparisons with the collected data at the regional level, e.g.,
of Greece or Andalusia, yielding reasonable correspondence between model results and the observed epidemiological reality.
Moreover, the model captures some of the spatial features of the infection progression: for instance, it shows that the infection
persisted the longest in regions of very high population density. We believe that this effort paves the way for a distributed
observation of the relevant spreading, but it also has some weaknesses, challenges, and improvements that are worth considering
in future steps.
The model may be extended, initially at the ODE level, to incorporate the dynamics of the carrier of the virus, in the spirit
of Ref. [40]. Respiratory infections are caused by pathogens that are transported by respiratory droplets. These are generated
by, e.g., laughing, breathing, speaking, coughing, sneezing of infected individuals, be they symptomatic or asymptomatic. The
dynamics of these droplets, and their coupling to the model populations, determine the evolution of the disease, and, more
importantly, the transmission pathways of the respiratory virus.
It would be especially useful in the context of the present pandemic of unprecedented information flow [33] to have easily
accessible temporally and spatially resolved data for the evolution of the pandemic in different regions. Such “seeding” in a
distributed way (rather than the colloquial seeding at hotspots performed herein) would build into the model an accurate spatial
distribution of infected population, and, hence, would be far closer to the country’s pandemic evolution. Indeed, there is another
challenge that is arguably even more significant. Diffusion is clearly a valuable mechanism for spreading the disease (through
its interplay with nonlinear contact interactions), not to mention a realistic one. Yet, admittedly it is not sufficient for expanding

17

FIG. 11. Evolution of the Andalusian confirmed case density C(x, y, t) for t = 1, t = 6, t = 16, and t = 31 days.

the infection at the scale of the country as our results show, at least not via realistic spatial and temporal scales of individual
mobility. In particular, it has not escaped our attention that this type of spreading does not account for the directed motion of
individuals (possibly infected ones) from the city to the country, or from one city to another for pleasure or business. This is
especially important for travel (and hence infection transport) at a longer spatial scale (rather than the shorter one enabled by
diffusion).
This suggests that some form of a probabilistic element needs to be inserted in the model. One possibility that we are
exploring is the spatial distribution of the initial condition of the asymptomatic population. This may generate infections in a
more spatially distributed way, leading to the spatial expansion of the pandemic throughout the country in a more consistent
way with the observed data [25]. A perhaps even more significant or possibly complementary perspective worth considering is,
naturally, a probabilistic one. In addition to deterministic processes like diffusion or convection (which at a second step is also
worth integrating in the model as well), it seems relevant to include a probabilistic gain and loss term reminiscent of (a longrange variant of) the conservative Kawasaki dynamics [41] at the level of spins. This type of term would generate infections
in a probabilistic way (possibly with a probability weighed upon the region’s population density) by allowing individuals to
effectively “perform trips” through the country, i.e., disappearing from one location and reappearing (within a short time scale
of less than a day for the regions of interest) in another.
As discussed also in the Introduction, there are also other ways in which to bypass the practicalities of the application of
PDEs at the level of a country. One of the canonical ones involves the application of the theory of networks in the realm of
metapopulation models in a way similar to the work of [21]. Such approaches are already being brought to bear, as in the
work of [20] and are certainly also worth expanding upon and refining, as well as comparing with the data available in the
context of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Building such networks for the examples of Greece and Andalusia considered herein (and of
course beyond) also constitutes a worthwhile direction of future research. Clearly, further efforts at the level of data collection
and curation, at the level of model setup and validation, and then at the level of optimization and utilization for prediction are
needed. Our hope, however, is that the approach proposed herein is an initial step towards putting together a number of state-of-

18
the-art tools to enable going beyond the 0D approach of ODE models and gradually considering in more detail the expansion of
a pandemic at a combined spatial and temporal level.
Appendix A: Next-generation calculation of the basic reproduction number R0

We will use the next generation matrix approach to find R0 . In particular, we set up the vectors:




(σA + σI )E
βSA SA + βSI SI




−σA E + MAR A
0












−σI E + M I
0







−γM I + (1 − ω)χH + ωψH 
0
.



F =

, V = 
βSA SA + βSI SI
0








MAR A
0








 −(1 − γ)M I − (1 − ω)χH 


0
−ωψH
0
The idea is that we rearrange the compartments so that the infectious/infected compartments E, A, I, H, appear first. We then
place S, AR, R, D. If we calculate F − V, it should yield a reordered version of the vector field that describes our disease
system.
We then focus on the 4 infectious/infected compartments and ignore the rest. We find the Jacobians of F, V with respect to
E, A, I, H in the order in which they appear. This will yield two 4 × 4 matrices:




(σA + σI ) 0
0
0
0 βSA S ∗ βSI S ∗ 0




MAR
0
0
0
0
0

 −σA
0
F =

, V = 


0
−σI
0
M
0
0
0
0
0
0 −γM ωψ + d + (1 − ω)χ
0
0
0
0
The basic reproductive number is the spectral radius of F V −1 which in our case is
R0 =

βSA S ∗ σA
βSI S ∗ σI
.
+
(σA + σI )MAR
(σA + σI )M

(A1)

This result is in accordance with epidemiological intuition: the first contribution to R0 is proportional to βSA and S ∗ , namely,
the transmission rate and total susceptible population S ∗ . It is also proportional to σA /(σA + σI ), namely the fractional rate
at which exposed hosts become infectious, yet asymptomatic, A. Finally, it is inversely proportional to the loss rate MAR of
the infectious asymptomatic class A. We have a second similar contribution to R0 because we have two modes of transmission,
namely through contact with A and through contact with I. The dominant contribution to the next-generation R0 in our results
given in the main text comes from the first term in Eq. (A1), the term that arises from the interaction of susceptibles with
asymptomatics. The second transmission mode, contact of susceptibles with infected, gives a significantly smaller contribution
to the basic reproduction number.
Acknowledgements. The authors are are indebted to Dr. Maksym Bondarenko for his substantial help with the WorldPop maps
and setup and also thank Dr. Jinlan Huang for assistance in setting the relevant computation up in COMSOL. PGK gratefully
acknowledges discussions and input from Andy Ludu including regarding the layout of Fig. II. This material is based upon work
supported by the US National Science Foundation under Grants No. DMS-1815764 (ZR), PHY-1602994, and DMS-1809074
(PGK). PGK also acknowledges support from the Leverhulme Trust via a Visiting Fellowship and thanks the Mathematical
Institute of the University of Oxford for its hospitality during this work.
Disclaimer The views expressed in this manuscript are purely those of the authors and may not, under any circumstances, be
regarded as an official position of the European Commission.

[1] B.S. Graham, J.R. Mascola, and A.S. Fauci, JAMA 319, 1431 (2018).
[2] World Health Organization Writing Group, Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 88 (2006).
[3] N.M. Ferguson et al., Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduceCOVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial
College, London, Mar. 2020, https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/covid-19/

19
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]

See, e.g., https://www.covid19vaccinetrial.co.uk/about
Y. Drossinos and N.I. Stilianakis, Aerosol Sci. Technol. 54, 639 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2020.1751055.
K. Mizumoto, K. Kayaga, A. Zarebski, and G. Chowell, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025866
P. Yang, J. Qi, S. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Bi, Y. Yang, and B. Sheng, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20043794
Ka-Ming Tam, Nicholas Walker,and Juana Moreno, arXiv:2004.02859.
L. Danon, E. Brooks-Pollock, M. Bailey, and M. Keeling, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.12.20022566.
A. Arenas et al., https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040022; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054320.
G.D. Barmparis and G.P. Tsironis, arXiv:2003.14334.
S. Flaxman et al., Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European
countries, https://doi.org/10.25561/77731
S.B. Bastos and D.O. Caljueiro, arXiv:2003.14288.
C. Qi, D. Karlsson, K. Sallmen, and R. Wyss, arXiv:2004.01575
E. Gjini, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20038141
C. Yang and J. Wang, Math. Biosci. Eng. 17, 2708 (2020).
L. Russo, C. Anastassopoulou, A. Tsakris, G.N. Bifulco, E.F. Campana, G. Toraldo, and C. Siettos, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.17.
20037689; C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, C. Siettos, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.11.20022186
C. Gai, D. Iron, and T. Kolokolnikov, J. Math. Biol. 80, 1389 (2020).
T. Reluga, J. Theor. Biol. 229, 249 (2004).
G. Martı́n, D.E. Singh, M.-C. Marinescu, and J. Carretero, Parallel Computing 42, 88 (2015).
V. Colizza and A. Vespignani, J. Theor. Biol. 251, 450 (2008).
I.G Kevrekidis, C.W. Gear, J.M. Hyman, P.G. Kevrekidis, O. Runborg, and C. Theodoropoulos, Comm. Math. Sci. 1, 715 (2003).
M. M. Arons et al., Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections and transmission in a skilled nursing facility, NEJM, DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2008457.
See, e.g., https://elifesciences.org/articles/57309
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020/coronavirus/pandemic/in/Greece
See, e.g.,:
https://time.com/5824836/greece-coronavirus/ and also https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-04-10/
greece-handled-coronavirus-crisis-better-than-italy-and-spain
COMSOL Multiphysicsr v. 5.5. https://www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
https://www.worldpop.org/
F.R. Stevens, A.E. Gaughan, C. Linard, and A.J. Tatem, PLoS ONE 10, e0107042 (2014).
R. Dandekar and G. Barbastathis, arXiv:2004.02752.
J.P. Arcede, R.L. Caga-anan, C.Q. Mentuda, and Y. Mammeri, arXiv:2004.01805.
M. Robinson, N.I. Stilianakis, and Y. Drossinos, J. Theor. Biol. 297, 116 (2012), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.12.015
https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/tree/master/csse/covid/19/data
http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/institutodeestadisticaycartografia/salud/index.htm
https://www.dropbox.com/s/4tcqfjdo7ideidv/Greece I.gif?dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/shvydmnr109k2yp/Greece D.gif?dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/rc5zoab5218z919/Greece C.gif?dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/antk00oe22owr1h/andalusia I.gif?dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/qa0l30sns8ihora/andalusia D.gif?dl=0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/gn9moe2eu6t7rtd/andalusia C.gif?dl=0
S. Flaxman et al., arXiv:2004.11342.
D. Tsiotas and L. Magrafas, arXiv:2004.06536.
T. Chacón Rebollo and D. Franco Coronil, arXiv:2004.12341.
N.I. Stilianakis and Y. Drossinos, J. R. Soc. Interface 7, 1355 (2010), https://doi:10.1098/rsif.2010.0026.
See, e.g., section 6.4 in http://physics.bu.edu/∼redner/896/spin.pdf
Li et al., Science 368, 489–493 (2020)
X. He et al., Nature Medicine 26, 672–675 (2020)

