1

arXiv:2005.02816v2 [physics.soc-ph] 22 Sep 2020

Enabling and Emerging Technologies for Social
Distancing: A Comprehensive Survey and Open
Problems
Cong T. Nguyen1 , Yuris Mulya Saputra1 , Nguyen Van Huynh1 , Ngoc-Tan Nguyen1 , Tran Viet Khoa1 ,
Bui Minh Tuan1 , Diep N. Nguyen1 , Dinh Thai Hoang1 , Thang X. Vu2 , Eryk Dutkiewicz1 , Symeon Chatzinotas2 ,
and Björn Ottersten2
1 School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2 Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Abstract—Social distancing plays a pivotal role in preventing
the spread of viral diseases illnesses such as COVID-19. By
minimizing the close physical contact among people, we can
reduce the chances of catching the virus and spreading it across
the community. This paper aims to provide a comprehensive
survey on how emerging technologies, e.g., wireless and networking, artificial intelligence (AI) can enable, encourage, and even
enforce social distancing practice. To that end, we first provide
a comprehensive background of social distancing including basic
concepts, measurements, models, and propose various practical
social distancing scenarios. We then discuss enabling wireless
technologies which are especially effective and can be widely
adopted in practice to keep distance, encourage, and enforce
social distancing in general. After that, other emerging and
related technologies such as machine learning, computer vision,
thermal, ultrasound, etc., are introduced. These technologies open
many new solutions and directions to deal with problems in social
distancing, e.g., symptom prediction, detection and monitoring
quarantined people, and contact tracing. Finally, we provide
important open issues and challenges (e.g., privacy-preserving,
scheduling, and incentive mechanisms) in implementing social
distancing in practice. As an example, instead of reacting with
ad-hoc responses to COVID-19-like pandemics in the future,
smart infrastructures (e.g., next-generation wireless systems like
6G, smart home/building, smart city, intelligent transportation
systems) should incorporate a pandemic mode in its standard
architecture/design.
Index Terms—Social distancing, pandemic, COVID-19, technologies, wireless, networking, positioning systems, AI, machine
learning, data analytics, localization, privacy-preserving, scheduling, and incentive mechanism.

I. I NTRODUCTION
COVID-19 has completely changed the world’s view on
pandemics with dire consequences to global health and economy. Within only four months (from January to April 2020),
210 countries and territories around the world have reported
more than three million infected people including more than
two hundred thousand deaths [1]. Besides the global health
crisis, COVID-19 has also been causing massive economic
losses (e.g., a possible 25% unemployment rate in the U.S. [2],
IEEE Copyright Notice: This paper was accepted and published by IEEE
Access. The published versions of this article are: “A Comprehensive Survey
of Enabling and Emerging Technologies for Social DistancingPart I: Fundamentals and Enabling Technologies” DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3018140
and “A Comprehensive Survey of Enabling and Emerging Technologies for
Social DistancingPart I: Fundamentals and Enabling Technologies” DOI:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3018140.

one million people lost their jobs in Canada during March
2020 [3], 1.4 million jobs lost in Australia [4], and a projected
global 3% GDP loss [5]), resulting in a global recession as
predicted by many experts [5]–[7]. In such context, there is
an urgent need for solutions to contain the disease spread,
thereby reducing its negative impacts and buying more time
for pharmaceutical solution development.
In the presence of contagious diseases such as SARS,
H1N1, and COVID-19, social distancing is an effective nonpharmaceutical approach to limit the disease transmission [8],
[20], [27]. Social distancing refers to measures that minimize
the disease spread by reducing the frequency and closeness
of human physical contacts, such as closing public places
(e.g., schools and workplaces), avoiding mass gatherings, and
keeping a sufficient distance amongst people [8], [9]. By
reducing the probability that the disease can be transmitted
from an infected person to a healthy one, social distancing
can significantly reduce the disease’s spread and severity.
If implemented properly at the early stages of a pandemic,
social distancing measures can play a key role in reducing the
infection rate and delay the disease’s peak, thereby reducing
the burden on the healthcare systems and lowering death
rates [8], [20], [27]. Fig. 1 illustrates the effects of social
distancing measures on the daily number of cases [11]. As
can be observed in Fig. 1(a), social distancing can reduce the
peak number of infected cases [27] to ensure that the number
of patients does not exceed the public healthcare capacity.
Moreover, social distancing also delays the outbreak peak [27]
so that there is more time to implement countermeasures.
Furthermore, social distancing can reduce the final number
of infected cases [27], and the earlier social distancing is
implemented, the stronger the effects will be as illustrated in
Fig. 1(b) [11].
During the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, many governments have implemented various social distancing measures
such as travel restrictions, border control, closing public
places, and warning their citizens to keep a 1.5-2 meters
distance from each other when they have to go outside [12]–
[14]. Nevertheless, such aggressive and large-scale measures
are not easy to implement, e.g., not all public spaces can be
closed, and people still have to go outside for food, healthcare,
or essential work. In such context, technologies play a key
role in facilitating social distancing measures. For example,

2

Delay outbreak peak

Daily
number
of
cases

Reduce
outbreak
peak

Cases without
protective measures

Heath care system capacity

Cases with protective
measures

Time since first case

(a)
Cumulative
cases
70,000

No social
distancing

60,000

Social distancing
implemented 1
day later (n+21)

50,000

40 % more cases

40,000

Social distancing
implemented on
day n+20

30,000

technologies for social distancing. It is worth noting that, due
to the increasingly complex development of many types of
viruses as well as the rapid growth of social interaction and
globalization, the concept of social distancing is not as simple
as physical distancing. In fact, it also includes many nonpharmaceutical interventions or measures taken to prevent the
spread of contagious diseases, such as monitoring, detection,
and warning people (as we identify and propose in Table I).
Thanks to the significant development of emerging technologies, e.g., future wireless systems, AI, and data analytics, many
new solutions have been introduced recently which can create
favorable conditions for practicing social distancing.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the rest of this paper is organized as
follows. We first provide a brief overview of social distancing
and distance measurement methods in Section II. Then, Section III and Section IV discuss enabling wireless technologies and other emerging technologies for social distancing,
respectively. After that, we discuss open issues and future
research directions of technology-enabled social distancing in
Section V, and conclusions are given in Section VI.

20,000

II. S OCIAL D ISTANCING : A F UNDAMENTAL BACKGROUND

10,000

5

10

15
20
Number of days

25

30

(b)

Fig. 1: Effects of social distancing [11].

wireless positioning systems can effectively help people to
keep a safe distance by measuring the distances among people
and alerting them when they are too close to each other.
Moreover, other technologies such as Artificial Intelligence
(AI) technologies can be used to facilitate or even enforce
social distancing.
In this article, we present a comprehensive survey on
enabling and emerging technologies for social distancing. The
main aims are to provide a comprehensive background on
social distancing as well as effective technologies that can be
used to facilitate the social distancing practice. In particular,
we first present basic concepts of social distancing together
with its measurements, models, effectiveness, and practical
scenarios. After that, we review enabling wireless technologies
which are especially effective in monitoring and keeping
distance amongst people. Then, we discuss various emerging
technologies, e.g., AI, thermal, computer vision, ultrasound,
and visible light, which have been introduced recently in order
to address many new issues related to social distancing, e.g.,
contact tracing, quarantined people detection and monitoring,
and symptom prediction. Finally, some important open issues
and challenges (e.g., privacy-preserving, scheduling, and incentive mechanisms) of implementing technologies for social
distancing will be discussed. Furthermore, potential solutions
together with future research directions are also highlighted
and addressed.
Although there are few surveys related to localization
and positioning systems, e.g., [15]–[18], to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first survey in the literature discussing

A. Social Distancing
1) Definition and Classifications: Social distancing refers
to the non-pharmaceutical measures to reduce the frequency
of physical contacts and the contact distances between people
during an infectious disease outbreak [10]. Social distancing
methods can be classified into public and individual measures.
Public measures include closing or reducing access to educational institutions and workplaces, canceling mass gatherings,
travel restrictions, border control, and quarantining buildings.
Individual measures consist of isolation, quarantine, and encouragement to keep physical distances between people [9].
Although these measures can cause some negative impacts on
the economy and individual freedom, they play a crucial role
in reducing the severity of a pandemic [10].
2) Measurements and Models: The evaluation of social
distancing measures is often based on several standardized
approaches. One of the main criteria for social distancing
measures selection is the basic reproduction number Ro which
represents on average how many people a case (i.e., an infectious person) will infect during its entire infectious period [19].
For example, Ro < 1 indicates that every case will infect
fewer than 1 person, and thus the disease is declining in
the considered population. Since the value of Ro represents
how quickly the disease is spreading, Ro has been one of
the most important indicators for social distancing measures
selection [20], [27]. Mathematically, Ro can be determined by
∫ ∞
b(a)F(a)da,
(1)
Ro =
0

where b(a) is the average number of new cases an infectious
person will infect per unit of time during the infectious period
a, and F(a) is the probability that the individual will remain
infectious during the period a [19].
Beside showing the transmissibility of a disease, Ro also
gives some intuitive ideas on how to limit the disease spread.

3

A. Social
Distancing

B. Positioning
Technologies

A. Wi-Fi

II. Social
Distancing: A
Fundamental
Background

Enabling and
Emerging
Technologies for
Social
Distancing

IV. Other
Emerging
Technologies
for Social
Distancing

A. Computer
Vision

B.
Ultrasound

C. Inertial
Sensors

D. Visible
Lights

B. Cellular

E. Thermal

F. Artificial
Intelligence

C. Bluetooth

D. Ultrawideband

III. Wireless
Technologies
for Social
Distancing

A. Security and
Privacy-Preserving
in Social Distancing

E. GNSS

F. Zigbee

G. RFID

V.
Open Issues
and Future
Research
Directions

B. Real-time
Scheduling
and Optimization

C. Incentive
Mechanism to
Encourage Social
Distancing

D. Pandemic Mode
for Social
Distancing
Implementation

Fig. 2: The organization of this survey.

As observed from (1), Ro can be reduced in different ways,
i.e., to decrease b(a) or F(a). To reduce b(a), there are
several approaches such as to lower the number of contacts
the infected individuals make per unit of time (e.g., avoid
mass gatherings and public places closures) or to reduce the
probability that a contact will infect a new person (e.g., by
wearing masks). To reduce F(a), the infected person needs to
be cured or completely avoid contacts with the non-infected
(e.g., isolation and quarantine).
3) Effectiveness: To evaluate the effectiveness of social
distancing, a common approach is to measure the attack rate
which is the percentage of infected people in a susceptible
population (where no one is immune at the beginning of the
disease) at the time of measurement [22]. The attack rate
reflects the severity of a disease at a given time, and thus it
has different values during the disease outbreak. Among these
values, the peak attack rate is often considered and compared
to the current healthcare capacity (e.g., intensive care unit
capacity) to see the current system’s ability to handle the peak
number of patients. After the outbreak is over, data is often
collected to determine the final attack rate which is the total
number of infected cases over the entire course of the outbreak
divided by the total population.
Social distancing measures are proven to be effective when
implemented properly [22]–[28]. Different types of social
distancing measures may have diverse levels of effectiveness
on the disease spread. In [22], the effect of social distancing
measures at workplaces is evaluated by an agent-based simulation approach. In particular, six different workplace strategies
that reduce the number of workdays are simulated. The results
show that, for a seasonal influenza (Ro = 1.4), reducing the
number of workdays can effectively reduce the final attack rate
(e.g., up to 82% if three consecutive workdays are reduced).
Nevertheless, in a pandemic-level influenza (Ro = 2.0), reducing the number of workdays has a significantly weaker impact,
i.e., 3% (one extra day off) to 21% decrease (three extra
consecutive days off). Several other studies present similar
results. In [23], it is shown that workplace social distancing
can reduce the final attack rate by up to 39% in a Ro = 1.4

setting. Similarly, [24] shows that different types of measures
can reduce the attack rate from 11% to 20% depending on the
frequency of contacts among the employees.
For school closure measures, studies also show positive
effects. In [25], a modeling technique is employed to examine
the effects of four different social distancing measures under
three varying Ro settings. Among different types of measures,
the school closure measure is shown to be able to reduce the
final attack rate by 20%, 10%, and 5%, and the peak attack
rate by 77%, 47%, and 32% in the cases where Ro < 1.9,
2.0 ≤ R0 ≤ 2.4, and Ro > 2.5, respectively. Similarly, it is
shown in [26] that prolonged school closure in a pandemic
context can reduce the final attack rate by up to 17% and the
peak attack rate by up to 45%.
Another common social distancing measure is the isolation
of the infected cases and cases with similar symptoms. In [27],
large-scale epidemic simulations are performed to evaluate
different strategies for influenza pandemic mitigation. Among
the simulated strategies, the results show that the proper
implementation (such that an isolated individual reduces 90%
of its contact rate) of isolation can reduce the final attack rate
by 7% in a Ro = 2 setting. Similarly, it is shown in [25] that
isolation can reduce the final attack rate by 27%, 7%, and 5%,
and the peak attack rate by 89%, 72%, and 53% in the cases
where Ro < 1.9, 2.0 ≤ R0 ≤ 2.4, and Ro > 2.5, respectively.
For household quarantines, studies have shown that this
measure can be effective if the compliance level is sufficient.
In [27], the effects of voluntary quarantine of household for
a duration of 14 days are examined. Simulations are carried
out with the assumption that 50% of households will comply,
which leads to a 75% reduction of external contact rates, while
the internal contact rate will increase by 100%. The results
show that this measure can reduce the final attack rate by up
to 6% and the peak attack rate by up to 40%. Similarly, in [28],
simulations are performed to examine the impacts of different
measures. For household quarantines, the result shows that this
measure can reduce the final attack rate by 31% and the peak
attack rate by 68% with Ro = 1.8 and a compliance rate of
50%.

4

Apart from the abovementioned measures, the effectiveness
of the other social distancing measures either received limited
attention or was often considered in combination with another
approach. In [27], the effectiveness of travel restrictions and
border control measures are examined. However, the results
only show that different levels of travel restrictions (from
90% to 99.9%) can delay the peak attack rate by up to six
weeks, while how travel restrictions affect the attack rate is
not examined. Another type of measure that does not receive
much attention is community contact reduction measures (e.g.,
avoid crowds and mass gatherings cancellation). In [25], it is
shown that this type of measure can reduce the final attack
rate by 17%, 14%, and 10%, and the peak attack rate by 72%,
49%, and 38% in the cases where Ro < 1.9, 2.0 ≤ Ro ≤ 2.4,
and Ro > 2.5, respectively.
When combined together, social distancing measures are
proven to be even more effective [25], [27], [29]. It is shown
in [25] that when all four measures, i.e., school closure,
isolation, workplace nonattendance, and community contact
reduction, are in effect, they can drastically reduce the attack
rates in all the considered Ro settings. In particular, the final
attack rate can decrease from 65% to only 3% and the peak
attack rate from 474 cases per 10 thousand to only five cases,
in the highest Ro setting. Similarly, [27] examines the effects
when household quarantines, workplace closures, border control, and travel restrictions are combined. The results show
that the final and peak attack rates are three times and six
times, respectively, lower than when no policy is implemented.
Moreover, the peak attack rate can be delayed by nearly three
months in a Ro = 1.7 setting. In [29], it is also shown that
when four types of measures (i.e., school closure, household
quarantines, workplace nonattendance, and community contact
reduction) are in effect, the final attack rate can be reduced
3-4 times depending on Ro .
There are several studies focusing on the negative impacts
of social distancing. In [30], simulations are performed to
evaluate the benefit and cost of different social distancing
strategies. In this study, simulations are carried out without and
with social distancing under different caution levels settings.
Simulation results are evaluated based on the benefits of the
reduced infection rate and the economic cost of reducing
contacts. The main finding of this work is that a favorable
result can only be obtained by implementing social distancing
measures with a high caution level. Since the economic
cost is also considered, it is shown that implementing social
distancing with an insufficient caution level gives worse results
than that of the case without social distancing. In [31], a
game theoretical approach based on the classic SIR model is
proposed to evaluate the benefits and costs of social distancing
measures. Interestingly, the results show that in the case where
Ro < 1, the equilibrium behaviors include no social distancing
measures. Moreover, social distancing measures are shown to
achieve the highest economic benefit when Ro ≈ 2.
In the current COVID-19 pandemic, the World Health
Organization (WHO) estimates that the value of Ro would
be in the range of 2-2.5 [33]. As can be seen from the
abovementioned studies, social distancing measures can play a
vital role in mitigating this pandemic with such Ro values. For

example, Fig. 3 illustrates the rolling 3-day average of daily
new confirmed COVID-19 cases in several countries [32].
Generally, after a country began implementing social distancing (e.g., lockdown at different levels) for 13-23 days, the daily
number of new cases begins to drop. As can be also seen from
the second graph, the curves representing the total number of
cases become less steep after social distancing is implemented
(i.e., flattening the curve).
Daily number of
cases, rolling 3-day
average

Social distancing
begins

8,000

Number of
cases begins
decreasing

7,000
6,000

5,000
United Kingdom
Spain

4,000
3,000

Italy
Germany
France

2,000
1,000
0
Feb 21, 2020

Mar 11, 2020 Mar 21, 2020 Mar 31, 2020 Apr 10, 2020

Apr 24, 2020

Time

Fig. 3: Real-world effects of social distancing [32].
Despite its significant potential, it can be observed that
social distancing is very effective only when applied properly.
Nevertheless, it is not easy to implement because of many
reasons such as the negative economic impacts, personal freedom violation, and difficulties in changing people’s behaviors.
Thus, technologies can play a key role in facilitating social
distancing, which will be discussed in the next sections.
4) Practical Scenarios: The practical social distancing scenarios identified/proposed in this survey are categorized and
illustrated in Fig. 4. More specific scenarios are summarized
in Table I. The scenarios can be briefly classified as follows:
• Keeping distance: In these scenarios, various positioning
and AI technologies can assist in keeping sufficient distance (e.g., 1.5m apart) between people. Based on that,
when a person gets too close to another or a crowd, the
person can be alerted (e.g., by smartphones).
• Real-time monitoring: Many wireless and related technologies can be utilized to monitor people and public
places in real-time (without compromising citizens’ privacy). The purposes of such monitoring are to gather
meaningful data (e.g., numbers of people inside buildings,

5

Social Distancing Scenarios
Keeping Distance

Real-time Monitoring

Between 2
persons

Information system

Incentive

Crowd
contacts

From
crowd

Hygiene
quarantined/
susceptible/
symptoms

Medical Form

Infected
movement

Contact
tracing

Sharing
Location

Scheduling

Medical
Appointment

AI

Selfisolation

Automation

Home
Healthcare

Data

Prediction

Data Mining

Public building
access

Traffic
Control

Fig. 4: Practical social distancing scenarios.

•

•

•

contacts, symptoms, crowds, and social distancing measures violations) to facilitate social distancing. Based on
these data, appropriate measures can be carried out (e.g.,
limit access to buildings when there are too many people
inside, avoid crowds, and alert/penalize violations).
Information system: Technologies such as Bluetooth,
Ultra-wideband, Global Navigation Satellite Systems
(GNSS), and thermal can be employed to collect the
trajectory data of the infected individuals and the contacts
that these individuals made. Based on this information,
susceptible people who were at the same place or had
contacts with the infected ones can take cautious actions
(e.g., self-isolation, and test for the disease).
Incentive: Social distancing has negative impacts on
personal freedom and the economy. Therefore, incentive
mechanisms are needed to encourage people to comply
with social distancing measures (e.g., incentivize people
to share their movement data and self-isolate). Optimization techniques and technologies such as Bluetooth, WiFi, and cellular together with economics tools like game
theory, auctioning, and contract theory can facilitate those
incentive mechanisms.
Scheduling: Various scheduling techniques can be employed to increase the efficiency of workforce and home
healthcare service scheduling, thereby decreasing the
number of employees at workplaces and patients at
hospitals. Moreover, scheduling techniques can also be
applied for traffic control to reduce the number of vehicles
and pedestrians on the street. Furthermore, technologies

•

•

such as Wi-Fi, Radio frequency identification (RFID), and
Zigbee can be applied for building access scheduling.
Automation: In the social distancing context, autonomous
vehicles such as medical robots and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) can be utilized to reduce the need for human
presence in essential tasks, e.g., medical procedures and
delivery services. Technologies such as ultra-wideband,
GPS, ultrasound, and inertial sensors can be leveraged
for the positioning and navigation of these autonomous
vehicles.
Modeling and Prediction: AI technologies can be employed for pandemic data mining. The results can help
to predict the future trends and movement of the infected
and susceptible individuals. Moreover, AI-based classification algorithms can be leveraged to detect disease
symptoms in public places.

The applications of technologies to specific social distancing
scenarios are illustrated in Fig. 5.
B. Positioning Technologies
Since the main principle of social distancing is to increase
the distances of human contacts, approaches to determine the
positions and measure the distance between people can play
a vital role in facilitating social distancing measures. Using
ubiquitous technologies, such as Wi-fi, cellular, and GNSS,
positioning (localization) systems are crucial to many practical
social distancing scenarios such as distance keeping, public
places monitoring, contact tracing, and automation.

6

Infected movement
prediction
Quarantined/at-risk people
location prediction
Sickness trend prediction

Cellular

People/traffic density
prediction
Symptom detection
and monitoring

AI

Detect and monitor
quarantined people

Thermal

Ultra-wideband

Contact tracing
Crowd Detection
Distance to/from crowds

Other Emerging Technologies

Lockdown violation
detection

Inertial Sensors

Bluetooth

Non-essential
travel detection
Physical contact
monitoring

Visible light

Susceptible group
detection
Distance between
any two persons

Ultrasound

GNSS

Traffic/movement
monitoring
Infected movement data

Wireless Technologies

Computer Vision

Autonomous delivery
systems

Blockchain

Robot-assisted social
distancing

RFID

Public place/building
access scheduling

Public place
monitoring

Incentive

Location/movement sharing
encouragement
Stay-at-home
Encouragement

Scheduling and
Optimization

IoT

Traffic control
Workforce scheduling
Medical/health
appointment scheduling

Wi-Fi

Home healthcare
scheduling

Fig. 5: Application of technologies to different social distancing scenarios.

1) Overview of Positioning Systems: Fig. 6 illustrates the
general process and several popular methods of a positioning
system [34]. Generally, a positioning system aims to continuously track the position of an object in real-time [18].
To achieve this goal, firstly, signals are transmitted from the
target to the receiving nodes (e.g., sensors). From the received
signals, useful properties such as arrival time, signal direction,
and signal strength (depending on the measurement methods)
are extracted in the signal measurement phase. Based on
these features, the position of the target can be calculated
using various methods in the position calculation phase [34].
Several effective signal measurements and position calculation
methods are presented in the rest of this section.
2) Signal Measurements: Typical signal measurement
methods can be classified based on the extracted property of
the received signal. Among them, time-based methods use the
arrival time of the signal to determine the distance between
the receiving nodes and the target [34]. Time-based methods

can be further classified as follows:
•

Time-of-Arrival (TOA) [37]: This method determines the
distance D between the receiving node and the target
based on the time it takes for the signal to travel from
the target to the node, i.e.,
D = ct,

•

(2)

where c is the speed of the signal transmission and t is
the time for the signal to reach the receiving node.
Time Difference-of-Arrival (TDOA) [37]: This method
uses two kinds of signal with different speeds and calculates D based on the difference between them, i.e.,
D D
−
= t1 − t2,
c1 c2

(3)

where c1 , c2 , t1 , and t2 are the speeds and arrival time of
the two signals, respectively.

7

TABLE I: Practical Social Distancing Scenarios
Scenarios
Keeping
Distance

Detect and monitor the distance between
any two people

Distance to/from crowds

Alert when approaching a crowd

Physical contact
monitoring
Symptom detection and
monitoring
Susceptible group
detection

Thermal

[216], [217]

Detect and monitor
quarantined people

Detect and monitor quarantine people (e.g.,
for complying/violating the
isolation/quarantine requirement)

Crowd detection

Detect crowds/gatherings in public places

AI, Cellular, Ultrasound,
Visible Lights, Computer
Vision
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, RFID,
Zigbee, AI, Ultra-wideband,
Cellular, GNSS, Computer
Vision, Visible Light

Infected movement data

Location/movement
sharing encouragement
Stay-at-home
encouragement

Medical/health
appointment scheduling

Public place/building
access scheduling
Traffic control
Robot-assisted social
distancing
Autonomous delivery
systems (e.g., UAVs, ...)
Infected movement
prediction
Quarantined/at-risk
people location prediction
People/traffic density
prediction
Sickness trend prediction

•

[113], [114]

Monitor highly susceptible groups

Home healthcare
scheduling

Modeling
and
Prediction

[106], [209], [219],
[248], [300]

[165]

Workforce scheduling

Automation

[73], [105], [185], [210],
[248]

[209], [210]

Contact tracing

Scheduling

References

Computer Vision, Thermal,
AI

Traffic/movement
monitoring
Lockdown violation
detection

Incentive

Monitor and gauge the number of people
inside/at a public place
Monitor physical contacts, e.g.,
handshakes, hugs, between people
Detect and monitor sickness symptoms,
e.g., body temperature, coughs

Bluetooth, Ultrasound,
Thermal, Inertial,
Ultra-wideband
AI, Thermal, Inertial,
Ultra-wideband, Computer
Vision
Wi-Fi, RFID, Zigbee,
Cellular, GNSS, Ultrasound
Computer Vision, Thermal

Non-essential travel
detection

Information
System

Technologies

Distance between any
two people

Public place monitoring

Real-time
Monitoring

Description

Using location information to determine if
the trip is essential (e.g., medical facilities
and gasoline stations) or not (e.g.,
restaurants and cinemas)
Detect the vehicles on the street when
isolation measures are in effect
Detect violations of public place’s closure
or lockdown.
Track the infected people’s movement to
notify susceptible people who were at the
same places
Trace the contacts that an infected
individual made
Encourage people to share their movement
data
Incentivize people to stay home
Limit the number of people at the
workplaces
Schedule medical appointments to reduce
the number of patients
Optimize home healthcare services to
reduce the number of patients at the
hospitals
Control the number of people inside public
buildings
Regulate and reduce vehicles and
pedestrians density
Improve positioning and navigation of
robots, especially medical robots inside
hospitals
Reduce the number of people going
outside (food, merchandise, etc., delivery)

[173], [302]
[43], [71], [78], [87],
[105], [120]

Cellular, GNSS, Thermal

[156], [157], [213]

GNSS, Vision, Cellular

[122], [156], [157]

GNSS, Cellular, Thermal

[122], [156], [157], [212]

Cellular, Blockchain, GNSS,
Computer Vision

[220]–[222], [224]

Bluetooth, Blockchain
Ultra-wideband, Thermal,
AI
Bluetooth, Blockchain,
incentive mechanism
Wi-Fi, Cellular, incentive
mechanism

[63], [105], [210], [300]
[63], [66], [322]
[138], [139], [246],
[324], [325]

Scheduling

[225]–[228]

Scheduling

[231]–[235]

Scheduling

[236]–[240]

Ultra-wideband, Wi-Fi,
RFID, Zigbee

[47], [78], [87], [114]

Visible Light, Scheduling

[204], [241], [242]

Ultra-wideband, GNSS,
Visible Lights, Inertial,
Ultrasound,

[159], [188], [202],
[253], [254]

GNSS, Inertial

[153], [255], [256]

Predict infected people’s movement

AI

[301]

Predict quarantined and at-risk people’s
current location to enforce them stay at
isolation/protection facility

AI

[302], [303]

Predict people density and traffic density

Cellular, AI

[131]–[135], [304]

Predict sickness trends in specific areas

AI

[306]

Round Trip Time (RTT) [34]: The RTT method measures
the duration in which the signal travels to the targets and
comes back, i.e.,
tRT − ∆t
D=
,
(4)
2
where tRT is the time of the whole round trip, and ∆t is

the predetermined delay between when the target receives
the signal and when the target starts sending back.
A common disadvantage of the TOA and TDOA methods is
that they require synchronized clocks at the node and the
target to determine t, t1 and t2 . That may be costly to be
implemented as it requires frequent calibrations to maintain

8

the accuracy. Although the RTT method does not require clock
synchronization, it needs to acquire the delay ∆t which cannot
be predicted in many circumstances [35]. Consequently, extra
efforts are needed to determine ∆t.
Unlike the time-based methods, the Angle-of-Arrival (AOA)
method determines D by measuring the angle of the incoming
signals by using directional antennas or array of antennas. The
measured angles can then be used in the triangulation method
to geometrically determine the target position. However, the
main disadvantage of this method is that it requires extra
directional antennas which are costly to implement [34].
The Received Signal Strength Indicaton (RSSI) method
measures the attenuation of the signals to determine the
distance. Typically, the relationship between the RSSI and
distance can be formulated as follows [41]:
PR = α − 10n log10 (d) + X,

(5)

where PR is the RSSI value at the receiver (e.g., access point),
d represents the distance from the user device to the access
point, X is a random variable (caused by the shadowing effect)
which follows the Gaussian distribution with zero mean. α is a
constant value which can be known in advance and depends on
fading, antennas gain, and emitted power of the user device.
n is the path loss exponent which depends on the channel
environment between each user device and the access point.
Thus, based on the RSSI level of the received signals, the
access point can estimate the position of the user device in
indoor environments.
3) Position Calculation: Based on the measured signal
properties, different methods are employed to calculate the
target’s position. Among them, Trilateration is a common
method which uses three reference nodes and the distances
between them to the target to calculate the position [34], as
illustrated in Fig. 6. More specifically, using the coordinates
(x1, y1 ), (x2, y2 ), (x3, y3 ) of the reference nodes and the corresponding measured distances D1, D2 , and D3 , the coordinate
(x, y) of the target can be determined by
p


(x − x)2 + (y1 − y)2 = D1,

p 1

(6)
(x − x)2 + (y2 − y)2 = D2,
p 2


 (x3 − x)2 + (y3 − y)2 = D3 .

Instead of using distances, the Triangulation method uses
the angles of the signal (from the AOA method) to determine
the target’s position. As illustrated in Fig. 6, if the coordinates
of two reference nodes and the corresponding measured angles
α1, α2 are known, the target’s position can be geometrically
determined [34].
To address the uncertainty in measurements, the Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (MLE) method is often employed. This
method utilizes the signal measurements from a number of
reference nodes (usually three or more) and applies some
statistical approaches such as the minimum variance estimation
method [36] to calculate the target’s position while minimizing
the impact of noises in the environment [34].
III. W IRELESS T ECHNOLOGIES FOR S OCIAL D ISTANCING
To enable social distancing, many wireless technologies
can be adopted such as Wi-Fi, Cellular, Bluetooth, Ultra-

wideband, GNSS, Zigbee, and RFID. In this section, we first
briefly provide the fundamentals of these technologies and
then explain how they can enable, encourage, and enforce
people to practice social distancing. After that, we discuss the
potential applications, advantages, limitations, and feasibility
of these technologies.
A. Wi-Fi
Due to the fact that Wi-Fi technology is widely deployed
in indoor environments, this technology can be considered to
be a promising solution to practice social distancing inside
multi-story buildings, airports, alleys, parking garages, and
underground locations where GPS and other satellite technologies may not be available or provide low accuracy [38]. In
a Wi-Fi system, a wireless transmitter, known as a wireless
access point (AP), is required to transmit radio signals to
communicate with user devices in its coverage area. Currently,
Wi-Fi enabled wireless devices are working on the IEEE
802.11 standards. Wi-Fi 6 (based on 802.11ax technology)
is the latest version of Wi-Fi standards which provides highthroughput and reliable communications [39]. We discuss few
example scenarios of social distancing that can be enabled by
Wi-Fi as follows.
1) Crowd Detection: One potential application of Wi-Fi
technology in social distancing is positioning [41]- [57]. Based
on the location of users, the authority can detect crowds
inside a building and force them to maintain a safe distance.
This is an essential factor to practice social distancing during
a pandemic outbreak in indoor public places such as train
stations and airports. There are two main reasons making WiFi technology possible in social distancing. First, due to the
convenience of hardware facilities, we can quickly deploy WiFi systems for user positioning with very low cost and efforts [40]. Second, with recent advances in Wi-Fi-based indoor
positioning, Wi-Fi can provide reliable and precise location
services to enable social distancing. The most common and
easiest way for indoor positioning is to calculate the user’s
location based on the RSSI of the received signals from the
user device [41], [42]. However, the accuracy of this solution
much depends on the propagation model. Thus, in [41], the
authors present a new method to dynamically estimate the
channel model from the user device to the access point. The
key idea of this solution is continuously determining the RSSI
values in real-time to obtain the estimated channel model that
is close to the real channel model. Once the propagation is
estimated, the distance between the access point and the user
device can be accurately determined. After that, the user’s
location will be derived by using the trilateration mechanism.
Differently, the authors in [42] propose to adopt the inertial
navigation system (INS) to significantly increase the accuracy
of conventional RSSI-based methods. The key idea of this
solution is using a Kalman filter to combine and fill the signal
database with the INS data. As such, the authors can obtain the
average distance error as small as 0.6m. The above RSSI-based
solutions can be easily adopted to detect crowds in indoor
environments. Then, the local authorities can take appropriate
actions to disperse the crowds or suggest other people to not

9

Signal Measurement
Time-based
TOA
tct

Trilateration

AOA

α

TDOA

D1

Position
Calculation

MLE

D2

c 1t1
D3
RTT
Signals

tRT

c 2t2
RSS

Triangulation
α1

p(D)

Position

α2

Fig. 6: General principle of positioning systems.

go to the place. For example, if there are too many people
in a supermarket, the authorities can notify and recommend
new coming customers to go to other supermarkets or come
in another time so that they can avoid crowds.
2) Crowd Detection in Dynamic Environments: Although
the RSSI-based solution can detect the user’s location with
sufficient accuracy, it may not be effective in dynamic and
complicated indoor environments such as airports or train
stations [43], [44], [45]. This is due to the effects of nonline of sight (NLOS) on the wireless signals between the
user’s device and the access point, especially in dynamic
and complicated environments in which the wireless signals
are greatly scattered by obstacle shadows or people (e.g.,
running and walking) [43]. Another RSSI-based indoor localization technique is the fingerprinting approach (or radio
map) that locates devices based on a previously built database.
In particular, this database contains the signal fingerprints
corresponding to several access points in a specific area.
Nevertheless, collecting fingerprint data is time-consuming and
laborious [46], especially in large areas such as airports or train
stations. In addition, it is infeasible to directly apply the preobtained fingerprint database to new areas for localization [47].
The main reason is that the adjustment process to apply the
fingerprint database of an area to another is time-consuming
and usually requires human intervention.
To address these problems, several solutions [43]–[47]
are proposed to enable indoor localization in dynamic and
complicated areas such as airports and train stations. With
these solutions, the authorities can detect crowds and force
people to leave to enable social distancing during pandemic
outbreaks. Specifically, in [43], the authors show that when
the environment changes, e.g., the presence of people in the
line of sight between the user device and the access point,
the performance of conventional RSSI-based localization techniques is greatly decreased. Thus, the authors propose an
adaptive signal model fingerprinting algorithm to adapt to
the dynamic of the environment by detecting users’ positions
and updating the database simultaneously. In [47], the authors
propose a new localization technique to locate multiple users
in different areas by performing a fine-grained localization. In
addition, the authors introduce a transfer mechanism to adjust
the fingerprint database over multiple areas to minimize human
intervention.
An interesting design is proposed in [48] to locate and track

people by using Wi-Fi technology, namely Wi-Vi (stands for
Wi-Fi Vision). This technology allows the authorities to track
people in indoor environments and detect potential crowds,
so that they can take appropriate actions to enable social
distancing, e.g., inform people not to go to potentially crowded
places. In particular, Wi-Vi uses an MIMO interference nulling
to remove reflections from static objects and only focuses on
moving objects, e.g., a user. Moreover, the authors propose to
consider the movement of a user as an antenna array and then
track the user by observing its RF beams. If there are many
people having the same direction, e.g., going to the same place,
the authorities can notify them to avoid forming crowds. Thus,
Wi-Vi can be considered as a promising technology to enable
social distancing.
However, to efficiently detect crowds, Wi-Fi-based localization systems may require several transceivers attached to
each access point to obtain high accuracy. Another problem
is to differentiate between human and machine terminals. To
address this problem, fingerprint databases can be used to
detect machine terminals which are usually placed at known
locations. Nevertheless, this solution may not be feasible if we
consider autonomous robots in the environments, and thus can
be a potential research direction.
3) Public Place Monitoring and Access Scheduling: Another way to apply Wi-Fi technology in social distancing is
by controlling the number of people inside a building, e.g.,
supermarket, shopping mall, and university. Specifically, with
various Wi-Fi access points implemented inside the building,
the number of people currently inside the building can be estimated based on the number of connections from user devices
to the access points. Based on this information, several actions
can be made, such as forcing people to queue before entering
the building to maintain a safe number of people inside the
facilities at the same time. Another application is notifying
people who want to go to the building. Specifically, based
on the number of people inside the building, the authority
can encourage/force them to stay home or come at a different
time if the place is too crowded. However, the accuracy of
this approach depends on many factors such as the number of
smart devices one person possesses, how many devices can be
connected to a network simultaneously, and whether the user
connects to the access point as many people completely rely
on their cellular connections.

10

4) Stay-at-home Encouragement: Wi-Fi technology can
also be used to encourage people to stay at home by detecting
the frequency of moving outside their houses for a particular
time, e.g., a day. Specifically, when user devices move far
away from the access point inside their houses, the connection
between them will be weak or lost. Based on this information,
the access points can estimate the frequency of moving out of
their house and then notify the users to encourage them to
stay at home as much as possible.
Summary: Wi-Fi technology is a prominent solution to
quickly and effectively enable, encourage, and force people to
practice social distancing. With the current advances of WiFi, the accuracy of localization systems can be significantly
improved, resulting in effective and precise applications for
social distancing. However, Wi-Fi-based technology is mainly
used for indoor environments as this technology requires
several access points for localization which may not be feasible
for outdoor environments. For outdoor environments, other
wireless technologies, e.g., Bluetooth, GPS, and cellular technologies, can be considered.
B. Cellular
Over the past four decades, cellular networks have seen
tremendous growth throughout four generations and become
the primary way of digital communications. The fifth generation (5G) of cellular networks is coming around 2020 with the
first standard. According to the Cisco mobile traffic forecast,
there will be more than 13 billion mobile devices connected
to the Internet by 2023 [117]. That positions the cellular
technology at the center to enable social distancing in many
circumstances including real-time monitoring, people density
prediction and encouraging stay-at-home by enabling 5G live
broadcasting, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
1) Real-time Monitoring: Individual tracking and mobility
pattern monitoring are potential approaches using cellular
technology to practice social distancing as shown in Fig. 7(a).
According to the 3GPP standard, the current cellular networks,
i.e., LTE and LTE-A, are employing various localization
methods such as Assisted-GNSS (A-GNSS), Enhanced CellID (E-CID), and Observed TDoA (O-TDoA) as specified
in the Release 9; Uplink-TDoA (U-TDoA) included in the
Release 11; and with the aids of other technologies like Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth, and Terrestrial Beacon System (TBS) as stated in
the Release 13 [118], [119]. Cellphone location data collected
by the current cellular network is normally used for network
operations and managers [119] such as network planning and
optimization to enhance the Quality of Service (QoS) rather
than user applications due to privacy and network resource
concerns. However, in the context of social distancing, user
tracking based on data of user movement history can be very
effective, e.g., for quarantined people detection, and infected
people tracing. The authorities can check whether infected
people are violating quarantine requirements or not. In cases
they do not follow the requirements, the authorities can send
warning messages or even perform some aggressive measures,
e.g., fines and arrests, to force them to self-isolate.
Moreover, when a user has been exposed to the virus, the
user’s mobility history can be extracted to investigate the

spread of the virus. In these cases, the cellular technology can
outperform other wireless technologies in term of availability
and popularity. For example, localization services relying on
wireless technologies such as GPS always need to be run in
the foreground application (i.e., the availability), while this
service is a part of cellular network operations. In addition,
Ultra-wideband and Zigbee technologies require additional
hardware [89], [106] (i.e., the popularity). Incoming 5G networks with the presence of key technologies such as mmWave communications, D2D communications, and Ultra-dense
networks (UDNs) [120] are capable of performing a high
precision localization. Two positioning schemes exploiting the
mm-Wave communications are proposed in [121] based on
the validation of triangulation measurements and angle of
differences of arrival (ADoA). The simulation results show
that the triangulate-validate and ADoA methods can obtain a
sub-meter accuracy level with a probability of 85% and 70%,
respectively in a 18m × 16m indoor area. The authors in [122]
propose a positioning scheme in UDNs using a cascaded
Extended Kalman filter (EKF) structure to fuse the DoA
and ToA estimations from the reference nodes. The proposed
scheme can localize a moving target at speed 50 km/h with a
sub-meter level accuracy in an outdoor environment. It can be
used for tracking vehicles and monitoring the traffic density.
Recently, some governments have required telecom companies to share cellphone location data to implement social
distancing to deal with COVID-19. For instance, Taiwan
deployed an “electronic fence” exploiting the cellular-based
triangulation methods to ensure that the quarantined cases stay
in their homes [123]. The local officials call them twice a day
to ensure they do not leave their phones at home and visit them
within 15 minutes after their phones are turned off or they
move away from their home. The Moscow government is also
said to be planning to use SIM card data for tracking foreigners
and residents who have close contacts with foreigners when
the border closure order is lifted [124]. However, individual
tracking using cellular technology has risen concerns about
privacy [125], [126]. Instead, group/crowd detecting and monitoring based on shared location data which is anonymous and
aggregated from carriers become the key approach utilized by
several governments such as Italy, Germany, Austria, the UK,
Korea, and Australia [127]–[130]. This approach is intended
to alleviate privacy concerns compared with individual-level
tracking (i.e., it satisfies the EU privacy rules [126]). The
metadata can be used to obtain the mobility patterns, thus
the governments can monitor whether people are complying
with the lock-down rules or not. It can be also employed to
model the spread of the virus to aid the governments to analyze
and evaluate the effectiveness of ongoing quarantine measures
during the outbreak.
2) People Density Prediction: In addition to the real-time
crowd monitoring and modeling the spread of the virus, the
movement history data can be utilized to predict the network
traffic thanks to the large-scale location data provided by
carriers and the recent advances of machine learning. There are
various works on network traffic prediction proposed in [131]–
[135] using the history of users’ movements. Furthermore, the
number of users in a specific area can be also estimated from

11

Triangulation
methods
Enter Text

Real-time Monitoring
& Infected Movement
Data

Predicted
network traffic

People
density
prediction

Video
multicast

Stay-at-home
Encouragement

Other
services
Network slicing

Fig. 7: Cellular communications systems to support social distancing.

the network traffic of that area as illustrated in Fig. 7(b). Thus,
the authorities can predict the crowd gathering in public places
(e.g., shopping malls, airports, and train stations) relying on
the corresponding forecasted network traffic. Then, appropriate
actions can be performed by the authorities to prevent crowd
gathering in these places. For example, if the predicted number
of people entering a shopping mall exceeds a threshold, the
authorities can notify customers to avoid coming to this place
at this time or recommend them to go to other shopping malls
having lower densities. In addition, this method can be also
applied in residential areas to study how often people stay
home as well as predict when they go out or the places they
come to. This can provide significant data input for network
traffic forecasts in public places. In addition, if they regularly
go to non-essential places, the authorities can warn or force
them to stay at home as much as possible.
3) Stay-at-home Encouragement: To implement social distancing, many people must do their daily activities remotely
from their home such as working, studying, and entertainment.
Therefore, some video conference applications used to work
from home or study online have witnessed an explosion of
downloads. For example, the Zoom application has achieved
an increase by 1,270% from 22 Feb to 22 Mar in 2020 [136]
and the number of newly registered users of Microsoft Teams
has also risen 775% monthly in Italy after the full lock-down
was started [137]. As a result, 5G live broadcasting technology
can be used to encourage people to stay at home while
minimizing the impact on their work, or study (Fig. 7(c)).
Especially, this is probably applicable to cases where landline
Internet is not available. There are many works to enhance
the quality of video multicast/broadcast applications by utilizing the advances of 5G networks [138]–[142]. Video multicast/broadcast services are defined as an ultra high definition
slice in an MIMO system [138]. To improve the spectral effi-

ciency for video multicast/broadcast in the proposed system,
the authors introduce a hybrid digital-analog scheme to tackle
channel condition and antenna heterogeneity. Another possible
solution that can significantly improve qualities for video
multicasting/broadcasting is data caching. A novel caching
paradigm proposed in [139] is applied for multicast services
in heterogeneous networks. With the awareness of multicast
files, the proposed caching policy can select files efficiently
for the caches. Studies in [140], [141] propose using NOMA
techniques to support multicast/broadcast by increasing the
spectrum efficiency in multi-user environments. Finally, the
authors in [142] propose a video multicast orchestration
scheme for 5G UDNs which can help to improve the spectrum
efficiency.
4) Infected Movement Data: Due to the omnipresence of
mobile phones and the near world-wide coverage of cellular
signals, cellular technology can be an effective tool to track
the movement of people. Unlike in the quarantined people
detection scenarios where these people may deliberately leave
their phones at home, people do not have any reason to do
so in the infected movement data scenario. Therefore, cellular
can be an effective technology in this scenario. The authors
of [224] summarize the methods to trace human position in
outdoor environments using base stations and indoor environments using access points. However, the positioning accuracy
for outdoor environments still needs to be improved because a
small error by using the cellular network technology can cause
a big error in the distance measurement.
Summary: Cellular technology can be considered to be one
of most important approaches to assist social distancing. It
can be deployed on a large scale due to its convenience
and ubiquitousness compared to other wireless technologies.
It can be used to track quarantined or infected individuals.
Furthermore, it can provide a unique solution to not only

12

monitor crowds in real-time, but also allow the local authorities
to predict the forming of crowds in public areas (e.g., airports,
train stations, and shopping malls) based on the forecasted
network traffic. The low latency feature of 5G networks
in data processing using edge/fog computing enables quick
responses of the authorities (e.g., send notifications instantly),
for example, to prevent close contact. However, the use of
subscriber’s location data for social distancing measures is
subject to great privacy concerns from citizens (to be discussed
more details in Section V).
C. Bluetooth
With the explosive growth of Bluetooth-enabled devices,
Bluetooth technology is another solution for social distancing in both indoor and outdoor environments. In particular, Bluetooth is a wireless technology used for short-range
wireless communications in the range from 2.4 to 2.485
GHz [58], [59]. Bluetooth devices can automatically detect
and connect to other devices nearby, forming a kind of ad-hoc
called piconet [59]. Recently, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
has been introduced as an extended version of the classic
Bluetooth to reduce the energy usage of devices and improve
the communication performance [59]. Given the above, the
BLE localization technology possesses several advantages
compared with those of the Wi-Fi localization. First, the BLE
signals have a higher sample rate than that of the Wi-Fi signals
(i.e., 0.25 Hz ∼ 2 Hz) [60]. Second, the BLE technology
consumes less power than that of the Wi-Fi technology, and
thus it can be implemented widely in handheld devices. Third,
the BLE signals can be obtained from most smart devices,
while Wi-Fi signals can be obtained from only access points.
Finally, BLE beacons are usually powered by battery, and
thereby they are more flexible and easier to deploy than
Wi-Fi. It is worth noting that Bluetooth is mainly used for
infrastructureless adhoc communications in contrast to other
technologies.
1) Contact Tracing: One application of Bluetooth in social
distancing is contact tracing [61], [62] as illustrated in Fig. 8.
The key idea is using Bluetooth to detect other users in close
proximity with their information (e.g., identifier) stored in a
person’s Bluetooth device, e.g., a mobile phone. When there is
an infected case, the authorities can ask people to share these
records as a part of a contact tracing investigation. Thereby,
the authorities can detect people who may have close contact
with the infected one and notify them promptly to prevent the
spreading of diseases. Several attempts to use Bluetooth in
contact tracing have been reported. Apple and Google have
recently introduced a mobile application (running on both
iPhone and Android devices) that can detect other smartphones
nearby using Bluetooth technology [63]. If a person is tested
positive for a disease, he/she will enter the result in the app
to inform others about that. Then, people who may have close
contact with the positive case will be notified and instructed
about what to do next. Note that a Wi-Fi or cellular connection
would be also required to enable the app. Similar apps have
been recently launched in Singapore [65], Europe [67], and
India [68].

2) Crowd Detection: Bluetooth technology can be used
to detect crowds in indoor environments to practice social
distancing with the latest advances in Bluetooth localization
techniques [71], [73]. In particular, based on signals received
from users’ Bluetooth devices, a central controller can calculate the positions of users and detect/predict crowds in indoor
environments. If a crowd is detected, the local manager can
force people to leave to practice social distancing. In addition,
they can advise people who want to go to the place to come
at a different time if the place is too crowded at the moment.
In [71], the authors point out that with the development of
Bluetooth Low Energy, Bluetooth-based indoor localization
can be considered as a practical method to locate Bluetooth
devices in indoor environments due to its low battery cost and
high communication performance. The authors then propose
indoor localization schemes that collect RSSI measurements
to detect the user’s location by using the triangulation mechanism.
In [72], the authors show that the BLE technology is
strongly affected by the fast fading and interference, resulting
in a low accuracy when detecting the user’s device. To improve
the accuracy of the BLE positioning, the authors run several
experimental tests to choose the optimal parameters to set up
BLE localization systems. The authors demonstrate that the
BLE-based indoor localization can achieve a better performance than that of Wi-Fi localization systems. The authors
of [74] point out that the accuracy of BLE-based localization is
strongly affected by advertising channels, human movements,
and human obstacles. To address these problems, they propose
a dynamic AI model that can detect human obstacles by using
three BLE advertising channels. Then, the RSSI values will
be compensated accordingly.
In [75] and [76], the authors show Wi-Fi-based and Bluetooth based localization systems can be strongly affected by
the interference from other wireless devices operating at 2.4
GHz bands. To mitigate the interference, Wi-Fi devices can
use 802.11b and 802.11g/n standards which deploy directsequence spread spectrum and orthogonal frequency-division
multiplexing signaling methods. Similarly, Bluetooth devices
can avoid interference from other wireless devices, e.g., WiFi enabled devices, by using the spread-spectrum frequency
hopping technique to randomly use one of 79 different frequencies in Bluetooth bands. As such, the interference from
other devices is significantly reduced, thereby improving the
accuracy of localization systems.
3) Distance Between Two People: Bluetooth can also be
used to determine the distance between two persons by using
their Bluetooth-enabled devices, e.g., smartphone or smartwatch, as depicted in Fig. 9. Specifically, similar to the WiFi technology, based on RSSI levels, a device can calculate
the distances between it and other nearby devices [73]. It is
worth noting that Bluetooth technology can allow a device to
connect to multiple devices at the same time [58]. Thus, the
device can simultaneously detect distances to multiple devices
in its coverage. If the distance is less than a given threshold,
e.g. 1.5 meters [12], the devices can warn and/or encourage
users to practice social distancing.
Summary: Bluetooth technology is a very promising solu-

13

Alice and Bob meet each other and have
close contact

(1)

Their phones exchange anonymous
identifiers

Alice is tested positive for a disease. Alice
then enters the result in an app from the
authority

(2)

With Alice’s consent, her phone uploads
her identifier to the cloud

(4)

(3)

Bob’s phone periodically download the
broadcast identifier of everyone who has
tested positive. A match is found with
Alice’s identifier

Bob receives a notification with instruction
information about what to do next

(6)

(5)

Fig. 8: Contact tracing application based on Bluetooth technology [63].

Warning

Safe distance

Close distance

Warning

Fig. 9: Distance between any two persons based on Bluetooth
technology.
tion to enable social distancing. However, the privacy of users
needs to be taken into account as the applications require users
to share information with the authorities and third parties. This
can be a research direction to ensure privacy and encourage
people to share their information to prevent the spreading of
diseases. In addition, several drawbacks of Bluetooth technology in social distancing which need to be considered such as
the accuracy of localization techniques when the users’ devices
are located inside the pockets or bags and their devices always
need to turn on the Bluetooth mode. Furthermore, combining
Bluetooth and other technologies (e.g., Wi-Fi [77]) to improve
the localization accuracy is also an open research direction.
D. Ultra-wideband
Ultra-WideBand (UWB) technology has been deemed to be
a promising candidate for precise Indoor Positioning Systems
(IPSs) that can sustain an accuracy at the centimeter level in
the ranges from short to medium. This is thanks to its unique
characteristics (e.g., high time-domain resolution, immunity of
multipath, low-cost implementation, low power consumption,
and good penetration) [102]. Due to the wide bandwidth nature
of UWB signals (at least 500 MHz as specified by FCC [103]),
the impulse radio (IR) UWB technology has the capability
of generating a series of very short duration Gaussian pulses
in time-domain which enables its advantages compared with
other RF technology. Pulse position modulation with time

hopping (TH-PPM) is the most popular modulation scheme
exploited in the impulse radio based UWB [104]. This pulse
can directly propagate in the radio channel without requiring
additional carrier modulation. The baseband-like architecture
of the IR-UWB facilitates extremely simple and low-power
transmitters. Thus, the advantages of the IR-UWB technology can greatly support social distancing, even better than
other wireless technologies (e.g., higher accuracy in indoor
positioning applications) or provide exclusive solutions (e.g.,
device-free tracking/counting) for some scenarios, as discussed
below.
1) Real-time Monitoring: In this section, we review some
social distancing scenarios using Ultra-wideband technology
for real-time monitoring such as crowd detection (e.g., tracking
users’ location), public place monitoring and access scheduling
(e.g., counting the number of people in a specific area).
a) Crowd detection: One of the major solutions for
crowd detection is tracking locations of people in public areas.
There are many commercial products exploiting the IR-UWB
technology for real-time localization in both daily life and factories such as DecaWave [105], BeSpoon [106], Zebra [107],
Ubisense [108]. DecaWave and BeSpoon claim their products
based on ranging measurements can offer an accuracy under
10 cm [105], [106]. Furthermore, Ubisense and Zebra provide
industrial products which can obtain a high accuracy even
in cluttered, indoor factory environments [107], [108]. All
of them support real-time positioning for multiple mobile
tags by using the triangulation techniques based on the absolute locations of reference nodes or anchors (e.g., UWB
transceivers). Especially, the Dimension4 sensor invented by
Ubisense can be integrated with a built-in GPS module for
outdoor tracking purposes. Experiments conducted to evaluate
holistically the performance of three commercial products
(i.e., DecaWave, BeSpoon, and Ubisense) under indoor industrial environment setting (with the presence of NLOS)
can be found in [109]. The availability of commercial UWBbased localization systems enables real-time people tracking

14

a) An UWB-based tag-less counting system.
P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

10
5
Amplitude

in public places by localizing their UWB-supported phones, or
personal belongings equipped with tags (e.g., keys and shoes).
Thus, the authorities can detect the crowd to notify them and
other people in the area, disperse the crowd or even predict
and prevent the forming of the crowd by using AI/Machine
learning algorithms based on the previously collected data.
Recently, device-free localization (or passive positioning)
techniques have witnessed significant interest. This is thanks
to the capability to tackle inherent problems of aforementioned
communication-based localization approaches: (i) privacy issues (e.g., tracking targets do not need to communicate with
an access point/network coordinator, thus it can protect private
information of the target), and (ii) physical obstacles (e.g.,
LOS communications have significant influence by obstacles) [110]. The high time-domain resolution feature of the IRUWB technology enables the device-free localization methods
relying on the changes of very short pulses properties between
two transceivers because of absorption, scattering, diffraction,
reflection, and refraction [111], [112]. In particular, the authors
in [111] use monostatic radar modules (i.e., P410 platform)
equipped with one transmitter and one receiver for multi-target
tracking based on Gaussian mixture probability hypothesis
density (GM-PHD) filters. Information (including raw signal,
bandpass signal, motion filtered signal, and detection list)
extracted from the reflected signals is used to estimate the
locations of targets with an accuracy at the decimeter level.
To improve the accuracy, a multi-static is deployed in [112]
to track a person in real-time by determining the difference
between the newly channel impulse response with the presence
of a new object with that of the previous one without the
object. The location of the object can be found with the mean
error of only 3 cm by applying a leading edge detection
algorithm on the difference between the two measurements.
However, the limitation of this work is that it can track only
one target at a time. Motivated by the above works, we can
easily deploy device-free localization techniques for crowd
detection in public areas without revealing any personal information and hardware requirements on target objects. Thereby,
the authorities can locate the exact locations of crowds and
have appropriate actions to disperse crowds or force them to
practice social distancing.
b) Public place monitoring and access scheduling:
A simple solution for public place monitoring is referred
to as device (or tag)-free counting techniques [113], [114].
Specifically, the authors in [113] propose an advanced people
counting algorithm using the revelation of the received signal pattern according to the number of people illustrated in
Fig. 10(a). This method enables people counting even with
the presence of dense multipath signals in the environment
which is not able to be performed by counting techniques
based on detecting single signals corresponding to individual
persons. For example, other counting approaches using WiFi and Zigbee rely on the number of connections from users
to an access point (i.e., Wi-Fi) or a network coordinator (i.e.,
Zigbee). Major clusters are picked up to find main pulses having maximum amplitude. A joint probability density function
derived from these main pulses is utilized to derive maximum
likelihood (ML) equation. Then, the estimated number of

0
-5
-10

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Distance Index (samples)

b)The received signal combining reflected impulses.

Fig. 10: Tag-less counting technique using the UWB technology.

people is determined to be the figure having the maximum
likelihood as shown in Fig. 10(b). Similarly, the solution
in [114] also provides a counting approach without positioning
targets by using the crowd-centric method based on energy
detection. Without requiring hardware deployment like WiFi and Zigbee, the approaches proposed in [113], [114] can
provide a low-cost and high-privacy solution to detect the
number of people in public areas. Further actions can be
conducted by the local manager to maintain social distancing
such as scheduling people to enter the place based on the
counting information or giving advice to other people who
are planning to go to the crowded place to come at a different
time.
2) Keeping Distance and Contact Tracing: Similar to Bluetooth, the IR-UWB technology can also be applied to maintain the distances between people as well as close physical
contact tracing by using ranging methods with high precision in both indoor and outdoor environments [105], [115].
While DecaWave provides a ranging measurement using sensors and tags [105], Apple has already brought this feature
to their phones (e.g., Iphone 11 series) for their primitive
location-based services (e.g., finding objects and improving
AirDrop) [115]. These approaches use time-based ranging
techniques like ToF, TDoA or combined ToF and AoA to
measure the distances to nearby sensors, tags, or phones.
However, these products can be employed to detect close
proximity between users in public places. Thanks to the IRUWB technology, they can frequently broadcast pilot messages containing some information (e.g., their specific IDs,
timestamp, etc.) to nearby devices for ranging measurements
with extremely low energy consumption. Then, surrounding
devices can utilize the information of the received messages

15

to estimate the distance from the source device and warn the
users if they are too close to each other (e.g., less than 1.5m in
a pandemic situation [12]). In addition, these devices can also
store other information like who had close contacts with them
along with the distances and duration periods. This information
is very important because it can be used to trace close contacts
in the future (e.g., investigate the spread of the virus in a
pandemic) with minimal privacy violation.
In order to help people to avoid crowds, especially vulnerable or at-risk groups, in indoor environments such as shopping
malls, hospitals, and office buildings, BeSpoon introduces a
commercial product that allows moving targets to self-localize
their positions very accurately (i.e., less than 10 cm over 600
m in LOS environments) in a short time by using the IRUWB technology [106]. This product provides both evaluation
kits and an ultra-compact UWB module which can be easily
integrated into off-the-shelf products (e.g., shopping trolleys or
baskets) for localization and navigation purposes. A SnapLoc
platform proposed in [116] allows an unlimited number of tags
to self estimate their locations at position update rates up to 2.3
kHz. It uses the TDoA technique based on all simultaneous
responded information from reference nodes integrated into
one single channel impulse response. By combining with the
positioning service (i.e., to provide locations of other people in
a specific area), a navigation application exploiting commercial products like BeSpoon can be developed to assist people
(e.g., customers) for self-detecting their current locations as
well as crowds’ locations along the way, thereby assisting them
to plan their moves and navigate to stay away from crowds.
Summary: With the aforementioned potential applications,
the IR-UWB systems can be considered to be an outstanding
solution to handle social distancing in both indoor and outdoor environments. The IR-UWB based localization systems
discussed in [105]–[108] can be employed for detecting and
monitoring crowds in public places with a low-cost deployment. Although this technology can also be used to monitor
the positions of self-isolated people to check whether they may
violate the quarantine requirements or not, it is less attractive
than other RF technologies like Wi-Fi or cellular which do not
require to install additional hardware for tracking purposes.
In addition, UWB-enabled phones like iPhone 11 series can
assist users in practicing social distancing without localization
and navigation services. However, this solution only works
with a modern iPhone equipped with a UWB chip. Last but
not least, the device-free technology presented in [111]–[114]
is a great advantage of the IR-UWB technology compared
with other wireless technologies for the crowd detecting and
monitoring in public places with acceptable accuracy at the
decimeter level [111].
E. Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS)
The GNSS has been being the most widely used for positioning purposes in the outdoor environment nowadays. GNSS
satellites orbit the Earth and continuously broadcast navigation
messages. When a receiver receives the navigation messages
from the satellites, it calculates the distances from its location
to the satellites based on the transmitting time in the messages.

Basically, to calculate the current location of a user, it requires
at least three different navigation messages from three different
satellites (based on the Trilateration mechanism in Section II).
However, in practice, to achieve a high accuracy in calculating
the location of a user, at least four different messages from
four satellites are required (the fourth one is to address the
time synchronization problem at the receiver) [143]. Currently,
some GNSS systems (e.g., Galileo [144]) can achieve an
accuracy of less than 1m. As a result, GNSS systems can
be considered to be a very promising solution to enable social
distancing practice.
1) Real-time Monitoring: Due to the outstanding features
of GNSS technology in locating people, especially in outdoor
environments, this technology is very useful for tracking
people to practice social distancing. Specifically, most smartphones are currently equipped with GPS devices which can
be used to track locations of mobile users when needed. In
the context of a pandemic outbreak, e.g., COVID-19, many
suspects, for example, returning from an infected area, will
be required to be self-isolated. Thus, to monitor these people,
the authorities can ask them to wear GPS-based positioning
devices to make sure that they do not leave their residences
during the quarantine [156], [157]. The main advantage of
using GNSS technology compared to Wi-Fi or Infrared-based
solutions for people tracking is that this technology allows
to monitor people anywhere and anytime globally, and thus
even the suspects move from one city to another city, the
authorities still can track and monitor them. However, one of
the major disadvantages of this technology is that it depends
on the satellite signals. Thus, in some areas with weak or
high interference signals (e.g., inside a building or in crowded
areas), the location accuracy is very low [150], [154], [158].
To overcome this limitation, pseudolites have been proposed.
Pseudolites are ground-based transceivers that can act as an
alternative for satellites to transmit GNSS signals. These
pseudolites can be installed in the areas where the satellite
signals are weak to enhance the positioning accuracy of the
GPS. Nevertheless, pseudolites have not been widely deployed
because of their high price and strict time synchronization
requirement [155].
2) Automation: Another useful application of GNSS to
practice social distancing is automation. It comes from the
fact that GNSS is especially important for navigation in
autonomous systems, such as robots, UAVs, and self-driving
cars. Thus, in a pandemic outbreak when people are required
to stay at home, GNSS-based autonomous services play a
key role to minimize physical contact between people. For
example, customers can shop online and receive their items
with drone delivery services. Such kind of services has been
introduced recently by some large retail corporations such
as Amazon and DHL. Similarly, robotaxi services have been
introduced recently in some countries to deal with COVID-19
outbreak [153], [159]. It can be clearly seen that these GNSSbased autonomous services can contribute a significant part in
implementing social distancing in practice by minimizing the
required human presence for delivery and transportation.
3) Keeping Distance and Crowd Detection: In [152], the
authors introduce a GNSS service which can be used to

16

determine the locations of users, thereby can warn them if
they violate the social distancing requirements. In particular,
in this service, mobile users are required to install a mobile
application which can track the location of the users based on
GPS technology. Then, the users’ locations will be updated
constantly to the service provider. Thus, based on the users’
locations, the service provider can determine whether the user
violates the social distancing requirements or not. For example,
if there are more than two users locating too close to each
other (e.g., less than two meters), the service provider can
send warning messages to remind the users. Furthermore, in
the cases where a user goes to restricted areas, e.g., isolated
areas, they will receive warning messages to be aware of using
protection measures.
4) Infected Movement Data: In the infected movement data
scenario, GNSS can be a very effective technology because
of its world-wide coverage and positioning accuracy is not
the main concern. For the outdoor environment, using GNSS
alone can be sufficient for tracking the location of infected
people. With the omnipresence of smartphones with builtin GPS feature, the movement path of the infected people
can be easily determined. However, the main concern in this
scenario is that people have to turn on GPS service on their
smartphones, which necessitate mechanisms to incentivize
people to share their movement information. This issue will
be further discussed in Section V.
Summary: Although this GNSS-based service has many
advantages in practicing social distancing, e.g., tracking users,
keeping distance, and group monitoring, it has some shortcomings which limit its applications in practice. Specifically,
this service requires tracking locations of users based on
GPS in a real-time manner, which may cause some extraimplementation costs and privacy issues for users. Furthermore, in terms of determining the distance between two
people, the accuracy of GNSS services is not high in general,
especially for distances less than two meters. Thus, some
recent advanced GNSS technologies like [146], [148], [149],
[155] can be used to improve the accuracy of the GPS.
However, these technologies are still quite expensive and have
not been widely deployed for public services, and thus more
research in this direction should be further explored. For the
privacy issues, they will be discussed in Section V with several
solutions such as location information protection and personal
identity protection.
F. Zigbee
Zigbee is also a potential technology that can help to enable
social distancing. In particular, Zigbee is a standard-based
wireless communication technology for low-cost and lowpower wireless networks such as wireless sensor networks.
A Zigbee system consists of a central hub, e.g., network coordinator, and Zigbee-enabled devices. Zigbee-enabled devices
can communicate with each other at the range of up to 65
feet (20 meters) with an unlimited number of hops. Compared
with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth technologies, Zigbee is designed
to be cheaper and simpler, making it possible for low-cost
and low-power communications for smart devices [87], [88].

Moreover, Zigbee can operate at several frequencies, such as
2.4 GHz, 868 MHz, and 915 MHz. Given the above, Zigbee
is ideal for constructing mesh networks with long battery life
and reliable communications [88]. As a result, Zigbee can be
considered as a promising candidate in several applications
that enable social distancing during a pandemic outbreak.
1) Crowd Detection: One promising application of Zigbee
is detecting and tracking users’ location in indoor environments. The key idea is that based on the RSSI level of the
received signals from the user’s Zigbee-enabled device, the
Zigbee control hub can determine the location of the user.
Several research works report that Zigbee localization systems
can achieve high accuracy with low-power and low-cost devices [87]. Based on the location of users, the central hub can
detect crowds, i.e., many users in the same area, and notify the
local manager to ask people to practice social distancing during a pandemic outbreak. With the state-of-the-art mechanisms
in the literature, the accuracy of Zigbee localization systems is
significantly improved, making it feasible for social distancing.
In [89], the authors propose a novel framework to enhance
the localization accuracy of Zigbee devices by considering
the effect of “drift phenomenon” when users move from a
place to another place in indoor environments. The authors
then demonstrate that the proposed framework can increase the
accuracy by up to 60% compared with conventional solutions.
Differently, in [90], the authors introduce an ensemble
mechanism to further improve the localization accuracy. In
particular, instead of using the RSSI level, the proposed
solution combines the gradient-based search, the linear least
square approximation, and multidimensional scaling methods
together with spatial dependent weights of the environment to
approximate the target’s location. In [91], the authors propose
an energy-efficient indoor localization system that can obtain
Wi-Fi fingerprints by using ZigBee interference signatures.
The key idea of this work is using ZigBee interfaces to
detect Wi-Fi access points which can significantly save energy compared with using Wi-Fi interfaces. Furthermore, a
K-nearest neighbor method with the Manhattan distance is
introduced to increase the accuracy of the localization system.
The experimental results show that the proposed solution can
save 68% of energy compared with the method using Wi-Fi
interfaces. The accuracy is also improved by 87% compared
to state-of-the-art WiFi fingerprint-based approaches.
2) Public Place Monitoring and Access Scheduling: In a
Zigbee system, there is a central hub, known as the network
coordinator, to control other connected devices in the network.
Thus, Zigbee can be used to control the number of people
in indoor environments. Specifically, when a person equipped
with a Zigbee-enabled device (e.g., ID card or member card)
enters the place, the device will connect to the Zigbee central
hub. As such, the central hub is able to calculate the total
number of people inside the place at a given time. Based on
this information, the local manager can ask people to queue
before entering the place if it is too crowded.
Summary: Zigbee technology can play an important role in
enabling social distancing during pandemic outbreaks. However, Zigbee is a new technology and has not been widely
adopted in our daily life, and thus limiting its practical applica-

17

tions. Nevertheless, with the support from leading companies
such as Amazon, Google, Apple, and Texas Instruments [88],
the number of Zigbee-enable devices is expected to explosively
increase in the near future. Furthermore, combining Zigbee
with other technologies (e.g., Wi-Fi [91]) is also a promising
research direction to improve the performance of localization
systems in terms of the accuracy and robustness.
G. RFID
RFID plays a key role in real-time object localizing and
tracking [78]. An RFID localization system usually consists
of three main components: (i) RFID readers, (ii) RFID tags,
and (iii) a data processing system [79]. Typically, RFID tags
can be categorized into two types: (i) active tags and (ii)
passive tags. A passive RFID tag can operate without requiring
any power source, and it is powered by the electromagnetic
field generated by the RFID reader. In contrast, an active
RFID tag has its own power source, e.g., a battery, and
continuously broadcasts its own signals. Active RFID tags are
usually used in localization systems. Thus, RFID technology
can be considered as a potential technology to practice social
distancing.
1) Crowd Detection: One potential application of RFID
technology is locating users in the indoor environment based
on recent RFID-based localization solutions [78]- [82]. To that
end, each user is equipped with an RFID tag, e.g., the staff
ID or member cards. Based on the backscattered signals from
the RFID tag, the RFID reader can determine the location of
the user. If there are too many people in the same area, the
system can notify the authorities to take appropriate actions,
e.g., force people to leave the area to practice social distancing.
Several recent mechanisms in the literature can be adopted
to make this application possible during pandemic outbreaks.
In [80], the authors propose an RFID-based localization system
for indoor environments with high localization granularity
and accuracy. The key idea of this solution is reducing the
RSSI shifts, localization error, and computational complexity
by using Heron-bilateration estimation and Kalman-filter drift
removal. In [81], the authors propose to use a moving robot to
enhance the accuracy of a real-time RFID-based localization
system. In particular, the robot is able to perform Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM), and thus it can continuously interrogate all RFID tags in its area. Then, based on
passive RFID tags at known locations, we can estimate the
location of target tags by properly manipulating the measured
backscattered power. Alternatively, in [78], the authors propose
to equipped two RFID tags at the target instead of only
one as in conventional solutions to improve the accuracy of
localization techniques. Adding one more RFID tag possesses
several advantages: (i) easy to implement and adjust the RFID
reader’s antenna, (ii) enabling fine-grained calculation, and
(iii) enabling accurate calibration. The experimental results
then show that equipping two tags at the user can greatly
increase the localization accuracy of the system.
However, the RFID technology has several limitations due
to the fact that both the receiver and the RF source are in the
RFID reader. Specifically, the modulated signals backscattered

from the RFID tag are strongly affected by the round-trip
path loss from the receiver and the RF source. In addition,
the RFID system can also be affected by the doubly nearfar problem [83]. To address these problems, a few recent
works propose to use bistatic and ambient backscattered
communication technologies (extended version of RFID) for
localization [84], [85]. The key idea is separating the RF
source from the receiver. The RF source now can be a
dedicated carrier emitter or an ambient RF source. The tag
can then transmit data to the receiver by backscattering the
RF signals generated by the RF source. Based on the received
signals, the receiver can estimate the location of the tag.
In [85], the authors propose a localization system based on
backscatter communications to locate patients in a hospital.
In particular, each patient is equipped with a backscatter tag
which can backscatter signals broadcast by an RF source.
Then, the location of a patient can be detected by a localization
algorithm, namely Remix, based on the backscattered signals
from the backscatter tags. Remix consists of two processes.
First, the algorithm approximates the distance from the tag
to the receiver based on the backscattered signals. Second,
the signal paths are modeled with linear splines. Then, an
optimization problem is solved to find the effective distances
corresponding to the paths that close to the actual paths from
the tag to the receiver. As a result, Remix can accurately
estimate the position of the backscatter tag by modeling the
spline structure. Based on the users’ locations, Remix can
detect crowds in the hospital and advice the authorities to
take appropriate actions to practice social distancing. Note that
this solution can also be deployed to detect crowds in other
places such as workplaces, schools, and supermarkets where
backscatter tags can be easily attached to users/customers’
cards, e.g., staff cards, student cards, and member cards.
2) Public Place Monitoring and Access Scheduling: Another application of RFID in social distancing is monitoring
the number of people inside a place, e.g., a building or
supermarket. In particular, an RFID reader will be deployed
at the main gate of a place, and users are equipped with RFID
tags (can be both active and passive tags). The users’ tags can
broadcast their ID (active) or send their ID upon receiving RF
signals from the RFID reader (passive). When a user enters the
place, the RFID reader can receive the user’s ID and increase
the counter. As such, the RFID reader can calculate the number
of people inside the place. If there are too many people, the
system can notify the local manager to force people to queue
before entering the place to practice social distancing. This
solution can be deployed in supermarkets or workplaces where
the customer/staff usually have member/staff ID cards which
can be equipped with RFID tags.
Summary: RFID technology is a potential solution to enable
social distancing. However, unlike other wireless technologies,
RFID technology has not been widely adopted in practice due
to its complexity in implementation. Specifically, to be able to
detect the location of people by using RFID technology, they
need to be equipped with RFID tags. However, RFID tags are
not readily available likes Wi-Fi access points or Bluetooth.
Thus, applications of RFID technology for social distancing
are still limited in practice.

18

Table II summarizes the technologies discussed in this
Section. Technologies that have a wide communication range
such as cellular and GNSS are effective solutions for the
scenarios where it is necessary to track people’s location over
a large area (e.g., the infected movement data scenario). On
the other hand, technologies with a shorter communication
range (e.g., Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, and RFID) are more
suitable for scenarios that involve indoor environments such
as public place monitoring. Moreover, technologies that can
achieve a high positioning accuracy (e.g., Ultra-wideband and
Bluetooth) can be employed to keep a safe distance between
any two people, except for GNSS since it requires a high cost
to maintain a sufficient accuracy. Furthermore, most of these
technologies are ready to be implemented and integrated with
existing systems such as smartphones. However, user privacy
is an open issue for most wireless technologies. Furthermore,
other emerging wireless technologies such as LoRaWAN, ZWave, and NFC [86] have not been well investigated in the
literature for positioning systems, and thus they could be
potential research directions for social distancing in the future.
IV. OTHER E MERGING T ECHNOLOGIES FOR S OCIAL
D ISTANCING
In addition to the wireless technologies, other emerging
technologies such as AI, computer vision, ultrasound, inertial
sensors, visible lights, and thermal also can all contribute to
facilitating social distancing. In this section, we provide a brief
overview of each technology and discuss how it can be applied
for different social distancing scenarios.
A. Computer Vision
Computer vision technology trains computers to interpret
and understand visual data such as digital images or videos.
Thanks to recent breakthroughs in AI (e.g., in pattern recognition and deep learning), computer vision has enabled computers to accurately identify and classify objects [160]. Such capabilities can play an important role in enabling, encouraging,
and enforcing social distancing. For example, computer vision
can turn surveillance cameras into “smart” cameras which
can not only monitor people but also can detect, recognize,
and identify whether people comply with social distancing
requirements or not. In this section, we discuss several social
distancing scenarios where computer vision technology can
be leveraged, including public place monitoring, and highrisk people (quarantined people and people with symptoms)
monitoring and detection.
1) Public Place Monitoring: Despite government restrictions and recommendations about social gathering, some people still do not comply with, which can cause the virus infection to the community. In such context, human detection features in object detection [161], a major sub-field of computer
vision, can help to detect crowds in public areas through realtime images from surveillance cameras. An example scenario
is described in Fig. 11(a). If the number of people in an
area does not meet the social distancing requirement (e.g.,
gathering above 10 people), the authorities can be notified to
take appropriate actions.

There are two main approaches to detect humans from
images in object detection namely region-based and unifiedbased techniques. The former detects humans from images in
two stages including the region proposal and the procession
according to the regions [162]. Based on this approach,
several frameworks including Fast-RCNN [168] and FasterRCNN [169] are developed in combination with Convolution
Neural Network (CNN) [166]. In [170], the authors improve
the Faster-RCNN by proposing the Mask Regions with CNN
features (Mask RCNN) method which masks the bounding
box to detect the object with high accuracy while adding a
minor overhead to the Faster-RCNN. Mask RCNN outperforms previous methods by simplifying the training process
and improving the accuracy in detecting humans in the images
for calculating the density of people in a particular area.
Although the above region-based approach has high recognition accuracy [170], it has high complexity, which is unsuitable for devices with limited computational capacity. To
address this, the unified approach is more appropriate to
implement, which can reduce the computational complexity
by detecting humans from images with only one step. This
approach maps the pixels from image to the bounding box
grid and class probabilities to detect humans or objects in
real-time. Following this direction, the You Only Look Once
(YOLO) method proposed in [171] can detect/predict objects
(even small ones) in real-time with high accuracy. In addition, in [172], the authors propose the Single Shot Multibox
Detector (SSD) framework which uses a convolution network
on the image to calculate a feature map and then predict the
bounding box. Through experimental results, they demonstrate
that this method can detect objects faster and more accurately
than those of both YOLO and Faster-RCNN. For public place
monitoring, both YOLO [171] and SSD [172] can be used to
detect fast and accurately humans from real-time images or
videos of surveillance cameras. After identifying people, we
can use a real-time automatic counter to count and identify
whether the number of gathering people complying with social
distancing requirements or not.
2) Detecting and Monitoring Quarantined People: To prevent the spread of the virus from an infected person to others,
the infected person or people who had physical contact with
them must be isolated at the restricted areas or at home.
For example, citizens who come back from highly infected
countries/regions of COVID-19 are often requested to be
quarantined or self-isolate for 14 days. Due to the lack of
facilities, most countries require these people to self-isolate at
home. In this case, the face recognition capability of computer
vision can help to enforce this requirement by analyzing the
images or videos from cameras to identify these people (i.e.,
to check whether they breach the self-isolation requirements
or not). If these people are detected in public, the authorities
can be notified to take appropriate actions.
Unlike object detection, the dataset including the full face
images of the isolated people needs to be built. The face recognition system firstly learns from this dataset and then analyzes
the images from public surveillance cameras to identify their
appearances as in Fig. 11(b1). The authors in [173] propose
a framework named DeepFace using Deep Neutral Network

19

TABLE II: Summary of Wireless Technologies Applications to Social Distancing
Technology

Range

Accuracy

Privacy

Readiness

Indoor/Outdoor

Low

Low

High

Indoor

Mobile phones, smart home, smart
city [53], [96]

Less than
50cm [122]

Low

Low to
High

High

Both

Smartphone, Smartwatch, Mobile
phones [325], Intelligent
Transportation Systems [284],
[304], [305]

Less than
10cm [105],
[106], [112]

Low

High

Medium
to High

Both

Smartphone [115], Smart
industry [105]–[107], Public
transport management [108],
Commercial vehicles [105], [108]

1m - 2m
[74]

Low

Low

High

Both

Mobile phones, smart home, smart
city [73], [77], [96]

3m - 5m
[87]

High

Low

Low

Indoor

Mobile phones, smart home, smart
city [99]–[101]

World-wide
coverage

Outdoor less
than 10cm
[151],
indoor in m

Low - High
(depend on
accuracy)

Medium

Yes

Outdoor

Mobile phones [301], [303],
[323], Intelligent Transportation
Systems [284], [285]

Active: 100m or
more. Passive: ∼
10m [94]

Less than
1m [80]

High

Low

Medium

Indoor

Mobile phones, smart home, smart
city [97], [98]

Wi-Fi [38],
[39], [41],
[43], [47],
[96]

Typically up to
50m indoors and
100m outdoors
[92]

1m - 5m
[42]

Cellular [131],
[132], [135],
[138], [142]

Short to Long

Short to Medium

Ultrawideband
[105]–[108],
[112], [113],
[115], [116]
Bluetooth
[63], [65],
[68],
[71]–[76],
[96]
Zigbee [87],
[90], [91],
[96]
GNSS [146],
[148]–[150],
[152]–[154],
[156]–[159]
RFID [78],
[80], [82],
[96]

Outdoor: 55m 78m. Office:
15m - 19m.
Home: 26m 35m [93]
Up to 300+ m
(line of sight).
Up to 75m 100m
indoor [88]

Cost

(b2)

(b1)
(a) Human Detection

Integrate with existing systems

(b) Face Recognition

(c) Pose Estimation

Fig. 11: Computer vision technologies for social distancing (a) human detection to identify the number of people in the public
place, (b) face recognition to identify (b1) the full face of isolated person, (b2) person with mask or person behind the mask
and (c) pose estimation to detect one with coughing symptom.

(DNN) which can detect with an accuracy of 97.35% and
91.4% in Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) and YouTube
Faces (YTF) dataset, respectively. To improve the accuracy
in detecting human from surveillance cameras, some advanced
techniques can be implemented such as [174], [175] and [176].
To prevent the spread of infectious diseases such as COVID19, people are often required to wear masks in public places,
which necessitates approaches to recognize or identify people
with or without masks as illustrated in Fig. 11(b2). For example, the cameras in front of a public building can recognize
and send warning messages (e.g., a beep sound) to remind
the person who does not wear a mask when he/she intends
to get into the building. This idea is introduced in [182] by
using the CNN to detect people who do not wear the masks.
However, this work is justs at the first step, which still requires

much more efforts to demonstrate the effectiveness as well as
improve the accuracy.
3) Symptoms Detection and Monitoring: After a few days
of being infected with the virus, the infected person may have
some symptoms such as coughing or sneezing. To minimize
spreading the virus to others, it would be very helpful if
we can detect these symptoms from people in public and
inform them or the authorities. The idea here is similar to
that of using thermal imaging cameras at airports or train
stations. Specifically, detecting human behaviors, motion, and
pose in computer vision can play a pivotal role [177]. Pose
estimation captures a person with different parts (as illustrated
in Fig. 11(c)) then detects human behaviors by studying
the parts’ movements and their correlation. For example, a
coughing person in Fig. 11(c) usually moves his hand near

20

his head and his head would have a vibration.
Recognition of human behaviors from surveillance cameras
is a challenging problem because the same behaviors may
have different implications, depending on the relationship
with the context and other movements [178]. The recent
advances in AI/ML are instrumentals in correlating different
movements/parts to interpret the associated behavior. In [179]
the authors propose to use CNN [166] to enhance the accuracy
of the model of the interaction between different body parts.
In addition, the authors in [180] introduce several methods to
detect body parts of multiple people in 2D images, and the
authors in [181] propose methods to estimate 3D poses from
matching of 2D pose estimation with a 3D pose library. These
works can be further developed for future studies to detect
people with symptoms of the disease such as coughing or
sneezing in real-time. To improve the accuracy of the symptom
detection in social distancing, computer vision-based behavior
detection methods can be combined with other technologies,
e.g., thermal imaging.
4) Infected Movement Data: To prevent the spread of the
virus, tracing the path of an infected person plays an important
role to find out the people who were in the same place as the
infected person. For this purpose, computer vision technology
can not only detect the infected people by facial recognition
but also contribute to the positioning process. In [220], the
movement of people is determined by analyzing the key
point of transition frames captured from smartphone cameras.
This method can draw the trajectory of movements and the
location with an accuracy around two meters. In [221], the
authors propose to combine the human detection techniques
of computer vision with digital map information to improve
the accuracy. In this study, the user path from cameras is
mapped to the digital map which has the GPS coordinates.
This method can achieve a very high accuracy within two
meters. In another approach, the authors in [222] propose
to use both smartphones’ cameras and inertial-sensor-based
systems to accurately localize targets (with only 6.9 cm error).
This approach uses the fusion of keypoints and squared planar
markers to enhance the accuracy of cameras to compensate for
the errors of inertial sensors.
5) Keeping Distance: Computer vision can also be very
helpful to support people in keeping distance to/from the
crowds. In [219], the authors develop an on-device machinelearning-based system leveraging radar sensors and cameras of
a smartphone. When the radar sensor detects the surrounding
moving objects, the smartphone camera can be utilized to
capture its surrounding environment. Taking into account the
recorded data, the smartphone can train the data using machine
learning algorithms to determine the existence of nearby
people and its distance from those people with respect to the
social distancing requirements. We can also use a smartphone
to estimate the distance between the mobile user and other
people using radar sensors and cameras along with machine
learning algorithms.
Summary: Computer vision can be utilized in several social
distancing scenarios, especially the ones that require people
monitoring and detection. Particularly, computer vision is the
only method that can differentiate between people and identify

complex features such as masks and symptoms. To further
improve the effectiveness of computer vision in the social
distancing context, future research should focus on increasing
the accuracy and reducing the complexity of computer vision
methods, so that they can be integrated into existing systems
such as surveillance cameras.
B. Ultrasound
The ultrasound or ultrasonic positioning system (UPS) is
usually used in the indoor environment with the accuracy
of centimeters [183]. The system includes ultrasonic beacons
(UBs) as tags or nodes attached to users and transceivers.
Beacon units broadcast periodically ultrasonic pulses and radio
frequency (RF) messages simultaneously with their unique ID
numbers. Based on these pulses and messages, the receiver’s
position can be determined by position calculation methods
such as trilateration or triangulation [184]. In comparison with
other RF-based ranging methods, the UPS does not require a
line of sight between the transmitter and the receiver, and it
also does not interfere with electromagnetic waves. However,
since the propagation of the ultrasound wave is limited, most
UPS applications for social distancing are only limited within
the indoor environment.
1) Keeping Distance: For this purpose, UPS can be used
to position and notify people. One of the first well known
UPS systems is Active Bat (AB) [185] based on the time-offlight of the ultrasonic pulse. Typically, an AB system consists
of an ultrasonic receiver matrix located on the ceiling or
wall, a transmitter attached to each target, and a centralized
computation system to calculate the objects’ positions. As
presented in [185], by using a receiver matrix with 16 sensors,
the AB system can achieve very high positioning accuracy,
i.e., less than 14 centimeters. However, a limitation of this
system is its high complexity, especially if a large number of
ultrasonic sensors are deployed.
Another limitation of the AB system is the privacy risk
for users since the location of users under the AB system is
calculated at the central server. To address that, the Criket (CK)
system is proposed in [186] wherein the position calculation
is executed at the receivers. Specifically, a receiver in the CK
system passively receives RF and ultrasound signals from UBs
located on the wall or ceiling, and then the receiver calculates
its position by itself based on UBs’ ID and coordinates.
Since the receivers do not transmit any signals, the privacy
of users will not be compromised. Fig. 12 demonstrates the
two systems in the keeping distance application.
2) Real-time Monitoring: In the context of social distancing, UPS can be an effective solution for real-time monitoring
scenarios, especially gauging the number of people in public
buildings. In particular, the main characteristic that makes UPS
different from other positioning technologies is confinement,
i.e, the ultrasound signal is confined within the same room
as the UBs [184]. Among the other positioning technologies,
only infrared technology shares the same characteristic. Nevertheless, infrared signals prone to interference from sunlight
and other thermal sources, and they also suffer from line-ofsight loss [184]. As a result, ultrasound is the most efficient

21

Fig. 12: Ultrasound application for keeping distance using a) Cricket system [186], and b) Active Bat system [185].

technology for binary positioning [184], i.e., determine if the
object is in the same room as the UBs or not. Thus, UPS can be
particularly useful in the social distancing scenarios where the
exact positions of people are not as necessary as the number of
people inside a room (e.g., to limit the number of people). This
technology is more efficient because it needs a few reference
nodes (e.g., UBs) to determine the binary positions of people,
which can significantly reduce implementation costs.
3) Automation: Ultrasound can also be applied in the social
distancing scenarios that utilize medical robots or UAV. Mobile
robots, especially medical robots, can play a key role in
reducing the physical contact rates between the healthcare
staff (e.g., doctors and nurses) and the patients inside a
hospital, thereby maintaining a suitable social distancing level.
In such scenarios, UPS can help to improve the navigation of
medical robots. In [188], a navigation system based on WiFi and ultrasound is proposed for indoor robot navigation.
To deal with the uncertainties which are very common in
crowded places like hospitals, the system employs a Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process, and a novel algorithm
is also introduced to minimize the calibration efforts.
In the social distancing context, besides the outdoor applications, UAVs can also be employed to reduce the necessity
of human physical presence. For example, UAVs can be used
to deliver goods inside a building or to manage warehouse
inventory. However, most of the existing studies focus on UAV
navigation for the outdoor environment, which often relies on
GNSS for UAV positioning. Since GNSS’s accuracy is low
for the indoor environment, these methods cannot be applied
directly for UAV navigation inside a building. To address that
limitation, a navigation system is proposed in [187], which
utilizes ultrasound, inertial sensors, GNSS, and cameras to
provide precise (less than 10cm) indoor navigation for multiple
UAVs.
Summary: Ultrasound can be applied in several social

Keeping Distance

Automation

Fig. 13: Inertial-sensors-based systems for several social distancing scenarios.

distancing scenarios. In the keeping distance scenarios, UPS
systems such as AB and CK can be applied directly to localize
and notify people to keep a safe distance. Moreover, due
to its confinement characteristic, ultrasound is one of the
most efficient technology for binary positioning, which is
particularly useful for monitoring and gauging the number
of people inside the same room. In the automation scenarios,
ultrasound can facilitate UAVs and medical robots navigations,
especially for the indoor environment.

C. Inertial Sensors
In the context of social distancing, inertial-sensors-based
systems can be applied in distance keeping and automation
scenarios as illustrated in Fig. 13. For example, positioning
applications utilizing built-in inertial sensors can be developed
for smartphones which can alert the users when they get close
to each other or a crowd. Moreover, inertial sensors can be
integrated into robots and vehicle positioning systems, which
can facilitate autonomous delivery services and medical robot
navigation. All of these scenarios can contribute to reducing
the physical contact rate between people.

22

Inertial sensors consist of two special types of sensors,
namely gyroscopes and accelerometers, attached to an object to measure its rotation and acceleration. Based on the
measured rotation and acceleration data, the orientation and
position displacements of the object can be determined [247].
Because inertial sensors do not require any external reference system to function, they have been one of the most
common sensors for dead reckoning, i.e., calculation of the
current position is based on a previously determined position,
navigation systems. Such navigation systems can provide
accurate positioning within a short time frame. However, since
the current position is determined based on the previously
calculated positions, the errors accumulate over time, i.e.,
integration drift. Therefore, Inertial-Navigation-System (INS)
is often used in combination with other positioning systems,
e.g., GPS, to periodically reset the base position [247].
1) Keeping Distance: Traditionally, INS has been widely
used for aviation, marine, and land vehicle navigation. Recently, the ever-increase presence of smartphones has enabled
many INS applications for pedestrian positioning and navigation, which can support social distancing scenarios. Moreover,
INS is one of the few technologies that can enable accurate
pedestrian positioning for the outdoor environment, especially
when combined with other outdoor positioning technologies
such as GPS. In [248], a smartphone-based positioning system
is proposed. The system makes use of a smartphone’s builtin sensors, including gyroscopes, accelerometers, and magnetometers (sensors that measure magnetism), to calculate
the smartphone’s position. In particular, magnetometers are
combined with gyroscopes to improve the accuracy of rotation
measurements. This is done by correlating their measurements
via a novel algorithm which uses four different thresholds to
determine the weights of the gyroscope and magnetometers
measurements in the correlation function.
In [249], a novel indoor positioning system is developed
using Wi-Fi and INS technologies. In this system, INS is
utilized for the area where Wi-Fi coverage is limited, while
Wi-Fi positioning is used to compensate INS’s integration
drift. Another positioning system using inertial sensors and
Wi-Fi is presented in [250], where Wi-Fi fingerprinting technique is used to improve the accuracy of the dead reckoning
navigation. Because of the integration drift, a dead reckoning
navigation system needs to frequently update its position by
referencing to an external node. In the proposed system, a
Wi-Fi fingerprinting map is set up in advance and the dead
reckoning system can use the map to update its position.
Moreover, in [223], the authors propose using Kalman filter
to combine the measurement data from Wi-Fi and INS, which
can reduce the error to 1.53 meters.
Beside Wi-Fi, INS can be used in combination with other
positioning technologies. In [251] and [252], INS has been
combined with the UWB technology for pedestrian positioning
and tracking. Generally, INS helps to reduce UWB’s high
implementation cost and complexity, while INS’s integration
drift can be compensated. Particularly, INS is employed to
compensate for the UWB’s low dynamic range and proneness
to external radio disturbances in [251]. To enable the combination, an information fusion technique using the extended

Kalman filter is proposed to fuse the measurement data coming
from both the INS and UWB sensors. The result shows that the
hybrid system can achieve better performance than both the
individual systems. In [252], the information fusion problem
between the INS and UWB is optimized to minimize the
uncertainties in the measurements. As a result, the positioning
accuracy can be significantly improved.
2) Automation: Beside pedestrian positioning, INS can
also be applied for social distancing scenarios involving autonomous vehicles, e.g., medical robots and drone delivery.
Generally, INS has been commonly used for medical robot
applications, including surgeon assists, patient motion assists,
and delivery robots. In this section, we will only focus on
the medical and delivery robot applications for social distancing purposes. In [253], a novel INS system is developed
specifically for mobile robot navigation. In addition, an error
model is proposed to increase the accuracy of the involved
inertial measurements. A Kalman filter is also proposed to
precisely estimate the velocity and orientation of the robot
in the presence of noises. A novel data fusion algorithm,
leveraging an adaptive Kalman filter is presented in [254] for
indoor robot positioning based on an INS/UWB hybrid system.
Unlike INS for mobile robots that are mostly developed
for the indoor environment, INS for UAV focuses on outdoor
applications. Note that UAV navigation must also consider its
altitude, which adds more complexity. The authors of [255]
leverage inertial sensors and cameras to determine the UAV’s
position, velocity, and altitude. Particularly, the cameras attached to the UAV capture the images of the surrounding
environment and send them to a control station. This station
will then process the images to determine the UAV’s pose in
regards to the surroundings. The pose’s data is then combined
with the inertial sensors data via a Kalman filter to determine
the UAV’s position and velocity. Similarly, a system combining
inertial and vision sensors is developed in [256] for UAV
positioning and navigation. The system utilizes two observers
which have inertial and vision sensors. The first observer
calculates the orientation based on gyroscope and vision
sensors, and the second observer determines the position and
velocity based on data from the accelerometers and vision
sensors. The experimental results show that the vision sensors
measurements can be used to compensate for the inertial
sensors errors, thereby achieving a high accuracy even with
low-cost inertial sensors.
Summary: The omnipresence of smartphones with built-in
inertial sensors has opened many opportunities for developing
positioning systems based on INS. For the distance keeping
scenarios, INS positioning systems, especially for pedestrians,
can play a vital role as they are readily available. In the other
scenarios such as medical robot navigation and UAV delivery,
INS-based techniques can help to increase the efficiency
(more accurate path, and lower traveling time) of the existing
navigation systems.
D. Visible Light
The recent development in the light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
technology has enabled the use of existing light infrastructures

23

for communication and localization purposes due to attractive
features of visible lights such as reliability, robustness, and
security [189]–[191]. Visible light communication (VLC) systems usually comprise two major components, i.e., LED lights
corresponding to transmitters to send necessary information
(e.g., user data and positioning information) via visible lights
and photodetectors (e.g., photodiodes) or imaging sensors
(e.g., camera) playing the role of receivers [17]. Due to the
ubiquitous presence of LED lights, VLC can be leveraged in
many social distancing scenarios as discussed below.
1) Real-time Monitoring: Communication systems using
visible light (e.g., LED-based communications) can provide
precise navigation and localization solutions in indoor environments. Utilizing this technology, some applications can be
implemented to support social distancing such as tracking individuals who are being quarantined, detecting and monitoring
crowds in public places as shown in Fig. 14(a).
a) Photodiode-based VLC systems: Due to many advantages such as low cost and easy to implement, the VLC
receiver using photodiodes can be employed as a “tag” that
is integrated into mobile targets such as trolleys/shopping
carts, autonomous robots, etc. People attached with these
tags can perform self-positioning based on the triangulation
method so that they can avoid crowded areas. Furthermore,
the tags’ locations can be collected by the authorities to
monitor people in public areas. Based on this location data,
further actions can be carried out such as warning people by
varying the color temperature of the lights in the crowded
areas. It is worth noting that this solution will not reveal any
personal information of users (e.g., customers) because it only
requires communications between VLC-based tags and light
fixtures. However, most VLC systems only provide half-duplex
communications due to the fact that LED lights operate as the
role of transmitters. Therefore, they should be combined with
other wireless technologies like Bluetooth [192], [193], and Infrared [194] to enable an uplink communication with the server
for location information exchange. Moreover, to improve the
accuracy of positioning people in indoor environments using
photodiodes, some advanced techniques can be used such as
data fusion of AOA and RSS methods proposed in [195]
and the AOA method using a multi-LED element lighting
fixture introduced in [196]. One main disadvantage of the
photodiode-based VLC systems is the need for hardware (i.e.,
the photodiode receiver) mounted on smart trolleys/shopping
carts to receive light signals. Consequently, the system might
fail to detect the locations of people who do not carry them.
Nevertheless, pureLiFi company has recently invented a tiny
optical front end which can be integrated into smartphones
to take benefits of the photodiode receiver in high accuracy
VLC-based localization services [197].
b) Camera-based VLC systems: The rapid development
of smartphones has enabled VLC-based applications on handheld devices such as indoor localization and navigation applications (e.g., smart retail systems [192], [193], [198]).
These systems use front-facing cameras of mobile phones to
receive visible light signals contained positioning information
(e.g., the LED light’s ID or location) from visible light
beacons [199]. The captured photos collected regularly by the

front-facing camera are sent to a cloud/fog server for image
processing to alleviate the computation on the phone. Then,
the beacon’s ID and coordinates can be extracted and sent back
to the phone. After that, the AoA algorithm is implemented
to estimate the location and orientation of the phone. An
attractive use case of the camera-based VLC systems [192],
[193], [198] is to assist users to quickly find specific products
in shopping malls, or supermarkets. Thus, we can adopt this
function to implement tracking and monitoring crowds in
public places as well as assisting people to avoid crowds in a
proactive manner. It is worth noting that this solution is more
convenient than using photodiodes since it uses front-facing
cameras of smartphones as the VLC receivers, thus everyone
using smartphones can be tracked. However, due to continuous
photo shooting, these positioning applications are very energyconsuming, which is a major drawback of camera-based VLC
systems when they are used for tracking people.
2) Automation: In public places, there is always a need for
assistance in specific circumstances (e.g., information or physical supports for customers, older and disabled people). For
instance, supporting staff in supermarkets can assist customers
to find products or help older/disabled people to carry their
goods. Similar assistance scenarios can be seen in hospitals,
banks, and libraries. This results in an increase in close
physical contacts between customers and assistants. Therefore,
autonomous assistance systems using VLC technology can
be employed to minimize the physical contacts as shown in
Fig. 14(a) and (b).
a) Information assistance: Beside the navigation purpose, the smart retail systems [192], [193] can also provide
information assistance services for shoppers. For example,
the product description, sale information, or other necessary
information can be displayed on the screen when the phone
is under a certain LED light. Another example is information
assistance services in museum [200], [201]. This can help to
reduce the number of close physical contacts in these places.
b) Autonomous robot: Similar to the information assistance systems for reducing close physical contacts, autonomous robots using the VLC technology for communication and localization can also be deployed to assist people
in certain circumstances, for example, elderly-assistant robots,
walking-assistant robots, shopping-assistant robots, etc., [202],
[203]. Moreover, visible light signals do not cause any interference to RF signals, and thus they can be effectively deployed
in diverse indoor environments such as hospitals, schools, and
workplaces.
3) Traffic Control: In the context of social distancing, high
demand traffic can cause a large concentration of people in
a certain area (e.g., city center). By adopting smart traffic
light systems in [204], [205], we can deploy an intelligent
traffic controlling system using the VLC technology to control
large traffic flows as illustrated in Fig. 14(c). That can help to
reduce vehicle density in public areas. The VLC technology
provides a communication method between vehicles and the
light infrastructure (e.g., traffic lights, street lights). First,
vehicles can send their information (e.g., their IDs) to the
light infrastructure by using its headlights as transmitters, thus
the system can detect and monitor the traffic flow. However,

24

Auditonium

Priceline

fashion
Excellence

GIRL
fashion

Rebel
Sports

Hype

H&M

Nike

Shaver
Shop
Uniqlo

Boutique

SPORTline

b) Navigation app & information display.

a) Real-time monitoring and assistance systems.

c) Outdoor VLC traffic controlling system.

Fig. 14: Visible light communications supporting social distancing.

in this case, it is required that the light infrastructure must
be equipped with VLC receivers (e.g., traffic cameras or
photodiodes). Second, based on the awareness of the traffic,
the system can control the vehicles by sending instructions to
guide them. In this case, the system uses traffic lights, or street
lights as transmitters to send information and the vehicles
use dash cameras to receive the information. For example,
the system will notify them about hot zones that have a high
density of vehicles and do not allow them to enter, so that
they can avoid these zones.
Summary: The availability of smart retail systems is proof of
the superior performance and convenience of VLC technology
compared to other RF technologies in high precise indoor
localization and navigation. By leveraging such commercial
approaches, we can deploy the cost-effective crowd monitoring
system on a large scale, not only in shopping malls or
hypermarkets but also in other public places, such as airports,
train stations, and hospitals, based on the existing illuminating
infrastructures. Building/facilities managers can immediately
alert or notify the users if they are in the middle of a crowd
(e.g., varying the color temperature of the lights in the highdensity zones). People can also take the initiative in planning
their move to the desired locations without encountering the
crowds. On the other hand, assistance systems help to reduce
the number of staff/volunteers, nurses inside public buildings;
or limit the close contacts between them and customers, patients. Moreover, the combination with other RF technologies
such as Bluetooth and Infrared also ensures the location-based
services are not interrupted when the smartphone is not being
actively used by the user (e.g., the phone is in the pocket).
Last but not least, the VLC technology can be a potential com-

munication method between the intelligent traffic controlling
system and vehicles in the outdoor environment. However, the
main disadvantage of the VLC technology is that interference
from ambient and sun lights have significant impacts on the
visible light communication channels [189], [191]. It results
in poor performance of the RSS-based positioning approaches
and outdoor communications.
E. Thermal
Thermal based positioning systems can be classified into
two main categories which are infrared positioning (IRP) systems and thermal imaging camera (THC). Typical IRP systems
such as [206], [208], [209] are low-cost, short-range (up to 10
meters) systems that use infrared (IR) signals to determine the
position of targets via AOA or TOA measurement method. On
the other hand, the THC, which constructs images from the
object’s heat emission, can operate at a larger range (up to
a few kilometers) [212]. Because of this difference, IRP and
THC can be applied in different social distancing scenarios as
discussed below.
1) Keeping Distance: In keeping distance scenarios, IRP
systems such as Active Badge [208], Firefly [210], and OPTOTRAK [209] can be utilized. In the Active Badge, badges
that periodically emit unique IR signals are attached to the
targets. Based on the distances from the fixed infrared sensors
to the badges, the target’s position can be calculated. As a
result, this application can be useful to determine the distance
between two people as well as to identify crowds in indoor
environments. The main advantages of this solution are low
cost and easy implementation. However, it requires users to
wear tag devices to track their locations.

25

Fig. 15: Physical contact monitoring by infrared system [210].

To achieve a higher positioning accuracy, the Firefly [210]
and OPTOTRAK [209] systems can be implemented. These
systems contain infrared camera arrays and infrared transmitter
called markers. Due to the difference in setups (one target
is attached with one tag in Firefly and multiple tags in
OPTOTRAK), the Firefly system can accurately determine
the target’s 3D position, whereas the OPTOTRAK system
can capture the target’s movement. The main disadvantage of
these systems is that they are prone to interference from other
radiation sources such as sunlight and light bulbs. Combined
with their short-range, IRP is mostly applicable in small rooms
with poor-light conditions.
2) Physical Contact Monitoring: Since the Firefly and
OPTOTRAK systems can accurately capture movements, they
can be useful for contact tracing scenarios in social distancing.
For example, markers can be attached to the target’s body parts
which are usually used in physical contacts, e.g., hands for
handshakes and body for hugs. The movement of these body
parts can then be captured by the IR camera as illustrated
in Fig. 15, and the recorded data can be analyzed later to
determine if there are close contacts between the target and
other people. Based on this information, the contacts that the
target made can be traced later if necessary.
3) Real-time Monitoring: For traffic monitoring in social
distancing contexts, both IRP and THC can be utilized, especially in poor-light conditions. The authors in [211] propose a
robust vehicle detector based on the IRP under the condition to
quantify traffic level and flow. The collected data can be sent to
assist the authorities in social distancing monitoring. However,
since IRP has a short range, THC systems such as [214] can
be a better choice in a larger area with high vehicle density.
Due to its very high observation range (a few kilometers) [213]–[215], THC is particularly effective for real-time
monitoring scenarios, such as public building monitoring,
detecting closure violation, and non-essential travel detection,
which does not require high positioning accuracy. THC systems such as those proposed in [206], [207] are efficient in
these scenarios since they are light-weight and can cover a
wide area with medium accuracy.
4) Symptom Dectection and Monitoring and Susceptible
Group Detection: Another application of thermal technology

is to detect susceptible groups. Since the THCs measure
heat emitted from people or other objects, they can be used
for checking people’s temperature quickly from a far distance [216], [217]. Further, the THC system has the ability
to detect slight temperature differences with a resolution of
0.01 degree [218]. Thus, it can be a good means to check
health conditions and sickness trends of patients. Moreover,
the system can be deployed in shopping centers to measure
customers’ temperature remotely. This can help to detect
infection symptoms early and also the prevent disease spread.
Summary: Thermal based positioning systems are helpful
in some social distancing scenarios, especially in poor-light
conditions. For short-range communication applications, the
IRP is cost-effective and can be used for positioning and
tracing purposes. Whereas, some light-weight THC systems
can be leveraged for real-time monitoring over long distances
due to their high range. However, the high cost of THC should
be considered when implementing in practice.
F. Artificial Intelligence
Over the last 10 years, we have witnessed numerous applications of AI in many aspects of our lives such as healthcare,
automotive, economics, and computer networks [258]. The
outstanding features of AI technologies are the ability to
automatically “learn” useful information from the obtained
data. This leads to more intelligent automation, operating
cost reduction as well as the great compatibility to adapt
to changing environments. For that, AI (and its underlying
machine learning algorithms) can also play a key role in social
distancing, especially in modern lives, with many practical
applications, as discussed below.
1) Distance to/from Crowds and Contact Tracing: Applications of machine learning to users’ location data allow us
to effectively monitor the distance between people and trace
the close contacts of infected people. In [300], the authors
analyze the accuracy of a user’s location prediction based on
his/her friends’ location datasets. In this case, a temporalspatial Bayesian model is developed to select influential
friends considering their influence levels to the user. Thus, the
service provider can predict the exact location of a mobile user
by using the temporal-spatial Bayesian model. Then, when
the user is too close to other mobile users/people at crowded
public places or his/her friends when they go in a group as
illustrated in Fig. 17(a), his/her smartphone can alert to keep
a safe distance. In addition, using the list of influential friends
based on their ranks, the service provider can utilize it for the
contact tracing purpose when the mobile user or one of his/her
influential friends in the list gets infected.
2) Infected Movement Prediction: Another application of
machine learning is to predict infected people movement from
one location to another one and hence can potentially predict
the geographic movement of the disease. The prediction is
particularly crucial as infected people may travel to various
places and can accidentally infect others before know that they
carry the disease. In [301], the authors introduce a smartphonebased location recognition and prediction model to detect
current location and predict the destination of mobile users. In

26

Patient
s

7-14 days

Crowds

Image
sensors

Reported
data

Audio
sensors

Fig. 16: Thermal camera used in susceptible group detection
and traffic monitoring.
Learning
process

Sickness trend
prediction

Early symptom from
the crowds

Alert: too close

Outside the
protection facility

Infected
location

Alert

Alert: too close

Alert

Non-infected
location

...

Alert
Location-related
information

Infected
location

Disease
movement
prediction

Location
prediction

Quarantined/
at-risk people
location
prediction

Infected
location

Location-related
information

Movement direction
Mobile user

Service provider

Mobile user

(a) Distance to/from Crowds

Mobile User

Service provider

(b) Infected movement prediction

(c) Quarantined/at-risk people location prediction

Crowds

Audio
sensors

Image
sensors

Vehicle

Patients

7-14 days

Road traffic
prediction

Upcoming
traffic
density or
alternative
routes

Reported
data

Mobile
users

Learning
process
Early symptom
from the crowds

Sickness trend

UAV

(d) People/Traffic Density Prediction

Service provider

(e) Sickness Trend Prediction

Fig. 17: Application of artificial intelligence to social distancing.

27

particular, the location recognition is implemented using the
combination of k-nearest neighbor and decision tree learning
algorithms, and the destination prediction is realized using
hidden Markov models. Given the history of infected people
movement, we can adopt the above model to recognize and
predict the potential geographic movement of the disease.
Using the information, people can be advised to stay away
from the possible infected locations through alerts from their
smartphones as illustrated in Fig. 17(b).
3) Quarantined/At-Risk People Location Prediction: The
current location prediction of quarantined people, e.g., infected
people, and at-risk people, e.g., sick and old people, is very
important to monitor whether they currently stay at the selfquarantined and self-protection areas, e.g., their homes, or
not. To this end, machine-learning-based location prediction
approach can help to detect the current position of those people
in a certain area. In [302], the authors apply the auto-encoder
neural networks and one-class support vector machines to
verify whether a user is within a specific area or not. Considering various channel models, i.e., path-loss, shadowing, and
fading, the proposed solutions can achieve Neyman-Pearson
optimal performance by observing the probability of missdetections and false-alarms. The authors in [303] propose a
novel localization system leveraging the federated learning to
allow mobile users to collaboratively provide accurate location services without revealing mobile users’ private location.
As such, the authors utilize deep neural networks with the
Gaussian process to accurately predict the desired location
of the mobile users. As a result, we can apply the proposed
solutions to detect if infected people or at-risk people currently
move away from their homes as illustrated in Fig. 17(c).
Moreover, we can utilize the proposed solutions to determine
the movement frequency of the self-isolated people outside the
protection facility. Using the movement frequency history, the
authorities can enforce them to stay at the protection facility
for further infection prevention.
4) People/Traffic Density Prediction: Predicting the density
of people or the number of people in public places allows
us to efficiently schedule or guide people to stay away or
refrain from coming to soon-to-be over-crowded places. For
example, when the predicted number of people in a certain
place almost reaches a pre-defined threshold (e.g., according
to the social distancing requirement), the service provider can
broadcast a local notification to incoming people via cellular
networks, aiming at encouraging them to move to another
area. In [304], the authors adopt advanced machine-learningbased approaches for edge networks to predict the number of
mobile users within base stations’ coverages. Particularly, the
framework first groups the base stations into clusters according
to their network data and deployment locations. Then, using
various machine learning algorithms, e.g., the Bayesian ridge
regressor, the Gaussian process regressor, and the random forest regressor, we can predict the number of mobile users within
their network coverages. From the preceding architecture, one
can utilize Wi-Fi hotspots and cluster them based on their
locations. By doing so, we can predict the number of people
within each cluster’s coverage. Using the same architecture, we
can extend the application to predict the traffic level on the

roads. Specifically, upon predicting the number of vehicular
users on the roads, we guide the drivers to choose particular routes to satisfy the social distancing requirements, e.g.,
suggest alternative routes to avoid crowded areas. In [305],
the authors introduce a UAV-enabled intelligent transportation
system to predict road traffic conditions using the combination
of convolutional and recurrent neural networks. In particular,
sensor cameras on the UAVs are utilized to capture the current
road traffic. By using this information, the UAVs can then
predict the road traffic conditions using the aforementioned
deep learning methods. Thus, from the traffic prediction, the
UAVs can work as mobile road side units to orchestrate road
traffic for over-crowding avoidance through informing the
upcoming road traffic conditions to vehicular users via cellular
networks accordingly (Fig. 17(d)).
5) Sickness Trend Prediction: Machine-learning-based location prediction method is also of importance to predict the
sickness trend in specific areas. This sickness trend prediction
can be used to inform people to stay safe from possible
infected places. For example, the work in [306] designs a
contactless surveillance framework, i.e., FluSense, to predict
the influenza-like disease 7-14 days before the real disease
occurs in the hospital waiting areas. In particular, a set of realtime sensors including a microphone array to detect normal
speech/cough sounds and a thermal camera to detect crowd
density are embedded into an edge computing platform. Considering millions of non-speech audio samples and hundred
thousands of thermal images for audio and image recognition
models, the proposed framework can accurately predict the
number of daily influenza-like patients with Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.95. The prediction model from this work
can be correlated/combined with the localized medical/health
information (e.g., from local hospitals/clinics) to further improve the prediction accuracy as shown in Fig. 17(e). We then
can inform the local mobile users about the sickness trend
prediction to avoid the potential areas where many influenzalike patients exist.
6) Symptom Detection and Monitoring: Coughing is one
of the most common and detectable symptoms of influenza
pandemics. In the presence of a pandemic, the early detection
of such symptoms can play a key role in limiting the disease
spread from the infected to the susceptible population. For
example, if a coughing person can be detected and identified
in public places, that person and the people in close proximity
can be tested for the disease.
In several studies, such as [307]–[310], AI technologies are
leveraged to identify the cough patterns in audio recordings
collected from microphones or acoustic sensors. In [307],
audio signals are analyzed using recurrent and convolutional
neural networks to detect coughs with a high accuracy (up
to 92%). Similarly, a hidden Markov model is proposed
in [308] to detect cough from continuous audio recordings.
In addition to audio signals, signals from motion sensors are
also analyzed in [309] by a novel classification algorithm.
However, a common limitation of these approaches is that they
require the sensors to be attached to the person, which is not
always possible in social distancing scenarios. To address this
problem, a cough detection system is proposed in [310]. This

28

system utilizes a wireless acoustic sensors network connected
to a central server for both cough detection and localization. In
particular, when a sound is detected, the sensors first localize
the sound source by the AOA technique. Then, the sensors
send the measured sound signals to the central server for cough
identification using a novel classification algorithm. In the
social distancing context, this system can be applied directly
to monitor and detect coughing people in public places.
Nevertheless, a limitation of this system is that the localization
and measurement errors increase significantly when the sound
source is too far from the sensors.
Summary: Various AI technologies can be leveraged to
facilitate social distancing implementations, especially in the
scenarios that require modeling and prediction. In particular,
AI technology can help to predict people’s locations, traffic
density, and sickness trends. Moreover, AI-based classifications algorithms can be utilized to detect symptoms such as
coughs in public areas.
Table III provides a summary of the technologies presented
in this Section. Generally, each technology has a special
characteristic that makes it a very effective solution for a
specific scenario. For example, Computer Vision is the only
technology capable of identifying a person without any attached device. As a result, this technology is particularly
effective for scenarios such as quarantined people detection
and monitoring. Moreover, ultrasound signals are confined by
walls, which enables low-cost ultrasonic positioning system
to efficiently monitor people in a small room. Furthermore,
since inertial sensors are built-in in most smartphones, they can
be quickly utilized for keeping distance smartphone applications. In addition, visible light technology can be leveraged
for building information assistance systems which help to
reduce human presence. Finally, thermal camera is the only
technology that can detect people over a large distance (a
few kilometers) without the need for attached devices, which
makes it an ideal solution to detect violation of quarantines or
closures.
V. O PEN I SSUES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss the open issues of social distancing implementation such as security and privacy concerns,
social distancing encouragement, work-from-home, and the
increased demands in healthcare appointments, home healthcare services, and online services. To addressed these issues,
potential solutions are also presented.
A. Security and Privacy-Preserving in Social Distancing
Most aforementioned social distancing scenarios (see Table III for more details) call for people’s private information,
to a different extent, ranging from their face/appearance to
location, travel records, or health condition/data. These data,
if not protected properly, attract cyber attackers and can turn
users into victims of financial, criminal frauds, and privacy
violation [277]. Users’ data like health conditions can also
adversely impact people’s employment opportunities or insurance policy. Given that, to enable technology-based social
distancing, it is critical to develop privacy-preserving and

cybersecurity solutions to ensure that users’ private data are
properly used and protected.
The general principle of users’ privacy-preserving is to keep
each individual user’s sensitive information private when the
available data are being publicly accessed. To do so, data
privacy-preserving mechanisms including data anonymization,
randomization, and aggregation can be utilized [268]. For
example, Apple, Google, and Facebook have developed people mobility trend reports while preserving users’ privacy
during the COVID-19 outbreak. In particular, Apple utilizes
random and rotating identifiers to preserve mobile users’
movements privacy [271]. Meanwhile, Google aggregates and
uses anonymized datasets from mobile users who turn on
their location history settings in their Android smartphones.
In this case, a differential privacy approach is applied by
adding random noise to the location dataset with the aim
to mask individual identification of a mobile user [269].
Similarly, Facebook utilizes aggregated and anonymized user
mobility datasets and maps to determine the mobility trend
in certain areas including the social connectedness intensity
among nearby locations [270]. In addition to the Apple’s,
Google’s, and Facebook’s latest privacy-preserving implementation, in the following, we will thoroughly discuss how the
latest advances in security and privacy-preserving techniques
can help to facilitate social distancing without compromising
users’ interest/privacy.
1) Location Information Protection: To protect the exact
location/trajectory information of participating mobile users
in social distancing, some advanced location-based privacy
protection methods can be adopted. Specifically, we can
anonymize/randomize/obfuscate/perturb the exact location of
each mobile user to avoid malicious attacks from the attackers
using the following mechanisms. For example, the authors
in [278] develop a privacy-preserving location-based framework to anonymize spatio-temporal trajectory datasets utilizing
machine-learning-based anonymization (MLA). In this case,
the framework applies the K-means machine learning algorithm to cluster the trajectories from real-world GPS datasets
and ensure the K-anonymity for high-sensitive datasets. Using
the K-anonymity [279], [280], the framework can collect location information from K mobile users within a cloaking region,
i.e., the region where the mobile users’ exact locations are
hidden [281], [282]. In [283], the use of K-anonymity is extended into a continuous network location privacy anonymity,
i.e., K DT-anonymity, which not only considers the average
anonymity size K, but also takes the average distance deviation
D and the anonymity duration T into account. Leveraging
those three metrics, the mobile users under realistic vehicle
mobility conditions can control the changes of anonymity and
distance deviation magnitudes over time.
The authors of [284] propose a mutually obfuscating paths
method which allows the vehicles to securely update accurate
real-time location to a location-based service server in the
vehicular network. In this case, the vehicles first hide their
IP addresses due to the default network address translation
operated by mobile Internet service providers. Then, they
generate fake path segments that separate from the vehicles’ actual paths to prevent the location-based service server

mous-based
ned location
ation

29

TABLE III: Summary of Other Emerging Technologies
Technology
Computer
Vision [170],
[171], [178],
[180], [181]
Ultrasound
[184], [185],
[187], [188]
Inertial
sensors
[247]–[250],
[253], [257]
Visible light
[192], [193],
[195], [197],
[198],
[201]–[203]
Thermal
[210],
[212]–[214],
[216]

Range

Accuracy

Cost

Depends on
the cameras

Low to High

Medium
to High

Short,
confined by
walls

Less than
14cm [185]

Not
applicable

Readiness

Indoor/Outdoor

Low

High

Both

Public and private camera systems

Low to
High

Low [185]
to
High [186]

High

Indoor

None

Less than
1m [247]

Low

High

High

Both

Smartphone

Short

≤ 1cm [202], ≤
10cm [193],
[195], [203],
≤ 20cm [196]

Low

High

High

Both

Smartphone, Smart Retail

IRP 10m,
THC a few
km

Medium

Low to
High

Low to
High

High

Both

None

Location-based
services server

Privacy

Anonymous-based
location information

Vehicle location
update

Location 1

Default network
address translation

Anonymous health
condition information

Spatio-temporal
information
Location 2

Collaborative path
obfuscation

LTE communication
DSRC communication
Vehicle
Service provider
(a) Location information protection

Sickness trend

Service provider

Location N

Mobile User

Service provider

(b) Personal identity protection

Patient with mobile devices
(c) Health condition protection

Fig. 18: Location-based privacy preserving for social distancing scenarios.

from tracking the vehicles. Exploiting dedicated short-range
communications (DSRC) among vehicles and road navigation
information from the GPS, the vehicles can mutually generate made-up location updates with each other when they
communicate with the location-based service server (to obtain
spatio-temporal-related information). In [285], vehicles which
use location-based services can dynamically update virtual
locations in real-time with respect to the relative locations
of current nearby vehicles. This aims to provide deceptive
information about the driving routes to attackers, thereby
hoc
enhancingAdlocation
privacy protection.

In addition to the anonymization and obfuscating methods, randomization and perturbation are the methods that
e User
Servicecan
provider
be employed to protect user’s location privacy in social
distancing scenarios. In [286], a location privacy-preserving
(b) Contact tracing
method leveraging spatio-temporal events of mobile users in
continuous location-based services, e.g., office visitation, is
investigated. Specifically, an -differential privacy is designed
to protect spatio-temporal events against attackers through
adding random noise to the event data [289]–[291]. In [292],
the authors present a location privacy protection mechanism

sentative user

Integrate with existing systems

using data perturbation for smart health systems in hospitals.
In particular, instead of reporting the patient’s real locations
directly, a processing unit attached to a patient’s body can
adaptively produce perturbed locations, i.e., the relative change
between different locations of the patient. In this case, the
system considers the patient’s travel directions and computes
the distance between the patient’s current locations and the
patient’s sensitive locations (i.e., patient’s pre-defined locations
which he/she does not want to reveal to anyone, e.g., patient’s
treating room). Using this dynamic location perturbation, the
need for a trusted third party to store real locations can be
removed. Leveraging the aforementioned methods, we can
also prevent the service provider to access mobile users’ and
vehicles’ exact locations/trajectories/paths when they implement social distancing for crowd/traffic density and movement
detection. Specifically, a platoon of mobile users/vehicles in
a certain area can collaborate together to mix their real
locations/trajectories/paths anonymously (Fig. 18(a)). In this
way, the service provider will only obtain the aggregated
location/trajectory/path information of the platoon instead of
each individual’s exact location/trajectory/path for its location

30

privacy.
2) Personal Identity Protection: In addition to protecting
mobile users’ location-related information, preserving their
personal identities is of importance to improve users’ acceptance of the latest technologies to social distancing. Specifically, we can exchange or anonymize personal identities
among trusted mobile users to avoid the attackers identifying the actual identity of each individual user. In [293],
the authors develop a pseudo-identity exchanging protocol to
swap/exchange identity information among mobile users when
they are at the same sensitive locations, e.g., hospital and
residential areas. In particular, when a mobile user receives
another trusted user’s identity and private key, the mobile
user will verify if the encryption of another user’s identity
hash function and public key is equal to the encryption of the
received private key. If that condition holds, the mobile user
will change his/her identity with that user’s identity and vice
versa.
Another method to protect personal identity in social distancing scenarios is individual information privacy protection
through indirect- or proxy-request as proposed in [294]. In
particular, instead of directly submitting a request to the server,
a mobile user can have his/her social friends through the
available social network resources, i.e., trusted social media,
to distribute his/her request anonymously to the server. The
request result can be returned to his/her social friends and then
forwarded to the requested mobile user, thereby preserving
the requested mobile user’s identity. In fact, there may exist
some malicious friends which expose the identity of the mobile
user. Therefore, the authors in [295] investigate a user-defined
privacy-sharing framework on social network to choose his/her
particular friends who are trusted to obtain the mobile user’s
identity information. In this case, the mobile user only shares
his/her identity information with the particular friends whose
pseudonyms match the mobile user’s identity through the
authorized access control. Using the same approaches from
the above works, we can use local wireless connections, e.g.,
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi Direct, to anonymously exchange actual
location information in a mobile user group, i.e., between a
mobile user and his/her trusted nearby mobile users, in an ad
hoc way. As shown in Fig. 18(b), when the service provider
requires to collect location-related information for the current
crowd density detection, a representative mobile user from the
group can send the group’s anonymous location information to
the service provider, aiming at preserving the personal identity
of each mobile user in the group.
Moreover, Apple and Google have recently introduced a key
schedule for contact tracing to ensure the privacy of users [63].
Specifically, there are three types of key: (i) tracing key, (ii)
daily tracing key, and (iii) rolling proximity identifier. The
tracing key is a 32-byte string that is generated by using
a cryptographic random number generator when the app is
enabled on the device. The tracing key is securely stored on
the device. The daily tracing key is generated for every 24-hour
window by using the SHA-256 hash function with the tracing
key. The rolling proximity identifier is a privacy-preserving
identifier which is sent in Bluetooth advertisements. This
identifier is generated by using the SHA-256 hash function

with the daily tracing key. Each time the Bluetooth MAC
address is changed, the app can derive a new identifier. When a
positive case is diagnosed, its daily tracing keys are uploaded
to a server. This server then distributes them to the clients
who use the app. Based on this information, each of the
clients will be able to derive the sequence of the rolling
proximity identifiers that were broadcasted from the user who
tested positive. In this way, the privacy of the users can be
protected because, without the daily tracing key, one cannot
obtain the user’s rolling proximity identifier. In addition, the
server operator also cannot track the user’s location or which
users have been in proximity.
Similarly, several solutions have been proposed in [66], [67].
The key idea of these solutions is generating a unique identifier
and broadcasting it to nearby devices. In particular, PACT [66]
regularly (every few seconds) emits a data string, called chirps,
generated by cryptographic techniques based on the current
time and the current seed of the user to ensure the privacy.
Similarly, in [67], the identifier E phI D (called ephemeral ID)
is created as follows:

E phI D = PRG PRF(SKt , broadcast key) ,
(7)
where PRF is a pseudo-random function (e.g., SHA-256),
broadcast key is a fixed and public string, and PRG is a
stream cipher (e.g., AES in counter mode). SKt is the secret
key of each user during day t which is computed as follows:
SKt = H(SKt−1 ),

(8)

where H is a cryptographic hash function. Upon receiving
the identifier, other nearby devices will keep it as a log. If a
user is diagnosed with the disease, other users who may have
encountered the infected person will receive a warning of a
potential contact.
With outstanding performance in data integrity, decentralization, and privacy-preserving, blockchain technology can be
an effective solution to preserve privacy to enable technologybased social distancing scenarios. A blockchain is a distributed
database shared among users in a decentralized network. This
decentralized nature of blockchain ensures its immutability
property, i.e., the data stored within cannot be altered without
the consensus of the majority of network users [69]. Another advantage of blockchain technology is that the users’
anonymity is ensured thanks to the public-private keys pair
mechanism [70]. As a result, blockchain technology can effectively address the personal identity issue in social distancing
scenarios where people have to share their movement and
location information but not their exact identities. For example,
in the infected movement data scenario, we only need to know
the movement path of a person, and whether or not that person
is infected. In this case, the person anonymity can be ensured
with the public-private keys pair mechanism, since there is no
way to link the public key to that person true identity.
3) Health-Related Information Protection: To monitor the
sickness trend in a certain place, e.g., the hospital, for the
social distancing purpose (i.e., to inform the upcoming mobile
users not to enter a high-risk area/building), the health-related
condition information of visiting mobile users has to be
shared to provide reliable learning dataset. To protect this

31

highly sensitive information, the authors in [296] propose a
differential privacy-based protection approach to preserve the
electrocardiogram big data by utilizing body sensor networks.
In particular, non-static noises are applied to produce sufficient
interference along with the electrocardiogram data, thereby
preventing the malicious attackers to point out the real electrocardiogram data.
To provide secure health-related information access for
authenticated users, a dynamic privacy-preserving approach
leveraging the biometric authentication process is introduced
in [297]. Specifically, when a user wants to access the medical
server containing his/her health condition, a secure biometric
identification at the server for the user’s validity is employed
where the exact value of his/her biometric template remains
unknown to the server. In this way, the personal identity of
the authenticated user can be preserved. To further enhance the
anonymity of his/her medical information, the random number
that is used to protect the biometric template is updated after
every successful login. Then, the authors in [298] propose a
secure anonymous authentication model for wireless body area
networks (WBANs). Specifically, this framework enables both
patients and authorized medical professionals to securely and
anonymously examine their legitimacies prior to exchanging
biomedical information in the WBAN systems. Motivated
from the above works, we can utilize mobile devices, secure
service provider, and the aforementioned privacy-preserving
approaches to anonymously collect people’s health condition
information for illness monitoring in the hospital/medical
center (Fig. 18(c)). In this way, the social distancing through
monitoring the sickness trend can be implemented efficiently
while preserving the sensitive information of the people in the
illness areas.
B. Real-time Scheduling and Optimization
In the context of social distancing, real-time scheduling and
optimization techniques can play a key role in preventing an
excessive number of people at the a given place (e.g., supermarkets, hospitals) while maintaining a reasonable Qualityof-Service level. Fig. 19 illustrates several social distancing scenarios where scheduling and optimization techniques
can be applied. In particular, proper scheduling can help
reduce the number of necessary employees at the workplace
and the number of patients coming to the hospital, thereby
minimizing the physical contacts among people. Moreover,
traffic scheduling can help to reduce the peak number of
vehicles and pedestrians, and network resource optimization
(e.g., network/resource slicing) can meet surging demands on
the online services while more people are working remotely
from home.
1) Workforce Scheduling: Workforce scheduling can help
to limit the number of people at the workplaces while ensuring
the necessary work is done. While working from home is
encouraged in social distancing, some essential work requires
people to be present at the workplace for important tasks
(e.g., health, transportation and manufacturing). Moreover,
different types of tasks impose various constraints such as due
date (time constraints), dependence among tasks (precedence

Optimize online services

Healthcare Appoinment
Scheduling

Workforce Scheduling

Traffic control

Home Healthcare Scheduling

Fig. 19: Scheduling and optimization for several social distancing scenarios.

constraints), skill requirements (skill constraints), and limited
resources usage (resource constraints) which further complicate the scheduling problem. For such scenarios, workforce
scheduling techniques can be utilized to optimally align and
reduce the number of required employees to practice social
distancing. In [225], a novel three-phase algorithm is proposed
for workforce scheduling to optimize the operational cost
and service level simultaneously. Another Genetic-Algorithmbased hybrid approach is presented in [226], which optimizes
the schedules of the workforce according to multiple objectives
including urgency, skill considerations, and workload balance.
Similarly, in [227], a Mixed-Integer-Programming-based approach is developed to minimize the operational cost with
consideration of skill constraints. It is worth noting that the
main objective of these approaches is to minimize cost, which
is not the highest priority in the context of social distancing.
In [228], [229], and [230], several methods are proposed to
optimize the workforce schedules with consideration of rotating shifts, which indirectly reduce the number of employees
to a certain extent. Nevertheless, the main objective of these
approaches is reducing costs. Therefore, developing techniques
to reduce the physical contacts or distance among employees
at the workplace is critical for workforce scheduling in social
distancing scenarios.
2) Medical/Health Appointment Scheduling: Besides workforce planning, scheduling techniques can also help to optimize healthcare services, especially healthcare appointments

32

and home healthcare services, thereby decreasing unnecessary
traffic and the number of patients coming to hospitals. Several
approaches have been proposed to effectively schedule appointments. In particular, a local search algorithm is proposed
in [231] to minimize patient waiting times, doctor idle times,
and tardiness (lateness). Moreover, a two-stage bounding approach and a heuristic are presented in [232] and [234], respectively. However, a common limitation of these techniques
is that they do not take into account the uncertainties in the
duration of the appointments and the possibility that the patient
will not come to the scheduled appointment. To address that,
the uncertainty in the processing times (e.g., of surgeries)
is considered by a conic optimization approach in [233].
Similarly, a multistage stochastic linear program is developed
in [235] to minimize patient waiting times and overtime, which
takes into account the unpredictable appointment duration and
unplanned cancellations. Although there are many effective
approaches to optimize appointment scheduling, the open issue
is to develop techniques that specifically minimize or control
the number of patients simultaneously coming to the hospitals
to maintain a suitable level of social distancing, similar to that
of the workforce scheduling scenario.
3) Home Healthcare Scheduling: Similar to appointment
scheduling, home healthcare services (HHS) can help to reduce
the pressure on hospitals and traffic in the social distancing
context. In [236], a multi-heuristics approach is proposed for
HHS scheduling to minimize the total traveling times of HHS
staff. An extended problem is presented in [237], where the
objective also includes minimizing the tardiness and additional
skills and time constraints are considered. For this problem,
local search-based heuristics are proposed in the paper. Another local search-based heuristic is proposed in [238] for
HHS scheduling with the objective to minimize traveling times
and optimize Quality-of-Service while considering workload
and time constraints. In [239], a Genetic-Algorithm-based
hybrid approach is proposed for HHS scheduling with uncertainty in patient’s demands to minimize transportation costs.
Also addressing uncertainties, a branch-and-price algorithm
is proposed in [240] to minimize the traveling costs and
delay of services while considering stochastic service times.
Unlike in workforce planning and appointment scheduling,
HHS scheduling techniques can be more effectively applied
to social distancing scenarios because they can minimize the
traveling distances while ensuring Quality-of-Service.
4) Traffic Control: Scheduling techniques have also been
applied for traffic control. In social distancing scenarios,
scheduling techniques can help to regulate the traffic level, especially the number of pedestrians. In [241], a novel scheduling algorithm is developed for traffic control, considering both
vehicles and pedestrians, to minimize the delays. Similarly, a
macroscopic model and a scheduling algorithm are proposed
for traffic control, which jointly minimize both the pedestrians
and vehicle delays in [242]. Another scheduling approach is
proposed in [243] that considers both pedestrians and vehicles.
Different from the previously mentioned approaches, this approach only focuses on minimizing pedestrian delay. Although
there is a vast literature on traffic scheduling techniques,
the social distancing implications have not been taken into

account. For example, to maintain social distancing, a more
meaningful objective would be to reduce/constrain the peak
number of pedestrians on the street at the same time.
5) Online Services Optimization: When social distancing
measures are implemented, more people will be staying at
home e.g., working from home. Physical meetings/gatherings
will move to virtual platforms, e.g., webinars. That results in
much higher Internet traffic and corresponding virtual service
demands (e.g., video streaming, broadcasting, and contents
delivery). Therefore, optimizing online services delivery is a
challenging issue in the social distancing context. Fortunately,
online services optimization is a well-studied topic with a
substantial body of supporting literature.
For example, in [244], a novel algorithm is proposed to optimize the contents delivery process in a CDN semi-federation
system. In particular, the algorithm optimally allocates the content provider’s demand to multiple Content Delivery Networks
(CDNs) in the federation. The results show that the latency
can be reduced by 20% during peak hours. Another technique
to reduce the delay and network congestion is edge-caching,
which brings the contents closer to the network users. In [245],
the performance of two edge-caching strategies, i.e., coded and
uncoded caching, are analyzed. Moreover, two optimization
algorithms are developed to minimize the content delivery
times for the two caching strategies.
Besides the contents delivery, the demands on video streaming traffic are also much higher during social distancing
implementation because there are many people who work from
home. In that context, emerging networking technologies can
be an effective solution. For example, an architecture utilizing
HTTP adaptive streaming [246] and software-defined networking technology is proposed to enable video streaming over
HTTP. Moreover, a novel algorithm is developed to optimally
allocates users into groups, thereby reducing communication
overhead and leveraging network resources. The results show
that the proposed framework can increase video stability,
Quality-of-Service, and resource utilization.
Scheduling and optimization are well-studied topics with
a vast literature available, which can be utilized for different social distancing scenarios such as workforce, healthcare
appointment, home healthcare, and traffic scheduling, and optimization of online services delivery. Nevertheless, except for
the home healthcare service scenario, the existing techniques’
objectives do not align with the objectives of social distancing.
Moreover, scheduling algorithms are often developed such
that they are only efficient for specific problems. Therefore,
developing novel optimization/scheduling algorithms in operations research and adopting social distancing as a new performance metric or design parameter is very much desirable.
Furthermore, the optimization of Internet-based services such
as content delivery can help to encourage people to stay at
home during social distancing periods by ensuring the service
levels.
C. Incentive Mechanism to Encourage Social Distancing
Due to the people’s self-interested/selfish nature characteristics in their daily life [311] (especially during the pandemic

33

outbreak), incentive mechanisms can be very helpful in encouraging people to accept or share relevant information to
enable new social distancing methods. These mechanisms have
been thoroughly discussed in crowdsourcing as implemented
in [287], [316]–[319]. Therein, the service providers can
provide incentives to a large number of people to attract their
contributions in data collection for crowdsourcing process. For
example, the contract theory-based incentive mechanism for
crowdsourcing is discussed in [316], [317]. In particular, this
approach is considered as an efficient mechanism to leverage common agreements between the participating entities,
e.g., a service provider and its mobile users, in a certain
area under complete and incomplete information from the
participants [312]. The use of a game theory-based incentive
mechanism to encourage a set of mobile users to form a
crowdsourcing community network is investigated in [287],
[318]. Then, in [319], the authors utilize an auction theorybased approach incentive mechanism to stimulate mobile users
participation in crowdsourcing tasks such as traffic monitoring.
In the following, we also highlight the existing incentive
mechanisms and how they can be further adopted to encourage
social distancing applications.
1) Distance Between any Two People and Distance to/from
Crowds: To motivate people to keep safe distances from
themselves to others, contract theory-based incentive models
via D2D communications, e.g., Bluetooth, Wi-Fi Direct, can
be employed. In [313], the authors propose a contract theorybased mechanism to provide a higher reward for D2D-capable
mobile users if they send the information to a requesting
mobile user with a higher transmission data rate. Taking into
account the number of potential nearby mobile users in proximity, the authors in [314] introduce the same mechanism such
that a mobile user will receive a higher payment if they can
share the information to more nearby users. Likewise, the same
approach considering a higher reward for a mobile user who
has shorter distances in sharing its information to nearby D2D
pairs is presented in [315]. Inspired by the aforementioned
works, we can consider the contract theory-based method
along with D2D communications to encourage people to
keep distances from other people/crowds. Specifically, mobile
service providers can be subsidized/funded or requested by
the government to provide incentives to their users to keep
a distance from others when they are in public. Specifically,
a service provider can offer contracts to mobile users, as
illustrated in Fig. 20(a). Considering the current distances
from the nearby mobile users and capability to inform them
through D2D communications, those mobile users can obtain
more rewards when they successfully keep a sufficient distance
(e.g., at least 1.5 meters) from other people/users. A violation
(e.g., getting closer than 1.5 meters to someone) can lead to
a “penalty” (e.g., losing part of the previous rewards).
2) Contact Tracing: In a pandemic outbreak, contact tracing is considered as one of the most important actions to
contain the spread of the disease. To trigger each mobile user
for information sharing, e.g., mobile user’s public identity, the
network operator requires to offer incentives to those who
contribute such information (besides privacy-preserving solutions). In [316], the authors introduce a contract theory-based

incentive mechanism in a crowdsourced wireless community
network. In particular, the network operator offers contracts to
network-sharing mobile users containing a Wi-Fi access price
(for their nearby mobile users accessing the network sharing)
and a subscription fee (for the network-sharing mobile users).
Motivated from this work, we can also develop a contacttracing framework which allows a mobile user to broadcast
his/her public identity to the nearby mobile users as long as
their distances are within 1.5 meters. Then, the nearby mobile
users can store this public identity in their close-contact log
files including the time and location when they receive that
public identity as shown in Fig. 20(b). Mobile users who store
such log files will pay the sharing mobile user to compensate
for the information sharing. In this way, when at least one of
the mobile users in the log files is infected by the contagious
disease, the mobile service provider can alert the mobile users
with the log files to implement social distancing.
3) Crowd Detection: A high density of people in specific
areas can make contagious diseases to spread the infection
more quickly due to people’s close proximity. To support
social distancing, an incentive mechanism approach can also
be applied to detect the people density in public areas or the
number of people in a building. In [317], the authors present
a tournament model-based incentive mechanism to encourage
mobile users (with various performance ranks) connected to
the local wireless networks, e.g., Wi-Fi hotspots, to send the
location and unique identifier of the networks to the service
provider (Fig. 20(c)). From the hotspots’ location information,
the service provider can then determine the people density in
each hotspot area or the number of people in a building (which
may have several hotspot areas). Using the above method, we
can also encourage mobile users to avoid non-essential public
places, e.g., restaurants and shopping malls. In this case, the
reward can be adapted according to the locations and essential
level of the services (e.g., cinemas, restaurants, grocery stores,
schools, and hospitals).
In addition to the people density detection, we can adopt
incentive mechanisms to monitor the density of vehicles on
the city roads for traffic crowd avoidance purposes. In fact,
the contagious diseases, e.g., coronavirus, can remain on the
surfaces for fours hours up to several days [320]. Thus,
avoiding traffic jams on the roads can reduce the possibility of
disease infection. In [321], the authors propose a reward-based
smartphone collaboration method to support data acquisition
for location-based services. Specifically, a client will attract
surrounding smartphone users, e.g., vehicular users on a
highway, to collaborate together with the aim to build a big
database containing location information as implemented in
Google’s Android smartphones and Apple’s iPhone [63]. The
joining smartphone users then receive shared rewards from
the client considering their collaboration costs. Based on this
database, the client can determine the traffic levels according
to the vehicles’ density on the roads dynamically and sell
this information to the authorities or service provider. Such
information can be useful for several social distancing scenarios such as crowd detection, traffic/movement monitoring, and
traffic control.

34
MUs rewards for Type 1 < Type 2 < Type 3 <

Type-1
contract

< Type N

Type-1

Type-1

Share unique ID
information

Type-2
contract

...
Location 1

Type-2

Type-N
contract

...

...

...

Type-2

Location 2

Type-N
Type-N

Mobile User
Base Station

Mobile User

MUs rewards for Type 1 < Type 2 < Type 3 <
(a) Distance to/from Crowds

< Type N

Location N

Contact log file

MUs rewards for Type 1 < Type 2 < Type 3 <

< Type N

(b) Contact tracing

Mobile User

...

Isolation facility
Service provider

Mobile User

(c) Crowd Detection

Service provider
(d) Self Isolation

Fig. 20: Contract-based incentive design scenarios to encourage social distancing.

4) Location/Movement Sharing Stay-at-home Encouragement: To further drive people away from high-density public
places, one can also consider incentive mechanisms for better
social distancing efficiency (especially for the people with their
mobile devices). In particular, the authors in [322] study the
uneven distribution of the crowdsourcing participants when
maximizing the social welfare of the network. To address this
problem, a movement-based incentive mechanism to stimulate
the participants to move from popular areas to unpopular ones
was introduced. This approach guarantees that the participants
will announce their actual costs for further reward processes.
Likewise, an incentive mechanism in spatial crowdsourcing
considering budget constraints to reduce imbalanced data collection is discussed in [323]. Particularly, the service provider
will provide a higher reward when the mobile users are willing
to participate in remote locations instead of nearby locations
where they belong to (based on their daily routines). A
similar work utilizing a redistribution algorithm to incentivize
crowdsourced service providers from oversupplied areas to
undersupplied ones is also investigated in [288]. The above
works are then extended in [324]. Instead of encouraging
mobile users to completely move to faraway locations, the
service provider will offer a task-bundling containing the
nearby and remote tasks for each participating mobile user. All
of these works show that the proposed incentive mechanisms
can efficiently balance the various location popularity such that
we can encourage people to move to low-density places.
In a narrow-down scenario, we can also utilize an incentive
mechanism to encourage family-isolation/group-isolation for
the possible vulnerable/at-risk people, e.g., sick people and
older people. For example, the authors in [325] propose a
spatio-temporal-based incentive mechanism using both smartphone and human intelligence in an ad hoc social network.
This framework allows a very large crowd to work together
in providing information sharing, i.e., geo-tagged multimedia
resources, while receiving incentives from the system. Based
on this method, we can also engage the vulnerable/at-risk
groups to isolate themselves and deliver incentives for them
at a certain location during a particular period (Fig. 20(d)).
The larger number of vulnerable/at-risk members in a group,
the higher incentives will be given. Furthermore, we can
design a real-time incentive mechanism to encourage people to
implement self-isolation by providing more rewards for those

who spend more time at a given location, e.g., at home. In this
case, the reward can be negative, i.e., penalty, to discourage
people from going to crowded places.
D. Pandemic Mode for Social Distancing Implementation
An occasional pandemic outbreak in a particular period can
drive the mobile service providers, e.g., Google and Apple,
to build up a pandemic mode application for current users’
mobile devices, e.g. smartphones. This application represents
a comprehensive framework utilizing the current pandemic
situation, i.e., infected movement data, to help the mobile users
stay aware of the contagious diseases and perform cautious
actions to slow down the spread of the diseases through
implementing social distancing. To this end, the use of users’
smartphones is very crucial to realize this pandemic mode
application as similarly implemented for smartphone-based
disaster mode application in [259]–[265]. When a contagious
disease outbreak is imminent, the government can first broadcast an urgent notification for mobile users to install/deploy the
official pandemic mode application in their smartphones. Then,
based on the current infected movement data, e.g., the current
reported number of infected people and currently infected
areas, from the government officials, the service providers
can determine the risk levels of the pandemic and activate
a certain level in the smartphones. Considering the risk level,
the smartphones can leverage the existing sensors and wireless
connections to perform effective contact tracing activity for
contagious disease containment.
1) Infected Movement Data: To determine the risk levels
of pandemic mode, the authorities first need to monitor the
current infected movement information, i.e., infected areas and
the number of infected people. Based on this observation,
the authorities then can orchestrate the pandemic mode risk
levels and notify mobile users such that they can avoid the
areas where the highly-likely infection exists according to
the current risk level. In [266], the authors introduce an
identification framework to observe the spatial infection spread
based on the arrival records of infectious cases in subpopulation areas. Considering susceptible and infectious people
movement in metapopulation networks, the framework first
splits the whole infection spread into disjoint subpopulation
areas. Then, a maximum likelihood estimation is applied to

Hotspot
(b) Infected Movement Data

Region 1

(a) Contact Tracing

35

Infected Movement Data

Region 1
...

Region 2

Moderate
level

Low
level

Region N

Region N

...

Region 2

Pandemic mode application

High
level

Contact Tracing

Service provider
Infection point

Mobile user

Base Station

Hotspot

Fig. 21: Pandemic mode in future infrastructures to support social distancing.

predict the most likely invasion pathways at each subpopulation area. Using a dynamic programming-based algorithm,
the framework can finally reconstruct the whole spread by
iteratively assembling the invasion pathways for each subpopulation to produce the final invasion pathways. Then, the authors
in [267] present a spatial-temporal technique to locate realtime influenza epidemics utilizing heterogeneous data from the
Internet. In particular, the technique constructs a multivariate
hidden Markov model through aggregating influenza morbidity
data, influenza-related data from Google, and international
air transportation data. This aims to identify the spatialtemporal relationship of influenza transmission which will
be used for surveillance application. Through experimental
results, the technique can predict an influenza epidemic ahead
of the actual event with high accuracy. Recently, Google and
Apple also create a framework to demonstrate the community
mobility trend with respect to the COVID-19 outbreak [269],
[271]. In particular, this framework is generated based on the
regions of mobile users and changes in visits monitoring at
various public places, e.g., groceries, pharmacies, parks, transit
stations, workplaces, and residential areas.
Motivated by the above works, the authorities can first collect the spatio-temporal infectious disease-related information
from the Internet and official reports. Using the aforementioned methods, the authorities can then extract meaningful
information about the spread locations/pathways and time of
the infectious diseases, which leads to various spatio-temporal
disease spread levels. Based on these disease spread levels,
the authorities can customize the pandemic mode risk level for
different regions, e.g., states, cities, and provinces, at different
times. For example, if the disease spread level, e.g., the density

of infected people, at a particular city is high, the authorities
can set the pandemic mode into a high-risk level for a week
(as shown in Fig. 21). Otherwise, the pandemic mode level
can be set at a low-risk level.
2) Contact Tracing: After determining the risk levels of
pandemic mode based on the infected movement data, the
authorities can broadcast the risk level notification through
smartphones’ pandemic mode application. Afterward, the
smartphones can perform contact tracing to help quickly
discovering infected people for efficient outbreak containment [272], [273]. Based on the risk level of the pandemic
mode, the smartphones can automatically trace contacts using certain sensors and wireless connections. For example,
Google and Apple currently collaborate together to develop
a contact tracing application utilizing Bluetooth technology,
aiming to quickly detect past contacts among mobile users in
close proximity [63]. In this case, the Bluetooth is used to
exchange beacon signals containing unique keys between two
smartphones prior to storing these keys to the cloud server
for infected people notification. Similarly, the work in [274]
develops a wireless sensor system to exchange beacon signals
between a mobile device with other nearby mobile devices
as its contact information. In another work, an epidemiological data collection scheme utilizing users’ smartphones is
described in [275]. Specifically, a user’s smartphone can be
used as a sensor platform to collect high accurate information
including the user’s location, activity level, and contact history
between the user and certain locations. Then, a smartphonebased contact detection system leveraging the smartphone’s
magnetometer history is investigated in [276]. To determine
the close contact, the system measures the linear correlation

36

between two smartphones’ magnetometer records.
Inspired by the aforementioned works, the smartphones
can be utilized as crucial tools to implement contact tracing
considering the current risk level of the pandemic mode
activated by the authorities (as illustrated in Fig. 21). In
particular, if the authorities activate low-risk levels, i.e., the
current number of infected people and areas are small, the
smartphones can trace close contacts using cellular networks
only. In this case, the pandemic mode application will disable
certain sensors, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi by default. However, if
high-risk level pandemic mode, i.e., the current number of
infected people and areas are large, is activated, the pandemic
mode application will enable all of the wireless connections
including Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and cellular network, as well as
relevant sensors automatically to trace contacts faster.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Social distancing has been considered to be a crucial
measure to prevent the spread of contagious diseases such
as COVID-19. In this article, we have presented a comprehensive survey on how technologies can enable, encourage,
and enforce social distancing. Firstly, we have provided an
overview of the social distancing, discussed its effectiveness,
and introduced various practical social distancing scenarios
where the technologies can be leveraged. We have then presented and reviewed various technologies to encourage and
facilitate social distancing measures. For each technology, we
have provided an overview, examined the state-of-the-art, and
discussed how it can be utilized in different social distancing
scenarios. Finally, we have discussed open issues in social
distancing implementations and potential solutions to address
these issues.
R EFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, Coronavirus (COVID-19), World
Health Organization, Apr. 22, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://covid19.who.int/ .[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[2] E. Lempinen, COVID-19: Economic impact, human solutions,
Berkeley
News,
Apr.
10,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://news.berkeley.edu/2020/04/10/covid-19-economic-impacthuman-solutions/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[3] P. Evans, Canada lost more than 1 million jobs last month
as COVID-19 struck, CBC News, Apr. 9, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/canada-jobs-march-covid19-1.5527359. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[4] K. Sullivan, Unemployment rate predicted to reach 10 per cent amid
coronavirus pandemic, pushing Australia into recession, ABC News,
Apr. 13, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/202004-13/coronavirus-unemployment-covid-19-treasury-figures-joblessrate/12145542. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[5] G. Gopinath, The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since
the Great Depression, International Monetary Fund Blog, Apr. 14,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-greatlockdown-worst-economic-downturn-since-the-great-depression/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[6] R. Pickert, Y. Qiu and A. McIntyre, The Great Lockdown: Worst
Economic Downturn Since the Great Depression, Bloomberg, Apr.
8, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/useconomic-recession-tracker/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[7] BBC News, Coronavirus: World economy ’may face double
recession’,
BBC,
Apr.
16,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bbc.com/news/business-52306001.
[Accessed
Apr.
20, 2020].

[8] N.M. Ferguson et al., “Strategies for containing an emerging influenza
pandemic in Southeast Asia,” Nature, vol. 437, no. 7056, pp. 209-214,
Sep. 2005.
[9] C. Adlhoch et al.,“European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.
Considerations relating to social distancing measures in response to
COVID-19 second update,” European Centre for Disease Prevention
and Control, Stockholm: ECDC, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: Available: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid19-social-distancing-measuresg-guide-second-update.pdf. [Accessed
Apr. 20, 2020].
[10] J. K. Kelso, G. J. Milne and H. Kelly, “Simulation suggests that rapid
activation of social distancing can arrest epidemic development due
to a novel strain of influenza,” BMC public health, vol. 9, no.1, pp.
117-127, Dec. 2009.
[11] U. Irfan, The math behind why we need social distancing, starting right now, Vox, Apr. 22, 2020. [Online].
Available:https://www.vox.com/2020/3/15/21180342/coronaviruscovid-19-us-social-distancing. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[12] Department of Health, Social distancing for coronavirus (COVID19), Australian Government, Mar. 31, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus2019-ncov-health-alert/how-to-protect-yourself-and-others-fromcoronavirus-covid-19/social-distancing-for-coronavirus-covid-19.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[13] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Social Distancing, Quarantine, and Isolation, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Apr.
4, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html. [Accessed Apr. 20,
2020].
[14] Public Health England, Guidance on social distancing for everyone in
the UK, Public Health England, Mar. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-guidanceon-social-distancing-and-for-vulnerable-people/guidance-on-socialdistancing-for-everyone-in-the-uk-and-protecting-older-people-andvulnerable-adults. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[15] C. Yang and H. R. Shao, “WiFi-based indoor positioning,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 150-157, Mar. 2015.
[16] H. Soganci, S. Gezici and H. V. Poor, “Accurate positioning in ultrawideband systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 2, pp.
19-27, Apr. 2011.
[17] J. Armstrong, Y. A. Sekercioglu and A. Neild, “Visible light positioning: a roadmap for international standardization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 68-73, Dec. 2013.
[18] A. F. Ferreira, D. M. Fernandes, A. P. Catarino and J. L. Monteiro,
“Localization and positioning systems for emergency responders: A
survey” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp.
2836-2870, May 2017.
[19] J. M. Heffernan, R. J. Smith and L. M. Wahl, “Perspectives on the
basic reproductive ratio,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol.
2, no. 4, pp. 281-293, Sep. 2005.
[20] C. Fraser, S. Riley, R. M. Anderson and N. M. Ferguson, “Factors that
make an infectious disease outbreak controllable,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 101, no. 16, pp. 6146-6151, Apr.
2004.
[21] H. W. Hethcote, “The mathematics of infectious diseases,” SIAM
review, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 599-653, Oct. 2000.
[22] Mao L., “Agent-based simulation for weekend-extension strategies to
mitigate influenza outbreaks,” BMC public health, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
511-521, Dec. 2011.
[23] S. Kumar, J. J. Grefenstette, D. Galloway, S. M. Albert and D. S. Burke,
”Policies to reduce influenza in the workplace: impact assessments
using an agent-based model,” American journal of public health, vol.
103, no. 8, pp. 1406-1411, Aug. 2013.
[24] T. Timpka et al., “Relevance of workplace social mixing during
influenza pandemics: an experimental modelling study of workplace
cultures,” Epidemiology & Infection, vol. 144, no. 10, pp. 2031-2042,
July 2016.
[25] G. J. Milne, J. K. Kelso, H. A. Kelly, S. T. Huband and J. McVernon,
“A small community model for the transmission of infectious diseases:
comparison of school closure as an intervention in individual-based
models of an influenza pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 1-7,
Dec. 2008.
[26] S. Cauchemez, A. J. Valleron, P. Y. Boelle PY, A. Flahault and
N.M. Ferguson, “Estimating the impact of school closure on influenza
transmission from Sentinel data,” Nature, vol. 452, no. 7188, pp. 750754, Apr. 2008.

37

[27] N. M. Ferguson et al.,“Strategies for mitigating an influenza pandemic,”
Nature, vol. 442, no. 7101, pp. 448-452, July 2006.
[28] J. T. Wu, S. Riley, C. Fraser and G. M. Leung, “Reducing the impact
of the next influenza pandemic using household-based public health
interventions,” PLoS medicine, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 1532-1540, Sep. 2006.
[29] R. J. Glass, L. M. Glass, W. E. Beyeler and H. J. Min, “Targeted
social distancing designs for pandemic influenza,” Emerging infectious
diseases, vol. 12 no. 11, pp. 1671-1681, Nov. 2006.
[30] S. Maharaj and A. Kleczkowski, “Controlling epidemic spread by
social distancing: Do it well or not at all,” BMC Public Health, vol.
12, no. 1, pp. 679-697, Dec. 2012.
[31] T. C. Reluga, “Game theory of social distancing in response to an
epidemic,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1-9, May
2010.
[32] Daily confirmed COVID-19 cases, rolling 3-day average,
Our world in data, Apr. 24, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/daily-covid-cases-3-dayaverage?time=2020-02-21..&country=GBR+ESP+ITA+FRA+DEU.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[33] World Health Organization (Mar 2020). Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200306-sitrep-46-covid19.pdf?sfvrsn=96b04adf 4
[34] D. Zhang, F. Xia, Z. Yang, L. Yao and W, Zhao, “Localization
technologies for indoor human tracking,” in 2010 5th international
conference on future information technology, Busan, South Korean,
May 21-23, 2010, pp. 1-6.
[35] S. Park, H. S. Ahn and W. Yu, “Round-trip time-based wireless
positioning without time synchronization,” in 2007 International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems, Seoul, South Korean, Oct.
17-20, 2007, pp. 2323-2326.
[36] D.G. Chapman and H. Robbins, “Minimum variance estimation without
regularity assumptions,” inThe Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol.
22, no. 4, pp. 581-586, 1951.
[37] D. Dardari, P. Closas and P. M. Djuri, “Indoor tracking: Theory, methods, and technologies,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1263-1278, Feb. 2015.
[38] C. Yang and H.-R. Shao, “WiFi-based Indoor Positioning,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 150-157, Mar. 2015.
[39] Wi-Fi Alliance introduces Wi-Fi 6, [Online]. Available: https://www.
wi-fi.org/news-events/newsroom/wi-fi-alliance-introduces-wi-fi-6
[40] W. Liu, Q. Cheng, Z. Deng, H. Chen, X. Fu, X. Zheng, S. Zheng,
C. Chen, and S. Wang, “Survey on CSI-based Indoor Positioning
Systems and Recent Advances,” in International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Pisa, Italy, Sept.30-Oct. 03
2019, pp. 1-8.
[41] S. Mazuelas, A. Bahillo, R. M. Lorenzo, P. Fernandez, F. A. Lago,
E. Garcia, J. Blas, and E. J. Abril, “Robust Indoor Positioning Provided
by Real-time RSSI Values in Unmodified WLAN Networks,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 821831, Oct. 2019.
[42] A. El-Naggar, A. Wassal, and K. Sharaf, “Indoor Positioning Using
WiFi RSSI Trilateration and INS Sensor Fusion System Simulation,”
in 2nd International Conference on Sensors, Signal and Image Processing, Prague, Czech Republic, Oct. 8-10 2019, pp.21-26.
[43] R. C. Luo and T. J. Hsiao, “Dynamic Wireless Indoor Localization
Incorporating With an Autonomous Mobile Robot Based on an Adaptive Signal Model Fingerprinting Approach,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1940-1951, Mar. 2019.
[44] X. Guo, R. Nkrow, N. Ansari, L. Li, and L. Wang, “Robust WiFi
Localization by Fusing Derivative Fingerprints of RSS and Multiple
Classifiers,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no.
5, pp. 3177-3186, May 2020.
[45] I. H. Alshami, N. A. Ahmad, S. Sahibuddin, and F. Firdaus, “Adaptive
Indoor Positioning Model Based on WLAN-fingerprinting for Dynamic
and Multi-floor Environments,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1789-1818,
Aug. 2017.
[46] B. Wang, X. Liu, B. Yu, R. Jia, and X. Gan, “An Improved WiFi Positioning Method Based on Fingerprint Clustering and Signal Weighted
Euclidean Distance,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 2300-2320, May
2019.
[47] L. Chang, X. Chen, Y. Wang, D. Fang, J. Wang, T. Xing, and
Z. Tang, “FitLoc: Fine-grained and Low-cost Device-free Localization
for Multiple Targets Over Various Areas,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1994-2007, Aug. 2017.

[48] F. Adib and D. Katabi, “See Through Walls With WiFi!,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2013 conference on SIGCOMM, Hong
Kong, China, Aug. 27 2013, pp. 75-86.
[49] X. Ge and Z. Qu, “Optimization WIFI Indoor Positioning KNN Algorithm Location-based Fingerprint,” in IEEE International Conference
on Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), Beijing, China,
Aug. 26-28 2016, pp. 135-137.
[50] A. Sciarrone, C. Fiandrino, I. Bisio, F. Lavagetto, D. Kliazovich, and
P. Bouvry, “Smart Probabilistic Fingerprinting for Indoor Localization
Over Fog Computing Platforms,” in IEEE International Conference on
Cloud Networking (Cloudnet), Pisa, Italy, Oct. 03-05 2016, pp. 39-44.
[51] Y. Zhuang, Z. Syed, Y. Li, and N. El-Sheimy, “Evaluation of Two
WiFi Positioning Systems Based on Autonomous Crowdsourcing of
Handheld Devices for Indoor Navigation,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1982-1995, Aug. 2016.
[52] H. Zou, M. Jin, H. Jiang, L. Xie, and C. Spanos, “WinIPS: WiFibased Non-intrusive IPS for Online Radio Map Construction,” inIEEE
Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS), San Francisco, CA, USA, Apr. 10-14 2016, pp. 1081-1082.
[53] W. Lan and H. Li, “A Modified KNN Indoor WiFi Localization Method
With K-median Cluster,” in IOP Conference Series: Materials Science
and Engineering, Shanghai, China, May 20-26 2019, pp. 12008-12015.
[54] Y. Zhong, Z. Yuan, Y. Li, and B. Yang, “A Wifi Positioning Algorithm
Based on Deep Learning,” in 7th International Conference on Information, Communication and Networks (ICICN), Macao, Macao, Apr.
24-26 2019, pp. 99-104.
[55] C. Cai, L. Deng, M. Zheng, and S. Li, “Pilc: Passive Indoor Localization Based on Convolutional Neural Networks,” in IEEE Conference
on Ubiquitous Positioning, Indoor Navigation and Location-Based
Services (UPINLBS), Wuhan, China, Mar. 22-23 2018, pp. 1-6.
[56] A. Bose and C. H. Foh, “A Practical Path Loss Model for Indoor WiFi
Positioning Enhancement,” in International Conference on Information,
Communications & Signal Processing, Singapore, Dec. 10-13 2007, pp.
1-5.
[57] J. S. Lim, W. H. Jang, G. W. Yoon and D.S. Han, “Radio Map Update
Automation for WiFi Positioning Systems,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 693-696, Apr. 2013.
[58] “Bluetooth Technology”. [Online]. Available: https://www.bluetooth.
com/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[59] N. Todtenberg and R. Kraemer, “A Survey on Bluetooth Multi-hop
Networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 93, pp. 101922-101949, Jun. 2019
[60] Y. Zhuang, J. Yang, Y. Li, L. Qi, and N. El-Sheimy, “Smartphone-based
Indoor Localization With Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons,” Sensors,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 596-616, Apr. 2016.
[61] R. Gredley, Phone Tracking Considered to Curb Spread of COVID-19,
Mar. 25, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://7news.com.au/lifestyle/
health-wellbeing/phone-tracking-on-cards-for-virus-tracing-c-761265.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[62] K. Mingis, Tech Pitches in to Fight COVID-19 Pandemic, May 5, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.computerworld.com/article/3534478/
tech-pitches-in-to-fight-covid-19-pandemic.html. [Accessed Apr. 20,
2020].
[63] T. Romm, D. Harwell, E. Dwoskin and C. Timberg, Apple, Google Debut Major Effort to Help People Track if
They’ve Come in Contact With Coronavirus, Apr. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/04/
10/apple-google-tracking-coronavirus/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[64] “Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing”. [Online]. Available: https://
www.apple.com/covid19/contacttracing. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[65] “TraceTogether”. [Online]. Available: https://www.tracetogether.gov.
sg/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[66] “PACT: Private Automatic Contact Tracing”. [Online]. Available: https:
//pact.mit.edu/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[67] PEPP-PT, Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing. [Online]. Available: https://www.pepp-pt.org/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[68] D. K. Bhavani, This App Scores You on Your Social
Distancing Amid The Coronavirus Pandemic, Apr. 06, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/
dror-app-adds-bluetooth-feature-which-scores-users-on-their-social-distancing/
article31268723.ece. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[69] C. T. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, D. Niyato, H. T. Nguyen,
and E. Dutkiewicz, “Proof-of-Stake Consensus Mechanisms for Future
Blockchain Networks: Fundamentals, Applications and Opportunities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 8572785745, Jun. 2019.
[70] A. Dorri, M. Steger, S. S. Kanhere and R. Jurdak “Blockchain: A
distributed solution to automotive security and privacy,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 12, pp.119-125, Dec. 2017.

38

[71] Y. Wang, Q. Ye, J. Cheng and L. Wang, “RSSI-based Bluetooth
Indoor Localization,” in International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc
and Sensor Networks (MSN), Shenzhen, China, Dec. 16-18, 2015, pp.
165-171.
[72] R. Faragher and R. Harle, “Location Fingerprinting With Bluetooth
Low Energy Beacons,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2418-2428, Nov. 2015.
[73] Y. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu and L. Cuthbert, “Bluetooth
Positioning Using RSSI and Triangulation Methods,” in IEEE 10th
Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las
Vegas, NV, USA, Jan. 11-14, 2013, pp. 837-842.
[74] S. Naghdi and K. O’Keefe, “Detecting and Correcting for Human
Obstacles in BLE Trilateration Using Artificial Intelligence,” Sensors,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1350-1367, Feb. 2020.
[75] L. Pei, J. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Chen and L. Chen, “Evaluation of
Fingerprinting-Based WiFi Indoor Localization Coexisted With Bluetooth,” The Journal of Global Positioning Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, Oct.
2017.
[76] L. Pei, J. Liu, R. Guinness, Y. Chen, T. Kroger, R. Chen and L. Chen,
“The Evaluation of Wifi Positioning in a Bluetooth and Wifi Coexistence Environment,” 2012 Ubiquitous Positioning, Indoor Navigation,
and Location Based Service (UPINLBS), Helsinki, Finland, Oct. 3-4,
2012, pp. 1-6.
[77] I. G.-Tejada, E. I. Sandoval and R. Brena, “Wifi Bluetooth Based
Combined Positioning Algorithm,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 35, pp.
101-108, Jan. 2012.
[78] F. Xiao, Z. Wang, N. Ye, R. Wang and X. -Y. Li, “One More Tag
Enables Fine-grained RFID Localization and Tracking,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 161-174, Feb. 2018.
[79] J. Wang, R. K. Dhanapal, P. Ramakrishnan, B. Balasingam, T. Souza
and R. Maev, “Active RFID Based Indoor Localization,” in IEEE
International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION), Ottawa,
ON, Canada, Jul. 2-5, 2019, pp. 1-7.
[80] C. H. Huang, L.-H. Lee, C. C. Ho, L.-L. Wu and Z.-H. Lai, “Real-time
RFID Indoor Positioning System Based on Kalman-filter Drift Removal
and Heron-bilateration Location Estimation,” IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 728-739, Mar.
2015.
[81] S. Megalou et al., “Fingerprinting Localization of RFID Tags with
Real-Time Performance-Assessment, Using a Moving Robot,” in European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), Krakow,
Poland, Mar.31-Apr. 5, 2019, pp. 1-5.
[82] P. Yang, W. Wu, M. Moniri and C. C. Chibelushi, “Efficient Object
Localization Using Sparsely Distributed Passive RFID Tags,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 5914-5924,
Dec. 2013.
[83] N. V. Huynh, D. T. Hoang, X. Lu, D. Niyato, P. Wang and D. I. Kim,
“Ambient Backscatter Communications: A Contemporary Survey,”
IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 28892922, Fourthquarter 2018 .
[84] F. Jameel, R. Duan, Z. Chang, A. Liljemark, T. Ristaniemi and
R. Jantti, “Applications of Backscatter Communications for Healthcare
Networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 50-57, Dec. 2019.
[85] D. Vasisht, G. Zhang, O. Abari, H.-M. Lu, J. Flanz and D. Katabi,
“In-body Backscatter Communication and Localization,” in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM, Aug. 2018, pp. 132-146.
[86] DataFlair Team, ”IoT Technology & Protocols 7 Important IoT
Communication Protocols”, DataFlair, Sep. 15, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://data-flair.training/blogs/iot-technology/. [Accessed May
12, 2020].
[87] L. Luoh, “ZigBee-based Intelligent Indoor Positioning System Soft
Computing,” Soft Computing, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 443-456, Jun. 2013.
[88] Zigbee Alliance, Zigbee. [Online]. Available: https://zigbeealliance.
org/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[89] C. H. Chu, C. H. Wang, C. K. Liang, W. Ouyang, J. H. Cai and Y.
H. Chen, “High-accuracy Indoor Personnel Tracking System With a
ZigBee Wireless Sensor Network,” in IEEE International Conference
on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, Beijing, China, Dec. 16-18,
2011, pp. 398-402.
[90] S. H. Fang, C. H. Wang, T. Y. Huang, C. H. Yang and Y. S. Chen,
“An Enhanced ZigBee Indoor Positioning System With an Ensemble
Approach,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 564-567,
Apr. 2012.
[91] J. Niu, B. Wang, L. Shu, T. Q. Duong and Y. Chen, “ZIL: An Energyefficient Indoor Localization System Using ZigBee Radio to Detect
WiFi Fingerprints,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1431-1442, Jul. 2015.

[92] B. Mitchell, What Is the Range of a Typical Wi-Fi Network?, Nov. 10, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.lifewire.com/
range-of-typical-wifi-network-816564. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[93] “Understanding
Bluetooth
Range,”
Bluetooth.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bluetooth.com/learn-about-bluetooth/
bluetooth-technology/range/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[94] “Various Systems Using RAIN RFID Technology,” IMPINJ. [Online].
Available: https://www.impinj.com/about-rfid/types-of-rfid-systems.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[95] M. Idoudi, H. Elkhorchani and K. Grayaa, “Performance Evaluation
of Wireless Sensor Networks Based on ZigBee Technology in Smart
Home,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Elect. Eng. Softw. Appl., 2013, pp. 14.
[96] B. Jang and H. Kim, “Indoor Positioning Technologies Without Offline
Fingerprinting Map: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 508-525, First Quarter 2019.
[97] L. Shahid, H. Shahid, M. A. Riaz, S. I. Naqvi, M. S. Khan, Y. Amin and
J. Loo, “Chipless RFID Tag for Touch Event Sensing and Localization,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 502-513, Jan. 2020.
[98] Y. Ma, B. Wang, X. Gao and W. Ning, “The Gray Analysis and
Machine Learning for Device-Free Multi-target Localization in Passive
UHF RFID Environments,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 802-813, Feb. 2020.
[99] V. Bianchi, P. Ciampolini and I. D. Munari, “RSSI-Based Indoor
Localization and Identification for ZigBee Wireless Sensor Networks
in Smart Homes,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 566-575, Feb. 2019.
[100] Y.-T. Chen, C.-L. Yang, Y.-K. Chang and C.-P. Chu, “A RSSI-Based
Algorithm for Indoor Localization Using ZigBee in Wireless Sensor
Network,” in Proc. of the 15th International Conference on Distributed
Multimedia Systems (DMS 2009), 2009, pp. 70-75.
[101] K. Subaashini, G. Dhivya, and R. Pitchiah, “ZigBee RF Signal Strength
for Indoor Location Sensing-Experiments and Results,” in International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology (ICACT),
PyeongChang, South Korea, Jan. 27-30, 2013, pp.50-57.
[102] Z. Sahinoglu, S. Gezici and I. Gvenc, Ultra-wideband positioning systems: theoretical limits, ranging algorithms, and protocols, Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[103] “Revision of part 15 of the Commissions rules regarding ultrawideband transmission systems, FCC, Washington, DC, USA, First
Rep. and Order 02-48, Apr. 2002.
[104] I. Oppermann, M. Hmlinen and J. Iinatti, UWB Theory and Applications, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[105] “DecaWave Technology,” Decawave. [Online]. Available: https://www.
decawave.com/technology1/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[106] “BeSpoon Technology,” Bespoon. [Online]. Available: http://bespoon.
com/technology/precise-location-rtls/.. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[107] “Zebra Technologies,” Zebra. [Online]. Available: https://www.
zebra.com/ap/en/products/location-technologies/ultra-wideband.html.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[108] “Ubisense,” Ubisense. [Online]. Available: https://ubisense.com/
dimension4/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[109] A. R. J. Ruiz and F. S. Granja, “Comparing Ubisense, BeSpoon, and
DecaWave UWB location systems: indoor performance analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 66, no. 8, pp.
2106-2117, Aug. 2017.
[110] R. C. Shit et al., “Ubiquitous localization (UbiLoc): a survey and
taxonomy on device free localization for smart world,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3532-3564,
Fourthquarter 2019.
[111] B. Gulmezoglu, M. B. Guldogan and S. Gezici, “Multiperson tracking
with a network of ultrawideband radar sensors based on gaussian
mixture PHD filters,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 22272237, Apr. 2015.
[112] A. Ledergerber and R. DAndrea, “A multi-static radar network with
ultra-wideband radio-equipped devices,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 6, pp.
1599-1619, Mar. 2020.
[113] J. W. Choi, D. H. Yim and S. H. Cho, “People counting based on
an IR-UWB radar sensor,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 17, no. 17, pp.
5717-5727, Sep. 2017.
[114] S. Bartoletti, A. Conti and M. Z. Win, “Device-free counting via wideband signals,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol.
35, no. 5, pp. 1163-1174, May 2017.
[115] T. Ertan et al., “Electronic devices with motion sensing and angle
of arrival detection circuitry,” U.S. Patent 2019/0317177 A1, Oct. 17,
2019.

39

[116] B. Growindhager et al., “SnapLoc: an ultra-fast UWB-based indoor [135] Y. Sun, Y. Chang, M. Hu and T. Zeng, “A universal predictive mobility
management scheme for urban ultra-dense networks with control/data
localization system for an unlimited number of tags,” in ACM/IEEE International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks
plane separation,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 6015-6026, Apr. 2017.
(IPSN), Montreal, Canada, Apr. 16-18, 2019, pp. 61-72.
[136] S.
Williams,
“COVID-19:
Zoom
downloads
explode
as
people
work
from
home,”
IT
Brief,
Mar.
25,
[117] Cisco,
“Cisco
Annual
Internet
Report
(20182023),”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://itbrief.com.au/story/
Cisco.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/
covid-19-zoom-downloads-explode-as-people-work-from-home.
solutions/collateral/executive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
white-paper-c11-741490.pdf. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[118] J. A. del Peral-Rosado, R. Raulefs, J. A. Lpez-Salcedo and G. Seco- [137] M. Giles, “Microsoft Teams has seen a 775% rise in users in
Italy because of COVID-19,” Forbes, Mar. 30, 2020. [Online].
Granados, “Survey of cellular mobile radio localization methods: from
Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/martingiles/2020/03/30/
1G to 5G,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 2,
microsoft-cloud-service-775-percent-rise-covid-19/#6dada6236862.
pp. 1124-1148, Secondquarter 2018.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[119] C. Laoudias, A. Moreira, S. Kim, S. Lee, L. Wirola and C. Fischione,
[138] B. Tan, J. Lu, J. Wu, D. Zhang and Z. Zhang, “Toward a network
“A survey of enabling technologies for network localization, tracking,
slice design for ultra high definition video broadcasting in 5G,” IEEE
and navigation,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20,
Wireless Communications, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 88-94, Aug. 2018.
no. 4, pp. 3607-3644, Fourthquarter 2018.
[120] M. Agiwal, A. Roy and N. Saxena, “Next generation 5G wireless [139] K. Poularakis, G. Iosifidis, V. Sourlas and L. Tassiulas, “Exploiting
caching and multicast for 5G wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions
networks: a comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2995-3007, Apr. 2016.
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1617-1655, thirdquarter 2016.
[121] J. Palacios, G. Bielsa, P. Casari and J. Widmer, “Single- and multiple- [140] J. Montalban et al., “Multimedia multicast services in 5G networks:
subgrouping and non-orthogonal multiple access techniques,” IEEE
access point indoor localization for millimeter-wave networks,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 91-95, Mar. 2018.
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 19271942, Mar. 2019.
[141] L. Lv, J. Chen, Q. Ni and Z. Ding, “Design of cooperative nonorthogonal multicast cognitive multiple access for 5G systems: user
[122] M. Koivisto et al., “Joint device positioning and clock synchronization
scheduling and performance analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Commuin 5G ultra-dense networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 2641-2656, June 2017.
nications, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2866-2881, May 2017.
[123] BBC technology, “Coronavirus: Under surveillance and confined at [142] X. Zhang, M. Yang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and J. Ge, “An SDN-based
video multicast orchestration scheme for 5G ultra-dense networks,”
home in Taiwan,” BBC, Mar. 24, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 77-83, Dec. 2017.
www.bbc.com/news/technology-52017993. . [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[124] S. Sandurskaya, “Moscow plans coronavirus surveillance for [143] S. Dawoud. (May 2012). GNSS principles and comparison.
[Online].
Available:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f77d/
foreigners,” The Moscow Times, Apr. 9, 2020. [Online].
36966cfd66be3d1feefe9faae1a6aa7e2756.pdf
Available:
https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2020/04/09/
moscow-plans-coronavirus-surveillance-for-foreigners-kommersant-a69928.
[144] European Global Navigation Satellite Systems Agency, “The
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
Results are In: Galileo Increases the Accuracy of Location Based
Services,” European Global Navigation Satellite Systems Agency, May
[125] C. Timberg and D. Harwell, “Government efforts to track virus through
27,2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.gsa.europa.eu/newsroom/
phone location data complicated by privacy concerns,” The Washington
news/results-are-galileo-increases-accuracy-location-based-services.
Post, Mar. 20, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.washingtonpost.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
com/technology/2020/03/19/privacy-coronavirus-phone-data/.
[145] S. apkun, M. Hamdi and J. P. Hubaux, “GPS-free positioning in mobile
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
ad hoc networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 5 no. 2 pp. 157-167, Apr.
[126] K. Lyons, “Governments around the world are increasingly using
2002.
location data to manage the coronavirus,” The Verge, Mar. 23, 2020.
[146] M. Shao and X. Sui, “Study on Differential GPS Positioning Methods,”
[Online]. Available: https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/23/21190700/
in 2015 International Conference on Computer Science and Mechanieu-mobile-carriers-customer-data-coronavirus-south-korea-taiwan-privacy.
cal Automation (CSMA), Hangzhou, China, Oct. 23-25, 2015, pp. 223[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
225
[127] E. Pollina and D. Busvine, “European mobile operators share data for
coronavirus fight,” Reuters, Mar. 19, 2020. [Online]. Available: https: [147] Talbot, Nicholas C., Michael T. Allison, and Mark E. Nichols. ”Centimeter accurate global positioning system receiver for on-the-fly real//www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-europe-telecoms/
european-mobile-operators-share-data-for-coronavirus-fight-idUSKBN2152C2. time kinematic measurement and control.” U.S. Patent No. 5,519,620.
21 May 1996.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[128] Jay Jay, “UK telecom operators to share citizens location data with the [148] A. Al-Shaery, S. Zhang and C. Rizos, “An enhanced calibration method
of GLONASS inter-channel bias for GNSS RTK,” GPS solutions, vol.
government,” Teiss, Mar. 23, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
17, no. 2, pp. 165-173, Apr. 2013.
teiss.co.uk/government-telecom-location-data/.
[129] K. Eun-jin, “SK Telecom Joins Forces with North Gyeongsang [149] R. Tu, J. Liu, R. Zhang, L. Fan, P. Zhang and J. Han, “Real-time
kinematic positioning algorithm with GNSS and high-frequency acProvincial Police Agency to Contain COVID-19 Spread,” Business
celerometer observations for broadband signals,” Measurement Science
Korea, Mar. 26, 2020.[Online]. Available: http://www.businesskorea.
and Technology, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 35007-35020, Dec. 2019.
co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=43290. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[130] C.
Rowland,
“Vodafone
handed
over
aggregate
net- [150] J. Soubielle, I. Fijalkow, P. Duvaut and A. Bibaut, “GPS positioning
in a multipath environment,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
work
information
to
governments
to
allow
measurevol. 50, no. 1, pp. 141-150, Jan. 2002.
ment
of
Australians
movements,”
Ausdroid,
Apr.
5,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://ausdroid.net/2020/04/05/
[151] P. Dabove and V. D. Pietra, “Towards high accuracy GNSS real-time
vodafone-handed-over-mobile-phone-location-data-to-governments-to-allow-them-to-map-australians-movements/.
positioning with smartphones” Advances in Space Research, vol. 63,
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
no. 1, pp. 94-102, Jan. 2019.
[131] I. Alawe, A. Ksentini, Y. Hadjadj-Aoul and P. Bertin, “Improving [152] G. B. Al-Suwaidi and M. J. Zemerly, “Locating friends and family
traffic forecasting for 5G core network scalability: a machine learning
using mobile phones with global positioning system (GPS),” in 2009
approach,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 42-49, Dec. 2018.
IEEE/ACS International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications, Rabat, Morocco, May 10- 13, 2009, pp. 555-558.
[132] C. Wang, L. Ma, R. Li, T. S. Durrani and H. Zhang, “Exploring
trajectory prediction through machine learning methods,” IEEE Access, [153] I. Dayarian, M. Savelsbergh, J. P. Clarke, “Same-day delivery with
vol. 7, pp. 101441-101452, July 2019.
drone resupply,” Transportation Science, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 1-21, Jan.
2020.
[133] V. Sciancalepore, K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez, D. Bega, M. Gramaglia
and A. Banchs, “Mobile traffic forecasting for maximizing 5G network
[154] R. Xu, W. Chen, Y. Xu, S. Ji and J. Liu, “Improved GNSS-based indoor
slicing resource utilization,” IEEE INFOCOM, Atlanta, GA, May 1-4,
positioning algorithm for mobile devices,” Gps Solutions vol. 21, no.
2017, pp. 1-9.
4, pp. 1721-1733, Oct. 2017.
[134] D. Bega, M. Gramaglia, M. Fiore, A. Banchs and X. Costa-Perez, [155] C. Ma, J. Yang, J. Chen and Y. Tang, “Time synchronization require“DeepCog: cognitive network management in sliced 5G networks with
ment of global navigation satellite system augmentation system based
deep learning” in IEEE INFOCOM, Paris, Apr. 29-May 2, 2019, pp.
on pseudolite,” Measurement and Control, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 303-313,
Mar. 2019.
280-288.

40

[156] S. Y. Tsui and A. S. Shalaby, “Enhanced system for link and mode
identification for personal travel surveys based on global positioning
systems,” Transportation Research Record, vol. 1972, no. 1, pp. 38-45,
Jan. 2006.
[157] G. M. Vazquez-Prokopec et al., “Using GPS technology to quantify
human mobility, dynamic contacts and infectious disease dynamics in
a resource-poor urban environment” PloS one, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 5880258812 , Apr. 2013.
[158] X. Li, “A GPS-Based Indoor Positioning System With Delayed Repeaters,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology vol. 68, no. 2,
pp. 1688-1701, Dec. 2018.
[159] N. Zart, “WeRide resumes robotaxi service in China after COVID-19,”
Electrek, Mar. 16, 2020. [Online] Available: https://electrek.co/2020/
03/16/weride-resumes-robotaxi-service-in-china-after-covid-19/. [Accessed May 12, 2020].
[160] R. Szeliski, Computer vision: algorithms and applications. Berlin:
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
[161] L. Liu et al., “Deep learning for generic object detection: A survey,”
International journal of computer vision, vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 261-318,
Feb. 2020.
[162] Z. Q. Zhao, P. Zheng, S. T. Xu and X. Wu, “Object detection with
deep learning: A review,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and
learning systems, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3212-3232, Jan. 2019.
[163] “Business people walking together outside the office Free Photo,”
Freepik. [Online]. Available: https://www.freepik.com/free-photo/
business-people-walking-together-outside-office 3274253.htm.
[Accessed May 12, 2020].
[164] “Mand holding a cup Free Photo,” Freepik. [Online]. Available: https://www.freepik.com/free-photo/mand-holding-cup 1216024.
htm#page=1&query=man&position=14. [Accessed May 12, 2020].
[165] “5 Things You Should Know About a Chronic Cough,” Aqua
Plumbing & Air, Feb. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.
aquaplumbingsarasota.com/article/5-things-know-chronic-cough. [Accessed May 12, 2020].
[166] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever and G. E. Hinton “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Neural Information Processing Systems 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, Dec. 3-8, 2012, pp. 1097-1105.
[167] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell and J. Malik, “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,” in IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, Columbus,
Ohio, June 24-27, 2014, pp. 580-587.
[168] R. Girshick, “Fast r-cnn,” in IEEE international conference on computer vision, Las Condes, Chile, Dec. 11-18, 2015, pp. 1440-1448.
[169] S. Ren, H. Kaiming, R. Girshick and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards
real-time object detection with region proposal networks,” in Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Montreal, Canada,
Dec. 7-12, 2015, pp. 91-99.
[170] H. Kaiming, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollr and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
Venice, Oct. 22-29, 2017, pp. 2961-2969.
[171] R. Joseph and A. Farhadi. “Yolov3: An incremental improvement,” 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02767.
[172] W. Liu et al., “Ssd: Single shot multibox detector,” in European
conference on computer vision, Amsterdam, Oct. 11-14, 2016, pp. 2137.
[173] Y. Taigman, Y. Ming, M. A. Ranzato and L. Wolf, “Deepface: Closing
the gap to human-level performance in face verification,” in IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, Columbus,
Ohio, June 24-27, 2014, pp. 1701-1708.
[174] Y. Sun, X. Wang and X. Tang, “Deep learning face representation from
predicting 10,000 classes,” in IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, Columbus, Ohio, June 24-27, 2014, pp. 1891-1898.
[175] Y. Sun, C. Yuheng, W. Xiaogang and T. Xiaoou, “Deep learning face
representation by joint identification-verification,” in Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, Montreal, Canada, Dec. 8-13,
2014, pp. 1988-1996.
[176] Y. Sun, L. Ding, W. Xiaogang and T. Xiaoou, “Deepid3:
Face recognition with very deep neural networks,” 2015,
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1502.00873.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.00873.
[177] O. P. Popoola and K. Wang, “Video-based abnormal human behavior
recognitionA review,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 865-878,
Jan. 2012.

[178] J. Candamo, M. Shreve, D. B. Goldgof, D. B. Sapper and R. Kasturi, “Understanding transit scenes: A survey on human behaviorrecognition algorithms,” IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 206-224, Oct. 2009.
[179] A. Toshev and C. Szegedy, “Deeppose: Human pose estimation via
deep neural networks,” in IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, Columbus, Ohio, June 24-27, 2014, pp.1653-1660.
[180] Z. Cao, T. Simon, S. Wei and Y. Sheikh, “Realtime multi-person 2d
pose estimation using part affinity fields,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, U.S., July 2126, 2017, pp. 7291-7299.
[181] C. Chen, and D. Ramanan, “3d human pose estimation= 2d pose
estimation+ matching,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, U.S., July 21-26, 2017, pp. 7035-7043.
[182] A. Bornstein, “Personal Face Mask Detection with Custom
Vision
and
Tensorflow.js,”
Medium,
Mar.
22,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/microsoftazure/
corona-face-mask-detection-with-custom-vision-and-tensorflow-js-86e5fff84373.
[183] S. Holm, “Airborne ultrasound data communications: the core of
an indoor positioning system,” IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Taipei,
Taiwan, Oct. 21-24, 2005, pp. 1801-1804.
[184] S. Holm, “Ultrasound positioning based on time-of-flight and signal
strength,” in 2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and
Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Sydney, NSW, Nov. 13-15, 2012, pp. 1-6.
[185] A. Ward, A. Jones and A. Hopper, “A new location technique for the
active office,” IEEE Personal Communications, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 42-47,
Oct. 1997.
[186] N. B. Priyantha, “The cricket indoor location system,” Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2005.
[187] J. Tiemann and C. Wietfeld, “Scalable and precise multi-UAV indoor
navigation using TDOA-based UWB localization,” in 2017 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
Sapporo, Japan, Sep. 18-21, 2017, pp. 1-7.
[188] M. Ocana, L. M. Bergasa, M. A. Sotelo and R. Flores, “Indoor robot
navigation using a POMDP based on WiFi and ultrasound observations,” in 2005 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Edmonton, Alberta, Aug. 2-5, 2005, pp. 25922597.
[189] T. Komine and M. Nakagawa, “Fundamental analysis for visiblelight communication system using LED lights,” IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 100-107, Feb. 2004.
[190] S. Rajagopal, R. D. Roberts and S. Lim, “IEEE 802.15.7 visible light
communication: modulation schemes and dimming support,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 72-82, Mar. 2012.
[191] P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu and P. Mohapatra, “Visible light communication, networking, and sensing: a survey, potential and challenges,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 20472077, Fourthquarter 2015.
[192] A. Jovicic, “Qualcomm LumicastTM: A high accuracy indoor positioning system based on visible light communication, San Diego, CA,
USA, Qualcomm, White Paper, Apr. 2016.
[193] “Atrius Navigator,” Acuity Brands. [Online]. Available: https://www.
acuitybrands.com/products/detail/776333/Atrius/Atrius-Navigator/
Atrius-Navigator-indoor-positioning-and-location-based-platform-service-SDK.
[Accessed Apr. 20, 2020]
[194] C. Chen, R. Bian and H. Haas, “Omnidirectional transmitter and
receiver design for wireless infrared uplink transmission in LiFi,” in
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), Kansas City, MO, May 20-24, 2018, pp. 1-6.
[195] A. ahin, Y. Erolu, . Gven, N. Pala, and M. Yksel, “Hybrid 3D localization for visible light communication systems,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 22, pp. 4589-4599, Nov. 2015.
[196] Y. S. Eroglu, I. Guvenc, N. Pala and M. Yuksel, “AOA-based localization and tracking in multi-element VLC systems,” in IEEE 16th Annual
Wireless and Microwave Technology Conference (WAMICON), Cocoa
Beach, FL, Apr. 13-15, 2015, pp. 1-5.
[197] pureLiFi, “LiFi integration,” pureLiFi. [Online]. Available: https://
purelifi.com/lifi-products/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020.]
[198] Philips, “Carrefour in France Installs Philips LEDBased
Indoor Positioning System”, Philips. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.lighting.philips.com/main/cases/cases/food-and-large-retailers/
carrefour-lille.html. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020]
[199] Y. -S. Kuo, P. Pannuto, K. -J. Hsiao, and P. Dutta, “Luxapose: indoor
positioning with mobile phones and visible light,” in ACM MobiCom,
New York, USA, Sep. 7-11, 2014, pp. 447458.

41

[200] L. Grobe et al., “High-speed visible light communication systems”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 60-66, Dec. 2013.
[201] M. Kim and T. Suh, “A low-cost surveillance and information system
for museum using visible light communication,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1533-1541, Feb. 2019.
[202] W. Guan, S. Chen, S. Wen, Z. Tan, H. Song and W. Hou, “Highaccuracy robot indoor localization scheme based on robot operating
system using visible light positioning,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol.
12, no. 2, pp. 1-16, Apr. 2020.
[203] Y. Zhuang, Q. Wang, M. Shi, P. Cao, L. Qi and J. Yang, “Lowpower centimeter-level localization for indoor mobile robots based
on ensemble Kalman smoother using received signal strength,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6513-6522, Aug. 2019.
[204] J. Jin, X. Ma, and I. Kosonen, “An intelligent control system for traffic
lights with simulation-based evaluation,” Control Engineering Practice,
vol. 58, pp. 24-33, 2017.
[205] H. Wei, G. Zheng, H. Yao, and Z. Li, “IntelliLight: a reinforcement
learning approach for intelligent traffic light control,” in 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, London, UK, Aug. 19-23, 2018, pp. 24962505.
[206] E. Aitenbichler and M. Muhlhauser, “An IR local positioning system
for smart items and devices,” in 23rd International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, Rhode Island, U.S., May
19-22, 2003, pp. 334-339.
[207] E. Martin-Gorostiza et al., “Infrared local positioning system using
phase differences,” in 2014 Ubiquitous Positioning Indoor Navigation
and Location Based Service (UPINLBS), Corpus Christ, TX, Nov. 2021, 2014, pp. 238-247.
[208] R. Want, A. Hopper, V. Falcao and J. Gibbons, “The Active Badge
Location System,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 91-102, Jan. 1992.
[209] R. States and E. Pappas, “Precision and repeatability of the Optotrak
3020 motion measurement system,” Journal of Medical Engineering
and Technology, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1-16, Jan. 2006.
[210] T. Fujiwara et al., “Firefly capturing method and its application to
performance analysis of athlete” in SICE Annual Conference, Kagawa,
Japan, Sep. 17-20, 2007, pp. 295-298.
[211] Y. Iwasaki, M. Misumi and T. Nakamiya, “Robust vehicle detection
under various environmental conditions using an infrared thermal
camera and its application to road traffic flow monitoring,” Sensors,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp.7756-7773, June 2013.
[212] W. K. Wong et al., “An effective surveillance system using thermal
camera,” in 2009 International Conference on Signal Acquisition and
Processing, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Apr. 3-5, 2009, pp. 13-17.
[213] A. Torabi, G. Mass and G. Bilodeau, “An iterative integrated framework
for thermalvisible image registration, sensor fusion, and people tracking for video surveillance applications,” Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, vol. 116, no. 2 , pp. 210-221, Feb. 2012.
[214] F. Leira, T. A. Johansen and T. I. Fossen. “Automatic detection,
classification and tracking of objects in the ocean surface from UAVs
using a thermal camera,” in 2015 IEEE aerospace conference, Big Sky,
MT, 2015, pp. 1-10.
[215] E. Benli, Y. Motai and J. Rogers, “Human behavior-based target
tracking with an omni-directional thermal camera,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol.11, no. 1, pp. 36-50, July
2017.
[216] A. Szajewska, “Development of the Thermal Imaging Camera (TIC)
Technology,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 172, pp. 1067-1072, Jan.
2017.
[217] J. M. Lloyd, Thermal imaging systems. Berlin: Springer Science &
Business Media, 2013.
[218] Flir, “Whats The Difference between Thermal Imaging and Night
Vision?,” Flir. [Online]. Available: https://www.flir.com/discover/ots/
thermal-vs-night-vision/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020]
[219] J. Johnson, S. Hasan, D. Lee, C. Hluchan and N. Ahmed, “Socialdistancing monitoring using portable electronic devices,” Apr. 2020,
Technical Disclosure Commons. [Online]. Availabe: https://www.
tdcommons.org/dpubs series/3158/.
[220] W. Elloumi, A. Latoui, R. Canals, A. Chetouani and S. Treuillet,
“Indoor pedestrian localization with a smartphone: A comparison of
inertial and vision-based methods,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no.
13, pp. 5376-5388, May 2016.
[221] J. Yan, G. He and C. Hancock, “Low-cost vision-based positioning
system,” in 14th International Conference on Location Based Services,
Zurich, Jan. 15-17, 2018, pp. 44-49.

[222] A. Poulose and D. S. Han, “Hybrid Indoor Localization Using IMU
Sensors and Smartphone Camera,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 23 pp. 50845101, Nov. 2019.
[223] F. Evennou, F. Marx, “Advanced integration of WiFi and inertial
navigation systems for indoor mobile positioning,” EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2006, no. 1, pp. 1-11, Jan.
2006.
[224] A. H. Sayed, A. Tarighat and N. Khajehnouri, “Network-based wireless location: challenges faced in developing techniques for accurate
wireless location information,” IEEE signal processing magazine, vol.
22, no. 4, pp. 24-40, June 2005.
[225] C. Ignacio, T. Joro and Y. Li, “Workforce scheduling with multiple
objectives,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 196, no.
1, pp. 162-170, Jul. 2009.
[226] V. Valls, A. Perez and S. Quintanilla, “Skilled workforce scheduling
in Service Centres,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol.
193, no. 3, pp. 791-804, Mar. 2009.
[227] M. Frat and C. A. J. Hurkens, “An improved MIP-based approach for a
multi-skill workforce scheduling problem,” Journal of Scheduling, vol.
15, no. 3, pp. 363-380, Jun. 2012.
[228] N. Balakrishnan and R. T. Wong, “A network model for the rotating
workforce scheduling problem,” Networks, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 25-42,
Jan. 1990.
[229] N. Musliu, J. Grtner and W. Slany, “Efficient generation of rotating
workforce schedules,” Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 118, pp. 8598, Apr. 2002.
[230] M. Mora and N. Musliu, “Genetic algorithm for rotating workforce
scheduling problem,” in Second IEEE International Conference on
Computational Cybernetics, Vienna, Aug. 30- Sep.1 2004, pp. 121126.
[231] G. C. Kaandorp and G. Koole “Optimal outpatient appointment
scheduling,” Health care management science, vol.10, no. 3, pp. 217229, Sep. 2007.
[232] B. Denton and D. Gupta, “A sequential bounding approach for optimal
appointment scheduling,” IIE transactions, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 10031016, Nov. 2003.
[233] H. Y. Mak, Y. Rong and J. Zhang “Appointment scheduling with limited
distributional information,” Management Science vol. 61, no. 2, pp.
316-334, Feb. 2015.
[234] C. Zacharias and M. Pinedo, “Appointment scheduling with noshows
and overbooking,” Production and Operations Management, vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 788-801, May 2014.
[235] S. A. Erdogan and B. Denton, “Dynamic appointment scheduling of
a stochastic server with uncertain demand,” INFORMS Journal on
Computing, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 116-132, Feb. 2013.
[236] G. Hiermann, M. Prandtstetter, A. Rendl, J Puchinger and G. R. Raidl
“Metaheuristics for solving a multimodal home-healthcare scheduling
problem,” Central European Journal of Operations Research, vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 89-113, Mar. 2015.
[237] D.S. Mankowska, F. Meisel and C. Bierwirth “The home health care
routing and scheduling problem with interdependent services” Health
care management science, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 15-30, Mar. 2014.
[238] A. Trautsamwieser, P. Hirsch, “Optimization of daily scheduling for
home health care services,” Journal of applied operational research,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 124-136, Jan. 2011.
[239] Y. Shi, T. Boudouh and O. Grunder “A hybrid genetic algorithm for
a home health care routing problem with time window and fuzzy
demand” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 72, pp. 160-176, Apr.
2017.
[240] B. Yuan, R. Liu and Z. Jiang, “Home health care crew scheduling
and routing problem with stochastic service times,” in 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE), Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 18-22, 2014, pp. 564-569.
[241] Y. Zhang, R. Su, K. Gao, Y. Zhang, “A pedestrian hopping model
and traffic light scheduling for pedestrian-vehicle mixed-flow networks,” May. 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05251.
[242] Y. Zhang, K. Gao, Y. Zhang and R. Su, “Traffic light scheduling
for pedestrian-vehicle mixed-flow networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1468-1483, Aug.
2018.
[243] Y. Zhang, R. Su, K. Gao and Y. Zhang, “Traffic Light Scheduling
for Pedestrians and Vehicles,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Control
Technology and Applications (CCTA), Hawaii, USA. Aug. 27-30, 2017,
pp. 1593-1598.
[244] H. Wang, G. Tang, K. Wu and J. Fan, “Speeding Up Multi-CDN
Content Delivery via Traffic Demand Reshaping,” in 2018 IEEE 38th

42

[245]

[246]

[247]

[248]

[249]

[250]

[251]

[252]

[253]

[254]

[255]

[256]

[257]

[258]

[259]

[260]
[261]

[262]

[263]

[264]

[265]

International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS),
Vienna, July 2-5, 2018, pp. 422-433.
T. X. Vu, S. Chatzinotas and B. Ottersten, “Edge-Caching Wireless
Networks: Performance Analysis and Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2827-2839, Apr.
2018.
A. Bentaleb, A. C. Begen, R. Zimmermann and S. Harous “SDNHAS:
An SDN-enabled architecture to optimize QoE in HTTP adaptive
streaming,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 19, no. 10, pp.
2136-2151, Jul. 2017.
M. S. Grewal, L. R. Weill and A.P. Andrews. Global positioning
systems, inertial navigation, and integration. Hoboken, NJ:John Wiley
& Sons, Mar. 2007.
W. Kang, S. Nam, Y. Han and S. Lee, “Improved heading estimation
for smartphone-based indoor positioning systems,” in 2012 IEEE
23rd International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications-(PIMRC), Sydney, Australia, Sep. 9-12, 2012, pp.
2449-2453.
F. Evennou and F. Marx “Advanced integration of WiFi and inertial
navigation systems for indoor mobile positioning,” EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2006, no. 1, pp. 1-11, Dec.
2006.
R. Ban, K. Kaji, K. Hiroi and N. Kawaguchi, “Indoor positioning
method integrating pedestrian Dead Reckoning with magnetic field and
WiFi fingerprints,” in 2015 Eighth international conference on mobile
computing and ubiquitous networking (ICMU), Hokkaido, Japan, Jan
20-22, 2015, pp. 167-172.
A. D. Angelis, J. Nilsson, I. Skog, H. Peter and P. Carbone, “Indoor positioning by ultrawide band radio aided inertial navigation,” Metrology
and Measurement Systems, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 447-460, Jan. 2010.
M. Kok, J. D. Hol and T. B. Schn, “Indoor positioning using ultrawideband and inertial measurements,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1293-1303, Jan. 2015.
B. S. Cho, W. S. Moon, W. J. Seo WJ and K. R. Baek, “A dead
reckoning localization system for mobile robots using inertial sensors
and wheel revolution encoding,” Journal of mechanical science and
technology, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2907-2917, Nov. 2011.
Q. Fan, B. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Wu and X. Zhuang, “Data fusion for indoor
mobile robot positioning based on tightly coupled INS/UWB,” The
Journal of Navigation, vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 1079-1097, Sep. 2017.
L. R. Carrillo, A. E. Lpez, R. Lozano and C. Pgard, “Combining stereo
vision and inertial navigation system for a quad-rotor UAV,” Journal
of intelligent & robotic systems, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 373-387, Jan. 2012.
T. Cheviron, T. Hamel, R. Mahony and G. Baldwin, “Robust Nonlinear
Fusion of Inertial and Visual Data for position, velocity and attitude estimation of UAV” in 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, Rome, Apr. 10-14, 2007, pp. 2010-2016.
M. George and S. Sukkarieh, “Tightly coupled INS/GPS with bias
estimation for UAV applications,” in Australian Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ACRA), Sydney, Australia, Dec. 5-7, 2005, pp.1-7.
H. Yao, C. Jiang and Y. Qian, Developing Networks Using Artificial
Intelligence, Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing,
2019.
T. Hossmann, F. Legendre, P. Carta, P. Gunningberg and C. Rohner,
“Twitter in disaster mode: opportunistic communication and distribution of sensor data in emergencies,” in ACM ExtremeCom, Sep. 26-30,
2011, pp. 1-6.
P. Neumann, “Disaster and emergency mode for mobile radio phones,”
U. S. Patent US8238944B2, Aug. 2012.
A. Fujihara and H. Miwa, “Disaster evacuation guidance using opportunistic communication: the potential for opportunity-based service,” in
Big Data and Internet of Things: A Roadmap for Smart Environments,
N. Bessis, C. Dobre Eds. Basel, Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing, 2014, pp. 425-446.
A. Hossain, S. K. Ray and R. Sinha, “A smartphone-assisted postdisaster victim localization method,” in IEEE HPCC/SmartCity/DSS,
Sydney, Australia, Dec. 12-14, 2016, pp. 1173-1179.
Z. Lu, G. Cao, and T. La Porta, “TeamPhone: networking smartphones
for disaster recovery” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol.
16, no. 12, pp. 3554-3567, Dec. 2017.
M. Kamruzzaman, N. I. Sarkar, J. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “A study
of IoT-based post-disaster management,” in IEEE ICOIN, Da Nang,
Vietnam, Jan. 11-13, 2017, pp. 406-410.
A. Thomas and G. Raja, “FINDER: a D2D based critical communications framework for disaster management in 5G,” Peer-to-Peer
Networking and Applications, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 912-923, Oct. 2018.

[266] J. Wang, L. Wang, and X. Li, “Identifying spatial invasion of pandemics
on metapopulation networks via anatomizing arrival history,” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 2782-2795, Dec. 2016.
[267] X. Zhou et al., “A spatial-temporal method to detect global influenza
epidemics using heterogeneous data collected from the Internet,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 802-812, Apr. 2018.
[268] H. T. Tran and J. Hu, “Privacy-preserving big data analytics a comprehensive survey,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol.
134, pp. 207-218, Dec. 2019.
[269] Google, “Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports,” Google.
[Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[270] Facebook, “Our Work on COVID-19,” Facebook Data For Good. [Online] Available : https://dataforgood.fb.com/docs/covid19/. [Accessed
Apr. 20, 2020].
[271] Apple, “Mobility Trends Reports,” Apple. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.apple.com/covid19/mobility. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2020].
[272] K. Tsui, Z. S. Wong, D. Goldsman, and M. Edesess, “Tracking
infectious disease spread for global pandemic containment,” IEEE
Intelligent Systems, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 60-64, Nov. 2013.
[273] H. Chen, B. Yang, H. Pei, and J. Liu, “Next generation technology for
epidemic prevention and control: data-driven contact tracking,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 2633-2642, Jan. 2019.
[274] X. Sun, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, M. Salath and G. Cao, “Infectious disease
containment based on a wireless sensor system,” IEEE Access, vol. 4,
pp. 1558-1569, Apr. 2016.
[275] M. S. Hashemian, K. G. Stanley, D. L. Knowles, J. Calver and
N. D. Osgood, “Human network data collection in the wild: the
epidemiological utility of micro-contact and location data,” in ACM
SIGHIT, Miami, FL, Jan. 28-30, 2012, pp. 255-264.
[276] S. Jeong, S. Kuk, and H. Kim, “A smartphone magnetometer-based
diagnostic test for automatic contact tracing in infectious disease
epidemics,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 20734-20747, Jan. 2019.
[277] T. Menzies, E. Kocaguneli, L. Minku, F. Peters and B. Turhan, Sharing
Data and Models in Software Engineering. Burlinngton, MA: Morgan
Kaufmann, 2015.
[278] S. Shaham, M. Ding, B. Liu, S. Dang, Z. Lin and J. Li, “Privacy
preserving location data publishing: a machine learning approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.
[279] Y. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Peng, H. Chen and C. Li, “MagiCrowd: a crowd
based incentive for location-aware crowd sensing,” in IEEE WCNC,
Doha, Qatar, Apr. 3-6, 2016, pp. 1-6.
[280] P. Zhao, J. Li, F. Zeng, F. Xiao, C. Wang and H. Jiang, “ILLIA: enabling k-anonymity-based privacy preserving against location injection
attacks in continuous LBS queries,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1033-1042, Apr. 2018.
[281] J. Y. Koh, G. W. Peters, D. Leong, I. Nevat and W. Wong, “Privacyaware incentive mechanism for mobile crowd sensing,” in IEEE ICC,
Paris, France, May 21-25 2017, pp. 1-6.
[282] A. Martinez-Balleste, P. A. Perez-martinez and A. Solanas, “The
pursuit of citizens’ privacy: a privacy-aware smart city is possible,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 136-141, Jun.
2013.
[283] G. P. Corser, H. Fu and A. Banihani, “Evaluating location privacy
in vehicular communications and applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 2658-2667, Sept.
2016.
[284] J. Lim, H. Yu, K. Kim, M. Kim and S. Lee, “Preserving location
privacy of connected vehicles with highly accurate location updates,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 540-543, Mar. 2017.
[285] J. Cui, J. Wen, S. Han and H. Zhong, “Efficient privacy-preserving
scheme for real-time location data in vehicular ad-hoc network,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3491-3498, Oct. 2018.
[286] Y. Cao, Y. Xiao, L. Xiong, L. Bai and M. Yoshikawa, “Protecting
spatiotemporal event privacy in continuous location-based services,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.
[287] Y. Zhang and M. van der Schaar, “Reputation-based incentive protocols
in crowdsourcing applications,” in IEEE INFOCOM, Orlando, FL, Mar.
25-30, 2012, pp. 2140-2148.
[288] A. G. Neiat, A. Bouguettaya and S. Mistry, “Incentive-based crowdsourcing of hotspot services,” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-24, Jan. 2019.
[289] C. Xu, L. Zhu, Y. Liu, J. Guan and S. Yu, “Dp-ltod: differential privacy
latent trajectory community discovering services over location-based
social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing.

43

[290] C. Yin, J. Xi, R. Sun and J. Wang, “Location privacy protection based
on differential privacy strategy for big data in industrial internet of
things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 8,
pp. 3628-3636, Aug. 2018.
[291] J. Wei, Y. Lin, X. Yao and J. Zhang, “Differential privacy-based
location protection in spatial crowdsourcing,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, 2019.
[292] I. Natgunanathan, A. Mehmood, Y. Xiang, L. Gao and S. Yu, “Location
privacy protection in smart health care system,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3055-3069, Apr. 2019.
[293] G. Sun, D. Liao, H. Li, H. Yu and V. Chang, “L2P2: A location-label
based approach for privacy preserving in LBS,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 74, pp. 375-384, Sep. 2017.
[294] M. Han, et al., “Cognitive approach for location privacy protection,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 13466-13477, Mar. 2018.
[295] G. Sun, Y. Xie, D. Liao, H. Yu and V. Chang, “User-defined privacy
location-sharing system in mobile online social networks,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 86, pp. 34-45, May 2017.
[296] C. Lin, Z. Song, H. Song, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang and G. Wu, “Differential
privacy preserving in big data analytics for connected health,” Journal
of Medical Systems, vol. 40, no. 97, pp. 1-9, Feb. 2016.
[297] L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Tang and H. Luo, “Privacy protection for ehealth systems by means of dynamic authentication and three-factor
key agreement,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65,
no. 3, pp. 2795-2805, Mar. 2018.
[298] P. Vijayakumar, M. S. Obaidat, M. Azees, S. H. Islam, and N. Kumar,
“Efficient and secure anonymous authentication with location privacy
for IoT-based WBANs,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2603-2611, Apr. 2020.
[299] Z. Li, K. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Wang and M. Shen, “Machinelearning-based positioning: a survey and future directions,” IEEE
Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 96-101, Jun. 2019.
[300] Y. Jia, Y. Wang, X. Jin, and X. Cheng, “Location prediction: a temporalspatial bayesian model,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1-25, Apr. 2016.
[301] S. B. Cho, “Exploiting machine learning techniques for location
recognition and prediction with smartphone logs,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 176, pp. 98-106, Feb. 2016.
[302] A. Brighente, F. Formaggio, G. M. Di Nunzio and S. Tomasin, “Machine learning for in-region location verification in wireless networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 37, no. 11,
pp. 2490-2502, Nov. 2019.
[303] F. Yin, Z. Lin, Y. Xu, Q. Kong, D. Li, S. Theodoridis
and S. Cui,“FedLoc: federated learning framework for
cooperative localization and location data processing,” Mar.
2020, arxiv preprint arXiv:2003.03697. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.03697.
[304] M. Polese, R. Jana, V. Kounev, K. Zhang, S. Deb and
M. Zorzi, “Machine learning at the edge: a data-driven
architecture with applications to 5G cellular networks,” Apr.
2019, arxiv preprint arXiv:1808.07647v3. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.07647v3.
[305] U. Challita, A. Ferdowsi, M. Chen and W. Saad, “Machine learning for
wireless connectivity and security of cellular-connected UAVs,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 28-35, Feb. 2019.
[306] F. A. Hossain, A. A. Lover, G. A. Corey, N. G. Reigh and T. Rahman,
“FluSense: a contactless syndromic surveillance platform for influenzalike illness in hospital waiting areas,” ACM IMWUT, vol. 4, no. 1, pp.
1-28, Mar. 2020.
[307] J. Amoh and K. Odame, “Deep Neural Networks for Identifying Cough
Sounds,”IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, vol.
10, no. 5, pp. 1003-1011, Oct. 2016.
[308] S. Matos, S. S. Birring, I. D. Pavord and H. Evans, “Detection of
cough signals in continuous audio recordings using hidden Markov
models,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 53, no.
6, pp. 1078-1083, June 2006.
[309] E. Vizel et al., “Validation of an ambulatory cough detection and
counting application using voluntary cough under different conditions,”
Cough, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3-11, Dec. 2010.
[310] P. Zhang, Z. Sunand and A. Purohit, “CoughLoc: Location-Aware
Indoor Acoustic Sensing for Non-Intrusive Cough Detection,” in International Workshop on Emerging Mobile Sensing Technologies, Systems,
and Applications, San Francisco, June 12, 2011, pp. 1-6.
[311] Y. Zhang, M. Pan, L. Song, Z. Dawy and Z. Han, “A survey of contract
theory-based incentive mechanism design in wireless networks,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 80-85, June 2017.

[312] P. Bolton and M. Dewatripont, Contract Theory. Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[313] Y. Zhang, L. Song, W. Saad, Z. Dawy and Z. Han, “Contract-based
incentive mechanisms for device-to-device communications in cellular
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol.
33, no. 10, pp. 2144-2155, Oct. 2015.
[314] Y. Chen, S. He, F. Hou, Z. Shi and J. Chen, “Promoting device-todevice communication in cellular networks by contract-based incentive
mechanisms,” IEEE Network, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 14-20, May 2017.
[315] Y. Chen, S. He, F. Hou, Z. Shi, and J. Chen, “An efficient incentive
mechanism for device-to-device multicast communication in cellular
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17,
no. 12, pp. 7922-7935, Dec. 2018.
[316] Q. Ma, L. Gao, Y. Liu and J. Huang, “Incentivizing Wi-Fi network
crowdsourcing: a contract theoretic approach,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1035-1048, June 2018.
[317] Y. Zhang, C. Jiang, L. Song, M. Pan, Z. Dawy and Z. Han, “Incentive
mechanism for mobile crowdsourcing using an optimized tournament
model,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 880-892, Apr. 2017.
[318] J. Liu, L. Gao, T. Wang, X. Zeng, W. Lu and Y. Zhong, “Crowsourcing:
a novel approach to organizing WiFi community networks,” in IEEE
WiOpt, Shanghai, China, May 7-11, 2018, pp. 1-8.
[319] J. Xu, J. Xiang and D. Yang, “Incentive mechanisms for time window dependent tasks in mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 6353-6364, Nov. 2015.
[320] N. van Doremalen, et al., “Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1,” New England Journal of Medicine,
vol. 382, no.16, pp. 1564-1567, Apr. 2020.
[321] L. Duan, T. Kubo, K. Sugiyama, J. Huang, T. Hasegawa and J. Walrand,
“Incentive mechanisms for smartphone collaboration in data acquisition
and distributed computing,” in IEEE INFOCOM, Orlando, FL, Mar.
25-30, 2012, pp. 1701-1709.
[322] F. Tian, B. Liu, X. Sun, X. Zhang, G. Cao and L. Gui, ”Movementbased incentive for crowdsourcing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 7223-7233, Aug. 2017.
[323] J. Liu, Y. Ji, W. Lv and K. Xu, “Budget-aware dynamic incentive
mechanism in spatial crowdsourcing,” Journal of Computer Science
and Technology, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 890-904, Sep. 2017.
[324] Z. Wang, et al., ”Task bundling based incentive for location-dependent
mobile crowdsourcing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no.
3, pp. 132-137, Mar. 2019.
[325] M. A. Rahman and M. S. Hossain, “A location-based mobile crowdsensing framework supporting a massive ad hoc social network environment,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 76-85,
Mar. 2017.

