Bluetooth Smartphone Apps: Are they the
most private and effective solution for
COVID-19 contact tracing?
Scott McLachlan1,2, Peter Lucas3, Kudakwashe Dube2,4, Graham A Hitman5, Magda Osman6,
Evangelia Kyrimi1, Martin Neil1, Norman E Fenton1
1

Risk and Information Management, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom
2
Health informatics and Knowledge Engineering Research (HiKER) Group
3
Faculty of EEMCS, University of Twente, Netherlands
4
School of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, New Zealand
5
Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom
6
Biological and Experimental Psychology Group, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Many digital solutions mainly involving Bluetooth technology are being proposed for Contact Tracing
Apps (CTA) to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Concerns have been raised regarding privacy, consent, uptake
required in a given population, and the degree to which use of CTAs can impact individual behaviours. However,
very few groups have taken a holistic approach and presented a combined solution. None has presented their
CTA in such a way as to ensure that even the most suggestible member of our community does not become
complacent and assume that CTA operates as an invisible shield, making us and our families impenetrable or
immune to the disease. We propose to build on some of the digital solutions already under development that,
with addition of a Bayesian model that predicts likelihood for infection supplemented by traditional symptom
and contact tracing, that can enable us to reach 90% of a population. When combined with an effective
communication strategy and social distancing, we believe solutions like the one proposed here can have a very
beneficial effect on containing the spread of this pandemic.

Introduction
At the time of writing many of us are in our fifth or sixth week of social distancing and lockdown in an effort,
we were told, that would flatten the curve and curtail the spread of COVID-19. As considerations move from
dealing with the worst of the disease to containment of any remaining pockets of infection, much noise is
being made in the media concerning the need to implement contact tracing apps (CTA) before the world
can return ostensibly to normal (Mathews, 2020; Scott, 2020; Whittaker, 2020; Drew 2020). While the
claimed benefits for CTA of being able to leave our homes, reopen workplaces and revive crippled
economies are significant, CTA are not without some controversy (Lomas, 2020; Volk, 2020). Questions
regarding transmission dynamics and optimal intervention strategies for the disease, and the risk CTA pose
to individual privacy and efficacy are repeatedly raised, and many feel these have not been adequately
answered (Crocker et al, 2020; Sun & Viboud, 2020). Some describe CTA as the trojan horse: reminding
us that many governments and corporations already operate population-wide electronic surveillance and
the likelihood that they do not, and once they also get access to our CTA data, will not, act in good faith
(Lomas, 2020). However, what everyone fails to ask is whether this personal information is being provided
in support of the most, or even an effective method and at what uptake rate in the general population are
we sure that it will be worthwhile. Is a Bluetooth radio beacon paired to a smartphone app the most effective
method for digital contact tracing? In this paper we address these key questions for smartphone-based
contact tracing solutions.

What is Contact Tracing?
Proposed more than 80 years ago for the control of syphilis (Paran, 1937), contact tracing is a surveillance
and containment strategy for infectious disease (Vazquez-Prokopec et al, 2017). Rather than managing
only isolated cases as they seek medical attention, contact tracing follows the path of infection from
diagnosed patients to those with whom they have been in close physical contact (Armbruster & Brandeau,
2007; Eames, 2007; Vazquez-Prokopec et al, 2017). Several approaches for contact tracing have been
described in the literature, including: first-order, single-step, iterative and retrospective (Eames, 2007;
Klinkenberg et al, 2006). First-order tracing only identifies those people the patient immediately came into
contact with, and advises them of potential exposure and the need to seek medical advice or self-isolate. It
does not concern itself with tracing the contacts of contacts, leaving that second-order process to occur as
and when the first-order contact seeks medical care. Single-step contact tracing identifies all people that
the infected person came into contact with, and as any of those are also identified as infected, their contacts
are identified and the process continues. One issue with single-step contact tracing is that asymptomatic
infecteds can spread the disease until they are detected and isolated. In contrast, Iterative contact tracing
continues to track and re-apply the relevant diagnostic test to contacts iteratively before their infection may
even be detected through symptom screening. The process continues until no further infecteds are
identified. The final type, Retrospective contact tracing, follows the same process as either single-step or
iterative with the addition that it also operates in reverse by considering the people with which the infected
patient had been in contact with in their recent past, with the goal to identify who it was that infected the
patient. Each approach is demonstrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1: (a) first order; (b) single-step; (c) iterative; and (d) retrospective contact tracing.
Contact tracing has traditionally been conducted as a manual multi-stage process that begins when a
patient is diagnosed with an infection that is usually also subject to notification rules that require the clinician
to apprise the health authority (HA) of the infected’s status. Any likely contacts of the infected patient are
determined, identified, advised of their exposure status and encouraged to seek medical advice (Armbruster
& Brandeau, 2007; Eames, 2007). Generally, contact tracing has only been used for diseases with low
prevalence: meaning diseases where there is only a small number of cases in the community at any given
time (Armbruster & Brandeau, 2007). Examples of diseases where contact tracing has been applied
include: tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, Ebola and sexually transmitted diseases (Armbruster & Brandeau, 2007;
Danquah et al, 2019; Eames, 2007; Yasaka et al, 2020). On review, many of these examples show the
efficacy and reliability of contact tracing to be uncertain and contentious issues.

Modern contact tracing using wireless beacons
With our vastly increased global population, international airline travel, megacities and mass transit, it is
unlikely that traditional contact tracing alone could contain even a minimally contagious disease (Niehus et
al., 2020). Traditional contact tracing was used early-on during the SARS epidemic (Fidler, 2004; Huat,
2006). However, it failed to contain the infection which quickly spread through the wider community, with

global HAs realising that new approaches were now required (Fidler, 2004; Huat, 2006). Modern contact
tracing approaches have been proposed using ubiquitous and pervasive smartphones and the wireless
technologies they contain to record and report when we have come into close physical contact with others.
It is believed this automated contact tracing will overcome situations when we either are not aware of, or
don’t recall, every contact incident (Maghdid & Ghafoor, 2020). The proposed approaches shown in Figure
2 incorporate these technologies to more efficiently and effectively provide: (a) movement-focused mobileassisted automatic contact recording; (b) contact identification; (c) contact notification; and, (d) narrowcast
messaging (Maghdid & Ghafoor, 2020; Vazquez-Prokopec et al, 2017; Yasaka et al, 2020). Proponents of
CTA claim, possibly disingenuously given their extensive and publicly-funded investment in development
of the app, that installing the app will significantly reduce the chance of you passing on the infection to your
family and friends (COVIDSafe App, 2020), and essential to keeping your family safe from COVID-19
(Hamilton, 2020).

Figure 2: Modern applications of contact tracing using smart devices
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

CTA automatically records anonymous IDs of other devices that come within the broadcast distance of the
wireless technology being used (Bluetooth or wifi).
Central server operated by health authority or a technology supplier maintains the linking table that can
identify all users of CTA.
When an infected person (in RED) notifies the CTA of their positive diagnosis, the central server advises
all CTA users who have been in close physical contact with the infected that they should seek medical
advice.
The central server can also be used to send narrowcast messages, for example: alerting people who CTA
location tracing identified near a particular infection hotspot during a defined period (in GREEN) that they
may have been exposed and to seek medical advice.

While solutions using WiFi MAC address sniffing (Lu et al, 2020), GPS (Finazzi, 2020; Klopfenstein et al,
2020; Maghdid & Ghafoor, 2020) and cellular network geolocating (DP3T, 2020; PEPP-PT, 2020) have all
been proposed, many believe Bluetooth tracing to be the most suitable for use in CTA (Berke et al, 2020;
Brack et al, 2020). Authors point to the fact that Bluetooth has already been demonstrated effective for
proximity detection (Berke et al, 2020; Brack et al, 2020). It is also claimed that while Bluetooth has an
effective range of around 25-30 metres, signal strength can be used to effectively identify whether another
device is within the 2-metre rule promoted as a component of social distancing (Berke et al, 2020; Brack et
al, 2020; Xia & Lee, 2020).

CTA Data Points and Privacy
Most attention to privacy in the literature focuses on the interactions and data passing between users of the
CTA when they come into close physical contact and their devices handshake. A smaller focus is given to
interactions between the CTA and HA server, whose privacy exposure is mitigated, it is claimed, by
decentralised solutions: that is, solutions where most data remains on the user’s device and only small
push or pull transactions occur to the HA server to either advise the system of the user’s COVID-19

diagnosis, or verify that the user has not already been in contact with another who has since been
diagnosed. What is clear is that while labelling their solutions as privacy-preserving, most authors seek to
mitigate one form of data or privacy loss while ignoring, intentionally or not, every other possible disclosure
vector (Kuhn et al, 2020). To the best of our knowledge, no author considered the issue of metadata and
its effect in nullifying their often complicated and expensive privacy solutions.
Metadata is the most common and easily accessible form of personal information being collected
(McLachlan, 2016). Metadata is defined as information about a communication: the who, when, where, and
how but not the what. Metadata contains sufficient information to know when you made a call, texted,
emailed or accessed a web page, who your communication or web request was made to, how and whether
the person or system at the other end received the communication. The only thing metadata does not
contain is the actual content of the message (Maurushat et al, 2015). For more than a decade metadata
has been used by law enforcement and others to draw inferences about our state of mind, intentions,
previous travel, personal associations and interactions (Maurushat et al, 2015; McLachlan, 2016). In many
countries metadata may be accessed without a warrant by authorised organisations and agents, and laws
exist requiring telecommunications, internet service provider companies and web hosts to maintain large
stores of metadata collected as a result of the activities of individual subscribers (Maurushat et al, 2015;
McLachlan, 2016; Shamsi et al, 2018).
Let us consider the data that is generated while using a CTA. Figure 3 presents the typical CTA
use-case described by many authors, in which: (a) the primary CTA user and others install and register the
app on their smartphones; (b) as they move around and come into close physical contact with each other,
their smartphones identify other smartphones and a contact trace is recorded; (c) an upload of some
information passes from the CTA on the users device, via their provider’s core network (cellular or ISP); (d)
from their provider, via the internet, to the HA servers; and (e) alerts and updates can also be sent from the
HA server to individuals, or every user. Some variation is observed in the literature claiming to present
privacy-preserving methods regarding: (i) the type of information passed from the CTA to the health
authority server; and (ii) whether the data passes directly to the HA server or, as with the Singapore
(TraceTogether), Australian (COVIDSafe) and proposed Apple/Google collaboration examples, into a thirdparty supplier’s international datacentre cloud network (i.e. Google, Apple or Amazon Web Services) before
being received by the HA server (Maddocks, 2020).

Figure 3: The Typical CTA scenario
Metadata are generated at every step of the typical CTA scenario. Every communication or request
sent to cellular, internet service provider or web host organisations results in metadata that must be stored
in logs in their network that identify you from your subscriber identity module (SIM) record matched to the
details of your device, with a record of what you requested or sent, to or from whom, and when (De Carli et
al, 2020; McLachlan, 2016; Shamsi et al, 2018). All digital traffic passing from your provider’s network via
the internet to the HA results in metadata being captured inin the systems of every network provider
between the two, but more importantly, in the HA’s network systems and servers. Believed by many to be
non-sensitive, metadata often remains overlooked in smartphone and internet-facing solutions even though
it can be a trivial matter to re-identify an individual and their actions and interactions with others from the
metadata, or digital breadcrumbs, they create (Ho et al, 2018; Maurushat et al, 2015; Perez et al, 2018;
Shamsi et al, 2018).

CTAs for COVID-19
While Singapore and Australia’s Health Departments have already commenced rollout of CTA solutions for
COVID-19, the United Kingdom (UK), North America and most of Europe will only commence their trial
deployments in the coming week (Hern & Sabbagh, 2020). Taiwan, South Korea and Israel were even more
proactive, with increased testing, quarantines and mandated CTA of recent travellers and the infected that
has resulted in lower rates of secondary infections and significantly fewer deaths, with alarms being raised,
similar to home detention systems for criminals, informing police if those in quarantine left the building in
which they were being housed (Lee, 2020; Lomas, 2020b). Most literature proposing CTA and being used
by academics and governments to support efforts, efficacy and expenditure of public funds for COVID-19
contact tracing with smartphones, are theoretical solutions in hurriedly prepared preprints that are yet to
undergo rigorous testing or peer review. Examples include: (Berke et al, 2020; Brack et al, 2020; De Carli
et al, 2020; Hekmati et al, 2020; Klopfenstein et al, 2020; Maghdid & Ghafoor, 2020; Reichart et al, 2020;
Xia et al, 2020). While acknowledging that privacy is not a design goal for any CTA, many propose solutions
that they claim are privacy-preserving: both between app users generally, and between individuals and the
health authority and technology suppliers who maintain the central servers (Brack et al, 2020; Reichert et
al, 2020). Only one paper was identified in this work that acknowledged no privacy could exist where there
was a central authority, and that users should only expect solutions to keep them blinded from each other
(Berke et al, 2020).
Some solutions present as a confusing array of seemingly random technology, thrust together
(Reichart et al, 2020). Apps proposing ID hashing or public/private key encryption between central server
and end-user claim these additions ensure complete user privacy: and while authors acknowledge that the
central server will have recorded your current and all previous hashIDs and will be used to distribute alerts
to other users, they also disingenuously claim that the health authority are entirely unable to learn anything
at all about users, the infected, or their contact history from this vast collection of data (Brack et al, 2020).
Many proclaim CTA ineffective because it relies on willing individuals who must provide identifying
information about themselves and those they come into contact with, and self-report their infected status
via the app for storage on a central server (Brack et al, 2020; Hekmati, 2020; Yasaka et al, 2020). Usually,
while simultaneously claiming to provide a decentralised or privacy-protecting solution that still uses user
IDs and other information such as location or contact lists that are uploaded or shared via the central server
(Brack et al, 2020; Hekmati et al, 2020; Reichert et al, 2020; Yasaka et al, 2020). However, decentralisation
adds complexity (Berke et al, 2020), often without a significant improvement in privacy. In one case an
infected still self-reports, except that they are instead required to provide a signed medical certificate,
exposing even more personal information to whomever runs the central server so that an alert can be
broadcast to others who the infected has previously been in contact with (Hekmati et al, 2020).

Efficacy of CTA
Researchers and epidemiologists have sought, somewhat unsuccessfully, to understand the efficacy and
overall value of disease contact tracing for many years, with heightened interest often observed in the
aftermath of disease outbreaks. Many issues limit contact tracing efficacy, the most significant being the
need to understand transmission, susceptibility, prevalence, and latency for the target disease (Kiss et al,
2005). Before deciding on an effective control strategy, it is essential to understand the course of the
disease. In epidemiology, many compartmental models have been developed for modelling infectious
diseases (Roddam, 2001; Hethcote, 2000). One commonly used model computes the theoretical number
of people infected with a contagious disease in a closed population over time is the Susceptible-InfectedRecovered (SIR) model (Anderson, 1991; Rodrigues, 2016). These mathematical models are being
considered an important source of knowledge for global governments making life-or-death decisions
regarding management of COVID-19. The Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR) model has
been used to focus on transmission of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China (Lin et al, 2020), and to compare
outcomes for different containment policies (Casella, 2020). The Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered-Dead
(SIRD) model has been used to provide estimations of the basic reproduction number (R0), per day
infection mortality and recovery rates, and attempts to forecast the evolution of an outbreak at the epicentre
three weeks in advance (Anastassopoulou et al., 2020). Susceptible-Infected-Diagnosed-AilingRecognized- Threatened-Healed-Extinct (SIDARTHE) was proposed as an extension to SIR in an effort to

model the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy (Giordano et al., 2020). Their model showed that enforced lockdowns
could be mitigated in the presence of widespread testing (Peto, 2020) and contact tracing, strongly
contributing to rapid resolution of the epidemic. Similar findings were also found in (Hellewell et al., 2020).
While some believed contact tracing was effective during the SARS outbreaks of the early 2000’s (Kiss et
al, 2005), we have already discussed Singapore’s reliance on contact tracing during that period and how
on review it was found to have failed (Fidler, 2004; Huat, 2006). Other examples where contact tracing
failed, in some cases even with the use of smartphone technology and apps, include an audit of contact
tracing use for tuberculosis (Hussain et al, 1992; Mwongela, 2018); the Foot and Mouth outbreak in the UK
in 2001 (Kiss et al, 2005; Kao, 2003); and the 2014-16 Ebola epidemic in West Africa (Danquah et al, 2019).
While many claim suitability, viability and effectiveness for CTA, in most cases the CTA solution they
propose has yet to be prototyped, and for those that were, trialled in anything approaching a real-world
situation (Brack et al, 2020; De Carli et al, 2020; Hekmati et al, 2020; Klopfenstein et al, 2020; Mwongela,
2018; Yasaka et al, 2020).
We sought to understand how effective CTA
Literature Review
might be as a containment approach for COVID-19 in
We searched PubMed, medRxiv, bioRxiv, arXiv and
highly populous locations like London or Birmingham DOAJ for peer-reviewed articles and preprints that
in the UK, or Sydney and Melbourne in Australia. We mentioned the terms “contact tracing”, and “COVIDobserved that most papers presenting a CTA 19”. Our initial search revealed more than 1300
appeared to silently apply best-case assumptions articles published since December 2019. We
when discussing or evaluating their models in order to narrowed our search to those articles published since
paint their solution in the best light. For consistency, March 2020 and selected only those that proposed a
we chose to continue this practice albeit with the novel CTA solution. This identified a collection of 72 papers
addition of transparency. With respect to how many whose solutions were reviewed. From these papers
59 (89%) used the term privacy in either the title,
people an infected person may come into contact with, abstract or introduction, and 52 (72%) proposed
we rely on the calculations provided in the UK that solutions claimed to be privacy-preserving. Solutions
have come to be known as the Oxford figures and have intended to reduce or eliminate data passing to a
been used by those developing and promoting the central server, described as decentralised solutions,
need for an NHS-specific app, and in the media, to were proposed in 19 (26%). Only 3 (4% ) solutions
support efficacy, funding and deployment of the NHS described production of a prototype with 1 (1%)
app (Merrick, 2020). The authors used an SEIR model solution having been tested with simulated data.
to suggest that in a 14-day period post-lockdown the
average person comes into contact with 217 people, of which 59 are considered to be close contacts
sufficient for disease transmission, and of those 36 would be individuals in a CTA scenario who are
potentially traceable (Keeling et al, 2020). While we could have worked from the number of 59 close
contacts which would have made our numbers significantly larger and more dramatic, in order to
demonstrate the fallacy of claims made in support of CTA even as a component in disease containment for
COVID-19, we chose again to work from a best-case position and elected to use latter and much lower
figure for total transmissions. The Oxford figures also provide that the average latent period, usually defined
as the period between when a person is exposed to the virus and when they begin exhibiting symptoms, is
4 days (Keeling et al, 2020). Other authors using larger datasets provided this incubation period was 5
days, with 97% of patients showing symptoms at day 12 (Lauer et al, 2020; Qi et al, 2020). Younger infected
patients tend to be asymptomatic, and for longer periods, and while the mean serial interval, the time
between when symptoms appear in infector and infectee) varies between 4 and 7.5 days (Du et al, 2020;
Qi et al, 2020). It should be noted that our best-case assumptions are similar to those of Dr Hannah Fry’s
group (Kucharski et al, 2020) except that our mean delay from symptoms to isolation was reduced to 1 day:
the effect of which would be to reduce the number of secondary infecteds created by each primary in our
scenarios. In spite of this, our results were statistically similar to those of Kucharski et al (2020).
The assumptions used in our calculations include that:
a) The infection clock starts from exposure;
b) From day 5 the infected begins to shed the virus;
c) Patients may become symptomatic between days 5.5 and 11.5;
d) At day 12 every infected is considered to by symptomatic;
e) Each infected comes into close contact with 36 people in a 14-day period, pro rata for the
period between day 5 and when they become symptomatic;
f) Every infected has self-isolated from day 13;

For the 6 o’clock path shown in Figure 4, we present the absolute best-case scenario where 100%
of the population have smartphones, install the CTA, are tested, immediately self-report and self-isolate.
This scenario, whilst being quite impossible, would actually contain the disease in only two cycles, or 14
days.

Figure 4: COVID-19 CTA Infection Scenarios
The 3 and 9 o’clock paths present the UK and Australian scenarios for the claimed 60% (Merrick,
2020) and 40% (Woodley, 2020) adoption that we are told would deliver CTA success in their respective
populations. In each scenario every infected spreads COVID-19 to only a small number of infecteds, and
while a percentage of secondary infecteds are alerted through the CTA and self-isolated, the remaining
percentage, those without the app, persist to spread the infection to a significantly large number of people.
Figure 5 provides a visual representation of the progress at each stage for the 60% adoption NHS CTA
scenario.

Figure 5: Visual representation for the 60% CTA user NHS scenario

Smartphone penetration for adults in the UK has only achieved 79%, reducing to 40% in the key
COVID-19 demographic, the over-65s. Australian figures are similar. To get 60% penetration in the overall
UK population, more than three quarters (76%) of all smartphone owners must install, register and use the
app. This assumes absolutely no loss to follow-up, which occurs where a user either stops using or removes
the app from their device for any reason. When the average loss to follow-up in a clinical trial is 6% (Akl et
al, 2012), the NHS app would actually require more than 82% of the smartphone-owning population to
initially install and register the app to increase the probability that 60% will use their CTA to completion.
For the 40% (Australian) and 60% (UK) scenarios we begin from the position that 40% and 60% of
the population respectively have installed the app and immediately self-report and/or self-isolate when
alerted. As these scenarios played out, we calculated under an absolute best-case wherein people who
were alerted by the app or who reached day 13 all immediately self-isolated. The issue with this is that we
know some people’s symptoms will not be severe enough at first for them to believe they have the disease
and seek medical advice. This is human nature. Studies report that around 18% of all exposed people
remain asymptomatic but recover from the virus in a timeframe similar to that of people who do become
symptomatic (Mizumoto et al, 2020; Day, 2020). Further, 1-2% of patients will be asymptomatic but remain
contagious and continue to shed the virus from 1-3 months after their initial exposure, with or without a
symptomatic period (Bengali, 2020). In keeping with our best-case model we have not incorporated
additional potential exposures that would arise from these groups of people in our calculations.
A final set of calculations was performed seeking the sweet spot: that number below absolute for
CTA adoption in the overall population where the number of secondary cases was manageable by manual
contact tracing and other containment methods, and the NHS generally. Table 1 presents the results of
those calculations and, similar to figures proposed by other groups who have evaluated this issue
(Bulchandani et al, 2020), we find the sweet spot for CTA uptake in order to control COVID-19 lies
somewhere between 90 and 95%. As discussed, such high uptake is simply not credible or possible.
Table 1: Number of additional infecteds created per one infected, based on % of the population installing
and immediately complying with the CTA
Day:

12

14

16

18

20

95%

18.0

4.5

4.7

5.1

6.2

90%

18.0

9.0

9.9

11.3

16.0

80%

18.0

18.0

21.6

27.0

46.8

*NB - While estimates suggest 94% of UK adults owns a mobile telephone
(https://www.tigermobiles.com/blog/mobile-phone-usage-statistics/) only 79% of those over 18 in
have a smartphone (source: https://www.finder.com/uk/mobile-internet-statistics ) and only 40%
over 65 - the key demographic for infection and death from COVID-19.

Proposed and current COVID-19 Solutions
This paper has considered many of the barriers that continue to impede success for contact tracing, even
when it is automated with a smartphone app. We now turn to consider the current or proposed solutions
and how, even if not completely successful, they might be better designed and promoted in order to produce
a lasting benefit for the average individual and wider community.

Solution Option 1: Oxford/NHS App
The United Kingdom breakout box describes the app being rolled out by the UK government and NHS. We
refer to it as the Oxford/NHS app since its development was led by academics at Oxford. The government
are pinning their hopes on this app being a key enabler for relaxing the current lockdown policy. Appendix
3 discusses the common properties and data being collected by CTA reviewed during this research. We
believe the statistics and overall proposal to support development of the app and promote its uptake in the

community are based on best-case scenarios. However, we do perceive that the strength of Government
and NHS support comes from the perception of trust they seek to engender. The openness and degree of
transparency that the NHS and Oxford teams have been upselling in the media, if delivered, far exceed that
of any other. We found no other State-developed or operated solution that suggested a willingness to allow
the media, technologists and general public access to the source code. However, early non-published
results of a pilot trial on the Isle of Wight are less encouraging with a major limiting factor being the variation
in smartphone operating systems, especially those of older phones (Duell, 2020). The level of transparency
underpinning the NHS solution needs to also be adopted in any use of the APIs provided by the
Apple/Google collaboration.

Solution Option 2: Chan/Spector Symptom Tracker App merged
with CTA
In late March 2020 a collaboration between Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Guys and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London released their COVID-19
Symptom Tracker (Drew et al, 2020). They currently have 2.8 million users and report symptoms data
gathered from around 1.6 million, of whom only a tiny fraction of 1,176 (0.07%) had undergone some form
of PCR-based diagnostic test (Drew et al, 2020). Many issues may present with this type of study. These
issues include the subjective nature of the endeavor, the bias that comes from the fact that the app was
initially promoted to and installed by clinical staff and their families, and that many in the wider community
who voluntarily install such apps are the worried well who, when prompted with questions suggesting the
symptoms that go with a condition, are more likely to identify as having some of them. Unless carefully
managed, suggestibility unintentionally induces conditioned associations between symptoms, leading
patients to report more intense or additional flu-like symptoms (Skelton et al, 1993).
Leaving these issues aside we believe a good solution might have been to incorporate CTA into
this Symptom Tracker app, and allow the existing user-base to either consent or decline providing that
additional information. That a high number of existing users would consent to the addition is far more likely
than believing that almost 3 million people will install a second COVID-19 related app. We also believe that
any proposed CTA solution should contemplate capture of many of the same symptom-based data-points,
whether used directly in contact tracing or not. We suggest this in order to enable future anonymous
aggregation and data mining/knowledge engineering on COVID-19 from what could be a considerably much
larger and richer dataset.

Solution Option 3: Bayesian network based COVID-19 CTA
Our proposed solution focuses on enabling users to diagnose the possible presence of Covid-19
themselves. This is done through a causal probabilistic model (a Bayesian network, that we describe in
Section 4.1) that is made available in a smartphone app based on the architectural framework (that we
describe in Section 4.2). The app provides the user with information about how likely it is they have or have
not mild or severe Covid-19. When this probabilistic information is combined with data about the GPSlocation of the smartphone, together with information about the age group of the person the triple (Prob.
user has Covid-19, GPS-location, Age-group) can be used to provide information about the distribution of
mild and severe Covid-19. For example using colour shades on the map of a country, the data can be used
to present a dynamic visualization of the probability distribution on the location where that information was
collected (Hay et al, 2013). This solution option involves providing diagnostic-oriented feedback to citizens
with real time Covid-19 surveillance and minimal privacy infringement as quickly as possible in the face of
all the limitations of the current constantly changing situation. Response measures from the information
collected from this option operate mainly at the population location level, such as intensified lockdown,
social/physical distancing and self-isolation campaigns rather than more granular contact tracing and
individual isolation measures requiring massive resource deployment. This option is dramatically different
from the many trace and contact app solutions provided elsewhere.

4.1 The Bayesian network (BN) for providing feedback on user symptoms
A Bayesian network (BN) (Cowell et al, 1999; Fenton and Neil 2018, Koller & Friedman, 2009;
Pearl, 1988) is a graphical model consisting of nodes and arcs as shown in Figure 4 (this is the draft model
we propose for our app). Some of the variables (such as those representing symptom nodes) may be
directly observable while others (such as the COVID-19 node) are not. There is an arc between two nodes
if the corresponding variables are causally linked in a probabilistic sense. The strength of the link, as well
as the uncertainty associated with these, is captured using probabilities and statistical distributions. When
data are entered into the model for specific variables that are observed, all of the probabilities for, as yet,
unknown variables are updated using an AI algorithm called Bayesian inference. Hence, in the model here,
the BN algorithm computes the probability of having none, mild, or severe COVID-19 , based on present
signs and symptoms and other relevant background information entered by the user.
The model makes a number of simplifying, but rational assumptions. For example, it assumes: that
a person can only become infected if they have been in recent contact with an infected person (or some
biological matter from an infected person); that a positive test result from a perfectly accurate COVID19
test procedure would mean that the person has COVID19 (even if they were asymptomatic); that there may
be other conditions such as COPD or flu that have some symptoms in common with COVID-19.
The probability distributions in the model for the symptoms given the disease status (i.e. the status
of the COVID-19 variable) are based on the statistics provided in the paper by Huang et al. (2020). All the
assumptions are described in Appendix 5.

Figure 4: Covid-19 Bayesian network model structure. The probabilities shown for the
COVID19 status node represent the prior probabilities when no observations are entered.
Figure 5 shows the updated predicted probabilities with some user entered observations; in this
example a user has many of the COVID19 symptoms and has had multiple recent interactions with other

people. Although this user has not entered their background or risk factors, the model infers there is a 76%
probability the person has Covid19 (66% probability severe and 11% probability mild). Note that the model
also updates the probabilities for the unknown risk factors and background nodes. For example, this person
is more likely to be male than female (56%) and is likely to be over 65 (54% probability). The probability of
obesity is 12% (up from a prior of 10%). These backward inferences are simply the application of Bayes.
Appendix 5 illustrates the power of the model through other scenarios.

Figure 5: Covid-19 BN model for a user with most CODID19 symptoms and multiple recent
interactions with other people (nodes with observations are denoted with a scenario label).
Depending on the value of the ‘alert threshold’ that is set the model will trigger an alert (it will trigger
a separate hospitalization alert depending on the length of time the symptoms have been present and
whether or not they are improving). So those people with the app who have come into contact with the
person will be alerted that they have been in contact with a person most likely to be Covid19 positive, while
this person could be given appropriate instructions for contacting the health authorities.
This model is still an incomplete attempt at developing a BN for the prediction of the presence of
Covid-19 (we are in the process of gathering the relevant data required to complete all of the probability
tables; currently those for which we do not have relevant data, or are not logically determined, are simply
estimated). It is possible to add other signs and symptoms (for example dizziness seems useful) and also
comorbidities and immunodeficiency could be added, as the literature provides the relevant information.
The advantage of a BN is that it can still generate predictions with incomplete information. Thus, if
certain evidence is not entered by the user, the model is able to use prior probabilistic information rather
than make particular assumptions. So, although body temperature and oxygen saturation are key
measurements, the user decides whether or not these measurements are actually done. Using the BN it is

also possible to predict which feature will be the most informative one in contributing to the diagnosis, and
this feature can be used to request additional information from the app’s user after some initial input.

4.2 Design of the BayesCOVID Surveillance Framework
The envisioned use of such a probabilistic BN model is as a foundation of population surveillance
of the geographical outbreak and spread of Covid-19. The proposed infrastructure for personalised Covid19 status feedback and collecting geographical data is shown in Figure 5, and is inspired by related
research of the authors’ research groups (van der Heijden et al, 2013; Velikova et al, 2014).

Figure 5: Infrastructure for personalised Covid-19 feedback and collecting geographical Covid-19
data.
As Figure 5 illustrates, the BN is embedded or integrated into an app meant to run on a person’s
smartphone. The presentation of the feedback is expected to be attractive and easily understood by the
smartphone user with additional advice whether or not it is wise to contact a GP.
This solution operates within the CardiPro environment using the Web/PWA front-end and Agena
CloudAPI (McLachlan et al, 2020). Our research group has the means now to demonstrate both the
elements and the entire solution presented in Figure 5. The minimalist data transmitted to the server, even
if coupled with collecting a similar anonymous symptom set as used for the Chan/Spector app, might be
more palatable to people who may be concerned about privacy in both the UK and Netherlands.
In summary, in this proposed solution, it is assumed that a citizen of a country obtains feedback
about the likelihood of the presence of mild or severe Covid-19 from a smartphone app, but the main
purpose of making an app with the BN embedded is to monitor the population for detecting new outbreaks
and the locations at which this occurs as early as possible. For this purpose, it is only needed that the
minimalistic data triple (Prob. user has Covid-19, GPS-location, Age-group) is collected centrally. The age
information might be useful to get information about required protection of particular groups. In addition it
might be useful to also add an app-specific unique identifier so that it is possible to follow the progress of
Covid-19 in the individual (possibly until hospital admission). However, collecting only the above-mentioned
data triple has the advantage of minimal infringement of privacy.

Discussion
On installing CTA some personally identifiable information is always captured as a result of downloading
the app from the app store, and for some apps, like the Australian and UK ones, when registering on first
use (Maddocks, 2020). At a minimum, this is information which when combined with the metadata being
generated makes every user and their associations identifiable. We contend that many claims regarding
privacy and efficacy of CTA for COVID-19 in these papers may not be justified, and in some cases are
misleading. We are not the first to identify the falsity of attempts at CTA privacy (Berke et al, 2020; Kuhn et
al, 2020), nor to raise concern regarding the efficacy and applicability of CTA for COVID-19 contact tracing.

However, we are the first to consider both issues together, and as a result to demonstrate that Bluetooth
CTA are not the COVID-19 panacea we all seek.
The UK and several other countries including Australia, Singapore and Germany, propose a
centralised approach whereby data will be collected on smartphones and some component of that data is
forwarded to a central server, enabling contact alerting and tracing of the epidemic. Some countries favour
use of the solution presented by the Apple and Google Partnership, which is claimed to be a ‘local’ solution
under development that will not breach data security and will not lead to any centralisation of data. Their
proposal for privacy-safe contact tracing using Bluetooth would, they say, require explicit user consent,
which is another issue that needs greater
Australia
consideration. The Apple/Google solution APIs on
Rather than develop their own app, the Australian
first blush don’t appear to collect personally
Government licensed rights to rebrand the
identifiable information or user location data, and
TraceTogether app developed by the Singaporean
suggest a list of people you’ve been in contact with
Government, and deploy it as COVIDSafe. As is
never leaves your phone (detected via Bluetooth LE).
common, emergency legislation was hurriedly drafted
and enacted under the catchy title: Biosecurity (Human
We are also told that people who test positive are not
Biosecurity Emergency)(Human Coronavirus with
identified to other users, Google or Apple. That the
Pandemic Potential)(Emergency Requirements information would only be used for contact tracing by
Public Health Contact Information) Determination 2020
public health authorities for Covid-19 pandemic
Act (PHCIA, 2020). While making it an offence for a
management which in itself, like every other
person outside those employed by a state or federal
proposed decentralised system would necessitate
health authority to collect, use or disclose COVID app
communication with and storage of data in some
data except for the purposes of contact tracing (Section
form of central server. However, with regard to
6(1) & (2)), this determination explicitly limits the same
metadata and privacy, we are circumspect that
provision to data generated within the app or by the
Commonwealth and stored on the user’s mobile
Apple/Google or the various HA using their APIs will
device. PHCIA also excludes from all provisions,
not be collecting at least part of the data being
privacy or otherwise, information arising from any
generated for secondary use purposes. It should also
source other than the National COVIDSafe data store
be noted that the Apple/Google APIs are simply an
(Section 6(3)). The effect of provisions of the PHCIA
interface for HAs to expedite development of CTA
make it unlawful for an app user or member of the
solutions: they are not a CTA. APIs act as a
general public to decrypt, view or disseminate any data
standardised intermediary, in this case between the
from their device, or even knowledge about data that
user interface and a data backend, both of which will
the app collects or stores, while leaving Government
still require HAs to engage software architects and
organisations able to interact with this data more freely.
The PHCIA contracts itself out of provisions of the
developers to create. There is no guarantee that
Privacy Act 1998 that may be found inconsistent under
without engaging far more experienced technologists
power of Section 477(5) of the Biosecurity Act 2015,
and serious reconsideration, any app the NHS
but does not exclude itself from the operation of others,
develop using the Apple/Google APIs will not fare as
including the Telecommunications (Interception and
badly as the first 24 hours of real-world testing of the
Access) Act 1979 (TIAA, 2018) which invokes data
NHSX CTA on the Isle of Wight (Duell, 2020). If we
retention provisions on telecommunications providers,
are to use these APIs, a better solution might be a
including your telephony and internet service
Progressive Web App (PWA). A single PWA could be
providers, and Amazon Web Services who will be the
developed to be compatible with both Android and
web host of the central server, to store records of all
forms of electronic communication for at least two
Apple architectures, and engineered to avoid the
years. The TIAA also makes metadata available
main issue seen with the NHS trial app:
without warrant to a broad range of organisations that
incompatibility with variants of the smartphone’s
include law enforcement, local, state and federal
operating system. We have already developed and
government bodies, the RSPCA, the Australian Navy
demonstrated an example of this approach, called
and Border Protection Services, the Thoroughbred
CardiPro (McLachlan et al, 2020).
horse and greyhound racing associations, Workplace
It can be inferred from the literature, mass
Safety investigators, the Clean Energy Regulator,
media and download pages of those developing and
National Measurement Institute, Building and
promoting CTA, that to at least some degree they
Construction Commission, Taxi Services Commission
and in some cases it has been demonstrated, private
seek to create the belief that implementation of
investigators (Farrell, 2016; Guy, 2015).
contact tracing makes containment of COVID-19 a
fait accompli. Each presents a solution couched in
words suggesting that, for successful eradication of COVID-19, we need only to install the CTA, and in
doing so we will have identified everyone who, symptomatic or asymptomatic, might have the disease.
However, this assumes the data collected by the CTA will be clean, accurate and sufficiently complete, and

will fully support their containment efforts which, despite best intentions, is extremely unlikely (Senga et al,
2017). We accept that solutions operating at the front end of contact tracing, like the CTA, will produce
more data. More contact information will require time-consuming and labour-intensive follow-up, and
consumption of considerable resources in order to identify and weed out the true cases from the spurious
chatter (Senga et al, 2017). But it should be noted that previous work has failed to consider:
a) the effect of people simply leaving their smartphone at home, or in the car;
b) how to effectively deal with people who might have two or more devices; or
c) how to identify the owners of prepaid devices that in some countries can be registered without
identification, or anonymously.
d) the effect of a CTA user coming into close physical contact with others who eschew, or cannot
afford, smartphones (all previous work assumed that the adjectives pervasive and ubiquitous meant
complete coverage).
We believe that care should be taken when deploying CTA in any community. Not just because of
privacy or consent issues. But rather, to ensure that even the most suggestible member of our community
does not become complacent and assume that CTA operates, as claims like those provided with the
Australian Government COVIDSafe app would seem to suggest, as an invisible shield making us and our
families impenetrable or immune to the disease.
Even if all potential privacy issues were resolved, the decision to install and register the CTA in
most western countries would remain voluntary. This raises the question: How can high-level uptake of the
CTA be assured? To answer this question we propose that at least three related matters must be
considered: (i) public compliance with existing social distancing measures; (ii) media narrative of CTA; and,
(iii) ongoing changes in peoples’ subjective estimate of severity and susceptibility to the virus.
Opinion polls in recent weeks are finding that
United Kingdom
the majority in each country are in favour of existing While drawing significant criticism, the UK National
social distancing measures, irrespective of how strictly Health Service (NHS) has rejected the Apple/Google
they are maintained and for how long they remain APIs and decentralised model, expressly favouring a
(Ipsos-mori, 2020a). When compared to other centralised approach that they say will allow for
countries, people in the UK are displaying a higher collection of more granular data and broader analysis
degree of support for continued social distancing. to study and track the pandemic (Hamilton, 2020).
Similarly, the UK population has shown overwhelming The key difference to be noted between the NHS
support for lockdown measures, again irrespective of approach and all others is upfront acknowledgement
severity and duration of the lockdown. It may be that of the intention to maintain this central collection of
data while also making substantial claims regarding
this public acceptance will extend to other State- the privacy strength of the userland app and ethics of
operated measures including the suggested test, track their approach. Unlike descriptions of all other
and trace strategy that includes the CTA, as it is being claimed privacy-preserving apps seen in the COVIDpromoted as a way to end the lockdown and reduce 19 literature, and in stark contrast to the Australian
the possibility for additional and more severe lockdown approach of denying the public any real knowledge of
measures. It is possible that, irrespective of how the data being collected and transmitted by their
privacy-invading CTA methods may be, or the device (PHCIA, 2020), the NHS are making
potential negative impact that third-party use of encouraging noises regards allowing researchers,
metadata resulting from individual engagement with security analysts and the general public access to the
the app, the public may accept these impositions in source code, to see behind the curtain and verify
what data the app is collecting and transmitting
return for the benefits of a lifted lockdown and lighter (Gould & Lewis, 2020). Unlike any other, and if taken
social distancing measures. Certainly, the polling on face value, this could allow UK citizens to consider
conducted between the 10th to 13th of April 2020 in the that data’s existence and potential uses when
UK suggests this holds true, with 65% showing support deciding whether to download and activate the app
for the CTA (Ipsos-mori, 2020b). However, public on our personal devices.
opinion elsewhere is somewhat mixed.
In other countries the trade-off is not the same: the protection of privacy outweighs relaxed social
distancing through use of a CTA. For example: (i) in France, where 53% of respondents are opposed to the
CTA (Hughes Hubbard, 2020); and, (ii) the US, where 50% of respondents are opposed to the CTA,
(Kirzinger et al, 2020). The US poll also showed opinion somewhat changes when benefits such as going
back to work are more prominently presented, in which case 66% would agree to download the CTA.
However, from 64% of the US total sample 17% indicated that a CTA would make them feel less safe, while
47% said the CTA would make no difference to their feelings of safety at all. The current media narrative
and an individual’s subjective estimates of severity and susceptibility are two broad factors that, whilst not

independent of each other, account for the observed differences in opinion and behaviour both between
countries and over time (Abeysinghe & White, 2011; Leppin & Aro, 2009; Slovic, 2000; Wagner-Egger et
al, 2011; Wheaton et al 2011).
The contentious issue of privacy presents as a far more salient and palatable target than dealing
with the overwhelming lack of evidence for efficacy. On these issues there are now several open letters
from scientists that are being communicated to the general public. While the sustained focus on data privacy
concerns remains strong in the mainstream media, this negative issue will dominate public understanding
of CTAs and significantly restrain uptake. If the narrative can be drawn towards the potential benefits for
everyone that come from a general loosening of restrictions to open schools and workplaces, then the
success we have seen in compliance with the current lockdown may allow these people to accept the tradeoff and come out in favour of the CTA. Naturally, this won’t be isolated from individual’s estimates of severity
and susceptibility to the virus, and by extension, for those close to them. But if there is a sufficiently strong
belief that severity and susceptibility is high in those close to oneself, even if the severity and/or
susceptibility is low for themselves, then, just as we have seen with compliance to lockdown measures,
compliance with State messaging on voluntarily using a CTA may also be high.
Many proposed solutions, even the
The data being collected
Google/Apple
collaboration, focus very heavily on
Drawn from many of the cited papers in this work, most
privacy
and
app
distribution and make almost no
apps will collect and transmit some subset of the following
mention regarding accuracy. Despite best
data fields:
intentions, the levels of inaccuracy that arise in
● MAC address of your device’s Bluetooth or Wi-Fi
any data recording mean that any contact tracing,
chip
● Your Phone number (or IMEI number if the device
manual or digital, will always be incomplete
does not easily report the subscriber phone
(Senga et al, 2017). Even when we have a
number)
significant proportion that do comply with contact
● The MAC address of other people your phone
tracing, we often still have poor data arising out of
sees (Bluetooth handshakes with everything it
the methods employed to collect the data. The
sees that is also Bluetooth, even when it doesn’t
normal inaccuracies that occur in data recording
know the device and has never been paired with
and data entry are amplified with contact tracing
it)
because some people simply don’t want to be
● The time, date and in some cases, location data
traced, while others have limited socio-cultural
from your GPS for each new interaction with
another in-range device (accurate to about 15
understanding for why we are wanting to trace
meters). A new interaction is when your device
them (Senga et al, 2017). Contact tracing
sees another device move into its broadcast area.
represents an expensive win/lose situation. A
Note that in a corporate office the app might see
very small group of university researchers and
the device of someone in the next room move into
technology companies receive a large funding
and out of range tens or hundreds of times over
boost to develop the CTA and deal with the data
the course of a working day.
that it collects, and a large number of people
● The Bluetooth or device name of the smartphone
involved in manual contact tracing win jobs.
that is running the app, and every other Bluetooth
However, the overall community suffers more
device that crosses into its broadcast range. This
last point can more easily enable re-identification
significant risks, and losses, when they choose to
as people often name their smartphone ‘Tim’s
re-engage in normal behaviours under the false
iPhone’ or similar.
sense of hope that most CTA are promoted as
giving, and risk becoming infected and infecting
their family, potentially leading to death.
We are sceptical that any standalone contact tracing approach, manual or automated, could contain
a high-prevalence highly contagious disease like COVID-19. This is primarily because the CTA acts
retrospectively. It advises the user they were previously in close contact with an infected, and in the case
of COVID-19, this advice often comes only after they have already begun asymptomatically shedding the
disease. The primary (third) solution we propose integrates the retrospective CTA with symptom tracking
and a BN, providing the user with a prospective view of the probability that they may have contracted
COVID-19. In this way we increase CTA utility for users. We believe that with increased utility uptake may
be improved, as is the opportunity to collect useful data and identify actionable clinical knowledge to
improve the response in future disease outbreaks. Solutions like the one proposed here can have a very
beneficial effect on containing the spread of infection.
One final point that returns to the issue of consent that was raised earlier. For many proposing
CTA, the idea of using an app instead of just network tracing via the cellular network or other means is not

as much about Bluetooth being more accurate, it is about the idea of claiming to have informed consent:
that by downloading the app and clicking through a privacy agreement they have received ‘informed
consent’ to access and monitor an individual through their device. In studies evaluating the impact and
effect of privacy policies and user agreements it was found that 54% are written in language
unapproachable by most people (Jensen et al, 2004), 40% of participants do not even recall seeing the
agreement while clicking through to install the app (Good et al, 2005), and only 0.24% of more than 55,000
actually clicked or scrolled to view the policy (Jensen et al, 2004). Most users have no idea what they have
agreed to, and given that organisations change their policies and agreements regularly, whether the current
version of the agreement is consistent with that which the media may have discussed when the CTA was
being rolled out. Given these findings, is it ethical to consider that when users install and register the CTA,
the inclusion of a long privacy policy and user agreement that potentially more than half of the population
will be unable to comprehend constitutes informed consent?

Conclusion
In writing this paper we reviewed a large collection of topical works on COVID-19. Most works were recent
preprints proposing CTA solutions for containment of the disease, while others presented the latest
research and evaluation of the spread of the disease in our communities. While there is a focus in the
literature on two issues, privacy and efficacy, the current media narrative for CTA in many countries strongly
emphasises perceived privacy risks, and in the UK especially, the risks some attach to the NHS decision
to eschew the presumed leading solution: the Apple/Google collaboration.
We also sought to simulate the operation of CTA, and the results of our calculations appear largely
in agreement with those of other groups just published. Introduction of a new CTA alone would not contain
the disease, and the best-case sweet spot for uptake is beyond that which could conceivably be achieved.
However, by providing people with an understanding not just retrospectively for whether they have been in
contact with an infected previously, but also using a Bayesian approach to proactively provide the
probability that they might have the disease, we can increase the CTAs utility to users while potentially
improving the uptake and knowledge to be learned from use of the app. When combined with an effective
communication strategy and sensible social distancing, we believe solutions like the one proposed here
can have a very beneficial effect on containing the spread of this pandemic and reducing the need for
draconian lockdown procedures.

Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge support from the EPSRC under project EP/P009964/1: PAMBAYESIAN:
Patient Managed decision-support using Bayes Networks

References
Abeysinghe, S., & White, K. (2011). The avian influenza pandemic: Discourses of risk, contagion and preparation in
Australia. Health, Risk & Society, 13(4), 311-326.
Akl, E. A., Briel, M., You, J. J., Sun, X., Johnston, B. C., Busse, J. W., ... & Alshurafa, M. (2012). Potential impact on
estimated treatment effects of information lost to follow-up in randomised controlled trials (LOST-IT):
systematic review. Bmj, 344, e2809.
Anastassopoulou, C., Russo, L., Tsakris, A., & Siettos, C. (2020). Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of
the COVID-19 outbreak. PLoS ONE, 15(3), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230405
Anderson, R.M. Discussion: The Kermack-McKendrick epidemic threshold theorem. Bltn Mathcal Biology 53, 1 (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464422
Armbruster, B., & Brandeau, M. (2007). Contact tracing to control infectious disease: When enough is enough. Health
Care Management Science, 10, pp 341-355.
Bengali, S. (2020). He was symptom-free. But the coronavirus stayed in his body for 40 days. LA Times. Last accessed:
04th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2020-04-30/why-some-patientskeep-testing-positive-for-the-coronavirus
Berke, A., Bakker, M., Vepakomma, P., Raskar, R., Larson, K., & Pentland, A. (2020). Assessing disease exposure
risk with location histories and protecting privacy: A cryptographic approach in response to a global pandemic.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14412.

Brack, S., Reichert, L., & Scheuermann, B. (2020). Decentralized Contact Tracing Using a DHT and Blind Signatures.
Last accessed: 01st May, 2020. Sourced from: https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/398.pdf
Bulchandani, V. B., Shivam, S., Moudgalya, S., & Sondhi, S. L. (2020). Digital herd immunity and COVID-19. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.07237.
Casella, F. (2020). Can the COVID-19 epidemic be controlled on the basis of daily test reports? ArXiv.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.06967
COVIDSafe App, (2020). Australian Government Department of Health: COVIDSafe App. Last accessed: 29th April,
2020. Sourced From: https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/covidsafe-app
Cowell, R., Dawid, A., Lauritzen, S., & Spiegelhalter, D. (1999). Probabilistic Networks and Expert Systems. New York:
Springer.
Crocker, A., Opsahl, K., & Cyphers, B. (2020). The challenge of Proximity Apps for COVID-19 Contact Tracing.
Electronic
Frontier
Foundation.
Last
accessed:
29th
April,
2020.
Sourced
from:
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/04/challenge-proximity-apps-covid-19-contact-tracing
Danquah, L. O., Hasham, N., MacFarlane, M., Conteh, F. E., Momoh, F., Tedesco, A. A., ... & Weiss, H. A. (2019). Use
of a mobile application for Ebola contact tracing and monitoring in northern Sierra Leone: a proof-of-concept
study. BMC infectious diseases, 19(1), 810.
Day, M. (2020). Covid-19: identifying and isolating asymptomatic people helped eliminate virus in Italian village. BMJ
(Clinical Research Ed.), 368(March), m1165. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1165
De Carli, A., Franco, M., Gassmann, A., Killer, C., Rodrigues, B., Scheid, E., Schonbachler, D., & Stiller, B. (2020).
WeTrace: A privacy preserving mobile COVID-19 tracing approach and application. ArXiv preprint:
2004.08812v1
DP3T, (2020). Decentralised privacy-preserving proximity tracing. Last accessed: 21st April, 2020. Sourced from:
https://github.com/DP-3T/
Drew, D. A., Nguyen, L. H., Steves, C. J., Wolf, J., Spector, T. D., Chan, A. T., & COPE Consortium. (2020). Rapid
implementation of mobile technology for real-time epidemiology of COVID-19. medRxiv.
Du, Z., Xu, X., Wu, Y., Wang, L., Cowling, B. J., & Meyers, L. A. (2020). The serial interval of COVID-19 from publicly
reported confirmed cases. medRxiv.
Duell, M. (2020). New NHSX Covid-19 contact tracing app doesn't work on two-year-old phones say Isle of Wight
residents using it in trial. Mail Online, Last accessed: 08th May, 2020. Sourced from:
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8297475/NHSX-Covid-19-contact-tracing-app-doesnt-work-twoyear-old-phones.html
Eames, K. (2007). Contact tracing strategies in heterogeneous populations. Epidemiology and Infection, 135, pp 443454.
Farrell, P. (2016). Lamb chop weight enforcers want access to Australians’ metadata. The Guardian, Last accessed:
02nd May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/lamb-chop-weightenforcers-want-warrantless-access-to-australians-metadata
Fenton, N.E. and M. Neil (2018), Risk Assessment and Decision Analysis with Bayesian Networks, Second Edition.
2018, Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, ISBN: 9781138035119
Fidler, D. (2004). SARS, Governance and the Globalization of Disease. Springer.
Finazzi, F. (2020). Earthquake network - Pilot investigation COVID-19 in Val Seriana. Last accessed 7th April, 2020.
Sourced from: https://sismo.app/covid/
Giordano, G., Blanchini, F., Bruno, R., Colaneri, P., Di Filippo, A., Di Matteo, A., & Colaneri, M. (2020). Modelling the
COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. In Nature Medicine.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0883-7
Good, N., Dhamija, R., Grossklags, J., Thaw, D., Aronowitz, S., Mulligan, D., & Konstan, J. (2005, July). Stopping
spyware at the gate: a user study of privacy, notice and spyware. In Proceedings of the 2005 symposium on
Usable privacy and security (pp. 43-52).
Gould, M., & Lewis, G. (2020). Digital contact tracing: Protecting the NHS and saving lives. Healthtech Blog, Last
accessed: 02nd May, 2020. Sourced from: https://healthtech.blog.gov.uk/2020/04/24/digital-contact-tracingprotecting-the-nhs-and-saving-lives/
Guan, W. J., Ni, Z. Y., Hu, Y., Liang, W. H., Ou, C. Q., He, J. X., ... & Du, B. (2020). Clinical characteristics of coronavirus
disease 2019 in China. New England journal of medicine, 382(18), 1708-1720
Guy, G. (2015). Requests for Access to Telecommunications Metadata under 176A of the TIA. Right to Know. Last
accessed 02nd May, 2020. Sourced from: https://goo.gl/jQHysu
Hamilton, I. (2020). The UK won’t use Apple and Google’s coronavirus contact-tracing technology for its app, sparking
privacy worries about how people’s data will be used. Business Insider, Last accessed: 02nd May, 2020.
Sourced from: https://www.businessinsider.com/uk-nhsx-rejects-apple-google-coronavirus-app-model-20204?amp;IR=T&r=US&IR=T
Hay, S. I., Battle, K. E., Pigott, D. M., Smith, D. L., Moyes, C. L., Bhatt, S., ... & Gething, P. W. (2013). Global mapping
of infectious disease. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 368(1614),
20120250.

Hethcote, H. W. (2000). Mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Review, 42(4), 599–653.
https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144500371907
Hekmati, A., Ramachandran, G., & Krishnamachari, B. (2020). CONTAIN: Privacy-oriented Contact Tracing Protocols
for Epidemics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05251.
Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N. I., Jarvis, C. I., Russell, T. W., Munday, J. D., Kucharski, A. J., Edmunds,
W. J., Sun, F., Flasche, S., Quilty, B. J., Davies, N., Liu, Y., Clifford, S., Klepac, P., Jit, M., Diamond, C., Gibbs,
H., … Eggo, R. M. (2020). Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts.
The Lancet Global Health, 8(4), e488–e496. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7
Hewrn, A., & Sabbagh, D. (2020). Critical mass of Android users crucial for NHS contact-tracing app. The Guardian,
Last accessed: 07th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/06/criticalmass-of-android-users-needed-for-success-of-nhs-coronavirus-contact-tracing-app
Ho, S. M., Kao, D., & Wu, W. Y. (2018). Following the breadcrumbs: Timestamp pattern identification for cloud forensics.
Digital Investigation, 24, 79-94.
Hu, Z., Song, C., Xu, C., Jin, G., Chen, Y., Xu, X., ... & Wang, J. (2020). Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic
infections with COVID-19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing, China. Science China Life Sciences, 16.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., ... & Cheng, Z. (2020). Clinical features of patients infected with
2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The lancet, 395(10223), 497-506.
Huat, C. B. (2006). SARS epidemic and the disclosure of Singapore nation. Cultural Politics, 2(1), 77-96.
Hughes Hubbard (2020). Guidance from the EDPB and the CNIL for GDPR-Compliant Covid-19 contact tracing. Last
accessed: 06th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.hugheshubbard.com/news/guidance-from-the-edpband-the-cnil-for-gdpr-compliant-covid-19-contact-tracing
Hussain, S. F., Watura, R., Cashman, B., Campbell, I. A., & Evans, M. R. (1992). Audit of a tuberculosis contact tracing
clinic. British Medical Journal, 304(6836), 1213-1215.
Ipsos mori (2020a). One month in: British public opinion on Covid-19. https://www.ipsos.com/ipsos-mori/en-uk/onemonth-british-public-opinion-covid-19-coronavirus.
Ipsos mori (2020b). Majority of Britons support government using mobile data for surveillance to tackle coronavirus
crisis.
https://www.ipsos.com/ipsos-mori/en-uk/majority-britons-support-government-using-mobile-datasurveillance-tackle-coronavirus-crisis
Jensen, C., & Potts, C. (2004, April). Privacy policies as decision-making tools: an evaluation of online privacy notices.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 471-478).
Johns Hopkins University, (2020). COVID-19 Dashboard, Centre for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE), USA,
Last accessed: 07th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT press.
Kao, R. R. (2003). The impact of local heterogeneity on alternative control strategies for foot-and-mouth disease.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 270(1533), 2557-2564.
Kiss, I. Z., Green, D. M., & Kao, R. R. (2008). The effect of network mixing patterns on epidemic dynamics and the
efficacy of disease contact tracing. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 5(24), 791-799.
Klinkenberg, D., Fraser, C., & Heesterbeek, H. (2006). The effectiveness of contact tracing in emerging epidemics.
PLoS ONE. 1(1). e12.
Klopfenstein, L., Delpriori, S., Di Francesco, G., Maldini, R., Paolini, B., & Bogliolo, A. (2020). Digital Ariadne: Citizen
empowerment for epidemic control. ArXiv preprint: 2004.07717v1
Kucharski, A. J., Klepac, P., Conlan, A., Kissler, S. M., Tang, M., Fry, H., ... & CMMID COVID-19 Working Group.
(2020). Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing and physical distancing on reducing transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 in different settings. medRxiv.
Kuhn, C., Beck, M., & Strufe, T. (2020). Covid Notions: Towards formal definitions - and documented understanding of privacy goals and claimed protection in proximity-tracing services. ArXiv preprint: 2004.07723v1
Kirzinger, A., Hamel, L., Muñana, C., Kearney, A., & Brodie, M., (2020). KFF Health Tracking Poll - Late April 2020:
Coronavirus, Social Distancing, and Contact Tracing. Last accessed: 06th May, 2020. Sourced from:
https://www.kff.org/global-health-policy/issue-brief/kff-health-tracking-poll-late-april-2020/
Lee, Y. (2020) Taiwan’s carrot-and-stick approach to virus fight wins praise, but strains showing. Reuters, Last
accessed: 07th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-taiwanquarantine/taiwans-carrot-and-stick-approach-to-virus-fight-wins-praise-but-strains-showingidUSKBN21E0EE
Leppin, A., & Aro, A. R. (2009). Risk perceptions related to SARS and avian influenza: theoretical foundations of current
empirical research. International journal of behavioral medicine, 16(1), 7-29.
Lin, Q., Zhao, S., Gao, D., Lou, Y., Yang, S., Musa, S. S., Wang, M. H., Cai, Y., Wang, W., Yang, L., & He, D. (2020).
A conceptual model for the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Wuhan, China with individual
reaction and governmental action. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93, 211–216.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.058
Lomas, N. (2020). Europe’s PEPP-PT COVID-19 contacts tracing standard push could be squaring for a fight with
Apple and Google. Tech Crunch. Last accessed: 29th April, 2020. Sourced from:

https://techcrunch.com/2020/04/17/europes-pepp-pt-covid-19-contacts-tracing-standard-push-could-besquaring-up-for-a-fight-with-apple-and-google/
Lomas, N. (2020b). Israel passes emergency law to use mobile data for COVID-19 contact tracing. Tech Crunch. Last
accessed: 06th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/18/israel-passes-emergency-lawto-use-mobile-data-for-covid-19-contact-tracing/
Maddocks, (2020). Department of Health: The COVIDSafe Application Privacy Impact Assessment. Last Accessed:
01st May, 2020.
Maghdid, H., & Ghafoor, K. (2020). A smartphone enabled approach to manage COVID-19 lockdown and economic
crisis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12240.
Mathews, S. (2020). Private contact-tracing apps could ease coronavirus lockdown and get major businesses back to
work by monitoring COVID-19 spread in offices and alerting staff if they have been in contact with an infected
colleague. Daily Mail. Last accessed: 29th April, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article8260301/Private-contact-tracing-apps-help-ease-coronavirus-lockdown.html
Maurushat, A., Bennett-Moses, L., & Vaile, D. (2015). Using 'big' metadata for criminal intelligence: understanding
limitations and appropriate safeguards. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Law (pp. 196-200).
McLachlan, S. (2016). Predicted by Orwell: A discourse on the gradual shift in electronic surveillance law.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.11594
McLachlan, S., Paterson, H., Dube, K., Kyrimi, E., Dementiev, E., Neil, M., Daley, B., Hitman, G.A., & Fenton, N. (2020).
Real-time Online Probabilistic Medical Computation using Bayesian Networks (No. 2744). EasyChair Preprint:
https://easychair.org/publications/preprint/9Jks
Merrick, R. (2020). Coronavirus: NHS contact tracing app needs 60% take-up to be successful, expert warns. The
Independant.
Last
accessed:
04th
May,
2020.
Sourced
from:
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/coronavirus-app-uk-nhs-contact-tracing-phone-smartphonea9484551.html
Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., Zarebski, A., & Chowell, G. (2020). Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.
Eurosurveillance, 25(10), 2000180.
Mwongela, S. W. (2018). A Mobile based Tuberculosis contact tracing and screening system (Doctoral dissertation,
Strathmore University).
Niehus, R., De Salazar, P. M., Taylor, A. R., & Lipsitch, M. (2020). Using observational data to quantify bias of travellerderived COVID-19 prevalence estimates in Wuhan, China. The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, 3099(20), 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30229-2
Oxford University (2020), COVID-19 Evidence Service, Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM), United Kingdom.
Last accessed 06th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www.cebm.net/covid-19.
Parran, T. (1937) Shadow on the Land: Syphilis. New York, Reynal & Hitchcock.
Pearl, J. (2014). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Elsevier.
PEPP-PT, (2020). Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing. Last accessed: 20th April, 2020. Sourced from:
https://www.pepp-pt.org/
Perez, B., Musolesi, M., & Stringhini, G. (2018). You are your metadata: Identification and obfuscation of social media
users using metadata information. In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
Peto, J. (2020). Covid-19 mass testing facilities could end the epidemic rapidly. The BMJ, 368(March), 110110.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1163
PHCIA, (2020). Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity Emergency)(Human Coronavirus with Pandemic Potential)(Emergency
Requirements - Public Health Contact Information) Determination 2020 Act. Last accessed: 02nd May, 2020.
Sourced from: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2020L00480
Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., ... & Xing, X. (2020). Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan,
China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine.
Reichert, L., Brack, S., & Scheuermann, B. (2020). Privacy-preserving contact tracing of covid-19 patients. Sourced
from:
Roddam, A. W. (2001). Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases: Model Building, Analysis and Interpretation.
International Journal of Epidemiology, 30(1), 186–186. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/30.1.186
Rodrigues, H. S. (2016). Application of SIR epidemiological model: new trends. International Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Informatics, 10. http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.02565
Scott, D. (2020). What good digital contact tracing might look like. Vox. Last accessed: 29th April, 2020. Last accessed:
01st
May,
2020.
Sourced
from:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/375.pdfhttps://www.vox.com/2020/4/22/21231443/coronavirus-contact-tracingapp-states
Senga, M., Koi, A., Moses, L., Wauquier, N., Barboza, P., Fernandez-Garcia, M. D., ... & Kargbo, D. (2017). Contact
tracing performance during the Ebola virus disease outbreak in Kenema district, Sierra Leone. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1721), 20160300.

Shamsi, J. A., & Khojaye, M. A. (2018). Understanding privacy violations in big data systems. IT Professional, 20(3),
73-81.
Skelton, J. A., Loveland, J. E., & Yeagley, J. L. (1996). Recalling symptom episodes affects reports of immediatelyexperienced symptoms: Inducing symptom suggestibility. Psychology and Health, 11(2), 183-201.
Slovic P. (2000). The perception of risk. London: Earthscan.
Sun, K., & Viboud, C. (2020). Impact of contact tracing on SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Lancet, DOI: 10.1016/S14733099(20)30357-1
TIAA, (2018). Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979. Last accessed: 02nd May, 2020. Sourced from:
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2019C00010
van der Heijden, M., Lucas, P. J., Lijnse, B., Heijdra, Y. F., & Schermer, T. R. (2013). An autonomous mobile system
for the management of COPD. Journal of biomedical informatics, 46(3), 458-469.
Vazquez-Prokopec, G., Montgomery, B., Horne, P., Clennon, J., & Ritchie, S. (2017). Combining contact tracing with
targeted indoor residual spraying significantly reduces dengue transmission. Science Advances, 3, e1602024.
Velikova, M. V., Terwisscha van Scheltinga, J. A., Lucas, P. J., & Spaanderman, M. (2014). Exploiting causal functional
relationships in Bayesian network modelling for personalised healthcare. International Journal of Approximate
Reasoning. 55. pp 59-73.
Volk, S. (2020). Coronavirus contact-tracing apps: Most of us won’t cooperate unless everyone does. The
Conversation. Last accessed: 29th April, 2020. Sourced from: https://theconversation.com/coronaviruscontact-tracing-apps-most-of-us-wont-cooperate-unless-everyone-does-135959
Wagner-Egger, P., Bangerter, A., Gilles, I., Green, E., Rigaud, D., Krings, F., ... & Clémence, A. (2011). Lay perceptions
of collectives at the outbreak of the H1N1 epidemic: heroes, villains and victims. Public Understanding of
Science, 20(4), 461-476.
Wheaton, M. G., Abramowitz, J. S., Berman, N. C., Fabricant, L. E., & Olatunji, B. O. (2012). Psychological predictors
of anxiety in response to the H1N1 (swine flu) pandemic. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36(3), 210-218.
Whitaker, S. (2020). Hundreds of academics back privacy-friendly coronavirus contact tracing apps. Techcrunch. Last
accessed: 29th April, 2020. Sourced from: https://techcrunch.com/2020/04/20/academics-contact-tracing/
Woodley, M. (2020). RACGP releases COVIDSafe factsheet. Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Last
accessed: 05th May, 2020. Sourced from: https://www1.racgp.org.au/newsgp/professional/racgp-releasescovidsafe-fact-sheet?feed=RACGPnewsGPArticles
Xia, Y., & Lee, G. (2020). How to return to normalcy: Fast and comprehensive contact tracing of COVID-19 through
proximity sensing using mobile devices. ArXiv preprint: 2004.12576v1
Yasaka, T., Lehrich, B., & Sahyouni, R. (2020). Peer-to-peer contact tracing: Development of a privacy-preserving
smartphone app. JMIR MHEALTH and UHEALTH, 8(4), e18936.

