COVID-19: Nowcasting Reproduction Factors Using Biased Case Testing Data.
Carlo R. Contaldi∗

arXiv:2005.12252v1 [q-bio.PE] 25 May 2020

Headquarters, Standing Joint Command (UK) and
Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK
(Dated: May 26, 2020)
Timely estimation of the current value for COVID-19 reproduction factor R has become a key
aim of efforts to inform management strategies. R is an important metric used by policy-makers in
setting mitigation levels and is also important for accurate modelling of epidemic progression. This
brief paper introduces a method for estimating R from biased case testing data. Using testing data,
rather than hospitalisation or death data, provides a much earlier metric along the symptomatic
progression scale. This can be hugely important when fighting the exponential nature of an epidemic.
We develop a practical estimator and apply it to Scottish case testing data to infer a current (20
May 2020) R value of 0.74 with 95% confidence interval [0.48 − 0.86].

I.

INTRODUCTION

The worldwide COVID-19 pandemic poses a particular challenge for data–driven epidemiological modelling
due to the inability of testing regimes to provide a fair,
unbiased sample of the infection rate in the general population. Testing has, understandably, been prioritised for
essential, key–workers associated with a country’s health
systems, emergency services, or critical infrastructure.
Focusing only these sections of the population means
testing is a highly biased tracer of the underlying infection rate. The result is that data analysis has focused on
death or hospitalisation data as more robust indicators of
disease progression 1 2 3 . The disadvantage is that these
provide a time-lagged metric of the disease with respect
to the point of infection. The lag between infection and
hospitalisation could be as long as two weeks whilst the
lag to recovery or death could be an additional two weeks
or more (see e.g. [1]).
As countries move out of initial lockdowns and into
recovery phases the focus will be on indicators of any
second wave of infections. Testing data could provide
a key indicator for rising levels of transmission but the
challenge is to account for the biased selection of the population that is being tested due to limited capacity. In
this paper we introduce a method for estimating current
values of R using biased testing data. This comes under
a class of methods know as nowcasting and are a more
useful input to policy–making than forecasts based on
model fits using data that lags the point of infection by
many days. Since an epidemic is essentially an exponentially unstable system, providing a feedback to mitigate
instabilities at the earliest possible time can change the
impact by orders of magnitude.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section II we
introduce a simple extension of SIR models that includes

∗
1
2
3

additional compartments. These are used to show how
the effect of multiple pathways from infection to death
or recovery can be included into the estimate of reproduction factors. Section III introduces a model for linear
biasing of testing data with respect to underlying infections and shows how this can be combined with a linearised approximation of the early stages of the epidemic
in order to obtain an estimator for the reproduction factor R as a function of time. In Section IV we show how
the estimator can be applied to practical situations which
require proxies for correction factors. We apply the estimator to Scottish, historic case testing data in Section V.
The application yields an estimate for R(t) in Scotland.
We discuss the results in Section VI.

II.

SIRFH COMPARTMENTAL MODEL

In order to determine a method for estimating R
using biased testing data we use an extension of the
Susceptible–Infected–Removed (SIR) [2, 3] compartmental epidemic model. The extension introduces additional
compartments that track hospitalisations and hospital–
based fatalities. The SIRFH model has been used to fit
epidemic parameters to UK hospital and death data in
aide to the military response to the current outbreak [4].
A more complete model would include latent compartment and non–hospital based fatalities but as we shall
see, for the purpose of this estimate, these are not strictly
necessary.

The model consists of a set of coupled ordinary differential equations for the following compartmental break
down of a population; Susceptible (S), Infected (I), Rec.contaldi@imperial.ac.uk
www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/ covered (R), Fatalities (F ), and Hospitalised (H). The
total population is a conserved number N = S + I + R +
covid-19
www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/tackling-covid-19/
F +H. The variables are linked via a set of coupling rates
www.ox.ac.uk/coronavirus-research
which may themselves have additional time-dependence

2
through an external deterministic mechanism,
dS
S
dI
S
= −β I ,
= β I − (γ + α)I ,
dt
N
dt
N
dH
dR
= γI + ζH ,
= αI − (ζ + µ)H ,
dt
dt
dF
= µH ,
dt

(1)

where t is the independent variable (in units of days).
Integrating the equations leads to a time evolution for
all compartments. Initial conditions are required for integration and usually consist of a seed number of initial
infections I0 . These also determine the initial number of
susceptible individuals S0 = N − I0 . All other variables
have vanishing initial conditions.
The rate variables are to be interpreted as effective
rates which may be susceptible to a combination of external factors not directly modelled by the set of differential
equations. The model does not include natural mortality
or birth processes that would change the underlying total for the population. This simplification is equivalent
to assuming that the duration of the epidemic is short
compared to the timescale on which the total population
changes in the absence of excess deaths.
In Table I we summarise the physical interpretation of
the five coupling rates. The rate β is often related to
a basic reproduction factor R0 for the disease through
β = R0 γ. The reproduction factor describes the average
number of new infections caused by an infected individual during the timescale 1/γ for which the individual is
assumed to be infectious. All rates included in the model
may themselves be time-dependent with their evolution
determine by mechanisms external to the model. β, in
particular, is susceptible to mitigation strategies such as
social distancing and lockdowns. In this work we assume
that only β is time-dependent via R0 = R(t).
TABLE I. Interpretation of the model rates controlling the
movement of the population between model compartments in
the SIRFH model (1)
Parameter Interpretation
β
Susceptible → Infected
α
Infected → Hospital
γ
Infected → Recovered
Hospital → Fatality
µ
ζ
Hospital → Recovered

III.

BIASED, LINEARISED SYSTEM

During the initial stages of the epidemic, when S ≈
N (1 + ) with   1, the system (1) can be linearised
and the equation for dI/dt decoupled to obtain
d log I
= γR(1 + ) − (γ + α) .
dt

(2)

 is a perturbation variable which only becomes large
when the system departs from the linear regime. In terms
of the decoupled system, it can be understood as a correction term accounting for the non–linear coupling between
I and S compartments. We can invert (2) to obtain an
equation for an estimate R̃(t) as a function of the rate at
which the logarithm of the number of infections is changing



1
1 d ln I
R̃(t) ≈
1+
+α
.
(3)
1+
γ
dt
Therefore, if we could establish γ, α, and the rate
d ln I/dt, we could determine the instantaneous reproduction factor R if the decoupled, linearised approximation holds. This estimate would be accurate in the early
stages of the epidemic when still far from the herd immunity fixed point.
In the absence of a direct measurement for d ln I/dt we
consider how biased testing can be used to evaluate R(t).
We introduce a linear bias factor b(t) [5] and define
P (t) =

1
NT (t) b(t) I(t) ,
N

(4)

where P is the number of test–confirmed cases at time
t that resulted from NT tests. Both the bias factor
and NT (t) modulate the positive counts with respect
to the underlying infection rate I(t)/N but the effect
of any changing test capacity can be removed by considering only the positive fraction of test results p(t) ≡
P (t)/NT (t) such that
p(t) =

1
b(t) I(t) .
N

(5)

Considering the derivative of p we have
d ln p d ln b
d ln I
=
−
.
dt
dt
dt

(6)

This allows us to relate R to the rates of change in the
logarithm of p and linear bias factor b


1
1
d ln p d ln b
R̃(t) =
+
−
+ α . (7)
1 +  γ(1 + )
dt
dt
This result shows that, since R is related to the rate at
which the infection is progressing, it is not sensitive to
the biasing itself but to the derivative of the logarithm of
bias. If the selection of the population being tested remains relatively constant the term d ln b/dt will be small
and a measurement of p(t) can be used to estimate R(t).
The rate α incorporates the rate at which individuals are
being removed from the infected compartment through
a channel other than recovery. In the SIRFH model this
is the rate at which infected are hospitalised 4 and thus

4

We are assuming there is no nosocomial infection.

3

FIG. 1. Epidemic curves (top) for a constant R = 2.5 model
with 1/γ = 6 days, ζ = 0.05, α = 0.0026, µ = 0.034, and 5000
seed infections. The estimate R̃ (bottom) is shown for both
zeroth and first order in epsilon. The total population N is
50 million in this model and b is assumed to be constant.

removed from the infection chain. It could also describe
the rate at which individuals are removed through isolation. Unless the hospitalisation or isolation fraction is
comparable to I(t)/N this term will be small. α < 0.005
for the current outbreak [4].
Fig. 1 shows the application of (7) to a model with
constant R = 2.5. The linear bias is assumed to be constant in this example such that d ln p/dt = d ln I/dt. We
use  = S/N − 1 and since this is obtained from a full
integration of the non-linear system we recover R exactly
at first order in .
This example is an unmitigated scenario where the
disease progresses rapidly through the full infection and
reaches herd immunity for the particular value of R. The
zeroth order estimate R̃(0) diverges from the true value
as soon as  ∼ 1 close to the peak of infections. A zeroth
order estimate would therefore be of little value in such
a scenario. Below we show how some simple refinement
can improve on this.

FIG. 2. Epidemic curves (top) for a time-dependent R(t)
scenario where mitigation is in place. All other rates are same
as in the previous scenario. The estimated reproduction factor
(bottom) is shown for successive refinements of the correction
factor. We assume perfect knowledge of θ(tf ) at tf = day
60 (vertical dashed line) but its time-dependence is unknown.
The correction ˜ using c(t) as a proxy for (t) recovers the true
R(t) accurately. Despite being normalised around tf = 60 this
correction works well even beyond the point where the true
R increases beyond 1.

IV.

PRACTICAL ESTIMATION OF THE
REPRODUCTION FACTOR

In practical situations b is not constant and we do not
know , γ, and α exactly. In the following we assume
alpha is sufficiently small and can be neglected. This
will be true for any epidemic where the hospitalisation
rate is small compare to the basic transmission rate.
A distribution for γ will be know with some degree of
precision from studies of the serial interval of the disease
[6]. We will introduce a distribution in the application
below.
Maintaining a constant selection of the population in
measuring p will also mitigate against the term d ln b/dt.
Alternatively, if b changes in rapid stages, for example
through rapid changes in testing regime, it will lead to
sharp peaks in d ln b/dt which will have limited effects on
longer–term trends in R̃. Here, we focus on a proxy for
the correction .
A crude approximation for  can be obtained if we have

4
access to an estimate of the fraction of the population
that has been infected by time tf 5
θ(tf ) =

I(tf ) + R(tf )
.
N

(8)

A linear approximation for  could be employed
¯(t) = −

θ(tf )
t.
tf

(9)

Assuming we observe the curve p(t) we can integrate
it to obtain its normalised cumulative
Z
1 t
c(t) =
dt p(t) ,
(10)
C 0
with
Z
C=

tf

dt p(t) .

(11)

0

A better proxy for  would then be
˜(t) = −θ(tf ) c(t) .

(12)

Any approximation for the correction term  will fail
once the number of infected becomes comparable to N
but in epidemics where transmission is suppressed using
external mitigation and S remains close to N the proxies
can be used effectively.
We show an example in Fig. 2. R is now timedependent with a suppression (lockdown) phase with
R < 1 and a later phase where R > 1. We use a constant bias factor of 20 to approximate p(t), although this
normalisation does not affect the estimate of R.
We assume an estimate of θ is obtained on day 60,
during the lockdown. On that day θ = 17%. This value
is used to normalise the approximations ¯(t) (9) and ˜(t)
(12). The estimate using the correction ˜ recovers the
true R(t) very accurately even beyond the point tf and
where R > 1.
V.

APPLICATION TO SCOTTISH TESTING
DATA

Scotland is the only UK nation whose government publishes testing data that includes positive and negative
testing numbers6 . The historical record is for the whole
of Scotland.
The results of the estimate is shown in Fig.3. We take
the daily positive fraction of tests as the data and fit a
univariate spline to ln p with a number of knots limited

5
6

We neglect compartments H and F here.
https://www.gov.scot/publications/
coronavirus-covid-19-trends-in-daily-data/,
23 May.

FIG. 3. Scottish testing data (top) with a Nyquist limited
spline used as an estimate of p(t) and its cumulative function
c(t). The R estimate (bottom) shows the result given by the
mean value for the serial interval 1/γ and the 95% ranges.
The estimate assumes 5% of the Scottish population has been
infected so far.

to Nk = L/14 where L is the length of the set in days
(the ”Nyquist” spline). This ensures that any systematic, weekly modulation due to reporting is smoothed
out whilst retaining as much of the long–term trend as
possible. We use the smoothed estimate as p(t) and calculate its cumulative function c(t). We assume θ=5% of
the Scottish population has been infected so far 7 .
We assume the infectiousness timescale (serial interval)
1/γ is a random variable following a Gamma distribution
of shape parameter 6.5 and scale parameter 0.62 [6]. We
sample the distribution to find the 2.5%, 50%, and 97.5%
percentiles and use these values to evaluate a median R̃
and 95% confidence intervals around it.
This preliminary analysis indicates that the reproduction factor for the whole of Scotland is R = 0.74 with
95% confidence interval [0.48 − 0.86]. A key assumption
underlying this result is that the Scottish outbreak is no
where near heard immunity level which would be closer
to the range of 60% to 70% as the infected fraction of the
total population.

accessed
7

To refine this one could marginalise over a range in θ.

5
VI.

DISCUSSION

The method discussed here could be used to analyse
any regional outbreak where the total number of infected
individuals is small compared to the total population.
The key requirement for this analysis is the ability to
determine the positive fraction of samples tested. This
data is not openly available for other UK nations or for
Scotland at sub-national level.
A key advantage of this method is that it uses data
from case testing. This is the largest data set upstream of
case hospitalisations that is a direct tracer, albeit biased,
of the infection. As such it offers a valuable insight for
planning purposes and for policy–making. Considering
the exponential increase in cases when R > 1 every day
gained in obtaining indications of rising infection rates
will result in a large, positive impact for any mitigation
strategy.

setting up systems for ”smart” lockdowns where mitigation strategies are implemented locally in order to minimise economic and health impact of intervention in areas
where transmission rates are not high.
The large volume of data can also be used in mitigating effects of any testing regime changes. For example,
samples used could be selected to maintain the bias as
constant as possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Given the volume of data it should be feasible to determine R at sub-national resolution. This could help in

We acknowledge many useful discussions with Professors Arttu Rajantie and Toby Wiseman. The author
would also like to acknowledge the many individuals in
the Information Manoeuvre Group (IMG) HQ SJC(UK)
whose extraordinary effort to understand the epidemic
inspired and enabled this work. The author also acknowledges the large and rapidly evolving body of literature on
COVID-19 which they have not been able to adequately
survey. As such they are grateful for any indication of
related work by readers.

[1] K. Gaythorpe et al. (2020), report 8, Imperial COVID
Reports.
[2] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London Series A 115, 700 (1927).
[3] H. W. Hethcote, SIAM Review 42, 599 (2000).

[4] C. R. Contaldi (2020), internal report, Standing Joint
Command.
[5] N. Kaiser, Astrophysical Journal Letters 284, L9 (1984).
[6] A. G. Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra et al. (2020), report
13, Imperial COVID Reports.

