Computational modeling of Human-nCoV
protein-protein interaction network
Sovan Saha1,+, Anup Kumar Halder2,+, Soumyendu Sekhar Bandyopadhyay2,
Piyali Chatterjee3, Mita Nasipuri2, and Subhadip Basu2,*
1

Dr. Sudhir Chandra Sur Degree Engineering College, Computer Science and Engineering, Kolkata, 700074,
India
2
Jadavpur University, Computer Science and Engineering, Kolkata, 700032, India
3
Netaji Subhash Engineering College, Computer Science and Engineering, Kolkata, 700152, India
*
subhadip.basu@jadavpuruniversity.in
+
Equal Contribution, both shared 1st authorship

ABSTRACT
COVID-19 has created a global pandemic with high morbidity and mortality in 2020. Novel coronavirus (nCoV), also
known as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2), is responsible for this deadly disease.
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) has declared that nCoV is highly genetically similar to SARSCoV epidemic in 2003 (∼ 89% similarity). Limited number of clinically validated Human-nCoV protein interaction data is
available in the literature. With this hypothesis, the present work focuses on developing a computational model for nCoVHuman protein interaction network, using the experimentally validated SARS-CoV-Human protein interactions. Initially,
level-1 and level-2 human spreader proteins are identified in SARS-CoV-Human interaction network, using SusceptibleInfected-Susceptible (SIS) model. These proteins are considered as potential human targets for nCoV bait proteins. A geneontology based fuzzy affinity function has been used to construct the nCoV-Human protein interaction network at ∼
99.98% specificity threshold. This also identifies the level-1 human spreaders for COVID-19 in human protein-interaction
network. Level-2 human spreaders are subsequently identified using the SIS model. The derived host-pathogen interaction
network is finally validated using 7 potential FDA listed drugs for COVID-19 with significant overlap between the known
drug target proteins and the identified spreader proteins.

Introduction
COVID-19 evolved in the Chinese city of Wuhan (Hubei province)1. The first case of human species getting
affected by nCoV was observed on 31 December 2019 2. Soon it expands its adverse effect on almost all
nations within a very short span of time3. World Health Organization (WHO) observes that the massive
disastrous outbreak of nCoV is mainly due to mass community spreading and declares a global health
emergency on 30 January 20204. After proper assessment, WHO presumes its fatality rate to be 4%5 which urges
the global researchers to work together to discover a proper treatment for this pandemic6, 7. Coronaviridae is the
family to which a corona virus belongs. It also infects birds and mammals besides affecting human beings.
Though the common symptoms of corona virus are common cold, cough etc., but it is accompanied by severe
acute chronic respiratory disease along with multiple organ failure leading to human death. Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) are the two major outbreaks in
2003 and 2012 respectively before SARS-CoV2. The source of origin of SARS was located in Southern China.
Its fatality rate was within 14%-15%8 due to which 774 people lost their lives among 8804 affected cases. Saudi
Arabia was marked as the base for the commencement of MERS. 858 persons among 2494 infected cases were
defeated in their battle against MERS virus. Thus it generated a much higher fatality rate of 34.4%9 when
compared to that of SARS. All of the three epidemic creators SARS, MERS and SARS-CoV2 are biologically
included in the genus Betacoronavirus which is under the family Coronaviridae. Both structural and nonstructural proteins are involved in the formation of SARS-CoV2. Out of the two, structural proteins like the
envelope (E) protein, membrane (M) protein, nucleocapsid (N) protein and the spike (S) protein play a major
role in transmitting the disease by binding with the receptors after entering into human body10 . No clinically
proven and approved vaccine for nCoV is available till date though researchers have been trying hard to develop
it. So there is an urgent need to understand and analyse the mechanism of disease transmission of this new virus.

Host-pathogen protein-protein interaction networks (PPIN) are very significant for understanding the mechanism of
transmission of infection, which is essential for the development of new and more effective therapeutics, including
rational drug design. Progression of Infection and disease results in due to the interaction of proteins in between
pathogen and host. Pathogen plays an active role in spreading infection. It has been proved to be an acute threat to
human lives as it has the mutative capability to adapt itself toward drugs. Pathogen and host PPIN permits
pathogenic microorganisms to utilize host capabilities by manipulating the host mechanisms in order to abscond
from the immune responses of the host11–13. Detection of target proteins through the analysis of pathogen and host
PPIN is the central point of research study14, 15. Topologically significant proteins having higher degree of
interactions are generally found to be essential drug targets. However, proteins having less number of interactions
or topologically not significant may be involved in the mechanism of infection because of some biological pathway
relevance.
However, clinically validated Human-nCoV protein interaction data is limited in the current literature. This has
motivated us to develop a new computational model for nCoV-Human PPI network. We have subsequently
validated the proteins involved in the host-pathogen interactions with respect to potential Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) drugs for COVID-19 treatment. Key aspects of this research work are highlighted below:
• It has been reported that SARS-CoV has ∼ 89%16, 17 genetic similarities with nCoV.
• SARS-CoV-Human protein-protein interaction network has also been studied widely and available in
literature18–20.
• Recently we have developed a computational model to identify potential spreader proteins in a
Human-SARS CoV interaction network using SIS model21.
• Sequence information of some of the nCoV proteins have been released22.
• Gene ontological (GO) information (Biological Process (BP), Molecular Function (MF), Cellular
Component (CC)) of some of the nCoV proteins are also available22, 23.
• Recently we have also developed a method to predict interaction affinity between proteins from the
available GO graph.24.
• Assessment of interaction affinity between nCoV proteins with potential Human target/bait proteins, which
are susceptible to SARS-CoV infection, has been done.
• Fuzzy affinity thresholding is done to detect High Quality nCoV-Human PPIN. The selected human
proteins are considered as level-1 human spreader nodes of nCoV.
• Level 2 spreader node in nCoV-Human PPIN are detected using spreadability index and validated by
SIS21, 25 model.
• Validation of our developed model is done with respect to the target proteins of the potential FDA drugs
for COVID-19 treatment.26

Results
Our developed computational model of nCoV-Human PPIN contains high quality interactions (HQI) and proteins
identified by Fuzzy affinity thresholding and spreadability index validated by SIS model respectively. Sources
of input and the generated results always play a crucial role in any computational model which is also true for
our proposed model.
Overview of the data sets
SARS-CoV-Human PPIN serves as a baseline for our model. The potential level-1 and level-2 human
spreaders of SARS-CoV becomes the possible candidate set for selecting level-1 human spreaders of SARSCoV2. Various datasets have been curated for this purpose which has been outlined below:
Human PPIN

The dataset27, 28 consists of all possible interactions between human proteins that are experimentally
documented in humans. Human proteins are represented as nodes while the physical interactions between
proteins are represented by edges. It is a collection of 21557 nodes and includes 342353 edges/interactions.

SARS-CoV PPIN

The dataset18 consists of interactions between SARS-CoV proteins. It contains 7 unique proteins along with the
involvement of 17 interacting edges out of which only the densely connected proteins are considered rather
than the isolated ones since theformer play a more active role in transmission of infection than the later.
SARS-CoV-Human PPIN

The dataset18 comprises of 118 interactions between SARS-CoV and Human. It is used to fetch the level-1
human interactions of SARS-CoV.

Figure 1. Computational model for the selection of spreader nodes in Human-SARS CoV PPIN by
spreadability index. Red colored nodes represent SARS-CoV proteins while blue colored nodes are the selected
spreader nodes in it. Deep green colored nodes represent level-1 human connected proteins with SARS-CoV
proteins while yellow colored nodes represent the selected human spreaders in it. Light green colored nodes
represent level-2 human spreaders of SARS-CoV.
SARS-CoV2 Proteins

This data is collected from pre-released dataset of available SARS-CoV2 protein from UniProtKB22 (https://covid19.uniprot.org/) which include 14 reviewed SARS-CoV2 proteins.
GO Graph and Protein-GO annotations

Three types (CC, MF and BP) of GO graph are collected from GO Consortium23,
(http://geneontology.org/). Protein to GO-annotation map is retrieved from UniProtKB database.

29

Potential COVID-19 FDA drugs

Seven potential FDA drugs : Lopinavir30, Ritonavir31, Hydroxychloroquine32, 33, Azithromycin33,
Remdesivir34–36, Favipi- ravir37, 38 and Darunavir39 have been identified from the DrugBank40 published white
paper26 which have been used for validation in our proposed model.
Selection of spreader nodes in Human-SARS CoV interaction network using spreadability
index validated by SIS model:
SARS-CoV-Human PPIN (up to level-2) is formed by the combination of SARS-CoV-Human and HumanHuman PPIN datasets. SARS-CoV-Human dataset generates the direct level-1 human interactions of SARS-CoV

while human-Human PPIN dataset is used to fetch the corresponding level-2 human interactions. Potential
spreader nodes are identified using spreadability index which has been validated by SIS model (see Figure 1)21.
The selected spreader nodes in SARS-COV-Human PPIN are highlighted in Table S1, Table S2 and Table S3
in the supplementary document. The network view of SARS-CoV-Human PPIN at each level and various
selected thresholds are also available online (SARS-CoV Level-1 human spreaders, Level-1 & Level-2:high
human spreaders at high threshold of spreadability index, and Level-1 & Level-2:low human spreaders at low
threshold of spreadability index).

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of Fuzzy PPI model. A) The fuzzy PPI model finds the interaction affinity
between the SARS-CoV2 and Human proteins (L1 and L2 spreader of SARS-CoV) using gene ontological
information. B) All GO pair-wise interaction affinities are assessed from three independent GO-relationship
graphs CC, MF and BP and fuzzy binding affinity of a protein pair is computed from all three pairwise scores of
all GO-pair affinities. C) Heatmap representation of Fuzzy PPI score. D) Network representation of Human and
SARS-CoV2 proteins with 0.2 onward threshold of Fuzzy PPI score at high specificity. Finally, high quality
interactions are extracted to retrieve the potential human prey for SARS-CoV2 at 1.4 threshold.

Figure 3. Network representation of HQIs (score≥ 0.4) between SARS-CoV2 and human proteins. Blue and
yellow spherical nodes represent the SARS-CoV2 and human proteins respectively. The edge width reflects
the fuzzy score of binding affinity.

Identification of the nCoV-Human proteins interactions using Fuzzy PPI model:
The GO information can be useful to infer the binding affinity of any pair of interacting proteins using three
different types of GO hierarchical relationship graph (CC, MF and BP)23. The fuzzy PPI model has been
proposed to find the interaction affinity between the SARS-CoV2 and Human proteins using GO based
information (please see Figure 2 and Methods for details). To identify the interactors of SARS-CoV2 on human
using the Fuzzy PPI model, a set of candidate proteins are selected as the L1 and L2 spreader nodes of SARSCoV using SIS model (as depicted in Figure 1). Fuzzy PPI model is constructed from the ontological
relationship graphs by evaluating the affinity between all possible GO pairs annotated from any target protein
pair and finally the fuzzy score of interaction affinity of protein pair is computed from these GO pair-wise
interaction affinity in to a range of [0,1] (details are discussed in the Methods). The heatmap representation of
fuzzy interaction affinities (with score ≥ 0.2 for very high specificity ~ 99%) is shown in supplementary Figure
S1 and Table S4. The high quality interaction (HQI) is retrieved at threshold 0.4, (almost ~ 99.98%
Specificity) which results total 78 interactions between SARS-CoV2 and Human (37 proteins). The interaction
networks predicted from Fuzzy-PPI model are shown in Figure 3.
Identification of Human spreader proteins for nCoV
Human proteins present in the high quality interactions of nCoV-Human PPIN fetched by applying fuzzy affinity
threshold are considered as level-1 spreaders. From these level-1 spreaders, corresponding level-2 human
interactions are obtained using human-Human PPIN dataset. Spreadability index is thus computed for these
level-2 human proteins for the identification of level-2 human spreader nodes. The selection is also verified by
SIS model. The selected spreader nodes in SARSCOV-Human PPIN are highlighted in Table S4, Table S5 and
Table S6 in the supplementary document. A sample computational model

Figure 4. Derived nCoV-Human PPIN with human spreader proteins from proposed computational model.
Blue, yellow and green colored nodes denote nCoV spreaders, its human level-1 and level-2 spreaders. level-1
human spreaders are detected by applying fuzzy affinity thresholding while level-2 human spreaders are
identified by spreadability index validated by SIS model.

Figure 5. Validation of our developed computational model with respect to the target proteins of the FDA
accepted drugs for COVID-19 treatment. Yellow and green colored nodes denote level-1 and level-2 human
spreader of nCoV which acts as the drug protein targets.
of nCoV-Human PPIN under high threshold has been highlighted in Figure 4. The network view of SARSCoV2-Human PPIN at each level and various selected thresholds are also available online (SARS-CoV2 Level-1
human spreaders, Level-1 & Level-2:high spreaders at high threshold of spreadability index and Level-1 &
Level-2:low human spreaders at low threshold of spreadability index).
Validation using potential FDA drugs for COVID-19:
After proper assessment of all potential drugs as mentioned in the DrugBank40 white paper26, seven
drugs Lopinavir30, Ritonavir31, Hydroxychloroquine32, 33, Azithromycin33, Remdesivir34–36, Favipiravir37, 38
and Darunavir39 are identified which are showing expected results to some extent in the clinical trials done for
SARS-CoV2 vaccine till date. All approved human protein targets for each of the five approved drugs are
fetched from the advanced search section41 of drug bank40, 42. These targets when searched in our proposed
model of nCoV-Human PPIN are found to play an active role of spreader nodes. This reveals the fact that the
selected spreader nodes are of biological importance in transmitting infection in a network which actually make
them the protein drug targets of the potential FDA drugs for COVID-19. The target protein hits in our nCoVHuman PPIN for each of the 7 potential FDA drugs are highlighted in Figure 5. It can be observed that 4 target
protein hits are obtained for Hydroxychloroquine, 3 target proteins for Ritonavir, 2 target protein hits for each of
Lopinavir, Darunavir and Azithromycin and 1 target protein hit for Remdesivir and Favipiravir. Out of these
protein targets, ACE2 is the most important one since it is considered to be the one of the crucial receptors of
human for nCoV to transmit infection deep inside the human cell43–45.

Discussion
In any host-pathogen interaction network, identification of spreader nodes is crucial for disease prognosis. Not
every protein in an interaction network has intense disease spreading capability. In this work, we have used the
SARS-CoV-Human PPIN network and the spreader nodes at both level-1 and level-2 using the SIS model.
These spreader nodes are considered for computing the protein interaction affinity score to unmask the level-1
human spreaders of nCoV. GO annotations have been also taken into consideration along with PPIN properties
to make this model more effective and significant. With the gradual progress of the work, it has been observed
that the selected human spreader nodes, identified by our proposed model, emerge as the potential protein
targets of the FDA approved drugs for COVID-19. The basic hypotheses of the work may be listed as follows:

Figure 6. Specificity at different threshold (x-axis) of binding affinity obtained from Fuzzy PPI model for
complete human proteome interaction network. At 0.2 onward threshold, it produces high specificity with
respect to benchmark positive and negative interaction data. High quality interactions are extracted at 0.4
threshold with ~ 99.9% specificity.
• There is a genetic overlap of ~ 89% (as suggested by ICTV) between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2,
which also leads to a significant overlap in spreader proteins between human-SARS-COV and humanSARS-COV2 protein-interaction network.
• Fuzzy PPI approach can assess protein interaction affinities at very high specificity with respect to
benchmark datasets
as shown in Figure 6. High specificity signifies very low false positive rate at a given threshold. Thus, at
0.4 threshold (~ 99.9% specificity), the proposed model evaluates high quality positive interactions in
Human-nCoV PPIN.
Finally we propose, that the developed computational model effectively identifies Human-nCoV PPIs with
high specificity. nCoV-Human interactions are inferred from another pandemic initiator SARS-CoV which is
believed to be highly genetically similar to nCoV. We also identify the human spreader proteins (up to level-2)
using spreadability index, validated through SIS model. Due to high network density in human interaction
network, number of proteins increase with the transition from one level to another. So, our proposed model is
also capable of identifying human spreader proteins in level-2 by using spreadability index which is validated
by SIS model.
Target proteins of the potential FDA drugs for COVID-19 are found to overlap with the spreader nodes of
the proposed computational nCoV-Human protein interaction model. Target proteins of seven potential FDA
drugs: Lopinavir30, Ritonavir31, Hydroxychloroquine32, 33, Azithromycin33, Remdesivir34–36, Favipiravir37, 38
and Darunavir39 for COVID-19 as mentioned in the DrugBank white paper26 overlap with the spreader nodes
of the proposed in silico nCoV-Human protein interaction model (see Figure 5). Though clinical trials for
COVID-19 vaccine in 2020 are on their way till date but three out of the seven i.e. Remdesivir46
Hydroxychloroquine47 and Favipiravir47 are found to be the most promising as well as effective ones and
their protein targets R1AB_SARS2, TLR9, ACE2, CYP3A4 and ABCB1 are also successfully identified as
spreader nodes by our proposed model. This assessment reveals the fact that these spreader nodes are indeed
have biological relevance relative to disease propagation.

Methods
Our developed computational model for nCoV-Human PPIN consists of two important methodologies 1)
identification of spreader nodes by spreadability index along with the validation of SIS model and 2) Fuzzy PPI
model.
Identification of spreader nodes by spreadability index along with the validation of SIS model:
In nCoV-Human PPIN, the former acts as a pathogen while the host acts as bait. The transmission of infection

starts when a pathogen enters a host body and starts infecting its protein which in turn affects its directly or
indirectly connected neighborhood proteins. Considering this method of transmission, PPIN of human and
SARS-CoV are considered to detect spreader nodes. Spreader nodes are those nodes proteins which actually
transmits the disease fast among its neighbors. But not all the nodes in a PPIN are spreaders. So, proper
detection of spreader nodes is crucial. Thus, spreader nodes are identified by spreadability index which
actually measure the transmission capability of a node protein.

Figure 7. Synthetic protein-protein interaction network. It is comprised of 10 nodes and 25 edges.
Table 1. Computation of spreadability index of Figure 7 along with validation of selected top 5 spreader nodes
by SIS model.

Rank
1
2
3
4
5

Proteins
Node 3
Node 9
Node 6
Node 8
Node 1

6
5
5
6
5

3
4
2
2
4

Edge
Ratio

Neighborhood
Density

Node
Weight

Spreadability
Index

Sum of SIS
infection rate of
top 5 nodes

1.75
1.20
2.00
2.33
1.20

6.94
7.07
3.93
2.27
4.21

2.83
3.00
2.60
3.25
3.40

14.99
11.48
10.46
8.55
8.45

1.19

Compactness of PPIN and its transferal capability is evaluated using centrality analysis. Nodes having high
centrality value are usually considered as spreader nodes or the most critical node in a network.
Spreadability index21 is one of the centrality based measure which is a combination of three major topological
neighborhood based features of a network. They are: 1) Node weight 48 2) Edge ratio49 and 3) Neighborhood
density49. Nodes having high spreadability index are considered as spreader nodes. The spreader nodes thus
identified are also validated by SIS model25. SIS model is implemented with a motive of designing the SARSCoV and SARS-CoV2 outbreak into a disease model consisting of proteins based on their present infection
status. A protein can be in either of one of the three states: 1) S: Susceptible, which means that every protein is
initially susceptible though it is not yet infected but is at risk of getting infected by disease. 2) I: Infected, which
means that the protein is already infected by the disease and 3) S: Susceptible, which means proteins again
become susceptible after getting recovered from infected state. This model is implemented in such a way that it
generates the overall infection capability of a node after a certain range of iterations. Thus the sum of the
infection capability of the top selected spreader nodes are computed by this model which is compared against
the sum obtained for the selected top critical nodes by other existing centrality measures like Betweenness
Centrality (BC)50, Closeness centrality (CC)51, Degree centrality (DC)52 and Local average centrality (LAC)53.
Our proposed method of selecting spreader nodes21 has performed better in comparison to the other existing

state-of-the-art. A synthetic PPIN is considered in Figure 7 to demonstrate the entire methodology of
spreadability index. Computational analysis of spreadability index of our proposed model with one of the other
methodology BC has been highlighted from Table 1 to supplementary Table S7.
edges which are outgoing from the ego network

whereas

is the total number of

is denoted as the total number of

interconnections in the neighborhood of node 49.
of node 3 is 6 while
of node 3 is 3 which
highlights the fact that node 3 has the highest transmission ability from its ego network to outside when
compared to other nodes. Node 3 has also the highest spreadability index. But BC failed to rank node 3 in first
position. Same scenario can be observed for some other nodes in the synthetic network too. Besides SIS
validation result shows that the selected top ranked spreader nodes in this proposed model have the highest
infection capability in comparison to the other ranked nodes.
Fuzzy PPI Model for potential SARS-CoV2-Human interaction identification:
The binding affinity between any two interacting proteins can be estimated by combining the semantic similarity
scores of the GO terms associated with the proteins15, 24, 54–56. Greater number of semantically similar GO
annotations between any protein pair indicates higher interaction affinity. Fuzzy PPI model is a hybrid
approach24 that utilizes both the topological57 features of the GO graph and information contents56, 58, 59 of the
GO terms.
GO is organized in three independent directed acyclic graphs (DAGs): molecular function (MF), biological
process(BP), and cellular component(CC)23. The nodes in each GO graph represent GO terms and the edges
represent different hierarchical relationships. In this work, two most important relations ‘is a’ and ‘part of’ has
been used for GO relations29.
The semantic similarity between any two proteins is estimated by considering the similarities between their
all pairs of annotating gene ontology (GO) terms belonging to a particular ontological graph. The similarity of a
GO term pair is determined by considering certain topological properties (shortest path length) of the GO graph
and the average information content (IC)60 of the disjunctive common ancestors (DCAs)54, 55 of the GO terms as
proposed in24. Fuzzy PPI first rely on a fuzzy clustering of the GO graph where the selection of GO terms as
cluster center is based on the level of association of that GO term in the GO graph. The cluster centers are
selected based on the proportion measure of GO terms. The proportion measure for any GO term t is computed
( ) (| ( )| | ( )|)⁄| ( )|where
as
( ) , ( ) represents the ascendant and descendant of
term and ( ) is the total number of GO terms in ontology O . Higher value of proportion measure
signifies higher coverage of ascendants and descendants associated with the specific node. The GO terms for
which this proportion measure is above a predefined threshold are selected as cluster centers. In this work, the
cluster centers are selected based on the threshold values as suggested in 15, 24.
After selecting the cluster centers, the degree of membership of a GO term to each of the selected cluster
centers is calculated using its respective shortest path lengths to the corresponding cluster centers. The
membership of the GO term to a cluster decreases with increase in its shortest path length to the cluster center.
(
) ⁄
( )
The membership function is defined as
where is
center and is the width of
membership function and is the shortest path length from to . The difference in membership values
between the GO pair and with respect to each cluster center, are computed to find the weight parameter.
The weight parameter is defined as
(
)
(
). This weight value determines how
dissimilar two GO terms can be with respect to the cluster centers. Next, the shared information content (SIC)
is computed using average IC60, of the DCAs of GO term pair (
) is determined from three GO graphs.
The SIC is defined as
(
) ∑
( ) ⁄|
(
)|, where
(
) represents the
(
)
disjunctive common ancestors of GO-term and .The semantic similarity of protein pair (
) for each
GO-type (CC, MF and BP), is estimated by utilizing the maximum similarity of all possible GO pairs from the
annotations of proteins and for each type of GO. The binding affinity of protein pair (
) is defined as
the average of CC, MF and BP based semantic similarity. The fuzzy score of binding affinity is computed by
normalizing the binding affinity using max-min normalization. In this work, the fuzzy binding affinity score is
computed between the protein pairs of SARS-CoV2 and human proteins using the available ontological
information. Finally, with high specificity threshold (please see Figure 6), high quality interactions are
extracted for human-SARS-CoV2.

References
1. Wang, C., Horby, P. W., Hayden, F. G. & Gao, G. F. A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health
concern. The Lancet 395, 470–473 (2020).
2. World-Health-Organization Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak.
3. World Map | CDC.
4. Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee
regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
5. Statement on the meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding
the outbreak of novel coronavirus 2019 (n-CoV) on 23 January 2020.
6. Huang, C. et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The
Lancet 395, 497–506 (2020).
7. Heymann, D. L. Data sharing and outbreaks: best practice exemplified. The Lancet 395, 469–470 (2020).
8. Organization, W. H. et al. Update 49-sars case fatality ratio, incubation period. World Heal. Organ. Geneva
(2003).
9. WHO | Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
10. Chen, Y., Liu, Q. & Guo, D. Emerging coronaviruses: genome structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J.
medical virology 92, 418–423 (2020).
11. Dyer, M. D., Murali, T. & Sobral, B. W. Computational prediction of host-pathogen protein–protein
interactions. Bioinformatics 23, i159–i166 (2007).
12. Dutta, P., Halder, A. K., Basu, S. & Kundu, M. A survey on ebola genome and current trends in
computational research on the ebola virus. Briefings functional genomics 17, 374–380 (2018).
13. Dyer, M. D., Murali, T. & Sobral, B. W. Supervised learning and prediction of physical interactions
between human and hiv proteins. Infect. Genet. Evol. 11, 917–923 (2011).
14. Saha, S., Sengupta, K., Chatterjee, P., Basu, S. & Nasipuri, M. Analysis of protein targets in pathogen–host
interaction in infectious diseases: a case study on plasmodium falciparum and homo sapiens interaction
network. Briefings functional genomics 17, 441–450 (2018).
15. Halder, A. K., Dutta, P., Kundu, M., Basu, S. & Nasipuri, M. Review of computational methods for virus–
host protein interaction prediction: a case study on novel ebola–human interactions. Briefings functional
genomics 17, 381–391 (2018).
16. China releases genetic data on new coronavirus, now deadly | CIDRAP.
17. Chan, J. F.-W. et al. Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated
from a patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting wuhan. Emerg. microbes & infections 9, 221–236
(2020).
18. Pfefferle, S. et al. The sars-coronavirus-host interactome: identification of cyclophilins as target for pancoronavirus inhibitors. PLoS pathogens 7 (2011).
19. Von Brunn, A. et al. Analysis of intraviral protein-protein interactions of the sars coronavirus orfeome.
PloS one 2 (2007).
20. Fung, T. S. & Liu, D. X. Human coronavirus: Host-pathogen interaction. Annu. review microbiology 73,
529–557 (2019).
21. Saha, S., Chatterjee, P., Basu, S. & Nasipuri, M. Detection of spreader nodes and ranking of interacting
edges in human-sars-cov protein interaction network. bioRxiv (2020).
22. Uniprot: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic acids research 45, D158–D169 (2017).
23. Consortium, G. O. The gene ontology (go) database and informatics resource. Nucleic acids research 32,
D258–D261 (2004).
24. Dutta, P., Basu, S. & Kundu, M. Assessment of semantic similarity between proteins using information
content and topological properties of the gene ontology graph. IEEE/ACM transactions on computational
biology bioinformatics 15, 839–849 (2017).
25. Bailey, N. T. et al. The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its applications (Charles Griffin &
Company Ltd, 5a Crendon Street, High Wycombe, Bucks HP13 6LE., 1975).
26. Lucy Chin, Jordan Cox, Safiya Esmail, Mark Franklin, D. L. COVID-19 : Finding the Right Fit Identifying
Potential Treatments Using a Data-Driven Approach. Drugbank White Pap. (2020).
27. Agrawal, M., Zitnik, M., Leskovec, J. et al. Large-scale analysis of disease pathways in the human
interactome. In PSB, 111–122 (World Scientific, 2018).
28. BioSNAP: Network datasets: Human protein-protein interaction network.
29. Botstein, D. et al. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nat genet 25, 25–29 (2000).
30. Harrison, C. Coronavirus puts drug repurposing on the fast track. Nat. biotechnology 38, 379–381 (2020).
31. Cao, B. et al. A trial of lopinavir–ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe covid-19. New Engl. J.
Medicine (2020).
32. Food, Administration, D. et al. Emergency use authorization http://www.fda.gov/emergencypreparedness/

counterterror- ism/medicalcountermeasures. MCMLegalRegulatoryandPolicyFra mework/ucm 182568
(2014).
33. Gautret, P. et al. Hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin as a treatment of covid-19: results of an open-label
non-randomized clinical trial. Int. journal antimicrobial agents 105949 (2020).
34. De Wit, E. et al. Prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir (gs-5734) treatment in the rhesus macaque model
of mers-cov infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 6771–6776 (2020).
35. Emergency Access to Remdesivir Outside of Clinical Trials.
36. Remdesivir Clinical Trials.
37. China approves antiviral favilavir to treat coronavirus - UPI.com.
38. Taiwan synthesizes anti-viral drug favilavir for COVID-19 patients - Focus Taiwan.
39. Efficacy and Safety of Darunavir and Cobicistat for Treatment of COVID-19 - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov.
40. Wishart, D. S. et al. Drugbank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets. Nucleic acids
research 36, D901–D906 (2008).
41. Advanced Search - DrugBank.
42. DrugBank.
43. Mourad, J.-J. & Levy, B. I. Interaction between raas inhibitors and ace2 in the context of covid-19. Nat.
Rev. Cardiol. 1–1 (2020).
44. ACE-2 is shown to be the entry receptor for SARS-CoV-2: R&D Systems.
45. Patel, A. B. & Verma, A. Covid-19 and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
blockers: what is the evidence? Jama (2020).
46. Trial shows Covid-19 patients recover with Gilead’s remdesivir.
47. Clinical Trial of Favipiravir Tablets Combine With Chloroquine Phosphate in the Treatment of Novel
Coronavirus Pneumonia - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov.
48. Wang, S. & Wu, F. Detecting overlapping protein complexes in ppi networks based on robustness.
Proteome science 11, S18 (2013).
49. Samadi, N. & Bouyer, A. Identifying influential spreaders based on edge ratio and neighborhood diversity
measures in complex networks. Computing 101, 1147–1175 (2019).
50. Anthonisse, J. The rush in a directed graph, stichting mathematisch centrum, amsterdam (1971).
51. Sabidussi, G. The centrality index of a graph. Psychometrika 31, 581–603 (1966).
52. Jeong, H., Mason, S. P., Barabási, A.-L. & Oltvai, Z. N. Lethality and centrality in protein networks.
Nature 411, 41–42 (2001).
53. Li, M., Wang, J., Chen, X., Wang, H. & Pan, Y. A local average connectivity-based method for identifying
essential proteins from the network level. Comput. biology chemistry 35, 143–150 (2011).
54. Couto, F. M., Silva, M. J. & Coutinho, P. M. Semantic similarity over the gene ontology: family correlation
and selecting disjunctive ancestors. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on
Information and knowledge management, 343–344 (2005).
55. Couto, F. M., Silva, M. J. & Coutinho, P. M. Measuring semantic similarity between gene ontology terms.
Data & knowledge engineering 61, 137–152 (2007).
56. Resnik, P. Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. arXiv preprint cmplg/9511007 (1995).
57. Jain, S. & Bader, G. D. An improved method for scoring protein-protein interactions using semantic
similarity within the gene ontology. BMC bioinformatics 11, 562 (2010).
58. Lin, D. et al. An information-theoretic definition of similarity. In Icml, vol. 98, 296–304 (1998).
59. Jiang, J. J. & Conrath, D. W. Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy. arXiv
preprint cmp-lg/9709008 (1997).
60. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. acm sigmobile mob. Comput. Commun. Rev 5,
3–55 (2001).

Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the CMATER research laboratory of the Computer Science and
Engineering Department, Jadavpur University, India, PURSE-II and UPE-II grants. Subhadip Basu
acknowledges Department of Biotechnology grant (BT/PR16356/BID/7/596/2016), Government of India. For
research fellowship support, Anup Kumar Halder acknowledges the Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme for Electronics
& IT, an initiative of Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India. We
acknowledge Prof. Jacek Sroka (Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw ) for his contribution toward the
developments of the fuzzy ppi methods.

Author contributions statement
S.S., A.K.H. and S.B. conceived the idea of the research and wrote the manuscript. S.S. and A.K.H. conducted
the experiment(s). P.C, S.S.B., M.N. and S.B. analyzed the results. M.N., P.C and S.B. reviewed the
manuscript.

Additional information
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
All Supplementary information are freely available for academic and research purpose only.
All queries should be send to the corresponding author’s email: subhadip.basu@jadavpuruniversity.in

