Non-Compulsory Measures Sufficiently Reduced
Human Mobility in Tokyo during the COVID-19
Epidemic

arXiv:2005.09423v2 [physics.soc-ph] 26 Jun 2020

Takahiro Yabe1 , Kota Tsubouchi2 , Naoya Fujiwara3,4,5 , Takayuki Wada6 , Yoshihide
Sekimoto4 , and Satish V. Ukkusuri1,*
1 Lyles

School of Civil Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
Japan Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
3 Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
4 Institute of Industrial Science, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
5 Center for Spatial Information Science, the University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan
6 Graduate School of Human Life Science, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan
* sukkusur@purdue.edu
2 Yahoo

ABSTRACT
While large scale mobility data has become a popular tool to monitor the mobility patterns during the COVID-19 pandemic,
the impacts of non-compulsory measures in Tokyo, Japan on human mobility patterns has been under-studied. Here, we
analyze the temporal changes in human mobility behavior, social contact rates, and their correlations with the transmissibility
of COVID-19, using mobility data collected from more than 200K anonymized mobile phone users in Tokyo. The analysis
concludes that by April 15th (1 week into state of emergency), human mobility behavior decreased by around 50%, resulting
in a 70% reduction of social contacts in Tokyo, showing the effectiveness of non-compulsory measures. Furthermore, the
reduction in data-driven human mobility metrics showed correlation with the decrease in estimated effective reproduction
number of COVID-19 in Tokyo. Such empirical insights could inform policy makers on deciding sufficient levels of mobility
reduction to contain the disease.

Keywords:

COVID-19, human mobility, contact networks, epidemics, mobile phone data

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has posed unprecedented challenges for cities around the globe1 . Countries have tackled this
challenge with a variety of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), ranging from complete regional lockdowns, closures of
non-essential businesses, to testing and tracing2 . In order to monitor, analyze and evaluate the impacts of such interventions,
large scale mobile phone data has been identified as an effective data source3 . Previous studies on human mobility analysis
have shown that such large-scale mobility data collected from mobile devices (e.g. GPS, call detail records) may be used to
assist the modeling of epidemic spread4–7 . During the current COVID-19 crisis, researchers from academia, industry, and
government agencies have started to utilize large-scale mobility datasets to estimate the effectiveness of control measures in
various countries including China, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and the United States8–17 .
Several studies have been conducted to analyze the mobility patterns in Japan during the state of emergency due to
COVID-1918 . Moreover, private companies such as Agoop19 and NTT Docomo20 have visualized changes in population
distributions during the spread of COVID-19 using mobile phone data. However, we lack studies that attempt to analyze the
mobility behavioral changes in Japan and to further understand its correlation with the spread of COVID-19. Japan, in particular,
has experienced a significantly low number of cases and deaths due to COVID-19 in comparison to other countries in Europe
and America, despite the social and physical proximity to China and intervention policies that are not as aggressive as some of
the other countries21, 22 . NPIs implemented by the Japanese government include non-mandatory closures and remote-working
of non-essential business employees (February 26th), closures of public elementary, junior high and high schools (March 2nd),
and incremental inbound entry restrictions, starting with personnel who have visited Hubei Province, China (February 3rd),
until restricting inbound visitors from 73 countries (April 3rd). In the case of Japan, the current justice system does not allow
the government to lay out a mandatory lockdown. Such differences in policies and COVID-19 spread dynamics make Japan
an interesting case study for international comparative analysis. The objective of this paper is to provide empirical analysis

Figure 1. Macroscopic mobility dynamics. (A)-(C) show the population distributions on 3 different dates at same times
(12PM), each on the same day of week (Mondays). Significant decrease in the population density at stations and cities along
the Yamanote-line (ring railway) can be observed. (D) shows the timeline of the COVID-19 response and occurrence of new
cases in Tokyo. Green bars show the number of cases for each day, blue annotations show inbound travel restrictions, and red
annotations list related events and the policy interventions by the Japanese Government.
on the effects of such non-compulsory NPIs on changes in i) individual human mobility behavior and ii) amount of social
contacts, and to iii) analyze the correlations between such mobility changes and transmissibility of COVID-19. In this study,
large-scale mobility data collected from more than 200K mobile phones across a four month period in Tokyo are used to answer
the aforementioned research questions.

Results
Macroscopic Mobility Dynamics and Timeline
Panels A-C in Figure 1 show the daytime population distributions on 3 different dates at same times (12PM), each on the
same day of week (Mondays) in Tokyo, Japan. Mobile phone data were interpolated to produce movement trajectories, and
the locations of the users at 12PM on each day were spatially aggregated into 100 meter grid cells. The population density
was corrected by the number of observed users on each day, as the number of active users had daily fluctuations. As shown in
previous studies23 , we observe high population density along the railway lines and hub stations during the daytime. Comparing
the three panels, we observe significant decrease in population density at stations and cities along the Yamanote-line (ring
railway), such as Shibuya, Shinjuku, Akihabara, and Tokyo Stations. By April 14th, which was 1 week after the declaration of
state of emergency, these hub stations had a 76% to 87% decrease in foot traffic compared to the baseline, which was computed
by taking the average population density of weekdays at 12PM before the crisis (January 2020).
Figure 1D shows the timeline of the COVID-19 response and occurrence of cases in Tokyo Metropolis. Green bars show the
number of cases for each day, blue annotations show inbound travel restrictions, and red annotations list the policy interventions
by the Japanese Government. The number of cases for each day were obtained from the Tokyo Metropolitan Government
website24 . Major non-pharmaceutical measures taken by the government include issuing non compulsory requests for remote
working to private companies on February 26th, and closing public schools (elementary, junior high, and high schools) from
March 2nd until the end of the semester, which is usually the end of March25 . The 2020 Olympic Games were postponed for a
year on March 24th, and the State of Emergency (SoE) was declared on April 7th. Entry restrictions for inbound travellers were
gradually reinforced, with the first restriction on February 3rd from Hubei Province, China. The restrictions were expanded to
all foreign nationals who visited China or South Korea during the past 14 days on March 5th, and to 73 countries including the
United States on April 3rd.
2/9

Figure 2. Changes in individual mobility patterns. Temporal transition of mean and median radius of gyration (A), total
travel distance per day (B) and their complementary cumulative distribution functions (C), (D), respectively. Panel (E) shows
the rate of staying κ meters within estimated home locations.

Changes in Human Mobility Behavior
Here, we evaluate how individual users’ mobility behavior has changed before and after the state of emergency in Tokyo, Japan.
Figure 2 shows the transitions of various metrics of individual mobility patterns. Panels A and B in Figure 2 show the mean and
median values of the radius of gyration (RG) and total travel distance (TTD), which characterize the magnitude and extent of
individual mobility behavior26 (see Methods). We observe two steps of decrease in both metrics, the first starting around the
end of February and stabilizing until late March, and the second which is a more rapid decrease until April 15th. Both the mean
and median values of RG and TTD have been reduced by 50% of the typical values by the end of the observation period on
April 15th. Panels C and D in Figure 2 show the complementary cumulative probability distribution plots for both mobility
metrics across three different dates, January 20th (before the pandemic), March 30th (before the state of emergency), and April
14th (after the state of emergency), which are all Mondays. The RG values observe a dip at around 20km, which corresponds
to the diameter of the Tokyo Metropolitan area (scale shown in Figure 1A-C). This implies that while the majority of the
individuals move within the metropolitan area, some individuals travel to different regions outside Tokyo. In both mobility
metrics, we observe significant tempering of the tail probability as time passes. This indicates a decrease in relatively long
distance travelers (> 20km for RG and > 100km in TTD), reflecting the decrease and closures of airlines and inter-urban
railways that travel outside the metropolitan Tokyo area. Figure 1 E shows the rates of users staying κ meters within their
estimated home locations. This figure suggests that the rate of people staying close to their estimated home locations increased
since mid-March and doubled by April 15th regardless of the threshold value κ, reflecting the increase in people working from
home and spending time within their neighborhoods.
Social Contact Analysis
Figure 3 shows the results of the social contact analysis in Tokyo over the observation period (see Methods). The panel figures
show the temporal transitions in the relative average social contact index. The contact index is calculated by tracking the
number of individual users that each user encounters in a given temporal window, using the interpolated trajectory data. We
have used 100 meters as the spatial threshold parameter for detecting encounters for this analysis. The social contact indexes
were normalized by the mean peak contact index values observed prior to the pandemic (January 2020). Thus, in Figure 3,
contact index value of 1 indicates the average amount of observed contacts during peak hours on a typical weekday prior to the
pandemic. The temporal periodicity in Figure 3 A shows the daily and weekly patterns, including the highest point showing
the morning rush hour peak, the following peak showing the returning home rush hour, and significantly small amount of
3/9

contacts (around 0.2) on weekends and holidays, including the New Year breaks. Panels B and C in Figure 3 show the total
daily contact index and the daily peak contact index values, respectively. By comparing the average social contacts across
the time horizon, we can observe in Figure 3 A that the average amount of social contact for each user starts to decrease as
COVID-19 became a threat globally in mid February down to 90% of the typical value. The value decreases more rapidly
towards the end of February with the government request for remote working, down to 65% of the typical values. The contact
index stays at 65% of typical values until the end of March, and as the number of cases in Tokyo starts to increase (Figure 1),
the contact index further starts to decrease and reaches 30% of typical values by April 15th, almost reaching the government’s
goal of reducing social contacts by 80% of the typical values27 . However, regarding the daily peak contacts (morning rush
hour peaks on weekdays and lunchtime peaks on weekends and holidays), Panel C shows that peak time social contacts have
decreased successfully to around 20% of the typical values by April 15th.
Moreover, the inequality in mobility changes across different spatial regions within Metropolitan Tokyo were tested, since
it has been suggested that inequality in society could aggravate the spread of COVID-1928 . Panel D of Figure 3 shows the
transition of daily total contacts for the 23 wards in central Tokyo. Although the social contact index of the regions follow similar
general patterns, some heterogeneity in the contact decrease can be observed. Panel E shows strong correlation (Pearson’s
correlation coefficient ρ = 0.875∗∗∗ ) between the non-normalized amount of contacts on January 15th (before the pandemic)
and April 15th, which is after the pandemic. Most of the 23 regions were successful in reducing the social contact index by
80% (shown by gray dashed line), except for wards including Nerima Ward. Panel F further shows the log-log plot between the
relative contact index on April 15th and average taxable income per household for each ward in Tokyo. The average taxable
income per household was calculated using data provided by the Official Statistics of Japan through the Portal Site29 . We
observe strong negative correlation (ρ = −0.696∗∗∗ ) between taxable income per household and contact index, indicating that
households in higher income regions were able to reduce the amount of social contacts and risk of COVID-19 transmission
more than households in lower income regions. This highlights an inequality across households in terms of the voluntary
mobility restrictions. Higher income households are more likely able to reduce their social contacts by reducing mobility,
however lower income households may not have this flexibility. This inequality has significant implications in terms of disease
spread and will require a holistic policy planning.
Correlation of Mobility Indexes with Effective Reproduction Number R(t)
To understand the implications of mobility behavior change and decrease in social contacts on the transmissibility of COVID-19
in Tokyo, we compare the quantified mobility behavior changes with the estimated effective reproduction number R(t) of
Tokyo. The R(t) values were estimated using the weekly averaged number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Tokyo, reported
by the metropolitan government (see Methods). Figure 4 shows the weekly moving averaged values of (A) social contact
index, (B) radius of gyration, and (C) stay-at-home rates plotted along with the dynamic R(t) values. The gray shaded areas
show the 95% confidence interval for the estimated R(t). Panels D-F in Figure 4 show the temporal evolution of the mobility
metrics and R(t), where each dot corresponds to daily values. The vertical error bars show the 95% confidence interval of the
estimated R(t) values. A non-linear relationship between the mobility metrics and transmissibility are observed, where the R(t)
values significantly decrease around a threshold value of 0.33 in the contact index. We observe that R(t) < 1 is achieved with
reduction in social contacts down to 0.33 on April 3rd. Further reduction in mobility and social contacts are observed after the
declaration of the SoE on April 7th, but R(t) had reached a bottom before the declaration. This suggests that restrictions on
mobility certainly allow the reduction of number of transmissions up to a point, but further severe restrictions could have less
effects on transmissibility reduction. A more targeted and nuanced approach may be needed to determine where and when
mobility restrictions should be imposed.
To provide some examples of such nuanced and directly observable metrics of mobility reductions, Panel G shows the
relative amount of visits to various types of points of interest (POIs) on April 3rd, which was when sufficient decrease in
mobility was observed. We can observe that for all listed types of POIs (Table S2) including business districts (e.g. Tokyo
Midtown, Roppongi Hills), shopping areas (e.g. Ginza, Omotesando), and major stations (e.g. Shinjuku, Shibuya), visits were
reduced by around 35% to 40% on average compared to January weekdays (before the pandemic). Haneda Airport (major
airport in Tokyo area) on the other hand, had larger decrease in visits (55%) due to travel restrictions which were imposed in
early February and March (Figure S7) .

Discussion
Large-scale mobility data collected from mobile phones provide us with an opportunity to monitor and understand the impacts
of NPIs during the COVID-19 pandemic with an unprecedented spatio-temporal granularity and scale. In this study, we utilized
such data to quantify the changes in human mobility behavior and social contacts during the COVID-19 spread in Tokyo,
Japan, which provides a unique case study where government policies were limited to non-compulsory measures. The analysis
concludes that by April 15th (1 week from declaring state of emergency), human mobility behavior have decreased by around
4/9

Figure 3. Social contact analysis. (A) shows the amount of contacts an individual encounters outside home for each time
period. (B) and (C) show the individuals’ mean total daily contacts and the mean daily peak contacts, respectively. (D) Daily
total contacts in the 23 central districts (wards) in Tokyo Metropolitan Area. (E) Correlation between non-normalized social
contacts before and after the COVID-19 spread. (F) Correlation between average taxable income per household and daily
contact index on April 15th.

50% both in terms of radius of gyration and total travel distance per user, and also that social contact index in Tokyo had
been reduced by more than 70% both in terms of daily total contacts and daily peak time contacts following non-compulsory
measures including remote working requests to businesses and closures of public schools. The analysis results also showed that
mobility reduction had already taken place before late March (around 40% decrease of social contacts), when the number of
imported cases of COVID-19 started to increase. This indicates that even before the actual spread of COVID-19 in Tokyo, and
even under only non-compulsory measures, a significant amount of cooperation was provided by the citizens to contain the
spread of COVID-19. By comparing the mobility analysis results with the effective reproduction number R(t) estimated from
the daily confirmed number of cases in Tokyo, we were further able to show correlation between the mobility reduction and
decrease in transmissibility of COVID-19. During late March, R(t) rose above 1 and the number of cases increased, however,
the nation-wide state of emergency triggered further reduction in mobility, resulting in R(t) to drop below 1. In fact, it was
found that reduction of mobility and social contacts beyond certain thresholds (e.g. social contact index of 0.33) had little
incremental effects on the decrease in R(t). Looking forward into lifting the state of emergency declaration, these results could
inform decision making on how much human mobility and social contact reduction is needed to keep the effective reproduction
number of COVID-19 below 1. Figure 4G provides more directly observable measures of mobility reduction at various points
of interest which can be used to interpret the sufficient amount of social contact reduction to contain COVID-19.
The presented empirical results should be considered in the light of some limitations. First, the presented analysis was
limited to understanding the correlations between mobility and contact reduction and transmissibility. However, microscopic
human behavior, such as sanitizing hands more often or higher rates of wearing face masks, could have affected the reduction
in transmissibility. Because of such factors other than human mobility, the relationships between mobility reductions and
transmissibility could change after lifting the state of emergency. Due to the lack of data on R(t) under no interventions, it
is not certain whether the R(t) values reach a similar value of that in European countries and the US. Additional household
surveys and interviews need to be conducted to quantify the effects of such behavioral changes. Second, GPS location data
collected from mobile phones are prone to spatial errors up to 100 meters. This spatial error could have biased the results of the
5/9

Figure 4. Correlation between mobility behavior changes and effective reproduction number R(t). (A-C) shows the
human mobility metrics along with the R(t) values in Japan estimated by the health ministry panel on coronavirus infection
cluster under the Japanese Government. (D-F) shows the relationships between the mobility metrics and R(t). All panels show
that R(t) falls under 1.0 with reduction in mobility and social contacts, and that such reduction may have been excessive in
containing the spread of COVID-19. (G) Relative amount of visits to various point of interests on April 3rd, when sufficient
reduction in transmissibility was achieved in Tokyo.

mobility metrics. However, sensitivity analysis suggests that the conclusions are not affected by the spatial thresholds selected
in this study (Figures S3, S4). In addition to the 2% sample rate, the granularity of the data was not adequate to compute the
actual contacts between individuals (i.e. 2 meters distance for all individuals). Moreover, it is known that mobile phone data
contain biases in age groups. It is important to analyze the mobility of the elderly population due to the high mortality rate of
COVID-19. Although similar conclusions were reached when different spatial thresholds were used via sensitivity analysis,
additional validation using small scale but precise data could further clarify the approximate social contact measure computed
in this study using mobile phone data.
Future research steps include extending the analysis to other cities in Japan such as Sapporo and Osaka, where different
patterns of COVID-19 spread have been observed (Figure S1). Cross-comparative analysis including multiple regions could yield
novel and more generalizable insights on the relationships between mobility pattern changes and COVID-19 transmissibility.
In addition to the spatial dimension, extending the time period of analysis after April 15th and analyzing the dynamics
after the lifting of the interventions could strengthen our understanding between social contact decrease and transmissibility
reduction. Although this study used aggregated measures to quantify the behavioral changes (e.g. average social contacts),
more microscopic analysis of mobility changes could be conducted with additional data.

6/9

Materials and Methods
Mobile Phone Location Data
Location data of smartphones were collected by Yahoo Japan Corporation through the disaster alert app in order to send relevant
notifications and information to the users. The users in this study have accepted to provide their location information. The
data are anonymized so that individuals cannot be specified, and personal information such as gender, age and occupation are
unknown. Each GPS record consists of a user’s unique ID (random character string), timestamp, longitude, and latitude. The
data acquisition frequency of GPS locations changes according to the movement speed of the user to minimize the burden on
the user’s smartphone battery. If it is determined that the user is staying in a certain place for a long time, data is acquired at a
relatively low frequency, and if it is determined that the user is moving, the data is acquired more frequently. The data has
a sample rate of approximately 2% of the population, and past studies suggest that this sample rate is enough to understand
the macroscopic urban dynamics, even during an emergency30 . We selected a panel of users who were active each day in
Tokyo metropolitan area before, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. This leads to a sample of about 200k users, with
approximately 50 data points per user each day (Figure S2).
Socio-Economic Data
Socio-economic data of 23 wards in Tokyo Metropolis were obtained from the Portal Site of Official Statistics of Japan29 . The
number of households and total taxable income collected from the residents were available through the Portal Site. The taxable
income per household values used in the analysis in Figure 3F were calculated by dividing the total taxable income by the
number of households in each region (ward) (Figure S5, Table S1).
Effective Reproduction Number R(t)
The effective reproduction number R(t) is commonly used to quantify transmissibility of an infectious disease, which is defined
as the average number of secondary cases generated by a single infectious case31 . Effects of NPIs such as social distancing
can be measured by the effective reproduction number. In order to estimate R(t) of COVID-19 in Tokyo, we employed time
series data of daily confirmed COVID-19 cases in Tokyo reported by Tokyo metropolitan government24 . Since the data of
the onset cases are unavailable, we used the confirmed date for the estimation. The original daily data were smoothed by
taking the centered 7-day moving average. Estimation of R(t) is conducted based on the code implemented by Jung et al.,
which is available on the Github repository32 . The code estimates R(t) using the following steps. First, the backcalculation is
performed33 in two steps. Since our data is based on the laboratory confirmation, there is a time lag associated with the date of
onset. The time duration between the onset of the infections and the actual reported data is estimated using the right truncated
Weibull distribution with the shape factor 1.741 and scale factor 8.573. Next, the date of the infection is estimated with back
calculation using the lognormal distribution for the incubation period. Parameter values of the mean 5.6 days and the standard
deviation 3.9 days for COVID-19 estimated by Linton et al.34 is adopted. Finally, R(t) is estimated based on the renewal
equation35 , which relates the time series of the number of new infected cases and the effective reproduction number. This is
done by maximizing the likelihood function based on the assumption that the infection rates follow a Poisson distribution. To
model the serial interval, the Weibull distribution with shape factor 2.305 and the scale factor 5.452 is assumed36 .
Individual Mobility Indexes
Several indexes have been used in previous studies to characterize individual human mobility patterns26, 37 . In this study, we
use three key indexes: Radius of Gyration (Rg ), total travel distance (T T D), and stay-at-home rates parameterized by a spatial
threshold κ (SAHκ ). Given a sequence of GPS observation points Pi = {p1i , p2i , · · · , pNi } in a single day of an individual user i,
the radius of gyration is calculated using the following equation.
s
1 N n
(1)
Rg =
∑ (pi − p̄i )2
N n=1
where p̄i denotes the center of mass of the GPS observation points of user i. The total travel distance of an individual user is the
sum of Euclidean distances between all subsequent pairs of GPS observation points on a given day. The stay-at-home rate,
parameterized by a spatial threshold κ, is the rate of individual users who had stayed the entire day within a distance κ from the
estimated home location.
Quantifying Social Contact Index from Trajectory Data
To overcome data sparsity, spatio-temporal interpolation of the GPS location observations were performed. Because the GPS
data are collected less frequently when movement is detected, we assume that the individual users are static while there are no
observations. Using the interpolated individual trajectory data produced from mobile phones, the social contact indexes were
7/9

computed. The social contact indexes shown in Figure 3 were computed for 30 minute intervals. First, for each time interval
[t,t + dt), where dt = 30 minutes, users who were not within 100 meters from their estimated home locations were detected as
“staying out”. We denote this set of individual users as Ntout . For user i staying out (i ∈ Ntout ), we compute the number of other
“staying out” users who are within 100 meters from user i, and use that count ci,t as a proxy for social contacts. The social
contact index is calculated as the total social contacts for all users staying out, divided by the total number of users including
those staying at their homes. Thus, mean social contact value is computed as Ct = ∑i∈Ntout ci,t /N, where N is the total number
of users observed on that day. The social contact index is the relative value of mean social contacts with respect to typical
mobility patterns, observed before the COVID-19 pandemic. The typical mean social contact value is computed by taking the
average of daily peak social contact values observed on weekdays in January 2020. Thus, the social contact index (SCI) of 1
corresponds to the same amount of social contacts as the daily peak times on weekdays before the COVID-19 pandemic.

References
1. Anderson, R. M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D. & Hollingsworth, T. D. How will country-based mitigation measures
influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The Lancet 395, 931–934 (2020).
2. Flaxman, S. et al. Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in
european countries: technical description update. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11342 (2020).
3. Oliver, N. et al. Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across the covid-19 pandemic life cycle. Sci. Adv. 6
(2020).
4. Bengtsson, L. et al. Using mobile phone data to predict the spatial spread of cholera. Sci. reports 5, 8923 (2015).
5. Finger, F. et al. Mobile phone data highlights the role of mass gatherings in the spreading of cholera outbreaks. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 113, 6421–6426 (2016).
6. Tizzoni, M. et al. On the use of human mobility proxies for modeling epidemics. PLoS computational biology 10 (2014).
7. Wesolowski, A. et al. Quantifying the impact of human mobility on malaria. Science 338, 267–270 (2012).

8. Klein, B. et al.
Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility in major metropolitan areas
in the united states during the covid-19 outbreak.
https://www.networkscienceinstitute.org/publications/
assessing-changes-in-commuting-and-individual-mobility-in-major-metropolitan-areas-in-the-united-states-during-the-covid-19-outbrea
(accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
9. Kraemer, M. U. et al. The effect of human mobility and control measures on the covid-19 epidemic in china. Science 368,
493–497 (2020).
10. Lai, S. et al. Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions for containing the covid-19 outbreak in china. medRxiv DOI:
10.1101/2020.03.03.20029843 (2020).
11. Pepe, E. et al. Covid-19 outbreak response: a first assessment of mobility changes in italy following national lockdown.
medRxiv DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.22.20039933 (2020).
12. Bonato, P. et al. Mobile phone data analytics against the covid-19 epidemics in italy: flow diversity and local job markets
during the national lockdown. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11278 (2020).
13. Wellenius, G. A. et al. Impacts of state-level policies on social distancing in the united states using aggregated mobility
data during the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10172 (2020).
14. Gao, S., Rao, J., Kang, Y., Liang, Y. & Kruse, J. Mapping county-level mobility pattern changes in the united states in
response to covid-19. Available at SSRN 3570145 (2020).
15. Dahlberg, M. et al. Effects of the covid-19 pandemic on population mobility under mild policies: Causal evidence from
sweden. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09087 (2020).
16. Santana, C. et al. Analysis of human mobility in the uk during the covid-19 pandemic. https://covid19-uk-mobility.github.io/
(published April 8, 2020; accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
17. Cintia, P. et al. The relationship between human mobility and viral transmissibility during the covid-19 epidemics in italy.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03141 (2020).
18. Mizuno, T. & Ohnishi, T. Controling the spread of covid-19 using human mobility big data. https://www.canon-igs.org/
column/macroeconomics/20200414_6352.html (published April 14, 2020, in Japanese; accessed May 15, 2020) (2020).
19. Agoop Corporation. Analysis of changes in human mobility due to spread of novel coronavirus. https://corporate-web.
agoop.net/pdf/covid-19/agoop_analysis_coronavirus.pdf (accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
8/9

20. NTT Docomo, Inc. Mobile spatial statistics population map. https://mobakumap.jp/ (accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
21. Dong, E., Du, H. & Gardner, L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious
diseases (2020).
22. Idogawa, M., Tange, S., Nakase, H. & Tokino, T. Interactive web-based graphs of novel coronavirus COVID-19 cases and
deaths per population by country. Clin. Infect. Dis. DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa500 (2020). Ciaa500.
23. Kashiyama, T., Pang, Y. & Sekimoto, Y. Open pflow: Creation and evaluation of an open dataset for typical people mass
movement in urban areas. Transp. research part C: emerging technologies 85, 249–267 (2017).
24. Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Covid-19 information website. https://github.com/tokyo-metropolitan-gov/covid19
(accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
25. Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan. About coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/
seisakunitsuite/bunya/newpage_00032.html (accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
26. Gonzalez, M. C., Hidalgo, C. A. & Barabasi, A.-L. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. nature 453,
779–782 (2008).
27. The Japan Times. Japan’s coronavirus total surpasses 10,000 as tokyo adds 181 cases. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/
news/2020/04/18/national/covid-19-infections-10000/#.Xr37bGgzY1s (published April 18, 2020; accessed May 15, 2020)
(2020).
28. Ahmed, F., Ahmed, N., Pissarides, C. & Stiglitz, J. Why inequality could spread covid-19. The Lancet Public Heal. 5,
e240 (2020).
29. Statistics Bureau of Japan. Portal site of official statistics of japan. https://www.e-stat.go.jp/en/regional-statistics/ssdsview/
municipality (accessed June 26, 2020) (2020).
30. Yabe, T., Tsubouchi, K., Fujiwara, N., Sekimoto, Y. & Ukkusuri, S. V. Understanding post-disaster population recovery
patterns. J. Royal Soc. Interface 17, 20190532 (2020).
31. Held, L., Hens, N., D O’Neill, P. & Wallinga, J. Handbook of infectious disease data analysis (Chapman and Hall/CRC,
2019).
32. Jung, S.-m. J., Akhmetzhanov, A. R., Mizumoto, K. & Nishiura, H. Real-time estimation of the effective reproduction
number of covid-19 in japan. https://github.com/contactmodel/COVID19-Japan-Reff (accessed May 15, 2020) (2020).
33. Becker, N. G., Watson, L. F. & Carlin, J. B. A method of non-parametric back-projection and its application to aids data.
Stat. medicine 10, 1527–1542 (1991).
34. Linton, N. M. et al. Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with
right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available case data. J. clinical medicine 9, 538 (2020).
35. Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, H. & Britton, T. Mathematical tools for understanding infectious disease dynamics, vol. 7
(Princeton University Press, 2012).
36. Nishiura, H., Linton, N. M. & Akhmetzhanov, A. R. Serial interval of novel coronavirus (covid-19) infections. Int. journal
infectious diseases (2020).
37. Blondel, V. D., Decuyper, A. & Krings, G. A survey of results on mobile phone datasets analysis. EPJ data science 4, 10
(2015).

9/9

