Getting Insights from a Large Corpus of Scientific Papers on
Specialisted Comprehensive Topics - the Case of COVID-19
Bernard Dousseta , Josiane Motheb

arXiv:2005.00485v1 [cs.DL] 30 Apr 2020

a IRIT,
b IRIT,

UMR5505, CNRS & Univ. Toulouse, France
UMR5505, CNRS & INSPEE UT2J, Univ. Toulouse, France

Josiane.Mothe@irit.fr
ABSTRACT
COVID-19 is one of the most important topic these days, specifically on search engines and news. While
fake news are easily shared, scientific papers are reliable sources where information can be extracted.
With about 24,000 scientific publications on COVID-19 and related research on PUBMED, automatic
computer-assisted analysis is required. In this paper, we develop two methodologies to get insights on
specific sub-topics of interest and latest research sub-topics. They rely on natural language processing
and graph-based visualizations. We run these methodologies on two cases: the virus origin and the uses
of existing drugs.
KEYWORDS
Topic analysis; Automatic mining of scientific publication; COVID-19; automatic keyphrase extraction;
1 INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 is one of the most important topic these days, specifically on search engines and news. It is
a worldly shared topic of interest. While news are looped on TV, a very few specialists know deeply on
COVID-19. On the Internet, a lot of fake news started to circulate and spread as fast as the virus it-self.
In such situation, citizens and decision makers need reliable sources of information. Scientific papers are
certainly such reliable sources that could be used for helping citizens knowing more about it and being
informed on both a reliable and accurate way.
Not only scientific sources can be use to try to answer some specific questions that arise but it is also a
way to know the main researchers, groups or institutes that work on a specific sub-topic, what the collaborations are, ... Both in- deep analyses and overviews on a large quantity of research papers can help decision makers or even citizens to be better educated on the state of the art. For people, it can help move
aside fake news. It can also help new comers in the COVID-19 research field providing overviews of subtopics first (main publication venues, main authors, ...
Indeed the research in the domain is quite huge specifically if we consider other forms of COVIDs, Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome, and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. For example, the recently released
collection named COVID-19 Open Research Dataset 1 consists of more than 40,000 articles. Some papers
1

https://pages.semanticscholar.org/coronavirus-research

start to provide reviews 6, 11, 15 which are indeed very useful. This paper aims at providing a systematic
methodology to mine such a large publication set while giving some specific focuses on topics of interest.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents some related works; Section 3 describes
the analysis framework including the data description and the methodology for analysis that was followed; Section 4 describes the methodology we developed to get insights oo a specific sub-topic or on latest research. Section 5 focuses on a deeper analysis on the origins of COVID-19. Section 6 focuses on the
analysis of the terminology related to the latest research. Finally Section 7 concludes this paper.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Publication analysis on COVID-19.
Some related work reports either studies on various topics or focuses on one or two topics. For example,
the report from Nature Medecine 6 presents a focus on clinical trials and human studies, Preclinical studies, and Epidemiology. Another distinction on related work is what level as automatic assistance they
benefit from. In most of the cases, it is difficult to know that level as it is not necessarily depicted. For
example, 6 seems to be a manual analysis of a few papers on the topic since the references are few. Harapan et al. 11 presents a literature review on Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). This study cites 74
references and presents a comprehensive state of the art on different sub-topics such as COVID-19 transmission, risk factors, diagnosis or treatments. Huang et al. 15 reviewed 1,281 abstracts from which they
identified 322 manuscripts relevant to 5 areas of interest for their study. The five topics they chose are
as follows: antibody kinetics, correlates of protection, immunopathogenesis, antigenic diversity and crossreactivity, and population seroprevalence. Dousset et al. 8 presents a short analysis of a larger dataset
which size is similar to the one that we are using in this study. However their study does not go in deep
in the publication content but rather analyze the collaborations between researchers and countries. They
do not analyze any specific topic.
Different from the previous analysis, this paper combines (a) the analysis of a large data set of about
25,000 references and (b) highly assisted analysis. While the methodology could be apply to various COVID19 subtopics, we focus here on two main topics: the origin of the virus and the use of other disease treatment.
2.2 Mining scientific publications
Most of the work in automatic publication analysis is related to scientometrics 26 which as been defined
as “quantitative study of science, communication in science, and science policy” 13 . In this paper, publication mining is not strictly a question of scientometrics, rather the objective is to build knowledge from a
large set of publications.
Shibata et al. 31 uses citation network analysis in order to detect emerging research. Small et al. also use
direct citation and co-citation analysis in order to identify emerging topics 32 . Unfortunately, this information is not necessarily provided in digital database for large quantities of documents. Buscaldi et al.
mine scholarly publications to build scientific knowledge graphs 5 . As in our approach, the authors use
existing natural language processing and mining tools in their approach; however, they focus on the tex-

tual parts of the publications. Ronzano and Saggion developped a platform to automatically extract and
enrich structural and semantic aspects of scientific publications. Their approach also focuses on the textual content and their applications are related to rhetorical sentence classification and extractive text
summarization 29 . Mothe et al. present a platform to mine scientific publications. In their paper, they
focus on detecting the main collaborations, focusing on the geographical structure of a domain 24 .
3 ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK
3.1 COVID-19 scientific publication set
Recently, publishers have released the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset. It is available at https://
pages.semanticscholar.org/coronavirus-research. This data set consists of multiple files.
Among them, the Metadata file (60Mb) is a CSV file corresponding to 44,270 research articles with links
to PubMed, Microsoft Academic and the WHO COVID-19 database of publications. The fields of the
structure of the records are as follows: title, doi, abstract, date of publication, authors, journal, as well
as internal document ids (PMC ID, PUBMED ID, Microsoft Academic Paper ID, WHO ID) and information whether the full text is available or not. While the meta file is a rich source of information, other
pieces of information that are missing in that data file can be very useful such as the affiliation of the authors for example. For this reason we also considered a more complete set regarding the attributes that
are provided.
We chose to focus on the documents from PubMed only 2 , which is known to be realable source. It does
not contains all the 44k scientific papers from the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset but about 24,000
papers. The query used to query the PubMed collection (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) was
the same as the one used in the submentioned data set:
"COVID-19" OR "covid19" OR "Coronavirus" OR "Corona virus" OR "2019-nCoV" OR "SARS-CoV"
OR "MERS-CoV" OR âĂĲSevere Acute Respiratory SyndromeâĂİ OR âĂĲMiddle East Respiratory
SyndromeâĂİ
3.2 A few elements of the document collection
A few statistics are presented in Table 1 where the top 7 authors (the ones that authored the larger number of publications in the analyzed collection) are listed in Table 2. In average, there is 5.6 authors per
publications. Not all the publications come with an abstract (72% have an abstract for a total of 17,116).
Table 3 lists the most frequent venues where the scientific papers have been published.
Table 1. A few statistics on the data collection.

Label
Publication
Abstract
Author
Venues
Year
2

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

Number of
23,784
17,116
75,1473
3,120
604

Occur. at
least twice

at least
10 times

9,211
1,832
54

1,145
431
48

Table 2. Authors (full author names) with more than 100 publications in the collection.

Authors
YUEN, KWOK-YUNG (Univ. of Hong-Kong)
PERLMAN, STANLEY (Univ. of Iowa)
DROSTEN, CHRISTIAN (Berlin Institute of Virology, Germany)
BARIC, RALPH S. (Univ. of North Carolina, USA)
MEMISH, ZIAD A (Alfaisal University, Saudi Arabia)
JIANG, SHIBO (New York Blood Center, USA)
ENJUANES, LUIS (Campus Univ. AutÃşnoma de Madrid, Spain)
Table 3. Most frequent publication venues in the collection.

Venues
JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY
ADVANCES IN EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY
VIROLOGY
EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES
BMJ (CLINICAL RESEARCH ED.)
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL VIROLOGY
THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL VIROLOGY

3.3 Topics of interest
. While researchers have their topic of interest driven by their funding, project and research, topic of interest also come from the civil society on COVID-19.
It is worth to mention that NIST/TREC has formed a joint effort called TREC-COVID5 . Like the other
TREC tracks6 , TREC-COVID aims at gathering research teams in information retrieval to evaluate search
engines on specific tasks. Mid April 2020, TREC-COVID has release a set of 30 topics of interest. A
topic of interest is for example the “Coronavirus origin” or “early symptoms”.
These topics also echo the most popular questions web searchers are interested on. Google trends mentions "Where did coronavirius start?" and "How to know if you have coronarius" among the most asked
questions.
Finally, these topics also echo the ones that have been considered in some related work papers 6, 11 that
generally target the COVID-19 origins, its symptoms, spreading, risk factors and treatments.
4 METHODOLOGY
4.1 Overview.
The information we use is the data as collected. While automatic analysis helps in handling large quantities of publications, the conclusions drawn have to be handle with caution because there is no manual
analysis of the content and no checking. Moreover, we did not solved content anomalies such as variants
5

https://ir.nist.gov/covidSubmit/
TREC: Text Retrieval Conference is co-sponsored by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and
U.S. Department of Defense supports research for large-scale evaluation of text retrieval methodologies trec.nist.gov
6

of entities spelling (e.g. author names). There are also missing values that we did not consider either and
not resolved (See Table 1).
The methods we use are usual data mining tools like frequency, graph-based visualization, factorial analysis. We consider crossing meta-data with content-based information from free texts as detailed later on.
The analysis considers both meta-data, such as the source, publication date and author fields and free
text data such as the title and abstract fields. With regard to the titles and abstracts, we consider both
single words as well as phrases that we automatically extracted.
4.2 Keyphrase extraction
. Different methods have been developed to extract key-phrases from free texts 2, 12 ; among the most
popular are graph-based extraction 3, 4, 25 , co-occurrence-based methods 16 and more recently embeddings 30 .
In our approach, we use a n-gram word extraction where we skip stop words. More precisely, we extract
the most frequent n-grams after stop word removal, but without stemming to keep more precise semantics. We also consider an initial lexicon from composed terms (as written by the authors e.g. “anti-malagia”
or “animal-origin”) as initial phrases that are enriched by the n-gram extracted ones.
4.3 Graph-based visualization
Graphs are among visualization tools the most used in the literature, as linking concepts or objects is the
most common mining technique 24 . Graph-based visualizations are widely used to visualize bibliometric
networks 9, 34 .
In this paper, we mainly use bipartite graphs. A bipartite graph is a graph whose vertices (nodes) can be
divided into two disjoint and independent sets and where edges connect a node of each type. A bipartite
graph does not contain any odd-length cycle (Wikipedia). This type of representation is also widely used
for document analysis and visualizations 1, 7 . In this paper, bipartite graphs are used to visualize the results of crossing meta-data and keyphrases extracted from publications.
4.4 Process
In this paper, we developed two different processes: the first one can be applied to focus on any specific
sub-topic of interest, this is the process we applied to the "Origin" of the virus sub-topic (See Section 5).
The second process is related to the latest research and we apply it to detect some topic clusters (See
Section 6).

Getting insights on a specific topic
This process consists into three steps:
• Select the keyphrases related to the topic of interest. It can be computer-assisted by considering

strings of characters (e.g. "ORIGIN" is a relevant character string to extract many relevant keyphrases such as "BAT-ORIGIN", "HUMAN-ORIGIN",...) ; stems of the topic word(s) is a good
start. The automatically obtain list should then be manually checked in order to remove non-relevant
terms (e.g. "ORIGINALITY")
• Build a bipartite graph where vertices are key-phrases in the one hand and publication identifiers in
the other hand. This first representation provides a quick overview of the use of the terms: are the
terms shared among publications or are they rather partitioned (each publication is more focusing
on one of the aspects). It is also a mean to directly go to the associated publications;
• For one specific term, build the bipartite graph where the other vertices are authors names. This
graph can be weighted by the number of publications of each author that mention the terms. This
graph shows the most "important" authors related to that term (who are likely to be specialists).
Such a graph can also be built considering several related terms at the same time when terms are
non independents in publications (cf previous step). The later graph makes it possible to highlight
the authors that tackles several aspects of the topic.
Other meta data could be also crossed to include additional steps in that process (e.g. considering the
authors’ affiliation or affiliation countries). This step was not included in this paper.

Getting the latest research topic of interest
This process also consists into three steps:
• Extract the latest terminology: these are the keyphrases that occurs in the latest year(s) but not
before. They are obtained by crossing the keyphrases and the year of the publications the keyphrases
occur in. We consider also the occurrence frequency when selecting them;
• Extract highly connected graphs (“communities” of keyphrases). This step results in sub-topics of
interest consisting of terms of various nature but often used together in recent publications;
• Build bipartite graphs where vertices of the first type are the terms from one community and vertices of the second type are publication identifiers to identify the relevant publications with regard
to the group of terms.
This process is used to get the latest research topics and associated publications.
5 ORIGINS
The topic of interest we tackle in this section is related to the COVID-19 origins and uses the first process as described in Section 4.
Figure 1(a) displays the terms related to the ORIGINs of the virus (extracted from the publications titles and abstracts when available) as well as their frequency. For example, 33 publications study BAT-

(a) Terms related to the ORIGINs of the virus (b) Publication PMID that mention BAT-ORIGIN

(c) Graph of the ORIGIN terms and associated PUB-ID
Figure 1. Focus on ORIGIN

ORIGIN and 7 AVIAN-ORIGIN. We also used these terms to extract the associated publications. These
terms are used in the graph from Figure 1(c) as blue nodes. Figure 1(b) displays the PMID of the publications that mention the "BAT-ORIGIN".
Figure 1(c) is a bipartite graph where blue nodes are the ORIGIN terms while the red nodes are the publication identifiers. This graph is not fully linked since some publications mention one of these "ORIGIN"
terms only. From this graph, we can also identify the publications that mentions several of the ORIGIN

terms as PMID- 26689940 14 , 31996437 35 and 23719724 22 which mention both "ANIMAL-ORIGIN" and
"BAT-ORIGIN". Another example is PMID- 16012012 18 which mention both "HUMAN-ORIGIN" and
"ANIMAL-ORIGIN" (See Figure 1(c)).

Figure 2. Authors associated to (a) BAT-ORIGIN term (b) ORIGIN terms from the one listed in Figure 1

With regard to the publications associated with BAT-ORIGIN terms in Figure 1(b), we can mention
Ren et al. 28 (PMID- 32004165) who report a novel bat-origin CoV causing severe and fatal pneumonia
in humans. The identified virus is phylogenetically closest to a bat SARS-like CoV. PMID-31996413 20
employs a capture-based NGS approach for virus discovery. Since (SARS)-COV and (MERS)-CoV both
originated from bats, active surveillance is recommended in this paper. Yang et al. 37 (PMID- 31554686)
study potential cross-species transmissibility of SADS-CoV. PMID- 30533848 21 studies the full-length
genome sequence of a novel swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV), CH/FJWT/2018

(a) Chloroquine-treatment term network (b) Obesity Risk Factor network
Figure 3. Examples of most recent terms and semantic network.

which is closely related to CN/GDWT/2017. A link is also made with bat-origin SADS-related coronaviruses. Wang et al. (PMID- 29680361 36 ) report cross-species transmission due to a large number of
mutations on the receptor-binding; here a novel bat-origin coronaviruses found in pigs is considered. Considering the the publications that mention BAT-ORIGIN of COVID, the oldest paper was published in
2006 10 , 11 were published in 2020, 2 in 2019 and 4 in 2018.
We also had a look to the associated authors (See Figure 2(a)). In this figure, the only blue node is BATORIGIN term, while the red nodes are authors of publications that mention this term. The value on the
link indicates the number of publications a researcher authored that mention BAT-ORIGIN. Figure 2(b)
shows, for those authors that mention BAT-ORIGIN, the other ORIGIN terms also mentioned by them.
The thickness of the link is an indication of the number of publications as well as the size of the nodes.
6 LATEST RESEARCH
While in the previous section we did not consider the year of publication, in this section, we focus on the
latest research and the associated terminology. We consider the publications that are published in the
30 last years only (1991 to 2020). We then keep the only phrases or automatically extracted keywords
from the titles and abstracts (see Section 3) that mainly occurs in 2020. More precisely, to be kept, a
keyphrase has to occur at least 80% times in 2020. These keyphrases (there are about 1,500) are thus
the keyphrases of current interest. We then built a graph where nodes ( keyphrases) are linked when cooccuring in a publication. This is a weighted graph (the more the two keyphrases co-occur, the higher
the weight). We then extracted clusters of terms that are closely related as communities (nodes that are
highly inter-connected together and weakly connected with other nodes) considering different focuses.
The example in Figure 3(a) focuses on the Chloroquine-treatment while Figure 3(b) is related to Obesity
risk factor. From these figures, we can also identify the related terms.
COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 and several papers investigate the use of existing anti-viral treatments. For examples, some of the publications mention "anti-" (e.g. anti-flu, antimalaria, ..). We thus had a closer look to the network related to treatment used for other diseases consid-

Figure 4. Various "ANTI-" uses.

ering various "anti-" terms as shown in Figure 4. As we did in Section 5 and illustrated in Figure 1(c),
we look at the publications associated with these terms. We found 33 publications directly related to
these terms. The PMID of these publications as well as related terms are presented in Figure 5.

Figure 5. PMID of the publications that mention an "ANTI" terms and the other related terms.

From this Figure 5, we can see that some of the papers are more connected than others; suggesting they

potentially mention more topics of interest. For example, PMID 32277367 23 , which is marked up with a
black square on the right-bottom part of Figure 5, was published on the 10th of April, in J Neurooncol.
and results from a collaborative work of India, Russia, and UK and concludes that “it may be cautiously
recommended to continue glucocorticoids and other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
in patients receiving these therapies, with discontinuation of DMARDs during infections as per standard
practice”. This paper also mentions various evidence that suggest potential benefits of various drugs. Reversely, we can see in the same figure that some keywords are also more shared than others. As an example, anti-rheumatic is mentioned in 9 of the displayed publications.
Among these publications, we can quote Perricone 27 (PMID- 32317220) discusses the anti-viral aspect of
immunosuppressants for searching for a potential treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Lehrer et al. 19
(PMID- 32313883) discusses the effects of biguanides on influenza and coronavirus. Kumar et al. (PMID32313660) study the antibody therapy as an immediate strategy for emergency prophylaxis and SARSCoV-2 therapy 17 . Song et al. (PMID- 32314010) reports a case of COVID-19 pneumonia on a 61-yearold female rheumatoid arthritis; she was treated with antiviral agents (lopinavir/ritonavir), and treatment with cDMARDs was discontinued except hydroxychloroquine. Her symptoms gradually improved
and three weeks later, real-time PCR for COVID-19 showed negative conversion 33 .
7 CONCLUSION
This paper presents two analytical processes in order to mine scientific papers that are illustrated on
COVID-19 scientific publications. The results are knowledge graphs of various natures that helps getting insights on specific subtopics or recent research topics. While scientific papers are reliable sources of
knowledge, on COVID-19, other sources of information such as the World Health Organization reports
would also worth being analysed using the same type of methodology.
REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

Alsallakh, B., Micallef, L., Aigner, W., Hauser, H., Miksch, S., Rodgers, P., 2014. Visualizing sets
and set-typed data: State-of-the-art and future challenges, in: Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis), pp. 1–22.
Beliga, S., 2014. Keyword extraction: a review of methods and approaches. University of Rijeka,
Department of Informatics, Rijeka , 1–9.
Boudin, F., 2013. A comparison of centrality measures for graph-based keyphrase extraction, in:
Proceedings of the sixth international joint conference on natural language processing, pp. 834–838.
Boudin, F., 2018. Unsupervised keyphrase extraction with multipartite graphs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.08721 .
Buscaldi, D., Dessì, D., Motta, E., Osborne, F., Recupero, D.R., 2019. Mining scholarly publications
for scientific knowledge graph construction, in: European Semantic Web Conference, Springer. pp.
8–12.
Carvalho, T., 2020. Covid-19 research in brief: 18 april to 24 april, 2020. NatureMedecine, News, 24
April .
Crossno, P.J., Wilson, A.T., Shead, T.M., Dunlavy, D.M., 2011. Topicview: Visually comparing topic

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

models of text collections, in: 2011 ieee 23rd international conference on tools with artificial intelligence, IEEE. pp. 936–943.
Dousset, B., Mothe, J., 2020. A short study on covid-19 open research scientific papers. Internal
Report, March URL: http://www.irit.fr/publis/SIG/2020_COVID_BD_JM.pdf.
van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2014. Visualizing Bibliometric Networks. Springer International Publishing, Cham. chapter 13. pp. 285–320. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10377-8_13,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10377-8_13.
Feng, Q., Liu, Y., Qu, X., Deng, H., Ding, M., Lau, T.L., Yu, A.C.H., Chen, J., 2006. Baculovirus
surface display of sars coronavirus (sars-cov) spike protein and immunogenicity of the displayed protein in mice models. DNA and cell biology 25, 668–673.
Harapan, H., Itoh, N., Yufika, A., Winardi, W., Keam, S., Te, H., Megawati, D., Hayati, Z., Wagner, A.L., Mudatsir, M., 2020. Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): A literature review. Journal of
Infection and Public Health .
Hasan, K.S., Ng, V., 2014. Automatic keyphrase extraction: A survey of the state of the art, in:
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pp. 1262–1273.
Hess, D.J., 1997. Science studies: An advanced introduction. NYU press.
Hu, B., Ge, X., Wang, L.F., Shi, Z., 2015. Bat origin of human coronaviruses. Virology journal 12,
221.
Huang, A.T., Garcia-Carreras, B., Hitchings, M.D., Yang, B., Katzelnick, L., Rattigan, S.M., Borgert, B., Moreno, C., Solomon, B.D., Rodriguez-Barraquer, I., Lessler, J., Salje, H., Burke, D.S.,
Wesolowski, A., Cummings, D.A., 2020. A systematic review of antibody mediated immunity to
coronaviruses: antibody kinetics, correlates of protection, and association of antibody responses with
severity of disease. medRxiv doi:10.1101/2020.04.14.20065771.
Kaur, J., Gupta, V., 2010. Effective approaches for extraction of keywords. International Journal of
Computer Science Issues (IJCSI) 7, 144.
Kumar, G., Jeyanthi, V., Ramakrishnan, S., 2020. A short review on antibody therapy for covid-19.
New Microbes New Infect doi:10.1016/j.nmni.2020.100682.
Lai, T.S.T., Keung Ng, T., Seto, W.H., Yam, L., Law, K.I., Chan, J., 2005. Low prevalence of subclinical severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus infection among hospital healthcare
workers in hong kong. Scandinavian journal of infectious diseases 37, 500–503.
Lehrer, S., 2020. Inhaled biguanides and mtor inhibition for influenza and coronavirus. World
Academy of Sciences Journal .
Li, B., Si, H.R., Zhu, Y., Yang, X.L., Anderson, D.E., Shi, Z.L., Wang, L.F., Zhou, P., 2020. Discovery of bat coronaviruses through surveillance and probe capture-based next-generation sequencing.
Msphere 5.
Li, K., Li, H., Bi, Z., Gu, J., Gong, W., Luo, S., Zhang, F., Song, D., Ye, Y., Tang, Y., 2018. Complete genome sequence of a novel swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus, ch/fjwt/2018, isolated
in fujian, china, in 2018. Microbiol Resour Announc 7, e01259–18.
Lorusso, E., Mari, V., Losurdo, M., Lanave, G., Trotta, A., Dowgier, G., Colaianni, M.L., Zatelli, A.,
Elia, G., Buonavoglia, D., et al., 2019. Discrepancies between feline coronavirus antibody and nucleic

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.

34.
35.

36.
37.

acid detection in effusions of cats with suspected feline infectious peritonitis. Research in veterinary
science 125, 421–424.
Misra, D.P., Agarwal, V., Gasparyan, A.Y., Zimba, O., 2020. RheumatologistsâĂŹ perspective on
coronavirus disease 19 (covid-19) and potential therapeutic targets. Clinical Rheumatology , 1–8.
Mothe, J., Chrisment, C., Dkaki, T., Dousset, B., Karouach, S., 2006. Combining mining and visualization tools to discover the geographic structure of a domain. Computers, environment and urban
systems 30, 460–484.
Mothe, J., Ramiandrisoa, F., Rasolomanana, M., 2018. Automatic keyphrase extraction using graphbased methods, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pp.
728–730.
Osabe, Y., Jibu, M., 2018. Introductory chapter: Scientometrics. Scientometrics , 1.
Perricone, C., Triggianese, P., Bartoloni, E., Cafaro, G., Bonifacio, A.F., Bursi, R., Perricone, R.,
Gerli, R., 2020. The anti-viral facet of anti-rheumatic drugs: Lessons from covid-19. Journal of Autoimmunity , 102468.
Ren, L.L., Wang, Y.M., Wu, Z.Q., Xiang, Z.C., Guo, L., Xu, T., Jiang, Y.Z., Xiong, Y., Li, Y.J.,
Li, X.W., et al., 2020. Identification of a novel coronavirus causing severe pneumonia in human: a
descriptive study. Chinese medical journal .
Ronzano, F., Saggion, H., 2016. Knowledge extraction and modeling from scientific publications, in:
International workshop on semantic, analytics, visualization, Springer. pp. 11–25.
Sahrawat, D., Mahata, D., Zhang, H., Kulkarni, M., Sharma, A., Gosangi, R., Stent, A., Kumar, Y.,
Shah, R.R., Zimmermann, R., 2020. Keyphrase extraction as sequence labeling using contextualized
embeddings, in: Jose, J.M., Yilmaz, E., Magalhães, J., Castells, P., Ferro, N., Silva, M.J., Martins,
F. (Eds.), Advances in Information Retrieval, Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 328–335.
Shibata, N., Kajikawa, Y., Takeda, Y., Sakata, I., Matsushima, K., 2009. Detecting emerging research fronts in regenerative medicine by citation network analysis of scientific publications, in:
PICMET’09-2009 Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering & Technology,
IEEE. pp. 2964–2976.
Small, H., Boyack, K.W., Klavans, R., 2014. Identifying emerging topics in science and technology.
Research policy 43, 1450–1467.
Song, J., Kang, S., Choi, S.W., Seo, K.W., Lee, S., So, M.W., Lim, D.H., 2020. Coronavirus disease
19 (covid-19) complicated with pneumonia in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis receiving conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Rheumatology International , 1.
Van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2017. Citation-based clustering of publications using citnetexplorer and
vosviewer. Scientometrics 111, 1053–1070.
Wan, Y., Shang, J., Graham, R., Baric, R.S., Li, F., 2020. Receptor recognition by the novel coronavirus from wuhan: an analysis based on decade-long structural studies of sars coronavirus. Journal
of virology 94.
Wang, L., Su, S., Bi, Y., Wong, G., Gao, G.F., 2018. Bat-origin coronaviruses expand their host
range to pigs. Trends in microbiology 26, 466–470.
Yang, Y.L., Qin, P., Wang, B., Liu, Y., Xu, G.H., Peng, L., Zhou, J., Zhu, S.J., Huang, Y.W., 2019.
Broad cross-species infection of cultured cells by bat hku2-related swine acute diarrhea syndrome

coronavirus and identification of its replication in murine dendritic cells in vivo highlight its potential for diverse interspecies transmission. Journal of virology 93.

