The effect of norm-based messages on reading and understanding
COVID-19 pandemic response governmental rules
Ennio Bilancini1, Leonardo Boncinelli2, Valerio Capraro3, Tatiana Celadin1, Roberto Di Paolo1,4
1

IMT School of Advanced Studies, Lucca, Italy, 2 University of Florence, Italy, 3 Middlesex University London, 4
University of Alicante.

Forthcoming in: Journal of Behavioral Economics for Policy

Abstract
The new coronavirus disease (COVID-19) threatens the lives of millions of people around the
world, making it the largest health threat in recent times. Billions of people around the world are
asked to adhere to strict shelter-in-place rules, finalised to slow down the spread of the virus.
Appeals and messages are being used by leaders and policy-makers to promote pandemic response.
Given the stakes at play, it is thus important for social scientists to explore which messages are
most effective in promoting pandemic response. In fact, some papers in the last month have
explored the effect of several messages on people’s intentions to engage in pandemic response
behaviour. In this paper, we make two contributions. First, we explore the effect of messages on
people’s actual engagement, and not on intentions. Specifically, our dependent variables are the
level of understanding of official COVID-19 pandemic response governmental informative panels,
measured through comprehension questions, and the time spent on reading these rules. Second, we
test a novel set of appeals built through the theory of norms. One message targets the personal
norm (what people think is the right thing to do), one targets the descriptive norm (what people
think others are doing), and one targets the injunctive norm (what people think others approve or
disapprove of). Our experiment is conducted online with a representative (with respect to gender,
age, and location) sample of Italians. Norms are made salient using a flier. We find that normbased fliers had no effect on comprehension and on time spent on the panels. These results suggest
that norm-based interventions through fliers have very little impact on people’s reading and
understanding of COVID-19 pandemic response governmental rules.

1. Introduction
At the time in which we write (May 1, 2020), over 3 million people worldwide have been affected
by the disease COVID-19, caused by the new coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). More than 230,000

people are confirmed dead1, and this is likely to be a severe underestimation (Burn-Murdoch,
Romei, & Giles, 2020). To stop the exponential spread of the virus, dozens of countries have
implemented shelter-in-place rules to the point that, at the moment, about one third of the world
population is under some form of restriction (Kaplan, Frias, & McFall-Johnsen, 2020).
While medical scientists work hard to find a cure or a vaccine, the role of social and behavioural
scientists is to give insights that can help align human behaviour with the recommendations of
epidemiologists and public health experts (Van Bavel et al. 2020). These insights include finding
efficient mechanisms to inform the population and drive behavioural changes, with the overarching
goal of promoting pandemic response and minimising the potentially devastating consequences
that the pandemic might cause (Van Bavel et al. 2020).
Among these mechanisms, social scientists have primarily focused on which appeals and messages
promote intentions to engage in prevention behaviours (Barari et al. 2020; Capraro & Barcelo,
2020; Everett et al. 2020; Falco & Zaccagni, 2020; Heffner et al. 2020; Jordan et al. 2020; Lunn
et al. 2020; Pfattheicher et al. 2020). The importance of finding efficient messages is clear, as they
represent an easy and potentially scalable intervention: messages can be texted by phone, spread
on social media, put inside postal boxes, and even voiced in the streets using cars equipped with a
megaphone, as it happened in Italy (Provantini & Ugolini, 2020). Yet, one important limitation of
these works is that they focus on intentions to engage in behaviours related to pandemic response,
and not on actual engagement (Gollwitzer et al. 2020).
In this paper, we make two contributions. The first one is methodological: we develop an
experimental design aimed at measuring pandemic relevant actual behaviours. To this end,
compared to previous works, we consider a different dependent measure: instead of focusing
directly on behaviours such as practicing physical distancing (Everett et al., 2020; Jordan et al.
2020) or wearing a face covering (Capraro & Barcelo, 2020), which are clearly hard to measure in
reality, we focus on reading detailed and official information about the coronavirus. This measure
is incentivised, not with money, of course, but with time. Specifically, participants in our
experiment will read a series of detailed information regarding the coronavirus and then will be
asked some comprehension questions. Our primary dependent measure will be the percentage of
correct answers (which, as we will see, is correlated with the time spent on the panels).
Our second contribution is practical: we test a new set of messages to promote (our measure of)
pandemic response. To develop this set of messages, we take a theory-driven approach. More than
a century of research in social science has shown that people’s decisions are affected by what
people believe to be the norms in a given context (Durkheim, 1894/2017; Schwartz, 1977; Cialdini
et al.,1990; Bicchieri, 2005). People tend to follow what they think other people are doing (the socalled descriptive norm), what they think other people would approve of (the injunctive norm),
1

https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/

and what they personally think is the right thing to do (the personal norm). Consequently, in recent
years behavioural scientists have started using norm-based interventions to promote desirable
behaviour in economic experiments (D’Adda et al. 2017; Bicchieri & Xiao, 2009; Bilancini et al.
2020; Capraro & Rand, 2018; Capraro et al. 2019; Capraro & Vanzo, 2019; Eriksson et al. 2017;
Krupka & Weber, 2009; Krupka & Weber, 2012; Kimbrough & Vostroknutov, 2016) as well as in
the field (Agerström et al., 2016; Croson et al., 2010; Ferraro & Price, 2013; Frey & Meier, 2004;
Goldstein et al. 2008; Allcott, 2016; Hallsworth et al. 2017; Allcott & Kessler, 2019). Moreover,
several recent works have highlighted the social motives behind COVID-19 prevention behaviour
(Campos-Mercade et al. 2020; Lees et al. 2020; Raihani & de-Wit, 2020). This suggests that normbased interventions may be useful to promote pandemic response (Van Bavel et al. 2020).
Having this in mind, we designed, pre-registered, and conducted a four-condition, betweensubjects experiment, in which participants were shown a flier before reading a series of panels
containing detailed information about how to behave in response to the coronavirus threat. Each
of the three “treatment” fliers targeted a different norm; a fourth flier corresponded to the baseline.
The text reported in the panels was downloaded from the website of the Italian Ministry of Health.
We decided to conduct the experiment using fliers and governmental information, because of the
potential scalability of such intervention: the government can send a summary of the shelter-inplace rules with a flier by text message, email, or regular mail. The experiment was conducted
with a representative (with respect to age, gender and location) sample of Italians.
2. Method
The experiment was conducted between the 22nd and the 23rd of April, 2020. It was implemented
with Qualtrics. We recruited a representative (with respect to gender, age, and location) sample of
640 Italian subjects using the online platform Lucid2. Participants were paid 1.25€ for a 10-minute
survey. A posteriori sensitivity analysis shows that this sample size is sufficient to detect an effect
size of d = 0.28 with significance α = 0.05 and power of β = 0.80. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of four treatments. In one treatment they were shown a flier with no explicit
reference to norms (baseline), while in each of the other three treatments the flier aimed at making
one of the three norms (personal, descriptive, injunctive) more salient (see Figure 1). In the
Baseline (N=158), we invited participants to reflect on the current emergency situation. In the
Personal Norm treatment (N=165), we invited participants to reflect on which behaviours they
think are right in the current emergency situation. In the Descriptive Norm treatment (N=160), we
invited participants to reflect on which behaviours they think are widespread among other people
in the current emergency situation. Finally, in the Injunctive Norm treatment (N=157), we invited
participants to reflect on which behaviours they think other people believe to be right in the current
2

Lucid is an aggregator of survey respondents from many sources. It collects basic demographic
information from all their subjects, facilitating quota sampling to match the demographic census margins
for many countries (including Italy).

emergency situation.3

Baseline

Descriptive Norm

Personal Norm

Injunctive Norm

Figure 1 - Fliers shown in each treatment. Translated from the Italian, in the Baseline, participants
are invited to participants to reflect on the current emergency situation. In the Personal Norm
treatment, participants are invited to reflect on which behaviours they think are right in the current
emergency situation. In the Descriptive Norm treatment, participants are invited to reflect on
which behaviours they think are widespread among other people in the current emergency
situation. In the Injunctive Norm treatment, participants are invited to reflect on which behaviours
they think other people believe to be right in the current actual emergency situation.
After being shown the flier, participants read five informative panels about the recommended
behaviours during the Covid-19 pandemic disease. The information in the panels was taken from
the website of the Italian Ministry of Health4. A timer (invisible to the participants) allowed us to
record the time that each participant spent on each panel. After each panel, participants had to
answer a comprehension question about what they had just read; each question had three possible
3

An alternative way to target the descriptive norm and the injunctive norm could have been to tell
participants: “90% of your neighbours think …” We opted for not using this type of nudges for two
reasons: (i) to avoid deception (we do not know the location of the participants, so we cannot know what
their neighbours think), and (ii) to maximise comparability with the personal norm condition (there is no
way to make the personal norm salient by using a nudge of the shape “90% of…”).
4

http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/home.html

answers, one of which was correct. Correct answers were not incentivised with money, because
we did not want to motivate participants to pay attention just for receiving a monetary payment.
The flier was shown before each panel. However, after the first panel, the fliers were slightly
different (see Appendix). The order of the panels, as well as the order of the possible answers to
the questions, were fully randomised.
After the five panels and the corresponding five questions, participants were asked a set of
demographic variables: sex, age, education, income, residence, political affiliation, general health,
whether they were tested positive for COVID-19 and whether they had relatives that were tested
positive for COVID-19. These measures are not explored in this paper and left for further
investigation. We refer to the Appendix for full experimental instructions, both in Italian (original)
and in English.
Our primary dependent variable is the percentage of correct answers given during the experiment.
We investigate the effect of norm-based interventions targeting the personal norm and the two
social norms (descriptive and injunctive) on this variable. Moreover, as a secondary (preregistered) analysis, we test the differences in the distribution of times spent on the panels across
treatments. The design and the analyses were pre-registered at https://aspredicted.org/th7kw.pdf.
3. Results
Table 1 reports the demographic characteristics of the overall sample. Our sample is representative
(with respect to gender, age and location) of the Italian population. In the analysis below, we drop
out one participant because she spent 25 hours on the survey, probably leaving the survey open on
the computer. Given that the time spent on the panels is an important measure for our analysis, we
eliminate this extreme outlier which generates a huge standard deviation in the data.
Demographics
Gender

Age

Percentage in the
sample

Percentage in Italian
population

Female

49.77

51.32

Male

50.23

48.68

18-24

8.29

10.21

25-34

12.83

12.43

35-44

16.59

15.34

Location

45-54

19.72

18.43

55-64

17.68

15.60

65+

24.88

26.00

North

42.72

45.98

Center

20.19

19.91

South

37.09

34.11

Table 1 - Demographic characteristics of the sample.

We begin by analysing the percentage of correct answers that participants give to the five
questions, for each treatment. Figure 2 reports the distribution of the percentage of correct answers
by treatment (left panel) and the average values of the “percentage of correct answers” variable
split by treatment (right panel). As pre-registered, we first make an overall comparison using the
Kruskal-Wallis test to identify differences in the distribution across all treatments, then we
compare each treatment with the Baseline using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For the KruskasWallis test we find no statistically significant difference (X2 = 1.272; p = 0.714). Similarly, neither
of the pairwise comparisons between each treatment and the Baseline is statistically significant
(all p-values are larger than 0.1).

Figure 2: Percentage of correct answers distributions, split by treatments (left chart). Average
values of the “percentage of correct answers” variable by treatment (right chart). Error bars
represent 95% CI.

As (pre-registered) secondary analysis we analyse the time each participant spent on the five
informative panels. The idea is to use it as a proxy for the effort that people exert to read and
understand the panel. First of all, we show that the amount of time spent on the panel is positively
associated with the number of correct answers, which is correlated with the understanding of the
information contained in the panel itself. A linear regression predicting the number of correct
answers as a function of the average time spent on the panels reports a statistically significant
positive effect (coeff = 0.136, p < 0.001). Then we analyse the time spent on each panel across
treatments. Figure 3 shows the average time spent on each treatment. As pre-registered, we first
use the Kruskal-Wallis test to check for differences in distributions, and we then use the Wilcoxon
rank-sum test to compare each treatment with the Baseline. For the Kruskal-Wallis test we find no
statistically significant difference (X2 = 4.346; p = 0.226). The results of the pairwise comparisons
are somewhat more equivocal: the largest effect size is found comparing the Injunctive Norm with
the Baseline, but it is slightly above the conventional significance level (Z = 1.932; p = 0.053).

Figure 3: Average time spent on the informative panels by treatments. Errors bars represent 95%
CI.
Finally, one may wonder if the previous results are a consequence of participants who do not read
the panels, which would prevent treatments from being effective. Indeed, while analysing the data,
we noticed that a substantial proportion of participants had spent far too little time on the
informative panels, suggesting that they had not read them. Therefore, we tried to identify, for

each informative panel, two sets of participants, those who had read it and those who had not. The
left chart of Figure 4 provides evidence that the distributions of the time spent on each panel tend
to be bimodal. We classified a panel as “read” by a participant if the time that the participant spent
on it was larger than the minimum frequency between the two peaks in the distribution of time
spent for that panel; otherwise, we classified the panel as “non-read” by the participant. Averaging
over panels, the first peak corresponds to about 3 seconds spent on a panel (far too little to be able
to read it), while the second peak corresponds to about 57 seconds (enough for a careful reading).
Being classified as “read” turns out to be, as expected, correlated with the number of correct
answers (coeff = 9.15, p < .001).
Following this categorization, we have that 50% of the participants read all the panels, while about
the 20% of them did not read any of the panels. Therefore, we conducted some robustness analyses
to test whether the norm-based fliers had some effects on the set of people who read all the panels.
Figure 4 (right chart) shows the mean values of the “percentage of correct answers” split by
treatments for those who effectively read all the five panels. As before, we do not find any
statistically significant difference when we compare the treatments (all p-values are larger than
0.1), suggesting that previous results are robust.

Figure 4: Distribution of the average time spent (in log scale) on each informative panel (left chart).
Percentage of correct answers among participants classified as “readers” of all the five panels (right
charts)

4. Discussion

In our experiment the norm-based interventions through fliers aimed at promoting a pandemic
response had substantially no effect on reading and comprehension of the informative panels
regarding behaviours recommended by the Italian Ministry of Health. The lack of a sizeable effect
on comprehension was inferred from the lack of variance, across treatments, in the number of
correct answers to comprehension questions administered after each informative panel. This is not
an artifact of the ceiling effect as the fraction of correct answers is far below 100%, so that there
was substantial room for potential improvements. The lack of a sizeable effect on reading was
inferred from the lack of variance, across treatments, in the time spent in each informative panel.
Actually, the distribution of time spent in each panel appears to be two-peaked, with one peak
around 3 seconds and one peak around 1 minute, which suggests that participants either read the
panel accurately or just skipped it, but such behaviour does not seem to be affected by our normbased intervention.
In terms of power, a sensitivity analysis shows that our sample size was sufficient to detect a
relatively small effect (d=0.28) on the primary dependent variable (percentage of correct answers).
The results show very little variation on this variable across treatments and thus we believe that
our sample was correctly powered to detect significant treatment effects on the primary variable.
In terms of the secondary variable (time spent on the informative panels), the results are more
equivocal and suggest that there might be an effect that we failed to detect because of insufficient
power, such that making the norms salient has the effect that people spend less time on the panels.
Paired with the fact that, when the norms are salient, people correctly answer the same number of
questions as in the baseline, it is therefore possible that making the norm salient increases
“efficiency of reading” (people read faster, but understand the same); an alternative explanation
could be that making the norm salient has the effect that people remember that they have heard
similar information in the past, and that they do not need to read the panels in detail to find the
answer. Future work should test these hypotheses with a larger sample.
Our findings leave us with a warning: when actual behaviour is considered, instead of intentions,
and behaviour is costly to adopt, nudging interventions should be carefully designed to be
effective. Indeed, norm-based interventions may be seen as a form of nudging: they alter the choice
architecture without affecting material incentives, rather relying on cognitive biases or alike
(Sunstein, 2014). In light of our results, which fall possibly in the cases of ineffectiveness discussed
by Sunstein (2017), we recommend future research to explore the effectiveness of stronger nudges:
for instance, shocking images might be used in fliers, showing hospital wards full of sick people,
or even military trucks loaded with coffins (such a kind of shocking images have already been
used in a variety of situations, e.g., billboards portraying car accidents and packs of cigarettes
showing smoking consequences).
Our study considered the effects of norm-based interventions on a representative sample of Italians
(in terms of gender, age, and location) because we wanted to provide results about policies relying
on massive and non-targeted communication. A potentially relevant direction to be explored in

future research is whether the same norm-based interventions that we considered here are more
effective on sub-samples with specific characteristics, such as activity on social networks or
expertise of communication technologies. Given the potential heterogeneity in personal and
perceived social norms, another potentially relevant direction concerns the extent to which the
effects of the interventions are norm-specific (e.g., stronger effects for more extreme norms).
Moreover, we stress that the ineffectiveness of our norm-based interventions may be due to the
fact that people have received so many messages and appeals to behave responsibly that no room
is left for additional effects of simple nudges (such as norm-based text messages). Also, this might
be especially true for online surveys and COVID-19 related studies.
We close this discussion with a methodological notice: in this paper we introduced an incentivised
mechanism which is not based on money, but on effort exerted performing a task (in our case,
reading the informative panel). Rather than considering this as a shortcoming, we believe it
reinforces the external validity of our treatments, in that they are closer to feasible public policy
interventions.
References
D’Adda, G., Capraro, V., & Tavoni, M. (2017). Push, don’t nudge: Behavioral spillovers
and policy instruments. Economics Letters, 154, 92–95.
Agerström, J., Carlsson, R., Nicklasson, L., & Guntell, L. (2016). Using descriptive
social norms to increase charitable giving: The power of local norms. Journal of
Economic Psychology, 52, 147–153.
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics,
95, 1082-1095.
Allcott, H., & Kessler, J. B. (2019). The welfare effects of nudges: A case study of
energy use social comparisons. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
11, 236-276.
Barari, S., et al. (2020). Evaluating COVID-19 public health messaging in Italy: Selfreported compliance and growing mental health concerns. Available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.27.20042820v2.full.pdf+html
Bicchieri, C. (2005). The grammar of society: The nature and dynamics of social norms.
Cambridge University Press.
Bicchieri, C., & Xiao, E. (2009). Do the right thing: but only if others do so. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 191–208.
Bilancini, E., Boncinelli, L., Capraro, V., Celadin, T., & Di Paolo, R. (2020). “Do the
right thing” for whom? An experiment on ingroup favouritism, group assorting
and moral suasion. Judgment and Decision Making, 15, 182-192.
Burn-Murdoch, J., Romei, V., & Giles, C. (2020). Global coronavirus death toll could be

60% higher than reported. Financial Times.
Campos-Mercade, P., Meier, A. N., Schnider, F. H., Wengström, E. (2020). Prosociality
predicts health behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic. Available at
http://www.armandomeier.com/wpcontent/uploads/2020/05/SocialPreferencesHealth.pdf
Capraro, V., & Barcelo, H. (2020). The effect of messaging and gender on intentions to
wear a face covering to slow down COVID-19 transmission. Available at
https://psyarxiv.com/tg7vz.
Capraro, V., Jagfeld, G., Klein, R., Mul, M., & van de Pol, I. (2019). Increasing altruistic
and cooperative be- haviour with simple moral nudges. Scientific Reports, 9,
11880.
Capraro, V. & Rand, D. G. (2018). Do the right thing: Experimental evidence that
preferences for moral be- havior, rather than equity or efficiency per se, drive
human prosociality. Judgment and Decision Making, 13, 99–111.
Capraro, V. & Vanzo, A. (2019). The power of moral words: Loaded language generates
framing effects in the extreme dictator game. Judgment and Decision Making, 14,
309–317.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of normative
conduct: recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places.
Journal of personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Croson, R. T., Handy, F., and Shang, J. (2010). Gendered giving: The influence of social
norms on the do- nation behavior of men and women. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 15, 199–213.
Durkheim, E. (2017). Les règles de la me ́thode sociologique. Flammarion..
Eriksson, K., Strimling, P., Andersson, P. A., & Lindholm, T. (2017). Costly punishment
in the ultimatum game evokes moral concern, in particular when framed as payoff
reduction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 69, 59–64.
Everett, J. A., Colombatto, C., Chituc, V., Brady, W. J., & Crockett, M. (2020). The
effectiveness of moral messages on public health behavioral intentions during the
COVID-19 pandemic. https://psyarxiv.com/9yqs8
Falco, P., & Zaccagni, S. (2020). Promoting social distancing in a pandemic: Beyond the
good intentions. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/a2nys

Ferraro, P. J. & Price, M. K. (2013). Using nonpecuniary strategies to influence behavior:
evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics,
95, 64–73.
Frey, B. S. & Meier, S. (2004). Social comparisons and pro- social behavior: Testing"
conditional cooperation" in a field experiment. American Economic Review, 94,
1717–1722.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., and Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint:
Using social norms to mo- tivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of
Consumer Research, 35, 472–482.

Gollwitzer, A., Martel, C., Marshall, J., Höhs, J. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2020). Connecting Self-Reported
Social Distancing to Real-World Behavior at the Individual and U.S. State Level.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/kvnwp

Hallsworth, M., List, J. A., Metcalfe, R. D., and Vlaev, I. (2017). The behavioralist as tax
collector: Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal of
Public Economics, 148, 14–31.
Heffner, J., Vives, M., & FeldmanHall, O. (2020). Emotional responses to prosocial messages
increase willingness to self-isolate during the COVID-19 pandemic.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/qkxvb

Kimbrough, E. O., & Vostroknutov, A. (2016). Norms make preferences social. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 14, 608–638.
Jordan, J., Yoeli, E., & Rand, D. (2020). Don’t get it or don’t spread it? Comparing selfinterested versus prosocially framed COVID-19 prevention messaging.
https://psyarxiv.com/yuq7x/download?format=pdf
Kaplan, J., Frias, L., & McFall-Johnsen, M. (2020). A third of the global population is on
coronavirus lockdown. Business Insider.
Krupka, E., & Weber, R. A. (2009). The focusing and informational effects of norms on
pro-social behavior. Journal of Economic Psychology, 30, 307–320.
Krupka, E. L., & Weber, R. A. (2013). Identifying social norms using coordination
games: Why does dictator game sharing vary? Journal of the European Economic
Association, 11, 495–524.
Lees, J. M., Cetron, J. S., Vollberg, M. C., Reggev, N., & Cikara, M. (2020). Intentions to
comply with COVID-19 preventive behaviors are associated with personal
beliefs, independent of perceived social norms.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/97jry
Lunn, P. D., Timmons, S., Barjaková, M., Belton, C. A., Julienne, H., & Lavin, C.
(2020). Motivating social distancing during the Covid-19 pandemic: An online
experiment. https://www.esri.ie/pubs/WP658.pdf
Pfattheicher, S., Nockur, L., Böhm, R., Sassenrath, C., & Petersen, M. (2020). The
emotional path to action: Empathy promotes physical distancing during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Available at https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/y2cg5
Provantini, A., & Ugolini, V. (2020). Coronavirus, col megafono e sui social, sindaci in
prima fila. E c’è chi requisisce anche gli asparagi. Il Messaggero.
Raihani, N., & de-Wit, L. (2020). Factors Associated With Concern, Behaviour & Policy
Support in Response to SARS-CoV-2. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/8jpzc
Schwartz, S. H. (1977). Normative influences on altruism. In Advances in experimental
social psychology, volume 10, 221–279. Elsevier.
Sunstein, C. R. (2014). Nudging: a very short guide. Journal of Consumer Policy, 37,
583-588.
Sunstein, C. R. (2017). Nudges that fail. Behavioural Public Policy, 4-25.
Van Bavel, J. J., Baicker, K., Boggio, P., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Crockett, M., …

Willer, R. (2020). Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19
pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour.

Appendix A.
Here, we provide the experimental instructions of our study. Notice that we report the baseline
condition, which differs from the other treatments just for the text in the flier (see Figure 1).

Appendix B.
Here, we provide the English translation of the experimental instructions of our study.
WELCOME!
Information for Participants and Consent
How will personal information be protected?
All the answers that you provide will be completely anonymous, you will be assigned a random
participant code that cannot be linked in any way to your personal identity. If you authorize the
survey by completing and submitting it, we will discuss/publish the results in an academic outlet.
In any publication, the information will be provided in such a way that you cannot be identified.
Only members of the research team will have access to the original data set, which will be stored
on a password-locked computer. Before your data is shared outside the research team, any
potentially identifying information will be removed; the data provided could be used by the
research team or shared with other researchers, both for related and unrelated research purposes in
the future. Your (anonymous) data may also be made available in online data repositories such as
the Open Science Framework, which allows other researchers and stakeholders to access the data
for further analysis.
Declaration of consent
I agree to participate in this project, the details of which have been explained to me and a written
statement have been provided in plain language.
I understand that after clicking on the button below, this consent form will be retained by the
researcher.
I recognize that:
a) I have been informed that I am free to withdraw from the project at any time without
explanation or prejudice and to withdraw all the raw data that I have provided;
b) The project is aimed at research;
c) I have been informed that the confidentiality of the information provided will be protected
from any legal requirements;
d) Any information I provide will be completely anonymous;
e) Only members of the research team will have access to my raw data, which will be stored
on a computer locked with a password. Once all identifiable information has been removed,
my anonymous responses can be shared with other researchers or made available in online
data stores.
I agree to participate in this research and that the answers I provide are treated as indicated
above:
Agree - Disagree

Next page
THANK YOU FOR PARTICIPATING!
During this study, you will read five panels regarding the right behaviors to be followed due to
Covid-19.
All information on Covid-19 reported here is taken from the web page of the Ministry of Health.
After each prospect you will be asked to answer a question.
Next page
Subjects will randomly be assigned to one of the following treatments.
Baseline:
Coronavirus information
Before continuing, we invite you to take a moment to reflect upon the current emergency situation.
Personal Norm:
Coronavirus information
Before continuing, we invite you to take a moment to reflect upon what behaviors you think are
right in the current emergency situation.
Descriptive Norm:
Coronavirus information
Before continuing, we invite you to take a moment to reflect upon what behaviors you think are
widespread among other people in the current emergency situation.
Injunctive norm:
Coronavirus information
Before continuing, we invite you to take a moment to reflect upon what behaviors you think other
people believe to be right in the current emergency situation.
Next page (Notice that, hereafter, we insert the baseline condition that differs from the other
treatments just for the text in the flier.)
Panel:
Since the 26th of March, with the entry into force of the decree-law 25 March 2020, n. 19, the
sanctions have been made more severe and immediate. In general, for those who violate the
restrictions to contain the epidemic, an administrative sanction in cash is foreseen (from 400 to
3,000 euros). If the violation occurs through the use of a vehicle, the penalties can reach up to
4,000 euros. In addition to this, in case of violation of the containment measures provided for
public exercises, sports, leisure or entertainment activities, business or professional and
commercial activities, the immediate suspension of the activity up to 30 days may be imposed. In
case of reiteration, the fines are doubled (therefore from 800 to 6,000 euros or 8,000 euros if
committed through the use of a vehicle), while the ancillary one is applied to the maximum extent.

Failure to comply with the quarantine by those who tested positive for Covid-19, on the other hand,
entails criminal penalties: detention from 3 to 18 months and payment of a fine from 500 to 5,000
euros, without the possibility of “oblation”.5 In any case, if the elements of a crime are also found
in the behavior of those who violate the aforementioned containment measures, the criminal
responsibility for this more serious crime remains. So, for example, making false statements in
substitute statements delivered to the police force during checks remains a crime, which requires
immediate reporting. Or violate the quarantine and, having contracted the virus, leaving the house
spreading the disease can lead to reporting for serious crimes (epidemic, murder, injury), punished
with severe penalties, which can go as far as life in prison.
Next Page
What are the sanctions that have been introduced with Law Decree 25 March 2020, n. 19
where the subjects are found to violate the containment measures?
- Administrative penalties are provided for those who violate containment and criminal
penalties for those who test positive for Covid-19
- Criminal penalties are provided for all those who violate containment measures
- Criminal and administrative penalties are provided for all those who violate containment
measures
Next Page
Coronavirus information
Again, we invite you to take a moment to reflect on the current emergency situation
Next Page
Panel:
The provisions currently in force allow the return to Italy, if it is an absolute necessity.
Therefore, for example, the return of Italian citizens or foreigners residing in Italy who are abroad
temporarily (for tourism, business or otherwise) is allowed.
Italian citizens forced to permanently leave the foreign country where they worked or studied are
also allowed to return to Italy (because, for example, they were fired, they lost their home, their
course of study was definitively interrupted).
Once they enter the national territory, the interested parties must reach their home in the shortest
possible time.

5

Oblation, in the Italian code of law, represents the possibility to pay a certain sum of money to
extinguish the crime.

Circumstances of absolute urgency must be self-certified. It is recommended to prepare the selfcertification before departure, indicating specifically the reasons for the return, in a way to speed
up the checks.
Next Page
For which situations can you return to Italy if you are abroad?
- You can go back to Italy only for reasons of absolute necessity
- You can go back to Italy if you have your residence in the national territory
- You can go back to Italy with the authorization of the Farnesina
Next Page
Coronavirus information
Again, we invite you to take a moment to reflect on the current emergency situation
Next Page
Panel:
With the Ministerial Decree of 22 March 2020, the Government issued new additional measures
regarding the containment and management of the epidemiological emergency from COVID-19,
applicable throughout the country.
The provision provides for the closure of non-essential or strategic production activities. Food,
pharmacies, necessities shops and essential services remain open.
The provisions take effect from March 23, 2020 and are effective until April 3, 2020.
The same provisions apply, cumulatively to those of the Prime Ministerial Decree of 11 March as
well as to those provided for by the ordinance of the Minister of Health of 20 March 2020 whose
terms of effectiveness, already set for 25 March 2020, are both extended to 3 April 2020.
Among the new measures, the ordinance of 22 March 2020 was also adopted, signed jointly by the
Minister of Health and the Minister of the Interior, which prohibits all persons from moving with
public or private means of transport in a municipality other than the one in which they are located,
except for proven essential work, absolute urgency or health reasons. For example, it is justified
by reasons of necessity to move to shop, to buy newspapers, to go to the pharmacy, or in any case
to buy goods necessary for daily life. Furthermore, every exit from the home for outdoor sports or
motor activities is justified. In any case, all movements are subject to the general assembly ban,
and therefore the obligation to respect the minimum safety distance of 1 meter between people.
Next Page

What essential measures have been introduced with the Prime Ministerial Decree of March
25, 2020?
- It is not possible to leave your home, except for jogging close to your home
- It is not possible to travel by public transport in municipalities other than your own, even
if for essential work or health reasons
- It is not possible to stay on the balcony for a long time in the company of neighbors
Next Page
Coronavirus information
Again, we invite you to take a moment to reflect on the current emergency situation
Next Page
Panel:
To keep yourself protected, stay informed on the spread of the pandemic, available on the WHO
website and the ministry website, and take the following personal protection measures:
● Stay at home, leave it only for essential work, health reasons and necessities (see
containment measures)
● Wash your hands often;
● Avoid close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections;
● Avoid hugs and handshakes;
● Maintaining, in social contacts, the interpersonal distance of at least one meter;
● Respiratory hygiene (sneeze and/or cough in a handkerchief, avoid contact of the hands
with respiratory secretions);
● Avoid the promiscuous use of bottles and glasses;
● Do not touch your eyes, nose and mouth with your hands;
● Cover your mouth and nose if you sneeze or cough;
● Do not take antiviral drugs and antibiotics unless prescribed by your doctor;
● Clean the surfaces with chlorine or alcohol based disinfectants;
● Use the mask only if you suspect that you are sick or if you are caring for sick people.
If you have a fever, cough or breathing difficulties and suspect that you have been in close contact
with a person suffering from Covid-19 respiratory disease: stay at home, do not go to the
emergency room or doctor's office but call your family doctor on the phone, your paediatrician or
the medical guard. Or call the regional toll-free number. Use the emergency numbers 112/118 only
if strictly necessary.
Next Page
Can Antibiotics Help Prevent Covid-19 Infection?

-

No, antibiotics are not effective against viruses, but only work against bacterial
infections
Yes, antibiotics are effective for preventing Covid-19 infection
Yes, but you should take them only if prescribed by your doctor

Next Page
Coronavirus information
Again, we invite you to take a moment to reflect on the current emergency situation
Next Page
Panel:
The current spread of Covid-19 is the result of human-to-human transmission. To date, there is no
evidence that pets can spread the virus. Therefore, there is no justification for taking measures
against pets that could compromise their well-being.
However, since animals and humans can sometimes share certain diseases (known as zoonotic
diseases), it is always necessary and not only for fear of Covid-19, that the normal hygiene
measures recommended by doctors and veterinarians are always adopted to avoid the spread of
disease.
The Ministry of Health, following what has been expressed by authoritative international bodies,
recommends compliance with the most basic hygiene rules such as washing hands before and after
being in contact or having touched animals, their food or supplies, avoid kissing them, get licked
or share food.
Upon returning from a walk, always clean their legs avoiding aggressive products and those based
on alcohol which can induce irritative phenomena.
Small tricks that allow us to minimize the risk of introducing into the home, at the end of a walk,
pathogens that could spread in the common areas.
In homes where there are subjects affected or undergoing medical treatment for Covid-19, close
contact with their animals should be avoided as far as possible, as is the case with other cohabitants
and ensure that another one is taken care of relatives.
The presence of an animal in the house can be considered a great opportunity for the whole family,
both from an educational and social point of view.
Next Page
Can pets transmit Covid-19?
- Pets may be susceptible to Covid-19, but there is no evidence that they are vectors of the
virus
- Pets may be susceptible to Covid-19 and there is evidence that they are vectors of the virus

-

Pets are not susceptible to Covid-19, and therefore are not vectors of the virus

Next Page
Age:
Gender: Man-Woman
Indicate the highest level of education you have achieved:
- Primary school
- First grade secondary school
- High school
- Bachelor’s degree
- Master’s degree
- PhD
- Other
Place of residence:
Where are you currently domiciled? Indicate municipality (Province):
Indicate your profession:
Taking your general health condition into consideration, how would you rate your health?
Very bad/Bad/Neither bad nor good/Good/Very good
Check the following list of pathologies.
Cardiovascular problems, diabetes, hepatitis B, chronic lung problems, chronic kidney
problems, cancer.
How many of the following conditions do you currently have:
0 1 2 3 4 5 or more
Have you had symptoms related to Covid-19? Yes-No-Rather not to answer
Hve you tested positive for Covid-19? Yes-No-Rather not to answer
Do you have close acquaintances who were tested positive for Covid 19: Yes-No-Rather not to
answer
Indicate the level of net income in 2019. Consider all forms of income:
- Up to 15,000
- 15.001 - 28.000
- 28,001 - 55,000
- 55.001 - 75.000
- Over 75,001
Which political party are you closer to?
Next Page
Thanks for your participation!

Continue to finish the study.

