Pandemic, Shutdown and Consumer Spending: Lessons
from Scandinavian Policy Responses to COVID-19∗
arXiv:2005.04630v1 [econ.GN] 10 May 2020

Asger Lau Andersen (University of Copenhagen and CEBI)
Emil Toft Hansen (University of Copenhagen and CEBI)
Niels Johannesen (University of Copenhagen and CEBI)
Adam Sheridan (University of Copenhagen and CEBI)
May 12, 2020

Abstract
This paper uses transaction data from a large bank in Scandinavia to estimate the effect
of social distancing laws on consumer spending in the COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis
exploits a natural experiment to disentangle the effects of the virus and the laws aiming
to contain it: Denmark and Sweden were similarly exposed to the pandemic but only
Denmark imposed significant restrictions on social and economic activities. We estimate
that aggregate spending dropped by around 25 percent in Sweden and, as a result of
the shutdown, by 4 additional percentage points in Denmark. This implies that most of
the economic contraction is caused by the virus itself and occurs regardless of whether
governments mandate social distancing or not. The age gradient in the estimates suggest
that social distancing reinforces the virus-induced drop in spending for individuals with
low health risk but attenuates it for individuals with high health risk by lowering the
overall prevalence of the virus in the society.

∗

Asger Lau Andersen: asger.lau.andersen@econ.ku.dk; Emil Toft Hansen: eth@econ.ku.dk; Niels Johannesen:
niels.johannesen@econ.ku.dk; Adam Sheridan: adam.sheridan@econ.ku.dk. We are extremely grateful to key
employees at Danske Bank for their help. All individual data used in this analysis has been anonymized and no
single customer can be traced in the data. All data processing has been conducted by authorized Danske Bank
personnel, following the bank’s strict data privacy guidelines.

1

Introduction

One of the key policy choices facing governments in the COVID-19 pandemic is whether to shut
down economic activity in order to slow the spread of the disease. Many types of consumption
take place in settings with a high density of people (e.g., restaurants, public transit) or involve
direct physical contact (e.g., hair dressers, dentists) and contribute to the disease spreading.
Other types of consumer spending (e.g., retail shopping) involve proximity to shop assistants
and other consumers and therefore also pose risks. Most governments have implemented social
distancing laws that restrict some of these economic activities. However, the severity of these
restrictions vary considerably across countries and many governments are considering day-byday whether to loosen, maintain, or tighten restrictions in response to new data on COVID-19
cases and mortality.
The policy choice facing governments is often portrayed as a simple trade-off between saving
lives and saving the economy. By this logic, more severe restrictions help contain the virus and
reduce the ultimate death toll but cause more economic pain as more households cut spending,
more businesses go bankrupt and more workers lose their jobs.1 However, this view does not
account for the possibility that the underlying health risks that the restrictions are designed
to curtail may inflict significant harm on the economy in their own right: individuals may
themselves choose to restrain economic activity based on their personal health risk, even when
this is not mandated by law. This points to an indirect mechanism whereby shutting down
sectors with high social proximity may improve aggregate economic outcomes: it constrains the
choices of low-risk individuals (e.g., the young) who would otherwise contribute most to the
spreading of the disease and thus induces high-risk individuals (e.g., the old) to choose a higher
level of economic activity.
In this paper, we study empirically how social distancing laws affect aggregate consumer
spending in a pandemic: how much spending is lost when sectors with high social proximity are
shut down compared to a situation where these sectors remain open and the disease is contained
less effectively? We also investigate an important mechanism underlying the effect of shutdowns
by estimating how the effect varies across groups with different health risks: do social distancing
laws cause particularly large drops in spending for low-risk individuals while allowing for greater
economic activity for high-risk individuals as a result of the containment of the virus?
Our empirical design draws on a salient natural experiment in Scandinavia. The two neigh1

For instance, Gourinchas (2020) writes “flattening the infection curve inevitably steepens the macroeconomic
recession curve.”

1

boring countries, Denmark and Sweden, were exposed to the COVID-19 pandemic in a very
similar way. In both countries, the epidemic started on 26-27 February 2020 and mortality
rates increased at a similar pace over the following weeks.2 The policy response, however, differed significantly in the two countries. Starting on 11 March 2020, Denmark took measures
to limit social interaction in order to contain the virus: congregations of more than 10 people
were prohibited; schools, universities and other non-essential parts of the public sector were shut
down; borders were closed for foreign nationals; and the population was encouraged to stay at
home and minimize social contact. The measures had direct implications for many types of economic activity involving high social proximity: restaurants were not allowed to seat customers;
the entertainment industry including nightclubs, cinemas and concert venues was shut down;
personal services such as hair dressers and dentists were closed; retail was restricted to highstreet shops with malls being shut down entirely; and public transport was limited. Compared to
Denmark and almost every other Western country, Sweden took a much lighter touch approach:
the population were encouraged to stay home if feeling unwell and to limit social interaction if
possible; large-scale events were prohibited, and restaurants and bars restricted to table service
only, but private businesses were generally allowed to operate freely. Consistent with the notion
that restrictive measures help reign in the pandemic, mortality rates in Denmark and Sweden
diverged sharply around two weeks after the Danish shutdown.
Because Denmark and Sweden were exposed similarly to the epidemic, but only the Danish
government restricted economic activity, a comparison of spending dynamics in the two countries
allows us to isolate the effect of the restrictions. Importantly, the comparison captures both
the direct effects of the restrictions through the reduced availability of goods and services and
the indirect effects of the restrictions through the reduced spreading of the virus. By isolating
the differential effect of government policy, our analysis is fundamentally different from recent
papers estimating the total change in consumer spending through the COVID-19 pandemic in
the United States (Baker et al., 2020), China (Chen et al., 2020), Spain (Carvalho et al., 2020),
France (Bounie et al., 2020), the United Kingdom (Hoke et al., 2020) and Denmark (Andersen
et al., 2020a).
Our analysis is based on transaction data for about 860,000 individuals in Denmark and
Sweden who are active customers at Danske Bank, the second-largest bank in Scandinavia with
a customer base that is broadly representative of the general population. For each customer,
we measure spending by cards, cash withdrawals, mobile wallets and settlements of online in2

Sweden had a single confirmed case earlier on 31 January 2020, which was fully isolated.

2

voices until 5 April 2020. This allows us to construct a comprehensive customer-level measure of
spending at the daily frequency, which accommodates substitution across modes of payment.3
Exploiting a standardized classification of merchants, we break down card spending by expenditure categories and add them up to categories of spending that vary in their degree of social
proximity, such as social spending in restaurants, cinemas and concert venues, personal care
spending at hairdressers, beauticians and dentists and retail shopping on the high street and
in malls. Finally, the dataset allows us to distinguish between different demographic segments
based on customer information about age and gender.
Our first result is that the Danish shutdown had a modest effect on aggregate spending. We
estimate that Danish customers reduced spending by almost 29% relative to a counterfactual
trajectory without the COVID-19 pandemic. This is enormous compared to spending drops in
other contexts, e.g., it is four times larger than the typical spending drop around unemployment
events (Ganong and Noel, 2019; Andersen et al., 2020b), but only around half the size of the
aggregate spending drop in countries more adversely affected by the pandemic, such as France
(Bounie et al., 2020) and Spain (Carvalho et al., 2020). By comparison, we estimate that Swedish
customers reduced spending by around 25%.4 The difference of just under 4 percentage points
is precisely estimated and represents our preferred estimate of the causal effect of the Danish
shutdown on aggregate spending.
This finding suggests that, in the context of an escalating pandemic, shutting down sectors
with high social proximity is associated with a relatively small loss of aggregate spending. Even
when there are no major restrictions on economic activity, as in Sweden, a pandemic induces
a sizeable contraction of spending. The additional drop in spending caused by a shutdown, as
in Denmark, is relatively small. While these results confirm the popular notion that the lives
saved by a shutdown come at an economic cost, the trade-off is much less stark than suggested
by the large drops in economic activity around shutdowns.
Our next results document that the small effect of the shutdown on aggregate spending
conceals considerable heterogeneity across groups with different health exposure to the virus.
Specifically, we find that the effect of the shutdown on total spending exhibits a significant
age gradient: the effect is negative for young adults (18-29 years) and positive for the oldest
3

Most of the existing studies of consumer spending through the COVID-19 crisis are based on card payments
alone, which is problematic if there are large shifts in modes of payment. For instance, we document a significant
drop in the use of cash suggesting that consumers responded to the health risk inherent to touching coins and
bills that frequently change hands.
4
This estimate (24.84%) is based on weighting of the Swedish observations to match the socio-demographic
(age, gender, income) composition of the Danish sample. The estimate based on the unweighted observations is
24.72%.

3

group (70+ years). When breaking total spending into subcategories, we observe a clear positive
age gradient across the four major spending categories involving high social proximity: retail
(i.e., high-street shops and malls), social spending (i.e., food, drink and entertainment away
from home), personal care (e.g., hairdressers and dentists) and public transport (i.e., trains and
busses). As the risk of suffering serious health consequences of COVID-19, hospitalization and
ultimately death, is strongly increasing in age, we interpret the age gradient as the manifestation
of an underlying health risk gradient in the spending effects.
These results suggest that, in a pandemic, a shutdown decreases the total spending of individuals with low health risk. The effects are particularly pronounced for categories involving
high social proximity such as personal care and social spending. While low-risk individuals significantly reduce spending that exposes them to the virus even without any government interventions, a shutdown effectively constrains their choices and makes them reduce such spending
even further.
The results also suggest that, in a pandemic, a shutdown increases the total spending of
individuals with high health risk. The overall increase reflects modest decreases in spending for
categories involving high social proximity (e.g., personal care and social spending), and increases
for categories involving moderate social proximity (e.g., retail shopping and public transport).
In other contexts, it would be highly surprising that constraints on the availability of certain
goods and services cause some individuals to choose a higher overall level of consumption. In
the context of the pandemic, however, shutting down sectors with high social proximity reduces
the prevalence of the virus in society at large. This implies a lower risk of contracting the virus
in, for instance, public transit and retail shops, which stimulates the spending of individuals
with a high underlying health risk.
Our findings have important implications for the appropriate policy response to a pandemic
by suggesting that most of the reduction in economic activity is caused by the pandemic itself
and occurs regardless of whether governments shut down sectors with high social proximity
or not.5 Governments should weigh the benefits of the public health interventions in terms of
reduced mortality and serious illness (Juranek and Zoutman, 2020) against the small differential
cost in terms of economic activity.
Our findings also inform the rapidly developing macroeconomic literature on pandemics.
5

This is consistent with historical evidence that public health interventions to contain flu pandemics reduced
mortality (Bootsma and Ferguson, 2007) without depressing the economy (Correia et al., 2020). It is also
consistent with recent evidence from U.S. states that working hours (Bartik, 2020) and consumer spending
(Chetty et al., 2020) dropped significantly before state-level shutdowns.

4

The models start from different assumptions about the nature of the shock to the economic
system. Some assume that the COVID-19 pandemic is essentially a shock to the supply side
with possible spill-overs to the demand side (Guerrieri et al., 2020), while others emphasize
that the pandemic affects demand directly because it introduces a health cost of consumption
(Eichenbaum et al, 2020). Our findings suggest that the direct demand shock is important:
spending drops massively even when supply is unconstrained and the drop correlates strongly
with health risk.6
Finally, our analysis contributes to an emerging literature studying the effects of the social
distancing laws imposed by most governments in the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Most of the literature focuses on the effectiveness of these policies in limiting personal
mobility (Brzezinski et al., 2020; Sears, 2020) and containing the virus (Kraemer et al., 2020).
While several papers use quantitative models to evaluate social distancing policies (e.g. Bodenstein et al., 2020; Acemoglu et al., 2020), we are not aware of other causal evidence on the effect
on spending or other dimensions of economic activity.
The paper proceeds in the following way. Section 2 briefly accounts for the Danish context.
Section 3 describes the data sources and provides summary statistics. Section 4 develops the
empirical framework. Section 5 reports the results. Section 6 concludes.

2

Background

Denmark and Sweden had very similar early experiences of the COVID-19 outbreak, with cases
first taking off in the last week of February 2020. In both countries early cases were concentrated
among people returning from travels in the most affected areas of Europe, particularly Northern
Italy, with community spread following soon after.
Figure 1 provides evidence on the similar early experiences of COVID-19 in Sweden and
Denmark. The top panel plots the evolution of weekly excess deaths in 2020 in Denmark, Sweden
and, as a point of contrast, Italy. Excess deaths are measured as the percentage difference in
all-cause mortality in a given week relative to average deaths in that week over the previous 5
years. Through January and February, and up until early March, excess deaths evolved very
similarly in Denmark and Sweden: mortality was generally below normal, suggesting a milder
flu season than average, with some hints of an increasing trend in the first week of March in
6

We cannot exclude that some of the drop in spending that we estimate in Sweden and Denmark is due to
merchants closing down in response to concerns about the health risks for workers. This could be considered a
supply shock.

5

both countries. In contrast, mortality was rising in Italy from mid-February and excess deaths
reached almost 15% in the first week of March.
To provide further evidence on the similarity of early experiences, the bottom panel of
Figure 1 shows the evolution of excess weekly Google searches for the terms “cough”, “fever”,
and “sick”.7 In each country, Google searches for these terms display a seasonal pattern, peaking
in winter at the height of flu season. This seasonality presumably reflects people Googling their
symptoms. Thus, excess searches for these terms, relative to the average search behaviour in
weeks in previous years, suggests an increase in the incidence of illness. Moreover, the symptoms
of COVID-19 – especially a cough and a fever – were heavily publicized in the media and by
public health authorities as the outbreak took hold. Therefore, excess searches for these terms
in early 2020 may reflect both signs of an outbreak and heightened awareness of COVID-19. As
Figure 1 demonstrates, Google searches for these terms began rising in Sweden and Denmark
at precisely the same time in mid-February. By contrast, the series for Italy shows that Google
searches for these terms were already above normal in January, highlighting how these data
capture the differential timing of outbreaks across countries.
Despite these similar early experiences, Denmark and Sweden adopted very different policy
responses to the outbreak. On 11 March, the prime minister of Denmark announced a national
lockdown in a televised speech: schools, universities and other non-essential parts of the public
sector were shut down; borders were closed for foreign nationals, effectively ending international
travel; employers were urged to allow their employees to work from home, and people were urged
to stay at home and minimize social contact. On 18 March, the government announced further
restrictions banning congregations of more than 10 individuals, shutting down shopping malls,
closing establishments of high physical proximity, such as nightclubs and hairdressers, limiting
healthcare practices such as dentists to emergency treatment only, and restricting restaurants,
cafes and bars to take-away service only. The timing and severity of the measures were generally
comparable to most of Northern Europe (such as Germany and the Netherlands), but less
restrictive than in Southern Europe where the outbreak was more severe (such as Italy and
Spain).
In contrast to Denmark, and very different to almost all other Western countries, the Swedish
government opted for a lighter-touch approach to manage the outbreak, with most measures
being voluntary and coming relatively late in the outbreak.8 For example, the government first
7

In Danish, Swedish, and Italian, respectively: “cough” (“hoste”,“hosta”, “tosse”), “fever” (“feber”, “feber”,
“febbre”), “sick” (“syg”, “sjuk”, “malato”).
8
Swedish Health Minister Lena Hallengren was quoted as saying that their “strategy has always been to

6

advised people to stay at home if feeling sick on 10 March, the day before Denmark went on
lockdown. On 16 March, the government issued their first recommendations to employers to
allow their employees to work from home, and for people aged over 70 to limit close contact with
others. On 17 March, the government recommended that universities and senior high schools
(for children aged over 16) move to distance learning. Moreover, the government issued their
first recommendation for people to practice social distancing by avoiding meeting friends and
relatives in person, if possible, on 24 March. These key examples demonstrate the focus of the
government on voluntary measures to tackle the outbreak, but they did also introduce a number
of legal restrictions as things progressed. Meetings of more than 500 people were outlawed on
11 March, falling to 50 people on 27 March. On 24 March the government restricted all bars,
restaurants and cafes to table service only. Finally, on 1 April the government announced a
set of guidelines including that individuals should keep distance from others in public and that
high-risk groups, including over 70s, should avoid going shopping and meeting people. The
government did not impose any sanctions for not following these guidelines.
Figure 1 also demonstrates the consequences of these different policy responses for public
health. As shown in the top panel, two weeks after the Danish shutdown, marked by the dashed
line on 11 March, excess deaths began to diverge, with a sharp and continuous increase to over
40% in Sweden (coming close to levels in Italy) but a levelling off at around 5% in Denmark.
Moreover, the bottom panel shows that excess Google searches for symptoms began to fall quite
quickly in Denmark following the shutdown, but have remained elevated in Sweden. Figure
1 ends on 12 April, the last week of data on mortality that is available for Italy at the time
of writing. But for Denmark and Sweden, the most recent data suggests that excess weekly
mortality has remained at around 40% in Sweden and has fallen to around 2% in Denmark.
This evidence suggests that Sweden and Denmark would have continued to experience similar COVID-19 outbreaks, had they followed the same policy. The decision by the Swedish
government to remain open was not motivated by differences in the severity of the COVID-19
outbreak and, as will be seen in our empirical results, by differences in economic performance.
One factor that may explain this exogenous difference in policy is a historical feature of the
Swedish constitution that is not present in Denmark: the Swedish constitution does not allow
the government to call a state of emergency in peacetime, making it difficult - and historically
unprecedented - to quickly pass laws affecting individual liberties (Karlson, Stern and Klein,
introduce the measures at the time when they were necessary, at the point in the spread of infection when we
have noticed they are needed - perhaps a bit later than in other countries - but that’s been our aim.” (The Local,
2020)

7

2020).

3

Data

We study the effect of COVID-19 shutdown policies on consumer spending by using bank account
data from Danske Bank. The dataset for this paper is drawn from the 5 million adult individuals
across the Nordic countries with an account at the bank. This data has three advantages over
existing data sources. First, it includes information on the spending and key demographics of
a large sample of individuals. Second, it spans two countries, Denmark and Sweden, which are
highly comparable in terms of population, institutions and initial exposure to the COVID-19
outbreak but which differ dramatically in terms of government policy response to the outbreak.
Third, for many years Denmark and Sweden have had the highest card payments per capita and
the lowest cash payments per capita of almost any other countries (Danmarks Nationalbank,
2016), meaning that our measures of spending are precise and comprehensive.
Our key outcome variable is daily total consumer spending. We measure total spending
as the sum of credit and debit card transactions, mobile wallet payments, cash withdrawals,
and electronic invoice payments associated with online shopping.9 Electronic invoices are a
common payment option at online merchants in Sweden. Since our focus is on high-frequency
spending dynamics, we exclude other bill payments from our spending measure. These other
bill payments include things like direct debits for utilities that can be adjusted less quickly and
can have a large disparity between timing of payment and timing of consumption.
Beyond total spending, we are interested in studying how the Danish shutdown affects
spending behaviour in venues that vary in their level of (actual or perceived) social and physical
distancing and, consequently, in the extent of government intervention on their activity. To this
aim, we focus on offline card transactions and create four spending categories of interest.10 First,
social spending includes payments at venues of particularly high social proximity, either because
they are venues where a lot of socialising takes place or because they involve prolonged indoor
exposure to others. Examples of social spending include payments on food and drink away from
home, cinemas, museums and galleries, theatres, and sports clubs. Second, we measure spending
on personal care services, a type of spending that is characterised by one-on-one physical contact
9

From card payments, we exclude transactions that are identified as tax repayments or financial services,
such as money transfers to other persons or debt repayments.
10
Every card and mobile wallet transaction is associated with a Merchant Category Code (MCC), an international standard for categorising merchants according to the goods or services they provide. We use these MCCs
to construct our spending measures.

8

and includes services such as hairdressers and beauticians, and spending on medical services,
such as dentists and opticians. Third, we measure spending on public transport as purchases
of bus, train, and metro transportation; all venues of potentially high social proximity. Finally,
we create a category including all high street and mall shopping. Examples of spending in this
category are clothes and electronics stores, and professional services such as auto repair and dry
cleaning. This category of spending is likely to involve some proximity to merchants and other
individuals and, especially for the young, may also be a social activity. We provide more detail
on the coding of each spending measure in Table A1 in the Appendix.
These spending data have significant advantages over survey-based consumption measures
but still present some challenges for our analysis that we deal with through careful selection of
the analysis sample. First, we only observe data on spending from one bank, meaning that we
may miss some spending of customers in the full sample who have multiple bank relationships. In
order to minimise this problem, we limit our attention to a sample of individuals who have been
customers of the bank in every month from January 2018 to December 2019, have made at least
one card payment in each and every month of that two year period and, where information is
available, have declared their Danske Bank account to the government as their primary account
for tax purposes. We only impose the minimum monthly spending requirement until December
2019 as we want to allow for individual spending to fall to zero in response to the crisis. Second,
individual spending is often partly on behalf of other household members, for example, a person
might purchase flights from their personal account for themselves and their partner. In order
to account for household structure, we use the bank’s household identifiers – constructed from
information on joint accounts and co-residence – in order to split all expenditures of couples
on their personal and joint accounts across each spouse equally.11 Finally, in order to focus on
comparable samples that vary only by government policy response to the pandemic, we limit our
sample to individuals resident in either Denmark or Sweden as of December 2019. With these
restrictions, our sample consists of around 860,000 people, with 760,000 people in Denmark and
100,000 people in Sweden.
We link the spending data with key demographics for each customer, sourced from the bank’s
customer records. These include age, gender, and permanent income. Permanent income is
measured as average monthly total spending over a long period (two years). This measure is
designed to capture access to economic resources for individuals at different life stages more
11

For instance, when one member of a household spends $50 on groceries, we consider that each spouse has
spent $25.

9

accurately than income measured at a point-in-time.12 The demographics serve three roles.
First, they allow us to assess the representativness of our sample. Second, since they are
so important in explaining cross-sectional variation in spending, we use them to assess the
comparability of our sample across countries and re-weight our estimates to adjust for any
imbalances, ensuring that such imbalances are not driving our results. Finally, age is a key
factor in individual health risk and we explore how the effects of the shutdown vary across
individuals of different ages and hence different personal exposure to the COVID-19.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample and the populations they are
drawn from. Column 1 reports statistics for the Danish subsample and Column 2 provides
a comparison to the full adult population in Denmark, obtained from government registers.
Our sample of 760,000 individuals is largely representative of the adult population of 4,600,000
in terms of gender, age, and income. This reflects that Danske Bank is the largest bank in
Denmark, catering to all types of customers and with a significant presence in all parts of
the country. Columns 3 and 4 report summary statistics for our Swedish subsample and a
comparison to the full adult population in Sweden, again sourced from government registers.
The Swedish subsample represents a significantly smaller share of the full population than the
Danish subsample. This reflects the smaller relative market share of Danske Bank in Sweden.
The Swedish subsample overrepresents those aged 30 to 59. The female share is consistent with
that of the Swedish population and average income is slightly higher. Overall, the Swedish
subsample is broadly similar to the Danish subsample and, crucially, contains large numbers
of individuals across all ranges of demographics, allowing us to effectively control for possible
confounding differences in response to the crisis.

4

Empirical strategy

The main aim of the empirical analysis is to measure the change in consumer spending induced
by the COVID-19 crisis in Denmark and Sweden and to isolate the impact of the shutdown in
Denmark separately from the impact of the pandemic itself.
Our unit of observation is individual-by-day, allowing us to capture sharp changes in spending
as a result of the pandemic and the shutdown. The high frequency creates challenges, however,
12

For the Danish subsample, we also measure total disposable income from account inflows in 2019. Danske
Bank categorizes account inflows and we take the sum of inflows labelled as salary, government transfers, capital
income, and pension. We do not observe a similar classification for the Swedish subsample but we are able to
impute their disposable income from their spending based on the average propensity to consume in the Danish
sample.

10

due to the strong cyclicality of spending over the week, the month, and the year. As in Andersen
et al. (2020a), we address the cyclicality by comparing consumer spending on each day in 2020
to consumer spending on a reference day 364 days earlier. The reference day is always the same
weekday and almost exactly the same place in the monthly and annual spending cycle. For
example, we compare 17 January 2020 (a Friday) to the reference day 18 January 2019 (also a
Friday). This method does not account for the fact that increases in spending around paydays
may fall on different weekdays in different years, but this will not affect our key estimates as
explained below.13
For each individual in our sample and for each day of our window of analysis, we compute
the difference between spending on the day itself and spending on the reference day the year
before. Scaling with the average daily spending per person in the individual’s country over a
long period before the window of analysis, we obtain an individual-specific measure of excess
spending on a given day expressed as a fraction of the normal level of spending per person in
the country:
excess spendingict =

spendingict − spendingict−364
average spendingc

where spendingitc is spending on day t for individual i living in country c, and averagespendingc
is average daily spending per person in that country taken over all days in 2019.
We measure the individual-level spending change over the COVID-19 crisis as the difference
between average excess spending in the post-shutdown period, 11 March – 5 April, and average
excess spending in the early pre-shutdown period, 2 January – 15 February:

∆spendingic = Et [excess spendingict |t ∈ post] − Et [excess spendingict |t ∈ pre]
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
average excess spending
post-shutdown

average excess spending
pre-shutdown

Equipped with this machinery, we measure the effect of the COVID-19 crisis in country c
by averaging over individuals in our sample from that country:
∆spendingc = Ei [∆spendingic ]
Since excess spending is measured relative to average daily spending across all individuals,
∆spendingc measures the impact on aggregate spending relative to the 2019 baseline. With this
13

There is no uniform payday in Denmark and Sweden but salary payouts typically occur over a few days
toward the end of the month.

11

measure, we effectively use excess spending in the pre-shutdown period as a counterfactual for
excess spending in the post-shutdown period in each country. Simply put, we assume that yearover-year spending growth between 2019 and 2020 would have been the same after 11 March
as before absent the epidemic and the shutdown. However, we exclude 16 February - 11 March
from the pre-shutdown period as early restrictions (e.g. on air travel to Asia) and anticipation
of the broader crisis may have affected spending prior to the shutdown. While payday spending
creates spikes in excess spending on individual days – positive when we compare a pay day to
a normal day and negative when we do the opposite – they do not affect ∆spendingc because
both its terms average over the same number of positive and negative pay day spikes.
While ∆spendingc remains our summary measure of the spending effect in country c, we
also show plots that compare spending on each day in the window of analysis to spending on the
reference day the year before. These plots allow us to visually assess whether consumer spending
behaved similarly in the pre-shutdown period as on the same days the year before (except for a
level shift). This is key to assessing the credibility of our identifying assumption that consumer
spending would have behaved similarly in the post-shutdown period as on the same days the
year before (except for the same level shift) absent the epidemic and the shutdown.
Differences in average spending changes between Denmark and Sweden may be driven by
differences in the socio-demographic composition of the sample of bank customers across the
two countries. To remove the influence of such differences and isolate the effect of the variation
in lockdown policies, we estimate the following regression model:
∆spendingic = αc + Xi δc + ic

(1)

where αc and δc are country-specific parameter vectors and Xi is a vector of covariates
capturing the age, sex, and permanent income of individual i0 . Each variable is represented
discretely by a set of one or more dummies. The model is fully saturated in the sense that we
include all interactions between these dummies, as well as allowing for different coefficients in
Denmark and Sweden.
We use the estimates from equation (1) to produce adjusted measures of the aggregate
spending drop in each country: for each value of c, we compute predicted values from the model
and take the average over individuals in the Danish sample. For Denmark, the adjusted measure
is just equal to the unadjusted ∆spendingc . For Sweden, it is essentially a weighted average
of individual spending changes where the weights are constructed to make the Swedish sample
match the joint distribution of the variables in Xi in the Danish sample. One can think of this
12

as an estimate of the counterfactual aggregate spending drop in a Denmark if it had followed
the Swedish light-touch approach, holding socio-demograhic variables constant.
In order to estimate how the shutdown affects people differently depending on their health
risk, we also construct measures of the drop in spending within age groups in each country. These
measures are constructed exactly like the country-wide measures, except that excess spending
for an individual in age group a in country c is now scaled relative to average daily spending in
2019 for individuals in that age group and country. Letting ∆spendingiac denote the change in
excess spending for person i belonging to age group a in country c, we follow the same steps as
above and compute the unadjusted averages ∆spendingc by averaging over individuals in each
subsample. Similarly, we compute adjusted measures by estimating the equation:
∆spendingiac = αac + Xi δac + iac

(2)

where αac and δac are age-group-country-specific parameters and Xi is the same vector of
controls as in equation (1), except age. For each age group, we then compute predicted values
for both values of c and evaluate them for the average individual within that age group in the
Danish subsample. As for the full sample, the adjusted measures are equal to the unadjusted
ones for Denmark, whereas the adjusted measures for Sweden can be thought of as providing
age-specific counterfactual estimates for Denmark, holding the demographic composition of each
age group fixed.

5

Results

Figure 2 illustrates the high-frequency dynamics in aggregate spending in Denmark (upper
panel) and Sweden (lower panel) and how it is affected by the pandemic. For each day of the
window of analysis, we plot aggregate spending (red line) as well as aggregate spending on
the reference day one year earlier (gray line), both scaled by average daily spending in 2019.
In both countries, there is a pronounced weekly cycle with spending spikes around weekends
and in Denmark there is moreover a pay day cycle with large spikes around the end of the
month where most employees receive their salaries. In the beginning of the window, before
the pandemic reached Scandinavia, both the level and the cyclicality of spending are strikingly
similar to the reference period in both countries. In Denmark, spending drops sharply around
the shutdown on 11 March 2020 and remains below the level in the reference period, as indicated
by the shaded area, throughout the window of analysis. In Sweden, spending drops sharply at
almost the exact same time although no significant restrictions were imposed. Presumably, this
13

is no coincidence but reflects that the Danish shutdown responded to an escalating pandemic,
similar in the two countries, with its own strong effect on spending. This highlights the empirical
difficulty of separating the effects of social distancing laws and the pandemic they are designed
to contain.
Figure 3 shows our estimates of the drop in aggregate spending in each of the two countries
relative to a counterfactual without the pandemic (red bars) and the differential drop in Denmark
(blue bar). The estimated drop in Denmark is 28.74% reflecting that average spending was 2.86%
above the reference period before the shutdown and 25.88% below the reference period after the
shutdown. The analogous estimate for Sweden is 24.84% reflecting that average spending was
1.30% above the reference period before the shutdown and 23.54% below the reference period
after the shutdown.14 The differential spending drop in Denmark is thus 3.9 percentage points
and precisely estimated (the standard error is around 0.40 percentage points). This represents
our estimate of the effect of social distancing laws on aggregate spending.
Making inference about the effect of social distancing laws based on a simple comparison of
Denmark and Sweden raises a number of concerns. First, while we documented above that the
two countries were similarly exposed to the spreading of the virus, one may be concerned that
the ensuing global economic crisis affected them differently so as to confound our analysis. For
instance, one may imagine that Swedish firms were particularly affected by the contraction of
international trade and that differential stock market losses and unemployment risks can explain
why Swedish consumers reduced spending so much despite the virtual absence of restrictions
on economic activity. However, as shown in the Appendix, the major stock market indexes
in Denmark and Sweden followed almost the exact same trajectory through the crisis (Figure
A2) and, if anything, the rise in unemployment claims was slightly sharper in Denmark than
in Sweden (Figure A3).15 Second, one may be concerned that the Danish government offered
particularly generous subsidies to firms and workers and that these measures partly offset the
negative effect of the social distancing laws in Denmark. In the Appendix, we compare the
government programs designed to sustain the economy in Denmark and Sweden and show that
they were strikingly similar. Finally, as there is some economic integration between Southern
Sweden and Eastern Denmark, part of the drop in Swedish spending could, in principle, reflect
14

These estimates are reported with standard errors in Figure A1 in the Appendix. The estimates are based
on weighting of the Swedish observations to match the socio-demographic (age, gender, income) composition of
the Danish sample. The unweighted estimate of the spending drop in Sweden is 24.72%.
15
In a recent paper, we document that economic exposure to the COVID-19 crisis in the form of stock market
participation and employment in at-risk industries only accounts for a limited part of the aggregate spending
drop in Denmark (Andersen et al, 2020a).

14

that the Danish shutdown deterred Swedish consumers from spending in Denmark. However,
the Swedes in our sample are not concentrated in Southern Sweden where access to Denmark
is relatively easy, but spread out across the vast country. Before the pandemic, less than 1%
of card spending by the Swedish individuals in our sample was through points of payment in
Denmark.
Figure 4 illustrates how the effect of the shutdown, the differential spending drop in Denmark
relative to Sweden, varies by age group.16 . The effect is negative for the youngest group (age
18-29): spending by this age group dropped around 10 percentage points more in Denmark
than in Sweden. By contrast, the effect of the shutdown is positive for the oldest group (age
70+): spending by this age group dropped around 5 percentage points less in Denmark than
in Sweden. In the intermediate age groups, the effect of the shutdown is generally moderately
negative, sometimes statistically indistinguishable from zero.
As the risk of suffering serious health consequences of the virus is strongly increasing in age,
we interpret the age gradient as the manifestation of an underlying health risk gradient in the
spending effects. Under this interpretation, the social distancing laws put severe constraints on
the spending choices of individuals with low health risk: this group would have spent significantly
more during the pandemic if the availability of goods and services with high social proximity
had not been restricted despite the higher prevalence of the virus. At the same time, the social
distancing laws created a safer environment for consumption by individuals with high health
risk: this group would have spent significantly less during the pandemic if the shutdown had
not contained the virus despite the higher availability of goods and services.
Figure 5 shows the age gradient in the effect of the shutdown for categories of spending
involving high or moderate social proximity: retail (i.e., high-street shops and malls), social
spending (i.e., food, drink and entertainment away from home), personal care (e.g., hairdressers
and dentists) and public transport (i.e., trains and busses).17 Across all four categories, we
observe a clear age gradient: the effect of the shutdown is strongly negative for the young (low
health risk) and less negative, sometimes even positive, for the old (high health risk).
These results provide insights about the intriguing positive effect of the shutdown on the
total spending of groups with high health risk. They show that the overall positive effect reflects
modest negative effects in categories with high social proximity where the shutdown severely
16

The absolute magnitude of the effect in each country is reported with standard errors in Figure A4 in the
Appendix
17
The absolute magnitude of the effect in each country and each category is reported with standard errors in
Figure A5 in the Appendix

15

limited availability (i.e., personal care and social spending) and positive effects in categories with
moderate social proximity where the shutdown imposed smaller constraints on availability (i.e.,
retail shopping and public transport). This illustrates, in a very concrete way, the mechanism
through which social distancing can improve aggregate economic outcomes in a pandemic: by
reducing the prevalence of the virus, it lowers the risk of contracting it in public transit and in
retail shops, which stimulates the spending of individuals with a high underlying health risk.

6

Conclusion

This paper uses transaction-level bank account data from a large Scandinavian bank to study
the effect of government social distancing laws on consumer spending in the COVID-19 crisis.
We exploit a natural experiment to identify the effect of government restrictions separately
from the impact of the virus and the health risks it entails: despite similar early experiences
with the virus, the Danish government mandated social distancing to slow the spread of the
disease while the Swedish government opted for a light-touch approach with a focus on voluntary
recommendations.
We present two key results. First, we estimate a massive reduction in consumer spending
in both Denmark and Sweden around the date of the Danish lockdown. This drop consists of a
common component to both countries of around 25 percent, and an additional drop in Denmark
of just under 4 percentage points as a result of the shutdown. This finding suggests that the vast
majority of the fall in economic activity in the COVID-19 crisis can be attributed to perceived
disease risks influencing behaviour, rather than government restrictions.
Second, we find that the shutdown in Denmark decreases spending among the young (aged
under 29) by around 10 percent and increases the spending of the old (aged over 70) by almost
5 percent, relative to a counterfactual without restrictions and with higher disease risks. This
finding suggests that lockdowns have the potential to improve aggregate economic outcomes
by constraining the choices of low-risk individuals (the young) who would otherwise contribute
most to the spread of the disease and thus inducing high-risk individuals (the old) to choose a
higher level of economic activity and mobility.
Our analysis period ends on 5 April 2020. At the time of writing, excess deaths in Denmark
have fallen to almost zero and the Danish government has eased social distancing laws. In
contrast, Sweden has continued to experience excess mortality. Our results can only shine a
light on the immediate effect of the COVID-19 crisis and the shutdown on economic activity. In
future work, it will be interesting to to trace out the longer-run impact of the pandemic, initial
16

shutdown policies, and subsequent re-opening.

17

References
[1] Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., Whinston, M.D., 2020. “A Multi-Risk SIR
Model with Optimally Targeted Lockdown.” Working paper.
[2] Andersen, A.L., Hansen, E., Johannesen, N., Sheridan, A., 2020a. “Consumer Responses
to the COVID-19 Crisis: Evidence from Bank Account Transaction Data.” Working paper.
[3] Andersen, A.L., Jensen, A., Johannesen, N., Kreiner, C.K., Leth-Petersen, S., Sheridan, A.,
2020b. “How Do Households Respond to Job Loss? Lessons from Multiple High-Frequency
Data Sets.” Working paper.
[4] Baker, S., Farrokhnia, R.A., Meyer, S., Pagel, M., Yannelis, C., 2020. “How Does Household
Spending Respond To An Epidemic? Consumption During The 2020 Covid-19 Pandemic”
Working paper.
[5] Bartik, A.W., Bertrand, M., Li, F., Rothstein, J., Unrath, M. 2020. “Labor market impacts
of COVID-19 on hourly workers in small- and medium-sized businesses: Four facts from
Homebase data.”Retrieved from https://www.chicagobooth.edu/research/rustandy/
blog/2020/labor-market-impacts-from-covid19 on 8 May 2020.
[6] Bootsma, M.C. and Ferguson, N.M., 2007. “The effect of public health measures on the
1918 influenza pandemic in US cities.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
104(18), p. 7588-7593.
[7] Carvalho, V.M., Garca, J.R., Hansen, S., Ortiz, ., Rodrigo, T., Mora, S.R. and Ruiz, P.,
2020. “Tracking the COVID-19 Crisis with High-Resolution Transaction Data. ” Working
paper.
[8] Chen, H., Qian, W. and Wen, Q., 2020. “The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
consumption: Learning from high frequency transaction data. ” Working paper.
[9] Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hendren, N., Stepner, M., 2020. “Real-Time Economics: A
New Platform to Track the Impacts of COVID-19 on People, Businesses, and Communities
Using Private Sector Data ” Working paper.
[10] Correia, S., Luck, S. and Verner, E., 2020. “Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health
Interventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu.” Working paper.
[11] Danmarks Nationalbank, 2020. “Report on the Role of Cash in Society ” Danish
Payments Council Report. Retrieved from https://www.nationalbanken.dk/en/
bankingandpayments/danish_payments_council/Documents/Report_on_the_role_
of_cash_in_society.pdf on 8 April.
[12] Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., Trabandt, M., 2020. “The macroeconomics of epidemics”
Working paper.

[13] Ganong, P. and Noel, P., 2019. “Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and
normative implications.” American Economic Review 109(7), p. 2383-2424.
[14] Gourinchas, P.O., 2020. “Flattening the pandemic and recession curves.” Working paper.
[15] Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., Straub, L., Werning, I., 2020. “Macroeconomic Implications
of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?” Working paper
[16] John Hopkins University, 2020. “Coronavirus Resource Center.”Retrieved from https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/mortality on 8 April 2020.
[17] Juranek, S. and Zoutman, F., 2020. “The Effect of Social Distancing Measures on Intensive
Care Occupancy: Evidence on COVID-19 in Scandinavia.” Working paper
[18] Karlson, N., Stern, C., Klein, D., 2020. “The underpinnings of Swedens
permissive
COVID
regime”
Retrieved
from
https://voxeu.org/article/
underpinnings-sweden-s-permissive-covid-regime on 8 May 2020.
[19] Kraemer, M.U., Yang, C.H., Gutierrez, B., Wu, C.H., Klein, B., Pigott, D.M., du Plessis,
L., Faria, N.R., Li, R., Hanage, W.P., Brownstein, J.S., 2020. “The effect of human mobility
and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China.” Science.
[20] Sears, J., Villas-Boas, J.M., Villas-Boas, S.B., Villas-Boas, V., 2020. “Are We
#StayingHome to Flatten the Curve?” Working paper
[21] The Local, 2020. “Sweden’s corona patients in intensive care fall below 500 for first time
in a month” Newspaper article, Retrieved from https://www.thelocal.se/20200310/
timeline-how-the-coronavirus-has-developed-in-sweden on 8 May 2020.

19

Table 1: Summary statistics. This table presents summary statistics for our analysis sample of
Danske Bank customers in Denmark (Column (1)) and Sweden (Column (3)) and the approximate population of Denmark (Column (2)) and Sweden (Column (4)) from which they are drawn. Statistics in Columns
(1) and (2) are calculated in 2019. Population figures are sourced from Statistics Denmark (DST) and
Statistics Sweden (SCB) for the most comparable population available on their online statistics banks: 18+
year olds in 2018. Some differences in variable construction are explained below.
*For the Danish sample, disposable income is calculated based on a classification of account inflows and is
the sum of inflows labelled salary, capital income, government transfers, and pension. For the Swedish sample, income is imputed based on average spending in 2019, assuming that the Swedish sample has the same
average propensity to consume as the Danish sample. **Individual-level averages of the 20+ population in
2018. Total spending is measured as the sum of debit and credit card transactions, mobile wallet payments,
cash withdrawals, and electronic invoices associated with online shopping. Details on the construction of
the spending categories can be found in the Appendix.

Denmark

Female

Sweden

Sample
(1)

Population
(2)

Sample
(3)

Population
(4)

51.6%

50.6%

50.6%

50.1%

21.5%
14.0%
16.7%
17.1%
14.5%
16.2%

19.9%
14.7%
16.4%
17.2%
14.3%
17.6%

17.2%
17.7%
21.8%
18.9%
12.8%
11.5%

19.4%
16.5%
16.0%
15.9%
13.8%
18.4%

37,614.1**
37,184.6

34,754.1*
37,919.1

29,907.6**
31,718.6

Age:
18-29 year old
30-39 year old
40-49 year old
50-59 year old
60-69 year old
70+ years
Disposable income (USD)
Disposable income (USD, PPP)

37,541.4
37,112.9

Total spending (USD)
Total spending (USD, PPP)

19,494.5
19,272.0

Spending by category, %Total:
High street & malls: Retail goods and services
Social: Food/drinking, Recreation/entertainment
Personal care services
Public transport
Offline spending
Online spending
N

18,566.4
19,690.6

43.9%
8.1%
2.8%
1.4%
75.6%
24.4%
760,571

20

45.5%
12.4%
3.3%
1.5%
75.2%
24.7%
4,615,690

102,883

8,074,806

Figure 1: Impact of the Covid-19 outbreak on mortality and health. The figure shows
weekly excess mortality in Denmark, Sweden and Italy for weeks 2 through 15 in 2020 (top panel) and
excess Google searches for symptoms of illness (bottom panel) for the same period. Excess mortality for
each country is calculated based on daily data on deaths sourced from Statistics Denmark (DST, Denmark),
Statistics Sweden (SCB, Sweden) and ISTAT (Italy). Deaths data for Denmark and Sweden cover the whole
population, whereas the Italian data is available for approximately half of all Communes. Excess mortality
is calculated as the percentage difference between the total number of deaths from all causes in a week in
2020 and the average number of total deaths in that week, 2015-2019. Excess Google searches are calculated
based on data from Google Trends of weekly indices of search intensity for the terms “cough” (DK: “hoste”,
SE: “hosta”, IT: “tosse”), “fever” (“feber”, “feber”, “febbre”), “sick” (“syg”, “sjuk”, “malato”). Individual
indices for each search term are summed in order to create a composite index of all terms. Excess Google
searches are then calculated in the same way as for excess mortality.

Excess all­cause mortality, weekly (%)
Denmark
shutdown
begins

80

40

0
Feb

Mar

Apr

Excess Google searches: "cough", "fever", "sick", weekly (%)
160
120
80
40
0
Feb

Mar
21

Apr

Figure 2: Evolution of aggregate spending in Denmark and Sweden. The figure shows the
evolution of aggregate spending in Denmark and Sweden from 2 January to 5 April 2020. Red lines show
the evolution of spending in 2020 as a percentage of daily average spending in 2019. Grey lines show the
same series for the same weekday in 2019, i.e., 364 days earlier. The dash vertical line denotes 11 March,
when the Danish government announced the lockdown. Shaded red regions highlight the drop in spending
in both countries at this point in time.

%Daily average spending (2019), by country:
Denmark
Denmark
shutdown
begins

150

2020
100

2019*

Jan

50

Feb

Mar

Apr

Sweden
150

100

50
Jan
Feb
*2019 values at same weekday

Mar

22

Apr

Figure 3: Effect of the shutdown on total spending. The figure shows the impact of the
COVID-19 crisis on consumer spending in Denmark (DEN) and Sweden (SWE) (top panel) and isolates
the effect of the Danish shutdown (bottom panel). The estimates are based on weighting of the Swedish
observations to match the socio-demographic (age, gender, income) composition of the Danish sample, as
described in our empirical framework. Weights are based on 6 age groups (ages 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59,
60-69, and 70+), sex, and quartiles of purchasing power parity (PPP) adjust permanent income. Confidence
bounds at the 95% level (black vertical lines) are based on robust standard errors.

Impact of Covid­19 crisis
DEN

SWE

Effect of shutdown
DEN ­ SWE

30

25

20

15
Spending, %

23

10

5

0

Figure 4: Effect of the shutdown by age group. The figure shows the effect of the shutdown on
total spending by age group, a measure of COVID-19 disease risk. Age-specific estimates of the shutdown
effect are calculated as the difference between the estimated drop in consumer spending among that age group
in Denmark and Sweden, with the Swedish sample weighted to match the socio-demographic composition
of the Danish sample. Weights are based on 6 age groups (ages 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, and 70+),
sex, and quartiles of purchasing power parity (PPP) adjust permanent income. Confidence bounds at the
95% level (black vertical lines) are based on robust standard errors. Estimates of the country-specific effects
on total spending for each age group are provided in Figure A4 in the Appendix.

18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
10

5

0
5
Spending, %
Bigger drop in Denmark Bigger drop in Sweden

24

10

Figure 5: Effect of the shutdown by age group on spending categories that vary by
social proximity. The figure shows the effect of the shutdown by age group and across categories of
offline spending that vary in their degree of social proximity. Confidence bounds at the 95% level (black
vertical lines) are based on robust standard errors. Details on the spending categories are provided in Table
A1 in the Appendix. Estimates of the country-specific effects on spending categories for each age group are
provided in Figure A5 in the Appendix.

High street & malls: Retail goods and services
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

Social spending: Food/drink away from home, Recreation/entertainment
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

Personal care services
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

Public transport
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

60

40

20

0
20
40
Spending, %
Bigger drop in Denmark Bigger drop in Sweden

25

60

ONLINE
APPENDIX

26

Table A1: Construction of spending categories This table shows the grouping of Merchant
Category Codes (MCCs) into spending categories. We only report MCCs accounting for more than 0.5% of
all spending within each category. This categorisation applies to offline, i.e., in-merchant, payments only.
Social spending

High street & Malls

5812

Eating Places, and Restaurants

5039

5813

Drinking Places

5200

Home Supply Warehouse Stores

5814

Fast Food Restaurants

5211

Lumber and Building Materials Stores

7832

Motion Picture Theaters

5251

Hardware Stores

7922

Theatrical Producers

5311

Department Stores

7941

Commercial Sports, Professional Sports Clubs

5411

Grocery Stores and Supermarkets

7991

Tourist Attractions and Exhibits

5499

Miscellaneous Food Stores

7995

Betting

5511

Car and Truck Dealers (New and Used)

7996

Amusement Parks, Circuses, Carnivals, and Fortune Tellers

5533

Auto Parts and Accessories Stores

7997

Membership Clubs

5599

Miscellaneous Automotive

7999

Recreation Services - Not Elsewhere Classified

5611

Men's and Boy's Clothing and Accessory Stores

5462

Bakeries

5621

Women's Ready To Wear Shoes

Construction Materials - Not Elsewhere Classified

Personal care services

5651

Family Clothing Stores

5975

Hearing Aids Sales, Service and Supplies

5661

Shoe Stores

7230

Beauty and Barber Shops

5691

Men's and Women's Clothing Stores

7297

Massage Parlors

5712

Furniture and Equipment Stores (except Appliances)

7298

Health and Beauty Spas

5714

Drapery, Window Covering, and Upholstery Stores

8011

Doctors and Physicians

5719

Miscellaneous Home Furnishings Specialty Stores

8021

Dentists and Orthodontists

5722

Household Appliance Stores

8041

Chiropractors

5732

Electronics Stores

8042

Optometrists and Ophthalmologists

5912

Drug Stores and Pharmacies

8043

Opticians, Optical Goods, and Eyeglasses

5921

Package Stores - Beer, Wine, and Liquor

8049

Podiatrists and Chiropodists

5940

Bicycle Shops - Sales and Service

8062

Hospitals

5941

Sporting Goods Stores

8071

Medical and Dental Laboratories

5942

Book Stores

8099

Medical Services and Health Practitioners

5944

Jewelry

Public transport

5945

Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores

4011

Railroads

5977

Cosmetic Stores

4111

Local and Suburban Commuter Passenger Transportation

5992

Florists

4112

Passenger Railways

5994

News Dealers and Newsstands

4121

Taxicabs and Limousines

5999

Miscellaneous and Specialty Retail

4131

Bus Lines

7538

Automotive Service Shops (Non-Dealer)

4784

Tolls and Bridge Fees

0742

Veterinary Services

27

Figure A1: Effect of the shutdown in Denmark and Sweden This figure breaks down our
estimate of the effect of social distancing laws in Figure 2: gray bars denoted Pre show excess spending
in the period 2 January - 15 February; gray bars denoted Post show excess spending in the period 12
March - 5 April; and red bars denoted Post-Pre show the difference between them and thus represent our
estimates of the total spending drop induced by the COVID-19 crisis in Denmark (DEN) and Sweden (SWE)
respectively. Finally, the blue bar denoted Shutdown effect shows the difference between the red bars and
thus represent our estimate of the total spending drop induced by the Danish shutdown. The estimates
are based on weighting of the Swedish observations to match the socio-demographic (age, gender, income)
composition of the Danish sample, as described in our empirical framework. Weights are based on 6 age
groups (ages 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, and 70+), sex, and quartiles of purchasing power parity
(PPP) adjust permanent income. Confidence bounds at the 95% level (black vertical lines) are based on
robust standard errors.

SWE

5

0

Pre

Post Post ­ Pre

DEN­SWE

5

0

5

0

5

5

5

10

10

10

15

15

15

20

20

20

25

25

25

30

30

30

Pre

Post Post ­ Pre

28

% Spending

DEN

Shutdown effect

Figure A2: Effect of the Covid-19 crisis on stock markets This figure shows the effect
of the Covid-19 crisis on the Danish (OMXC25) and Swedish (OMXS30) stock market indices. Source:
Nasdaqomxnordic.com.

Stock prices, index (Jan 2. = 100)
110
Denmark
shutdown
begins

105

100

95

90

85

80

75

Feb

Mar

29

Apr

Figure A3: Effect of the Covid-19 crisis on new unemployment claims This figure shows
the effect of the Covid-19 crisis on new unemployment claims in Denmark and Sweden. The series show the
percentage deviation in weekly new unemployment claims in 2020 from the historical average in the same
week over 2015-2019 for Denmark and 2018-2019 for Sweden. Source: Statistics Denmark and Statistics
Sweden.

New unemployment claims, weekly (%)
350

Denmark
shutdown
begins

300

250

200

150

100

Feb

Mar

30

Apr

Figure A4: Effect of the shutdown by age group This figure shows the country-specific estimates
underlying Figure 4.
DEN: Impact of Covid­19 crisis

DEN ­ SWE: Effect of shutdown

18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

18­29
30­39
40­49

SWE: Impact of Covid­19 crisis

50­59

18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

50

60­69
70+
40

30
20
Spending, %

10

0

10

5
0
5
Spending, %
Bigger drop in Denmark Bigger drop in Sweden

31

10

Figure A5: Effect of the Covid-19 crisis on spending categories This figure shows the
country-specific estimates underlying Figure 5.
High street & malls: Retail goods and services ­ DEN
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
High street & malls: Retail goods and services ­ SWE
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Social spending: Food/drink away from home, Recreation/entertainment ­ DEN
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Social spending: Food/drink away from home, Recreation/entertainment ­ SWE
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Personal care services ­ DEN
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Personal care services ­ SWE
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Public transport ­ DEN
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+
Public transport ­ SWE
18­29
30­39
40­49
50­59
60­69
70+

80

60

40
Spending, %

32

20

0

Economic policy responses
Despite very different policy responses to managing the spread of Covid-19, Sweden and Denmark have introduced similarly massive government programs to mitigate the financial damage
of the crisis to businesses and households. First, both countries have introduced significant loan
subsidies, including state guarantees of 70% of new corporate loans related to Covid-19. Second, extensive furlough support schemes were introduced in order to prevent mass lay-offs. In
Denmark, the government committed to pay 75% of the salary of private sector employees who
are sent home but kept on the payroll. In Sweden, the government guarantees all workers will
receive up to 90% of their salary while allowing employers to cut working hours by up to 80%.
Third, in both countries the government will provide substantial cost subsidies that cover up
to 80% of fixed costs in Denmark and 75% in Sweden. Finally, both governments are allowing
many companies to postpone VAT payments.
The fact that both countries have introduced such similar and extensive financial support
to firms and households suggests that both governments expected the Covid-19 crisis to result
in significant economic damage. We have provided direct evidence on this, showing how both
countries experienced massive drops in consumer spending. Other evidence points to similar
effects across countries in terms of stock market and labor market performance. Figure A3
shows that both countries experienced highly similar trends in stock market performance in
January and early February 2020 and then experienced the same sudden drop in their stock
markets. Similarly, Figure A4 shows that both countries experienced highly similar trends in
new unemployment claims in January and February 2020 and then experienced the same sudden
spike in claims in March.

33

