arXiv:2005.09085v1 [cs.CY] 18 May 2020

Flexibility Is Key in Organizing a Global Professional Conference
Online: The ICPE 2020 Experience in the COVID-19 Era
Alexandru Iosup
VU Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
A.Iosup@vu.nl
José Nelson Amaral
University of Alberta,
Canada
jamaral@ualberta.ca

Catia Trubiani
Gran Sasso Science Institute,
Italy
catia.trubiani@gssi.it
Andre B. Bondi
Software Performance and
Scalability Consulting LLC, USA
AndreBBondi@gmail.com

Anne Koziolek
KIT,
Germany
koziolek@kit.edu
Andreas Brunnert
RETIT GmbH,
Germany
brunnert@retit.de

May 25, 2020

Abstract

poning to a later date, or converting the conference
to an online event. As late as mid-February, we were
unaware of the extent of the spread of COVID-19
in Canada, where the conference was due to occur,
or in the countries from which our attendees were expected to travel. This was not due to our ignoring the
news, but to the deficit of credible information offered
by state authorities. On March 9, one of the Program Chairs received the final institutional decision
of being stopped from international travel; one day
later, US- and EU-based keynote speakers for workshops started to declare their unavailability. Discussions with relevant stakeholders – local organizers,
local businesses and Horeca, international organizations – started, as did the consultation of relevant official guidelines1 . On March 13, we announced ICPE
2020 will not be held in April 2020 as planned. On
March 19, we discussed in the Steering Committee
of ICPE two options regarding the physical meeting:
cancelling and rescheduling for what we predicted as
a safer period, late-July2 .

Organizing professional conferences online has never
been more timely. Responding to the new challenges raised by COVID-19, the organizers of the
ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering 2020 had to address the question:
How should we organize these conferences online?
This article summarizes their successful answer.

1

Introduction

The evolving travel and gathering restrictions caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic created a climate of uncertainty that made for difficult planning and decision making about international conferences scheduled for April 2020. Tribute to the ingenuity of our
field, a new model quickly evolved, pioneered by conferences such as ASPLOS [8] and EDBT/ICDT [4],
and by ACM itself [1]. This article reports on a design
alternative to organizing professional conferences online, derived from our experience with organizing the
11th ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering (ICPE 2020).
Particular to the ICPE timing was the process to
decide about holding an in-person conference, post-

1 Advice
from
the
Canadian
Government:
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/
diseases/2019-novel-coronavirus-infection/
health-professionals/mass-gatherings-risk-assesment.
html
2 To arrive at the month of July, we asked an in-house

1

We discarded through discussion the idea of reinviting the authors of accepted articles for next years
conference. We decided to opt for a cancellation of
the physical conference, which was in line with our
moral choice to protect the community and was also
supported by our main technical sponsors. We also
formed a Task Force for Organizing ICPE Online. On
April 2, following extensive documentation, discussions, and try-outs, the Task Force decided to propose
organizing the 11th ICPE online. We were strongly
motivated by what we saw as our duty to deliver to
the community, but also by our belief that we could
do so through an online event. We saw it as our
duty to give justice to the authors of accepted papers
and to guarantee that they can get the same level of
feedback they would have received if attending the
physical meeting, and the online option seemed to
give us an opportunity to achieve this duty.
The 11th ICPE was held fully online, on April 2024, 2020, with two days of workshops and three days
of single-track conference sessions. Key to our approach to organizing ICPE online was to be flexible by design, mixing synchronous and asynchronous
events, and giving the attendees many options to
participate and contribute, while ensuring all of the
original sessions of the conference maintained a synchronous element. We also ensured free registration
and free publication of proceedings, which were only
possible thanks to our generous supporters and sponsors. These two elements, and others, distinguish our
design for the conference from previously reported
designs [8, 4]. In return, we observed a significant
increase in registered participants, and both the synchronous and the asynchronous channels were very
well attended, exceeding the audience of the physical
ICPE meetings in the past couple of years.
In hindsight, many of our decisions, starting with
organizing ICPE 2020 online, seem obvious. However, this was not the case at the time, and luckily by

the end of the process many were satisfied. To quote
one of the senior members of the community: I was
one of the sceptics for an online ICPE (or any other
online conference for that matter). But you really
proved me wrong :) It was a great event. There were
only 3 weeks to organize everything, and we greatly
appreciated the existing guidelines and reports ([1, 8]
and, from April 8, also [4]). For these reasons, we
present here a summary of our design choices, the
experience of the online ICPE 2020, the feedback
collected from the community, and the lessons we
learned as organizers.
The remainder of this document is structured as
follows. Section 2 presents our design choices for
ICPE 2020. Section 3 summarizes the execution of
the online conference. Section 4 reports on community feedback; further feedback appears in the Appendix. Last, Section 5 concludes and summarizes
our advice for organizers of future conferences.

2

Design
2020

Choices

for

ICPE

The reliability of communication over the Internet is
an important consideration when organizing a meeting online [1, 8, 4]. However, based on our past experience with online communities and especially gaming, and now also with ICPE, we believe Internet
reliability is not the key issue for organizing a professional meeting between motivated participants. It is
probably a confirmation bias: in hindsight, in most
cases the online operation of ICPE was not more
problematic than of an on-site (physical) operation3 .
Our main insight is that the most important
factor for the success of a professional meeting
is the human factor. Both availability and attention, which for online conferences can be limited by
time differences and a variety of factors, are thus the
key problems in need of good solutions. Also impor-

statistician to predict the period expected to exhibit a lowering of COVID-19 presence. The statistician used the SIR
model on WHO data of SARS cases. See David Smith and
Lang Moore, ”The SIR Model for Spread of Disease - The Differential Equation Model,” Convergence (December 2004) and
the WHO Epidemic curves - Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Nov 2002 to Jul 2003: https://www.who.int/
csr/sars/epicurve/epiindex/en/index1.html

3 Some of the failures that occur when organizing on-site
include microphone not working, speaker not having a compatible interface for the video projector, speaker trying to use
pointers on a mispositioned screen, video projector failing or
not displaying colors correctly, room too dusty or drafty, signaling difficult to follow, etc.

2

tant, but less in the hand of the organizers and more
a consequence of the community itself, is to have an
interesting program and attractive talks. Thus, we
set as our key principle to be as flexible as possible, incentivizing people to attend and facilitating
their interactions.

Q2: How to facilitate attendance for all possible members of the community?

A2: We realized early that attendance is significantly
limited by any financial burden. Thanks to generous funding from both technical sponsors (the ACM
SIGmetrics and the ACM SIGSoft), from the SPEC
We present in the following eight design choices. Board of Directors, and from Huawei (generously
How they were perceived by the community will be- confirming their Silver Sponsorship), and Samsung,
come clear in Section 4.
we were able to reimburse the authors registrations
in full and to make the proceedings freely accessible
online. With the help of the Faculty of Science at
the University of Alberta, and through a new sponsorship from the SPEC Board of Directors, we were
Q1: How to share the conference material, then also able to offer full, free access to the ICPE
flexibly?
2020 events. As we will see, this important decision
allowed students and other first-time participants to
A1: At a minimum, a conference needs to allow its attend, without a financial burden.
participants to access the written material (the publications) and to jointly see the presentations. We Q3: Which infrastructure to use for organizing
knew the ACM proceedings would be available at the conference online?
the start of the main conference and would be free
to access [3, 2], but this precluded them from being A3: We decided to use a set of largely compleseen earlier, and in particular did not allow the work- mentary software tools to build the infrastructure
shop attendees to access them—because the work- for the conference. Flexibility and ease of use were
shops were scheduled for the two days before the prime considerations, and we ended up using what
start of the main conference. We couldnt publish we think are the best tools currently available for the
the articles internally, due to copyright issues. Our job: email and website for one-way, asynchronous
solution was to ask the authors to publish pre-prints. communication; Zoom (primary) and GoToMeeting
Guidelines, email communication, archival offices and (secondary) for multi-party, synchronous video comarxiv.org, and good will were necessary to achieve munication and (to some extent) online messaging;
this. We also asked authors to create videos of their YouTube for one-way, asynchronous video communitalks the moment we decided to cancel the physical cation; Google Drive (primary) and various archival
meeting, and share these through the ICPE YouTube services (also primary) for asynchronous one-way
channel [6]; this decision would become useful in a sharing of files; Slack for multi-party, synchronous
later design decision. After deciding to go online, we and asynchronous messaging and file-sharing (secfurther asked the authors to create and share 1-slide ondary); and TimeAndDate to share official times
pitches of their work, and full slide-decks explaining in the format needed by the attendees. We also set
their work. We not only linked to these on the ICPE up a Mozilla Hubs breakout room – a virtual space
website [5], but also asked the authors to share links displaying in the browser or on a VR headset – but
to their papers via the ICPE Slack workspace [7] and the audience did not try it much. (We have also
also on social media (Twitter and LinkedIn, primar- considered many alternatives, especially for Zoom.)
ily). This abundance of material and channels put This allowed us to support various modes of commuadditional burden on the authors, but allowed the nication, much like a well-equipped physical facility
attendees the flexibility of choosing how to consume would allow; it also required us the organizers to act
the information.
as the technical team in ways that would normally
3

be delegated to the manager of the physical facility.

secretary per session and other self-appointed
participants) transcribe to the Slack. We noticed this decision has benefited attendees who
could not be present, due to other commitments
or illness.

Q4: How to organize the sessions, to maximize
availability and attention?
A4: We addressed this genuinely difficult question,
which also appears to be the crux of education and
training in general, through a set of measures. We
describe here a selection of such measures:

5. We aimed to improve attention, by asking for
each session a moderator plus a small team selected from PC members to revise slides and
videos, and to write on Slack questions for each
article presented in the session, prior to the session itself. This focused the communitys attention, and also removed the obstacle of asking the
first question.

1. We aimed to improve attention, at the possible
cost of availability, by organizing all the events
of the conference synchronously, that is, all the
keynotes, talks, and moderated Q&A parts are
attended by the audience when they occur. This
decision was also taken by EDBT/ICDT, but
contrasts to the asynchronous organization of
ASPLOS [2].

6. To improve both availability and attention, we
aimed to select only tools we considered easy-ofuse and appropriate for how conferences work.
This led us to, in the end, reject the use of the
Webinar mode of Slack and GoToMeeting—the
Q&A sessions were confusing, with participants
not able to understand immediately how to ask
questions or whether questions have been asked
at all. Furthermore, tools like Slack offer many
options and proved to be confusing for some in
the audience.

2. We aimed to improve both availability and attention by limiting the duration of the virtual day to
about 3 hours, aligned with the time-zone of the
original location of the conference (5pm in Central Europe is 9am in Edmonton, Canada). This
limited somewhat potential participation from
Asia, but time-zones are very limiting and we
reasoned the material is available online in any
case. This also limited the duration we can allocate per article, for example, but in our view
allowed the attendees to still have enough energy to engage beyond the session itself – a behavior we have observed is that both speakers
and authors would continue to engage on Slack,
synchronously or asynchronously.

7. To improve availability, we opted to have backup
infrastructure for any mode of communication,
e.g., Zoom and GoToMeeting for multi-party,
synchronous video communication; YouTube
and Slack for sharing videos; and Google Drive
and Slack for various files. This led to higher
costs (e.g., due to licenses), but gave us certainty
the event could proceed even if one of the software tools suffered a catastrophic outage. This
would be difficult to replicate with a physical organization of the conference.

3. To improve attention, we further limited the duration of each keynote to 25 minutes of one-way
communication and 5+ minutes of Q&A, and
asked presenters of peer-reviewed articles to stay
within a budget of about 20 minutes for full articles and 15 minutes for short articles (more
about this in Q5).

8. To improve availability, we opted for Zoom as
the primary infrastructure for multi-party, synchronous video communication, coupled with
Slack as primary tool for online messaging. In
our experience, among at least five other leading platforms, Zoom worked best, being easy
to install and use, and exhibiting very few hiccups even when the attendance scaled or became

4. We aimed to improve availability, by making all
the material available for offline access. This includes not only the material from Q1, but also
the Q&A and discussions. For the latter, we arranged to have helpers from the community (one
4

of Conduct4 , and informed various personas (e.g., authors, session chairs, other attendees) about how to
easily join the sessions. We clarified many aspects
using Slack and, especially among the organizers and
the Task Force, through online meetings.

global. (We will not comment on these features,
or on the security and privacy issues related to
Zoom and other platforms. We are not aware
of an impartial, high-quality, reproducible study
across all these platforms. Perhaps this is a topic
for ICPE 2021...)
Q5: How to organize the talks:
article-presentations, etc.?

Q7: How to facilitate the organization of
ICPE-related events, flexibly?

keynotes,

A7: We again put the guiding principle of flexibility
into practice: we offered advice and guidelines to organizers of workshops, but in the end were supportive
with any choice they made. For example, one of the
workshops decided to maintain the classic approach,
with long keynotes and talks leading to about 8 hours
in the virtual day; midway through the event, the
European participants had to leave, because it was
already late in their evening.

A5: Keynotes are typically the star of general participation, so we decided to preserve their typical organization as one-way talks followed by a moderated
Q&A session. However, for talks related to peerreviewed articles we reasoned that sitting through
one-way communication would diminish the energy
in the room. Thus, we diverged from the classic organization of conferences, and (1) asked the presenters to pre-record and share their talks on YouTube
with at least several days before the first day of the
main conference, (2) assigned the moderator and a
team of experts to view the videos and ask questions
prior to the live session, (3) encouraged the audience
to do the same, (4) asked the speakers to pitch their
work for up to 2 minutes at the start of the session,
and (5) enabled and encouraged live questions, which
were asked either by attendees live or, when technical
glitches or personal preference precluded this, by the
moderator. This flexible approach led to numerous
questions and a lively discussion, perhaps even more
than some articles would see in conferences organized
classically.

Q8: How to facilitate social events, flexibly?
A8: We discussed extensively whether we should try
to organize social events for the conference. In the
spirit of flexibility, the answer can only be: let the
society decide itself! And so we did. From the first
days of the conference, it emerged that at the end of
each day a sizable part of the community would simply hang out online, some with drinks, some chatting, some simply staying online. We also noticed
that groups would go to Slack, continuing the discussion, as reflected by the written messages. Last,
we suggested that Slack could also be the host of
private groups, where attendees with similar interests (and, as it turns out, also attendees with similar
background) could meet and arrange further messaging or even new Zoom or other video communication.

Q6: How to ensure that everyone knows what
to do?

A6: Communication is key in any process of change,
and it was also in our case. We used every channel 3
Executing the Online ICPE
at our disposal to communicate with the audience,
2020
first through email, then through an extensive booklet with guidelines, last but not least through online
Executing ICPE 2020 was challenging, but rewardmeetings and Slack. The booklet, Guidelines for the
ing. We describe the following setup and several obvirtual ICPE 2020, went through 3 major versions
servations.
(uploaded on Slack), and on only 6 pages described
4 https://icpe2020.spec.org/code-of-conduct/
the key terms of the meeting, pointed out the Code
5

Overall and Daily Setup
We asked attendees to register to the conference (for
free), and invited all registrants (nearly 550) to the
ICPE 2020s Slack workspace. From these, over 480
accepted the invitation and became attendees (see
also Observation O1). We announced a new Zoom
link each day; with the link used by all sessions, which
allowed all attendees to find a way to join (if they
wanted to).
Our Slack setup was similar to that of ASPLOS,
with channels for: the introductory session (1 channel), each keynote (2x), the awards session (1x), each
session of the main conference (7x), and posters and
demos (1x). Overall, each of these channels was well
attended (see also O2). We also created the icpe-2020
channel for chair announcements, general for anyone
to share, all-sessions for notifications about sessions
by session moderators, random for informal conversations, support for asking for help. We also created
private channels for organizers (org for the conference
chairs, org-ws for the workshops chairs). Overall, we
observed that each topical channel was well-attended,
but the more general channels were too numerous and
generated confusion.

Figure 1: ICPE 2020 attendee count, by date. (Data
until and including Apr 25.)
O1: ICPE 2020 had unusually high attendance.

Figure 1 depicts the growth in daily attendee count.
We exceeded the expected number of attendees (150)
by April 12, about 1 week after opening the registration process. At the start of the main conference, we
already had over 480 attendees, which triggered us to
upgrade the Zoom account to allow for more concurrent seats. This number of attendees is the highest
ever recorded for ICPE, exceeding among others the
Last, we saw the community create new channels, participation observed in the previous edition, an exboth public channels for emerging topics (listed as tremely successful event organized in India.
topic-x to group in the Slack interface) and private
channels (many organized by people from the same
O2: Testing every aspect of the infrastructure
geographical area).
is vital.
When using Slack, we found that it is important
to carefully edit permissions and settings. Slack is We tested the infrastructure extensively, including
aimed at teams and thus has less restrictive default during the event. Figure 2 depicts a bandwidth
settings. For example, we learned late that organizers measurement conducted during the event (load testshould disable displaying email addresses in member ing), indicating the performance of Zoom at the scale
profiles and disable that members can use @channel needed by the conference remains relatively stable
to notify all other members in larger conferences to and affordable for reasonable Internet connections.
avoid unsolicited advertisement.
O3: The conference continues long after its
All moving parts considered, the execution was last session.
relatively uneventful. The organizers were on-site
and addressed the occasional technical glitches (e.g., A conference does not have to end with its last sesZoom crashed), presenter issues (e.g., not sharing the sion. We conducted surveys to obtain feedback from
the attendees, compiled a report for the Steering
right screen), etc.
6

around 70 participants in the main conference, and
40-60 for the workshops. (We could not access the
Zoom statistics for these metrics, so we counted them
manually.)
Figure 3, which depicts the number of daily active
members and of daily active members posting messages, leads to our observation that activity is most
intense only during the conference. On Slack, we
counted over 325 daily active members. The peak
is recorded during the opening of the conference,
Figure 2: Bandwidth requirements for Zoom. (Live when in particular the SPEC community attended
session with 1 main speaker, 1 moderator, circa 70 (increase in the daily active members) but not necessarily engaged in the discussion (similar count of
attendees.)
members posting messages as in the previous days).
This indicates that more community management
Committee (this report), and started work on next and engagement is needed, to make such a commuyears conference. But two items deserve more dis- nity thrive beyond the limits of the ICPE event.
cussion:
O5: The workshops are important contributors to the discussion.

• Although Slack preserves the written conversation, its forum capabilities are limited, so discussions may quickly become difficult to traverse.
Following a tradition that exists in performance
engineering since at least the late 1950s [9], we
have decided to summarize all Q&A sessions, by
item of discussion, through a community effort.
The process is ongoing.

We often hear the argument that workshops bring
into the community hot topics of discussion, and overall can make conferences livelier. Figure 4 presents
quantitative evidence in this sense: from the Slack
channels dedicated to each session, the workshops
stand out as 3 of the Top-5 sessions with the largest
message count. (Public channels also accounted for
• We observed that the community has put ef- 85% of the message-views, so their impact of workfort into identifying four emerging topics, which shops was high.)
could lead to new entries in future ICPE conferences: topic-datasets, about sharing datasets
in the community, topic-edu, about creating
an education workshop associated with ICPE,
topic-history, about writing a (short) history
of the field, and topic-per-var, about understanding and controlling performance variability
in software and hardware systems.
O4: Activity is most intense during the conference.
The live participation was lower than the maximum
possible, but still exceeded our expectation. On
Zoom at peak, we counted over 175 concurrent attendees for the main conference, and 70-90 participants for the workshops. The lowest attendance was
7

Figure 3: Number of daily active members and of daily active members posting messages.

Figure 4: Number of messages posted in the public channels associated with ICPE main-conference sessions
and workshops. Only the Top-6 of the 30 public channels displayed. (Data until Apr 25.)

8

4

Community Feedback

From Q5 and Q6 (Figure 6), we observe that the
attendees appreciated the organization, both in terms
of design choices and in which software infrastructure
was selected. We will see later that the audience did
not like some of the features of an online conference as
much. From the foregoing, we conclude that there is
a need for new software that better supports the type
of online conference we ran. On the other hand, the
strong attendance and favourable feedback at the end
of the conference indicate that we made successful use
of the tools available, despite intense time pressure.

We have conducted a comprehensive survey with over
50 questions, which we analyzed when it reached 50
respondents (just over 10% of the attendees, and
over one-quarter of the peak of concurrent attendees
on Zoom). The participation was diverse in role in
ICPE 2020 (about 40% were authors, about a quarter
speakers), current occupation (PhD students, academic staff, and industry engineers each represent
over 20% of the respondents), seniority (about half
were seniors with 15+ years of experience, about
25% were juniors), ownership of a PhD degree (about
half), geolocation (about half from Europe and 40%
North America, with over 10 countries represented
in the survey), and gender (one-third not male). We
present here a selection of the results, with more results in the Appendix.

Figure 5: Summary of answers for Q3.
From Q3 (Figure 5), we observe that organizing online helped us enlarge participation, with about half
of the respondents being first-time attendees.

Figure 7: Summary of answers for Q8.
Overall from Q8 (Figure 7), we observe that the
attendees experienced the online talks as worse for
the online ICPE than for the classic. There was also
enough appreciation, with between one-third and just
less than half of the attendees appreciating the online approach more. This was consistent across both
talks and keynotes, and both for speakers and audience. This matches the findings of ASPLOS and
EDBT/ICDT, if we assume most of their borderline
decisions would be accounted to our Worse category.
The results for the moderated Q&A sessions were
much appreciated. About two-thirds of the attendees, both speakers and audience, considered the on-

Figure 6: Summary of answers for Q5 and Q6.
9

line event at least better, and about one-quarter con- ferences (but attended an online form!); (4) perhaps
sidered it much better. This confirms our own ob- unsurprisingly, about one-third of the respondents
servation that there was much more extensive and dislike the idea of online only conferences.
deeper interaction than we observed in the conventional format. The Slack channels were buzzing long
after the session ended.

Figure 10: Summary of answers for Q12.
Q12 (Figure 10) indicates over three-quarters of the
respondents prefer the medium-length day chosen for
ICPE. Some would have liked it even shorter; under
From Q9 (Figure 8), we conclude the need for social 5% would have liked a full-length day format.
interaction remained unfulfilled. Over two-thirds of
the respondents would have preferred more such interaction. This is consistent with the findings of the
EDBT/ICDT survey. In our view, better tools (and
maybe also better format-designs) need to appear before the online community can be fully satisfied about
this aspect.
Figure 8: Summary of answers for Q9.

Figure 9: Summary of answers for Q10.
From the answers to Q10a and Q10b (Figure 9), we
observe that: (1) as one might expect, many would
like a face-to-face only conference; (2) surprisingly,
Figure 11: Summary of answers for Q13.
most would enjoy attending a mix of online and faceto-face sessions (but would prefer these sessions do
not overlap); (3) a surprisingly high fraction of reFrom Figure 11, Q13a and Q13b indicate there are
spondents, about one-fifth, dislike face-to-face con- good reasons to organize the conference online: it
10

5 Conclusion and Our Advice
allows broadening participation.
Q13c gives another reason to allow (also) online
for Conference Organizers
attendance: people can attend more sessions. The
answers to Q13d show a majority of our respondents The ICPE 2020 experience has been rewarding for
have attended at least 7 sessions, with over 40% at- all involved. As organizers, we learned many lessons
tending over 10. We asked more about this: 11 of from organizing this conference online, including
our 16 sessions were attended by at least 60% of the
respondents. (The informal social sessions were at1. The most important factor for the success of a
tended by just over a quarter of the attendees, which
professional meeting is human. Focus on increasis less than the typical attendance at a conventional
ing the availability and attention of your audiconference.). Further details of the graphical repence. Be as flexible as possible. Engage with
resentation of the questions and corresponding rethe community. Also, train the community (husponses can be found in the appendix section.
manely).
2. Communication with people is of key relevance.
Authors of accepted papers needed some encouragement to prepare slides, videos, the 1-slide
pitch, a preprint of their articles, etc. PC members need to be tempted to volunteer in the revision of the material and to actively participate
in online sessions.
Figure 12: Summary of answers for Q11.
From Q11 answers (Figure 12), we observe that
live talks are preferred over any other form of prerecorded talk. However, pre-recorded talks that include even a short live teaser are almost as appreciated, but consume only a fraction of the time allocated for the subject and thus leave much more time
for Q&A.

3. A community that has as alternative not attending the conference at all will tolerate many
mishaps and issues with the infrastructure. Under these circumstances, the infrastructure is not
a major issue.
4. The infrastructure needed to organize a conference online includes many components. Prioritize flexibility and redundancy in supporting various modes of communication.
5. Testing the infrastructure is essential, but perhaps not much more so than in conventional conferences.
6. Organizing medium-length conference days of 34 hours is perceived as better than using shorter
or longer alternatives.
7. Daily Cafe (open) sessions at the end of each day
led to useful discussion, mostly for community
building and about how to organize better.
8. One innovation in format: the live pitch of about
2 minutes is an efficient replacement for the live

11

talk, which leaves more time for Q&A. Consequently, Q&A can be better than in conventional
conferences.

Face-to-Face Meetings, https://www.acm.org/
virtual-conferences, Apr 2020.
Accessed:
April 2020.

9. The online conference can offer various advan- [2] José Nelson Amaral, Anne Koziolek, Catia
tages over the classic physical format; perhaps
Trubiani, and Alexandru Iosup.
Icpe 2020
a mixed mode would become the norm in the
companion, proceedings of workshops, tutorifuture.
als, and demos. ACM conference proceedings
https://dl.acm.org/doi/proceedings/10.
10. One main advantage of organizing online: en1145/3375555, Apr 2020. Accessed: April 2020.
larging the audience at a fraction of the cost.
Compared with a physical conference, organiz[3] José Nelson Amaral, Anne Koziolek, Catia Truing online can lead to lower material costs, lower
biani, and Alexandru Iosup. Icpe 2020 full proenvironmental costs, (often) lower costs for the
ceedings of the main conference. ACM conemployer, and (often) lower personal costs. The
ference proceedings https://dl.acm.org/doi/
flexibility of joining or leaving at any moment
proceedings/10.1145/3358960, Apr 2020. Acalso decreases the opportunity costs.
cessed: April 2020.
11. One main victim of organizing online: the personal connection. Currently, there is no substi- [4] Angela Bonifati, Giovanna Guerrini, Carsten
Lutz, Wim Martens, Lara Mazilu, Norman Patute for the physical attendance of a conference
ton, Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles, Marc H. Scholl,
talk, or for the advantages in establishing coland Yongluan Zhou, editors. Holding a Conferlaborations of physical meetings. Also, the soence Online and Live, Due to COVID-19. ACM,
cial event still does not have a good equivalent
Apr 2020. Accessed: April 2020.
in the digital world. The existing tools, and perhaps also the formats tried so far, simply cannot
[5] ICPE Team. Icpe 2020 website. https://
deliver the same experience.
icpe2020.spec.org/, Apr 2020. Accessed: April
2020.

Acknowledgment

[6] ICPE Team.
Icpe 2020 youtube channel. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCq_
The authors would like to acknowledge the sponsors
1N-drTe7fdWLPRRbcihQ/videos, Apr 2020. Acof the ACM/SPEC ICPE 2020 conference. We also
cessed: April 2020.
want to thank all the organizers. The conference
could not have been organized without their com[7] ICPE Team. Icpe slack workspace. https://
bined and generous contribution.
icpeworkspace.slack.com, Apr 2020. Accessed:
The authors further thank Snigdha Singh, of KIT,
April 2020.
Germany, who kindly provided most of the visual
analysis presented in the Appendix. This extends
the analysis in Section 4 and provides a fuller view of [8] James R. Larus, Luis Ceze, and Karin Strauss, editors. The ASPLOS 2020 Online Conference Exthe feedback offered by conference attendees.
perience. ACM, Mar 2020. Accessed: April 2020.

References

[9] Christopher Strachey. Time sharing in large, fast
computers. In Information Processing, Proceed[1] ACM Presidential Task Force. Virtual conings of the 1st International Conference on Inforferences: A guide to best practices.
Remation Processing, UNESCO, Paris 15-20 June
port on What Conferences Can Do to Replace
1959, pages 336–341, 1959.
12

Author’s Biographies

40k USD) in 2014. Among various international
projects in which she has been involved, she is
Prof.dr.ir.
Alexandru Iosup is full tenured principal investigator of the GSSI unit for a MIURprofessor and University Research Chair at Vrije PRIN project (Young Line action). She served as a
Universiteit (VU) Amsterdam, and member of the Program Chair for ICPE 2020. She can be contacted
Young Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences of the at catia.trubiani@gssi.it or @CatiaTrubiani.
Netherlands. He received his PhD in computer
science from TU Delft, the Netherlands. He is the
Prof.dr. José Nelson Amaral, a Computing
chair of the Massivizing Computer Systems research Science professor at the University of Alberta,
group at the VU and of the SPEC-RG Cloud group. Ph.D. from The University of Texas at Austin in
His work in distributed systems and ecosystems has 2004, has published in optimizing compilers and
received prestigious recognition, including the 2016 high-performance computing. Scientific community
Netherlands ICT Researcher of the Year, the 2015 service includes general chair for the 23rd InterNetherlands Higher-Education Teacher of the Year, national Conference on Parallel Architectures and
and several SPEC community awards SPECtacular Compilation Techniques in 2014, for the Inter(last in 2017). He served as a Program Chair for national Conference on Performance Engineering
ICPE 2020. He can be contacted at A.Iosup@vu.nl (ICPE) in 2020, and for the International Conference
or @AIosup.
on Parallel Processing in 2020. Accolades include
ACM Distinguished Engineer, IBM Faculty Fellow,
Prof.dr. Anne Koziolek is a professor at Karl- IBM Faculty Awards, IBM CAS ”Team of the
sruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany, since Year”, awards for excellence in teaching, and the
2019. She received the Diploma degree in informatics GSA Award for Excellence in Graduate Student
from University of Oldenburg, Germany, in 2007, and Supervision. He is an elected member of the Board
the PhD degree in informatics from KIT in 2011. She of Directors of the Standard Performance Evaluation
received in 2008 a research fellowship of the German Corporation (SPEC), one of the ICPE sponsoring
National Academic Foundation (”Studienstiftung organizations. He served as a General Chair and as
des deutschen Volkes). She conducted research also Local Chair for ICPE 2020.
at the FZI Forschungszentrum Informatik and at
the University of Zurich, Switzerland. Her research
Dr. Andre B. Bondi is a highly experienced
attracted numerous citations and nominations, consultant, researcher, and author in software perincluding a Test of Time award from ICPE. She formance engineering. He recently completed a year
served in prestigious roles, such as co-chair, for as an Adjunct Professor of Software Engineering at
ICPE, WOSP-C, QRASA, etc. She served as a Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New
General Chair for ICPE 2020.
Jersey. He has served as a co-chair of the steering
committee of ICPE since 2012. He spent over ten
Dr. Catia Trubiani is Assistant Professor at the years working on performance at AT&T Labs and its
Gran Sasso Science Institute (GSSI) Italy, i.e., an predecessor, AT&T Bell Labs, before holding senior
international PhD school and a center for research performance positions in two startups and more than
and higher education. She received her PhD in ten years at Siemens Corporate Technology, where he
computer science at the University of LAquila, and initiated their U.S.-based performance engineering
she was a research fellow for a EU FP7 project at practice. He received the A. A. Michelson Award
the University of Rome. Her work on modeling and from the Computer Measurement Group in 2016. He
analyzing large-scale software systems has received received his Ph.D. in computer science from Purdue
prestigious recognition, including the Best Research University and an M.Sc. in statistics from University
Paper Award at ECSA in 2015 and ICPE in 2011, College London. He spent a semester as a visiting
the Microsoft Azure Research Award (market value: professor of computer science at the University of
13

LAquila in 2016. He served as a member of the
ICPE Task Force for Organizing ICPE Online.
Dr. Andreas Brunnert is founder of RETIT
GmbH, a software and consulting company focused
on software performance (https://www.retit.de).
Andreas gained more than 15 years’ experience in the
field of software performance engineering in his various roles at IBM and while leading a research group
focused on software performance at an institute of
the Technical University of Munich. In recent years,
he has focused on the integration of measurementand model-based performance evaluation approaches.
He holds a Diploma in computer science from University of Applied Sciences Brandenburg, Germany,
a M.Sc. in information systems from University of
Bamberg, Germany, and a Ph.D. in computer science from Technical University of Munich. He served
as the Chair of ICPE Industry Track.

A

Analysis (Cont’d.)

Figure 14: Summary of answers for Q2.
The answers to question Q2 (Figure 14) reveal
that the direct-messaging strategy of the conference
organizers worked very well. By far the most selected
answer (44% of the respondents) was that attendees
learned about ICPE 2020 going online from email.
The answers can include multiple choices, but email
still appears as the only consistent choice. This
may be surprising in an age where social media
receives so much attention, but it is an important
indication that professional meetings should still
use email as one of the main communication channels.

Figure 15: Summary of answers for Q4.
The answers for Q4 (Figure 15) reveal that organizing the conference online was much preferred by
The answers to question Q1 (Figure 13) indicate the respondents (94%, of which over three-quarters
the answers to our survey were provided primarily replied it was much better to do so), over not
by authors of articles presented in the conference organizing at all (only 6%).
(29%), followed by regular attendees (18%). This is
The answers to Q7 (Figure 16) indicate the use of
expected, as the commitment of authors may drive
them to further take the time to give feedback, but Slack is perceived as positive by a large part of the
may bias the results toward the positive, as authors community. Over 95% of the respondents indicate
could compare favorably the organization of the Slack should continue to be used as a mechanism to
conference (even online) against not organizing the maintain the ICPE community year-round.
conference at all.
The answers to Q13d (Figure 17) indicate the
Figure 13: Summary of answers for Q1.

14

while the Q&A was ongoing, using the 2x speedup
option of YouTube videos.)

Figure 16: Summary of answers for Q7.

Figure 19: Summary of answers for Q16.

Figure 17: Summary of answers for Q13d.
use of online technology allowed the ICPE audience
to attend a large number of sessions. There were
in total 16 sessions. Nearly two-thirds of the attendees attended at least 7 sessions, and over 40%
of the attendees attended over 10 sessions (about
two-thirds of the sessions on offer). Based on our
experience with conferences in general, this high level
of attendance may even exceed that of conventional
conferences.

Q16a and Q16b (Figure 19) reveal that both
the audience and the speakers experienced the
keynotes worse than they normally would in a
conventional conference. (This was not caused by
the speakers themselves, who were rated highly by
the audience.) This leads us to conclude that, even
if the attendees agree that the tools we used for the
conference were the best available, these tools still
cannot deliver an experience close to live-attendance.

Figure 20: Summary of answers for Q17a.
Figure 18: Summary of answers for Q15.
Q15 (Figure 18) reveals that watching videos in
advance of the day of the related Q&A session was
not done by over 40% of the audience. Thus, we
derive from this that the idea of the short pitch at
the start of each session was meaningful in providing
at least a good starting point for the discussion.
(In conversations with attendees, we learned some
of them watched the videos during the pitches and

Q17a (Figure 20) strengthens our conclusion that
the attendees appreciated the presence of good content, more than how it was supported by the communication tools. A majority of the attendees (54
However, the opinions are almost split over this
issue. With the argument that having a compact
program was desirable and useful for ICPE 2020, we
conjecture we had the right amount of keynotes.

15

Figure 23: Summary of answers for Q21.

Figure 21: Summary of answers for Q19.

interested in both the content (over 90%) and the
community (over 80%). This emphasizes the need to
find the right tools for community engagement.

From Q19a and Q19b (Figure 21), we observe
that shorter is in general preferable to our attendees.
One important decision we took, the trade-off of not
organizing even short talks but to switch entirely to
teasers, vs. how much the audience would prefer,
leads to an interesting conclusion. The attendees
would have preferred short talks, but, as indicated by
the experiment conducted by one of the workshops,
would not have attended them because the conferFigure 24: Summary of answers for Q22.
ence day would have run too long into the night (for
European attendees). This trade-off, of talk-length
(and thus day-length) vs. attendance, remains at
The answers to Q22 (Figure 24) indicate that,
the core of organizing conferences, whether they are
should we have used a longer conference-day, and in
organized virtually or physically.
particular the length of a conventional conference,
the audience would not have attended more sessions.
We conclude our design choice regarding the trade-off
day-length vs. attendance was appropriate. The
presence of the trade-off and this conclusion need to
be communicated more clearly to the audience, to
prevent confusion – as exemplified by some of the
answers to Q19a and Q19b.
Figure 22: Summary of answers for Q20.
Figure 25 summarizes the answers related to the
The answers to Q20 (Figure 22) indicate the
attendees would agree to online meetings being streaming solution, Zoom. Almost all of the responheld more frequently. This underlines a strength dents to Q23a (98%) agreed that Zoom is a good or
of online conferences: they can allow the com- very good solution for streaming. Yet, this does not
munity to meet more frequently, albeit, at the make it sufficient to emulate the physical meeting, as
cost of some of the quality. A combination of indicated by the answers given to Q16a and Q16b.
The answers to Q23b are not surprising: there
several online conferences and one main (yearly)
conference seems a good idea to explore in the future. exist many streaming tools that people have experience with and like. Among the most suggested
The answers to Q21 (Figure 23) are consistent are GoToMeeting, Cisco WebEx, Microsoft Teams /
with the idea that the ICPE audience was very Link, and Google Meet / Hangout. We, the authors
16

Figure 25: Summary of answers for Q23.
and other organizers, have conducted experiments
using GoToMeeting, and had personal experience
with the other three leading suggestions.
Figure 26 summarizes the answers related to the
messaging solution, Slack, and for the video-sharing
solution, YouTube. For Q24a, respondents indicate their acceptance of Slack as a messaging solution, with over 80% of them agreeing it is at least
good. However, relatively to Zoom for streaming,
the approval of Slack as very good for messaging is
much lower. From the open-form feedback, we observe some of the attendees found Slack as too complex when starting with it, a situation also identified
by the organizers of ASPLOS. It may be good for
Slack to provide a simpler interface for starting users,
with more advanced features enabled from specialized
menus.
Similarly to the answers given for Zoom as a
streaming platform, the attendees gave as answers for
Q24b a variety of other choices. Microsoft Teams,
Discord, using a LinkedIn community, and Mattermost (an open-source alternative very similar to
Slack) were the most popular choices. Members of
the team had extensive experience with the last three.
This indicates future ICPE events could experiment
with using Microsoft Teams instead of Slack.
Similarly to Zoom, the respondents to Q24c see
YouTube as good or very good. The answer most
given indicates YouTube is very good at what it can

Figure 26: Summary of answers for Q24.
provide in this area. Last, and perhaps confusingly,
over 60% of the attendees gave as an alternative to
YouTube “no idea” or YouTube itself (presumably,
as an indication there is no reasonable alternative
for this context).
The answers to Q25 (Figure 27) indicate the
diversity of our audience, occupation-wise. We
observe a balanced participation of industry staff,
academic staff, and students.

17

The answers to Q26 (Figure 28) reveal the gender

Figure 30: Summary of answers for Q28.
Figure 27: Summary of answers for Q25.

Figure 31: Summary of answers for Q29.
ing the previous edition organized in India, is not
well-represented this time. This indicates one of the
major drawbacks of online conferences: their operaparticipation in the conference. In our experience, tional hours can make it difficult to participate from
the fraction of attendees identifying as female is entire continents. (The alternative offered by conamong the highest in the field.
ventional conferences requires attendees from these
continents to travel to the location of the conference.)
Figure 28: Summary of answers for Q26.

Figure 29: Summary of answers for Q27.
The results for Q27 (Figure 29) are consistent with
a diverse community, but also with the idea that the
reputation of ICPE is one of experience-sharing.

Figure 32: Summary of answers for Q30.

The answers to Q30 (Figure 32) indicate participation from many countries, but also that countries
A large fraction of the participants have already like Germany, USA, Canada, Italy, and the Netheror expect soon to have a PhD degree, as indicated lands provide a majority of the participants. We see
it as the task of the Steering Committee to consider if
by the answers received for Q28 (Figure 30).
broadening and balancing participation across more
The answers to Q29 (Figure 31) indicate strong countries is possible.
participation from Europe and North America, but
also low participation from other continents. Asia,
which has given a large fraction of participants dur18

