Characterizing information leaders in Twitter during
COVID-19 crisis
David Pastor-Escuredo1,2,* and Carlota Tarazona1,*
Abstract.1 Information is key during a crisis such as the current
COVID-19 pandemic as it greatly shapes people’s opinion,
behaviour and even their psychological state. It has been
acknowledged from the Secretary-General of the United Nations
that the infodemic of misinformation is an important secondary
crisis produced by the pandemic. Infodemics can amplify the real
negative consequences of the pandemic in different dimensions:
social, economic and even sanitary. For instance, infodemics can
lead to hatred between population groups that fragment the society
influencing its response or result in negative habits that help the
pandemic propagate. On the contrary, reliable and trustful
information along with messages of hope and solidarity can be used
to control the pandemic, build safety nets and help promote
resilience and antifragility. We propose a framework to characterize
leaders in Twitter based on the analysis of the social graph derived
from the activity in this social network. Centrality metrics are used
to identify relevant nodes that are further characterized in terms of
users’ parameters managed by Twitter. We then assess the resulting
topology of clusters of leaders. Although this tool may be used for
surveillance of individuals, we propose it as the basis for a
constructive application to empower users with a positive influence
in the collective behaviour of the network and the propagation of
information.

1

INTRODUCTION

Misinformation and fake news are a recurrent problem of our
digital era [1-3]. The volume of misinformation and its impact
grows during large events, crises and hazards [4]. When
misinformation turns into a systemic pattern it becomes an
infodemic [5,6]. Infodemics are frequent specially in social
networks that are distributed systems of information generation and
spreading. For this to happen, the content is not the only variable but
the structure of the social network and the behavior of relevant
people greatly contribute [6].
During a crisis such as the current COVID-19 pandemic,
information is key as it greatly shapes people’s opinion, behaviour
and even their psychological state [7-9]. However, the greater the
impact the greater the risk [10]. It has been acknowledged from the
Secretary-General of the United Nations that the infodemic of
misinformation is an important secondary crisis produced by the
pandemic. During a crisis, time is critical, so people need to be
informed at the right time [11,12]. Furthermore, information during
a crisis leads to action, so population needs to be properly informed
1

Center of Innovation and Technology for Development, Technical
University Madrid, Spain
2
LifeD Lab, Madrid, Spain

to act right [13]. Thus, infodemics can amplify the real negative
consequences of the pandemic in different dimensions: social,
economic and even sanitary. For instance, infodemics can lead to
hatred between population groups [14] that fragment the society
influencing its response or result in negative habits that help the
pandemic propagate. On the contrary, reliable and trustful
information along with messages of hope and solidarity can be used
to control the pandemic, build safety nets and help promote
resilience and antifragility.
To fight misinformation and hate speech,content-based filtering is
the most common approach taken [6,15-17]. The availability of
Deep Learning tools makes this task easier and scalable [18-20].
Also, positioning in search engines is key to ensure that
misinformation does not dominate the most relevant results of the
searches. However, in social media, besides content, people’s
individual behavior and network properties, dynamics and topology
are other relevant factors that determine the spread of information
through the network [21-23].
We propose a framework to characterize leaders in Twitter based on
the analysis of the social graph derived from the activity in this social
network [24]. Centrality metrics are used to identify relevant nodes
that are further characterized in terms of users’ parameters managed
by Twitter [25-29]. Although this tool may be used for surveillance
of individuals, we propose it as the basis for a constructive
application to empower users with a positive influence in the
collective behaviour of the network and the propagation of
information [27,30].

2

MATERIALS AND METHODS

2.1

Data

Tweets were retrieved using the real-time streaming API of
Twitter. Two concurrent filters were used for the streaming: location
and keywords. Location was restricted to a bounding box enclosing
the city of Madrid [-3.7475842804, 40.3721683069, 3.6409114868, 40.4886258195] whereas the keywords were basic
terms naming the pandemic: ['coronavirus',
'Coronavirus',
'#CoronavirusES', 'coronavirusESP', '#coronavirus', '#Coronavirus',
'covid19', '#covid19', 'Covid19', '#Covid19', 'covid-19', '#covid*These authors equally contributed
email: david@lifedlab.org

19', 'COVID-19', '#COVID-19']. In total, we retrieved 100.000 posts
in the time interval between May 2nd and May 4th.

2.2

Network construction

Each tweet was analyzed to extract mentioned users, retweeted
users, quoted users or replied users. For each of these events the
corresponding nodes were added to an undirected graph as well as a
corresponding edge initializing the edge property “flow”. If the edge
was already created, the property “flow” was incremented. This
procedure was repeated for each tweet registered. The network was
completed by adding the property “inverse flow”, that is 1/flow, to
each edge. The resulting network featured 107544 nodes and 116855
edges.

2.3

Relevance metrics

Degree

Eigenvalue

Closeness

Betweenness

Current flow
Closeness

Current flow
Betweenness

Load

Radial and volume-based centrality computed from 1length walks (normalized degree) based on the flow
property. This centrality was computed for both
directions of the directed graph.
Radial and volume-based centrality computed from
infinite length walks. This centrality was computed for
both directions of the directed graph.
Radial and length-based centrality that considers the
length of the shortest past of all nodes to the target node
based on the flow property. This centrality was computed
for both directions of the directed graph.
Medial and volume-based centrality that considers the
number of shortest paths passing by a target node based
on the flow property. This centrality was computed for
both directions of the directed graph.
Radial and length-based centrality based on current flow
model using the inverse flow property. This centrality
was computed for the largest connected undirected
subgraph.
Medial and volume-based centrality based on current
flow model using the inverse flow property. This
centrality was computed for the largest connected
undirected subgraph.
The load centrality of a node is the fraction of all shortest
paths that pass through that node. Load centrality is
slightly different than betweenness.

Additionally the network was filtered to be connected which is a
requirement for the computation of several of the centrality metrics
described bellow. For this purpose the subnetworks connected were
identified, selecting the largest connected network as the target
network for analysis. The resulting network featured 12006 nodes
and 25316 edges.
Several centrality metrics were computed: cfbetweenness,
betweenness, closeness, cfcloseness, eigenvalue, degree and load.
Each of this centrality metric highlights a specific relevance property
of a node with regards to the whole flow through the network.
Descriptors explanations are summarized in Table 1.
Besides the network-based metrics, Twitter user’ parameters were
collected: followers, following and favorites so the relationships
with relevance metrics could be assessed.

2.4

Statistics

We applied several statistical tools to characterize users in terms of
the relevance metrics. We also implemented visualizations of
different variables and the network for a better understanding of
leading nodes characterization and topology.

3

RESULTS

3.1

Descriptors correlation

We compared the relevance in the network derived from the
centrality metrics with the user’ profile variables of Twitter: number
of followers, number of following and retweet count. Figure 1 shows
a scatter plots matrix among all variables. Principal diagonal of the
figure shows the distribution of each variable which are normally
characterized by a high concentration in low values and a very long
tail of the distribution. These distributions imply that few nodes
concentrate most part of the relevance within the network. More
surprisingly, same distributions are observed for Twitter user’
parameters such as number of followers or friends (following).

Table 1. List of descriptors

To compute centrality metrics the network described above was
filtered. First, users with a node degree (number of edges connected
to the note) less than a given threshold (experimentally set to 3) were
removed from the network as well as the edges connected to those
nodes. The reason of this filtering was to reduce computation cost as
algorithms for centrality metrics have a high computation cost and
also removed poorly connected nodes as the network built comes
from sparse data (retweets, mentions and quotes). However, it is
desirable to minimize the amount of filtering performed to study
large scale properties within the network. The resulting network
featured 15845 nodes and 26837 edges.

Figure 1. Matrix of histograms and scatter plots among all variables. Lleft
to right and from the top to the bottom: cfbetweenness, betweenness,
closeness, cfcloseness, eigenvalue, degree, load, followers, following,
favorites and status_count

The scatter plots shows that the is no significant correlation between
variables except for the pair betweenness and load centralities as it
is expected expected because they have similar definitions. This fact
is remarkable as different centrality metrics provide a different
perspective of leading nodes within the network and it does not
necessarily correlates with the amount of related users, but also in
the content dynamics.

3.2

Figure 4 shows the ranking resulting from using current flow
betweenness centrality as the reference. In this cases, the distribution
of this reference variable is smoother and shows a more gradual
behavior of leaders.

Ranking

Users were ranked using on variable as the reference. Figure 2 shows
the ranking resulting from using the eigenvalue centrality as the
reference. The values were saturated to the percentile 95 of the
distribution to improve visualization and avoid the effect of single
values with very out of range values. This visualization confirms the
lack of correlation between variables and the highly asymmetric
distribution of the descriptors.
Figure 3. Distribution of the ranked users for each descriptor.

Figure 3 summarizes the values of each leader for each descriptor
showing that even within the top ranked leaders there is a very large
variability. This means that some nodes are singular events within
the network that require further analysis to be interpreted, as they
could be leaders in society or just a product of the network
dynamics.

The occurrence of nodes with centrality values very far away from
the distribution average is an important phenomenon when study
social leaders. It has implications in the distribution of information
and misinformation. Each descriptors behaves differently as can be
observed from the comparison between Figure 2 (ranking by
eigenvalue) and Figure 4 (ranking by current flow betweenness).

Figure 2. Mosaic of bar plots for ranked users according to eigenvalue
centrality. Descriptors shown are: cfbetweenness, cfcloseness, eigenvalue,
followers, following, favorites and status_count. Each bar for each user.

Figure 4. Mosaic of bar plots for ranked users according to current flow
betweenness. Descriptors shown: cfbetweenness, cfcloseness, eigenvalue,
followers, following, favorites and status_count. Each bar for each user.

3.3

Network

To assess how the nodes with high relevance are distributed with
projected the network into graphs by selecting the subgraph of nodes
with a certain level of relevance (threshold on the network). The
resulting network graphs may not be therefore connected.
The eigenvalue-ranked graph shows high connectivity and very big
nodes (see Fig. 5). This is consistent with the definition of
eigenvalue centrality that highlights how a node is connected to
nodes that are also highly connected. This structure has implications
in the reinforcement of specific messages and information within
high connected clusters which can act as promoters of solutions or
may become lobbies of information.

By increasing the size of the graph more clusters can be observed,
specially in the eigenvalue-ranked network (Fig. 8). Some clusters
also appear for the current flow betweenness and current flow
closeness (see Fig.9 and 10). These clusters may have a key role in
establishing bridges between different communities of practice,
knowledge or region-determined groups. As the edges of the
network are characterized in terms of flows between users, these
bridges can be understood in terms of volume of information
between communities.

Figure 8. Graph of high-eigenvalue users (size 500).

Figure 5. Graph of high-eigenvalue users.

The current flow betweenness shows an unconnected graph which is
very interesting as decentralized nodes play a key role in
transporting information through the network (see Fig. 6). The
current flow closeness shows also an unconnected graph which
means that the social network is rather homogeneously distributed
overall with parallel communities of information that do not
necessarily interact with each other (see Fig. 7).
Figure 9. Graph of high-current flow betweenness users (size 500).

Figure 6. Graph of high-current flow betweenness users.
Figure 10. Graph of high-current flow closeness users (size 500).

4

Figure 7. Graph of high-current flow closeness users.

DISCUSSION

The distributions of the centrality metrics indicate that there are
some nodes with massive relevance. These nodes can be seen as
events within the flow of communication through the network [23]
that require further contextualization to be interpreted. These nodes
can propagate misinformation or make news or messages viral.
Further research is required to understand the cause of this massive

relevance events, for instance, if it is related to a relevant concept or
message or whether it is an emerging event of the network dynamics
and topology. Another way to assess these nodes is if they are
consistently behaving this way along time or they are a temporal
event. Also, it may be necessary to contextualize with the type of
content they normally spread to understand their exceptional
relevance.
Besides the existence of massive relevance nodes, the quantification
and understanding of the distribution of high relevant nodes has a lot
of potential applications to spread messages to reach a wide number
of users within the network. Current flow betweenness particularly
seems a good indicator to identify nodes to create a safety net in
terms of information and positive messages. The distribution of the
nodes could be approached for the general network or for different
layers or subnetworks, isolated depending on several factors: type of
interaction, type of content or some other behavioral pattern.
Experimental work is needed to test how a message either positive
or negative spreads when started at one of the relevant nodes or close
to the relevant nodes. For this purpose we are working towards
integrating a network of concepts and the network of leaders.
Understanding the dynamics of narratives and concept spreading is
key for a responsible use of social media for building up resilience
against crisis.
We also plan to make interactive graph visualization to browse the
relevance of the network and dynamically investigate how relevant
nodes are connected and how specific parts of the graph are ranked
to really understand the distribution of the relevance variables as
statistical parameters are not suitable to characterize a common
pattern.
It is necessary to make a dynamic ethical assessment of the potential
applications of this study. Understanding the network can be used to
control purposes. However, we consider it is necessary that social
media become the basis of pro-active response in terms of
conceptual content and information. Digital technologies must play
a key role on building up resilience and tackle crisis.

3.

Bakir, V.; McStay, A. Fake news and the economy of emotions:
Problems, causes, solutions. Digital journalism 2018, 6, 154-175.

4.

Allcott, H.; Gentzkow, M. Social media and fake news in the
2016 election. Journal of economic perspectives 2017, 31, 211236.

5.

Peters, M.A.; Jandrić, P.; McLaren, P. Viral modernity?
Epidemics, infodemics, and the ‘bioinformational’paradigm.
Taylor & Francis: 2020.

6.

Zarocostas, J. How to fight an infodemic. The Lancet 2020, 395,
676.

7.

Cinelli, M.; Quattrociocchi, W.; Galeazzi, A.; Valensise, C.M.;
Brugnoli, E.; Schmidt, A.L.; Zola, P.; Zollo, F.; Scala, A. The
covid-19

social

media

infodemic.

arXiv

preprint

arXiv:2003.05004 2020.
8.

Hua, J.; Shaw, R. Corona virus (Covid-19)“infodemic” and
emerging issues through a data lens: The case of china.
International journal of environmental research and public
health 2020, 17, 2309.

9.

Medford, R.J.; Saleh, S.N.; Sumarsono, A.; Perl, T.M.; Lehmann,
C.U. An" Infodemic": Leveraging High-Volume Twitter Data to
Understand Public Sentiment for the COVID-19 Outbreak.
medRxiv 2020.

10.

Vaezi, A.; Javanmard, S.H. Infodemic and risk communication in
the era of CoV-19. Advanced Biomedical Research 2020, 9.

11.

Militello, L.G.; Patterson, E.S.; Bowman, L.; Wears, R.
Information flow during crisis management: challenges to
coordination in the emergency operations center. Cognition,
Technology & Work 2007, 9, 25-31.

12.

Greenwood, F.; Howarth, C.; Escudero Poole, D.; Raymond,
N.A.; Scarnecchia, D.P. The signal code: A human rights
approach to information during crisis. Harvard, MA 2017.

13.

Gao, L.; Song, C.; Gao, Z.; Barabási, A.-L.; Bagrow, J.P.; Wang,
D. Quantifying information flow during emergencies. Scientific
reports 2014, 4, 3997.

14.

Morales, A.; Borondo, J.; Losada, J.C.; Benito, R.M. Measuring
political polarization: Twitter shows the two sides of Venezuela.
Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 2015,

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the Center of Innovation and Technology for
Development at Technical University Madrid for support and
valuable input, specially to Xose Ramil, Sara Romero and Mónica
del Moral. Thanks also to Pedro J. Zufiria, Juan Garbajosa,
Alejandro Jarabo and Carlos García-Mauriño for collaboration.

25, 033114.
15.

Pierri, F.; Ceri, S. False news on social media: A data-driven
survey. ACM SIGMOD Record 2019, 48, 18-27.

16.

MacAvaney, S.; Yao, H.-R.; Yang, E.; Russell, K.; Goharian, N.;
Frieder, O. Hate speech detection: Challenges and solutions. PloS
one 2019, 14.

17.

Ghanem, B.; Rosso, P.; Rangel, F. An emotional analysis of false
information in social media and news articles. ACM Transactions

REFERENCES

on Internet Technology (TOIT) 2020, 20, 1-18.
18.

Popat, K.; Mukherjee, S.; Yates, A.; Weikum, G. DeClarE:
Debunking fake news and false claims using evidence-aware

1.

Shu, K.; Sliva, A.; Wang, S.; Tang, J.; Liu, H. Fake news
detection on social media: A data mining perspective. ACM

2.

deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06416 2018.
19.

Ruchansky, N.; Seo, S.; Liu, Y. Csi: A hybrid deep model for fake

SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 2017, 19, 22-36.

news detection. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the 2017 ACM

Lazer, D.M.; Baum, M.A.; Benkler, Y.; Berinsky, A.J.; Greenhill,

on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management; pp.

K.M.; Menczer, F.; Metzger, M.J.; Nyhan, B.; Pennycook, G.;

797-806.

Rothschild, D. The science of fake news. Science 2018, 359,
1094-1096.

20.

Singhania, S.; Fernandez, N.; Rao, S. 3han: A deep neural
network for fake news detection. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Neural Information Processing; pp. 572-581.

21.

Miritello, G.; Moro, E.; Lara, R. Dynamical strength of social ties
in information spreading. Physical Review E 2011, 83, 045102.

22.

Iribarren, J.L.; Moro, E. Impact of human activity patterns on the
dynamics of information diffusion. Physical review letters 2009,
103, 038702.

23.

Morales, A.J.; Borondo, J.; Losada, J.C.; Benito, R.M. Efficiency
of human activity on information spreading on Twitter. Social
Networks 2014, 39, 1-11.

24.

Borondo, J.; Morales, A.; Benito, R.; Losada, J. Multiple leaders
on a multilayer social media. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2015,
72, 90-98.

25.

Balkundi, P.; Kilduff, M. The ties that lead: A social network
approach to leadership. The leadership quarterly 2006, 17, 419439.

26.

Bodendorf, F.; Kaiser, C. Detecting opinion leaders and trends in
online social networks. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM workshop on Social web search and mining; pp. 65-68.

27.

De Brún, A.; McAuliffe, E. Exploring the potential for collective
leadership in a newly established hospital network. Journal of
Health Organization and Management 2020.

28.

Fransen,

K.;

Van

Puyenbroeck,

S.;

Loughead,

T.M.;

Vanbeselaere, N.; De Cuyper, B.; Broek, G.V.; Boen, F. Who
takes the lead? Social network analysis as a pioneering tool to
investigate shared leadership within sports teams. Social
networks 2015, 43, 28-38.
29.

Goyal, A.; Bonchi, F.; Lakshmanan, L.V. Discovering leaders
from community actions. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the
17th

ACM

conference

on

Information

and

knowledge

management; pp. 499-508.
30.

Iakhnis, E.; Badawy, A. Networks of Power: Analyzing World
Leaders

Interactions

arXiv:1907.11283 2019.

on

Social

Media.

arXiv

preprint

