Making Sense of the Current Covid 19 Situation and Suggesting a
tailored Release Strategy through Modeling And Simulation
Case Study: Casablanca, Morocco
Mohamed Amine Chadi
LISI Laboratory, Computer Science Department, FSSM,
Cadi Ayyad University,
Marrakech, Morocco
m.aminechadi@gmail.com
Abstract— Since the very first days of announcing
Covid 19 as a global pandemic, researchers around the
world from different backgrounds and organizations
including national governments and the World Health
Organization (WHO) have extensively begun using
Modeling and Simulation (M&S) techniques in deciding on
the optimal strategies in order to mitigate the public health
and economical effects of Covid-19. In this paper, we
present our results from applying M&S on the city of
Casablanca, Morocco to comprehend (i): How it can be
relatively easy or difficult for such pandemic to penetrate
to the studied region (country, city, district, etc.). (ii): How
it can spread relatively fast or slow within that region. And
finally (iii): What is the optimal strategy for containing
and mitigating the propagation of the disease while still
keeping the economy as near to normal as possible.

Hajar Mousannif
LISI Laboratory, Computer Science Department, FSSM,
Cadi Ayyad University,
Marrakech, Morocco
hajar.mousannif@gmail.com
to this subject is what guided the plan of this article to be as
straight-forward, concise and practical as it can be.
Therefore, section 2 is a brief presentation of the studied
region (the city of Casablanca), its eight districts and some
of their socio-economical characteristics. Section 3 discusses
the current situation of Covid 19 in Casablanca. Section 4 is
a walkthrough the simulations techniques used to explain the
previously presented pandemic’s situation. And finally in
section 5 we suggest (what we believe to be) an optimal
strategy for the after lockdown time as the Moroccan
government is planning for a release in 20 May 2020.

Keywords— Covid-19; Modeling and simulation;
Lockdown-release strategy; Morocco, Casablanca
I. INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 is certainly one of the worst pandemics ever. As
of 20 April 2020, the virus has generated over 2 million of
confirmed infected cases and 150 thousand deaths [1]. In the
absence of a vaccine, classical epidemiological measures
such as testing in order to isolate the infected people,
quarantine and social distancing are ways to reduce the
growing speed of new infections as much as possible and as
soon as possible. But, the economical harm of these
measurements is estimated to be much more than that of the
economical crisis of 2008 [2]. On the other hand, some
studies [3] suggest that quarantine and social distancing
measures might be needed for as long as 18 months, and will
only be turned on and off alternatively during that period.
In order to get a better understanding and make quick and
optimal reactions to the current situation, many researchers
have decided to exploit the various M&S tools and
techniques [4][5][6].
In this paper, we aim to explain through M&S the current
situation of the Covid 19 pandemic in Casablanca, Morocco,
in order to reinforce the “so far” efficient measures, and also
suggest a context tailored optimal strategy of release in order
to contain and mitigate the spread of the virus while keeping
the economy as near to normal as possible.
The urgency of the current situation and the fact that the
targeted reader is meant to be from any background related

Figure 1: Map of Casablanca city and its eight districts
II. ABOUT THE CITY OF CASABLANCA
Casablanca is the metropolitan economical capital of
Morocco, most densely populated and currently, it holds the
highest number of infections. Casablanca has eight districts
(see figure 1), each district in Casablanca has its own
demographic characteristics such as population size, density
and dynamics but they don’t differ that much. What might
be the main difference between them is the type of each
district (industrial, downtown, etc.)). But to summarize all
briefly, there are three categories:
1st category: Casa Anfa district serves as the city's economic
and administrative center, cultural identifier, and historical
birthplace.
2nd category: The three districts Ain Sbaa, Ain Chock and
Bernoussi are host to lots of industrial areas and businesses.

3rd category: the remaining four districts: My Rchid, Sidi
Otmane, Mers Sultan and Hay Hassani are mostly popular
middle and working-class districts.
Each category of districts maps into one of three classes, this
classification is based on the number of transportations
quantity and means provided for a certain district and also
on the number of reasons people would go there, such as
super market, work, hospitals, etc. which can be found in the
official website of the administrative division of Casablanca
here [7].
-Highly attractive: that is a district that people from all
other districts go to for lots of reasons, in this category, only
Casa Anfa district is put here.
- Moderately attractive: these are districts that present a
relatively smaller number of reasons to visit; mostly in our
case is the number of companies existing, this category
holds Ain Chock, Bernoussi and Ain Sbaa districts.
- Slightly attractive: this category is for the last four
districts My Rchid, Sidi Otmane, Mers Sultan and Hay
Hassani.
III. THE CURRENT SITUATION OF COVID 19 IN

CASABLANCA

And here is the choropleth map version of the above table:
The choropleth map (figure 2) is utilized in order to easily
represent the variation of the infection rate across the eight
districts of the city of Casablanca. It is actually what made
us question the hidden reasons why some districts are much
more impacted than others even if they are near to each
other. For example, Mers Sultan district happened to be
located right between the two most infected districts among
all, yet it is surprisingly at the bottom of the ranking table.
IV. MAKING SENSE OF THE DATA
1) First simulation:
Surely, by now everyone interested in modeling and
simulation of Covid 19 has seen the Washington Post article
by Harry Stevens [8]. Inspired by it, we considered each
district in our previous map (figure 1) as a box containing
100 agents bouncing around randomly with 50% immobility.
If there is one thing we should learn from this simulation, is
that the number of infected people next day depends mainly
on: (i) the initial number of infectious people and (ii) the
contact rate (i.e. density and movement rate).

The table below shows the number of the infected people in
each district as of 19 April 2020.
Even though the earlier cases were reported in Sidi Otmane
and My Rchid districts, after 6 weeks now, both of the two
districts have very low number of cases (See table.1).
Table 1: the cumulated number of confirmed cases per
district as of 19 April 2020

Figure 3: the propagation of an epidemic proportional to
the contact rate and initial number of infected people

One thing to mention, this is not because people from these
two districts respected the lockdown measurements the
most. In fact the number of reported violations of the
measurements is the highest among those two districts more
than others. So why this is the case!
Given that all districts have quite similar demographics,
everyone expect that the one that starts first should be at the
top of the ranking list.

2) Second simulation:
a) Definition:
Connection rate: is essentially how much important is a

district to people from other districts, this can be
estimated from how much vital sectors (hospitals,
companies, businesses, etc.) are located within this
district, adding transportation’s destination data, which
both are available at [7] the official website of the
administrative division of Casablanca.
b) Simulation:
Here, we consider that all districts have same number of
population (100) and same number of initial infectious
people (3).
The box with the largest border line is the most
connected/attractive district (In our case, it is Casa Anfa).
Then there are three districts with thinner border line, those
are work areas (Ain Sbaa, Ain Chock and Bernoussi). The
other four boxes are the remaining districts that are
considered to have very low connection rate.

Figure 2: the choropleth map of the distribution of the
infection rate in each district of Casablanca

2) The lockdown-release strategy:
1-A new wave of infections after Release from lockdowns
is the "most probable" scenario!
Unless, either the virus ran out of people to infect or a
vaccine is available, no matter how much people respects
social distancing measures, at the end, if only one person
was infected and had not been identified, the wave of
infections will start again. Many M&S driven studies
[11][12][13] predict that any non careful release after
lockdowns will result in a new wave of infections
2- How to prevent that:

Figure 4: evolution of an epidemic in city's center, work
areas and popular areas
Because the city’s center receives the 3 infected from each
other region, city’s center is now with 3x7 = 27 infected.
Being as dynamic as such places, the contact rate tend to be
much higher, inducing a high infection rate per period. Now
Casa Anfa should be shut down. Consequently, economy
will decline, thus no budget to buy health equipments and
eventually the mortality rate will get very high. And same
logic goes for the work places, it just would be a little lower
because not everyone works in the same place but instead
the effect is distributed among all three districts.
Also, the contact rate is relatively low in the four popular
districts of the third category. This is due to the fact that
people that are living in these areas and have regular jobs,
their job’s place is most likely located either in the city’s
center or in the three districts with work areas.
Therefore, a considerable number of people spend most of
the daytime in other four districts and not in their districts,
and only after 6PM that they return. And because of
lockdown measures, after 6PM no one is allowed to stay out,
thus, the coming back people goes right to their homes after
spending the whole daytime in their work places.

As presented by the 2018 Nobel Prize laureate, economist
Paul Romer [14], testing and isolating everyone every short
period of time (each week or even each day) is certainly the
best straight-forward strategy to prevent the society from a
new wave of infections. But given the fact that it’s still a
debate whether it is feasible or not in terms of the cost
needed to make it in the United States, it is certainly not
feasible to make it with that scale in a developing country
such as Morocco. Thus, in the following, we present an
adapted hybrid incremental strategy for lockdownrelease for the Moroccan-like countries.
a) Identify highly attractive areas (with highest
connection rate):
In the majority of cases, these are areas where big
companies, businesses and commercial centers are located,
which means that they present a high contact rate. In
addition, these areas are critical to the maintenance of the
global economy, therefore identifying them can certainly be
of huge benefit in mitigating the spread of the virus as well
as maintaining the economy.
In our case, the area that presented the highest connection
rate was Casa Anfa. This is because of the number of
businesses, companies, government and private hospitals,
high-quality education private schools, etc. This assumption
was later verified by analyzing the transportation data in the
official website of the administrative division of Casablanca
[7]. The majority of transportation means from all other
districts are those that have a destination to Casa Anfa
(figure 4).

V. DISCUSSING THE OPTIMAL LOCKDOWN-RELEASE

STRAREGY
1) Context:
While some research [9] argues that a young-workforce
release would lead to substantial economic and societal
benefits without enormous health costs to the country, others
[10] suggest a community-based incremental approach to the
easing of lockdowns, tailored to demographic and social
stratifications of risk.
Here, we present a more flexible mix of the above
propositions with slight changes and added tips in order to
fit the context of a developing country like Morocco.

Figure 5: Map to network for the most attractive district
(Casa Anfa)

b) Test, Isolate and trace within the identified areas:
Until the Moroccan authorities have a sufficient amount of
testing and isolation hotels capacity alongside with a contact
tracing system for a targeted and non wasted test; not for
the whole population; but only for people who live and/or
work in the previously identified essential areas for the
global economy, we believe that Morocco cannot reopen
without having a new wave of infections as the most
probable scenario.
Once we are pretty sure the identified areas are totally virusfree, we should not allow any visitors to come-in unless they
are confirmedly tested negative for the maintenance of the
public health of these areas, as well as the global economy.
c) Generalize for other cities of the country gradually:
Implementing this strategy in other metropolitan cities of the
country an incremental manner is highly recommended since
it will much more strengthen the global economy until it is
near normal even with this infectious disease hanging
around.
Another consideration might be to release the youth workers
(20-30 years old) that are living apart from vulnerable
people such as their parents, especially if they represent a
significant proportion.
d) Now that the economy is "near" normal, what’s next?
At this point in time, we shall begin releasing gradually
people from the other areas while still keeping some of the
essential good practices and measurements such as wearing
masks and hand washing. Even if someone was tested
positive now, we know for sure that this infected person did
not go to the identified economical areas while he was
infected (because we test anyone coming in).

the spread of the virus while still maintaining the global
economy as near to normal as possible.
Finally, we hope that this article can make some
contributions to the world's response in general and
Moroccan’s response in particular to this epidemic and give
some references for future research.
Future research will focus on applying the same approach
described here for the prediction of the epidemic’s evolution
in other Moroccan and international regions (mainly cities)
as well as adding other features related to optimal lockdown
release strategies.

Important note :
This manuscript reports an early version of the model and
results, while deeper analysis is in progress.
We wish to disseminate this work as soon as possible, in
the context of the current Covid-19 urgency in general and for
our country of Morocco in particulier. We will continue to add
more detailed description and literature review in stages.
An interactive version of the simulations used in this paper
is systematically published in :
https://covid.mousannifhajar.com/
And the source code is available on github at :
https://github.com/amine179/Covid19_Morocco

REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, coronaviruse situation
report, https://www.who.int/docs/default-

source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200420sitrep-91-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=fcf0670b_4
[2] World Economic Outlook, The Great Lockdown,
Chapter 1, April 2020,

In addition, even in the worst-case scenario, if an infected
person transmitted the disease to lots of people, we now
would have a good economy to assess the health system.

https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/
2020/04/14/weo-april-2020

e) Argument about the budget:

[3] Neil Ferguson, Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and
healthcare demand, DOI: 10.25561/77482, 16 March 2020

Surely, this strategy would require a big budget at the
beginning for buying a large amount of testing kits (or
making them locally), but let’s think about it for a second, it
is far much better to spend 1 Billion “for once”, than to keep
spending 400 Million each time for multiple lockdowns and
releases loop.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK:
In this paper, through a M&S driven analysis of the existing
data of Casablanca city epidemic situation, we studied the
main factors affecting the spread of COVID-19, leading us
to determine three parameters as the most important ones:
the number of infected people now, the contact rate and
connection rate.
What’s more, is that our models helped us in inferring the
reasons why some regions might be more susceptible for
easy penetration and rapid spread of the virus than other
regions. Not only that, but it also helped us to suggest what
might be the optimal policy in order to contain and mitigate

[4] Christine S.M. Currie et al. How simulation modeling
can help reduce the impact of COVID-19, DOI:
10.1080/17477778.2020.1751570, 31 March 2020
[5] Cesar Bordehore et al. Understanding COVID-19
spreading through simulation modeling and scenarios
comparison: preliminary results, DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.18538.47046, Preprint March 2020
[6] Spiros Denaxas et al. Clinical academic research in the
time of Corona: a simulation study in England and a call for
action, DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.14.20065417, Preprint April
2020
[7] http://www.casablancacity.ma/
[8]https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020

/world/corona-simulator/

[9] Andrew J. Oswald et al. The Case for Releasing the
Young from Lockdown: A Briefing Paper for Policymakers,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340443646, 05
April 2020
[10] Benjamin J Ryan et al. Incremental Community-Based
Exit Strategies for Initiating and Removing Covid-19
Lockdowns, https://apcss.org/security-nexus/ 02 April
2020
[11] R. Porath, Monte-Carlo simulations to avoid a 2nd
wave of Covid-19, Preprint, 06 April 2020
[12] Thomas Rawson et al. Second waves, social distancing,
and the spread of COVID-19 across America,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020 .04.29.20084517

[13] Karl J. Friston et al. Second waves, social distancing,
and the spread of COVID-19 across America,
arXiv:2004.13017v1, 26 Apr 2020

[14] Paul Romer, Roadmap to Responsibly Reopen
America, https://roadmap.paulromer.net/paulromer-

roadmap-report.pdf

