CoVista: A Unified View on Privacy Sensitive Mobile Contact
Tracing Effort

arXiv:2005.13164v1 [cs.CR] 27 May 2020

David Culler, Prabal Dutta, Gabe Fierro, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Nathan Pemberton, Johann
Schleier-Smith, K. Shankari, Alvin Wan, and Thomas Zachariah
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Governments around the world have become increasingly frustrated with tech giants dictating public
health policy. The software created by Apple and Google enables individuals to track their own potential exposure through collated exposure notifications. However, the same software prohibits location
tracking, denying key information needed by public health officials for robust contract tracing. This information is needed to treat and isolate COVID-19 positive people, identify transmission hotspots, and
protect against continued spread of infection. In this article, we present two simple ideas: the lighthouse and the covid-commons that address the needs of public health authorities while preserving the
privacy-sensitive goals of the Apple and google exposure notification protocols.

1

Introduction

Apple and Google have adopted a decentralized approach to mobile contact tracing that prioritizes individual
privacy [1]. Under the Apple-Google Exposure Notification (AGEN) protocol (see Fig. 1), individual phones
determine if the user has been exposed, without revealing the identity of the infected individual and where the
contact event took place The AGEN protocol is related to contemporaneously proposed protocols including
PACT and DP-3t [2, 3]. Like these other protocols, the AGEN protocol does not use location information.
Instead, it relies on the Bluetooth radios present on all modern phones to detect proximity with others. Beyond
not collecting Protected Health Information (PHI), the decentralized approach retains the non-PHI on the phone,
allowing individuals to determine risk locally on their device.
Governments and public health authorities want to understand where and how the disease is spreading, so
they can take preventative measures. They also want to be able to use mobile contact tracing to augment existing
manual contact tracing efforts. With these goals in mind, governments advocate for a centralized approach,
whether national or regional, where they maintain records of each persons locations and interactions. This allows
governments to determine exposures and notify people directly, as timeliness reduces spread. While centralized
contact tracing may offer utility critical to re-opening the worlds economy, it raises profound concerns for civil
liberties and personal privacy. Government efforts that avoid reliance on the industrial Exposure Notification
offerings have run into a host of failings, including reliability, power drain, interoperability, and participation.
Apple and Google have taken an unprecedented position – essentially dictating public policy, not just by
requiring the decentralized approach, but also by prohibiting contact tracing apps from collecting location information. Further, they are restricting access to the new contact tracing APIs to national governments and
permitting only one app per country or region. This decision circumvents the local governments, tribal organizations, and community health services that are often most aware of existing manual contact tracing efforts and
1

RED MEANS “DIAGNOSED” OR “EXPOSED”

BLUE MEANS HOLDS A PHONE THAT CAN BROADCAST AND RECEIVE ANONYMOUSLY

123

How Contact
Tracing Works
123
123

Personally-identifiable information is never
shared, or even collected. Instead, users broadcast
and save random numbers. Protect privacy by not
collecting data.

figure by CoVista group at University of California, Berkeley. covista.org

901
123

123
987
456 012
435

901
123

123
987
456 012
435

Avery uses a seed to Jordan saves all Avery confirmed Avery uploads the Jordan downloads
create, broadcast a nearby random COVID+ by health seed used for their “diagnosed” seeds to
random number.
numbers.
professional random numbers. check exposure.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 1: Apple-Google Exposure Notification (AGEN) Protocol Overview.
the needs of their communities. Meanwhile, governments contact tracing apps have failed due to restrictions
imposed by AGEN.
In this article, we present two simple measures that enable the AGEN protocol to support manual contact
tracing efforts, provide visibility into the spread of disease, and return authority to local communities all while
preserving privacy within the Apple and Google framework.
1. Treat places as people. Endow public places with the same privacy-preserving technology we used to
monitor exposure for individuals.
2. Nation-scale data, not apps and processes. Build a common backend for the AGEN protocol that spans
apps and governmental boundaries.
In the rest of this article, we describe these two simple measures and how they both improve contact tracing
while also preserving individual privacy.

Lighthouse: Treat Places as People
If we treat public places as people, we can use the AGEN protocol to (a) understand COVID-19 exposures across
space, (b) integrate with manual contact tracing, and (c) do so with the same privacy-sensitive protocol. To treat
places as people in AGEN, simply attach mobile phones or specialized low-cost beacons to publicly accessible
places (e.g., county services, stores, buses). Like a lighthouse, these devices help communicate risk associated
with places. Well-positioned, they can offer robust proximity detection, can detect their exposure, and the can
convey aspects the risk that represents.
By choosing to share their locally computed exposure risk with public health authorities through the AGEN
protocol, owners of publicly-accessible places can aid in mitigating virus spread. Alternatively, if a place is
identified through traditional, manual contact tracing, the place can still anonymously participate in the AGEN
protocol, notifying others without revealing where they were exposed. Treating places as people empowers
stewards of public spaces to collaborate with public health authorities to help mitigate the spread of disease
without jeopardizing the privacy of patrons or the reputation of the public spaces. This procedure can facilitate detection of exposure from a non-participating individual while improving anonymity over manual contact
2

Others

.


Public Transit


bus, subway, train,
metro

Businesses


Publicly-Accessible 


factory, office,
bank, parks

shop, restaurant, mall,
supermarket, beach

Health Services

hospital, public health
office

.


Community Services:
post office, county office

figure by CoVista group at University of California, Berkeley. covista.org

Figure 2: Lighthouses Overview. Lighthouses can extend the AGEN protocol to physical places
tracing methods. Going even further, such places could provide other means of beaconing that do not involve
smartphones, such as QR code displays, codes on receipts and so on.

COVID Commons: A Nation-scale Data Backend
Rather than one app per nation, a better solution would be to provide a common privacy-preserving data exchange across apps and administrative boundaries a Commons. This would allow societal structures and innovation, rather than corporate policy, to determine how the app ecosystem should evolve. It is very likely that
participation will be greatest if the apps are available through local organizations (e.g., tribal organization, university campus) that individuals trust. A common privacy-preserving data exchange is already compatible with
the AGEN protocol.

COVID

Users upload only random numbers to a common
backend after receiving permission f rom a local
authority. No personally-identifiable information is

Commons

required for exposure notifications to work.
figure by CoVista group at University of California, Berkeley. covista.org

BJC

BJC

123

123
456

987

012

435
Diagnosis at local

PHA creates

User chooses whether or

Public Health

authorization

not to upload their seeds,

Authority (PHA)

token

using token.

1

3

2

COVID Commons

4

standard interface and shared backend

local policy and procedure

Figure 3: Caption
When an individual tests positive and they engage in a conventional contact tracing interview with a public
health professional, the professional obtains an authorization so the individual, on an opt-in basis, can share their

3

anonymous exposure information. Public health professionals serve to protect the integrity of the information in
the Commons without exposing any patient data or medical data.
Their actions are quite similar to publishing counts of cases, statistics and demographic information, as is
done today. The Commons might be hosted by governmental or NGO structures, based on national or regional
policy. A diverse and innovative app ecosystem can grow to meet the needs of individuals and agencies.
In the remainder of this article we describe both these technical solutions in greater detail. We have organized
each section to be relatively self-contained.

2

Background on Privacy-Sensitive Mobile Contact Tracing

The key building block for Privacy-Sensitive Mobile Contact Tracing (PS-MCT) is a subtle combination of radio
protocols, cryptography, and risk-calculation. Phones have a short-range radio, Bluetooth, used to connect to
nearby devices. To make those connections it periodically broadcasts tiny bits of information. The PS-MCT
protocols leverages this short-range background broadcast to resolve nearby individuals.
In the Apple-Google Exposure Notification (AGEN) protocol, each phone generates a daily secret key called
a Temporary Exposure Key (TEK). Then every 15 minutes the phone uses the TEK to generate a new 16 byte
Rolling Proximity Identifier (RPI). The RPI sequence is generated using a crytographic hash function and it
therefore caries no information about the source individual. The current RPI is then continuously broadcast
every few hundered milliseconds. All phones log the RPIs they hear for future exposure analysis. Because the
RPI is continuously changing, it also cannot be easily tracked.
When someone tests positive they can anonymously publish the daily keys (TEKs) from the days when they
were contagious. The confirmed positive collection of TEKs is called a Diagnosis Key in the AGEN protocol.
The Diagnois Keys are published by sharing them with a trusted and server whcich publishes the TEKs for
download. Others can obtain these keys and use the same cryptographic hash functions to recreate the sequence
of RPIs and determine if they encountered any infected individuals. This entire process is accomplished within
the Android and iOS operating systems with government sanctioned apps being responsible for authenticating
infected individuals and, with user permission, publishing the keys.
It’s important to note the distinction between policy and mechanism. The AGEN protocol (and the extensions
proposed in this paper) provide a mechanism to detect and notify users about exposure risk, but it is up to public
health authorities to define what constitutes an exposure. This distinction is explored in more detail in section 4.

3

Lighthouses: Treating Places as People

Despite their promise, there remains significant concern around the efficacy of privacy-preserving contact tracing
and exposure notification protocols. For one thing, not everyone has access to a mobile phone, and many that do
may be unwilling to participate (even Singapore only achieved 20% adoption [4]). This is a serious concern as
the probability of a successful detection grows quadratically with participation [2]. Of course, manual contact
tracing does not have this issue and remains the gold standard. Will these two techniques exist in isolation or
will they interact synergistically? Finally, bluetooth contact detection is limited in range and time; it cannot
detect many important forms of transmission like surfaces or HVAC systems [5].

3.1

Treating Places as People

There is a simple extension to mobile contact tracing that can help address these issues. The idea is rooted
in centuries old maritime signaling. To navigate at night, ships use signal lights, much like our Bluetooth
beacons, to identify and safely navigate around nearby ships. However, to safely sail at night, ships also rely on
lighthouses, strategically placed beacons, to identify and safely navigate around key landmarks. It is this second
4

form of beacon, the lighthouse, that is needed to address several of the key limitations in privacy-sensitive mobile
contact tracing.

3.2

What is an Exposure Notification Lighthouse?

A privacy-sensitive exposure notification lighthouse is a device (e.g., a mobile phone or even a smart sticker)
deployed in a public space following the same privacy sensitive mechanisms as individuals. Figure 4 gives a few
examples of what lighthouses could look like. Much like the maritime lighthouse, contact tracing lighthouses
can be used to inform others of potential exposures associated with public spaces discovered through manual
contact tracing. A contact tracing lighthouse can also log passing beacons to inform owners and public health
authorities of exposure risks. However, because the lighthouse follows the same privacy-sensitive protocols as
individuals, it retains all of the privacy guarantees of the existing protocols. Moreover, by installing contact
tracing lighthouses in participating public spaces ranging from stores and restaurants to schools and buses, we
introduce a privacy sensitive mechanism to bridge manual contact tracing with mobile contact tracing while also
giving public health authorities the ability to gain visibility into the spread of disease while preserving individual
privacy.

42ABC17

(a) Existing Devices: Easily deployed immediately but expensive to
deploy to new places. They can also
be unreliable when unattended.

(b) Dedicated Devices: Cheap and
reliable. They will require new development and can be tricky to place
correctly.

(c) No Device: Allows those without
the app or even a mobile device to
participate. They may be easier to
deidentify and require manual effort
from users to check.

wikimedia commons Travelarz CCASA 3.0

Figure 4: Lighthouses can be deployed using a number of different devices with varying tradeoffs. Each of these
examples is feasible to deploy in the near future.

3.3

What Do We Get From Lighthouses?

Figure 5 walks through an example of how lighthouses could work in a typical case. Let’s explore some of these
benefits in more detail.
3.3.1

Bridging Place and Mobile

The contact tracing lighthouse empowers stewards of public spaces (e.g., shop owners, school administrators) to
collaborate with public health authorities to help mitigate the spread of disease without jeopardizing the privacy
of patrons or the reputation of the public spaces. When an individual is tested and confirmed, the manual
5

BLUE MEANS HOLDS A PHONE THAT CAN BROADCAST AND RECEIVE ANONYMOUSLY

Treating Places
as People
8 AM

11 AM

Avery leaves for
work.

Boards 11 AM
bus to work

RED MEANS “DIAGNOSED” OR “EXPOSED”

Avery can still help their community without
downloading the app. They report locations
to only their doctor, who “diagnoses” places
Avery has been. Avery is always anonymous.
figure by CoVista group at University of California, Berkeley. covista.org

2 PM

Near app users at
2 PM shop

5 PM

8 PM

Other app users
board 5 PM bus.
Avery goes to the
health
professional, who
anonymously
marks lighthouses.

11 AM bus marked
“diagnosed”.

2 PM shop marked
“diagnosed”.

5 PM bus marked
“diagnosed”.

Everyone can now check exposure--those that came into direct (2 PM shop) and indirect (5PM bus) contact with Avery.

Figure 5: An example scenario of an affected individual (Avery) and a stranger (Bernie) that may have been
exposed. Even if Avery is not an app user, the doctor can still notify the shop and bus of their exposure;
lighthouses connect manual and mobile contact tracing. Lighthouses bridge place and mobile by allowing
the bus and shop to notice their exposure and mark themselves as exposed, even if Avery did not remember
visiting them. They also enabled less direct forms of exposure by notifying Bernie of there potential exposure,
even though they were not on the bus at the same time as Avery. Finally, lighthouses went beyond the standard
mobile contact tracing benefits because the shop and bus can track how often they are exposed, at what times,
and even where in their location (if they have multiple lighthouses installed).

6

contact tracing interview process begins. One of the first questions asked is Can you recall where you have been
that might have exposed others?. A place, unlike an individual, has a large set of explicit relationships with
its institutional environment - business license, health department approvals, chamber of commerce, etc. The
interview process routinely seeks to gather information about places. But often there is little the place can do to
help. With its lighthouse, it has a very simple way to provide assistance without undue impact on its reputation.
Just like a person, it can check its own potential exposures. And, like a person, it can anonymously publish its
own random numbers as COVID positive so that people can use them for detecting their exposure risk. This is
especially useful if the individual who tested positive was not using an app that broadcasts their own sequence
of random numbers. Unlike a persons phone, stationary lighthouses can be carefully positioned to avoid issues
like weak or unreliable broadcast that mobile phones can face. Finally, the public place may also take other
measures in assisting its local health authority in detecting hot spots, such as informing them of the exposure
risk that it observes.
3.3.2

Indirect Transmission

The lighthouse can be used to address forms of indirect transmission that are not captured in the existing privacysensitive mobile contact tracing efforts. If a COVID-positive individual enters a bus and touches or sneezes on
several surfaces they could potentially infect others over the next several hours, long after they have left the bus.
Air conditioning systems have also been implicated in spreading the virus over large distances [5]. Existing
wireless protocols will fail to capture these forms of transmission since they rely on close, contemporaneous radio proximity with the positive individual. However, with the introduction of the lighthouse, the bus or restaurant
can automatically determine that it was exposed and choose to anonymously publish its own random number
sequence.
3.3.3

Beyond Mobile Contact Tracing

Finally, the lighthouse can also extend the privacy-sensitive mobile contact tracing protocol beyond the smartphone. Places provide channels of communication to individuals that complement smartphones. Simple lighthouse codes might be included on printed receipts or handed to customers so that a person without contact
tracing on their phone might use such code they have received to privately check for exposure on public websites somewhat like they would if they used such an app.

3.4

Lighthouse Privacy

There are legitimate privacy interests for places, as there are for people. Businesses may fear irrational boycotts
or loss of reputation, and there are risks of perpetuating prejudice or stigma against neighborhoods or ethnic
groups (already a growing problem [6]). The good news is that lighthouses inherit the privacy protecting characteristics of the AGEN protocol. In their simplest form, they are phones running ordinary apps, different only
because they live in a fixed place rather than in purse or pocket.
Lighthouses can complement manual contact tracing by offering greater confidentiality in situations where
people cross paths in stigmatized locations. For example, investigators following up on a recent case cluster
associated with nightclubs in Korea catering to the LGBTQ community have struggled to contact attendees who
are afraid of being outed or facing discrimination [7]. Lighthouses can fill such gaps without requiring or relying
on anyone, even an affected person, to disclose their location history.
A potential concern about lighthouses is that internal state, if combined and aggregated, could be used to
undermine some of the privacy guarantees of AGEN. Indeed, with a sufficiently large deployment of lighthouses
and centralized collection of recieved RPIs, it would be possible to resolve the locations of all the COVID
positive individuals. We therefore stress that each lighthouse must follow the existing decentralized protocol for
risk assessment in which only risk is aggregated and not the underlying RPIs.
7

To address some of these security concerns, it is possible to deploy transmit only (passive) lighthouses
which could be used to anonymously notify others of exposure without listening for RPIs. This eliminates
the risk of resolving COVID positive individuals locations but also limits visibility into where the disease is
spreading.

4

Covid Commons: Unified Contact Tracing With Many Apps

Standardizing on an exposure notification protocol such as AGEN is crucial to achieving the critical mass of
participation required to make such an approach effective (estimated to be at least 80% for a city of 1 million
individuals [8]) and privacy preserving. Apple and Google, as producers of the two dominant smartphone OSes,
are uniquely positioned to bring these capabilities to nearly every smartphone and have engineered the AGEN
protocol to that end. Providing an implementation of the protocol through an OS upgrade would eliminate the
fragmentation of the protocol preventing sufficient adoption. However, standardizing the proximity detection
protocol is just part of the solution.
Due to concerns over potential misuse of the capabilities of the proximity detection protocol and location
tracking features of modern smartphones, Apple and Google have announced that access to the SDK for AGEN
to “public health agencies” [9]. The realization of this policy has evolved to essentially mean “one app per state.”
Centralizing the apps around state governments means that tracing efforts are not limited to local jurisdictional
boundaries. However, the public health authorities responsible for testing and tracing often operate at a more
local level [10, 11].
The fundamental issue with this policy is a failure to distinguish between ownership of the required repository of “diagnosis keys” and the applications that produce and utilize them. The repository contains keys that
correspond to times when diagnosed individuals may have interacted with others and must therefore be publicfacing so that individuals, via AGEN-compatible apps, can download the keys and determine their own exposure
risk. The keys uploaded to the repository must be limited to those that have been authorized by a public health
authority through some testing and interview process. In the U.S., public health measures such as contact tracing
and case reporting are carried out at a county or city level through individually executed processes, in coordination with state and national law and policy. However, health authorities do not generally have the technical,
human or financial resources to produce the required app and also stand up and maintain such a public-facing
data service. This is even less tenable during a pandemic, when such resources are already strained. Who, then,
manages the AGEN backend needed to share Report Keys?
The worst-case scenario is for the repositories to emerge as fragmented silos of diagnosis keys. In the midst
of the custody battle over administration of the emerging technical approaches to the contact tracing problem,
it is important to remember that exposure does not respect administrative boundaries. Regardless of how the
repository is established, it is essential that exposure notification can be transmitted across backends and across
apps. Indeed, there are already efforts to combine contact tracing efforts and data across the administrative
boundaries established by industry’s policy around AGEN [12].

4.1

A Path to Nation-scale Data

A solution to this issue is the creation of a privacy-preserving data exchange shared and accessible across apps
and administrative boundaries — a Commons. Different public health authorities could cooperatively contribute
to the Commons and individuals across many jurisdictions would access it through their apps. Such a Commons
might operate at the scale of one per nation, or it might be regional with some form of federation to share
keys and exposure information across individual instances. The Commons may be hosted and maintained by
governmental authorities, foundations or other appropriate institutional entities.

8

The Commons requires no change to the EN protocols. Each individual participates in the proximity detection using daily TEKs and the RPIs generated from them without change. With no other information leaving
the phone, the app on an indivual phone downloads the diagnosis keys and presents them to the SDK to obtain
exposure risk scores. The difference is that those diagnosis keys are not a priori limited to the ones produced by
users of the same app. Just as in the current decentralized protocol, an individual who tests positive — i.e. a confirmed case — and participates in contact tracing with a specific public health authority is asked to voluntarily
submit their TEKs for the past period over which they are likely to have been contagious. The AGEN protocol
does not stipulate how that request is formulated or how that submission is performed, but the introduction of
the Commons allows us to answer that question precisely.

4.2

The PHA Experience: Federating Access to the Commons

A Commons is utilized by a well-defined set of public health authorities that are registered with it. Professionals
at PHAs can authenticate to and access the Commons using well-established authentication techniques such
as LDAP and OAuth. As part of requesting a patient to submit their diagnosis keys to the Commons, the
professional requests a one-time authorization (OTA) from the Commons. The OTA authorizes the upload of
TEKs corresponding to the extent of time during which the patient is likely to have been contagious; this will
involve some days prior to the diagnosis and extend to several days or weeks following. The OTA is provided
to the patient to authorize the submission of their keys to the Commons; the upload is opt-in, as under the usual
AGEN protocol.
Because the OTA corresponds to a single interaction between a healthcare professional and a patient, it is a
natural key on which helpful metadata can be associated. The authorizing PHA may want their identity to be
associated with the submitted diagnosis keys so that the provenance of the diagnosis is preserved. This identity,
realized by the TLS public key of the PHA, can be associated with generated OTAs in the Commons. This
provides no more information than having each PHA host their own exposure key store, as currently envisioned.
As we will discuss below, the PHA identity can also be used to filter which diagnosis keys are considered in the
matching process on an individual’s phone.
The OTA itself is also a useful piece of metadata when associated with the uploaded keys in the Commons.
The authorizing professional will likely want to be able to determine whether the patient has in fact contributed
their keys as requested to determine if follow-up is necessary. Associating the OTA with the uploaded keys
places no new information in the Commons: the professional knows what they know about those they interview
and they know what authorizations they have requested. Each such confirmed case can be expected to have
generated some authorization request, but that information, along with all other aspects of the contact tracing
process, is under the purview of the PHA. Counts of confirmed cases and other aggregate information are already
regularly reported to the public.
The Commons is able to provide this functionality despite no patient data — indeed, no health or medical
data of any kind — ever being entered into the Commons. The Commons also takes no position on which
parts of the contact tracing process are automated and which are manual. It integrates cleanly with the existing
processes established by PHAs for interviewing patients, deciding which diagnosis keys are appropiate to share,
and so on. The Commons merely provides a means of carrying out the result of these decisions in a way that
does not require individuals to be using the same phone app.

4.3

The User Experience: Federating Downloads from the Commons

The current draft of the AGEN protocol says very little about how exposure notification information will be
transmitted or relayed among the different instances of the diagnosis key repository. A unified Commons immediately addresses this issue — all diagnosis keys are uploaded and downloaded from the shared repository.

9

However, under a federated regime, it is necessary to address how exposure notification and uploaded keys can
be routed across instances of the Commons.
Consider a scenario where an individual is diagnosed by one PHA but may travel or may have traveled to
regions covered by different PHAs. Individuals in those other regions should be able to obtain the TEKs for the
diagnosed individual, even though the diagnosis was performed by a remote PHA. There are two complementary
approaches.
The first approach proactively forwards diagnosis keys to relevant PHAs. A PHA professional can “tag” a
requested OTA with public keys or other metadata identifying relevant remote PHAs, using information acquired
as part of the interaction with the individual. The process of uploading diagnosis keys authorized by that OTA
to the Commons can then incorporate a simple forwarding mechanism that replicates those keys to the federated
instances of the Commons managed by those other PHAs. This can be performed by the Commons itself, or it
may be performed on an opt-in basis by the individual.
Under the second approach, individuals may proactively request diagnosis key downloads from federated
instances of the Commons they are interested in. An individual may subscribe to diagnosis key downloads for
Commons covering regions the individual has travelled to or will travel to. Additionally, an individual may
subscribe to Commons for surrounding regions.
Regardless of whether the Commons is realized as an administratively centralized server or a federated mesh,
the Commons must provide some mechanism for filtering or scoping the download of diagnosis keys onto an
individual’s device. The number of keys downloaded from the Commons will grow with the adoption of AGENbased apps, improvements in testing, and the spread of COVID-19. Without the ability to filter the set of keys
down to a reasonable and relevant set that is still large enough to maintain the privacy-preserving properties of
AGEN, the bandwidth requirements and compute requirements (for deriving the thousands of RPIs used for the
matching process) may grow to be untenable.

4.4

Extending the Commons

Once this basic separation of key repository has been established, along with the method for authorizing submissions and routing them to queries, it becomes possible to meaningfully entertain the question of including earlier
stages. Especially with testing being scarce, confirmation occurs late and involves the contact tracing processes
of public health authorities. Prior to that stage, we have Probable Covid (where a diagnosis has been performed
based on defined symptom criteria), preceded by Suspected Covid, and often preceded by individual state of
concern. Associated with each stage is a process, an (increasingly large) set of principals who might authorize
a submission, and a reduced significance in conveying exposure. For example, the physician or health service
making a Probable Covid diagnosis (and typically also authorizing testing) would be the natural principal to
authorize the individual to submit Probable Keys. The privacy-sensitive protocol could access these, as well as
the Confirmed Keys referred to as Diagnosis Keys in the EN protocol. The protocol permits the distinction to be
reflected in metadata carried along with the keys. Thus they might factor in, perhaps with lesser weight, into the
risk score.

5

Conclusion

With these two simple innovations, we can move past the conflicts and controversy and on to utilizing privacysensitive mobile contact tracing to improve the efficacy of public health measures - thereby saving lives and
unnecessary suffering - while respecting civil liberty. The companies should provide the interoperable building
blocks without themselves getting into the business of providing the Apps or holding the data. They can maintain
their privacy-first, decentralization posture, but should advocate for an interoperable covid key Commons, rather
than dictating policy on the App ecosystem. Government actors can regain policy determination and influence

10

the App ecosystem so as to best tailor offerings to their constituents, resolve how best to provide a Commons of
appropriate scale, and utilize physical measures not unlike what they do with security cameras, traffic signals,
inspections and other infrastructure to appropriately related anonymous key reports to the places within their
jurisdiction, recognizing the importance of public awareness, potential for creating stigma, and bringing benefit
to non-participating members of the communities. The technology can assist the contact tracing process, but
should not be dictating it or replacing the human relationship of the patient and the health professionals performing interviews and care. The trust that is built there is what makes opt-in approaches viable, and only with
appropriate individual protections.

References
[1] A. Inc., ”Apple and Google partner on COVID-19 contact tracing technology”, 10 April 2020 (accessed
25 May 2020). [Online]. Available: https://web.archive.org/web/20200410171128/https://www.apple.
com/newsroom/2020/04/apple-and-google-partner-on-covid-19-contact-tracing-technology/
[2] J. Chan, D. Foster, S. Gollakota, E. Horvitz, J. Jaeger, S. Kakade, T. Kohno, J. Langford, J. Larson,
P. Sharma, S. Singanamalla, J. Sunshine, and S. Tessaro, “Pact: Privacy sensitive protocols and mechanisms
for mobile contact tracing,” 2020.
[3] C. e. a. Troncoso, Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/blob/master/DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf
[4] 20 April 2020 - One Month On, 20 April 2020 (Accessed 24 May 2020). [Online]. Available: https://web.archive.org/web/20200524045214/https://support.tracetogether.gov.sg/hc/en-sg/articles/
360046475654-20-April-2020-One-Month-On
[5] J. Lu, J. Gu, K. Li, C. Xu, W. Su, and Z. e. a. Lai, “Covid-19 outbreak associated with
air conditioning in restaurant, guangzhou, china, 2020,” Emerging Infectious Disease, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200764.
[6] E. Y.-J. Kang, Asian Americans Feel The Bite Of Prejudice During The COVID19 Pandemic, National Public Radio, 31 March 2020 (Accessed 2 April 2020). [Online]. Available: https://web.archive.org/web/20200402203217/https://www.npr.org/local/309/2020/03/
31/824397216/asian-americans-feel-the-bite-of-prejudice-during-the-c-o-v-i-d-19-pandemic
[7] “South korea scrambles to contain nightclub coronavirus outbreak,” New York Times, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/reuters/2020/05/11/world/asia/11reuters-health-coronavirus-southkorea.
html
[8] R. Hinch, W. Probert, A. Nurtay, M. Kendall, C. Wymant, M. Hall, and C. Fraser,
“Effective configurations of a digital contact tracing app:
A report to nhsx,”
2020. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/BDI-pathogens/covid-19 instant tracing/blob/master/
Report-EffectiveConfigurationsofaDigitalContactTracingApp.pdf
[9] Exposure
Notification
API
launches
to
support
public
health
agencies,
Apple Incorporated,
Google LLC, 20 May 2020 (Accessed 24 May 2020). [Online].
Available:
http://web.archive.org/web/20200524152945/https://blog.google/inside-google/
company-announcements/apple-google-exposure-notification-api-launches/

11

[10] C. Ho, “Bay area coronavirus tests: Where can i get one?” 21 May 2020 (Accessed 25 May
2020). [Online]. Available: http://web.archive.org/web/20200525201614/https://www.sfchronicle.com/
health/article/Where-can-I-get-a-coronavirus-test-in-the-Bay-15136054.php
[11] N. A. of County and C. H. Officials, “Directory of local health departments,” 24 May 2020
(Accessed 24 May 2020). [Online]. Available: http://web.archive.org/web/20200524090932/https:
//www.naccho.org/membership/lhd-directory
[12] N. N. York,
“What you need to know about new yorks monumental contact tracing program,” 22 April 2020 (Accessed 24 May 2020). [Online]. Available:
http://web.archive.org/web/20200524162632/https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/coronavirus/
what-you-need-to-know-about-new-yorks-monumental-contact-tracing-program/2385611/

12

