Group testing as a strategy for the epidemiologic monitoring of COVID-19
Vincent Brault,1, 2 Bastien Mallein,3, 2 and Jean-François Rupprecht4, 2, ∗
1
Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France,
Members of the GROUPOOL collective & Participants in the MODCOV19 initiative.
3
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, LAGA, UMR 7539, F-93430, Villetaneuse, France.
4
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Centre de Physique Théorique,
Turing Center for Living Systems, Marseille, France.
(Dated: June 26, 2020)

arXiv:2005.06776v3 [q-bio.QM] 25 Jun 2020

2

Sample pooling consists in combining samples from multiple individuals into a single pool that is
then tested using a unique test-kit. A positive test means that at least one individual within the pool
is infected. Here, we propose an analysis and applications of sample pooling to the epidemiologic
monitoring of COVID-19. We first introduce a model of the RT-qPCR process used to test for the
presence of virus in a sample and construct a statistical model for the viral load in a typical infected
individual inspired by the clinical data from Jones et. al. (2020). We then propose a method for
the measure of the prevalence in a population, based on group testing, taking into account the
increased number of false negatives associated with this method. Finally, we present an application
of sample pooling for the prevention of epidemic outbreak in closed connected communities (e.g.
nursing homes).

Regularly monitoring the prevalence of a disease , i.e.
the proportion of infected individuals within the general
population at a given time, is a key element to prevent
the onset of an epidemic wave, to estimate the effect of
social distancing policies and to anticipate a potential
increase in the demand for hospitalization in intensive
care units [1].
In the context of the COVID-19 epidemics, contagious
individuals are generally assumed to bear a viral load
of SARS-CoV-2 in their respiratory tract [2, 3]. Such
viral load can be detected and quantified within swab
samples using a technique called reverse transcription
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) [4].
With tests performed in priority on symptomatic patients, the proportion of positive tests (which corresponds
to an apparent prevalence [5]) is larger than the prevalence among the whole population, which we call overall
prevalence. In principle, the overall prevalence could be
deduced from the apparent prevalence based on inferred
model estimates for the proportion of tested individuals
among the infected population. However, such reliable
estimation is challenging given (a) the current large uncertainty regarding the proportion of asymptomatic carriers (estimated to be in 20 − 50% range [6–9]) and (b)
the variable delay between the contamination and first
symptoms, which varies from 1 to 5 days [10, 11].
Testing a large portion of the population at random
would allow for a direct measure of the overall prevalence, including the proportion of asymptomatic individuals. Unfortunately, it appears that the production of
reactants used in RT-qPCR diagnostic would not meet a
demand in regular large-scale population testing [12, 13].
In such context of a shortage in reactants and/or of

∗ Electronic

address:
vincent.brault@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr;
mallein@math.univ-paris13.fr; rupprecht@cpt.univ-mrs.fr

RT-qPCR machines, group testing has received renewed
interest. The principle of group testing consists in combining samples from multiple individuals into a single
pool that is then tested using a single test-kit. The pool
sample is considered to be positive if and only if at least
one individual in the group is contaminated. The idea
of group testing is not new, with a long history that
dates back to 1943 [14] in the context of syphilis detection, see [15] for a review. Optimal diagnostic strategies
include smart-pooling, whereby pools are organised according to lines and columns on a grid –or hypercube–
with overlaps enabling the identification of positive individuals [16–18].
Several teams across the world have developed group
testing protocols for SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals
using RT-qPCR tests. As early as February 2020, pools
of 10 have been used over 2740 patients to detect 2
positive patients over the San Francisco Bay in California [19]. A recent publication from Saarland University,
Germany, shows that positive sample with a relatively
mild viral load from asymptomatic patients could still
be detected within pools of 30 [20]. Further works suggest that RT-qPCR viral detection can been achieved in
pools with a number of samples ranging from 5 to 64
[21–33].
In parallel, the theoretical literature on group testing for SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic is growing at a fast
pace [12, 34–39]. Most of the emphasis has been put on
the binary (positive or negative) outcome of tests, with
little or no regard on the viral load quantification [4].
Moreover, if the possibility of false negatives is sometimes
considered, the increase in the rate of false negatives with
dilution of samples due to group testing is rarely taken
into account [18].
In this article, we do not address any diagnostic problems, such as the question of determining optimal strategies to provide individual positive diagnostic to a large
population using a minimal number of tests. Rather, we

2
propose to evaluate pooling strategies as a tool for the
study of epidemiologic questions. In the pooling strategies we discuss below, no individual will be part of two
different pools at the same time, so no information on
the infection status of any distinguished individual is obtained.
Here, we instead focus on (i) the measure of the overall
prevalence and (ii) on the early detection of contamination in a closed community.
The rest of the article is constructed as follows. We
first present a simple protocol for the measure of the
prevalence in the population by the use of group testing;
we make in Section I the assumption of perfect test, i.e.
that the test used is not subject to any false positive or
negative, no matter the size of the pool to which the test
is applied. In Section II, we provide a short description
of the RT-qPCR and propose a statistical model for its
study, that underlines its limit of detection at small concentrations. Then in Section III, we analyse part of the
information recovered from the quantified viral charge
in patients from the clinical dataset of [40]; this gives
a sense of the viral load infected patients should carry
in the general population, therefore the effect of dilution
on the rate of false negatives. Finally, we show in Section IV how, using the statistical model and the measure
of the error rate discussed above, one can measure the
viral prevalence in the general population, or design a
protocol allowing an early detection of an epidemic outbreak in a closed vulnerable community (e.g. schools,
retirement homes, detention centers).

I.

MEASURING PREVALENCE WITH
PERFECT TESTS

We investigate in this section the measure of the prevalence of the disease in a population using a group testing
strategy, under the assumption of perfect tests, i.e. with
no risks of false negative (or false positive). Our derivation is similar to [41].
We assume that we have n tests at our disposal. Given
N ∈ N, we sample nN individuals at random in the general population, and organize n pools of N individuals.
Each of these pools is then tested using the perfect tests.
(N )
For all i ≤ n, we write Xi = 1 if the ith test is positive
(i.e. if and only if at least one of the N individuals in the
(N )
ith pool is infected), and Xi = 0 otherwise. We denote
by p the (unknown) proportion of infected individuals in
(N )
the population, then (Xi , i ≤ n) forms an independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sequence of Bernoulli
random variables with parameter 1 − (1 − p)N .
Lemma I.1. Writing X n

(N )

(N )
1−(1−X n )1/N

=

1
n

PN

j=1

(N )

Xj

, the quan-

tity
is a strongly consistent and asymptotically normal estimator of p. A confidence interval of

asymptotic level 1 − α is

(N )
CI1−α (p) = 1 − (1 − X n )1/N
q
(N )
(N )
(N ) 
qα (1 − X n )1/N −1 X n (1 − X n )
√
±
,
nN

(1)

where qα is the quantile of order 1 − α/2 of the standard
Gaussian random variable.
Proof. Note that (Xj

(N )

, j ≤ n) is a standard Bernoulli

model, hence
is a consistent and asymptotically
normal estimator of f (p) = 1 − (1 − p)N . Hence, using
that f −1 is C 1 and Slutsky’s lemma, we deduce all the
(N )
above properties of the estimator f −1 (X n ) of p.
(N )
Xn

Remark I.2. As limn→∞ 1 − (1 − X n )1/N = p almost
surely, for any N ∈ N the width of the confidence interval
defined in Lemma I.1 satisfies
q
(N )
(N )
(N )
2qα (1 − X n )1/N −1 X n (1 − X n )
√
nN
s
2qα (1 − p) 1 − (1 − p)N
a.s.
(2)
∼ √
n→∞ n
N
(1 − p)N
(N )

In other words, the precision of the measure of prevalence
decays as n−1/2 , with a prefactor that depend on the
prevalence p and the number N of individual per pool.
There exists an optimal choice of N that minimizes the
value of this prefactor, largely improving the precision of
the measure.
A classical computation (cf. e.g. [12]) shows that the
prefactor in Eq. (2) is minimal when the number of mixed
samples per pool is equal to:
(perf)

Nopt

=−

(perf)
c?
⇐⇒ (1 − p)Nopt ≈ 0.20, (3)
log(1 − p)

where c? = 2 + W (−2e−2 ) ≈ 1.59 and W is the Lambert
W function. Specifically, the size of the pools is optimal when approximately 80% of the tests made on the
groups turn positive, in sharp contrast with the Dorfman
criterium [14].
If we measure the prevalence of the population using
(perf)
group testing, choosing N = Nopt for the size of the
groups, then measuring with a given precision the prevalence will require significantly less tests than if we were
to use one test per sampled individual (i.e. if N = 1). On
the other hand, using this group testing method increases
the total number of individuals needed to be sampled,
which also has a cost to be considered. However, one
can observe that the bottom of the valley of the (red)
functions plotted in Fig. 1, that represent the number
of tests needed as a function of the size of the pool, is
rather wide and flat. There is therefore a large variety

3
a

x104

x104

Nb. of tests (n)

With false negatives
No false negatives

3

x105
12

2

8

2

8

1

4

1

4

0

0

0

0

5

10

15

20

Pool size(N)

25

0

40

80

Pool size(N)

120

Sample size (nN)

With false negatives 12
No false negatives

3

b x104

0

Figure 1: (a,b) Total number of tests (red) and total number
of sampled individuals (blue) in order to estimate a prevalence of p = 3% with a ±0.2% precision with 95% confidence
interval as a function of the pool size N for the perfect case
(dashed lines) considered in Sec. I with no false negative, and
the more realistic case (solid lines) considered in Sec. IV (with
false negatives; parameters are defined in Table II). In (a) N
ranges from 0 to 25; in (b) N ranges from 0 to 128; as visible
(perf)
in (b), the valley around the optimal pool size Nopt ≈ 50
is large: near optimal savings in tests are achieved even for
moderately large pool sizes that require smaller number of
individuals to sample.

of quasi-optimal pool sizes that can be chosen with minimal diminution of the precision in the measure of the
prevalence.
Taking the exemple of a prevalence at p = 3%, we expect the pool size minimizing the number of tests needed
(perf)
to read Nopt = 50, which divides by 20 the number of
tests needed (see Fig. 1). But to reach similar level of
precision than in single testing, the total number of individuals that need to be sampled is more than doubled.
Choosing instead a pool size of N = 20 requires almost
the same number of tests, yet at a cost of a 30% in the
total number N n of sampled individuals (c.f. Fig. 1).
The same observation holds for different values of the
prevalence, see SI. Fig. S1.

II.

the quantity of human DNA [4]. Such combined measure
can also improve precision of the measure as well as to
normalize the number of virus copies by the quantity of
human. We do not intend to include such features in our
model. Furthermore, we do not model here the possible
errors at the reverse transcription stage, which could lead
to some biased measure of the viral load distribution
PCR tests are prone to amplify non-specific DNA sequences [42, 43] that can trigger an onset of fluorescence
in a samples with no viral SARS-CoV-2 load. These
events, called artefacts [43], will typically occur beyond
a relatively large critical number of cycles, thus imposing
the following condition on the diagnosis: a reliable positive result can only be made if the Ct value is lower than
a critical value, denoted dcens . Here, the onset of fluorescence in which the virus is absent will be modelled as if
triggered by a vanishingly small artificial concentration,
denoted 1 .
A.

We propose to model the number of cycles threshold
value Ct as a random variable, denoted by Y , that depends on the viral load c in the measured sample as
Y = − log2 (c + 1 ) + 2 ,

(4)

where 1 is the law of the artefact, modelled as a lognormal distribution with parameters (ν, τ 2 ); 2 is an intrinsic measurement error on the threshold value Ct measurement, modelled as a centered Gaussian random variable with variance ρ2 .
As mentioned above, tests are considered to be reliably
positive when Y ≤ dcens . To avoid false positives, the
threshold dcens (with cens for censoring) is chosen such
that P(1 > 2−dcens )  1. Thus, using that as long as
a and b are of different orders of magnitude, we have
log(a + b) ≈ log(max(a, b)), we deduce that
Y ≈ min(− log2 (c), dcens ) + 2 ,

STATISTICAL MODELLING OF THE PCR

The RT-qPCR technique has been extensively used
to estimate the concentration of viral material in samples [42]. We briefly sketch the main steps of an RTqPCR diagnostic protocol in Box 1. The qPCR typically
returns a Ct value, which corresponds to − log2 of the
initial number of DNA copies in the sample, up to an
additive constant and measure error. It is measured as
an estimated number of cycles needed for the intensity
of the fluorescence of the sample to reach a target value
(see Fig. 2).
Combined measures of two viral RNA strands with a
control of a human RNA strand are recommended in order to detect defective sampling that could induce false
negatives, but also to improve precision of the measure
as well as to normalize the number of virus copies by

Statistical model for the cycle threshold value
for a fixed viral concentration

(5)

which obeys the law of a Gaussian random variable with
variance ρ2 and mean − log2 (c), censored at dcens .
In the idealized no artefact limit (1 → 0), the PCR
threshold intensity of a negative patient (c = 0) would
never be reached (Y → ∞ as well as dcens = ∞).
B.

Model of the cycle threshold values for pooled
samples

We now consider what happens when constructing a
pooled sample of N samples. For each i ≤ N , we write
Zi = 1 if the sample i contains a viral RNA load with
concentration Ci > 0, and Zi = Ci = 0 otherwise. In the
rest of the paper, we assume that, in a combined sample created from a homogeneous mixing of the individual

a

Intensity

Box 1: A brief description of RT-qPCR tests
We very briefly review some of the steps implemented
during an RT-qPCR diagnostic procedure [4]:
1. The sample is treated so that a target RNA sequence
(characteristic of the virus) is transcribed into DNA
(reverse transcription);
2. The sample is placed in a PCR machine, which can
measure the concentration of DNA of interest in the
sample by making it fluorescent;

0

3. A reactive is added which approximatively doubles the
number of DNA of interest at every cycle, driven by
temperature changes;

C

15
Ct = 23 25 Ct = 29 35
Number of PCR ampliﬁcation cycles (C)

limit of detection

Positive (in 64)
Positive (in 1)

Distribution

samples, the viral concentration reads:
N
1 X
=
Zj C j .
N j=1

(6)

This assumption relies on the fact that contaminated
individuals should have a sufficiently high number of viral
copies per sample, so that taking a portion 1/N of a
virus bearing sample brings a fraction 1/N of its viral
charge. The result of the RT-qPCR measure of a grouped
test with N individuals is then given by Eq. (4), with
c = C (N ) , hence reads




N
X
Zj Cj  , dcens  + 2 .
Y (N ) = min log2 N − log2 
j=1

(7)
where (Zi , i ≤ N ) are i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables
whose parameter is the prevalence of the disease in the
population; (Ci , i ≤ N ) are i.i.d. random variables corresponding to the law of the viral concentration within
samples taken from a typical infected individual in the
overall population.
Our model Eq. (7) is consistent with the experimental result of [21] as well as [32], whereby linear relations
are found between the logarithm of the pool size and the
measured Ct that are sufficiently distant from the identified detection threshold.
Remark II.1. If it were possible to combine samples without dilution (e.g. following the protocol of [33], whereby
the exact same volume of each sample is added to the
buffer solution as if the sample were being tested individually), Eq. (7) would then be replaced by




N
X
Ỹ (N ) = min − log2 
Zj Cj  , dcens  + 2 , (8)
j=1

in which case, theoretically, pool testing would never
loose precision when the pool size increases. That case

26 = 64

threshold

b

4. The time series of the concentration in DNA over time
is recorded; on a linear regression of of the logarithm
of the fluorescent signal over time, one deduces an estimate of the viral concentration in the sample from
the linear regression value at the origin.

(N )

Positive (in 64)
Positive (in 1)
Negative

limit of detection

4

15

25

30

dcens

Viral load: Ct measure

Figure 2: (a) Sketch of an RT-qPCR fluorescence intensity
signal for a positive patient without pooling (solid red line)
a single positive patient in a pool of 64 patients (dashed red
curve) and for a negative sample representing the response
of an artefact (dotted magenta curve); as pooling dilutes the
initial concentration, the pooled response (dashed red curve)
is expected to be close to the translation x → x+6 from that of
a single patient (solid red line). (b) Sketch of the distribution
of threshold values for qPCR, either for individual testing
(solid blue line) or in pools 64 (dashed red curve); part of the
distribution crosses the limit of detection of the test (figured
as the grey area) at the detection threshold dcens .

was treated in Section I. Hoewever, if the dilution effect
occurs for pool sizes exceeding a thresold size K, Eq. (7)
would be replaced by
Y

(N,K)



=


N
min log2 ( K
)+ − log2 

N
X





Zj Cj  , dcens  + 2 ; (9)

j=1

where log2 (N/K)+ = 0 if N < K and log2 (N/K)) otherwise; the analysis would then be similar to what is presented in the rest of the paper, yet with a lower false
negative rate.
In order to determine the statistics of the measured
cycle Y (N ) in a group test of N individuals, we need a
distribution for the value of Cj , the viral distribution of
infected individuals in the population; this is the objective of the next section.

5
b

0.08

limit of detection

0.04

false negative

Distribution

In [44], the authors propose an analysis of SARS-CoV2 viral load by patient age. Their analysis is based on
the clinically measured viral load of a series of 3,712 infected patients. In particular, in Fig. 1, an histogram
representing the frequency distribution of the viral load
estimated using RT-qPCR testing. We present in this
section a method to analyse these data as a mixture of
Gaussian random variables. As RT-qPCR does not allow the measure of viral load below a certain value, we
take this fact into account in our statistical modelling by
considering the Gaussian in the mixture to be censored
after a given threshold dcens .
Unfortunately, as the clinical dataset of [44] is not
available, we created a simulated set of measures which
reproduces the distribution described by the histogram
in Fig. 1 [44]. As the precise distribution of data points
within each class of the histogram of Fig. 1 [44] is unknown, we assumed that points were distributed uniformly in their class. We verified the robustness of our
estimator for several realizations for the simulated datasets, which lead to consistent values for our model parameters (see SI Sec. 2. B).
Furthermore, as we expect the measure error 2 of the
qPCR to be small with respect to the width of the histogram classes, we set ρ = 0 in the rest of the section.
The histogram of our simulated data is plotted in
Fig. 3. It is similar to the histogram [44, Fig. 1] but with
the x-axis graduated as − log2 of the viral concentration
(to obtain an estimation of the attended Ct value). We
observe the presence of a wide and rather low first bump,
centered around the value of 20. Additionally, two taller
but less wide bell shapes seem to be present, centered
around the values 29 and 34 respectively. After the value
of about 35.5, there is a significant drop in the number
of registered values, very likely due to a sharp detection
limit.
The presence of three well-marked distinct bell shapes
in the histogram suggests to model the density of − log2
of the viral load of contaminated patients as a mixture
of Gaussian distributions. Heuristically, the patient population can be divided into several groups, which we call
clusters, such that patients in cluster i have a Ct value
distributed according to a normal distribution with parameters (µi , σi ).
In a first paragraph A., we use a classical statistical
tool to estimate the number of clusters and their parameters (frequencies, means, variances). However, this
first Gaussian modelling does not take into account the
sudden drop observed for values around Ct ∼ 35.5, hence
the estimated density does not fit well to such drop. This
seems to be due to the sudden loss of sensitivity of qPCR
measure for low viral load.
To better represent the variables, we thus introduce
a (partially) censored Gaussian model in Section III B,
which, to our knowledge, was not previously proposed.

a

0.00

III. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE VIRAL
LOAD MEASURED IN POSITIVE SAMPLES

10

15

20

25

30

Viral load: Ct measure

35

30

35

Figure 3: (a) Representation of the density for the classical
mixing Gaussian model (dashed lines) and the partially censored model (solid lines) each composed as a sum of 3 components for the Gaussian model (orange/green/red dashed
lines) and the partially censored model (orange/green/red
solid lines); (purple vertical line) location of the threshold
dcens ≈ 35.6. (b) Focus on the false negative region, with the
estimated false negative probability in the partially censored
model (solid line) due to the defect of detection above the
threshold dcens (red color filled area).

Finally in Section III C, we construct a model consisting of a mixing of censored Gaussian variables, that we
apply to the data of [44]. This model fits better the data
with stable estimation of the parameters and provides
further validation of the previous three-cluster analysis
of the tested population.

A.

Mixture model

The shape of the histogram Fig. 3 suggests that the law
of the viral load is distributed according to a mixture of
three or more Gaussian distributions. The typical decomposition into three clusters is represented in dashed
lines in Fig. 3(a). We also plotted in SI. Fig. S4 the histogram with an example of the estimated density with 3
and 4 clusters.
We observe that the cluster associated to the lowest
viral load, i.e. the highest Ct value (red curve in Fig.
3) has a small variance. However, as recalled by [44],
there is a loss of sensibility of the measure for very small
viral loads, which can explain the drop in the number of
detected cases around dcens = 35.6. This motivates the
introduction of the censored Gaussian model in the next
section.

B.

Censored model and partially censored model

To model a partial lack of detection of low viral load
(Ct higher than a threshold dcens ), we introduce the partially censored Gaussian variable as a building block for
the representation of the density of the viral load in infected patients. However, depending on the machine tun-

6
ing, the Ct value of the sample can shift by an additive
constant, which is computed by measuring the Ct value
of a standard solution of viral DNA to tare the measure.
Then, some tests might allow the detection of lower viral
loads than others.
In view of the shape of the histogram Fig. 3, it is reasonable to assume that the Ct value of patients in a cluster follows a Gaussian distribution. To model this partial
censorship phenomenon, we assume that if the sampled
Ct value is lower than the detection threshold dcens , the
measure is always made for samples detected as positive. If the value is higher than dcens , the sample will
be detected with probability q, and its measure will be
registered. Otherwise, it will be discarded as a (false)
negative, with probability 1 − q. The parameter q represents the probability of detection of a viral load that falls
below the detection threshold of some PCR measures.
Remark III.1. The assumption that the probability of
detection only depends on whether the Ct value is higher
than a fixed threshold is of course an important simplification, as one would expect lower viral loads to be more
difficult to detect than higher ones. However, the simplicity of this model allows us to study it as a three parameters statistical model, and to construct simple estimators
for these parameters. Additionally, it fits rather well the
available data, and fitting a more complicate censorship
model would require a lot of measures of Ct values close
to the detection threshold dcens .
We call this statistical model a partially censored Gaussian model, denoted by CN dcens (µ, σ, q), with µ and σ the
mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian variable before censorship and q the detection probability above the
threshold. If we denote by X the random variable, fµ,σ
(resp. Fµ,σ ) the density (resp. the cumulative distribution function) of a Gaussian law N (µ, σ) then the density
of X is defined for every x ∈ R by:

fµ,σ (x)
1 if x ≤ dcens ,
×
(10)
fX (x) =
q otherwise.
q + (1 − q)Fµ,σ (dcens )
Remark III.2. In the absence of censorship (i.e. in the
limits q → 1 or dcens → +∞), we check that Eq. (10)
converges to a Gaussian density distribution.
To avoid the problem of modelling of the partial censorship described in Remark III.1, a solution that we implement here as a comparison tool, is to forget the values
after the threshold and to fit a completely censored model
(i.e. with q = 0) to the remaining data, that we denote
by CN dcens (µ, σ) = CN dcens (µ, σ, 0), with density defined
for every x ∈ R by
fX (x) =

fµ,σ (x)
1{x≤dcens } ,
Fµ,σ (dcens )

(11)

where 1{x≤dcens } is the indicator function equal to 1 if
x ≤ dcens , and 0 otherwise.
Due to the presence of the cumulative distribution
function of a Gaussian law in the denominator in the

normalization constant, it is not possible to obtain analytical forms of the parameter estimators. Nevertheless, we can estimate the parameters using an optimization algorithm like the R function nlm (available in [45])
which implements a Newton-type algorithm. The following Theorem III.3 guarantees the quality of the maximal likelihood estimators, hence of the estimations if the
maximization procedure is done correctly.
Theorem III.3. The estimators (b
µ, σ
b, qb) of (µ, σ, q) obtained by maximisation of the likelihood ratio are strongly
consistent and asymptotically normal.
The properties of the maximum likelihood estimators
is a consequence of the fact that the (partially) censored
Gaussian model belongs to the family of exponential laws
(c.f. [46, Chapter 9] and SI B. ). To check the quality of
the approximation of the estimators by nlm, we simulate
variable sizes of samples distributed according to the censored Gaussian model. The values of these estimations
are plotted in SI B.3.
C.

Censored mixture model

We apply here the statistical analysis described in the
previous section to simulated data based on the values for
the viral load distribution found in [44] with a mixture
model and a censoring threshold dcens ≈ 35.6 (so the two
rightmost bars in the histogram of Fig. 3, that appear
much smaller than the nearby values, are supposed to be
censored). It is reasonable to assume that the censoring
threshold has the same value for each sub-population, as
it depends on the test methodology rather than on the
tested individuals. In Fig. 3, we represent the histogram
with the density for the mixture.
We observe that the separation in sub-populations and
the resulting densities are very close to the ones obtained
in the “naive” Gaussian mixture model, constructed
without taking into account the detection threshold. The
principal difference between the naive and censored models consists, for the later, in a larger variance that extends above the threshold. To a lesser extent, the subpopulation with a median concentration can also exceed
the threshold. It is worth mentioning that as expected,
the probability of detection below the threshold value is
sensibly the same for all three clusters (around 20%).
As a result, using the computed estimates (see Tab. III
) and the model, we can calculate a theoretical false negative rate, see SI. Eq. [S3]: in this case, the value is
approximately 3.8% (represented by the red area on the
Fig. 3b); it mostly belongs to the third cluster. Besides
being based on simulated data, hence subject to caution,
this value should be treated as a lower bound, as it is
possible that a fourth cluster of infected individuals exists but with very small viral load, below the detection
threshold. It allows us to predict for example that at
least 150 clinical tests in the series of [44] might have
resulted in false negatives due to their low viral load.

7
To validate the censored model, we can verify that
if one (i) erases the data to the right of a certain
value and (ii) uses the totally censored model on the
remaining data, a similar estimate should be obtained
for the parameters. We display in SI. Fig. S7 the density obtained using the censored mixture estimation with
dcens ≈ 35.6, 34.4 and 33.2 (removing the first two, the
third, then the fourth rightmost bars in the histogram).
We observe that the first and second components are
globally unchanged. The mean and standard deviation of
the last component are almost the same for dcens ≈ 34.4
and dcens ≈ 35.6 (see SI. Tab. IV ); only the proportions naturally decrease with the threshold. On the other
hand, the mean moves slightly to the left for dcens ≈ 33.2;
this is due to the fact that we loose the information of the
largest bars of this component. It might also be caused
by our ignorance of the exact distribution of Ct values
within classes of the histogram (we recall that we assume
that it is a uniform distribution).
Note that if we were to set the threshold at dcens ≈
34.4 as threshold for the partially censored model without
erasing data, the optimization procedure nlm would not
converge. This is further indication that a detection drop
happens in the neighbourhood of 35.6.

D.

Application to other datasets

We applied a similar statistical analysis to simulated
datasets of 852 infected nursing home resident and workers studied by [27]. For this dataset, two to three subpopulations are identified by our algorithm. The estimation obtained for the Gaussian fit of the Ct distribution
they obtained is given in SI Tab. III. It would be interesting to link these observed sub-populations to characteristics of the individuals (e.g. age of the patients or stage
of the disease). We mention that in two other datasets
of smaller size [21, 47], the statistical resolution does not
allow us to distinguish between several sub-populations;
we rather found that the distribution of Ct corresponds
to a single Gaussian with standard deviation σ in the 5
to 6 range.

IV.

GROUP TESTING: APPLICATION TO
EPIDEMIOLOGY

We now show how the previous analysis of the tests
used to measure the viral load in patients can be used to
precise the epidemiological monitoring of the disease in
the general population.

A.

The number of infected individuals in pools
cannot be recovered

We expect the PCR result to correspond to the sample with the highest viral load, up to a dilution-induced

drift log2 (N ), under the model hypothesis of Sec. II (cf.
Fig. 2). Indeed, since the viral concentration in randomly
selected infected individuals spans several order of magnitudes, we expect that

log2 

1
N


X
i=1,...,j

Ci  ≈ log2



max Ci

i=1,...,j



− log2 (N ),
(12)

for j positive samples with concentration Cj diluted in a
pool of N .
We point out that the RT-qPCR viral load measure
could be used to improve efficiency and cross testing of
smart pooling type diagnostic methods, which are beyond
the scope of this paper. We plan to investigate this aspect
in future work.
Therefore, the measured value of the pooled sample viral concentration cannot be used to estimate the number
of infected individual within the pool.

B.

Group testing and the measure of viral
prevalence

Here, in contrast with Sec. I, we no longer consider that
the RT-qPCR tests to be perfect. As discussed in Eq. (7),
we model the concentration of the pooled sample as the
average of the individual sample loads; and we assume
that viral concentration becomes undetectable below a
given threshold. Therefore, creating groups has the effect of increasing the false negative rate, which has to be
quantified. We then use this estimation to un-bias the estimator of the prevalence in the overall population based
on group testing, and study its impact on the optimal
choice of group sizes.

1.

Estimation of the false negative rate induced by pooling

The distribution of the viral load of a single positive
sample within a pool of several negative samples appears
as shifted towards higher Ct -values, see Fig. 2. A pooled
sample returns positive only if the average concentration is smaller than dcens ; thus using the observation of
Sec. III C, contamination will be detected in a group of
N individuals typically if at least one individual in the
group has a viral charge larger than N 2−dcens . Therefore, there is a risk that low viral charge samples (that
would have been tested positive using individual tests)
would no longer be positive in pool tests. Similarly to
Eq. (5), we express the increased rate of false negative
due to pooling as P(− log2 (C) + 2 ≥ dcens − log2 (N )),
where log2 (C) is the viral concentration of the positive
individual. For simplicity we neglect the measurement
error of the qPCR, i.e. considering that ρ = 0, thus an
expression for the increased rate of false negatives reads

8
False negative risk
0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

Censored
Classical

0.05

0.00

2

4

6

Pool size (N)

8

10

12

Figure 4: Estimated false negative risk probability of a sample pooling test containing a single infected individual (with
a viral load distributed according to the simulated statistics
presented in Sec. III) as a function of the number of pooled
individuals N , using the estimated density obtained for the
classical (dashed line) and censored (solid line). The censored
and classical model give different estimates of (and probably
both underestimate, as we did not consider unsuccessful sampling) the false negative rate in group pooling under the model
assumption of Eq. (II B); such estimates will have impact on
the estimation of the prevalence.

1 − Φ(dcens ), where


)
Φ d(N
cens = P [− log2 (C) ≤ dcens − log2 (N )] .
(N )

(13)

We find that, when estimated by the censored model,
(N )
the false negative risk function Φ(dcens ) grows quicker as
the pool size increases than in the uncensored model, see
Fig. 4. This is partly due to the fact that the censored
model makes the assumption that dcens ≈ 35.6, whereas
dcens ≈ 37.3 in the uncensored model. Choosing a correct
statistical model for the distribution of Ct values has a
critical impact on the estimation of the false negative
risk, therefore on the estimate of the prevalence, as is
discussed next.
2.

Correction of the prevalence estimate by the false
negative rate

Assuming a false negative rate of 1 − Φ(dcens ) in pool
testing with groups of size N , we observe that 1 − (1 −

Table I: Table of the pool size as a function of the number
of tests for a prevalence of 3% measured with a precision of
0.2% at a 95% confidence interval, for both perfect tests (with
no false negatives, see Sec. I) and imperfect tests (with false
negatives; model parameters defined in Table II); computed
using Eqs. [1] and [14].
Pool
Perfect tests
Imperfect tests
size N Number of Sample size Number of Sample size
tests n
nN
tests n
nN
1
29100
29100
29464
29464
2
14775
29550
15069
30138
3
10003
30009
10261
30783
5
6191
30955
6411
32055
10
3350
33500
3530
35300
20
1973
39460
2130
42600
30
1561
46830
1716
51480
50
1349
67450
1525
76250
100
1884
188400
2235
223500
200
10378
2075600
13105
2621000

Box 2: A protocol of prevalence determination
We propose the following procedure for the measure of
prevalence via group testing:
1. Start from an a priori estimate for the prevalence (p̂0 ).
2. Based on the value of p̂0 , estimate the number N of
individuals in the pool that minimizes the total number of tests needed to achieve the estimation of the
prevalence p at the targeted precision and confidence
interval.
3. Construct a number of n pools containing each N individuals selected at random in the general population,
with n the number of tests available for the measure.
4. Count the number of positive tests and compute the
(N )
average X n .
5. An improved estimate of the prevalence then reads:
(N )
p̂1 = 1 − (1 − X n )1/N (cf Lemma I.1).
Note that this method can easily be adapted into a
Bayesian algorithm, with the number N of individuals
tested modified at each iteration of the procedure.

(N )

X n )1/N (as defined using the notation of Section I)
(N )
is a consistent estimator of pΦ(dcens ) (c.f. Lemma I.1).
As a result, the confidence interval constructed for the
prevalence p now reads
"
(N )
1 − (1 − X n )1/N
CI1−α (p) =
(N )
Φ(dcens )
r


(N )
(N )
(N )
(1 − X n )1/N −1 X n
1 − Xn

qα
.
±√

(N
)
n
N Φ(dcens )
(N )

(14)

For the numerical applications presented in Fig. 1 and
Table I, we consider a viral load C that is distributed according to Eq. (11). As expected, due to false negatives,
we find that the number of tests needed to reach a given
precision on the prevalence is increased, but relatively
moderately. In particular, the optimal pool size value,
(imper)
Nopt
, that minimizes the number of tests needed to
reach a given precision level, is close to the value Nopt ,
defined in Eq. (3).
Similarly, one can observe that using a different distribution with similar mean and variance for − log2 C
as Eq. (11) would lead to moderate changes of the values
estimated in Table I. While modelling of the viral load of
an infected individual is crucial to un-bias the estimator
(perf)

9
of the prevalence via group testing, the practical implementation of such group testing strategy, i.e. the choice
of the group size N and the number n of tests to use, is
relatively independent of the precise statistical properties
of the viral load distribution.
Based on Eq. (14), in Box 2. we propose an iterative
method to estimate p, which, during a survey, allows for
on-the-fly adaptations of the pool size.
C. Group testing and Bayesian inference of the
prevalence in sub-categories of the population

The viral prevalence may vary significantly among specific categories within the overall population. In particular, a prevalence reaching 5% was measured among the
health care workers population in a hospital [48], which
we expect to be significantly higher than the estimate
prevalence within the general population.
Here we show that we do not specifically need pool
samples from individuals from homogeneous categories
in order to recover the distribution of prevalence within
these categories.
The protocol described in Box 2 can be adapted to
study different prevalences in specific sub-populations,
provided that the number of individuals of each subpopulation is known for every grouped sample. In SI. Fig. S3
, we evaluate, as function of the number of tests, the credibility intervals on the prevalence within two categories
of the population: one at p1 = 5% representing 20% of
the total population (a value inspired by [48]), the other
being at p2 = 0.5% (a value inspired by [49]). More information on this adaptative protocol can be found in the
SI.
Remark IV.1. Note that once a difference in prevalence
is noted from the epidemiological study of the general
population, testing can be adapted to construct groups
containing only members of one subpopulation to attain
similar levels of precision for the prevalence of the subpopulations. The prevalence in the general population
can then be recovered by averaging the estimators of the
sub-populations. The advantage of these adaptative settings is that the existence of a difference of prevalence in
populations can be tested before deployment of resources
needed to measure them specifically.
D.

Group testing for regular monitoring in
communities

We now consider some applications of group testing
to the early detection of an epidemic outbreak within a
community, that is interconnected and reasonably closed
to the outside (e.g. schools, nursing homes, detention
centres).
Our results are based on a minimal working model for
epidemic outbreaks within a community of A individuals.
At a random date, which we choose to be time t = 0, the

patient 0 in the population gets contaminated, and immediately starts infecting members of its community at
rate λ. Each newly infected individual then contributes
to spreading the disease at the same rate λ.

1.

Optimization of the size of pools

We first consider the impact of group testing strategy,
consisting in k group test with pools of N individuals, on
the early time of the outbreak t  λ−1 . With a unique
contaminated individual in the population, the detection
probability reads
(N )
P [+|k tests] = kN Φ0 (dcens
)/A,

with kN ≤ A, (15)

where Φ0 (dcens ) is defined according to Eq. (13), with the
difference that the assumed viral load of the patient 0,
corresponding to that measured at early times, may need
not be equal to the distribution estimated in Eq. (11)
based on clinical data. For simplicity, we will assume in
the following that Φ0 is the cumulative distribution of a
log-normal viral load distribution logN(µ0 , σ0 ) of mean
µ0 and variance σ0 .
In Fig. 5, we represent the evolution of the probability
to detect the patient 0 as a function of the total number
of sampled individuals in a population of size A = 120.
We observe that if µ0 is close enough to dcens , i.e. if
the viral charge of the patient 0 is close to being undetectable, then there will exist an optimal size for the
pools. When N becomes too large the risk of false negative overcomes the potential benefits of testing larger
portions of the community (see Fig. 5a). In contrast, if
the viral load of patient 0 is slightly higher, the detection
probability becomes a monotonic function of the pool size
N , indicating that larger pools are always beneficial. Additionally, if using multiple tests increases the detection
probability when the viral load is close to the detection
threshold, using multiple tests has a smaller impact when
the viral load gets easier to detect.
(N )

Table II: Table with standard parameter values (with std. the
abbreviation of standard deviation).
Symbol Meaning
Value
dcens
Maximal cycle number
35.6
µi , σi , pi Viral load (in Ct ) distribution fits
Table IV
ρ
PCR measurement error (std.)
0
φ
Delay before onset of symptoms
5 days
λ
Intra-community contamination rate 0.5 days−1
r
Asymptomatic probability
40 %
τ
Time interval between grouped tests 1 − 12 days
A
Total number in the community
120 or 1000
N
Pool size
1–128
µ0 ; σ0 Viral load (in Ct ) (mean, std.)
30 − 35
ζ
Defective sampling probability
0

10
Patient 0 variability in viral load

Patient 0 mean viral load

1

0.15

k=1
0
0.40

0

k=5

0.20

3

k=4
k=3

0.10

k=5

0.25

k=4
k=3
k=2
k=1

k=5

0.20

k=2

k=1

k=1

0

0

0.5

k=5

0.5

Detection Probability

k=5

0.05

5

P [+|k tests] =

k=5

k=1

0.2

k=1
0

0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Number of sampled individuals (M = N k)

Figure 5: Detection probability of a single patient 0 with
low viral load within a community of 120 as a function of
the total number of sampled individuals M = k × N , where
k is the total number of tests used and N the number of
samples pooled together in a test, with k = 5 (red dotted
line); k = 4 (orange line with arrow), k = 3 (purple line
with circles); k = 2 (dashed green line); k = 1 (solid blue
line) for several values in the parameters describing the viral
load of the patient 0 at the onset of contagiosity, expressed
in terms of a normal distribution in Ct (the number of RTqPCR amplification cycles) with a standard deviation σ0 and
a mean µ0 and a threshold at a value denoted dcens satisfying:
µ0 = dcens −1 (top row), modelling a patient 0 with a very low
viral concentration, µ0 = dcens −3 (middle row), µ0 = dcens −5
(bottom row); σ0 = 2 (left column); σ0 = 6 (right column).

2.

random tests screenings time, see Fig. 6.
In this model, the number of infected individuals at
the date t, denoted by N (t), is distributed according to
a geometric random variable with parameter 1 − e−λt , as
expected for such a Yule process [50]. In the absence
of screening tests, we find that the average detection
time reads hTs i = φ − log(1 − r)/λ. The average number of contaminated individuals at that time then reads:
hN (Ts )i = eλφ /(1−r). In comparison, based on Eq. (15),
we find that the first screening test after contamination
will detect the outbreak with a probability

Optimization of the regularity of tests

We now consider the impact of a regular testing strategy every τ units of time, with k pools of N individuals
with individuals drawn at random in the population. To
compare the impact of the frequency of testing for a constant budget, we assume that the ratio k/τ is equal to
a fixed constant, representing the amount of tests spent
per unit of time by the community to detect infections.
What we consider here is a continuous-time steady-state
version of the previous paragraph IV D 1.
We denote by r the proportion of asymptomatic individuals. Symptomatic individuals start showing signs of
being contaminated a given number of days after infection, denoted by φ (that we assume to be constant in
this simplified model). The outbreak is detected either
if one of the screening tests finds a contaminated individual, or if one of the contaminated individuals shows
symptoms. We denote by Ts the epidemic detection time
without screening tests (as defined as the first detection
of a symptomatic individual) and Td is the one through

k(eλτ − 1)Φ(dcens )
.
λτ A
(N )

(16)

By the time of detection t = τ , a number of hN (τ )i =
(eλτ − 1)/λτ individuals has been contaminated.
Computing the average number of contaminated individuals hN (Td )i, we find that a screening strategy consisting in sampling a random subgroup of the community as frequently as possible is more efficient than the
one consisting in testing larger portion of the community
at less frequent time intervals. In Fig. 6, we compare
different screening scenarios for a large community composed of A = 1000 individuals. We vary the value of the
screening time interval τ while keeping fixed (1) the average number of tests per unit of time and (2) the size
of the pools on which each test is used. Our simulation
range from checking N individuals every day (with one
test) to checking 12 × N individuals in 12 pools every 12
days.

3.

Discussion

In Fig. 6, we chose to consider the case of presymptomatic patient 0 with a weak viral load (µ0 ≈ 30); we
find that a pooling method remains efficient for monitoring purposes even in such unfavorable settings. The recent study [51] indicates that a large fraction of presymptomatic individuals detected in a nursing homes had relatively high viral loads (in the µ0 ≈ 20−25 range), which
tends to indicate that screening methods based on pooling would be even more efficient than suggested in Figs.
5 and 6.
We also point out that, here, we have used a minimal set of parameters in order for analytical calculations
to be tractable. Including more parameters (e.g. considering a time-dependent infection rate or viral charge
for patients after their contamination, graph of relationship within the community) would be needed in order to
obtain conclusive results to be used as healthcare guidelines. In this direction, based on stochastic simulations
encompassing a large set of parameters, [52] also concludes on the efficiency of group testing in preventing
epidemic outbreaks in health care structures. We hope
our analytical calculations will inspire further epidemiological investigations. Without such further studies, our

a

Number of contaminated

11
ical practice/healthcare related behaviour.

without grouped tests

N(Ts)

Conclusion

Ts
grouped tests

N(Td)
1
0

b

test 1

0

test 4

test 3

test 2

days

1

healthy in group test 1
healthy in group test 2
healthy, not tested

No test limit

24

Number of contaminated

c

infected in group test 2
infected in group test 2
infected, not tested

20

increasing regularity

16

12

8

0
0

20

40

60

80

Pool size (N)

100

120

Figure 6: (a) Sketch of the time evolution of the number of
contaminated individuals in a community. The patient 0 is
contaminated from the outside of the community 0.8 units of
time after a test date. In the absence of screening tests, the
contamination is detected at the time T = Ts (after appearance of the first symptoms); with grouped tests, an infected
individual is detected at a time T = Td . (b) Sketch of two
group testing strategies, here with pools of size N = 4, one
with a single (k = 1) grouped tests every day (τ = 1); the
other with k = 2 grouped tests every second day (τ = 2);
the second strategy (least frequent testing) fails to detect the
outbreak early and results in more contamination. (c) Number of infected individuals at the detection of the outbreak
as a function of the pool size, using k = τ tests performed at
τ -day intervals, with τ = 12 (solid purple line), τ = 6 (dashed
orange line), τ = 4 (dark green solid line with square), τ = 3
(light green solid line with circles), τ = 2 (cyan line with
squares) and τ = 1 (solid blue line). Here we consider a large
community composed of A = 1000 individuals. The patient
0 has a viral load concentration distributed according to a
log-normal distribution with mean µ0 = 30 and standard deviation σ0 = 2 log2 (2); all others parameters can be found in
Table II.

We consider the effect of sample dilution in RT-qPCR
grouped tests and we propose a model to describe the
risk of false negatives as a function of the pool size.
We present a procedure to analyse experimental datasets
for the viral charge of patients. Inspired by the clinical
study [44], we expect the statistics of the number of amplification cycles to be well described as a mixture of 3
Gaussian variables censored at the RT-qPCR sensibility
limit. Our analysis may hint at the existence of 3 subclasses of interest that could each be interpreted in terms
of medical or physiological criteria [47].
We point out that the viral load distribution that we
determine here based on the clinical sampling presented
in [44] is possibly biased as compared to the viral load
that would be measured within a population targeted by
a group testing strategy. Indeed, asymptomatic individuals may exhibit a different viral load distribution than
the population that got tested. Furthermore, the measures of [44] were based on nasal swabs samples, and their
statistical distribution is likely to vary according to the
sampling method chosen for group testing.
Tests based on saliva samples appear to show promising results in terms of false negative risks while improving
the acceptance of tests among the population, decreasing the time needed for sample collection and reducing
the exposure of health care practitioners [53–57]. In this
context, we are looking forward to seeing whether group
testing on saliva samples would provide reliable results;
statistics on the distribution of the viral load in saliva
samples would then be of interest to evaluate the efficiency of a group testing strategy based on such samples.
We think group testing could provide the means for
regular and massive screenings allowing the early detection of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic individuals –
a particularly crucial task to succeed in the containment
and potential eradication of the epidemic [10, 58, 59].

Acknowledgments

results should not be used literally as a guideline for clin-

We wish to thank members of the MODCOV initiative and in particular Françoise Praz and Florence Debarre who gave us numerous helpful comments, including on the first version of this manuscript. We thank
Philippe Hupe for his critical reading. We also thank
Marie-Claude Potier and Marc Sanson for insightful discussions on RT-qPCR tests as well as on the interest of
saliva samples.

[1] H. Salje, C. Tran Kiem, N. Lefrancq, N. Courtejoie, P. Bosetti, J. Paireau, A. Andronico, N. Hozé,

J. Richet, C.-l. Dubost, Y. Le Strat, J. Lessler, D. LevyBruhl, A. Fontanet, L. Opatowski, P.-Y. Boelle, and

12
S. Cauchemez, Science 3517, 3517 (2020).
[2] R. Wölfel, V. M. Corman, W. Guggemos, M. Seilmaier, S. Zange, M. A. Müller, D. Niemeyer, T. C.
Jones, P. Vollmar, C. Rothe, M. Hoelscher, T. Bleicker,
S. Brünink, J. Schneider, R. Ehmann, K. Zwirglmaier,
C. Drosten,
and C. Wendtner, Nature
(2020),
10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x.
[3] World Health Organization, WHO - Interim guidance
2019, 1 (2020).
[4] V. M. Corman, O. Landt, M. Kaiser, R. Molenkamp,
A. Meijer, D. K. Chu, T. Bleicker, S. Brünink, J. Schneider, M. L. Schmidt, D. G. Mulders, B. L. Haagmans,
B. van der Veer, S. van den Brink, L. Wijsman, G. Goderski, J.-L. Romette, J. Ellis, M. Zambon, M. Peiris,
H. Goossens, C. Reusken, M. P. Koopmans,
and
C. Drosten, Eurosurveillance 25, 1 (2020).
[5] N. Speybroeck, B. Devleesschauwer, L. Joseph, and
D. Berkvens, International Journal of Public Health 58,
791 (2013).
[6] K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, and G. Chowell,
Eurosurveillance 25, 1 (2020).
[7] Q. Bi, Y. Wu, S. Mei, C. Ye, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, X. Liu,
L. Wei, S. A. Truelove, T. Zhang, W. Gao, C. Cheng,
X. Tang, X. Wu, Y. Wu, B. Sun, S. Huang, Y. Sun,
J. Zhang, T. Ma, J. Lessler, and T. Feng, The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 3099, 1 (2020).
[8] Y. Bai, L. Yao, T. Wei, F. Tian, D.-Y. Jin, L. Chen, and
M. Wang, JAMA 323, 1406 (2020).
[9] E. Lavezzo, E. Franchin, C. Ciavarella, G. Cuomodannenburg, L. Barzon, M. Sciro, S. Merigliano, E. Decanale, M. C. Vanuzzo, F. Onelia, M. Pacenti, S. Parisi,
G. Carretta, D. Donato, K. A. M. Gaythorpe, I. College,
L. C. Response, and R. Alessandra, medRxiv , 1 (2020).
[10] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay,
L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser,
Science 368, 6936 (2020).
[11] N. Sethuraman, S. S. Jeremiah, and A. Ryo, JAMA
(2020).
[12] C. Gollier and O. Gossner, Covid Economics , 32 (2020).
[13] K. B. Pouwels, L. S. J. Roope, A. Barnett, D. J. Hunter,
T. M. Nolan, and P. M. Clarke, PharmacoEconomics Open , 2 (2020).
[14] R. Dorfman, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics
(1943).
[15] M. Aldridge, O. Johnson, and J. Scarlett, Foundations
and Trends in Communications and Information Theory
15, 196 (2019).
[16] E. Barillot, B. Lacroix, and D. Cohen, Nucleic Acids
Research 19, 6241 (1991).
[17] N. Thierry-Mieg, Nature Methods 3, 161 (2006).
[18] T. Furon, [Research Report] RR-9164, Inria Rennes Bretagne Atlantique , 1 (2018).
[19] C. A. Hogan, M. K. Sahoo, and B. A. Pinsky, JAMA
323, 1967 (2020).
[20] S. Lohse, T. Pfuhl, B. Berkó-Göttel, J. Rissland,
T. Geißler, B. Gärtner, S. L. Becker, S. Schneitler, and
S. Smola, The Lancet Infectious Diseases 3099 (2020).
[21] I. Yelin, N. Aharony, E. Shaer Tamar, A. Argoetti,
E. Messer, D. Berenbaum, E. Shafran, A. Kuzli,
N. Gandali, O. Shkedi, T. Hashimshony, Y. MandelGutfreund, M. Halberthal, Y. Geffen, M. SzwarcwortCohen, and R. Kishony, Clinical Infectious Diseases
(2020), 10.1093/cid/ciaa531.
[22] R. Ben-Ami, A. Klochendler, M. Seidel, T. Sido,

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]

O. Gurel-Gurevich, M. Yassour, E. Meshorer,
G. Benedek, I. Fogel, E. Oiknine-Djian, A. Gertler,
Z. Rotstein, B. Lavi, Y. Dor, D. G. Wolf, M. Salton,
and Y. Drier, medRxiv , 2020.04.17.20069062 (2020).
N. Shental, S. Levy, S. Skorniakov, V. Wuvshet,
Y. Shemer-Avni, A. Porgador, and T. Hertz, medRxiv ,
2020.04.14.20064618 (2020).
M. Schmidt, S. Hoehl, A. Berger, H. Zeichhardt,
K. Hourfar, S. Ciesek, and E. Seifried, medRxiv ,
2020.04.28.20074187 (2020).
L. Mutesa, P. Ndishimye, Y. Butera, A. Uwineza,
R. Rutayisire, E. Musoni, N. Rujeni, T. Nyatanyi,
E. Ntagwabira, M. Semakula, C. Musanabaganwa,
D. Nyamwasa, M. Ndashimye, E. Ujeneza, I. E.
Mwikarago, C. M. Muvunyi, J. B. Mazarati, S. Nsanzimana, N. Turok, and W. Ndifon, arXiv (2020),
arXiv:2004.14934 .
I. Torres, E. Albert, and D. Navarro, Journal of Medical
Virology , 25971 (2020).
J. J. Cabrera, S. Rey, S. Perez, L. Martinez-Lamas,
O. Cores-Calvo, J. Torres, J. Porteiro, J. GarciaComesana, and B. J. Regueiro, medRxiv (2020),
10.1101/2020.05.30.20108597.
S. Wacharapluesadee, T. Kaewpom, W. Ampoot,
S. Ghai, W. Khamhang, K. Worachotsueptrakun,
P. Wanthong, C. Nopvichai, T. Supharatpariyakorn,
O. Putcharoen, L. Paitoonpong, G. Suwanpimolkul,
W. Jantarabenjakul, P. Hemachudha, A. Krichphiphat,
R. Buathong, T. Plipat, and T. Hemachudha, Journal
of Medical Virology , 0 (2020).
A. Martin, A. Storto, B. Andre, A. Mallory, R. Dangla,
B. Visseaux,
and O. Gossner, arXiv
(2020),
arXiv:2006.02908 .
A. Khodare, A. Padhi, E. Gupta, R. Agarwal,
S. Dubey,
and S. K. Sarin, medRxiv
(2020),
10.1101/2020.06.11.20128793.
K. Wernike, M. Keller, F. J. Conraths, T. C. Mettenleiter, M. H. Groschup, and M. Beer, bioRxiv ,
2020.06.03.132357 (2020).
Y. Gan, L. Du, O. D. Faleti, J. Huang, G. Xiao, X. Lyu,
T. Third, A. Hospital, S. Medical, X. Lyu, T. Third,
A. Hospital, and Z. A. West, medRxiv (2020).
S. B. Griesemer, G. Van Slyke, and K. St. George,
bioRxiv (2020).
R. Hanel and S. Thurner, arXiv , 3 (2020),
arXiv:2003.09944 .
A. Deckert, T. Bärnighausen, and N. Kyei, Bull World
Health Organ (2020), 10.2471/BLT.20.257188.
N. Sinnott-Armstrong, D. Klein,
and B. Hickey,
medRxiv (2020), 10.1101/2020.03.27.20043968.
C. M. Verdun, T. Fuchs, P. Harar, D. Elbrächter, D. S.
Fischer, J. Berner, P. Grohs, F. J. Theis, and F. Krahmer, medRxiv , 2020.04.30.20085290 (2020).
K. Narayanan, I. Frost, A. Heidarzadeh, K. K. Tseng,
S. Banerjee, J. John, and R. Laxminarayan, medRxiv ,
2020.04.03.20051995 (2020).
C. R. Bilder, P. C. Iwen, B. Abdalhamid, J. M. Tebbs,
and C. S. McMahan, Significance 17, 15 (2020).
T. C. Jones, B. Mühlemann, T. Veith, G. Biele, M. Zuchowski, J. Hoffmann, A. Stein, A. Edelmann, V. M. Corman, and C. Drosten, medRxiv , 2020.06.08.20125484
(2020).
K. H. Thompson, Biometrics 18, 568 (1962).
A. Forootan, R. Sjöback, J. Björkman, B. Sjögreen,

13

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]
[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

L. Linz, and M. Kubista, Biomolecular Detection and
Quantification 12, 1 (2017).
A. Ruiz-Villalba, E. van Pelt-Verkuil, Q. D. Gunst, J. M.
Ruijter, and M. J. van den Hoff, Biomolecular Detection
and Quantification 14, 7 (2017).
T. C. Jones, B. Mühlemann, V. Talitha, Z. Marta, J. Hofmann, A. Stein, A. Edelmann, V. M. Corman, and
C. Drosten, Preprint Charité Hospital (2020).
R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria (2020).
O. E. Nielsen, Information and exponential families : in
statistical theory (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester U.K.
New York, 2014).
Y. Liu, L.-M. Yan, L. Wan, T.-X. Xiang, A. Le, J.-M. Liu,
M. Peiris, L. L. M. Poon, and W. Zhang, The Lancet.
Infectious diseases (2020).
E. S. Barrett, D. B. Horton, J. Roy, M. L. Gennaro,
A. Brooks, J. Tischfield, P. Greenberg, T. Andrews,
S. Jagpal, N. Reilly, M. J. Blaser, J. Carson, and R. A.
Panettieri, medRxiv , 2020.04.20.20072470 (2020).
D. F. Gudbjartsson, A. Helgason, H. Jonsson, O. T. Magnusson, P. Melsted, G. L. Norddahl, J. Saemundsdottir,
A. Sigurdsson, P. Sulem, A. B. Agustsdottir, B. Eiriksdottir, R. Fridriksdottir, E. E. Gardarsdottir, G. Georgsson, O. S. Gretarsdottir, K. R. Gudmundsson, T. R.
Gunnarsdottir, A. Gylfason, H. Holm, B. O. Jensson,
A. Jonasdottir, F. Jonsson, K. S. Josefsdottir, T. Kristjansson, D. N. Magnusdottir, L. le Roux, G. Sigmundsdottir, G. Sveinbjornsson, K. E. Sveinsdottir, M. Sveinsdottir, E. A. Thorarensen, B. Thorbjornsson, A. Löve,
G. Masson, I. Jonsdottir, A. D. Möller, T. Gudnason,
K. G. Kristinsson, U. Thorsteinsdottir, and K. Stefansson, New England Journal of Medicine , NEJMoa2006100
(2020).
S. Meleard, Modèles aléatoires en Ecologie et Evolution
(CMAP, 2016).
M. M. Arons, K. M. Hatfield, S. C. Reddy, A. Kimball,
A. James, J. R. Jacobs, J. Taylor, K. Spicer, A. C. Bardossy, L. P. Oakley, S. Tanwar, J. W. Dyal, J. Harney,
Z. Chisty, J. M. Bell, M. Methner, P. Paul, C. M. Carlson,
H. P. McLaughlin, N. Thornburg, S. Tong, A. Tamin,
Y. Tao, A. Uehara, J. Harcourt, S. Clark, C. BrostromSmith, L. C. Page, M. Kay, J. Lewis, P. Montgomery,
N. D. Stone, T. A. Clark, M. A. Honein, J. S. Duchin,
and J. A. Jernigan, New England Journal of Medicine
382, 2081 (2020).
D. R. Smith, A. Duval, K. B. Pouwels, D. Guillemot,
J. Fernandes, B.-T. Huynh, L. Temime, and L. Opatowski, medRxiv (2020).
A. L. Wyllie, J. Fournier, A. Casanovas-Massana,
M. Campbell, M. Tokuyama, P. Vijayakumar, B. Geng,
M. C. Muenker, A. J. Moore, C. B. F. Vogels, M. E.
Petrone, I. M. Ott, P. Lu, A. Lu-Culligan, J. Klein,
A. Venkataraman, R. Earnest, M. Simonov, R. Datta,
R. Handoko, N. Naushad, L. R. Sewanan, J. Valdez, E. B.
White, S. Lapidus, C. C. Kalinich, X. Jiang, D. J. Kim,
E. Kudo, M. Linehan, T. Mao, M. Moriyama, J. E. Oh,
A. Park, J. Silva, E. Song, T. Takahashi, M. Taura, O.-E.
Weizman, P. Wong, Y. Yang, S. Bermejo, C. Odio, S. B.
Omer, C. S. D. Cruz, S. Farhadian, R. A. Martinello,
A. Iwasaki, N. D. Grubaugh, and A. I. Ko, medRxiv ,
2020.04.16.20067835 (2020).
L. Azzi, G. Carcano, F. Gianfagna, P. Grossi, D. D.

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

Gasperina, A. Genoni, M. Fasano, F. Sessa, L. Tettamanti, F. Carinci, V. Maurino, A. Rossi, A. Tagliabue,
and A. Baj, Journal of Infection , 1 (2020).
K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam,
T.-C. Wu, D. C. Lung, C. C.-Y. Yip, J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C.
Chan, T. S.-H. Chik, D. P.-L. Lau, C. Y.-C. Choi, L.L. Chen, W.-M. Chan, K.-H. Chan, J. D. Ip, A. C.-K.
Ng, R. W.-S. Poon, C.-T. Luo, V. C.-C. Cheng, J. F.-W.
Chan, I. F.-N. Hung, Z. Chen, H. Chen, and K.-Y. Yuen,
The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, 565 (2020).
E. Williams, K. Bond, B. Zhang, M. Putland, and D. A.
Williamson, Journal of Clinical Microbiology 50 (2020),
10.1128/JCM.00776-20.
Z. Khurshid, S. Zohaib, C. Joshi, S. F. Moin, M. Sohail,
D. J. Speicher, D. Implantology, K. Faisal, M. Sciences,
M. Al, B. Sciences, and B. Sciences, medRxiv (2020).
T. A. Treibel, C. Manisty, M. Burton, Á. McKnight, J. Lambourne, J. B. Augusto, X. Couto-Parada,
T. Cutino-Moguel, M. Noursadeghi, and J. C. Moon,
The Lancet 6736, 19 (2020).
S. M. Kissler, C. Tedijanto, E. Goldstein, Y. H. Grad,
and M. Lipsitch, Science 5793, eabb5793 (2020).

14
Supplementary Information
Group testing as a strategy for the epidemiologic monitoring of COVID-19
Vincent Brault, Bastien Mallein, Jean-Francois Rupprecht
Appendix A: Ideal tests

We present here some of results obtained from the computations made in Sec. I, where we assumed perfect group
testing and used it to measure prevalence in the population. Note that with a perfect test, the question of early
detection of an outbreak in a community becomes much simpler : one just need to test everyone at regular time
intervals with a single test.
1.

Number of tests and sample size as function of the population prevalence

We trace here, for various values of the prevalence, the number of tests and total number of samples needed to
archive a given precision for the confidence interval.
a

b

p = 1%

100000
75000

1000

50000
500
25000

7000

300000

6000

250000

5000

150000
3000
100000
2000

0

100

c

200

300
400
pool size (N)

500

50000

1000

0

0

200000

4000

0

600

0
0

25

50

d

p=5%

tot. number of sampled indiv. (nN)

1500

number of tests (n)

125000

tot. number of sampled indiv. (nN)

150000
2000
number of tests (n)

p = 3%

175000

2500

75
100
pool size (N)

125

150

175

p=15%

300000
250000

8000

200000

6000

150000
4000

100000
50000

2000

350000
300000

25000
250000
20000

200000
150000

15000

100000
10000

tot. number of sampled indiv. (nN)

number of tests (n)

10000

30000

number of tests (n)

350000

tot. number of sampled indiv. (nN)

12000

50000

0
0

20

40
60
pool size (N)

80

100

0

5

10
15
pool size (N)

20

25

Figure S1: Total number of tests and sampled individuals so that the width of the 95% confidence interval is smaller than 0.4%
as a function of the pool size N chosen for a perfect test, for a prevalence p equal to p = 1% (a), p = 3% (b), p = 5% (c),
p = 15% (d).

2.

Bayesian inference

We are now interested in a Bayesian approach to the measure of prevalence. We started with an initial prior
distribution with density f0 (p) = 6p(1 − p)1{0≤p≤1} for the prevalence, and for each new test j we do the following:
R1
1. take the the mean value pj−1 = 0 pfj−1 (p)dp of the prior;
2. choose the size Nj of the pool of the jth test computed as (cf. Eq. (3)):


c?
Nj = −
;
log(1 − pj−1 )
3. choose Nj individuals at random and test them in a group:

(S1)

15
a

10

1

10

2

10

3

b

Credible interval
p = 15%
p = 5%
p = 3%
p = 1%

100

0

500

1000

1500

2000

Number of tests (n)

Credible interval

10

1

10

2

Population 1
Population 2
Population 1+2

0

500

1000

1500

Number of tests (n)

2000

Figure S2: (a) Width of the 95% credible interval on the prevalance p with adaptative Bayesian sampling as a function of
the number of tests n for a set of values in the prevalence ranging from p = 15% (top, magenta dashed line) to p = 1%
(bottom, blue solid line). (b) Width of the credible intervals in a two-category mixed population for the prevalence either: in
the general population (magenta solid line); for the less exposed population 1 with a prevalence of 0.5%, representing 80% of
the general population (blue dashed line); for the more at-risk population 2 with a prevalence of 5% representing 20% of the
general population (red dotted line with circles).

• if the test is positive, then fj (p) = Cj+ (1 − (1 − p)Nj )fj−1 (p);
• if the test is negative, then fj (p) = Cj− (1 − p)Nj fj−1 (p);
with Cj± normalizing constants, chosen such that

R1
0

fj (p)dp = 1.

We trace in Fig. S2 the result in blue of this experiment, the 95% credible interval being [aj , bj ], with aj being the
2.5%th quantile of fj and bj its 97.5% quantile.
Simultaneously to this statistical experiment, one can follow the prevalence in sub-populations of interest. For
example, if we assume the population consists of two sub-populations 1 and 2 with different prevalences p1 and
p2 . Starting with a prior distribution fj (p1 , p2 )dp1 dp2 for these prevalences, if a group consisting of a individuals
of the first sub-population and b individuals of the second population is sampled positive, then Bayes rules gives
+
Cj+1
(1 − (1 − p1 )a (1 − p2 )b ) for the updated law of (p1 , p2 ). A similar update is made if the test is negative. As a
result, we get estimates for the prevalence in each sub-population at the same time as we are measuring the prevalence
in the overall population.
We test the above statistical experiment on a population which is composed of two sub-populations, one large
subpopulation of sparsely exposed individuals (prevalence 0.5%, representing 4/5th of the whole population), and
a smaller subpopulation of very exposed individuals (prevalence 5%). At each step, we choose the size of the pool
according to the available estimate for the prevalence in the complete population. The composition of the pool in
terms of individuals of each sub-population is chosen at random (at the jth step, there are Ber(Nj , 0.8) individuals of
the first sub-population). We also update our estimation of the prevalences (p1 , p2 ) in each of the two sub-populations.
The results are traced in Fig. S2 in orange and green curves. One can see that the width of the credibility intervals
of the sub-populations decay much slower than for the whole population. The reason is that the size of the groups
are optimized to measure as precisely as possible the mean value p.
However, observe that even with a naive group construction (without segregating individuals according to their
sub-population), one can extract information on the prevalence of the sub-populations of interest. Therefore, a design
for the measure of the prevalence in a stratified population could be the following: in a first time, pool testing is
implemented on randomly constructed group of individuals from the general population. Data is then analysed to
detect sub-populations with different prevalences (e.g. according to geography, age, occupation, ...). In a second time,
once sub-populations of interest are identified, pool testing is applied to each of the sub-populations independently.
We implemented this method if Fig. S3, with the same number of tests a much more detailed estimate of the prevalence
is obtained.

16
a

b

Median value of the prior

Credibility interval

0.08

0.06

10

1

10

2

0.04

0.02

0.00

0

250

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

0

2000

250

Number of tests (n)

c

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

Number of tests (n)

d

Median value of the prior

Credibility interval

100

0.10

0.08
10

1

10

2

10

3

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00

0

250

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

0

Number of tests (n)

250

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

Number of tests (n)

Figure S3: (a-b) Bayesian estimation of the parameters of a mixed population, consisting of 80% individuals of type 1 with
a prevalence of 0.5% and 20% individuals of type 2 with a prevalence of 5%. Pooled samples are constituted by sampling
randomly individuals from the two sub-populations, with a size optimized for the speed of convergence of the overall prevalence
of 1.4%. (a-c) Median value of the priors, overall population in blue, first resp second population in orange resp green. (b-d)
Width of the 95% credible intervals. In (c,d), the first 1000 tests are made on groups whose size is optimized to estimate
the prevalence of the overall population, the next 1000 tests are divided into two groups that are used on homogeneous sets
of the sub-populations, in groups optimized to estimate the prevalences within these sub-populations. This has the effect of
drastically improving the speed of convergence of the estimator of the prevalence in the subpopulations.

Appendix B: Censored Gaussians

In this section, we present the simple mixing models of Sec. III, as well as some complementary graphs and the
estimations obtained for the parameters of this models.

1.

Naive method based on mixing models

0.08
0.06
Count

0.04
0.00

0.02

0.04
0.00

0.02

Count

0.06

0.08

In this section, we trace the density estimated by a simple mixture of Gaussian variable presented in Sec. III A. An
estimation of the parameters of this mixture are given in Table III.

10

15

20

25
Simulated data

30

35

10

15

20

25

30

35

Simulated data

Figure S4: Representation of the histogram with the densities estimated with 3 classes (on the left) and 4 classes (on the right):
the color lines (other than blue) represent the density of each component and the blue line the density of the mixture.

As we do not have access to raw data, we performed simulations to generate a reconstructed datasets with consistent
histograms to Fig. 1 from [44], with randomized position of the points within each class. We applied the above
procedure to 100 independently reconstructed data, in order to limit the influence of the random part. Among these

17
100 simulations, we obtain 95 times 3 clusters and 5 times 4 clusters. When there are 3 clusters, the estimation of the
parameters is very stable (standard deviation less than 0.03 for each) but there is a little more variability in the case
of 4 clusters in particular for the two classes with the largest averages (but the standard deviation does not exceed
0.25).
2.

Proof of the Theorem III.3

To prove the lemma III.3, we observe that for every x ∈ R we have the following decomposition of the density fX
if q > 0:

with < ·, · > is the scalar product, η =

µ
σ2 ,

fX (x) = b (η) exp [hη, T (x)i] ,

− 2σ1 2 , ln q the natural parameters,

T (x) = x, x2 , 1{x>dcens } ,

(S1)

the sufficient statistics and


1
1
µ2
b (η) =
×√
exp − 2 .
q + (1 − q)Fµ,σ (s)
2σ
2πσ 2
For the totally censured model, we have the same decomposition with the third parameters and taking q = 0.
Thanks the decomposition in Eq. (S1), the (partially) censured model belongs to the family of exponential laws and
the maximum likelihood estimators are strongly consistent and asymptotically normal.
3.

Simulations

To study the quality of the estimators defined in Sec. III B, we simulated 104 samples of size n ∈ {102 , 103 , 104 , 105 }
of variables following the model CN dcens (0, 1, p) with dcens ∈ {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3} and q ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9}. We provide
boxplots estimations of the parameters in Fig. S5 and a zoom on significant part in Fig. S6. Note that these parameters
(µ = 0, |dcens | ≤ 3) are very different from the ones expected for Ct values, but the model can be straightforwardly
adapted by an affine transformation to measured parameters of interest.
Observe from Fig. S5 that the estimations are generally close to the parameters but we can sometimes have very
large deviations. We find that the more n increases, the better the estimator. The threshold seems to have a weak
influence on the estimation of the partially censored model but, for the fully censored model, we see that the more
dcens increases and the more the quality of the estimators increases; especially when dcens = −2 which represents
approximately the 2.3% quantile. Note that we observe large deviations in the partially censored model when dcens is
equal to 2; this may seem counter-intuitive since we have access to around 97.7% of uncensored Gaussian information.
However, this leaves few observations for the estimation of p (which we observe on the graphs of the last line) and this
weakens in this case the model because censorship no longer really has any reason to be. We therefore recommend
using the model only when the number of observations after censorship is sufficient to estimate the parameter p.
4.

Censored mixture model

In this section, we present the complementary graphs of Sec. III. The statistical model presented here has the
following density defined for all x ∈ R by:
f (x) =

3
X
k=1

πk



fµk ,σk (x)
1 + (qk − 1)1{x>dcens } .
qk + (1 − qk )Fµk ,σk (dcens )

(S2)

The completely censured mixture model has the same density than the Eq. (S2) with qk = 0.
With the model in Eq. (S2), we can estimate the theoretical false negative rate by the following formula:
P (false negative) =

3
X
k=1

πk [1 − Fµk ,σk (dcens )] (1 − qk ) .

(S3)

18
Completely
p=0

200

0

●

●
●
●

100

dcens

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

−2

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−1
0
1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

0

2
3

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
● ●
●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

1000

10000

1e+05

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−100

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

● ●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●
●

●
●

400

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

dcens

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●

−2

−1

−1

0
1

3

0

●
●

100

1000

10000

1e+05

100

0
● ● ● ● ● ●

●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−2
−1
0

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●

dcens

●

●
●

●

1
2
3

● ● ● ● ● ●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

1000

10000

n

1e+05

100

1000

n

10000

1e+05

n

1200
●

●

●

750

−2
−1
0
1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

500

2

● ●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●

100

●

●
●
●
●

250

● ● ● ●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●
●

0

●
●

1000

10000

●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●

0
1e+05

●

●

3

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●

100

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

900

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●

0

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

3

●
●
●
●
●
●

300

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

10000

1e+05

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

0

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

100

n

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

dcens

●

●
●
●

2

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
● ●

1000

●
●
●

600

●

●

●
●
● ●
●
●

1

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

n

−1

●
●
●

●

●

−2

●
●
●

● ●
●
●
●
●

●

dcens

●

sigma_est

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●

dcens
●

●
●

●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

1000

sigma_est

sigma_est

5

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

3

● ● ● ● ● ●

●
●
●

2

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

200

●

1250

10

● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

15

1

●

●

n

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0

●

●
●
●
●

●
●

200

2

●
●

●

dcens

−2

mu_est

●
●
●

100

20

●

●
●

●
●

mu_est

400

●

q = 0.9
400

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

mu_est

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

600

mu_est

200

●
●
●

800

Partially
q = 0.5

q = 0.1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

−2
−1
0
1
2

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●

3
●

●
● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

10000

1e+05

1000

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●

n

F gure S5 Boxp ots o the est mat ons o µ (first row) σ (second row) and p ( ast row on y or part a y censored mode ) n
unct on o mode (co umns) the s ze n o samp e (x-ax s) and the va ue o the thresho d s (co or) The true va ue s symbo sed
by the hor zonta b ack ne

Tab e III Est mated parameters or the na ve Gauss an m xture fit and the censored Gauss an m xture fits defined n Eq (S2)
or the datasets ava ab e n 44 and 27 Note the cons stency o the est mat ons n part cu ar n the part a y and comp ete y
censored mode s
Mode
q =1 3 µ1
σ1 π 1
µ2
σ2 π2
µ3
σ3 π3
Na ve
20 41 3 74 0 34 29 43 2 81 0 52 34 32 0 89 0 14
44
Part a y
02
20 14 3 60 0 32 29 35 2 96 0 53 34 78 1 32 0 14
Comp ete y
20 13 3 60 0 33 29 41 3 02 0 54 34 81 1 31 0 13
Mode
q =1
Na ve
27
Part a y
04
Comp ete y

3

µ1
19 75
20 16
20 55

σ1
2 05
2 19
3 45

π1
µ2
σ2
0 20 25 61 2 99
0 26 26 03 2 58
0 31 26 33 2 11

π2
µ3
σ3
0 39 34 28 2 36
0 43 34 54 2 66
0 24 34 41 2 98

π3
0 40
0 41
0 43

19

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

0.5
●

dcens

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

−1
●
●
●

● ● ●
● ● ●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

3

●
●

−0.5

−0.5

●

−1.0

−1.0
100

1000

10000

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1.0

1e+05

100

sigma_est

1.5

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

2.0

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●

1.5

dcens
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1.0
●
●
●
●
● ●

●
●
●
●
●
●

0.5

●
●

dcens

●

●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●

●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−1
0
1
2
3

●
●

●

●

●

−1.0
10000

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●

1e+05

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

−2
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●

−1
0
1

●
●

●
●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

1.5

●
●

dcens

●
●
●
●
●

−2
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●

●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●

−1
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●

0
1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●

3

0.5

●

0.5

dcens

●
●
●
● ●
●
●

●
● ●

●

−1
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●

● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ●

0
1

●

●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

3
−0.5

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−1.0
1000

10000

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1e+05

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

2.0

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1.5
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●

dcens
−2

●

−1
● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●

1.0
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●

● ● ●
●
● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●

0
1

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●

2
3

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
● ● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

3

●
●
●

0.5

●

0.0

0.0
100

1000

10000

1e+05

● ●
●
●

●

●

dcens

● ●
●
●

●

●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−2
−1
0
1
2
3

● ●
●
●
●

●
●

10000

1e+05

●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

● ●
●
●
● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ●
● ●

●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ● ●
●
● ● ● ● ●

dcens
−2
−1
0
1

●

2

● ●

3

●

●
●
●
● ●

●

●
● ●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

100

● ●

1000

●

●
●

●

●

0.75

dcens
●

−2

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−1
0

10000

2

1e+05

100

●

●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●

● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●

10000

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●

●

1000

10000

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

−1
0

●
●
●

0.50

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

1e+05

100

3

●

n

●
●

●
●

1e+05

100

2

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●
●
● ● ●

0

3

●

● ●
●
● ●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0.00

●

●

−2

1

●

●

●
●
●
●

0.25

●

10000

●

● ●
●
●
●
●
●

dcens

−1
●
●

●

●
●
●
● ●

●

1000

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

1
2

●
●
●
●
●
●

● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

● ●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

−2

●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

0.00

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0.75

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

dcens

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

1e+05

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

1.00

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●

0.25
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1000

●

n

0.50

3

●

●

1.00

● ●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

n

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

0.00

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●

0.0
100

n

q_est

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

1e+05

0.25

●
● ●
●
●

●

●

●

n

0.50

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.75

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●

●

1.00

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

1.0

2

q_est

10000

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●

1000

●
●

●

q_est

100

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●

0.5

●

0.0

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

● ●
●
●

n

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1000

● ●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

100

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0.0

2

●
●
●

● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●

−2
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

n

●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●

1.0

2

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0.5

●
●
●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
● ●
●
● ● ● ●
●
● ● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

100

2.0

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1.0

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

0.0

−0.5

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−2
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●

●

1000

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

n

sigma_est

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

n

2.0

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

0.0

2

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

0
1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

−2
●

●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●

0.0
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

q = 0.9

mu_est

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

1.0

●
●

●

mu_est

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

sigma_est

0.5

mu_est

●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

mu_est

1.0

Partially
q = 0.5

q = 0.1

sigma_est

Completely
q=0

● ●

● ●

1000

n

10000

●

1e+05

n

10

15

20

25
Simulated data

30

35

0.08
0.06

Count

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06
Count

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.04
0.02

Count

0.06

0.08

0.08

0.10

Figure S6: Zoom on boxplots of the estimations of µ (first row), σ (second row) and q (last row ; only for partially censored
model) in function of model (columns), the size n of sample (x-axis) and the value of the threshold s (color). The true value
is symbolised by the horizontal black line.

10

15

20

25
Simulated data

30

35

10

15

20

25

30

35

Simulated data

Figure S7: Density of the fits of the censored model with three components (obtained when erasing data to the right of the
threshold) with a threshold at 35.6 (left), 34.4 (middle) and 33.2 (right): the orange, green and red lines represent the density
of each component and the blue line the density of the mixture. The histogram correspond to the one presented in [44].

20
Table IV: Estimated parameters for the censored Gaussian mixture fit define in Eq. (S2) for different values of the threshold dcens ,
applied to reconstructed data data with same distribution as in [44] erased above dcens .
dcens µ1
σ1 π1
µ2
σ2 π2
µ3
σ3 π 3
35.6 20.13 3.60 0.33 29.41 3.02 0.54 34.81 1.31 0.13
34.4 20.13 3.61 0.35 29.35 2.99 0.57 34.21 1.03 0.08
33.2 19.97 3.56 0.03 29.40 3.14 0.59 33.21 1.16 0.48

21
Appendix C: Estimation of the false-negative risk in the presence of multiple positive individuals in the pool

We treat here the case of a pool of N samples that contains k > 1 positive individuals. It is particularly relevant to
consider these case when pooling correlated samples, (such has individuals living in the same household, or workers
sharing the same area). Indeed, in this case, knowing that one individual is contaminated increases the probability
that more individuals in the pool are as well, which should make the detection easier.
For the sake of completeness, here we also consider the risk of defective sampling (e.g. that the swabs fails to collect
viral load in an infected individual), which we denote ζ. The probability of having a negative pool result given that
there is k positive samples within the pool reads, according to the model presented in Eq. (7):




k  
X
X
k k−j
P [−|k+] =
ζ
Ci /N  > dcens  .
(S1)
(1 − ζ)j P log2 
j
j=1
i=1,...,j
Under the two assumptions that:
1. the viral load distribution spans several order of magnitudes (e.g. log-normal distributed), so that, following
Eq. (12):




h
i
X
)
(S2)
P log2 
Ci /N  > dmax  = P mini=1,...,j (log2 (Ci )) > d(N
max ,
i=1,...,j

with dmax = dcens − log2 (N ).
(N )

2. the viral loads (not the infection status) between the k infected individuals are independent, in which case:
h
i
h
ij
(N )
)
P mini=1,...,j (log2 (Ci )) > dmax
= P log2 (C1 ) > d(N
,
max )

(S3)

we find that Eq. (S1) takes the simple expression:

h
ik
)
P [−|k+] = ζ + (1 − ζ)(1 − P log2 (C1 ) < d(N
,
max )

h
ik
)
= 1 − (1 − ζ)P log2 (C1 ) < d(N
.
max )

(S4)
(S5)

In Fig. S8, in the case of correlated samples, we find that the false negative risk in pooling is greatly reduced if there
is more than one positive sample in the pool. The origin of such false-negative reduction is the large variability in
viral load and the fact that the amplification technique is particularly sensitive to the highest viral load in the sample.
Such false-negative reduction is robust to the presence of a finite risk of defective sampling ζ = 5%.
1 positive

False-negative risk

0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25

2 positives

0.20

3 positives
4 positives
5 positives

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

10

20

30

40

50

60

Pool Size (N)
Figure S8: Evaluation of the total risk of false negatives estimated according to Eq. (S1 as a function of the pool size N for
several values of the number of positive samples in the pool k = 1 (blue solid line); k = 2 (cyan dashed line); k = 3 (magenta
line); k = 4 (diamond orange line); k = 5 (circle red line). We consider a risk that the sample is defective ζ = 0.05.

